AN ACCOUNT OF Reason and Faith: In RELATION to the MYSTERIES OF CHRISTIANITY.

By JOHN NORRIS, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum.

Holding Faith, and a good Conscience; which some having put away, Concerning
Faith have made Shipwreck. 1 Timothy 1. 19. LONDON, Printed for S. Manship, at
the Ship near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1697.

To the Right Honorable Henry Lord of Colerane.
My Lord,
YOur Lordships Learning and Knowledge in Matters of Religion, and Sincerity in
the Belief and Profession of its Sacred Articles are both so well known, that I
cannot be supposed to Present this Book to your Lordship with a Design to
instruct you in the Former, or to Settle and Confirm you in the Latter. There
are indeed but too many in the World to whom it may be necessary upon those
Accounts, but all that I intend in reference to your Lordship by it is only to
express my Reverence and Respect for your great Worth and Goodness, and my
grateful Acknowledgments for that particular Share and Interest I have had in
your Favors.

Which give me further Occasion to hope that you will be as kind to the Book a^
you have been to the Author, and that as you were pleased to encourage the
Undertaking, so you will now favor the Performance, which with all deference
and Submission is humbly presented to your Lordship by

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obliged and very humble Servant, J. Norris.

THE PREFACE.
COntroversies of Religion, and particularly this, have been managed of late
with that Intemperance of Passion and Indecency of, Language, after such a Rude
Bear-Garden way, so much more like Duelling or Prizing than Disputing, that the
more good Natured and better Bred part of the World are grown almost Sick of
them and Prejudiced against them, not being able to see Men Cut and Slash and
draw Blood from one another after such an inhuman manner only to vent their own
Spleen, and make diversion for the Savage and brutalized Rabble, without some
troublesome resentments of Pity and Displacency. And truly it is hard for a Man
to read some certain things of this Character without being disturbed, and
growing out of humor upon it, and being even out of Conceit with Mankind, such
an Idea do they raise of the Malignity of Human Nature, and so do they ruffle
an^ Chagrine the Mind of the Reader: From which impressions he will hardly
recover himself till he meets with some Book or other of a Contrary Spirit
(whereof the Bishop of London-Derry's Excellent Discourse of the Inventions of
Men in the Worship of God is a very eminent Instance) which may serve to
recompose the One, and give him a better Opinion of the Other.

I have endeavored in the Management of the present Argument to use such
Christian Temper and Moderation as becomes the Search of Truth, and may argue a
Mind Concerned only for the finding it. For of all the ill-sorted things in
Nature I think it the most improper and disagreeable, to reason in a Passion,
especially when it is in defense of that Religion which neither needs at nor
allows it. And therefore laying aside all Anger and Disaffection (which even
for the advantage of well reasoning ought to be laid aside) I have set my Self
to observe the Laws of Decency as well as those of good Discourse, to Consider
things as they really are in their own Natures, to represent them as I find
them with all Calmness and Sedateness, to regard nothing but the pure Merits of
the Cause, and to treat that Party of Men I write against with that Candor and
Respect as may the better dispose them to lend Attention to my Arguments,
Considering it as one of the Principal Rules of the Art of Persuasion to gain
upon the Affections of Men in order to the Conviction of their Judgments. And I
do not know that I am guilty of any incivility toward the Men I deal with,
unless it be that of Contradicting them. Wherein as they are even with me, so I
hope they will not be less so in the other part, but will treat me with the
like return of Civility and good Temper, in Case they shall think fit to make
any.

The Occasion of this undertaking was a Certain late Book called Christianity
Not Mysterious, one of the most Bold, daring and irreverent pieces of Defiance
to the Mysteries of the Christian Religion that even this Licentious Age has
produced, and which has been supposed to have done great Battery and Execution
upon them, and to be indeed a very shrewd and notable Performance even by
people of competent Sense and Learning, not excluding the Author himself who to
show his good Opinion both of his Cause and of his Management of it, has since
published a Second Edition of his Book, with inlargements, and with his Name.
To which I thought once to have returned a direct and Formal Answer by way of
Solution of his Objections, till upon further Consideration I judged it better
to give an Absolute Account of the Positive Side of the Question; and after
having laid such grounds in it as might be made use of for the Confutation of
his Book, to make a short Application of them in a few Strictures upon it at
the End of Mine. But after I had laid those Grounds in the Absolute part, I
found the Application of them was so easy to the Author's Objections, that
they might as well be made by my Reader, who might with such readiness out of
the Principles here established form an Answer to all that deserves one in that
Book, that I thought there was no need of enlarging the Bulk of mine upon that
account. Which accordingly though I do not call by the Name of an Answer to
Christianity Not Mysterious, I cannot but reckon to have all the Substance
(though not the Formality) of a Reply to that Treatise, it being much the same
thing in effect either to unlock a door for a Man, or to put into his hands a
Key that will.

I write neither for Favor nor for Preferment, but only to serve the Cause of
Christianity (for so I call that of its Mysteries) and the interest of that
Church which is so great a Friend to it and Maintainer of it according to its
purest and most Primitive State of Apostolical and Evangelic Perfection. Of
whose Communion it is my Happiness to be a Member, my Glory to be a Priest, and
that I had better Abilities to do her Service, my highest Ambition. However
such as they are I humbly devote and employ them to that purpose, as I do this
and all other my Labors. I hope what I have written may do some Service to the
Cause whose Defense it Undertakes, and if it does, I shall not much regard the
resentments of any Designing or not so well affected Persons, Great or Little,
whose displeasure it may provoke, though I have taken all due Care not to give
any body any reasonable Offense. And so I Commit the following Papers to the
attentive Perusal of the Candid and Considerate Reader, and to the Blessing of
God.

THE CONTENTS.
Chapter I. OF Reason. Page 18. Chapter II. Of Faith. p. 53. Chapter III. The
Distinction of things Contrary to Reason, and above Reason, Considered. p. 100.
Chapter IV. That Human Reason is not the Measure of Truth. p. 137. Chapter V.
That therefore a things being Incomprehensible by Reason, is of it self no
Concluding Argument of its not being true. p. 230. Chapter VI. That if the
Incomprehensibility of a thing were an Argument of its not being True, Human
Reason would then be the Measure of Truth. p. 243. Chapter VII. That therefore
the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no just Objection against the Belief of
it. With an Account of the Cartesian Maxim, that we are to Assent only to what
is Clear and Evident. p. 251. Chapter VIII. Wherein is shown what is the true
Use of Reason in Believing. p. 282. Chapter IX. An Application of the foregoing
Considerations to the Mysteries of Christianity. p. 294. Chapter X. The
Conclusion of the Whole, with an Address to the Socinians. p. 307. Postscript.
p. 339.
The Introduction.
1. AMong the various Conjectures Men of a Prophetic Spirit have fallen into
Concerning the last events, we have had See Mrs. Bourignon 's Works at large*
particularly Vol. 7. Part 2d. page 193. As also Mr. Poiret 's Oeconomic Divine
Vol. 5. p. 338.
this Opinion not long since advanced for one, that as God formerly by
rejecting the Jews made way for the Gentiles, so in the latter days he will in
like manner by rejecting the Gentiles make way for the Jews to enter into the
Christian Church. That the state of Christianity being become entirely Corrupt,
and all over Anti-christianiz'd, the First of those Viols of the Divine Wrath
that are to exterminate the Wicked, and usher in the Terrors of the Great Day,
shall fall upon the Christian World, that Christendom shall be utterly
dissolved, broken in pieces, and destroyed, and that the Jews shall be replaced
and re^establish'd upon its Ruins. And, to render it Worthy of so Sore a
Calamity, that the generality of its Professors shall not only greatly depart
from the Primitive Power of the Evangelic Spirit, by Apostatizing from the
Purity and Perfection of both Christian Faith and Life (which we have already
seen come to pass) but shall even lay down their Holy Profession, renounce
their very Faith and Religion, and turn Infidels. Upon the latter part of which
Opinion those Words of our Savior seem to cast a very suspicious Aspect, Luke
18. 8.
When the Son of Man comes, shall be find Faith upon the Earth? As upon the
Former do also those words of St. Paul, Romans 11. 19, 20, 21, 22.
Thou will say then, The Branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in.
Well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by Faith. Be
not highminded, but fear. For if God spared not the Natural Branches, take heed
lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the Goodness and Severity of God:
On them which fell, Severity; but toward thee, Goodness, if thou continue in
his Goodness. Otherwise thou also shall be cut off: that is, as a dead,
withered and unfruitful Branch, as were the Jews for the same Reason before,
and as our Savior tells us every unfruitful Branch shall be. Ioh. 15. 2.


2. And truly if one were to judge of these Men's Opinion by the present face
and state of things, one would be inclined to think it true, and that they had
the right Key of Prophecy in their hands. For sure by all Signs and
Appearances, the Course of the World seems to drive this way; and if there be
such a Fatal Revolution to come, no doubt but that we are with large steps
hastening to it. For how are the Vitals of Religion continually struck at, the
Foundations of it unsettled and undermined, its venerable Articles disputed and
ridiculed, and by what a slender thread does Christianity hang! The great
Complaint for a long while has been of the Decay of Christian Piety, and the
Universal Corruption of Manners. But now our Religion is corrupted as well as
our Manners, and we every day make shipwreck of our Faith as well as of a good
Conscience. So that we have now filled our measure, and are every way ripe for
Destruction. Some deny all Revealed Religion, and consequently the Christian;
others allowing the Divinity of the Religion deny that of its Author, together
with the Doctrines of the Trinity, Incarnation and Satisfaction; others again
owning his Divinity deny the necessity of Believing it; others again granting
that, and the other Points, deny the necessity of his Satisfaction, which is
not only resolved into mere Prudential Reasons (as formerly) instead of being
grounded upon the Essential Order and Justice of God, but is brought down so
low of late as to be made an Accommodation and Condescension to, and a gracious
Compliance with the common Weaknesses and Prejudices of Mankind. Thus is the
Christian Religion so mangled and dismembered by some, and so odly and
insidiously represented by others, that between them both the general Faith of
the thing is endangered, and a ready way prepared to Skepticism and Infidelity.

3. Not that I think it ought to be any just matter of Scandal to any
considering Christians, or Prejudice to their Holy Religion to see so many
Corruptions of it, and Apostacies and Revoltings from it; since this is no more
than what the Holy Spirit of God has often forewarned us shall come to pass in
the latter days; wherein we are expressly told, that perilous times shall come,
and that Men shall resist the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.
be proud and high-minded, of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the
Faith. And moreover that they shall privily bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet.
2.
even denying the Lord that bought them. This therefore I say ought in reason
to be no matter of scandal to any Christians. And so neither ought the poor,
humble, suffering condition of Jesus Christ to have been any to the Jews, since
this also was plainly foretold of the Messiah, and made a notable part of his
Character. And yet we find that the Cross of Christ was a stumbling block to
the Jews, and so no doubt are the present sufferings, I may say Crucifixion, of
his Religion to many Christians; the generality of which measure the certainty
of their Faith by the firmness and constancy of its Professors, and are apt
more to stagger and take offense at the untoward appearance of any Event, than
to be confirmed in their belief from its agreement with Ancient Prophecies.

4. In the mean time what do those without think of us! Particularly the
Heathens, among whom no doubt there are some that neither want Intelligence nor
Curiosity to acquaint themselves with the present state of Christendom. What a
confirmation must it be to these Men in their Infidelity, to see Christians
grow weary of their own Religion, and willing to part with those great and
weighty Articles of it for which the holy Martyrs shed their Blood, and which
could not be extorted from them by all the might and power of their cruel
Emperors. Can it be expected that these Men should embrace a Religion which
they see thus continually deserted by its own Disciples! Or rather instead of
converting themselves to Christianity will they not look every day when the
Christians shall come over to them! For truly this seems to be the state of the
Christian World at this time. We are posting as fast as we can into Heathenism,
and stand even upon the brink of Infidelity. The great Articles of our Religion
are giving up every day, and when Men have parted with these, we are very much
beholden to them if they retain any of the rest, there being nothing in
Christianity considerable enough, when the great Mysteries of the Trinity,
Incarnation etc. are taken away, to make it appear an Institution worthy of
God, or to challenge the Assent of any thinking and considering^ Man But why do
I talk of running into Heathenism? I am afraid we are tending further. For as
from a Socinian it is easy to commence a Deist; so he that is once a Deist is
in a hopeful way to be an Atheist whenever he please.

5. I do not speak these things out of a Spirit of Peevishness and
Dissatisfaction, as some who being full of a Querulous Splenetick Humor, and
knowing not how better to dispose of it to their ease, give it vent upon the
Times, of which they are always complaining right or wring. No, the deplorable
and dangerous state of Christianity, and the too visible growth of Socinianism
and Deism among us extort these Reflections from me, and have given me many a
troublesome and uneasy Thought in my private Retirements. For my Satisfaction
under which, my best Salvo has been to consider that God governs the World, and
that Jesus Christ, who is the Head of his Church, will preserve it from all the
Powers of Earth, and even from the Gates of Hell. And that though now he seems to
be asleep in this Sacred Vessel while the Tempest rages, and the Waves beat
against it, and almost cover it, yet it is to be hoped he will awake, and rebuke
the Winds and the Sea, and make all calm and quiet again. However in the mean
time it is fit the Mariners should work, and neglect the use of no means that
are necessary to the safety of their Ship; some by Writing, others by private
Discourse, and all by Prayers and a good Life.

6. But now whereas all Rational Method of Cure is founded upon the knowledge
of the Cause of the Distemper, he that would contribute any thing to the
stopping this Contagion of Religious Skepticism, that now reigns among us,
ought in the first place to consider the Reason of it, what it is that makes
Men so disposed to waver in their Religion, and so ready to part with the great
Articles and Mysteries of it. Now to this purpose I call to mind a very
considerable Observation of Descartes concerning Atheism, which I take to be
equally applicable to Infidelity, In the Preface to his Metaphysical Meditat.
particularly to this of the Mysteries of the Christian Faith: The Observation
is this, That those things which are commonly alleged by Atheists to impugn
the Existence of God, do all turn upon this, that either we attribute some
Humane Affection to God, or else arrogate so great force and penetration to our
own minds as to go about to comprehend and determine what God can, and ought to
do. So that if we would but carry about us this Thought, that our Minds are to
be considered as Finite, but God as Incomprehensible and Infinite, there would
be no further difficulty in and of their Objections. Thus that very Acute and
Judicious Person concerning the Grounds of Atheism. And in like manner I think
it may be said of Infidelity as to the Mysteries of Christianity, That the
great Reason why so many that call themselves Christians do so obstinately
cavil at them and dispute them, is, that either they think too meanly of God,
or too highly of themselves; that either they ascribe something Humane to his
Nature, or something Divine to their own; that either they set too narrow
limits to the Divine Power and Greatness, or carry out too far those of their
own understandings; in one word, that either they Humani^e God, or Deify
themselves and their own Rational Abilities.

7. And they confess in effect as much themselves. For the Reason that these
Men commonly give out and pretend for their not allowing the Mysteries of the
Christian Religion any room in their Creed, is, that they are above the reach
of their Understandings. They cannot comprehend them, or conceive how they can
be, and therefore will not believe them; having fixed it as a Law in the
general to believe nothing but what they can comprehend. But now where does the
Ground of this Consequence rest at last, or upon what Principle does it
ultimately depend? How comes the Incomprehensibility of a Point of Faith to be
a presumption against it; why is its being above their Reason in Argument that
it is not true? Why I say, but only because in the first place they attribute
so much to their Reason (at least by a Confuse Sentiment) as to presume it to
be the Measure and Standard of all Truth, and that nothing that is True can
really be above it. Here I say the stress of the matter will rest at last. For
should the Argument of these Men be reduced to a Syllogistical Form, it must
necessarily proceed thus, Whatever is above our Reason is not to be believed as
true;
But the Reputed Mysteries of Christianity are above our Reason:
Therefore the Reputed Mysteries of Christianity are not to be believed as true.


Now the only contestable Proposition in this Syllogism is the Major, which can
be proved by no other Principle than this, That our Reason is the Measure of
all Truth, and whose Proof must be in this Form, Whatever is above the Measure
of all Truth is not to be believed as true;
But our Reason is the Measure of all Truth:
Therefore whatever is above our Reason is not to be believed as true.


By this Analysis of their Argument into its Principle it is plain, that this
their Reason of disbelieving the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, viz.
Because they are above their Reason, does at last resolve into this, That their
Reason is the Measure of all Truth, and that they can comprehend all things.
For otherwise how should their not being able to comprehend a thing, be an
Argument that it is not true? This I presume is a Principle our Adversaries
would be loath to own, and indeed with good Reason, it being the most
extravagantly absurd and self-arrowgating one that can possibly enter the
Thought, or proceed from the Mouth of a Man. And accordinly I do not know any
Socinian that had the immodesty in terms openly to assert it. But this is what
they must come to if they will speak out, and what in the mean time they do
vertually and implicitly say. So then their procedure in short seems to be
this, They first set their Reason above all things, and then will believe
nothing that is above their Reason. And if this be not in an unreasonable
measure to exalt that Faculty, to carry it beyond its due bounds, nay to set it
no bounds at all, but strictly to make it Infinite, and so to ascribe to it no
less than a Divine Perfection, I must profess my despair ever to know what is.

8. To be the adequate Measure of all Truth, so as to have no one Truth above
the comprehension of it, is as much as can be said of the Reason and
Understanding of God himself. His Infinite Understanding is indeed truly and
necessarily so, and whatever is above his Reason is for that very reason most
certainly not true. Because he essentially comprehending all that truly is, it
must necessarily follow that whatever he does not comprehend must be nothing.
But to say the same of the Reason of a Man, or of the Intelligence of the most
illuminated Angel, would be to confound all distinction between Finite and
Infinite, God and Creature, and to advance the most absurd, and withal the most
impious and blaspemous Proposition imaginable. And yet this is the general
Principle upon which the Body of Socinianism turns, and by which it would be
most directly and most compendiously confuted.

9. I shall therefore take hold of it by this handle: And since that which is a
Principle one way, as we argue forwards from the Cause to the Effect, may be
considered as a Consequence another way, as we argue backwards from the Effect
to the Cause; and since there are these two general ways of Reasoning, I shall
therefore proceed both these ways in the management of the present Argument,
which accordingly shall turn chiefly upon this double Hinge. First, I shall
overturn their Principle (I call it theirs, because it is what they must at last
necessarily come to) by showing that Humane Reason is not the measure of Truth,
or that there may be some things True which are above the comprehension of
Humane Reason, and that therefore a things being above Reason is no concluding
Argument of its not being True. Secondly, I shall argue ab Absurdo, by showing
that if a things being above Reason were an Argument of its not being True,
then it will follow that Humane Reason is the Measure of all Truth, which if I
bring them to, I shall think them reduced to a sufficient Absurdity. These I
intend as the two great Pillars of this Work, which like the sides of an Arch
will strengthen and bear up one another, that which is liable to exception in
the former part being made out in the latter, and that which is liable to
exception in the latter being made out in the former. For if it be questioned
in the First Part whether this be indeed their Principle, That Humane Reason is
the Measure of all Truth, that will appear in the Second, wherein it will be
shown to follow from their supposition. And if it be questioned in the Second
Part, whether this their Principle be absurd, and so whether they are reduced
to an Absurdity, that will appear in the First, wherein this Principle is shown
to be False.

10. And when by this Method I have shown in general both a Priori and a
Posteriori, that a things being above Humane Reason is of it self no sufficient
Argument of its not being true, I shall then make application of all to the
Mysteries of the Christian Religion, which I shall show may be true
notwithstanding their being above Humane Reason, and so that their being above
it is no just ground to conclude them False, and that therefore they ought to
be believed notwithstanding their being above our Reason, which in this case
ought to be no prejudice to our Faith, supposing them otherwise sufficiently
revealed. Which whether they are or no I shall not discuss, my design at
present not being to enter into the detail of the Controversy, to prove the
particular Mysteries of the Christian Faith, such as the Trinity, Incarnation,
or the like, but only to lay a general ground and foundation for the belief of
those Articles, and to destroy that upon which the Body of Socinianism stands.
The Great and General Principle of which I take to be, That nothing is to be
believed as revealed by God, that is above the comprehension of Humane Reason;
or, That a Man is to believe nothing but what he can comprehend. Which
Principle I hope by the help of God, with the utmost Evidence and Demonstration
to overthrow. And because in order to this I must first give a direct and
professed Account of Reason and Faith, besides what will be said Incidentally
and Occasionally of them in the Course of the Treatise, whose main design is so
to adjust and accommodate the Natures and Properties of these two things
together, as to show the Reasonableness of believing the Mysteries of the
Christian Religion; thereupon it is that I entitle the whole, An Account of
Reason and Faith, in relation to the Mysteries of Christianity. This is the
Gross of what I design, the Particulars of which will be more distinctly laid
down and accounted for in the following Chapters.

CHAP. I. Of Reason.
1. AMbiguity of Words being one great occasion of Confusion of Thoughts;
whoever will Discourse clearly and distinctly of any Subject, must in the first
place fix and settle the signification of his Terms, in case they are
Ambiguous; that is, if one and the same Term be applied to different Ideas. In
this case, Definition of the Name is to go before the Definition of the Thing;
between which two I conceive the difference to be this, That in a Nominal
Definition the word is only determined to such a certain Idea, whereas in a
Real one, the Idea it self is opened and explained by some other Ideas that are
supposed to be contained and involved in it. Upon which account it is that
Nominal Definitions are Arbitrary, and therefore incontestable, and therefore
may be used as Principles in Discourse, as they are in Geometry; whereas Real
Definitions are not Arbitrary, but must be conformed to the Nature of things,
and so are not to be taken for Principles, whose Truth is to be supposed, but
for disputable Propositions, whose Truth is to be proved.

2. Reason therefore being an ambiguous word, and of various acceptance,
before I proceed to give an account of the Nature of the thing it will be
necessary that I define the Name; which will also be the better defined, if it
be first distinguished. Now all Distinction being a sort of Division, in which,
according to the Rules of Logic, the Distribution ought to be into the most
general, and most immediate Members, I shall accordingly distinguish of the
several meanings of this word, Reason, by the same measure as I would divide
any whole into its parts.

3. I consider therefore that the most general distribution of Reason is into
that of the Object and that of the Subject; or, to word it more Intelligibly,
though perhaps not altogether so Scholastically, into that of the Thing, and
that of the Understanding. Reason objective, or of the Thing, is again very
various: Sometimes it is taken for Truth, and that both for Truth of the Thing,
namely the Essential relations that are between Ideas, and for Truth of the
Proposition which is its conformity to those Ideal Relations. Thus it is taken
the first way for the Ideal Relations themselves, when we inquire whether the
Reasons of Good and Evil are ab Eterno, meaning by Reasons the Essential
Relations or Differences. Thus again it is taken the second way, for the
agreement or conformity of a Proposition with those Essential Relations; as
when we say, This is Sense and Reason; meaning that the Proposition is true,
and conformable to the Nature of things. Sometimes again it is taken for the
Medium, Argument, or Principle whereby as Truth is proved; as when we say, Do
you prove this by Reason or by Authority? Sometimes again for the Rules and
Measures of Reasoning; as suppose I should say, That Reason is the ^ittest
Study for a Rational Creature, I should be supposed to mean those Rules and
Measures whereby we ought to reason, and so to intend a commendation of Logic.
Sometimes again it is taken for Moderation; as when we say, There is Reason in
all things. Sometimes for Right, Equity or Justice; the observation of which is
commonly called. Doing a Man Reason. It is also taken for the End or Motive of
an Action; as when we say, For what Reason do you this or that; in which sense
it is used by the Poet; -- stat pro Ratione voluntas.

4. Come we now to the Consideration of Reason, as it is taken subjectively, the
other general part of its distinction, in which also there is some variety of
Acceptance. For it is sometimes taken for the Act, sometimes for the Habit,
and sometimes for the Natural Power or Faculty of Reasoning. For the Act; as
when we say of a Man asleep, that he is deprived of his Reason. For the Habit;
as when we say of a Man, that he has lost his Reason, when his Intellectuals
are mightily disordered and impaired by a Disease. For the Natural Power or
Faculty of Reasoning; as when we say* That Man is a Creature endued with
Reason. Which being a Proposition of Universal Truth, and that proceeds of Man
as Man, must necessarily be verified of every Man, and consequently must not be
meant of the Act or Habit of Reason, (for these are not at all times in every
Man) but of the Natural Power or Faculty of it, which is not liable to be
suspended as the Act, nor lost as the Habit, but is Essential to the Nature of
Man, that which constitutes him what he is, and distinguishes him from other
Creatures, and consequently is inseparable from him, whether asleep or awake,
whether sick or well.

5. Reason thus considered as it stands for a Power or Faculty in Human Nature,
may be taken again either largely or strictly. Largely, for the Power of
Thinking or Perception in general, whereby a Man is capable of knowing or
understanding any Truth, let it be by what means, or in what order or method
soever. Strictly, for the same Power proceeding after a certain special manner,
and according to a peculiar order and method, namely, from the knowledge of one
thing to that of another, or to the knowledge of what is, as yet, obscure and
unknown, by the knowledge of what is more clear and better known; concerning
which a fuller account by and by.

6. After having thus distinguished, with what exactness of order I could, the
several Acceptations of the word Reason, I shall in the next place define in
which of these Senses I now use it. By Reason then in this place, I intend not
Reason of the Object, but that of the Subject; and that not as to the Act or
Habit, but as to the Natural Power or Faculty of Reasoning. And that again not
as it is taken strictly, as it uses a certain particular process in its
operation, but as it is taken more at large for the power of perceiving or
knowing in general. According to which Sense Reason is here the same with
Understanding. And so it is often used; as when we say, The Reason of a Man
teaches him this or that; meaning his Understanding at large, or the general
Power whereby he understands. For if Science, which strictly taken is that
particular kind of Knowledge which is acquired by Demonstration, be yet often
used more largely for Knowledge in general, why may not Reason, the great
Principle and Faculty of Science, which strictly taken signifies a Power of
Knowing by such a certain way and in such a certain manner of proceeding, be
taken as well in a greater latitude, for the Power of Knowing or Understanding
in general?

7. And the Nature of the Subject and Question now under Consideration requires
that it should be thus used here. For when it is inquired whether there be any
thing in Religion above Reason, the meaning certainly can be no other than
whether there be any thing which surpasses the Power and Capacity of a Man's
Understanding to comprehend or account for? And he that says there is nothing
in Religion above Reason, is supposed to mean, that there is nothing in it
beyond the comprehension of a Man's Natural Understanding, nothing but what he
can profound and fathom. And so also he that says, that there are Mysteries in
Christianity, or things above our Reason, must be presumed to mean, that there
are Revealed Truths that so far exceed the measure of our Intellectual
Faculties and are of a size so disproportionate to our Minds, that with all the
force and penetration of Spirit, and the utmost application of Thought, we
cannot possibly comprehend them, be our method of proceeding what it will. I do
not intend by this to state the Question (which shall be done more fully in its
due place) but only to give an account of one of its Terms, and to show that by
Reason I both do and should here mean, A Man's Natural Power of Knowing or
Understanding in general. In which use of the word, it is no (...) Authority to
me that the Excellent and most Accurate Author of L' Art de Penser, defines
Log^ck to be an Art of well conducting ones Reason in the knowledge of things:
Where by Reason it is plain he must mean the same as Understanding,

8. What this Power or Principle of Understanding is in its self, or in its own
Nature and Essence, I do not pretend to know, as not having any clear Idea of
my own Soul, and indeed as not knowing my self at all by Idea, but only by a
confuse Sentiment of internal Consciousness. And therefore I shall not go about
to examine what it is. For the same reason also I shall not set my self to
consider whether the Understanding be any Power or Faculty really distinct from
the Soul, or only the Soul it self acting after a certain manner, this being
almost as obscure as the other; and I care not to employ either my own
Thoughts, or my Readers, upon things whereof I have not any clear Conception.
All that I shall therefore further treat of concerning the Understanding (for
so I now call our Reason) shall be with respect to its Operations, by which the
Nature of it is best known, and whereof we are not only Conscious by way of
Sentiment, but have also, or at least by self-reflexion may have, some Notion
and Conception by way of Idea.

9. Now these are ordinarily supposed to be three, Apprehension, Judgment and
Discourse: By Apprehension, meaning the simple view or perception of a thing;
by Judgment, the joining or separating of Ideas by Affirmation or Negation; by
Discourse, the collecting of one thing from another. And upon this threefold
ground our Systems of Logic have for a great while proceeded with great
Agreement. But as Authentic as Time and Consent have made this Division, I
cannot think it right, when I compare it with what by self-reflexion I find to
pass within my own Mind. For supposing it were true as to the matter of it;
that is, I mean, that Judgment and Discourse did really belong to the
Understanding (which yet the Philosophers of the Carcesian way will by no means
allow) yet the Form of it must needs be very unartificial and inaccurate. For
Truth being the general Object of the Understanding, and there being nothing in
Truth but Ideas and the Relation that is between them, it is impossible there
should be any more operations of the Understanding than Perception and
Judgment; Perception as to the Ideas themselves, and Judgment as to their
Relation. Which Judgment it is true may be either Immediate or Mediate;
Immediate when the Relations of Ideas are judged of by the very Ideas
themselves, or Mediate when they are judged of by the help and means of some
other Idea, but then all this is but Judgment still, though in two different
ways, the difference between them being the same as between judging of a thing
under the Formality of a Proposition, and judging of the same thing under the
Formality of a Conclusion. These indeed are different ways of judging, but
still they are both but Judgments, and one as much as the other. So that in
reality that which these Men call Discourse is but a species of Judgment; and
if for that reason they will consider it as distinct from Judgment and make it
a third Operation, they might as well have put in the other species too
(Judgment immediate) and so made a fourth. But then this is against the great
Fundamental Law of Division which requires that one of the Members ought not to
be so included in the other, as that the other may be affirmed of it. Which is
plainly the Case here, this being such a kind of Division, as if one should
divide a Living Creature into a Plant, an Animal and a Man, and that because
Discourse is as much a Species of Judgment as Man is of Animal. And herein
(though the matter be so clear that I need it not) yet I happen to have the
Authority of a considerable Philosopher Philoso. contract. p. 242.
on my side, Monsieur Derodon, who in these few words expresses his Sense full
and home to this purpose; The third Operation of the Mind, says he, is commonly
called Discourse, but is properly the Judgment of the Consequent, as inferred
from the Judgment of the Antecedent.

10. By this it is evident, that supposing the matter of this Division never so
true, that is, that Judgment and Discourse do appertain to the Understanding,
yet the Form of it is wrong; Discourse, which is here made a third member of
the Division, being contained under Judgment, which is the second, as the
Species of it. But neither is the matter of it true. For Judgment and
Discourse, or to speak more accurately, Judgment, whether immediate or mediate,
does indeed not belong to the Understanding, but (as will by and by appear) to
the Will. There is but one general Operation that belongs to the Understanding,
and that is Perception. For as I said before, Truth being the general Object of
the Understanding, and there being nothing in Truth but Ideas and their
Relations, all that the Understanding can here have to do will be only to
perceive these Ideas, and the several Relations that are between them. For when
this is done, then is a thing sufficiently understood, to understand a thing
being no more than to perceive its Ideas, and how they stand related to one
another. Here is the whole compass and full extent of the Understanding, and
all that we can possibly conceive by it; and he that perceives Ideas and their
Relations understands as much of them as is to be understood. Whereby it is
evident, that Perception is the only operation of the Understanding, and that
it can have no other. It Is true indeed there is variety in this Perception, it
being either Simple or Complex; Simple of the Ideas themselves, and Complex of
their Relations; which latter again is either Immediate or Mediate, (as was
said before of Judgment) but still it is all but Perception, though differently
modified; which therefore I conclude to be the only Operation that properly
belongs to the Understanding.

11. But now if all that of right belongs to the Understanding be Perception,
then it is most certain that Judgment cannot belong to the Understanding, and
that because Judgment is not Perception. For we are said to judge as we
perceive, and some are so much in haste that they will judge before they
perceive, which plainly shows them to be two different things. And that they
are so this one Argument well considered is a Demonstration, that Judgment is a
Fallible thing, that may be true or false as it happens; whereas Perception is
always true, it being a Contradiction that it should be otherwise: For what a
Man does not truly perceive he does not perceive at all. I conclude therefore
that Judgment is not Perception; and since Perception is (as has been shown)
the only opera^ion of the Understanding, I conclude again that Judgment does
not belong to the Understanding. It must therefore belong to the Will, which is
the proper seat both of Judgment and of Error too. And it is nothing else but
the Will's consenting to and acquiescing in the Representations that are made
by the Understanding. Which agrees well with those weighty and very fruitful
Maxims, That the Will is the Subject and Principle of all Error as well as Sin
(which indeed ought to be voluntary to make it culpable). That it is in our
Power to avoid Error by suspending our Judgment till the Evidence be clear,
though it is not in our Power to avoid Ignorance or Non-Perception of many
things by reason of the limitedness of our Faculties. That the fault of those
that err is, that their Wills run before their Understandings, that they judge
and pronounce before they perceive, or of things whereof they have really no
Perception, which indeed is a great fault, and the cause of all our disorders.
That we are accountable for our Judgments as well as for any of our other
Actions. And lastly, That God is not the Cause of any of our Errors, which
with respect to him are only Negations, occasioned only by his not having given
us larger Capacities; but with respect to our selves are Privations, proceeding
from the ill use we make of those Natural Capacities he has endued us with. All
which great and momentous Truths are grounded upon the very Principle now laid
down, (which by this may appear to be something more than a Curiosity) That
Judgment however commonly ascribed to the Understanding, does yet really belong
to the Will, and not to the Understanding, whose operations are all terminated
within the limits of Perception. So well do these things cohere together, and
so aptly does one Truth hang and depend upon another.

12. But as right as I think this Account of the matter to be, yet considering
what an innovation it is from the Scholastic Measures, and how like a Paradox
it looks, I think a little Countenance from Authority may do well to
counterpoise the Prejudice of Singularity. And because this is a greater
Innovation than the precedent one, I shall back it with an Authority
proportionably greater than what was used upon the other occasion. Recherche de
la Verite. Live. 1. p. 10.
It may be well concluded from what has been said (says a Modern Writer, and
whom I think I may venture to call a Philosopher) that the Understanding never
judges, since it only perceives, or since Judgments and even Reasonings, with
respect to the Understanding, are only pure Perceptions. That it is the Will
alone which truly judges in acquiescing in that which the Understanding
represents to it, and in voluntarily reposing it self therein. And that also
it is that alone which leads us into Error. Again; I say then that there is no
other difference on the part of the Understanding between a simple Perception,
Judgment and Discourse, but that the Understanding perceives a simple thing
without any relation to any thing whatsoever, by a simple Perception. That it
perceives the Relations between two or more things in Judgment. And that in
fine, it perceives the Relations that are between the Relations of things in
Discourse. So that all the Operations of the Understanding are no other than
pure Perceptions. All which he further explains and confirms by an Illustration
taken from Numbers, with some other very considerable Reflections upon it;
which for brevity's sake I leave the curious Reader to consult in order to his
better satisfaction.

13. To this Account of this most excellent Person I fully agree as to the
substance and matter of it, only would by his leave make some little Alteration
in the Form of it; concerning which he had no occasion to be sollicitous, as
not designing a formal and exact division of the Operations of the
Understanding; but only to show that they were all no other than pure
Perceptions. And so far his representation of the Matter is right, and so, I
suppose, will the Form of it be too if it run thus. The only operation of the
Understanding is Perception: Which Perception is either Simple or Complex.
Simple of the Ideas themselves, and Complex of their Relations. Which Complex
Perception is again twofold, Immediate or Mediate. Immediate when the Relations
of Ideas are perceived by the perception and collation of the very Ideas
themselves whose Relations they are; Mediate when those Relations are perceived
by the help or mediation of some third Idea, made use of as a common measure of
comparing those Ideas which could not be so collated together as to have their
Relations perceived by themselves. And in this, I think, we have a right
Account of the Operations of the Understanding, both as to Matter and Form; the
knowledge of which, considering how much Spirit is above Body, though it were
only a piece of Speculation and Curiosity, I should think of greater worth and
consideration than that of the Properties of Lines and Figures, or any of the
Phenomena's of Nature.

14. This Complex Perception, or the Perception of the Relations that are
between Ideas, I take to be the same with what we commonly call Knowledge:
Which is usually defined by an evident Assent, but I think not rightly. For an
evident Assent is the same as an Assent upon Evidence; that is, an Assent to an
evident thing, or to a thing whereof we have an evident Perception. But now
Perception and Assent are two things, (the former being the ground of the
latter) and it is in the Perception, not in the Assent, that Knowledge properly
consists. For Knowledge is most certainly an Act of the Understanding; and it
was shown before, that the only Operation of that is Perception. As for Assent,
that will be found to belong to another Principle. For Assent is no other than
an Affirmative Judgment; (for then a Man is said to assent to a thing when he
judges it to be so or so, and then to dissent when he judges it not to be so);
and Judgment, as was shown before, belongs to the Will. Nor is it any thing to
the contrary that we necessarily assent to whatsoever we clearly perceive. This
neither proves Assent and Perception to be one and the same, nor that Assent
does not belong to the Will, but only that the Will necessarily follows, and
cannot possibly resist the clear Light of the Understanding; which is a great
Truth, but no Objection. Assent therefore is always voluntary, though not always
free; and whether voluntary or free is a plain Act of the Will embracing and
acquiescing in what is represented to it by the Understanding. And therefore
though we do always assent to what we evidently perceive, yet Knowledge does
not consist in the Assent, but in the Perception, which is the ground of that
Assent.

15. For, to push the matter a little further, though Assent necessarily
follows upon clear Perception, and cannot be separated from it, yet sure we may
use Abstraction here, and consider Perception without considering Assent, the
Idea of the one not including the Idea of the other. But now I would fain know
whether he that clearly perceives the Relations of things one to another, may
not be truly said to understand or know those things? Or whether there be any
thing further requisite to the understanding or knowledge of a thing after a
full and clear perception of it? If not, (as I think no Man that considers what
he speaks will say that there is) then Knowledge is supposed to be in its
complete and perfect act of being by Perception alone, and that before any
Assent be given; which Assent therefore cannot go to the making up of its
Nature, since it was supposed to be complete without it. To which I add, That
let our Assent be joined with never so much Evidence, still we are said to
assent because we know, and to what we know. So that our Knowledge is here
presupposed to our Assent, and consequently is in order of Nature at least
before it, and therefore cannot consist in it. I conclude therefore that
Knowledge is not evident Assent, but Perception, particularly that Perception
which I call Complex, the perception of the Relations that are between Ideas,
whether as to Agreement or Disagreement. Which, I think, till we can meet with
a better, may serve for a tolerable Definition of Knowledge.

16. But now whereas this Complex Perception (as was noted above) is either
Immediate or Mediate; hence it is that our Knowledge also admits of the same
division, being either Immediate or Mediate, or if you please, Intuitive or
Demonstrative. Between which two the difference usually made is, that in
Intuitive Knowledge we have an entire and simultaneous view of things, and see
all at once; whereas in Demonstrative Knowledge our prospect opens by degrees
and we proceed step by step, advancing from the knowledge of one thing to that
of another. This account indeed is true, but not explicit enough to make it
clear: For it is Characterising from the effect only, and does not explain how
our view in Intuitive Knowledge comes to be so entire, and in Demonstrative so
gradual and progressive. This therefore must be deduced higher, and explained
by a more distinct Principle. And I think we shall distinguish them more
clearly and exactly by saying, That Intuitive Knowledge is when we perceive the
agreement or disagreement of one Idea with another immediately and by
themselves, without the mediation or intervention of any other Idea.
Demonstrative, when this agreement or disagreement is perceived not
immediately, by comparing the Ideas with themselves, but mediately, by
comparing them with a third; that is, when we perceive them to agree or
disagree with themselves, as we find them to do so with some third Idea, which
we are oftentimes forced to make use of as a common measure, because we cannot
always, by reason of the narrowness of our Faculties, so collate and confront
our other Ideas together, as to see whether they agree or no by their mere
comparison.

17. This Demonstrative Knowledge is what in the Schools is called Science,
concerning which great stir is made, and variety of Definitions given, but
which by the measures already laid down, appears to be nothing else but a
Mediate Perception, or the perception of the Relations of Ideas by the
mediation of some other Idea. This other Idea is what we usually call a Medium
or Proof, because it is the common measure whereby our Ideas are compared, and
the Relations between them perceived. And it is the form and process of the
Understanding using this middle Idea as a measure whereby to perceive the
agreement or disagreement of the others, according as they agree or disagree
with this, that I would call Reasoning, which is not the very same with
Science, but the way and method to it. For we are said to reason in order to
know, and Science is the effect of Demonstration, according to that known
saying in Logic, Demonstratio est Syllogismus scientiam pariens.

18. If this Account of Reasoning be not clear enough to make it intelligible
in it self, or to distinguish it from Science, I would further explain it thus,
by saying that Reasoning (as I here consider it with respect to the
Understanding) is nothing else but the successive Perception of each of the
extreme Ideas with the middle one, in order to perceive the union that is
between them by the union that they have with the middle Idea. As for Example:
I am to perceive that Space is Body; and not being able to perceive this by the
immediate inspection of these two Ideas, I call in a third to my assistance,
and proceed to the perception of it thus: Whatever is extended is Body; Space
is extended, therefore Space is Body. Here it is plain that I perceive the union
of the two extreme Ideas Space and Body, by the successive Perception of the
union that each of them have with the middle Idea, extended. Now the very
Perception it self of the union of the two extreme Ideas, Space and Body, by
the mediation of the third and middle one, is what I would call Science: For
it is in the Formality of this Mediate Perception that I am said to know that
Space is Body. But the successive Perception that I have of the union of each
of these two extreme Ideas with the middle Idea in order to perceive the union
they have among themselves, is what I would call Reasoning. Which certainly
cannot be the very Perception of the conclusion it self (for that would
confound it with Science) and ^et must be Perception too, (or else it would not
belong to the Understanding) and therefore can be no other than this successive
Perception that I speak of. Whereby it may appear that the Reasoning here
specified is not only distinct from Science, but also from that Reasoning which
consists in illative Affirmations and Negations, and so is a Species of
Judgment, and accordingly belongs to the Will, not to the Understanding; as was
both remarked and accounted for before.

19. Those things which are known or perceived by Intuitive Knowledge we call
Principles, and those things which are perceived by Demonstrative Knowledge we
call Conclusions: Which though equally certain (because the Objects of
Knowledge) are yet not so clear as Principles, which serve indeed to the
demonstration of other things, but need none themselves, as being visible by
their own Light, and sometimes are so evident that they are not so much as
capable of any, but are strictly indemonstrable, there being nothing more clear
than themselves whereby they may receive further Evidence. We say of such
Propositions, That they are as clear as the Light; and there is more aptness in
the comparison than all that use it, I believe, are aware of. For Light is seen
immediately and by it self, and not by the mediation of any thing else; whereas
all other things are seen by Light. The Light that is thus seen by it self
answers to Principles, and those other things which are seen by Light answer to
Conclusions. And the resemblance holds as well on the part of the Act as of the
Object: For the first of these ways of seeing answers to Intuition, and the
last to Demonstration. So surprising is the agreement between Vision and
Knowledge, and so strange and wonderful the proportion in this as well as in
some other things between the Sensible and the Intellectual World.

20. Intuition is by far the most perfect and excellent way of Knowledge, as
being more clear, more simple, and more entire. More clear, for here we have
all Light without any mixture of Darkness, whereas in the other there is one
dark side. More simple, for here the Mind perceives the Truth by one single
View, whereas in the other it is fain to multiply its Perception. More entire,
for here again we have the prospect lying altogether before us in its full and
whole extent, whereas in the other it opens gradually and successively, the
Light stealing in upon us more and more as we go further and further, as it
does upon. Men that travel toward the East. To which may be further added, that
Intuitive Knowledge supposes and proceeds from perfection of the Understanding,
whose Perceptive Faculty is hereby argued to be very bright and clear. For it
must be a very clear Perception to perceive the Relations of Ideas by the very
Ideas themselves. Whereas Demonstrative Knowledge, and the necesslty of
Reasoning in order to it, is founded upon the narrowness of our Intellectual
Capacities, which not being able to perceive the Truth or Falsehood of a
Proposition by the single collation of the two Ideas that compose it, are fain
to make use of a third as a common measure between them; and so from the
consideration of something more clear and better known, to proceed in the
search of what is more obscure and less known. Accordingly we attribute the way
of Intuition to the most Perfect Beings, God and Angels. Though as to Angels, I
make no great doubt but that in the Consideration of very compounded Questions,
and such as include a multiplicity of Relations they are fain to use Reasoning
as well as we (as in the more simple ones we use Intuition as well as they)
though perhaps after a much more perfect manner, and by such compendious and
facilitating Rules as we know nothing of. And as they may be supposed when they
do reason, to reason better and more expeditely than we, so with equal
probability it may be presumed, considering the great disproportion of Natures
and States between us, that they use Intuition in very many things wherein we
are forced to have recourse to Reasoning.

21. Hereafter indeed when, as the Scripture tells us, all that is imperfect
about us shall be done away, and we shall be (...), not only like but equal to
the Angels, we shall be able to see ('it is to be hoped) by Intuition too; and
that many things which we here not only were ignorant of, but thought
impossible; things that were not only above our Reason, but, as we thought,
contrary to it. We shall not only be able to reason better than we do now, but
shall in most things not stand in need of any Reasoning at all, but shall with
one simple View glance over and through the Relations of Ideas, and so have an
entire prospect of the fair Field of Truth. But at present we must travel it
over, and that with many a weary step, there being but very few things that we
know by Intuition, no more than just to give us a taste of the great Privilege
of Heaven; and to encourage both our Desires and our Hopes of that perfect
State, when we shall be so far from needing any Logic to direct us in our
reasoning, that we shall have (in comparison) but little need or use even of
Reason it self. But in this present state of our Nonage and Infirmity our
Necessity of it is very great. For our Intuition is so short-sighted, and
reaches so very little a way, that, as, if we knew no more than what we can by
this Means attain to, the Compass of our Knowledge would be so very Scanty that
we should not have near light enough to direct us in our journey through the
World. So if we would Know more, and see to a further distance from us, we must
assist our Feeble Eye by the Advantage of a Glass. Now Reason is this Glass,
Naturally indeed a very good Prospective, but which Logic, and especially
Algebra, has improved into a Telescope. But yet still it is but an Artificial
way of seeing, and all Art supposes and argues a Defect in Nature. And though
it be a great help, yet we know it is no very great Commendation to a man's
eyesight to see with Spectacles.

22. And why then are we Proud? And why proud of that which should rather
deject us, and make us Humble, of our Imperfections and our Defects? Our
Natural Reason is a Mark of our Limitation as Creatures, and our Artificial one
of our Infirmity as Men, and both together give us but little Light, and help
us to see but a very little way off, and that after the most imperfect and
defective Manner, such as upbraids our Ignorance at the very same time that it
increases our Knowledge, our Reason not so much inlightning, as betraying the
Darkness of our Understandings. Some few things indeed we know as Angels do, by
Intuition (or else we could not so much as reason like Men) but still the main
Fund of our Knowledge lies in the Rational and Demonstrative kind, and we are
fain to use Clues and Chains to Conduct our Thoughts through the infinite Mazes
and Labyrinths of Truth, to proceed in a Train from one thing to another, to
walk step by step, and feel out our way with wariness and Caution like Men that
go in the Dark. And such indeed is our state in this Body and in this World.
It Is now a kind of Night with us, as having for the Most part only the Lesser
Light, Reason, for our Difection. As for the Greater, Int^ition, we have little
more of that than of the refracted Beams of the Sun a little before its rising,
and after its setting, enough to make a Twilight, a Mixture of Light and
Darkness, but such a Mixture as is very unequal, Darkness making the far
greater part of the Composition. And is not this Consideration sufficient (if
there were nothing else) to take down our Pride, and inspire us with a
Sentiment of the profoundest Humility and Self-dejection. If not, let us
Consider that even this Lesser Light that is to govern our present Night and
Darkness, does oftentimes fail us, and suffer an Eclipse. Let us Consider that
we have a darker side yet, and are subject to a Much lower Dispensation. There
being many things, and those of the highest Nature, and greatest importance,
wherein our Reason is utterly at a loss, and cannot help us out, and with
respect to which being destitute of Sight, we must be Content to walk
altogether by Faith. Concerning which in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of Faith.
1. FAith is a Term of great Ambiguity as well as Reason, but not to insist
upon the several Acceptations of it as it is used either in Divine or in Humane
Writings, I shall only define in what sense I here take it, and then proceed to
such Considerations upon it as may serve to lay open its Nature so far as is
requisite to the Present Design.

2. I do not take Faith here for the Object of Faith, but for the Act or Habit
of Faith, and that not Ethically considered, as it denotes the Moral Virtues of
Veracity, Fidelity, Honesty and the like, but Logically, as it signifies a
certain Assent, Judgment or Persuasion of the Mind, particularly that which is
founded upon Testimony or Authority. So that the Generical and Common Part of
Faith is Assent, wherein it agrees with some other Acts of the Mind, and the
more special and peculiar part that limits and Contracts the General, and
whereby the whole is differenced and distinguished, is the Motive and ground of
this Assent. It Is it seems an Assent grounded not upon the internal Reason and
Evidence of the thing, but upon the bare Testimony and Authority of the Speaker.

3. For I consider that there are two general grounds of Assent, Reason and
Authority. That is, we assent to a thing either because we have some Perception
or Knowledge of it our selves, or because its Truth is declared to us by
another upon whose Knowledge and Veracity we think we may safely depend. If the
Reason or evidence of the thing be imperfect and incomplete, that is, if we
perceive only in part, then we yield a partial and imperfect Assent, mixed with
some Fear or Suspicion of the Contrary, which is what we call Opinion. But if
the Evidence be full and perfect, then we yield a firm and most assured Assent,
which is generally distinguished from the other by the Name of Knowledge, which
according to the common Notion and Definition of it is an Evident Assent. But
it was shown before that Knowledge does not Formally Consist in the Assent, but
in the Perception which is the Ground of the Assent. And indeed how is it
possible it should consist in any thing else? For (to give yet a further
Confirmation to what has been already offered upon this Occasion) let Assent be
never so evident, the evidence lies in the Perception, not in the Assent, which
of it self is a blind dark Act of the Mind, and can be said no otherwise to be
Evident, than as it is an Assent to an Evident thing, that is, to what we
perceive. But now Perception and Assent are not only two things, but such as
belong also to two different and distinct Faculties, and therefore can never
join together to make up Knowledge, which is an Act only of one. And indeed to
speak the truth, Evident Assent (as it is here applied) seems to me a mere
jumble of Words confusely uniting together in one Idea Operations that belong
to distinct Faculties, one belonging to the Will and the other to the
Understanding. And how the result of this heterogeneous Composition should be
Knowledge, I must confess to be indeed a Mystery above my Comprehension. And
besides, after all, an Evident Assent when resolved into more words will amount
to the same as an Assent to what we know, and would it not be a Notable
Definition of Knowledge, to say, that it is an Assent to what we know?

4. If then Knowledge be not an Evident Assent, and indeed as to the Formality
of it has nothing of Assent in it, as consisting purely and wholely in
Perception, it is plain that this Assent to an evident thing ought not to be
called Knowledge. For it is necessary that the several Species of Assent should
all have the general Nature of Assent in them, and consequently this being a
certain Species of Assent must partake of the nature of Assent in general,
which it cannot do if it be Knowledge, for that were to pass over into another
Kind, Knowledge not being Assent, but Perception. It Is therefore most clear and
evident that our Common Systemes have here also gone upon a wrong ground, and
that Knowledge ought not to be put into the Number of the Three Assents (which
are usually reckoned to be Faith, Opinion and Science) since the Assent whose
ground is full Evidence, and which is the only one that may pretend and is
commonly presumed to be Knowledge, is most apparently not so, as differing from
it no less than in the whole kind.

5. If then it be demanded by what Name I would distinguish this Second Assent
to a thing when the Evidence is full and complete from the former wherein the
Evidence is supposed not to be so perfect, I answer that indeed (so little have
these things been Considered as they ought) there is no proper Name, that I
know of, for it. When we assent to a thing of incomplete Evidence we call it
Opinion, and when we assent to a thing whose Evidence is complete this has been
usually called Knowledge, but certainly with the utmost impropriety, knowledge,
as appears, being quite another thing. But by what name to call it, or how to
distinguish it, I pro^ess I know not. Not for want of real difference and
distinction in the thing (for my Thought of it is very distinct) but merely
because we want a word for it. As we do in like manner for Assent upon Reason
in general to distinguish it from Assent upon Authority in general. For as
Assent upon Authority in general Abstracting from Humane or Divine is called
Faith, so also Assent upon Reason in general abstracting from complete or
incomplete should be called somewhat, if one could tell what, as every
generical Idea ought to be distinguished by a generical Name. But since our
Language affords not any one word that will serve to either of these purposes
we must be content with the De^initio instead of the Definitum, and express the
things at large, by saying Assent upon Reason or Evidence, and Assent upon such
Evidence as is full and complete, which is sufficient to distinguish it from
Assent upon evidence incomplete, though we have no one proper word for this as
we have for the other, which is fitly called Opinion, whereby we denote the
imperfection both of the Evidence and of the Assent.

6. But now if the Assent he not grounded upon any internal Reason or Evidence
of the thing at all, but only upon Testimony or Authority, then we call it
Faith. Which appears to be an Assent of a quite different Nature from the other
two. For they both agree in the general Nature of Assent upon Evidence, and
differ only as the Evidence differs, and that is gradually, as complete differs
from incomplet^. But Faith differs from them both in the whole Kind, as having
no Evidence at all, but only Authority for its Ground. And thus we have here a
Threefold Assent, (though not such as is taught us in the Schools) the Account
of which in short proceeds thus. All Assent in general is either upon Reason or
Authority. If the Reason be incomplete then it is Opinion. If complete, then
it is another kind of Assent for which as yet there wants a Name, as also there
does for Assent upon Reason in General. But if the Assent be upon Authority
only, then it is Faith.

7. Now this Authority may be either of God or of Man. If the Authority
whereupon our Assent is grounded be of Man, then the Assent that is so grounded
is Human Faith. If of God, then it is Divine Faith. Between which two there is
this in Common, that they both proceed not upon the internal Light and Evidence
of the thing but upon Authority, and so agree in the general Nature of (...)*
only as the Authority differ (...) Faith also varies, and Human Authority
differing from Divine just as much as Fallible differs from Infallible* the
same in proportion will also (...) between Human and Divine ^aith. That is, the
former will always be a Fallible, and the latter an Infallible Assent.

8. Human Faith (though sometimes as actually undeceived as Divine) is yet
always liable to Error and Deception, and so doubtful, hazardous and uncertain
even when actually true, like a Conclusion drawn from uncertain Premises; in
which respect it resembles Opinion, and that so much that some have confounded
it with it, though I think illogically enough, since though there be a like
uncertainty in both Assents, yet they differ extremely in their Formal Motives,
one being grounded upon Reason, and the other upon Authority. And the
Distinction of these Assents is not taken from the degree of Certainty wherein
they agree, but from the Quality of the Motive wherein they differ. However
though this makes a great difference in Notion, it makes None in the Affairs of
Civil Life, and the Faith of him that believes the Testimony of a Man will as
to all real intents and purposes go for no more than his Opinion. And that
because though different Assents as to the Formality of their Motives, they are
yet Much at one rate for Certainty, being both Fallible in their Grounds, and
so subject to Error and Deception.

9. But the Case is quite otherwise as to Divine Faith whose Foundation stands
too sure not only to be overturned, but even so much as shaken. This Faith is
strictly and Absolutely infallible, not subject to the least Error, or
Possibility of Erring, as having the very Ground and Pillar of Truth it self,
the Omniscience and Veracity of God for its Security, than which there neither
Needs, nor Can be Greater. It Is Most Certain that God is both Actively and
Passively Infallible, his Omniscience will not suffer him to be deceived
himself, and his infinite Veracity and Truth will not suffer him to deceive us.
And therefore he that builds his Faith upon his Authority, goes upon the Most
sure Grounds, and cannot possibly Err in his Assent. And as he is secure from
Error, so he is also from all just reason of Scruple or Fear, and leaning upon
a firm and indefectible Support, may stay and repose himself upon it with full
Acquiescence. So that there is all the Certainty that can be in this Faith,
both Objective and Subjective, that of the Thing, and that of the Person. The
thing assented to is most undoubtedly true in it self, and he that assents to
it may be most firmly assured and persuaded of the Truth of it in his own Mind,
and among all Temptations to Doubt and Distrust may with great Triumph and
Confidence say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 12.
I know whom I have believed.

10. It was observed a little before of Humane Faith that it resembles Opinion,
in as much as they are both dubious and uncertain Assents, as proceeding upon
grounds of like uncertainty, though otherwise of different Natures. Now as this
Faith resembles Opinion, so in like manner it may be observed of Divine Faith
that it resembles Science, or rather that Second Assent (for so I am forced to
call it for want of a better Name) which we lately discoursed of, and placed
between Opinion and Faith. The Comparison here bears the same proportion as to
Certainty, as it did in the other Case as to uncertainty. Divine Faith has all
the Certainty that is possible, and therefore to be sure as much as Science or
that Second Assent can have. There is as much Certainty in the thing assented
to, and there may be as much Assurance and firmness of Persuasion in the Assent
it self, or in other words what a man believes upon the Authority of God is in
it self as certain as what he knows, and he may also be as Certain of it. For
he that assents to a thing upon full evidence can but assent fully and
perfectly without suspense or hesitation, and so also can he that assents to a
thing upon Divine Authority only. His Ground is every whit as Firm and Sure as
the others, and why then should the Measure of his Assurance be less? It cannot
possibly be if he Knows and Considers upon what Ground he stands. So that thus
far, both in regard of the Certainty of the Object, and the Firmness of the
Persuasion, Divine Faith may be justly placed upon a level with the Most
Evident Assent whatever.

11. Nor I suppose will this be thought an undue Elevation of Divine Faith. On
the Contrary I expect to be Complained of for setting the Dignity of it at too
low a Pitch by those who say that Divine Faith is Firmer than Science. But it is
for want of the Latter that these Men so excessively ex^ol the Former. I call
it excessively, because it is what strictly and exactly speaking cannot be. For
what I Perceive or Know is even by that very supposition unquestionably true,
(or else I cannot be said to Know it) and what I believe upon the highest
Authority can be no more. To say therefore that Faith is Firmer than Science,
is like saying that one straight Line is streighter than another. But perhaps
their Meaning only is, that it is safer relying upon the Aut^ority of God than
upon our own Rational Faculties, which indeed is right, and I heartily wish all
Men were convinced of it. For though what I do actually and really Know be to
the full as true and certain as what I Believe, and I can no more be out in one
than in the other, yet it is More Certain in the general that God cannot
deceive me, than that my Reason cannot be deceived. Not that what I assent to
by Divine Faith can have a greater Objective Certainty than what I clearly and
distinctly Perceive or Know, but only that there is a Possibility, not to say
Danger, of my taking that for a clear and distinct Perception which ^ndeed is
Not so, and so though I cannot be deceived in what I do truly know, yet I may
be deceived in thinking that I know when I do not. So that Divine Faith though
not more Certain than Knowledge it self, is yet of greater Certainty than our
Knowing Faculties, and generally speaking the Believer goes upon surer grounds
than the Man of Reason and Demonstration. Because his Reason may possibly lead
him into Error, whereas the Other's Authority cannot. And when they are both in
the right, yet still there will be this difference between them, that his
Reason is only not Deceived, whereas the Other's Faith is Infallible.

12. And thus far we have taken a view of the more bright and perfect side of
Divine Faith, I mean that of its Firmness and Certainty, in respect of which it
stands upon a just level with Science. But it has also a more dark side, in
which respect it comes short of it, and must give it the Precedence. And I
think it may be very properly called a Dark side, because it consists in
Darkness and Obscurity, and which is still so much the darker, because it is so
peculiar to Faith, and makes so great a part of its Character, being the Main
Difference that distinguishes it from Science, or that Second Assent before
spoken of. For as to Firmness and Certainty, therein they agree. For Faith may
be Firm, because he that believes in God may be supposed not in the least to
hesitate or doubt of the truth of what he reveals. And it is also certain,
because it relies upon the most certain Foundation, the Testimony of God, who
is Infallible himself, and cannot deceive. And hitherto they run parallel one
to the other. But here begins both the difference and the disproportion, that
there is Clearness and Evidence on the side of Science, and that Second Assent,
whereas there is none on the side of Faith, which walks indeed upon firm
Ground, but altogether in the dark. For he that Believes does not give his
Assent because either by Sense or Reason he perceives the Object of his Faith
to be thus or thus, but merely because he has the Word and Authority of God for
it. Which though it be sufficient to found a Firm and Certain, is yet however
not enough to beget a Clear and Evident Assent. So that the great and
distinguishing Character of Science and the Second Assent, is Light and
Evidence, and that of Faith inevidence and Obscurity, which accordingly is
commonly said to be an inevident Assent. But how and in what sense it is so
seems not commonly to be so well understood, and for the Consequence of what
depends upon the right stating of it, deserves to be explained with all
possible exactness.

13. In order to which we are carefully to distinguish between the thing
believed, and the Reason or Motive that induces us, to believe it; even as in
Knowledge we distinguish between the thing Known, and the Argument or Medium by
which it is Known, the Scitum and the Formalis ratio Sciendi. The thing
Believed I would call the Matter or the Object of Faith, and the Motive that
induces me to believe it I would call the Formal Reason of Faith. Aquinas I
know calls them both Objects, 22 ^. Q. 1. Art. 1.
and then after distinguishes them by calling the Former the Material Object,
and the latter the Formal Object of Faith. Accordingly he says that the Formal
Object of Faith is the First Truth, meaning (as he afterward explains himself)
that Faith relies upon the Truth of God as its Medium, or Argument. Which
Medium I choose rather to call (and I think more intelligibly) the formal
Reason, than the formal Object of Faith. Since the Term (Object) seems more
properly to design the Matter of Faith, or the thing Believed, and is hardly
applicable to the Motive or Reason of Believing. However since we both mean one
and the same thing, there need be no debate upon the different manner of
expressing it, especially since if any one think his Term more intelligible and
expressive of the Notion intended by it, or has any reverence for it upon any
other Consideration, he is at liberty to substitute it in the room of the other.

14. This necessary Distinction being premised, it is in the first place to be
well heeded that when Faith is said to be an obscure and inevident Assent, this
Obscurity or inevidence is not to be applied to the formal Reason or Motive of
Faith, but only to the Matter or Object of it. I say not to the formal Reason
of it. For as there may be in general a clear Reason why a Man should believe
an Obscure thing, so it is most Certain that the formal Reason for which we
assent to the things of Faith is very clear. For this formal Reason is no other
than the Authority of God, Or rather, since this includes the Truth of the
Revealer as well as the Revelation it self (for otherwise of what Authority
would be the Revelation:) I would choose to say that the Truth and Revelation of
God do jointly make up the formal Reason of Divine Faith, which accordingly
proceeds upon this double Principle, 1. That whatever God reveals is true, 2.
That this or that thing in particular is revealed by God. For Faith has its
Reasons as well as Science (though of another Nature) and its Reasons are these
two, as will more distinctly, appear by disposing the Process of Faith into a
Syllogistical Form, which will be this.

Whatever is revealed by God is true,
This is Revealed by God,
Therefore this is true.
The Conclusion of this Syllogism contains both the Matter and the Act of
Faith, as it is an Assent to such a thing upon such a ground, which is implied
by the Illative Particle, Therefore. The two other Propositions contain the
Ground it self or the formal Reason of Faith, which you see consists of the
double Principle beforementioned. Now it is most apparent that these two
Principles are both of them sufficiently clear, or at least may be so. It Is
clear in the first place that whatever is revealed by God is true. This is
either self-evident, or may be proved from the Idea of God, and so has either
the Light of a Principle, or of a Conclusion, either an immediate or a Mediate
Evidence. And it may be also clear (and to be sure is so whenever our Faith is
well-grounded) that such a thing in Particular is revealed by God. And in both
these respects it is true (what is commonly said) that Faith is the Highest
Reason. For you see it is perfectly reasonable in its Fund and Principle, and
does at last resolve, as much as any Mathematical Conclusion, into a rational
ground of unquestionable Light and Evidence. With this only difference that a
Conclusion in Geometry is founded upon a Ground taken from within, from the
intrinsic Nature of the thing, whereas our Conclusion of Faith proceeds upon a
ground taken from without, viz. from the Authority of God, but such as however
in Light and Evidence is no way inferior to the other.

15. This by the way may serve to show the vanity and impertinence of those who
when they are to prove that there is nothing in Christianity above Reason, run
out into a Popular Ve^^ of Harangue about the Reasonables of the Christian
Religion and its great Accommodation to Human Nature, crying out with repeated
importunity that Man is a Reasonable Creature, Christianity a reasonable
Service, and Faith a Rational Act, nay even the Highest Reason, and the like.
As if we were for a Blind and unaccountable Faith, and denied the use of Reason
in Religion, or that Faith was founded upon Reason. Or as if because there is a
Reason from without for Believing, therefore the thing Believed might not from
within, and as to the inward Matter of it be above Reason, so as not to be
comprehended or accounted for by it. But this will cross my way again in
another place, Chap. 7. Artic. 9.
and therefore I shall not anticipate here what further Considerations I may
have occasion to bestow upon it there.

16. To return therefore, I say that this Obscurity and inevidence that is in
Faith, and upon whose account it is commonly said to be an inevident Assent,
does not belong to its formal Reason (which you see may be clear enough, as
clear as any Principle of Natural Science) but only to the Matter or Object of
it. That is, in other words the inevidence does not lie in the Reason of
Believing, but in the Nature of the thing Believed. Not that the matter of
Faith again is wholly and all over without Evidence (for then there would be no
reason to believe it) but only that it has no evidence from within, and from
the Nature of the thing it self, as was remarqu'd before. Not that this again
is so to be understood neither as if the Proposition to be believed were not so
much as simply intelligible as to the very litteral sense and direct
signification of its Terms. No, we are no more to believe we Know not what,
than to believe we Know not why, and whatever Darkness there may be in Faith,
it is still so much a Luminous Assent, and an Act of Reason, as to require that
we understand the simple Meaning of the Proposition we are to believe, as well
as the Grounds of Credibility upon which it Challenges our Assent. For the
general Object of Faith is Truth, and Truth is the relation of Connection
between Ideas, I say Ideas, for Truth does not lie in Sounds or Words but in
Things. Therefore to believe such a Thing to be True is the same as to believe
that there is a Connection between such Ideas. But then a Man must know what
those Ideas are, or else how can he believe they are connected. Therefore he
must understand something more than the Terms themselves, he must also have the
Ideas of those Terms, which is the same as to under stand the Meaning and
Signification of them. And indeed he that has no Idea or Conception of what he
believes, believes he knows not what, and he that believes he knows not what
cannot be properly said to believe any thing. In all Faith therefore the
Proposition Must be simply intelligible, and though the Truth of it be to be
Believed, yet the Meaning of it must be understood.

17. For we are again Carefully to distinguish between the Meaning of a
Proposition, and the Truth of a Proposition. The meaning of a Proposition is
only the Determination of the Ideas that are signified by such Terms; the Truth
of it is the Union or Connection that is between those Ideas. Now though a Man
does not see the Connection that is between the Ideas of that Proposition he is
said to Believe, yet he must in some measure perceive the Ideas themselves,
because in believing the Proposition he is supposed to believe that such Ideas
are so related and Connected together. When therefore it is said that the Matter
of Faith is inevident as to the intrinsic Nature of the thing, the inevidence
must not be thought to lie in the Ideas whereof the Proposition to be Believed
Consists, but in the Connection of those Ideas, that is, not in the Meaning of
the Proposition, but in the Truth of it, which is properly the Object of Faith,
as the Ideas themselves are of Perception. Which again by the way may serve to
discover another Instance of Impertinency in the Reasoning of those, who when
they are Maintaining that there can be no Article of Faith above Reason, divert
into pompous Flourishes and Declamations about the Intelligibility of the
Objects of Faith, and the utter impossibility of Believing what is not
intelligible. As if we denied the simple intelligibility of the Proposition, or
would have Men believe they know not what (which certainly would be a strange
degree of Implicit Faith, and more Nonsensical than that of the Collier) or, as
if that Proposition which is clear enough as to its simple Meaning might not be
inevident, and so above Reason, as to its Truth, or in other words, as if
Clearness of Ideas might not consist with Obscurity of their Connection.

18. But then it must be observed again that when we say that the Inevidence
that is in the Matter of Faith respects the Truth of the Proposition not the
Meaning of it, or the Connection of the Ideas, and not the very Ideas
themselves, this is not so to be understood neither as if the Matter of Faith
even thus considered, were Absolutely, and in its self necessarily inevident,
and such as could not possibly be known without altering its Nature, and
ceasing to be any longer the Object of Faith. I know the contrary Supposition
has prevailed in some Schools, where it passes almost for Principle and Maxim
that Knowledge and Faith are mutually Exclusive of each other, that the same
thing cannot be at once the Object of both, and that therefore if a thing be
believed it cannot be known, and if known that it cannot be believed. St.
Austin was of this Opinion, and has in many places declared his mind to this
purpose, particularly in his XL Treatise of his Exposition upon St. John's
Gospel. Tom. 9. p. 107.
And his Authority has recommended it (as it did most other things) to several
of the Schoolmen, particularly Aquinas, whence it has been transmitted down
among many Modern Writers of the Systematical way, both Philosophers and
Divines. But we must follow Reason before Authority, and whoever can be
prevailed with to lay the latter quite aside, and to use the other as he ought,
will I believe clearly perceive that nothing hinders but that the same
Proposition may be at once the Object of both Faith and Science, or that the
Same thing may be at the same time both Known and Believed, provided it be by
different Mediums, according to the diversity of the respective Acts.

19. For, not to enter into the wrangle and Dust of the Schools upon this
Occasion, it may be sufficient to consider that there is no manner of
Opposition between Faith and Knowledge, or the Most evident Assent as to the
Essence of the Proposition (that being not supposed to be denied in the one
which is Affirmed in the other, or the contrary) but only as to the Medium of
the Act. And that it is not the Absolute Nature of the thing Believed, but the
Quality of the Motive that specifies Faith, and distinguishes it from other
Assents. So that it is no matter what the Absolute Nature of the thing be in it
self, whether it be evident or not evident, Knowable or not Knowable, provided
it be assented to upon the proper Medium and Motive of Faith, that is upon
Authority, without any respect had to the Natural evidence of the thing, though
otherwise never so evident in its own Absolute Nature, so as to be the Object
of Science (though upon a different Medium) at the same time. For as I said
before, it is not the Nature of the thing, but the Quality of the Medium that
specifies Faith, and though the same thing cannot have two Natures, or be in it
self at once evident and not evident, yet why may it not sustain two different
Relations, or be considered in two different Mediums, so as to be said to be
known when perceived by its Evidence, and to be believed when assented to upon
Authority? Which certainly may be done as fully, and with as little regard to
its evidence, as if there were no evidence in the thing at all. So that the
Evidence of the thing does not hinder the Belief of it, supposing the Belief
not to proceed upon that Evidence, but upon its own proper Medium, Authority.

20. But to use a way of Arguing less Abstract, though it may be with some more
pressing and convincing. Suppose God should reveal to me a Geometrical Truth,
as that two Triangles having the same Base, and being within the same
Parallels, are equal, and I who at first received it upon his bare Authority
should come afterward to be able to demonstrate it my self upon the known
Principles of Art, who that well considers the Natures of these things would
say that my Science evac^^ted my Faith, and that I ceased to be a Believer
as soon as I became a Mathematician? For though I am now supposed to Know what
before I only Believed, yet why should this Knowledge destroy my Faith, since I
may still have as much regard for the Authority of God, and as little to the
Evidence of the thing as I had before the Demonstration, and would still be
ready to assent to it though there were no evidence to be produced for it, only
upon the Ground of Divine Authority. And, to use another Sensible though not so
Artificial way of arguing, I would fain know whether any one of those who are
of the Contrary Sentiment would refuse a Demonstrative Account of a Revealed
Truth, suppose the Creation of the World, merely for fear of injuring or
destroying his Faith, which yet he were bound in Conscience to do, if Knowledge
and Faith were so exclusive of each other, and inevidence and Obscurity were so
absolutely of the Essence of Faith as some pretend. For then it would not be
lawful to acquire the Natural Knowledge of any revealed Truth, because it is
unlawful to destroy one's Faith, and every Believer would have just reason to
fear all further Light and Information about what he believes, which yet I
think would be acknowledged by all an extravagant Scruple, such as can hardly
enter, much less stay long in any Considering head; And is withal Contrary to a
plain Exhortation of the Apostle, who bids us add to our Faith Knowledge 2 Pet.
5.
.

21. When therefore the Matter of Faith, as it is taken for the Truth of the
Proposition Believed, is charged with Obscurity, and Faith it self upon that
account is said (as it commonly is) to be of inevident things, the Meaning
ought not to be of an Absolute, but of a Relative inevidence. Not that what is
Believed is so all over dark and obscure that it cannot (while Believed)
absolutely be known, but only that it cannot under that Formality, and so far
as it is Believed, being necessarily in that respect inevident, how bright or
clear soever it may be in other respects. That is in other words, though the
thing Believed absolutely considered may be Evident, yet it is not so as
Believed, or in relation to Faith, because that has no regard to the Evidence
how bright soever it may shine, but proceeds wholly upon another Argument,
between which and the Evidence of the thing there is not the least Affinity or
Communication. The short is, the Object of Faith simply and absolutely speaking
may admit of Evidence, but then though it be never so evident and demonstrable
in it self, yet as Believed it is always Obscure, Faith having no regard to the
proper light and Evidence of the thing, but only to the Testimony of the
Revealer, whose bare Authority is the only Motive that determines her Assent,
and the only Ground upon which she lays the whole weight of it, though the
Truth of the thing in it self absolutely Considered, may also stand upon other
Foundations, be rationally accounted for by Arguments from within, and so be
seen by its own Light. But let the Light shine never so bright upon the Object
from other sides, Faith lets in none, nor has any regard to that which she
finds there, but connives at it, and walks (as I may say) with her eyes shut,
contenting her self with the certainty of Revelation, and leaving to Science
(if there be any) the Evidence of the thing. So that the Object is always dark
to her, how clear and bright soever it may be in it self, or appear, when
absolutely considered, to a Philosophic Eye. In which respect it falls very
short of the Perfection of Science, though in respect of Firmness and Certainty
it be equal to it, as was said before. All which is briefly couched in that
excellent Account of Faith given by the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 11. 1.
when he says, that it is the Substance of things hoped for, and the Argument
of things not seen. Where by Substance and Argument he equals it with Science
in regard of the Firmness and Certainty of the Assent, but by saying that it is
of things not seen he makes it vail and stoop to it in point of Evidence, in
which respect indeed Faith, as Firm and as Certain as it is, is as much
inferior to Science, as Darkness is to Light.

22. To gather up then what has been here discoursed at large concerning the
inevidence of Faith into one view. When we say that Faith is an inevident
Assent we are not to understand this inevidence of the formal Reason of Faith,
but of the Matter of it. And when we say that the Matter of it is inevident, we
should not intend by it that it is wholly and all over without Evidence, but
only that it has none from within or from the intrinsic Nature of the thing.
And when we say that the Matter of Faith is inevident from within, this again
is not to be intended of the simple Meaning of the Proposition, but of the
Truth of it. And when we say that the Truth of it is inevident, this again
lastly is not to be understood, as if it were always and necessarily so in its
own Absolute Nature, but only so far forth as it is Believed, or as it is
considered under the formality of an Object of Faith. Or in other words, the
inevidence of the Matter of Faith in respect of the Truth of the Article is not
an Absolute but a Relative inevidence. Not that the Matter of Faith is Never
Absolutely and in the Nature of the thing inevident (for it may be so too as
will be seen afterward) but only that it is not necessarily so, there being no
reason from the Nature of Faith that requires it should, which may consist with
Evidence, though it proceeds not upon it, and has no regard to it as a Motive.
So then the formal Reason of Faith is always Clear, the Matter of it Absolutely
considered may be clear or not clear, as it happens, according as the Nature of
the thing is, but as Believed, or as Considered under the formality of being
the Object of Faith so it is always inevident and Obscure, as being not
supposed to be assented to for the sake of its Evidence (even when it has any)
but wholly upon another Account, already sufficiently represented.

23. And thus having struck some Light into the Darkness of Faith, by stating
and explaining with what exactness I could in what Sense it is an inevident
Assent, I cannot forbear Observing by the way (though a little of the soonest)
of what Service this Account may be toward the grand Question of Believing
things above Reason. For if Faith be an inevident Assent so far at least as not
to respect the Evidence of its Object, why may not a thing be believed though
it be above Reason? For what though it be above Reason, is it therefore above
Faith? Has Faith any regard to Evidence? Or is it determined by any Rational
Motive, I mean that is taken from the Nature of the Object? Even when a thing
is evident, Faith is not supposed to assent to it because of its Evidence, and
why then may not a thing be believed though it be not evident? Some Contend
that Faith and Evidence cannot possibly consist together, and according to them
Not only what is inevident may be believed, but whatever is believed must be
inevident. But this I look upon, and have already shown to be a Mistake. And
it is a Mistake in the Extremity too. For I take it to be every whit as much an
Extreme to say that the Object of Faith is always inevident, as to say that it
is always evident. However, it is always inevident so far as Believed, which is
the Middle Point between the two extremes. The Nature of Faith requires at
least this Relative inevidence of the Object, whatever it be in its own Nature,
and we need no More. For if the Object of Faith be always inevident so far as
Believed, then will it not follow that it May be believed though inevident? For
my part I see nothing that should hinder this Consequence, if the Principle it
proceeds upon be right. The Principle is (and a very moderate one sure, the
generality of Writers straining the Matter a great deal higher) that the Object
of Faith is inevident as far as Believed. The Consequence is, that therefore a
thing may be believed, though inevident. It Is true indeed one of these is an
Absolute, and the other only a Relative inevidence. But this signifies Nothing
to the Argument. For why may not a thing really and in it self inevident be
believed, when even that which is Evident is Considered by Faith as inevident?
Why, then it is all one (as to Faith) as if it were so indeed; For what does the
Evidence signify, or what real alteration does it make, if Faith has no regard
to it, nor Consideration of it? And what should hinder then but that a thing
really inevident may be believed, especially if revealed by God himself, and
concerning himself. The short is, Faith as Faith has no regard to Evidence (I
mean that of the thing) and Faith as Divine has no need of it, and therefore
why an inevident thing may not be believed is what I do not understand, and
would be glad to Learn.

24. But to return (for I look upon this as too much a digression from the
present, and too much a Prevention of what is to follow to be further pursued)
after having thus discoursed of the Nature of Faith in General, and the double
Distribution of it into Humane and Divine, with proper Considerations upon each
of them, it remains that it be now further considered that each of these may be
either Explicit or Implicit. Then we are said to believe Explicitly, when we
believe determinately such or such a thing in particular, distinctly knowing
what that Particular thing is. And then Implicitly, when we believe
indeterminately and at large whatever is proposed to us by such an Authority,
not knowing what in particular is proposed, or what it is we Believe. Which
though it seems to carry the Appearance of an Assent too blind and hood-winkt
to be the act of a Reasonable Creature, may yet in its proper place become him
as much as the other, and indeed is every whit as rational an Assent in its
Ground and Principle. For all Explicit Faith is founded upon Implicit, and has
Implicit Faith in it.

25. To understand both this and the Nature of Implicit Faith the better we are
to Consider (what has been already intimated) that Faith proceeds upon
Premises, as well as Science, and is the Conclusion of a Syllogism. And I
further Note (what perhaps may not be unworthy the Observation of the Curious)
that the Major Proposition in Faith Explicit is the Conclusion in Faith
Implicit, as may be seen in the Syllogism before set down. Whatever is revealed
by God is true,
This is Revealed by God,
Therefore this is true.
The Major Proposition here (whatever is revealed by God is true) is the
Conclusion of Implicit Faith, whose act is as much to believe to be true
whatever God reveals, as the act of Explicit Faith is to believe that this or
that in particular is so. So that Explicit Faith proceeds upon Implicit,
borrows from it its Conclusion for its Principle, and begins where the other
leaves off. Just as in the Subalternation of Sciences, that which is a
Conclusion in one is a Principle in the other, so it is here in the
Subalternation of these two Faiths, whereof that which is Explicit may be said
to be Subalternated to that which is Implicit. Let not any therefore vilify or
disparage Implicit Faith as a blind and irrational Assent, since it lays a
ground for Explicit, which serves it self of it, using its Conclusion as a
Principle, even as what is a Conclusion in Geometry is a Principle in
Perspective. And as Geometry is therefore accounted the Superior Science, so
ought implicit Faith to be reckoned as the Superior Faith, upon whose
Conclusion the other proceeds, and which it self proceeds thus, Whatever is
revealed by him that is Infallible is true,
God is Infallible,
Therefore whatever is revealed by God is true.
Here besides that it is plain to be seen that the Conclusion of this last
Syllogism is the Principle of the precedent One, and that Explicit Faith
supposes what is proved in Implicit, it may be further noted that Implicit
Faith (as being the highest degree of Faith) is due only to the highest, that
is, to an Infallible Authority, the reason why whatever is revealed by God is
here Concluded to be true, being, because he is infallible. Infallibility then
is the proper ground of Implicit Faith, and accordingly the Church of Rome
assuming to her self the Character of Infallible, does upon that Supposition
rightly require it. I say upon that supposition, for she is right enough in her
Consequence, supposing her Principle to be true. But the truth of it is, that
is Most Extravagant, and such as carries in it such matchless Arrogance and
Presumption as befits only him who as God sits in the temple of God, 2 These.
2. 4.
showing himself that he is God. For God only is Infallible, and therefore he
only has right to require Implicit Faith. And to him indeed it is due from
every one of his Creatures in the highest Measure imaginable, as is also
Implicit Obedience upon the same Ground. Of both which we have a signal Example
in Abraham, Heb. 11. 8.
who when he was called by God to go out into a place which he should after
receive for an Inheritance, is said by Faith to have Obeyed, and to have gone
out, not knowing whither he went.

26. But now what can be more dark and inevident than this Implicit Faith? Its
Formal Reason indeed is sufficiently clear, and it resolves at last into a
Ground highly Rational, and so may be said in that respect to be the highest
Reason. For certainly nothing can be more Reasonable than to believe whatever
God (who is Infallible) reveals. There is therefore no Darkness on this Side.
Nay even the Light it self does not shine more Clear. But as for the Matter of
it (if I may call it so where nothing distinctly is believed) that is sure as
dark and obscure as can well be conceived, so dark as even to be Invisible. For
a Man to believe at large without any restriction or limitation whatever God
shall propose to him, let it be what it will, not Knowing what that is (like
Abraham's going, not knowing whither he went) is such a dark and obscure act of
Faith as has nothing clear in it but the Humility and Devotion of him who so
believes. This is a Faith Worthy of God, as well as peculiar to him, and it is
the great inevidence and obscurity of it that makes it so. For so far is the
Matter of it from having any Evidence in it, that it is not so much as Evident
what the Matter of it is. Here then is the very Blackness of Darkness, and he
that has this infolded Faith (as every true Believer has) and can thus trust
God in the Dark, where he sees nothing but only the general Reason of his so
doing, is not likely in any of the more explicit instances of it to plead the
inevidence of the Article to excuse his Infidelity, or to deny his Faith to an
otherwise sufficiently clear Revelation, merely because it is above his shallow
Reason.

27. Upon what has been hitherto discoursed it will not be difficult to give in
few words a Satisfactory Resolution of a Celebrated Question which among the
Schoolmen has made a great many, and that is, whether Faith belongs to the
Understanding or to the Will: It is plain by the Measures already laid down
that it belongs to the Latter. For Faith (as all acknowledge) is an Assent, and
Assent is a Species of Judgment, and Judgment (as has been shown already) is
an act of the Will, not of the Understanding, whose only Operation is
Perception, and consequently Faith is an act of the Will consenting to,
embracing, acquiescing and reposing it self in what the Understanding
represents as proposed and revealed by God. And indeed unless Judgment and
consequently Faith did belong to the Will as their proper and immediate
Principle, it is impossible to Conceive how a Man should be blameworthy for any
of his Opinions, or how he should stand accountable either for Error on the one
hand, or for Infidelity and Heresy on the other. For if Faith be an act of the
Understanding then since the only Operation of the Understanding is Perception,
the greatest Fault of an Infidel or a Heretic will be Non-Perception, which
indeed is not Error but Ignorance, whereas Infidelity and Heresy are always
supposed to include Error, and to be also the worst of Errors. And this
Non-perception is only a Negation, and such as resolves into want of Parts,
which is not a Moral but a Natural defect, whereas Infidelity and Heresy (as
indeed all that is Faulty) are understood to be Privations, and Defects of a
Moral Nature. But then to make them so they must be voluntary (nothing being
faulty but what is so) that is again they must be Wilful, that is, they must be
acts of the Will, and Consequently Faith which is the Habit whereof those Sins
are Privations, must also belong to the same Principle, or else in short there
would be neither Virtue in having it, nor Vice in being without it. And
accordingly our Savior in upbraiding the Jews with Infidelity does all along
not only by Confequence, but directly and expressly, Charge it upon their Wills:
Joh. (...) 40.
Ye will not come to me, that ye may have Life.

28. And thus I have gone thorough what I intended, and what indeed is of
greatest Consideration, upon this Subject of Faith. In the account of which if
I differ from any Authors of the better Character that have either professedly
or occasionally written upon it, particularly Baronius and Dr. Pearson, it is
not that I love to lay aside great Authorities, or affect to be by my self, but
because I follow the best Light of my Understanding, write with Freedom and
Ingenuity what I think, and endeavor to represent things as they are, without
having regard to Authority any further than I think it joined with Truth and
Reason. Which shall also be my Rule in what remains of this Treatise. In the
Mean time what has been hitherto discoursed concerning Reason and Faith may
serve as a good Preparation in order to an Account of the Great Question
Concerning the Belief of things above Reason. But before we enter upon any
thing of that Nature, it is fit the Distinction of Above Reason, and Contrary to
Reason be Considered and rightly Stated, which is the task allotted for the
next Chapter.

CHAP. III. The Distinction of things Contrary to Reason, and above Reason,
Considered.
1. THere are some Distinctions in the World that are without a Difference,
though Difference be the Ground of all Distinction, and this by some is
pretended to be of that Number, who will have the Parts of it to be Coincident,
and that Contrary to Reason and above Reason signify in reality alike, and are
but different Expressions for one and the same thing. And though they may be
reasonably suspected to do this to serve the interest of a Cause for whose
advantage it would be to have this Distinction taken away, yet they have the
Confidence to Charge the same upon those that hold it, pretending that it is
only a dextrous Shift and Evasion invented by Subtle Men as an Expedient to
relieve the Distress of a desperate Argument, when there is nothing else to be
said for it.

2. Which of these is the Evasion, either the denying or the allowing this
Distinction, will best appear by the Examination of it, which, besides its
Serviceableness to our Clearer proceeding in what we are now upon, I am the
rather induced to undertake, because (as Mr. Boil Observes in a little
Treatise upon this Subject) there are diverse that employ this Distinction, few
that have attempted to explain it, and none that has taken care to justify it.
Indeed He himself is the only Person that I know of that has written
professedly about it (and I cannot but wonder that a thing of such Curiosity
and Importance should be so little Considered) though I think he has not gone
to the Bottom of the Subject, nor is sufficiently clear even as far as he goes.
However because he has some Considerable Observations upon it (as indeed his
Thoughts are generally very good) and there is no reason why we should refuse
any additional Light in so dark and untrodden a way, I shall for the further
advantage and illustration of the Matter first draw up into a short view what
that Excellent Person has Meditated concerning it, with such Occasional
Remarques as I shall think necessary, and then proceed to state the thing
according to my own Conceptions, hoping that between us both it will be
sufficiently cleared, and that nothing of any Consequence will be overlooked
that belongs to the Consideration of this so little considered, and almost
Virgin Subject.

3. To give you then in the first place the Sum of Mr. Boyle's Account, He
proposes in general two things. 1. To declare in what sense the Distinction is
to be understood. 2. To prove that it is not an Arbitrary or illusory
Distinction, but grounded upon the Nature of things. As to the first he tells
you that by things Above Reason he Conceives such Notions and Propositions as
Mere Reason, that is, unassisted by Revelation would never have discovered to
us, whether those things be to our Finite Capacities clearly comprehensible or
not. And that by things Contrary to Reason he understands such Conceptions and
Propositions as are not only undiscoverable by mere Reason, but such as when we
do understand them do evidently appear repugnant to some Principle, or to some
Conclusion of right Reason.

4. Now before I go any further I would here by this great Man's leave, and
with due deference to his high Character, remarque, that though things
undiscoverable by mere Reason without Revelation may in a Certain sense be said
to be above Reason, in as much as they surpass the Natural ability of the
Understanding to make the first Discovery of them, yet this is not what Divines
mean by Above Reason as they use the Phrase in this Distinction, opposing it to
Contrary to Reason. For this Distinction was intended against the Socinians,
who generally reject the Mysteries of Faith as contrary to Sense and Reason, to
which we reply that they are not Contrary to Reason but only Above it. They cry
out that this is no Distinction, but a mere Shift and Evasion, pretending that
the I arts of it fall in together, and that what is above Reason is also
contrary to it, and therefore not to be believed. Now it is most plain that both
they that use this Distinction, and they against whom it is used do not. Mean
by things Above Reason such as are beyond the first invention or Discovery of
it. For besides that to mean that our Mysteries are only undiscoverable when we
say they are above Reason, would be too little a thing to oppose to Contrary to
Reason, it is also too little a thing to intend by Mystery, since though the
undiscoverableness of them by Reason might be a sufficient ground of their
being so called before their Revelation, it can be none now after they are
revealed. And therefore if we say of these Mysteries now that they are above
Reason, we cannot be presumed to intend it in respect of their
undiscoverableness. And it is as plain that that our Adversaries do not so
understand us. For they deny that things above Reason are to be believed, and
that because (according to them) above Reason and contrary to Reason are all
one. But now no Socinian that understands his own Principle would deny the
Credibility of things above Reason, as that signifies only undiscoverable by
Reason alone, much less would he say that what is above Reason (in that Sense)
is also contrary to it. No, without doubt they will in this sense both allow us
the Distinction, and the Mysteries (if they may be so called) that are built
upon it. But then this plainly shows that they do not understand it in this
Sense, any more than we.

5. Instead therefore of saying undiscoverable, he should have said
incomprehensible by Reason. Into which he slips unawares in the account of the
other part of the Distinction, things Contrary to Reason, by saying that they
are such as when we do understand them do appear repugnant, etc. which plainly
implies that the former things that were said to be above Reason are such as we
do not understand, even when discovered, and not such as we are not able only
to Discover, since otherwise there will be no Antithesis in the Second part, in
which there is nothing amiss except those words as are not only undiscoverable,
which in my judgment ought to be expunged as the Production of the first
Mistake.

6. Mr. Boil proceeds to illustrate his Explanation of this Distinction by a
Comparison drawn from Sight. He supposes a Man to be asked by a Diver what he
could see in a deep Sea. To which the Man is supposed to reply that he could
see into a Seagreen Liquor to the depth of some yards and no further. So that
if further ask't if he could see what lies at the Bottom of the Sea, his Answer
no doubt would be in the Negative. But then if the Diver should let himself
down to the Bottom and bring up thence and show him Oysters or Muscles with
Pearls in them, he would easily acknowledge both that they lay beyond the reach
of his Sight, and that the Pearls were Genuin and Good. But if the Diver should
further pretend that each of these Pearls was bigger than the Shells they were
contained in, this would be thought not only undiscernible by the Eyes, but
contrary to their Informations, and to admit this would argue the Sight not
only to be imperfect, but false and delusory, and accordingly it is presumed
that this he would not admit.

7. Now I not only allow this Comparison, but even admire it for the singular
Aptness and Pertinency of it to illustrate, even to the Sense, the difference
between things above and things contrary to Reason, only I think it seems to
proceed upon the supposition that by things above Reason are meant such only as
are incomprehensible by it, which certainly would make the Comparison much more
Apposite and Exact. Whereof he himself appears sensible at the end of it, where
offering to consider the Matter more distinctly, he tells you that the things
above Reason are not all of one sort, but may be distinguished into two kinds
sufficiently differing from each other. which he makes to be these, that there
are some things that Reason by its own Light cannot Discover. And others, that,
when proposed it cannot Comprehend. This indeed is true, but then he should
have said so sooner, and have told us withal that by things above Reason (as
the Phrase is used in this Distinction) he meant the Latter Sort only, the
Former not being to the Purpose.

8. However he proceeds upon that part First, that is, to show that there are
diverse Truths in the Christian Religion that Reason left to it self would never
have been able to find out. Of which he gives several Instances, which as not
being to the Point, I pass over, and come to his other Consideration of things
above Reason, meaning such as when proposed do surpass our Comprehension, and
that (as he well observes) upon one or other of these three Accounts, either as
not clearly Conceivable by our understanding, such as the Infiniteness of the
Divine Nature, or as inexplicable by us, such as the Manner how God can Create
a Rational Soul, or how this being an Immaterial Substance can act upon a Human
Body, or be acted upon by it, etc. Or else lastly as Asymmetrical or
unsociable, that is, such, as we see not how to reconcile with other things
evidently and confessedly true, whereof he gives an instance in the Case of
Prescience and Contingency.

9. He further observes (and I think rightly) that there may be difference of
degree in things above Reason, as to their Abstruseness. That some things
appear to surpass our understandings immediately, even before attentively looked
into. And other things only when a narrow inspection is made into them, being
intelligible enough in the (...)* and as employed in common Discourse. Whereof
he gives instances in Place, Time, and Motion. And he makes use of this
Observation to solve a Difficulty wherein it is pretended that we cannot
profess to believe things which we acknowledge to be above our Reason, without
discovering that we do not well consider what we say, and that we then talk
like Parrots. To which the substance of his Answer is, that we may talk of
those things according to that Notion of them which is more Obvious and
Superficial, though not according to that which is Philosophical and Accurate.

10. After this Explanation of what is meant by Above Reason and contrary to
Reason he comes in the Second place to justify the Distinction by showing that
it is grounded upon the Nature of things. And that he does by showing that
there is no Necessity that things above Reason should be also Contrary to
Reason. This he shows first of things above Reason in the first Sense, viz.
those that are undiscoverable by Reason alone, but this being not the sense of
Above Reason as it is used in this Distinction, and since things according to
this sense above Reason are not affirmed by our Adversaries to be contrary to
it, I pass over all that he says upon this part, and strike in with him again
where he shows the same of things above Reason in the Second sense. I cannot
meet with any thing directly under that Head, but only a few Passages here and
there scattered up and down. As when he says of Galileo, that when he first
made his Discoveries with the Telescope and said that there were Planets that
moved about Jupiter, He said something that other Astronomers could not discern
to be true, but nothing that they could prove to be false. And again when he
says that for a thing to be above Reason is Extrinsecal and Accidental to its
being true or false. Because to be above our Reason is not an Absolute thing,
but a Respective One, importing a Relation to the Measure of Knowledge that
belongs to Human understanding. And therefore it may not be above Reason in
reference to a more enlightened Intellect etc. which indeed is rightly and very
judiciously remarqu'd in it self, and no less pertinently to the present
business. And again when he says that there are some things true which yet are
liable to Objections not directly answerable, and so above Reason. He instances
in the Controversy of the Divisibility of Quantity, where each side of the
Contradiction is pressed with unanswerable Objections, and yet as parts of a
Contradiction, one of them must necessarily be true. And yet take which you
will you run into invincible Difficulties. Which indeed well concludes that a
thing that is above Reason may yet be true, and if true then not contrary to
Reason, it being impossible that what is so should be true. Which one
Consideration is indeed enough to justify the Distinction beyond all exception.

11. Mr. Boil has yet a further Observation concerning this Distinction too
Considerable to be passed over, and that is, that he looks upon it to be of
Importance not only to the defense of some Mysteries of the Christian Religion,
but even of some important Articles of Natural Theology, in which (as he shows
by several Instances) there are many Doctrins which must be acknowledg^d to be
true, and yet whose Modus is not explainable.

12. After this he Considers an Objection wherein it is pretended that the
granting this Distinction would be of bad Consequence, as affording shelter to
any unintelligible stuff that a bold Enthusiast may obtrude under the venerable
Title of a Mystery, that is above Reason. To which he answers very judiciously,
that he does not deny but that the Distinction is liable to be ill employed,
but that this is no other than what is common to it with diverse other
Distinctions, which are without Scruple Admitted because useful, and not
rejected because they have not the Privilege that they can never be
Misapplied. And that therefore both in reference to those other Distinctions,
and that he had been treating of, it becomes Men to stand upon their Guard, and
strictly examine how far the Doctrine proposed as a Mystery, is entitled to the
benefit of this Distinction. Which if it should be employed to justify any
thing, that, though styled a Mystery, is but a pretended one, the Error (as he
well observes in the Close of all) will lie, Not in the Groundlesness of the
Distinction, but in the Erroneousness of the Application.

13. In this you have the Sum and Substance, as briefly and as clearly as I
could represent it, of Mr. Boyle's Thoughts concerning things above Reason and
contrary to Reason, which, like all his, are great and strong, and (allowing
only for those inaccuracies taken Notice of) just and true. And now though what
this Excellent Person has offered may serve to let in a great deal of Light
into the Distinction, yet since a thing of such Consequence if true, and so
much Contested whether true or no, can never be made too Clear, and sometimes a
different, though not better, Representation of a thing may contribute to its
further Illustration, every Reader having his particular Point of View, so as
that the very ^ame Notion or Truth that does not Meet with him in one Posture,
may shine full in his Face and strike him with success in another, I shall
therefore under the Shelter of Mr. Boyle's Authority, and by the advantage of
his Light, venture to set down my own Thoughts concerning this weighty Point,
applying my self chiefly to that part of it, wherein I think the other Account
Most defective.

14. And first though it should be true that to be above Reason is to be
Incomprehensible, and to be Contrary to Reason is to appear repugnant to some
Principle or Conclusion of Right Reason, yet I do not think this of it self
sufficient either to Clear or to Justify the Distinction, since it may be both
again demanded what it is to be incomprehensible, and what repugnant, and again
disputed whether incomprehensible and repugnant be not the same, as well as
whether that which is above Reason be not also Contrary to it. And then we are
but where we were before. This Account of the Matter is then too Gross and
General to be rested in, and we must be therefore more minute and particular in
our Explanation of it, if we would be more Clear.

15. However since Generals are to go before, and do also prepare the way for
Particulars, I shall first propose the general Idea of things above Reason and
contrary to Reason, and then particularize upon that Idea, by opening and
unfolding more distinctly and explicitly what is contained in it, and by so
comparing and collating together the two parts of the Notion as to show the
real Difference that is between them. So that I shall make but one work of the
Explanatory and Iustificatory parts, supposing that there needs no more to the
Justification of the Distinction, than only to have the Members of it well
explained. For if the Idea of Above Reason be distinct from the Idea of
Contrary to Reason (as the Explanation of them will show that it is) then the
Distinction proceeds upon a real Difference, is grounded upon the Nature of
things, and has all that is necessary to a true and good Distinction.

16. By things above Reason then (as the Expression is used in this
Distinction) I conceive to be Meant, Not such as Reason of it self cannot
Discover, but such as when proposed it cannot Comprehend. And by things
Contrary to Reason I conceive such as it can and does actually comprehend, and
that to be absolutely Impossible. Or in other words, a thing is then above
Reason when we do not comprehend how it can be, and then Contrary to Reason
when we do positively comprehend that it cannot be. Thus in the General.

17. But to be a little more Particular, we are to Consider upon the first
Part, that when we speak of things above Reason, the word Reason here (as was
shown in the first Chapter) signifies the same as Understanding, and there
being but one only Operation of that, namely Perception, by Comprehend here
must be meant the same as by Perceive. So that when we say of things above
Reason that they are such as Reason cannot Comprehend, it is the same as to say
they are such as the Understanding cannot Perceive. But then when we say,
Cannot Perceive, it is to be carefully noted that this is not to be understood
of the literal and Grammatical Meaning of the Proposition, as if the thing said
to be Above Reason were perfectly unintelligible, but only of the Truth of it,
as was observed before concerning Faith. And then again when we say that Above
Reason is when we do not Comprehend or Perceive the Truth of a thing, this must
not be meant of not Comprehending the Truth in its whole Latitude and Extent,
so that as many Truths should be said to be above Reason as we cannot thus
thorougly comprehend and pursue throughout all their Consequences and Relations
to other Truths (for then almost every thing would be Above Reason) but only of
not comprehending the Union or Connection of those immediate Ideas of which the
Proposition supposed to be above Reason consists. And which is therefore said
to be above Reason not because the simple and direct Meaning of its Terms is
unintelligible, or because the Truth of it is not comprehensible in its
remotest and utmost Extent, but purely because the Connection of its Ideas, or
the manner of it, is not discernible, and that partly for want of sufficient
clearness of the Ideas themselves so as to be able to perceive their Union
Intuitively, and partly for want of a due and proper Medium whereby to compare
them, so as to discern their Union in the way of Science and Demonstration.

18. It Is also to be Observed upon the Second part of the Explanation, that I
choose rather to say that things contrary to Reason are such as we Perceive to
be Impossible, than such as appear contrary to some Principle, or some
Conclusion of Right Reason. This being the more General and Absolute Idea,
whereof the two other are but Instances and Specifications. For then is a thing
said to be Impossible when its Ideas cannot stand together or be united. Which
may be either because of the immediate Opposition and Inconsistency of the
Ideas themselves with themsel^^s so as Mutually to Exclude each other (as in a
Contradiction) or because of their inconsistency with some other Truth, with
which it cannot Comport. Or in other words, either because one of the Ideas
cannot consist with the other, by reason of the immediate opposition that is
between them, or because the Union of both is inconsistent with some Truth or
other, which therefore will not suffer them to be United. Which Truth will be
indeed either a Principle or a Conclusion of right Reason. And then we are said
to Perceive a thing to be Impossible when we perceive that its Ideas cannot
stand together, and that either immediately by the very inconsistency of the
Ideas themselves, or mediately by the Repugnance that they carry to some other
Truth, whether Principle or Conclusion. Which Repugnance I take to consist in
this, that the supposed Principle or Conclusion cannot stand with the Union of
such Ideas, and that therefore if such a Principle or such a Conclusion be true
(as is supposed) then such Ideas are not United, and indeed are as incapable of
Union, that is as impossible, as if there were an immediate inconsistency
between the Ideas themselves. So that for a thing to be Contrary to Reason, is,
in short, for the Understanding to perceive the Absolute impossibility of it,
or that its Ideas cannot stand together, which it does either Immediately by
perceiving the direct inconsistency of those Ideas, or Mediately by perceiving
their inconsistency with some evident and incontestable Truth or other, whether
Principle or Conclusion. For the way and method is the same in knowing a thing
to be False or impossible as in knowing it to be True, and accordingly as the
Process of the Understanding is either Immediate or Mediate in the latter, so
is it also in the Former. But though there are these different ways of
perceiving the impossiblity of a thing, it is in the General Perception of its
Impossibility and not in the several ways of it that its contrariety to Reason
must be made Formally to consist; Even as it was shown before of Knowledge,
which is made to consist in the Perception of the Relation of Ideas, and not in
this or that determinate manner of perceiving it, which indeed serve afterward
to distinguish Knowledge into its kinds (as suppose Intuitive and
Demonstrative) but do not enter into its First and General Idea. For which
Consideration I think the Perception of a things impossibility does better
express its Contrariety to Reason than the Repugnance it appears to have to
some Principle or Conclusion of it, that being only (as I said before) an
instance and specification (and but one single one too) of its Impossibility.

19. So Now we are arrived to a Clear and Distinct Conception of things Above
Reason and things Contrary to Reason. A thing is then above Reason when we do
not Perceive or Comprehend how it can be. And then Contrary to Reason when we
do Perceive that it Cannot be, or is Impossible. As to give a plain and
sensible Instance of each of these. That the sides of an Hyperbola should be
always approaching to each other and yet never meet, though continued to
infinity; is a Proposition of unquestioned Certainty in Geometry, and yet such
as passes the Reason of a Man to Comprehend how it can be, and therefore may
properly be said to be one of those things that are above Reason. But now that
a Triangle should have Parallel Sides, is not only above Reason, but directly
Contrary to it. For here the Understanding is not only at a loss to Comprehend
how it may be, but does positively and evidently perceive that it cannot be, it
being utterly impossible that a Figure of Three Lines should have its sides
Parallel to each other.

20. Now though by this Explanation of things above Reason and contrary to
Reason the Difference between them is already obvious even to the eye, and
stares a Man in the very Face, like things of great inequality whose
Disproportion appears at View, without Measuring them, yet for further
Satisfaction's sake, and to make the matter as plain as any thing in Nature to
all but those who either have not, or will not use their Understandings, let us
a little Compare these Ideas together, thereby the better to illustrate their
Difference.

21. It is most Evident that the Idea of things above Reason and the Idea of
things contrary to Reason are two really distinct Ideas, and that One is Not
the Other. This immediately appears from the very direct View of the Ideas
themselves. For what can be More plain than that Not to Comprehend how a thing
may be, and to Comprehend that it cannot be, are two different things? And what
better way have we to know the Distinction of things, but only that the Idea of
one is not the Idea of another? But then besides, the Ideas of these things are
not only Formally different from each other, but have also different Properties
and Characters belonging to them, and such too as are exclusive of each other,
and which therefore do manifestly show the Ideas to which they belong to be
distinct. For, for a thing to be above Reason implies only a Negation, the Not
Comprehending how a thing can be, but for a thing to be Contrary to Reason
implies the Position of an Intellectual act, the Comprehending that it cannot
be. Again, in things above Reason the Proposition is supposed not to be
understood, whereas in things Contrary to Reason, it is supposed to be well
understood, and that to be false and impossible. Again, in things above Reason
the Mind determines nothing concerning the Object proposed, whether it be true
or whether it be false, whether it be Possible, or whether it be Impossible.
All that she determines is concerning her own Act, that she does not Comprehend
how it can be. But whether it be or not, that she does not affirm, but holds
herself in a perfect Suspense. But now in things Contrary to Reason the Mind is
every whit as positive and decisive, and does determine as boldly and freely as
in those things that are most according to it. Whereby it plainly appears that
to be Contrary to Reason is something more than to be above it, and that the
Mind proceeds a great deal further in the former than in the latter, the
Language of the Soul in things above Reason being only, How can these things
be! But in things Contrary to Reason she is Positive and Dogmatical, roundly
pronouncing, This cannot be. So that unless there be no difference between a
Negation and a Positive Act, between the Ignorance or Non-Perception of a
thing, and the knowing it to be False, between Suspension and a peremptory
Determination, between a greater and a less, it is most undeniably evident that
the Parts of this Distinction are not only really but widely different, and
that to be above Reason is one thing, and to be contrary to Reason is another.

22. If it be pretended (as some perhaps may be likely to Object) that to be
Contrary to Reason implies a Negation, as well as to be above Reason, because
it is there supposed to be Comprehended that the thing is False and cannot be,
and that therefore they agree in one of the Main instances of their Difference,
to this the Answer is Clear and Full. I grant there is a Negation in one as
well as the other, but then I distinguish of Negation. There is a Negation of
the Act, and a Negation of the Object. Contrary to Reason does indeed imply a
Negation of the Object, that is, it implies a Separation and disunion of
certain Ideas, as inconsistent and incompatible one with another. But it does
not imply a Negation of the Act, but the quite Contrary, because the
understanding is here supposed positively to comprehend the thing, and withal
the Impossibility of it, which is not done in things Above Reason, wherein the
Negation is that of the Act. So that this first and great difference between
them stands firm and good.

23. And now having thus far justified the reality of this distinction of
things Above Reason and Contrary to Reason both by the Explanation and
Collation of the Parts of it, which thereby appear to consist of Ideas as
different as can well be conceived, I might further proceed to do the same by
producing some Instances of things confessedly Above Reason that are also
notwithstanding as confessedly True. For if any one thing that is Above Reason
be yet found to be true, this plainly demonstrates the thing in Question (if
there can be yet any Question about it) most evidently showing that what is
Above Reason is not as such Contrary to Reason, it being impossible that what
is Contrary to Reason should be true, whatever is Contrary to Reason being also
as Contrary to Truth. I might also further allege that to be Above Reason does
equally abstract from True and False (which Contrary to Reason does not) and
that not only because, as I observed before, it determines nothing concerning
its Object, but also because it is a thing not of an Absolute, but of a Relative
Importance, as being an extrinsecal Denomination taken not from the Nature of
the Object as it is in it self, but only as it is to us, and in relation to our
not only Finite, but very Limited Capacities. For to be Above Reason is not to
be Above Reason in general or all Reason, so as to be absolutely
incomprehensible, but only Human Reason. But then that which is Above the
Reason of a Man may not be Above the Reason of an Angel (as indeed what is
Above the Reason of one Man may not transcend that of another) and what is
above the Reason of an Angel may yet be perfectly comprehended by God, the
Supreme and Sovereign Reason. So that to be Above Reason here is of a
respective signification, such as does not express the quality of the Object as
it is in its own Nature, but only as it is in reference to such a particular
Faculty, whereas to be Contrary to Reason is not a Relative but an Absolute
thing, and whatever is Contrary to Reason, is Contrary to all Reason, and so
consequently to Truth. I say I might further insist on these and some other
Considerations, but being partly prevented here by Mr. Boil (whose Account I
would have used to supply the defects of Mine, as Mine is intended to supply
some of his) and having so abundantly cleared the difference of these things
already, I shall not so far distrust either the Strength of the Argument, or
that of my Reader's Understanding, as to prosecute this Matter any further than
only to shape an Answer out of what has been laid down, to an Objection which I
meet with in a Modern Writer against Monsieur Iurieu, and which, to do it the
utmost Justice, I will set down in his own words.

24. I have Considered (says he) the Distinction which they use between being
Contrary to Reason, Avis Stir le Table^^ du Socinianisme. Traite 1. page 14*
and being above Reason. It Is agreed that it is not possible to believe what is
Contrary to Reason. But it is said that we can well believe what is above
Reason. This Distinction seems to me of no use, or else I do not comprehend it.
For if by being above Reason it be meant that we do not comprehend a Truth in
its whole Extent, though what we conceive of it be clear and certain, I own
that in this sense one ought to believe what is above Reason. But if by being
above Reason be meant a Doctrine, wherein we see nothing Clear, a Doctrine
which our Reason loses the sight of on all its sides, I mean that all the
Propositions which may be extracted from it appear incomprehensible, such a one
as this for example, that the three Divine Persons make but one God, etc. It
seems that to be above Reason in this sense, is the same as to be entirely
inaccessible to Reason, which differs nothing, but in words, from being
Contrary to Reason.

25. I suppose whoever has duly considered and well comprehended the Tenor of
the foregoing Discourse, can neither be insensible of the Deficiency of this
Allegation, nor be long at a loss what Answer to return to it. But to spare my
Reader this Trouble, My Reply is, that this Author's Argument proceeds upon a
wrong Supposition. He supposes here that to be Above Reason must be either the
Not Comprehending a thing in its whole Latitude and extent, or the
Comprehending Nothing at all of it. Whereas I have shown before that it is
neither of them; That we do not mean by Above Reason what is all over
unintelligible, even as to the very Meaning of the Proposition, nor what is not
to be Comprehended in its utmost extent, but only what is incomprehensible to
us as to the Truth of the thing, or the Manner of it. It Is true indeed if the
Proposition were perfectly unintelligible, so that (as he says) we could see
nothing clear in it, even as to the very Sense and Meaning of it, we could no
more believe it than what is Contrary to Reason, though even then it would not
(as this Author confusely enough pretends) be the same with it, because what is
Contrary to Reason is supposed to be well understood. But it is much otherwise
if it be incomprehensible only as to the Truth or Manner of the thing. This as
I shall show hereafter may very well be Believed, though what is Contrary to
Reason cannot, and what is utterly unintelligible cannot. And I have
sufficiently shown already that what is thus only inaccessible to Reason
differs, a little more than in words, from being contrary to it.

26. And now if Humane Nature were not a very unaccountable thing, I should
stand greatly amazed at either the Natural or wilful Blindness of those who are
for confounding things so vastly different as the parts of this Distinction, of
things above Reason and contrary to it, most apparently are. There are indeed
some things which we are ordinarily taught to distinguish, and yet when
strictly examined and compared, will be found to have no real ground of
Distinction in them. And it is every whit as great (and almost as Common) a
Fault to distinguish things that do not differ, as to confound those that do.
And there are also other things of such near Resemblance and Cognation to each
other that there needs a great deal of Art, Subtlety and nice Inspection to
discern their Difference. So Fine and Minute and almost imperceptible are the
Lines that terminate their Natures, and divide them from one another. But the
Ideas of these things are as different as those of a Man and a Tree, a Triangle
and a Square, so that a Man must wink hard not to perceive it, or be very
insincere not to acknowledge it. And I cannot imagine why those especially who
are known to serve themselves upon occasion of Distinctions which have no other
Foundation than the mere Will and Pleasure (unless you will say Interest) of
those that use them, should yet reject such a Solid and well-grounded, as well
as well Authorized, one as this, but only because it is not for their turn,
and, if admitted, would like a Bomb thrown into their Garrison, blow up and lay
wast their Main Strength, and force them to desert and give up a Cause which
they are (now especially) most Zealously Fond of, and seem resolved even
against Reason to Maintain.

27. For I must further remarqu^ (and it is an Observation not lightly to be
passed over) that if this One Distinction of things above Reason, and things
contrary to Reason be once admitted, or shown to be real, Solid and
well-grounded, the main part of the Socinian Controversy is immediately, or at
least in the very next Consequence, at an end. For the Reason why they will not
believe things above Reason is because (as they pretend) Above Reason differs
nothing in reality from Contrary to Reason, and so those things that are above
Reason are also as much contrary to it as above it, and what is Contrary to
Reason is on both sides acknowledged impossible to be believed. Well, but then
if it be made appear (as I think by this time is sufficiently done) that these
two are quite different things, and that to be above Reason is not the same as
to be contrary to it, then even by their own Confession there can be no
pretense why what is above Reason may not be Believed. Which I take to be the
true inducement that makes these Men stand out so fiercely and obstinately
against this Distinction (for they are aware what mischief it will do 'em) as
it is also the reason why I have bestowed so much care and pains to clear and
justify it.

28. And thus having given an Account of these great and Fundamental things,
what Reason is, what Faith is, and what it is to be Above, and what Contrary to
Reason, we have now prepared the way to the more full and direct Consideration
of the Belief of things above Reason, the true state of which Question by what
has been hitherto discoursed appears to be this, Whether we may not Assent upon
the Authority of Divine Revelation to such things as our Understanding or
Reason cannot perceive or Comprehend as to the Truth or Manner of them. Or,
whether our not being able thus to Comprehend them, be a sufficient Reason why
we should not believe them. For the Resolution of which we have already laid
the Grounds, and shall now proceed more directly to build upon them in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. IV. That Human Reason is not the Measure of Truth.
1. WE have gained a most wonderful Point in the foregoing Chapter, by proving
the Distinction between things Above and things Contrary to Reason, and such as
of it self alone is sufficient Not only immediately to decide, but even forever
to Silence the Controversy between us and our Socinian Adversaries concerning
the Belief of things above Reason. For the only Objection that is or can
possibly be pretended against the Belief of things above Reason being the
supposed Contrariety of the same things to Reason, if it be shown that to be
above Reason involves no such Contrariety, then the Objection against the
belief of such things is fairly and wholly removed, and consequently there
remains no Reason why they may not be Believed. So that I cannot but look upon
the Substance of my Work as most effectually done already, and those of our
Adversaries that have any reasonable Measure of Penetration and Sincerity must
needs be sensible of it. And I dare appeal even to their own Consciences
whether they are not. However considering the importunity of those I have to
deal with, as well as the weight of the Cause it self, I shall endeavor the
further establishment of it upon some other Considerations, whereby I shall
also give further Confirmation, and so repay what I am endebted to the Point
contended for in the preceding Chapter, since we may as well argue backwards
from the Believableness of things above Reason to their not Contrariety, as
forwards from their not Contrariety to their Believableness, the Consequence
being full as good, thus, Above Reason Believable, therefore not Contrary, as
thus, Above Reason not Contrary, therefore Believable. Now in order to the
fuller Conviction and demonstration of the Believableness of things above
Reason I set out upon this Ground, that Humane Reason is not the Measure of
Truth.

2. It Is agreed among the Masters of Reason that as all Proof ought to be only
of such things as need it, so there are Propositions so Clear and Evident of
themselves that they have no need of being demonstrated, and that there are
some again that are not capable of Demonstration, the Fullness and immediateness
of their Evidence rendering them strictly indemonstrable. And it has been
charged by one of the most Considerable of them as a Fault in the Method of the
Geometricians that they set themselves to prove things that have no need of
Proof, L' Art de Penser. p. 432.
whereof he gives an Instance in Euclid, who goes formally to work to prove
that two sides of a Triangle taken together are greater than one, although this
be most Evident even from the Notion only of a Right Line, which is the
shortest that can possibly be between two Points, and the Natural Measure of
Distance from one Point to another, which it could not be if it were not also
the shortest of all Lines that can be drawn from Point to Point.

3. Now though I cannot say that the Proposition of this Chapter is so Evident
of it self as not to be capable of Demonstration, yet I must Confess I cannot
but think it of the Number of those that do not need any, that is I mean, to
those who will but take the Pains to consider it with Attention, and are withal
so sincere as to say ingenuously what they inwardly think. For to unattentive
or Captious Persons nothing is plain (since there is Nothing but what some will
contradict, and there are those who profess to doubt of every thing) and even
the Sun it self cannot make a Man see, if either he want eyes, or will shut 'em.
I cannot therefore say that to such men either this or any other Proposition is
plain, but I would venture to be tried by any competent and indifferent
Considerer whether this be not indeed a very plain and certain Proposition, as
plain as most of those which pass for Principles and Maxims in Discourse, that
Human Reason is not the Measure of Truth. And accordingly I should justly fear
incurring the same Censure that is charged upon the Geometricians, of going to
prove what is evident, were there not something peculiar in the present Case
that makes it very different from theirs. For they dealing in Matters of an
Abstract and indifferent Nature, and such wherein the Lusts and Passions of men
are altogether uninteressed, have no real need to prove evident things, because
for that very reason their Evidence is never Contested; whereas the Point I
have now in hand being of a Moral Concernment and such as incounters the
Partialities and false Biasses of Humane Nature, particularly that great and
governing one of Self-Love, though it should be of equal evidence with some of
their Maxims, will yet not be equally secure from Opposition, and pass alike
uncontested. And so there may be need of proving it, if not to do any necessary
Service to the Proposition it self, yet to satisfy the importunity of the Men
I argue with. Which indeed is the present Case, since (as was intimated in the
Beginning) the Sentiment of these Men concerning the disbelief of things above
Reason resolves at last into this Principle, that Human Reason is the Measure
of Truth. Which therefore both for their Satisfaction and Refutation must be
shown to be False.

4. Now when I say that Human Reason is not the Measure of Truth, my meaning
is, that it is not that Common Standard whereby Truth in the General is to be
Measured, so that of every thing it may be safely Concluded that it is either
true or not true according as it accords with this Measure, as it is
comprehensible or not Comprehensible by Human Reason. It Is true indeed there is
a certain Sense in which Human Reason sometimes is, and may be truly said to
be the Measure of Truth, in as much as whatever the Understanding does clearly
and distinctly Perceive may be concluded as most certainly true, it being
impossible that a thing should be otherwise than as we clearly perceive it to
be, without supposing our Perceptive Faculties to be in themselves Naturally
False, and without supposing it also necessary that we should fall into Error
even in the right use of these Faculties (it being impossible to conceive a
More right use of them than to Assent only to what we clearly Perceive) which
are not only in themselves manifest Absurdities, but such also as would
necessarily infer the Author of our Natures to be also the Author of our
Errors and Deceptions. It must therefore be admitted by all what the
Philosophers of the Cartesian way so earnestly stand and Contend for, that
Clearness of Perception is the great Rule and Criterion of Truth, so far that
whatever we do clearly and distinctly perceive to be true is really in it self
True. But then this is only to be a Partial and inadequate Rule, and in some
certain limited respect only, not absolutely and in general. For though I grant
that whatever we clearly perceive is true, yet I deny that it follows likewise
Backwards, that whatever is true we do also clearly Perceive, and so
consequently that whatever we do not clearly Perceive is therefore not True. By
which it is plain that this Cartesian Maxim must be very much abused to prove
that Human Reason is the Common and General Measure of Truth, and I dare say
the Great Authors of it never intended it to that purpose.

5. Reason or Understanding in general may be safely said, and must necessarily
be allowed to be the Measure of Truth. For Truth in general carries a necessary
Relation to understanding in general, as fully adequate and commensurate to it.
So that all Truth is simply and absolutely intelligible, the greatest and
sublimest Truths as much as the least and meanest, those which the Angels study
and desire to look into, as much as those which employ the narrow Thoughts of
the poorest Rustic. The Former are in themselves as intelligible as the latter,
and if not actually so well understood it is not because of any incapacity in
the Objects, but by reason of the Disproportion of the Faculties that are
Conversant about them. But this disproportion must not be Universal, nor extend
throughout the whole Order of Being. For what is intelligible must be so to
some Understanding (since what no Understanding can Comprehend is the same as
not to be intelligible) and consequently there must be an Understanding that
Comprehends all that is truly intelligible, that is, all Truth. And accordingly
it may be truly said of this All-Comprehensive Understanding, that it is the
Measure of Truth, so that whatever this perfect Understanding does not
understand is not intelligible, and if not intelligible, then also not True.
Besides that it might be further Considered (were this a proper place for so
Abstract and Metaphysical a Speculation) that Truth it Self, as to the real
Nature and Essence of it, is one and the same with the Divine Ideas as they are
related to one another, and does therefore exist Originally and entirely in the
Mind of God, who is Substantial Truth, and accordingly does Comprehend all
Truth, and so consequently is the Measure of it. And because this
All-comprehensive Understanding is contained within the Extent of Reason or
Understanding in General, therefore it may be truly said also of Reason or
Understanding in General that it is the Measure of Truth, it being most certain
that what is above all Reason, or what no Reason whatsoever can Comprehend is
as much above Truth too, and cannot possibly be true.

6. But though it be thus necessary to allow this of Reason in General, the
same cannot be allowed of Human Reason. For whatever is the Measure of Truth
must be fully adequate and Commensurate to Truth. That Is Certain. And therefore
if Human Reason be the Measure of Truth it must have the same compass and
extent with Truth, and possess it whole and entire, if not Essentially and
Substantially as God does, yet at least Noetically and by way of Theory, so as
to be able thoroughly to Perceive and Comprehend all Truth. But now that this
Qualification cannot possibly agree to Human Reason (though it be somewhat
unreasonable that I should be put to prove such a Proposition as this) I hope
fully to demonstrate upon a Double Consideration, one taken from the Nature of
Human Reason, and the other from the Nature of Truth.

7. And first to begin with Truth. This, as the Most thinking and Metaphysical
Persons Conceive of it, is supposed to consist in the Relations of equality or
inequality, or Agreement or Disagreement. Now we are to Consider that these
Relations may be of Three Sorts, either such as are between Created Beings, or
such as are between Intelligible Ideas, or such as are between Created Beings
and their Ideas. And we are also to Consider that there are two General Sorts
of Truths extremely different one from another, and therefore carefully to be
distinguished. Those that regard only the Abstract Natures of things, and their
immutable Essences, independently on their actual Existence. And others again
that do regard things that do actually Exist. The former of these Constitute
that Order of Truths which we call Necessary, the latter that which we call
Contingent. And this double order of Truths results from that threefold
Relation beforementioned. From the first and third Relations arise Contingent
Truths, which are nothing else but the Relations of agreement of disagreement
that are either between Created Beings themselves, or between Created Beings
and their Ideas. And these I call Contingent Truths in opposition to those that
are Necessary and Eternal, partly because these Relations could not begin to
exist before those Beings were produced (it being impossible that there should
be Relations between things that are not) and partly because these Relations
might not have existed, because those Beings might not have been produced. And
as Contingent Truths arise from the first and third, so from the second and
middle Relations result those Truths which are Necessary, Eternal, and
Immutable, and which I understand to be nothing else but the Relations of
Agreement or Disagreement that are between Ideas.

8. I go here upon the common and allowed Distinction between Necessary and
Contingent Truths, and upon the as much allowed Supposition that there is such
an Order of Truths as are Necessary and Eternal, which therefore I take for
granted as a Principle, not to decline the trouble of proving it, but because
it is a Confessed as well as Evident thing, and I care not for proving any more
evident things than I needs must. And that these Necessary and Eternal Truths
are in this precisely distinguished from those that are Contingent, that they
are the Relations that are between Ideas, I think is plain from the very Notion
and Nature of them, because they are supposed to be such Truths as regard the
Abstract Natures and Essences of things as they are in Idea, and not as they
have an actual Existence in rerum Natura, since then they would not be
necessary, but Contingent Truths, which would be contrary to the Supposition.
And Because these Necessary Truths are the most considerable and principal sort
of Truths, as being the Ground and Foundation of all Science, and the true and
proper Objects of our Theory and Contemplation, and because for the same Reason
whenever we speak of Truth Absolutely and in General we are presumed to mean
necessary and immutable Truth, hence it is that Truth is commonly said by
Metaphysical Writers to consist in the Relations that are between Ideas, though
indeed this be strictly true only of Necessary Truth. But it is sufficient to
the present purpose that it is true of this. And so much I suppose will readily
be granted me at least, that the general Nature and Reason of Necessary and
Eternal Truths consists in the Relations that are between Ideas.

9. I further add that these Ideas must be the same with the Divine Ideas. It Is
true indeed that exactly speaking all Ideas are Divine Ideas, even those which
we use to call our own, it being most Certain (as might easily and with the
greatest Evidence be shown) that the immediate Objects of our Understandings
are no other than the Ideas of the Divine Intellect, in which we see and
contemplate all things. But not to enter into this sublime Speculation at
present, it will be sufficient to consider that unless the Ideas whose
Relations Constitute those Truths which are Necessary and Eternal be the Divine
Ideas, it will be impossible that Necessary and Eternal Truths should be what
we suppose they are, that is Necessary and Eternal. For Necessary and Eternal
Truths must be Necessary and Eternal Relations, and it being impossible that
Relations should be more Necessary or Eternal than the Subjects from which they
result, unless these Ideas the Subjects of these Relations be Necessary and
Eternal, how can their Relations be so? It Is plain therefore that these Ideas
must be Necessary and Eternal. But now I pray what Ideas are so but the Divine?
What is there in the whole Compass of Being that is Necessary, Eternal and
Immutable but God and his Divine Perfections? As therefore we say that these
Necessary and Eternal Truths are Relations between Ideas, and not such as are
between either Created Entities themselves, or between them and their Ideas,
because then they would be of the Order of Contingent, not of Necessary Truths,
For the same reason we must say that they are the Relations that are between
the Divine Ideas, those only being sufficiently steady and Permanent Subjects
to sustain such Stable and Immutable Relations. And indeed were it not for
those Representative Perfections of the Divine Nature which we call Ideas,
there would be no Necessary and Eternal Essences to support these Necessary and
Eternal Relations, and then there could be no such Relations, and if no such
Relations, then there could be no Necessary Truths, and is no Necessary Truths
then no Science Which by the way would most Convineingly prove to any Capable
and Attentive Understanding the absolute Necessity and Certainty of a God, as
the most inmost Ground and Central Support of the whole Intellectual World.

10. Well then it can no longer be doubted but that these Necessary and Eternal
Truths are the Relations that are between the Divine Ideas. But now as these
Ideas are Infinite as being the Essential Perfections of God, and really
identify'd with his Divine Nature and Substance, so it must necessarily follow
that the Relations that result from them, and subsist between them must also be
Infinite. And then since these Truths do essentially Consist in, and in their
Reason and Formality are no other than these Ideal Relations, it no less
evidently follows that Truth also must be Infinite too.

11. Which also will be necessary to Conclude upon another Account. For I
confider again that since Relations do not in reality differ as distinct
Entities from their Subjects and Terms (as the Relations of two Circles
supposed to be equal to each other do not really differ from the Circles
themselves so related) these Ideal Relations must in the reality of the thing
be one and the same with the Divine Ideas themselves, and consequently with the
Divine Nature with which these Ideas are identified. And accordingly Truth
which is the same with these Ideal Relations must also as to the real Essence
and Substance of it be one and the same with the Divine Nature.

12. And that indeed it is so may be further, and somewhat more directly,
demonstrated thus. That God is the Cause of whatever is besides himself, or,
that whatever is, is either God or the Effect of God is a clear and
acknowledged Principle. Necessary Truth then is either God or the Effect of
God. But it is not the Effect of God, and therefore it can be no other than God
himself. Now that it is not the Effect of God, the many gross Absurdities which
that supposition draws after it I think will oblige him that Considers them to
acknowledge. For First, if Necessary Truth be the effect of God either it would
not be necessary, which is against the Supposition; or if it be, then as being
a necessary Effect it must have a necessary Cause, that is a Cause necessarily
determined to act, and so God would be a necessary Agent, even ad extra. He
would also be an unintelligent Agent. The Consequence is not to be avoided. For
if Truth be the effect of God then antecedently to the effecting of it, there
was no Truth, and consequently no Knowledge, because there could be nothing
known; and so God in the production of Truth (if indeed he did produce it) must
be supposed to act altogether in the dark, and without any Intelligence. Again,
if Truth be the Effect of God, then the Perfection of the Divine Understanding
must be supposed to depend upon something that is not God, nay upon something
created by God, whereas God is the true perfective Object of all his Creatures,
and is himself completely Happy in the sole Contemplation of himself. 'T^will
follow again that God has constituted an Order of Realities which he has not
^ower to abolish; that he has made some things which he cannot unmake again.
And lastly to add no more, If Truth be the Effect of God then it cannot be God,
(because God cannot produce what is Himself) and if it be not God, then by the
Supposition there will be something Necessary, Immutable, Eternal and
Independent, etc. that is not God. Which last Consequence as it contradicts the
Common and Natural Sentiment of Mankind, so it struck so hard against a certain
very Thoughtful and Metaphysical Head, Cogit. Rational. de Deo, p. 296.
that he could not forbear urging this as One Argument against the very Being
of Necessary Truth; because then (as he pretends) there would be something
Necessary besides God, not considering that this Necessary Truth is really one
and the same with the Divine Substance. Which one Consideration puts by the
whole force of his Argument against the Being of Necessary Truth, though
however it be sufficiently conclusive of the Point we now contend for, that
this Truth is not the Effect of God. For if it were then his Allegation would
take place; that is, there would indeed be something Necessary besides God,
which though it does not follow from the Supposition of the Being of Necessary
Truth, is yet plainly inseparable from the other Supposition, that of its being
the Effect of God. For then the very next Consequence is, that there would be
something Necessary besides God, which no Religious, nor indeed Rational Ear
can bear. It Is plain therefore that Truth is not the Effect of God; and since
it is not, it remains by virtue of the premised Disjunction that it can be no
other than the very Substance and Essence of the Deity.

13. And to this purpose I further consider, That the whole Perfection of the
Mind does consist in its union with God, who is her only true Good. This seems
to me a Proposition of a very shining Evidence. For the good of the Mind must
of necessity be something Spiritual, otherwise it would be of a Nature
inferior to herself, and so not capable of being her Perfection. But neither
is that enough Whatever is the good of the Mind must not be only of a like
Nature with the Mind, that is, of a Spiritual, but of a superior Nature too.
It must be something above the Mind that can be its Perfection, and that can
act upon it, and inlighten it, and affect it with pleasing Sensations,
otherwise how can it be able to add any thing to its better Being or
Perfection? And in order to all this it must also be intimately present to it,
and united with it, otherwise how can it so act upon it? But now God is the
only Spiritual Being whom we can possibly conceive thus qualified to be the
good or perfective Object of our Minds. Whence it follows that he only is so,
and that we cannot become either more Perfect or more Happy in any Kind or
Degree but by our Union with, and Possession of God. And hence it further
follows, that Truth could not be any Perfection of our Understandings if it
were not the same with the Divine Essence (since that is our only perfective
and beatifying Object) and that therefore since it really is perfective of our
Understandings, and that in the very highest measure (the Understanding being
then most Perfect when it has the clearest and the largest view of Truth) it
can be no other than the very Essence of that Infinite Mind who is the only
true Good and Objective Perfection of all Spirits.

14. It Is true indeed Des Carts makes all Truth, even that which is Eternal to
have been positively instituted and established by God, to depend upon him as
the Summus Legislator, to be the effect of his Will and Pleasure, and by
Consequence to be Absolutely and Originally Arbitrary and Contingent. So that
according to him 2 and 2 might not have been 4, or 3 Angles of a Triangle might
not have been equal to 2 Right ones if God had pleased so to Order it. But this
Notion of this Great Man does so rudely Shock the Natural Sense of Mankind that
it cannot find Admission even where the rest of his Philosophy does, but is
generally exploded notwithstanding the eminency of its Author, and that even by
one of his greatest Admirers, Mr. Malebranche.
and (as I think) by far the Most Considerable of his Disciples. And truly I
think this Opinion is treated no worse than it deserves, since besides the
Absurdities already Mentioned, it shakes the Foundations of Science, yea and of
Morality too, by supposing the Natures not only of Metaphysical and
Mathematical Truth, but even of Moral Good and Evil to be of a Positive and
Arbitrary, and Consequently of a Contingent Ordination. It is therefore
deservedly as well as generally rejected, but then let those that reject it
have a Care that they fall not into a worse Absurdity. As they would not
suppose Truth to be of a Positive and Alterable Nature and that the Relations
of Ideas might have been otherwise than they are, so let them have a Care how
they make any thing Necessary and Immutable that is Not God. Let them be
Consistent with themselves, and as they justly reject the Opinion that makes
Truth the Effect of God's Free and Arbitrarious Constitution, and consequently
of a Mutable and Variable Nature, so let them own and Confess (as they are
Obliged to do) that it is no other than God himself. For there is no other way
of avoiding Des Cartes's Absurdity. For if Truth be not God then it is the
Effect of God, and if the Effect of God then since the Constitutions of God are
Free and Arbitrary, the Natures and Relations of things might have been quite
otherwise than they are, the whole Science of Geometry might be transposed, a
Circle might have the Properties of a Square, and a Square the Properties of a
Circle, 2 and 2 might not have been 4, or what else you will instance in. And
so in Morality too (which is of far worse Consequence) there might have been
the like transposition, what is Virtue might have been Vice, and what is Vice
might have been Virtue. These are the Natural Consequences of Truth's being the
Effect of Divine Constitution, and they are intolerable ones too, and therefore
the Principle from which they flow is by the general Current of Writers well
denied. But then unless they proceed, and acknowledge Truth to be one with the
Divine Essence they cannot help relapsing into the same or worse Absurdities.
For whoever says that Truth is not God must say that it is the Effect of God,
and whoever says that, must either say that it is Arbitrary and Contingent, or
if he says it is Necessary and Immutable, he must allow of something Necessary
and Immutable that is not God. But now it being most Evident that there is
nothing Necessary that is not God, if Truth be not God then it is plain that it
cannot be Necessary (which presently runs us into the Cartesian Absurdity of
the Arbitrary Position of Truth) or if it be Necessary then it is as plain that
it must be God. The short is, Truth is either God or the Effect of God. If it
be not God, then it is the Effect of God as Des Carts says. But if not the
Effect of God (as the Consequent Absurdities from that Principle demonstrate,
and as is generally granted) then it is God himself as we say. It must be one or
the other, there is no Medium. To say that Truth is God, or to say that it is
the Effect of God are each of them Consistent Propositions, though from the
gross Absurdities of the Latter the Former only appears to be the right, but to
deny that it is the effect of God and yet not to say that it is God, that is to
affirm that it is neither the Effect of God nor yet God, is all over
unmaintainable and inconsistent. If it be not the Effect of God (as is both
generally and justly acknowledged) then it must of Necessity be God, since
whatever is, is either God or the Effect of God.

15. And indeed if Truth be not God how comes it to be Clothed with the
Glorious Ensigns of his Majesty, to wear the Characters of his Divinity, and to
have so many of his peculiar and incommunicable Attributes? How comes it to be
Necessary, Immutable, Eternal, Self-existent, Increated, Immense, Omni-present
and Independent, and that not only upon the Conceptions of any Minds whether
Human or Angelical, but even all things whatsoever, which might never have been
made, or might now be annihilated without any Prejudice to the being of Truth,
which does not respect the natural and actual Existencies but only the Abstract
Essences of things. For were there no such thing as any real Circle or Triangle
in Nature it would still be never the less true that their Abstract Essences
would be determinate and invariable, and that such and such distinct Properties
would belong to them. Which by the way plainly Convinces that Truth is none of
the Effects, Works, or Creatures of God, since it did exist before them, does
not now depend on them, and would remain the self-same Immutable thing without
them. But then I demand whence has it this Self-subsistence and Independency of
Being? Whence again has it its fixed and unalterable Nature, such as we can
neither add any thing to, nor diminish ought from? How is it that it is Present
in all Places, and to all Minds, so as to be Contemplated by them all at the
same time, and after the same Manner? How comes it to pass that we cannot so
much as dis-imagine it, or by way of Fiction and Supposition remove it out of
Being; but it still returns upon us with a strong and invincible Spring, since
even the very Supposition that there is no Truth carries a Formal Proposition
in it whose Ideas have a certain Habitude to each other, and so Contradicts it
self. Besides how comes it to be a Perfection of the Divine Understanding? Is
any thing a Perfection to God but himself? How comes it also to be the Rule and
Measure of his Will, which can be determined by nothing but what is just
Reasonable and True? Can any thing be a Rule to God that is not himself? Does
he Consult or Follow any thing but what is One with his own Divine Nature and
Essence? And yet God consults and follows Truth, and cannot act but according
to its Immutable Laws and Measures. It is not therefore really distinguished
from him, but Coeternal and Consubstantial with him, and so in Consulting Truth
he Consults his own Essence Veritas immortalis est, veritas incommutabilis est,
veritas illud verbum est de quo dicitur in principio erat verbum, and verbum
erat apud Deum and Deus erat verbum. S. Austin in Psalm. 123.
, even the Divine (...), the Eternal and Increated Wisdom, the true
intelligible Light, in whom are all the Ideas and Essences of things, the
Fullness of Being and Truth, who in the Beginning was with God, and was God, who
is Eternally Contemplated by him with Infinite Joy and Complacency, and who
said of himself Incarnate, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. I would fain
know how all these incommunicable Attributes of God should agree to Truth if it
be any thing less than a Divine Nature. Particularly I demand, whence has it
that unshakeable Firmness and Stability, that invincible Permanency and
Sted^astness, that Necessity of Existence, that utter repugnance to Not Being,
but only because it is really Coessential and Consubstantial with him whose
Name is Jehovah, and who is Being it self, to whom it is Essential to Exist, or
rather, whose very Essence is Existence.

16. But now from this Coessentiality and Consubstantiality of Truth with the
Divine Nature (a Noble and Sublime Theory, but which I do but lightly touch
over, having not room here to pursue it at large) it evidently and necessarily
follows again that Truth is Infinite. There cannot be a more immediate, nor a
more necessary, nor a more inseparable Connection between any two things than
between this Consequence and that Principle. And indeed if Truth were not
Infinite how can the Knowledge of God be so? Not sure as Concretely and
Objectively Considered, for that manifestly implies the Infinity of its Object.
And what is the Object of the Divine, or of any other Understanding, but Truth?
And should Knowledge here be taken for the Power or Faculty of Knowing, to what
purpose is an Infinite Power of Knowing unless there be an Infinite to be
Known? And would not such a Power be uneasy and afflictive, as well as
useless, to him that had it, unless the Object be supposed to carry due
Proportion to it: For if it be so uneasy a Reflection to some of us to have
such short and narrow Faculties when the Compass of Truth has so large and
spacious an extent, to be able to know so little when there is so much to be
known, how much more troublesome and painful would it be to the Supreme
Intelligence to have an Infinite Understanding when all that is intelligible is
but Finite? Would not that Infinity of his Capacity serve to vex and disquiet
him more than the Narrowness of ours does us, the difference being as much as
between having a great Stomach and but little Meat, and a little Stomach when
there is a great deal of Meat, whereof which is the greatest Punishment is
Obvious to imagine. And we may judge of this in some measure by our selves. We
have in us a Capacity boundless and unlimited. For though our Understandings be
Finite, our Wills know no Measure, and are in a manner Infinite. As God has
made us capable of enjoying an Infinite Good, so Nothing less than that can
satisfy our Desires. For we desire Good as Good, and consequently all possible
Good. Now we find this to be a great Pain to us at present to desire an
Infinite Good when all that we can enjoy here is Finite. The greatest part of
the Uneasiness, the Melancholy, the Disconsolateness, the Aridity that
accompanies Human Life will be found, if traced to the Original, to proceed
from hence, viz. from the little proportion that is between our Capacities and
our Gratifications, between what is desired and what is enjoyed. And this
Desire of an Infinite Good will be a far greater Punishment to us Hereafter
when the Activity of our Faculties shall be more invigorated and enlarged, if
we have not then an Infinite Good to enjoy. ^Twill be at least the worst
ingredient of Hell and Damnation, if not all that is to be understood by it.
And yet we are still to Consider that our Will is In^^nite only Ex part
Objecti, because it desires an Infinite Good, and not Ex part Actus because it
desires it infinitely or with an unlimited Force and Activity. For it is
impossible that a Finite Nature should have any Power or Force in it that is
strictly infinite, or that any such Act or Operation should proceed from it.
But then what would the Affliction be if the Act were Infinite as well as the
Object, and we were to aspire after an Infinite Good with an Infinite Desire!
What Conception can Frame a just Idea of the Misery of such a State! And can it
be much less for an Infinite Intelligence to have only a Finite Intelligible
for its Object? But there is Nothing Painful or Afflictive in the Condition of
the Supremely and Completely Blessed. And therefore we must Conclude that as
the Infinite Will of God has a Good fully Commensurate and Adequate to its
unlimited Activity, whereon it may Center and Repose its Weight, so the
Infinite Understanding of God has also an Infinite Intelligible for its Object.
And since the Formal Object of Understanding in General, and Consequently of
the Divine, is Truth (as that of the Will is Good) hence it follows again that
Truth must needs be of an Infinite Nature.

17. And do we not find it so when we Convert our selves to it by Study and
Meditation? When we apply our Minds to the Contemplation of Truth, and set our
selves to muse and think, do we not find that we launch forth into a vast
intelligible Sea, that has neither Bottom nor Shore? And the more we think and
the more we Meditate are we not still more and more convinced of this, and do
we not discover the further we go in our Intellectual Progress, that there
still lies more and more beyond us, so that the more we advance in the
Knowledge of Truth the more we enlarge Our Idea of it, as the greatest
Travelers think most Magnificently of the World? Do we not find as in a
Spacious Campaigne, so in the immense Field of Truth, that our Eye wearies, and
our Sight loses it self in the boundless Prospect, and that besides the clear
view which we have of a few things at a little distance from us, there lie all
round us vast Tracts unmeasurably diffused, whereof we have only Confuse and
indistinct Images, like the Faint Blew of the far distant Hills? Are not the
Relations and Combinations of things with one another Infinite, and should but
one link in this Endless Chain be altered would not innumerable Alterations
ensue upon it? Should but One Proposition that is False be supposed True, or
One that is True be supposed False, what Understanding but the Divine could go
on with the Train of New Consequences that would result from such a
Supposition? I say New Consequences, For we are to consider that besides the
Absolute Systeme of Truth which contains the Relations of Ideas with their
settled Coherencies and Dependencies one upon another according as they really
stand in their Natural Order, there is a Secondary Systeme of Truth which I may
call Hypothetical, that results from any supposed Change made in the Absolute
Systeme, whence will still arise new and new Consequences even to Infinity. But
not to consider Hypothetical Truth, can the Bounds of that which is Absolute be
ever fixed, or its Stock ever Exhausted? Does it not after all the Study that
has been employed about it, and the Numberless Number of Volumns that have been
written upon it furnish perpetual matter for our Contemplation, and is it not a
Subject for everlasting Thoughts and Considerations? Has it not been the great
Research of the Thoughtful and Inquisitive for many Ages, and yet does not
every Age refine upon its Predecessor, and produce New Discoveries? Are not
the Sciences continually improved, and yet are there not still Depths in every
Science which no Line of Thought can ever Fathom? What a vast Fecundity is
there in some plain simple Propositions, nay who can number the Conclusions
that may be drawn from any one Principle! Take the most simple Figure in
Geometry, and where is the Mathematician who after a Thousand Years Study can
reckon up all the Properties that may be affirmed of it, both as Absolutely
Considered, and as it stands in relation to other Figures? And what then shall
we think of the whole Science in all its Branches and Dependencies,
Particularly of Algebra, the Main Ocean of this Bottomless Sea? And what shall
we say of Metaphysick's, another unmeasurable Abyss, and what of the endless
Circle of Truth, if not the same which one of Job's Friends says of God, Job
11. 7.
Can thou by searching ^ind out Truth, Can thou find her out unto
Perfection? It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? deeper than Hell, what
can thou know? The Measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than
the Sea. And that because they after all are Finite, whereas this is truly and
strictly Infinite. Which by the way sufficiently proves a God, and that this
God is Truth, whose Eternal and Glorious Majesty be Blessed for Ever.

18. But then let us Consider, if Truth be indeed (as you see) of an Infinite
Nature, then to prove that Human Reason is not fully adequate to it, does not
entirely possess it, nor all over and wholly comprehend it, and consequently
cannot be the Measure of it, there will be no need of laying open the great
Weakness and Deficiency of our Understanding: I need not represent the
Imperfection of its Light, nor the Shortness of its Views, nor the Slenderness
of its Seize, nor the very Narrow Extent of its Knowledge, nor the very
little Progress it is able to make in the Contemplation and Comprehension of
Truth; That there are a great many things whereof we have no Ideas (for which
we need go no further for an Instance than our own Souls) and that even where
we have Ideas of things we cannot always discern the Relations and Connexions
that are between them, and that either for want of sufficient Clearness in the
Ideas themselves to have their Relations perceived immediately without
comparing them with other mediate Ideas, or else for want of such due and
proper Mediums wherewith to compare them, and that therefore the extent of our
Knowledge is not only vastly exceeded by the Natures of things, but also very
Considerably even by our own Ideas, there being many things whereof we have
Ideas, and sometimes very clear ones too, and yet which we know no more how to
reason upon or discourse of intelligibly, or with any Certainty, than we do of
those things whereof we have no Ideas at all, being, for Example, no more able
to tell what proportion such a Circle bears to such a Square though we have
clear Ideas of both, than we are to tell what proportion there is between
Angels and our own Souls, things whereof we have no Ideas. A very remarkable
Instance of the Shortness and Contractedness of our Understandings, which it
seems are not only destitute of the Ideas of many things, and Consequently of
the knowledge of them (it being impossible that the extent of our knowledge
should exceed that of our Ideas) but are also Blind to those very Ideas which
they have, and cannot see even when they have the advantage of the Light. But I
say I need not present my Reader with a Night-piece of Human Reason, describe
great Blindness and gross Darkness, how ignorant she is when she does not
adventure to judge, and how Erroneous when she does, stumbling and falling (as
is usual in the dark) out of one mistake into another, out of one Error into
another, either by im^racing false Principles, or by drawing wrong Conclusions
from true ones, so that Ignorance seems her safest Retreat, and to suspend her
best Wisdom; These I say and such other of our intellectual Infirmities I need
not insist upon or make any advantage of, it being sufficient to conclude the
Point in hand that Human Reason in its largest Capacity and Extent and with all
the advantages of both Nature and Artificial improvement is after all but a
Finite thing (and that to be sure the most Zealous of its Votaries and
Advocates must confess that it is) since it is impossible that what has Bounds
should be able totally and adequately to Comprehend what has None, or that
Finite should be the Measure of Infinite.

19. I know but of one thing that can with any Pertinency be replied to this
Argument, and that is, that though Human Reason (as Finite) be not able to
comprehend all Truth (as being Infinite) yet however there may perhaps be no
one Truth in Particular but what, when presented to it, may be comprehended by
it, and so Human Reason may be rightly said to be Adequate and Commensurate to
Truth as Distributively, though not as Collectively considered. But to this I
have several things to return. First of all I say that such is the reciprocal
dependence and concatenation of Truth that the want of a thorough and entire
Comprehension of all Truth in its widest and most diffused Extent must needs
very much Eclipse the view and darken the Perception of any one Solitary Truth
in particular, so that however we may have some tolerable Perception of it, and
such as we may call Clear in Comparison of some other Truths which we do not
see so clearly, yet it cannot be near so clear and Distinct a Perception, as
that Infinite Being has of it who sees not only the Truth it self, but also the
Manifold Relation, Connection, and Combination that it has with all other
Truths. The difference between these two ways of Perception being of a like
Nature with that which is between seeing a Proposition as it stands singly by
it self, and seeing the same Proposition with all its Relations and
Dependencies, and in conjunction with the whole Context and Coherence of the
Discourse whereof it is a Part. I say again Secondly, that though we may have a
competent Perception of some plain and simple Truths without pursuing them
thorough all the Relations and Dependencies that they have with other Truths
(since otherwise, as I have hinted already, we should be able to understand
nothing, and every thing would be above Reason) yet however we do not know but
that there may be some Truths of such a Nature as not to be understood without
the adequate Comprehension of those Relations and Dependencies; which since we
have not, we do not nor can ever know but that there may be some Truths that
are so above us as to be out of our Reach, and to lie beyond all possibility of
Comprehension, and consequently that Human Reason is not adequate and
commensurate to Truth even Distributively considered. I say we do not know, and
it is impossible we should ever know but that thus it may be. For how should we
be able to know it, or upon what shall we ground this our Knowledge? It must be
either upon the Natural Force and Penetration of our Understandings, or upon
our Actual Views and Perceptions, or upon the Nature of Truth it self. As for
the Capacity of our Understandings though we do not know the precise and exact
Bounds and Limits of it, yet we know in the general that it is Finite, and has
its fixed and determinate Measure, which it would strive in vain to exceed. As
for the Nature of Truth, that we both experiment, and from the foregoing
Considerations must of necessity conclude to be Infinite. And what Ground of
Assurance can we have from either or both of these, which are apt rather to lay
a Foundation of Diffidence and Distrust? And then as for our actual Views and
Perceptions, though we should suppose them to have been hitherto never so clear
and distinct, never so numerous and extensive, and never so fortunate and
successful, so that our Victorious Understandings never yet met with a Baffle,
nor sounded a retreat from a too difficult and impregnable Theory, suppose in
one word, that we never yet applied our minds to the consideration of any one
Truth but what we fully comprehended and were perfect Masters of (which yet he
must be a very Presumptuous, or a very little experienced Thinker that shall
affirm of himself) how notwithstanding do we know, considering the Finiteness
of our Intellect, and the Infiniteness of Truth, but that there may be Other
Truths of a Nature so far above us, and so disproportionate to us, as not
possibly to be Comprehended by us. For we cannot argue here from the past
Successes and Achievements of our Understandings to the Future, or because
there has been nothing hitherto proposed to us but what we Comprehended, that
therefore there can be nothing proposed but what we can Comprehend. If we
conclude thus, we forget the vast disproportion between Truth and Human Reason,
that the one is Finite and the other Infinite, the due and attentive
Consideration of which would convince us that though we have thought never so
much, and never so well, and comprehended never so many Truths, yet for ought
we know there may be Truths which our intellectual Sight though aided with all
the advantages of Art, that may help the Mind as much as a Telescope does the
Eye, can yet never penetrate, and which (by the way) it may be Worthy of God to
reveal to us if 'twere only to Check and Control the daring Progress of our
Understanding, to make us understand our Measure and remember that we are but
Men, to be sensible of the defects of that part upon which we most value our
selves and despite others, and that even the Light that is in us is but
Darkness. Whether there be any such Truths I do not now say, but only that upon
the Supposition of the Infinity of Truth it is impossible for us to be sure but
that there may be such, which is enough to hinder Our Reason from being (at
least as to us) the Measure of Truth, since if it be so it is more than we know,
or can possibly be assured of, which makes it all one ( to us) as if it were
not. For we cannot make use of it as a Measure, or draw any Consequence from it
to the Falsehood, Impossibility, or Incredibility of things Incomprehensible,
since for ought we know or can know to the Contrary, there may be Truths which
we cannot Comprehend.

20. But then I say further Thirdly, that the Infinite Nature of Truth will
Oblige us to acknowledge that there actually are and must be such. For if Truth
be Infinite then it is plain that we cannot Comprehend it in its full and entire
Extent, and so much the very Objection supposes. But then I say that as the
want of a perfect Comprehension of all Truth does very much shade and darken
the perception of any one single Truth in particular, and that because of the
mutual connection and dependence of things one upon another (as was before
observed) so it must needs quite Eclipse and totally Abscond some Truths from
our View. For there are some Truths so very Complex and Abstruse, and that lie
so deep, and, as I may say, so far within the Bowels of the Intellectual
Systeme, that include such a Multitude of Relations, depend upon so many
Suppositions, are the Conclusions of so many Premises, presuppose and require
the knowledge of so many things (of some of which it may be we have not so much
as the simple Ideas) have such a Train of Principles Planted and Entrenched as
a Guard before 'em, and draw such an immense Retinue of Consequences after
them, and are every way so mingled, involved and combined with other Truths
that they cannot possibly be understood without an entire and all-comprehensive
view of the whole Rational Systeme. Instances of such Truths abound in every
Science. But there is nothing that may furnish us with so sensible and palpable
an Illustration of this Matter as the Order and Measure of Divine Providence.
We are all fully assured from the very Notion and Idea of God as involving all
possible Excellency and Perfection in it, that he is a Being infinitely Wise,
Good, Just and Holy, and Consequently that his whole Conduct in the Government
of the World must necessarily carry the Character of all these Attributes, and
that he cannot possibly do any thing contrary or repugnant to any of them any
more than he can deny himself, or depart from the Essential Perfections of his
Infinite Nature. And upon this Consideration is founded the best Argument we
have for Submission and Resignation to the Will of God, and Acquiescence in his
Providential Dispensations. Thus far then we are all satisfied and agreed. And
yet it cannot be denied when we come to Particulars, but that there are
Phenomena in the Moral as well as in the Natural World which are utterly
insolvible, and that a great many of these Dispensations of Providence are
accompanied with desperate and invincible Difficulties, such as have at once
exercised and puzzled the thoughts of the most inquisitive in all Ages, and
still remain Obstinate and Unmovable Objections not only to the Atheists and
Libertines, but even to the most sober and intelligent of both Philosophers and
Divines, Men of the greatest Light and Piety, those who best understand, and do
most reverence and adore the ways of God. And adore them after all they must,
for so intricate and intangling are the Difficulties, or (by the leave of some)
I would say Mysteries of Providence, especially in those dark Scenes of it that
relate to the Divine Concourse and Cooperation with the Will of Man, the
Ordination of his Final State, the Order and Distribution of Grace, the
Permission, Direction and Nice Conduct of Sin, etc. that the Capacity of our
Understanding will not serve us to give a clear and unobnoxious account of
them. Indeed the diligent and curious Wit of Man has gone a great way in this
as well as in Other Matters, and several Systemes and Hypotheses have been
invented about these things by Contemplative Spirits, among whom the two very
particular Authors of the Treatise of Nature and Grace, and of L'Oeconomie
Divine have I think gone the furthest of any. But though some of these Accounts
bid fairer for reception than others, by striking some glimmering Light into
these Abstrusities, yet still they all agree in this, that they leave a great
deal more in the Dark, and labor with Difficulties even where they do Explain:
So that after all they discover nothing so much as their own Shortness and
Deficiency. In the mean while we know and are most certain in the General, that
all is right and as it should be in the Conduct of God toward his Creatures,
and that he cannot make one false Step in the Government of the World. So much
we understand without Systemes, and truly not much more with them. For as for
the Particular Scenes of Providence we know not what to make of them; and when
we have considered the Dispensations of God as much as we can or dare, we find
our selves after all obliged to confess, that though Righteousness and Judgment
are the Habitation of his Seat, Psalm. 97. 2.
yet Clouds and Darkness are round about him.

21. But now how comes it to be so Dark and Cloudy? How come we to be so little
able to see the particular Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Holiness of those ways
of God, which in the general we are convinced to be so Wise, Good, Just and
Holy? Why can we not enter into the Detail of Providence? Why even because we
do not see it throughout, and have not a Comprehension of its Universal
Systeme. For the Passages of Providence (...) of such a Relative and
Complicated Nature, there is such a kind of (...) or mutual in-being or
indwelling in them, (if I may transfer an Expression hither, commonly applied
to a higher Mystery) they are so interwoven with, and have so common a
dependence upon one another, that without a Comprehensive View of the whole
Drama, we can hardly make any thing of any one Particular Scene. Indeed if we
could have such a View as that, a View that went round and through, and grasped
the whole Area of that immense Circle, we should quickly see the Regularity of
the most uneven and odd-figured Parts, and how wonderfully they conspired (like
the Flats and Sharps of Music) to the Order and Harmony of that excellent and
surprising Beauty that results from them. But being not able to reach this, we
are not competent Judges of the rest, (which by the way should repress our
forwardness to fit in Judgment upon things so far above the Cognizance of our
Court); and though we know the Measures of God to be all Wise, Good, Just and
Holy, yet this is only an implicit Knowledge, founded upon an External Evidence
only (much after the same manner as it is in Faith) even the general Conception
we have of the Divine Perfection, without any clear and immediate discernment
of the Internal Connection that is between the things themselves. We believe
it is all well and right because the Infinitely Wise God sits at the Helm; but
then again, because he is so Infinitely Wise we cannot found the Depths of his
Wisdom, (as indeed it would be very strange if an Infinitely Wise Agent should
not be able to do things Wisely, and yet beyond our Understanding) nor
reconcile all his particular proceedings to the Laws of Reason and Equity; but
the more we study about these things the more we are at a loss, the further we
wade into this Sea the deeper we find it, till at last we find our selves
obliged to cry out with the most inspired Apostle, O the Depth of the Riches
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, Romans 11. 33.
how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! And all for
want of an Entire and Comprehensive View of them. For if the Knowledge of some
very Compounded Truths be impossible without the Clear Perception of the Simple
Principles upon which they depend; and a Man would to no purpose beat his
Brains about the Consideration of Conical Sections, till he has first well
possessed himself of Ordinary Geometry; how much less then (may we conclude)
are the Intricate and very Complicated Events of Divine Providence to be
unravel'd without a Collected and Simultaneous Idea of the Universal Systeme
whereof they are parts, to which they relate, and from their Concentricity with
which they receive all their Order and Beauty, but which is in a manner lost to
us for want of Compass enough in our Prospect. By which single Instance it
appears (among many others that might have been given) how the Incapacity of
Comprehending Truth in its whole Extent may disable us from Comprehending many
Particular Truths; and consequently, that the same Infinity of Truth which
hinders us from Comprehending it according to that Extent, must also hinder us
as much from being able to comprehend every Particular Truth. So then there
will be Particular Truths which are Incomprehensible by us, and consequently
Human Reason is not Commensurate to all Truth, not only as Collectively, but
even as Distributively Considered. And therefore not as Distributively, because
not as Collectively.

22. But then to raise our Speculation a little higher, I consider yet further,
that the Infinity of Truth is not only an Infinity of Extent, but also an
Infinity of Nature, that is, that the Compass of Truth is not only Boundless
and illimited, and that it has in it an inexhaustible Spring, which like the
Source of Light, is never to be drawn dry by the most thirsty draught of the
whole Intellectual World, but also that there are Particular Truths of a Nature
truly infinite, and by consequence incomprehensible to any Understanding that
is not so. For we are here to recollect, what has been already shown, that
Truth is Consubstantial and Coessential with God and with the Divine Ideas. Now
though these Ideas are all equally of the Essence and Nature of God, and so far
equally Divine (it being impossible that there should be any thing in God that
is not God) yet there is this general and very remarkable Difference between
them, that some of these Divine Ideas are Absolute, and some Relative. That is,
some are of the Essence of God Simply and Absolutely as He is in Himself,
without any Relation to any thing out of Himself. And others again are of the
Essence of God considered purely in Relation to things without Him either in
Act or in Possibility, and only so far forth as the Divine Essence is
representative of Creatures. Or if you will, thus: We may consider a twofold
Being in Ideas, Esse Reale, and Esse Ideale or Repraesentativum. Some Ideas are
Divine, not only according to their Esse Reale (for so they are all) but also
according to their Esse Repraesentativum, as representing God to the Mind that
Contemplates them. Others again are Divine only according to their Esse Reale,
being indeed of the Substance of God, but not representing him, but his
Creatures, and so are Divine in the same sense as the Idea of a Body is
Spiritual, viz. Essentially only, not Representatively. Which Diversity indeed
resolves into the former, because they are of the Essence of God, not as it is
absolutely in itself, but only as it is representative of Creatures, according
to such a certain Modality and Limitation of Perfection. And accordingly though
they are truly Divine Ideas as well as the other, yet they are not said to be
Ideas of God, as not representing him, but his Creatures. The short is, The
Essence of God may be considered either as it is absolutely in it self
according to its Infinite Simplicity, or as it is in relation to, and
representative of things without, either of an Actual, or of a Possible
Existence. And so the Ideas or Essential Perfections of God are of two sorts:
Either such as are of the Essence of God considered in the first sense, as it
is in it self, or else such as are of the same Divine Essence only in the
second sense, as far forth as that Essence is representative of things out of
it self; upon which by the way, I suppose, must be grounded (if we will resolve
things into their last Principle) the common distinction of the Attributes of
God into Communicable and Incommunicable. The Incommunicable Attributes of God
being those Perfections that are of the Divine Essence Simply and Absolutely
considered as it is in it self; and the Communicable those that belong to the
Divine Essence Relatively considered, and as representative of Creatures, to
whom accordingly they are in their Measure truly applicable; whereas the former
are not, but are peculiar to God alone; which sufficiently shows the difference
between this double order of Divine Ideas. But to make it yet more intelligible
by an Instance. The Idea of the Divine Immensity, or that Perfection in God
which we call his Immensity, is of the Essence of God according to the first
sense, as it is simply and absolutely in it self; being no other than the
Substance of God as it is universally diffused, entirely present in, and
filling all places without being circumscribed by any, yet without any Local
Extension. But now the Idea of Extension, or that Perfection in God which
vertually, eminently, and modo intelligibili, answers to Extension (and is
therefore frequently called by Mr. Malebranch, L' etendue intelligibl^) is of
the Substance of God, not as it is in it self simply and absolutely, but only
as far forth as it is representative of Matter, or Body, and imitable or
participable by it, according to those Limitations and Imperfections which
belong to that kind of Being, and which are represented by this its Idea. I
know not whether I express my self to the Conception of every Reader, but I am
sufficiently Clear and Intelligible to my self; and whoever is not much wanting
either in Metaphysics, or in Attention, cannot I think well miss my Meaning.

23 Now the use that I make of this Speculation to the present purpose is this:
Those Ideas which are of the Essence of God only as that Divine Essence,
according to some certain Limitations and inadequate Considerations of it, is
representative of Creatures, must be considered by us as of a Finite Nature.
Because however truly Divine and of the Essence of God, yet not as it is
absolutely and simply in it self, but only as it is in relation to Creatures;
that is, as partially and inadequately considered, according to certain
Abstractions and Limitations of Entity and Perfection, such as the things
whereof they are Ideas do require. And accordingly such Ideas are ordinarily
said, not to be the Ideas of God who is Infinite (for they do not represent
him, though Essential to him) but to be the Ideas of Creatures, who are Finite.
They are indeed Divine Ideas, because Essential to God; but they are not Ideas
of God, because they are of the Divine Essence only as it relates to Creatures,
and is representative of them. Of Creatures therefore they are the Ideas, and
God in seeing them is not properly said to see himself, (though they are of
himself) but to see Creatures; because though they are of his Divine Essence,
yet it is only according to such Precisions, Limitations and Inadequations of it
as to be expressive and representative of their Finite Perfections. As
therefore the Realities which these Ideas represent are Finite, so these Ideas
must be conceived by us as Finite too; it being impossible that Infinite
considered as Infinite, should be representative of what is Finite. And as
these Ideas are Finite, so are they also by Consequence so Proportionate, and
of a Measure so adjusted to Finite Understandings, as to be Intelligible by
them, and within the Possibility of their Comprehension; which must also in
like manner be concluded of all those Truths which are Consubstantial to them.
And accordingly the Experiment answers the Theory. We find that not only
contingent Truths that regard only the Actualities and Existencies of Things,
such as matters of Fact, Human Events, etc. but even a great many of those
which are Ideal and Necessary, and concern only the Abstract Reasons and
Essences of Things independently on their Actual Existence, are Comprehensible
by us, as in Metaphysics and Geometry, in the Contemplation of which Sciences
we meet with a great many things which we well understand, and whereof we have
Clear Ideas and Conceptions.

24. But now it is not thus with the Ideas of the first Order, nor with their
Truths, Though those Divine Ideas which appertain to the Essence of God only as
representative of Creatures, be both Finite and Comprehensible by limited
Understandings, (which indeed otherwise would not be capable of any Science)
yet these Absolute Ideas which I now speak of, are neither Finite nor
Comprehensible. For these Ideas are of the very Essence and Substance of God as
it is in it self purely and separately considered according to its simple and
absolute Nature, and not as it is in relation to Creatures, or as
representative of any Reality out of it self. And accordingly God in
contemplating these Ideas of his may be truly and strictly said to contemplate
himself; and we also in the Contemplation of them do as really contemplate God,
and that because they are of his Divine Essence simply and absolutely
considered as it is in it self, and not as it is in reference to any thing
besides, or out of it self. These Ideas therefore are strictly Infinite
(because the Divine Essence, as it is in it self simply and absolutely
considered is so) and consequently Incomprehensible by any Finite, and
consequently by Human Understanding. God only can Comprehend these Ideas, and
that because he only can Comprehend himself. Human Reason indeed has Light
enough to discover that there are such Ideas and Perfections in God, and is
withal able to discern enough of them to raise her greatest Wonder and
Devotion, and to make her despise all other Intelligible Objects in comparison
of these Infinite Grandeurs; and the Angelic Spirits that wait about the Throne
of his Majesty, and stand in a better Light, are able to see yet more of them;
but neither the one nor the other can Comprehend them fully any more than they
can God himself, and that because they are God. So that though the other Ideas
are Finite and Comprehensible, these are truly Infinite and Incomprehensible.
And of this we have sufficient Evidence in the Instances above proposed of
each. The Idea of Extension is very Clear and Intelligible to our Minds, as
Finite and as Narrowly bounded as they are. We have a very distinct View of it,
we Perceive it, we Comprehend it. Among all Intelligible Objects there is none
that is more clear, nor whereof we have a more adequate and exact Notion. And
upon this is founded all that peculiar Clearness, Evidence and Certainty that
is in the Geometric Sciences, which alone have the happiness to be free from
Disputes, and without Contestation to find that Truth which the others seek
after, and that for no other Reason but because we have so clear and distinct a
Notion of its general Subject, Extension. But now as to the I the rather
Instance in the Divine Immensity, because the D^vout Psalmist does herein
parti^ularize his Ignorance, making it the Subject of his Astonishment rather
than his Curiosity. Such Knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high, I
cannot attain unto it, Psalm. 139.
Divine Immensity, so far are we from having a Clear Conception of that, that
no sooner do we set our selves to contemplate this vast Idea, but we enter into
Clouds and Darkness, or rather into such an over-shining and insupportable
Light as dazzles and blinds our Eyes, yea hurts and pains them, till they can
no longer endure to gaze, but are forced to refresh themselves either by
letting down their wearied Lids (suspense of Thought) or by turning their view
upon less glorious Objects. In the Meditation of the other Idea we are like Men
that wade in a River where we both see and feel the Bottom, and go on for a
pretty way together smoothly and without much difficulty, only now and then
meeting with an intangling Weed that lets and incumbers our progress. But in
the Contemplation of the Infinite Idea of the Divine Immensity we are like men
that commit themselves to the Main Sea, at the very first Plunge out of our
depth, and ready to be overwhelmed, swallowed up and lost in an Abyss that
knows no bottom.

25. I use a little Figure and Imagery here the better to impress this upon the
Imagination of those who are not so well habituated to the Conception of things
by Pure Intellection, but the thing it self needs none of the advantages of the
Metaphorical way, being strictly and severely true. And by these two Instances
it may appear what a vast difference there is between these two sorts of the
Divine Ideas, the Absolute and the Relative, those that are of the Essence of
God as in himself, and those that are of the same Divine Essence as it is in
relation to Creatures. The First, Infinite and Incomprehensible, the Second,
Finite and Comprehensible. For you see here the Idea of Extension is clear and
distinct, and such as we can fully and adequately Conceive, but the Idea of the
Divine Immensity, has nothing clear and distinct in it, but is all over
Darkness and Obscurity, and such as quite astonishes and confounds us with a
Thousand difficulties upon the first application of our Thoughts to it, as
indeed do all the Absolute Attributes and Perfections of God, which are all
equally Infinite, and equally incomprehensible to Finite Spirits, however they
may be able to Comprehend that which in the Essence of God is representative
of, and carries a Relation to those Realities which either actually do, or
possibly may exist out of it. And in this I say no more (setting aside only the
Rationale of the thing) than those who tell us that the Incommunicable
Attributes of God are Infinite and Incomprehensible. They are so. But what is
it that makes them Infinite and Incomprehensible? Even the same that makes them
Incommunicable, viz. their being of the Essence of God as it is in it self
according to its Absolute Simplicity, and not as it is in Relation to
Creatures. For it is most evident that the Essence of God as it is simply and
Absolutely in it self is every way Infinite and Incomprehensible, and therefore
all those Ideas and Perfections of his which are in this Absolute Sense
Essential to him must be also of an alike Infinite and Incomprehensible Nature.
Which by the way may serve to Silence the presumptuous Cavils of those who draw
Objections against the Existence of God from the incomprehensibility of his
Attributes, since if there be a God he must have incomprehensible Attributes,
which unless we ascribe to him we do not think either rightly or worthily of
him.

26. But to resume our Point, we see then here what a large Field is now opened
to our Prospect of Infinite and Incomprehensible Truths, even of a Compass as
large as the Absolute Ideas and Perfections of the Divine Essence. For though
all Created things are of a Finite Nature, and though even the Divine Ideas
that represent them, as far as representative of them, must fall under the same
limited Consideration, yet those Absolute Ideas and Perfections of God that
have no such external Reference, but are of the Divine Essence as it is in its
pure, simple, abstracted Self, must necessarily partake of the Divine Infinity,
and be as unbounded as God himself. And since Truth (as was before observed) is
Coessential and Consubstantial with the Divine Ideas, I further Conclude, that
though those Truths which regard the Actualities and Existencies of things, or
if you please, things that do actually exist, be Finite, because the things
themselves are so, and though even those that regard the Divine Ideas
themselves are also Finite supposing the Ideas to be of the inferior Order,
such as are of the Divine Essence only as it is representative of, and in
relation to Creatures, yet those Truths which respect those Divine Ideas of the
Superior Order, that are of the Absolute Essence of God as it is in it self
purely and simply Considered, and so are not only Essentially, but even
Representatively Divine, as truly representing God, and being in a strict and
proper sense his Ideas, I say the Truths of this Order and Character must
necessarily be of a Nature far exalted above all Creatures, yea above all other
Ideal Truths, even as far as what is of the Simple and Absolute Essence of God
transcends that which in the same Essence is only Relative to things without,
and can therefore be no less than Infinite. We have here then an Order of
Infinite Truths, even allthose which regard the Absolute Ideas and Perfections
of God. These Divine Ideas and Perfections are all Infinite, as that Glorious
Essence whose Ideas they are and whom they represent, and so also are the
Sublime Truths which result from them. They are of a Nature strictly Infinite,
and if Infinite then by Consequence Incomprehensible, I mean to all
understandings that are not so. For as Nothing Finite has Reality enough to
represent Infinite, so neither can any thing Finite have Capacity enough to
Comprehend it. For as the actual knowledge of any intelligent Being can never
exceed its intellectual Power, so neither can its Power exceed the measure of
its Essence. A Finite Being therefore must have a Finite Understanding, and a
Finite Understanding must have a Finite Perception. Since then our
Understandings are Finite, it is plain that our Perception of Infinite must also
be Finite. It Is true indeed that Objective Reality which we contemplate when we
think upon Infinite has no Limits, and so we may be said in some respect to
have an Infinite Thought, as far as the Operation of the Mind may be
denominated from the quality of the Object, but yet still we think according to
the Measure of our Nature, and our Perception of Infinite can be no more at the
most than Finite. But now a Finite Perception bears no proportion to an
Infinite Intelligible, besides that to perceive such an Object after a Finite
manner is not to perceive it as it is, but only Partially and inadequately. But
now a Partial and inadequate Perception of a thing can never be said to be a
Comprehension of that thing, even though the thing be Finite, much less then
when it is Infinite. Whereby it plainly appears that if there be an Order of
Infinite Truths the same will also be Incomprehensible Ones, and since again as
I have shown there is an Order of such Truths, even all those that regard the
Absolute Ideas and Perfections of the Divine Essence, it clearly follows that
there is an Order of Incomprehensible Truths, and Consequently that Human
Reason is not the Measure of Truth, even Distributively considered, since there
are Particular Truths which it cannot Comprehend; which was the thing to be
proved.

27. And of all this we may have a plain and visible illustration in the
forementioned Instance of the Divine Immensity. This is an Idea or Perfection
of God that is truly Insinite, as being of his Divine Essence as it is
Absolutely in it self, and not as in Order to, or representative of Creatures;
And as Infinite it is also Incomprehensible by any but God himself. Accordingly
the Complex Truth that regards this Absolute Idea of God is also Infinite, and
as such Incomprehensible. As appears in this Proposition, God is Immense; which
is an Infinite and Incomprehensible Truth. We find it is so a Posteriori by
casting the view of our Understandings upon it. And we find it must be so a
Priori by reasoning upon the Principles already laid down and established. And
to prevent all vain cavilling in this matter I further add, that though we
could suppose the Truths that result from Infinite Ideas not to be Infinite
(which yet we cannot by reason of their real Identity and Coessentiality with
those Ideas) yet however they must upon another account be incomprehensible,
even upon the Incomprehensibility of those Ideas. For if the Ideas whereof a
Truth consists be incomprehensible, as they must be if they are Infinite, that
alone would be enough to hinder us from being able to Comprehend such a Truth,
it being impossible we should thoroughly understand the Relations or Habitudes
between those Ideas whose Simple Natures (the Foundation of those Habitudes) we
do not Comprehend. For if in Finite things the not having a clear and adequate
Idea of a thing makes us unable to judge of the Truth or Falsehood of many
Propositions concerning that thing (whereof there are a multitude of Instances
in Morality, especially in Questions relating to the Soul of Man, which must
for ever lie undetermined merely for want of our having a clear Idea of that
Noble Essence) much more then in things Infinite will the not having a
Comprehension of the Ideas incapacitate us from Comprehending the Truths that
Result from them, which will therefore be as incomprehensible as if they were
(what indeed they are) in themselves Infinite.

28. I have hitherto shown the Incomprehensibility of Truth by Human Reason,
and consequently that Human Reason, is not the Measure of Truth, from the joint
Consideration of each. Only with this difference. I have considered and
represented Truth Absolutely as it is in it self, according to its own Infinite
and unmeasurable Nature. But as for Human Reason I have considered that only as
Finite, as supposing that sufficient to my present Purpose, and that there was
no need of placing it in any other Light. For after it has been shown that
Truth is Infinite, to prove that Human Reason cannot be the Measure of it, it
is certainly enough to Consider it as a Bounded Power, without representing how
very strait and narrow its Bounds are, since whatever is Finite can never
measurer Infinite. But then it so, what if we add the other Consideration to
it? If the bare Finiteness of Human Understanding (a defect common to it with
all Created Intelligencies) renders it incapable of Comprehending Truth, and
Consequently of being the Measure of it, how much more then does the littleness
and narrowness of its Bounds contribute to heighten that incapacity? If the
having any limits does so unqualifie it for the adequate Comprehension of
Truth, how then does the having so very short and strait ones? Strait indeed by
Natural and Original Constitution, but much more yet retrenched by Sin, and by
all those Passions, Prejudices, deordinate Affections and Evil Customs which
are the Effects and Consequences of Sin, and which have now so darkened our
Minds, and drawn such a gross Film over our Intellectual Sight that we can
hardly distinguish Day from Night, Clearness from Obscurity, Truth from
Falsehood, and are able to see but so very little a way into the Works of God
(much less into the Nature of God himself) that we need nothing else to depress
and humble our Pride and Vanity than that very Knowledge of ours which puffs us
up. So very narrow in its Compass and Extent, so very Shallow and Superficial
in its Depth, so very Confuse and Obscure in its Light, so very uncertain and
conjectural in its Ground, and so every way defective and imprerfect is it. But
how then can we found the Depth of Truth with so short a Line? A Bottomless
Depth with (I will not say a Finite, but) so very scanty a Measuer? And what an
extravagant Folly and Weakness, not to say Pride and Vanity is it to fancy that
we can? It would be a Vain Presumption in an Angel, but sure the very Madness
and Distraction of Impudence in Man, who may with less defiance to Sense and
Reason think to grasp the Ocean within the hollow of his hand, than to
Comprehend and Measure Truth, Infinite Boundless Truth, not only with Finite,
but so very limited Capacities.

29. But suppose Truth were not (what we have shown it to be) Infinite, but had
Bounds as well as our Reason, yet unless it had the Same, our Reason cannot be
Commensurate to it, or the Measure of it. But does the supposition of its
having Limits infer that it has the same? No, For though Finite, its Bounds may
possibly be extended further than those of our Understandings, and how can we
be sure that they are not? We cannot then even upon this supposition be sure
that our Reason is the Measure of Truth, and therefore it is all one as to us
(as I said before) as if it were not so, forasmuch as we cannot use it as a
Measure by drawing any Consequences from it concerning the Falsehood or
impossibility of things upon the account of our inability to Comprehend them,
since for ought we know the Limits of Truth though we should suppose it Finite,
may yet exceed, and that very greatly too, those of our Rational Faculties. And
Considering both the Natural and the Superaccessory defects of them it is very
reasonable to think that they do.

30. Some Essences perhaps there may be (though even this again is more than we
know) that sit so high in the Intellectual Form as to be able to Comprehend all
that is Finite, so that the only reason why they have not an adequate
Comprehension of Truth at large is because it is indeed Infinite. But there is
no Necessity, nor so much as Probability that Human Reason should be of so
raised an Order that nothing but Infinity should transcend its Comprehension.
And it must be a strange Composition of Pride and Self-love that can make us
fancy that it is; something like that, only much more extravagant, which
possesses the disturbed Heads of some in Bedlam, and makes them Conceit
themselves Kings and Emperors in the midst of their Irons, Rags, and Straw.
What though Truth were Finite, and some Understandings too that are so were
able to measure it, why must this needs be concluded of Human Understanding? If
a Finite Being were able to Comprehend Truth, why must Man be that Being? The
Scripture tells us he is made lower than the Angels, and how many Orders and
Degrees there may be among them we know not, nor indeed how many Ranks of
Spiritual Beings there may be in the Universe whose Understandings go beyond
ours. For who can define the Out-flowings of the Divine Fecundity, or Number
the Rounds of the Intellectual Scale? In the mean while though man knows not
how many Orders of Intelligent Creatures there are above him, yet it is with
great Reason and Consent presumed that there are none below him, so that he is
placed even by his own Confession in the lowest Form of the Intellectual Order.
And why then may not his Understanding (as much as he values himself upon it)
be of so Shallow a Depth, and so low a Size that even Finite Objects may be
disproportionate to him? Especially since we find him so often puzzled and
gravelled in Natural things, as also in those Ideal Truths that have relation
to the Natural and Ectypal World, such as Philosophical and Mathematical
Problems. Or if the Reason of any Creature could be the Measure of Truth, why
should he be that Creature, who is seated in the very Confines of the Material
and Immaterial World, and is as it were the Common-Point where Matter ends and
Spirit begins, who brings up the rear of the Intellectual kind, and is both the
youngest and the least endowed among the Sons of God.

31. These Considerations sufficiently show that there is no Necessity, nor so
much as Probability, that Human Reason should be the Measure of Truth even upon
the Supposition of its being Finite. Which indeed is enough of it self to carry
the Point Contended for as far as the Design of the present Argument is
Concerned. For if it be not necessary that Human Reason should be the Measure
of Truth, then it is Possible that it may not be, and if it is Possible that it
may not, then we can be never Sure that it is, and if we cannot be Sure that it
is, then we cannot Use it as a Measure, which (as I have remarqu'd already and
for the Moment of it do here reinculcate) makes it the same to all intents and
purposes as if it were not such at all. But yet to carry our Plea a little
highter I further Contend that as the foregoing Considerations suffice to show
that Human Reason may not, so there is One behind that very positively
Demonstrates that it Cannot be the Measure of Truth, even though we should allow
it to be of a Finite and bounded Nature as well as our own understandings.

32. As there are many things whereof our Ideas are very Confuse and Obscure,
so it is most (...) that there are some things (...) we have no Ideas at all, it
(...) not pleased the Eternal and (...) Intelligence to Exhibit that in Himself
which is Representative of those things to our Understandings. But now besides
the Difficultys and disadvantages we shall always ly under in the Comprehension
of things from the Confuseness and Obscurity of our Ideas, which of it Self
will many times render those things, and also whatever nearly relates to those
things incomprehensible by us, and besides that our not having any Ideas of
Certain things, is an invincible Bar to all Knowledge and Comprehension of
those things (unless we could be supposed to be able to see without Light) it is
also further Considerable that possibly the Knowledge of that Truth which we
set our Selves to Comprehend, and whereof we have the Ideas, may depend upon
the truth of another thing whereof we have no Idea. If it should be so tho
Truth in general be never so Finite, or the Particular Truth we would
Contemplate be never so Finite, it is plain we shall be no more able to
Comprehend it than if it were Infinite. Now I say that it is not only Possible
that this may be the Case (which yet of it Self as I have again and again Noted
is sufficient to debar us from using our Reason as the Measure of Truth) but
there are also some Instances wherein it appears actually to be so. We know
well enough what we mean by Liberty and Contingency, and are withal well
assured that we are Free Agents. We have also a Sufficient Notion of
Prescience, and are also no less assured of the Reality of it, And because both
these are true, and there can be no real repugnance between one Truth and
another we are also by Consequence assured that there is a good Harmony and
Agreement between them, and that they are Consistent with each other. But now
how to adjust their apparent Opposition, or reconcile those Instances of
seeming Contradiction and inconsistency wherewith they press us, this we
neither Know nor are able with all our Meditation to Comprehend, and that
because we have not an Idea of the Human Soul, without which there is no
possibility of Comprehending how its Free Workings may be the Objects of
Prescience, tho our Ideas of Prescience and Liberty were never so Clear. Or if
this Instance shall not be thought so proper because the Men with whom our
present Concern lies are pleased to disown the Doctrine of Prescience, let me
desire them to Consider whether there be not many other Difficulties concerning
Human Liberty, besides that taken from, Prescience, which they are no more able
to get over then they are that. And that for the very same Reason, even because
they ahve not an Idea of the Soul, upon the Knowledge of which the Solution of
those, as well as some other Difficulties in Morality, does Necessarily depend.
Or if they please let them take an Instance of a Physical Nature. We know well
enough what it is to be in a Place, and we know also as well what it is to be
Coextended to a Place. But now how Being in a Place may be without Coextension
to a Place, this is what we cannot Comprehend (tho as to the thing it Self,
upon other Considerations constrained to grant it) and that because we are
ignorant of the general Nature of Spirit, upon the clear Conception of which
the Comprehension of the other does so depend that it cannot be had without it.
And indeed we may concluded in general that when ever we have clear Ideas of
things, and yet are not able to Comprehend the Truth of them, it is because the
Knowledge of those things depends upon the Truth of something else whereof we
have either no Idea, or not such as is sufficiently Clear. Which must be the
true Reason of the hitherto presumed impossibility of finding out the exact
Proportion between a Circle and a Square. Why, Circle and Square are very
Intelligible things, and how come we then not to be able to determine the
precise and just Proportion that is between them: It cannot be from any
Obscurity in the things themselves, much less from our want of having Ideas of
them, for we have as clear and exact Ideas of these Figures as we can have of
any thing in the World. It must be therefore because the Knowledge of their
Proportion depends upon the Knowledge of some other thing whereof the Idea
fails us, which till we are possessed of we shall in vain endeavor to discover
the other. Whereby it plainly appears that we are not only incapable of
Comprehending those Truths that relate to things whereof we have no Ideas, but
that even where we have Ideas, and those very Clear ones too we may be as far
from Comprehending a Truth as if we had none merely upon the account of the
Dependence which that Truth has upon some other thing whereof we have not, at
least a just, Idea. Which single Consideration is enough for ever to spoil
Human Reason for setting up for the Measure of Truth, even upon the Supposition
of its being Finit. So very False is that arrogant Assertion of a Modern
Philosopher, ^erardi de Vries Prasessoris V^tra^ (...), exercitationes
rationales de Deo, Divinisque Perfectoinibus Page 248.
. Quaecunque existunt humanae Menti pervestigabilia, praeterquam In^initum.
Whatever is may be thoroughly Comprehended by the Mind of Man, except Infinite.
And again. Vnum duntaxat est quod omnem mentis nostrae vim longissime excedit,
ipsaque sua Natura, ut in se est, ab ea Cognosci nequit, In^initum puta. There
is but one only thing that far exceeds the Force and reach of our Mind, and
that cannot of its own very Nature be known by it as it is in it self, namely
Infinite. What but One thing excepted from the Verge, and placed beyond the
reach of Human Knowledge? It Is well that One thing is a pretty large one, but
sure the Author was ignorant of something else, that is Himself, or else he
could never have advanced such a Crude and ill-consider'd a Proposition.

33. And thus I have shown at large in a rational way by arguing a Priori, and
from the Nature of things, that Human Reason is not the Measure of Truth, and
that even upon the most Liberal Supposition of its being Finite; And if it be
not so supposing Truth to be Finite, much less is it supposing it (what it has
been proved to be) of an Infinite Nature. If upon the Former Supposition it
exceeds the Proportion of our Reason, certainly upon the latter there will be
no Proportion between them. But whether our Reason bears no Proportion to
Truth, or whether it be only Disproportionate to it, either way it follows that
it cannot be the Measure of it, which I cannot but now look upon as a
Proposition sufficiently demonstrated. And in all this I contend for no more
than what is implied in that Common and universally approved Maxim even among
those of the Rational way, that we ought not to deny what is Evident for the
sake of what is Obscure, or depart from a Truth which we see a Necessity to
admit because of some Difficulties attending it which we cannot solve; which
they say is an Argument only of our Ignorance, and not of the Falsehood of the
thing. This indeed is a true Rule, and such as must be allowed to hold good in
all our Reasonings, let the Matter of them be what it will. Only I wish that
the Implication of the Rule were as much minded, as the Rule it self is
generally received. For it plainly implies that there are some things which
though plain and certain as to their Existence, are yet incomprehensible and
inexplicable as to their Manner. But then as the Incomprehensibility of the
Manner should not make us reject the Truth of the thing when otherwise Evident,
so neither should the Evidence we have of the Truth of the thing make us disown
the Incomprehensibility of the Manner, since it is so far from being against
the Nature of Truth that it should be incomprehensible, that you see we have
discovered even from the Contemplation of its Nature that there are
incomprehensible Truths. Of which I might now subjoyn some particular Examples,
but that I should fall very deep into a Common Place, being herein prevented by
many other Writers, particularly by the admirable one of L' Art de Penser, to
the First Chapter of whose Fourth Book I refer my Reader; where he shows by
several, and some of them uncommon Instances that there are things which the
Mind of Man is not capable of Comprehending. After which he Concludes with a
very grave and useful Reflection, which for the great advantage and Pertinency
of it to the present Affair, though I refer my Reader to the rest of the
Chapter, I shall here set down. The Pro^it (says he) that one may draw from
these Speculations is not barely to acquire the knowledge of them, which of it
self is barren enough, but it is to learn to know the Bounds of our
understanding, and to force it to confess that there are things which it cannot
Comprehend. And therefore it is good to fatigue the mind with these kind of
Subtilties, the better to tame its Presumption, and abate its confidence and
daringness in opposing its Feeble Lights against the Mysteries of Religion,
under the Pretense that it cannot comprehend them. For since all the Force of
Human Understanding is constrained to yield to the least Atom of Matter, and to
own that it sees Clearly that it is infinitely divisible without being able to
Comprehend how this may be. Is it not apparently to transgress against Reason
to refuse to believe the wonderful effects of the Divine Onnipotence, Merely
for this Reason, that our Understanding cannot Comprehend them? Yes without
doubt it is, as will better appear in the sequel of this Discourse. In the mean
while before I take leave of the Subject of this Chapter, I have a double
Remarque to make upon it.

34. The First is, that since Truth in its full extent is Incomprehensible, we
should not vainly go about to Comprehend it, but be contented to be ignorant in
many things. And since there are some special Truths in particular that are
incomprehensible we should not apply our Thoughts to the Comprehension of all
things at a Venture, as some who are for understanding every thing, but sit
down first and Consider whether they are proportionate to our Capacities or No,
and, as far as we can learn to distinguish what Truths may, and what may not be
Comprehended by us, that so we may not lose that Time and Pains in the
Contemplation of them, which might be profitably employed in the Consideration
of other things, better suited to our Capacity. As a great many do, who busy
themselves all their Lives long about such things which if they should study to
Eternity they would not Comprehend, and that indeed because they require an
Infinite Capacity to Comprehend them. Whereas the shortest Compendium of Study,
and the best way to abridge the Sciences is to study only what we can Master,
and what is within the Sphere of our Faculties, and never so much as to apply
our selves to what we can never Comprehend.

35. The other Remarque is that the Conclusion proved in this Chapter does very
much Fortify and Confirm that which was undertaken to be made out in the last
Concerning the Distinction of Things Above, and Things Contrary to Reason. For
if there are Truths which we cannot Comprehend, then it seems what is above our
Comprehension may yet be True, and if True then to be sure not Contrary to
Reason, since whatever is Contrary to Reason is no less Contrary to Truth,
which though sometimes above Reason is yet never Contrary to it.

CHAP. V. That therefore a things being Incomprehensible by Reason is of it
self no Concluding Argument of its not being True.
1. AS there is nothing in Man that deserves his Consideration so Much, and Few
things without him that deserve it More than that part of him wherein he
resembles his Maker, so there is Nothing more worthy of his Consideration in
that part, or that is at least more necessary to be Considered by him, than the
Defects of it, without a due regard to which it would not be very safe for him
to dwell much upon the Consideration of the other, as being apt to seduce him
into ^ ride and Vanity, to blow him up with Self-Conceit, and so by an
imaginary Greatness to spoil and corrupt that which is Genuine and Natural.

2. Now the Defects of our Intellectual part Considered in their general Heads
are I suppose Sin, Ignorance, and Error. And though Sin in it self must be
allowed to be of a worse Nature and Consequence than either Ignorance or Error
(however some may fancy it a greater Reproach to 'em to have their
Intellectuals questioned than their Morals) and so upon that score may require
more of our Consideration, yet upon another account the Defects of the
Understanding seem to need it more than those of the Will, since we are not
only apt to be more proud of our Intellectuals than of our Morals, but also to
Conceit our selves more Free and Secure from Error than we are from Sin,
though Sin in the very Nature and Principle of it implies and supposes Error.

3. Pride the presumed Sin of the Angels is also the most Natural and
Hereditary one of Man, his dominant and most cleaving Corruption, the Vice as I
may call it of his Planet and Complexion. And that which we are most apt to be
proud of is our Understandings, the only Faculty in us whose limits we forget.
In other things we are Sensible not only of the general Bounds of our Nature,
but also of the particular narrowness of them, and accordingly do not attempt
any thing very much beyond our Measure, but contain our Selves pretty
reasonably within Our Line, at least are not such Fools as to apply our
Strength to Move the Earth out of its place, or to set our Mouths to drink up
the Sea, or to try with our Eyes to look into the Regions beyond the Stars. But
there is hardly any Distance but to which we fancy our Intellectual Sight will
reach, scarce any Object too bright, too large, or too far removed for it.
Strange that when we Consider that in us which makes us Men, we should forget
that we are so. And yet thus it is; when we look upon our Understandings it is
with such a Magnifying Glass that it appears in a manner boundless and
unlimited to us, and we are dazzled with our own Light.

4. Not that it is to be presumed that there are any who upon a deliberate
Consideration of the Matter have this Formed and express Thought that their
Understandings are Infinite Human Nature seems hardly capable of such Excess.
But only as the Psalmist says in another Case of some Worldly Men, that their
Inward Thought is that their houses shall continue for ever, Psalm. 4.
Not meaning that any could be so grossly absurd as positively and explicitly
to Conceive that their Houses any more than their own Bodies, should last
always, and never decay, but only that they had such a kind of a wandering and
Confuse Imagination secretly lurking in their Minds, and loosely hovering about
them; so in like manner there are a sort of People who are Parturient and
teeming with a kind of Confuse and unformed Imagination though perhaps they never
bring it to an express and distinct Thought, that their Understandings have no
bounds or limits belonging to them, though they cannot deny but that they have,
if directly put to the Question.

5. Accordingly you shall find those whose Conduct betrays this inward
Sentiment, who venture at all in their Studies, stick at nothing, but will
undertake to give a Reason for every thing, and positively decide whatever
Comes in their way without Suspense or Reserve, imagining (confusely at least)
they have a Comprehension of all things, and that there is nothing too hard or
knotty for them, nothing but what they either actually do, or are capable of
Comprehending, if they once set themselves to it. And from hence they roundly
Conclude that whatever they are not able to Comprehend is not true, and
accordingly deny their Belief to whatever transcends their Comprehension.

6. Now I confess there is no fault to be found with the Consequence of these
Men, nor with their Practice as it relates to that Consequence, which are both
(as far as I can see) exceeding right if their Principle be once admitted: For
if indeed it be really so that Human Reason is adequate and Commensurate to
Truth, so that there is no Truth but what it is able to Comprehend, then it
will certainly follow that whatever it cannot Comprehend is not True, and there
will need no other, nor better Argument of the falsehood of any thing than the
Incomprehensibility of it. For their Reasoning resolves into this Form.

Whatever is true we can Comprehend.
This we do not Comprehend,
Therefore this is not true.
Or thus, If whatever is true we can Comprehend, then what we cannot Comprehend
is not true,
But whatever is true we can Comprehend, Ergo etc.
Where it is plain that if the Major of the First, or the Minor of the Second
Syllogisin (wherein the Principle of these Men is Contained) be allowed, there
will be no avoiding the Conclusions of them. So that if we admit that Human
Reason is Comprehensive of all Truth we are not Consistent with our Selves if
we do not also grant that the Incomprehensibility of a thing is a just Warrant
to Conclude it not True.

7. But then on the other side if this Mighty Principle upon which such a
Weight is laid, and such great things built be false, if Human Reason be not
the Measure of Truth (as I think is with great Evidence Demonstrated in the
last Chapter) then is not the Consequence as good this way, that therefore a
thing's being Incomprehensible by Reason is no Concluding Argument of it is not
being True? For how are we inconsistent with our Selves, if granting Human
Reason to be Commensurate to Truth we deny that the Incomprehensibility of a
thing argues it not to be True, but only because in denying that we Contradict
our Principle; or, which is all one, Suppose the Contradictory Proposition to
it to be true, viz. that Human Reason is not Commensurate to Truth. But now if
in saying that the Incomprehensibility of a thing does not argue it not to be
true we in the Consequence of what we affirm Suppose that Human Reason is not
the Measure of Truth, then it is as plain that the Supposition of Reason's not
being the Measure of Truth will also Oblige us to say that the
Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument of it is not being True. Whereby
it is plain that the Consequence is every whit as good thus, Human Reason is
not the Measure of Truth, therefore the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no
Argument that it is not True; as thus, Human Reason is the Measure of Truth,
therefore the Incomprehensibility of a thing is an Argument that it is not
True. The only Reason why he that denies this latter Consequence upon the
Supposition or Concession of this latter Principle is inconsistent with
himself, being this, because in denying the latter Consequence he Supposes the
Former Principle, which Principle therefore must as much inter the Consequence
that Supposed it, viz. That a things being Incomprehensible by Reason is no
Warrant to Conclude that it is not true.

8. And because this Principle that Human Reason is not the Measure of Truth
has been already proved at large, I look upon the grounds of this Consequence
as already laid, and therefore to show the Connection that is between the one
and the other (besides what I have even now said to that purpose) need only add
this further Remarque. That since Human Reason is not the Measure of Truth, or
since there are Incomprehensible Truths, then it seems the Incomprehensibility
of a thing and the Truth of a thing may Consist together; or in other words,
the same thing may be at once True and Incomprehensible. But now there cannot
be in the whole Compass of Reasoning a more certain, or more evident Maxim than
this, That that which is when a thing is, or would be supposing it were, is no
Argument that it is not. As for Instance, Suppose it should be Objected against
the Copernican Hypothesis of the Motion of the Earth that it is repugnant to
Sense, since we see the Sun and the Stars Rise and Set, and Move round about
us. It is thought a sufficient Answer to this to say, That supposing the Earth
and not the Sun did really Move these Appearances would yet be the same as they
are now, since Sailing, Le Clerks Physics. Page 14.
as we do, between the Sun and the Stars (as a late Writer expresses it) not
the Ship in which we are, but the Bodies which surround us would seem to Move.
And it is most Certain that if supposing the Earth did) really Move the Motion
would yet seem to be in the Sun and Stars; then the seeming Motion of those
Bodies is no Argument that the Earth does not Move.

9. Why just so it is in the present Case, when it is Objected against the Truth
of a thing that it is Incomprehensible by Human Reason, it is a sufficient Answer
to say that this argues nothing, since if the thing were true it might yet be
Incomprehensible. And it is most certain that if supposing a thing to be True it
might yet be Incomprehensible, then the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no
good Objection against the Truth of it. And therefore since we have proved that
there are Incomprehensible Truths, and Consequently that the Truth of a thing
and the Incomprehensibility of the same thing may Consist together, we may now
with all Rational assurance Conclude that the Incomprehensibility of a thing is
no Argument that it is not True, any more than the seeming Motion of the Sun is
an Argument against the real one of the Earth, since the Former would be even
Supposing the Truth of the Latter. And both by Virtue of this most Evident and
incontestable Principle, That what may Consist with the Truth of any thing, can
be no good Argument that it is not True.

10. And indeed when it shall be Considered how many things surpass our
Conception when we are Children which yet we are able well to Comprehend when
we are Men, how many things again are beyond the Ken of Ignorant and Illiterate
Men which yet are very Intelligible and Shine forth with full Light to the Men
of Art and Learning, and how many things again even among the Learned are now
discovered and well understood by the help of Algebra which were Mysteries to
former Ages, and are still beyond even the Imagination of those who have not
that Noble and Wonderful Key of Knowledge. When again it shall be further
Considered how many of those things which we cannot even with the Assistance of
that Commanding Key unlock in this state of Mortality, we may yet have a clear
view of in that of Separation, when delivered from the Burden of our Flesh,
and that many of those things which are too high for us then may yet be of a
level with the Understanding of Angels, and that what is above their Capacity
may yet be most clearly and distinctly perceived by the Infinitely penetrating
and All-Comprehensive Intellect of God, I say he that shall but seriously enter
into this single Reflection must needs discover himself much wanting in that
Stock of Sense and Reason he pretends to, if he still continue to Measure the
Possibilities of things by their Proportionableness to his Understanding, or
Conclude any thing False or Impossible, when he has no better Reason for it but
only because he cannot Comprehend it.

CHAP. VI. That if the Incomprehensibility of a thing were an Argument of its
not being true, Human Reason would then be the Measure of Truth.
1. AS there is Nothing more Common than for people to hold Certain Principles
that have an inseparable Connection with very bad Consequences, and yet not
professedly to hold those Consequences, because either they do not attend to
them, or are not sensible that they do indeed follow from such Principles,
whereof we have two very pregnant Instances in the Maintainers of the
Predestinarian and Soli^idian Systemes, so on the other hand, and for the same
Reason there are those who take up, and with great Fixedness adhere to certain
Consequences without Professedly holding those Principles from which they truly
flow, and to which (if traced to the Head) they will infallibly lead them.

2. Of this we have a very particular Instance (where I confess one would not
expect to find it) in those of the Socinian Persuasion. The Reason these Men of
Reason give why they will not believe the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, is
because they are above their Reason, they cannot Comprehend them. Whereby they
plainly imply, that they will believe Nothing but what they can Comprehend, or
that Nothing is to be believed that is Incomprehensible, which is also a common
Maxim among them, who accordingly make Above Reason and Contrary to Reason to
be one and the same thing. And whereas it is only the untruth of a thing that
can make it unfit to be the Object of Faith, in saying they will not believe
what they cannot Comprehend, they do as good as say that what they cannot
Comprehend is not True, and so that the Incomprehensibility of a thing is a
just warrant to conclude it False. And all this they own and expressly declare,
if not in these very terms, yet at least in such as are equivalent to them as
is too Notorious and well known to need any Citations for the proof of it. But
now though they do thus profess^dly own that the Incomprehensibility of a thing
by Reason is an Argument of its not being true, yet that Human Reason is the
Measure of Truth, or that all Truth is Comprehensible by it, are (as I take it)
Propositions which they do not openly and professedly avow. For as I noted in
the Introduction it is such an Odious and Arrogant Assertion that they cannot
with any Face of Modesty or common Decency make a plain and direct Profession
of it, though at the same time it is most Certain, that this is the true
Principle of that Consequence which they do professedly hold, viz. that the
Incomprehensibility of a thing argues it not to be true, and that this
Consequence does as necessarily lead back to that Principle.

3. For as if Human Reason be the Measure of Truth it follows in the
descendintg line as a direct Consequence that the Incomprehensibility of a
thing argues it not to be true, so it follows as well Backwards and per viam
ascensus, that if the Incomprehensibility of a thing argues it not to be True,
then Human Reason is the Measure of Truth. Since if it were not, the
Incomprehensibility of a thing (as is shown in the Preceding Chapter) would
then not argue it not to be True. If therefore it does, it is plain that Human
Reason is the Measure of Truth. Which Principle whoever disowns ought also to
renounce the other Proposition, viz. That the Incomprehensibility of a thing is
an Argument of its untruth, which if yet he will embrace notwithstanding, it is
plain he holds the Consequence without its Principle, and has indeed no Reason
for what he Affirms.

4. For as he who granting Human Reason to be the Measure of Truth, denies yet
that the Incomprehensibility of a thing is an Argument of its not being true is
therefore inconsistent with himself, because in so doing he supposes the
Contradictory to what he had before granted, viz. that Human Reason is not the
Measure of Truth. So he that Affirms that the Incomprehensibility of a thing is
an Argument of its not being True, and yet denies that Human Reason is the
Measure of Truth, is also as inconsistent with himself, because in so doing the
supposes the Contradictory to his own Assertion, and does in effect say that
the Incomprehensibility of a thing is not an Argument of its not being True, as
most Certainly it would not be in case Human Reason be not the Measure of
Truth, as the foregoing Chapter has sufficiently shown. The short is, if the
Not being of A proves that C is not, then the being of C proves that A is,
since if it were not, according to the First Supposition C could not be. And so
here if Reason's not being the Measure of Truth proves that the
Incomprehensibility of a thing is not an Argument of its not being True, then
if the Incomprehensibility of a thing be an Argument of it is not being True
it is plain that Reason is the Measure of Truth, since if it were not then
according to the first Supposition the Incomprehensibility of a thing would not
be an Argument of its not being True.

5. For how I pray comes the Incomprehensibility of a thing to conclude the
untruth of it? I cannot Comprehend such a thing, therefore it is not True,
where is the Consequence? By what Logic does this Latter Proposition follow from
the Former? why we have here the Minor Proposition and the Conclusion, and to
make a Complete Argument of it we must add another, thus; If it were true I
should Comprehend it, but I do not Comprehend it, therefore it is not true.
Whereby it appears to the eye that my not being able to Comprehend a thing is
no otherwise an Argument of the ^^truth of it, than as it is first pre^^pposed
that if it were true I should (...) ^ble to Comprehend it. Which again
resolving into this Absolute ^^^^osition, that I am able to Comprehend all
Truth, it plainly follows that if my inability to Comprehend a thing be an
Argument that it is not true, then I am able to Comprehend all Truth, and that
my Reason is the Measure and Final Standard of it.

6. I Conclude therefore that if the Incomprehensibility of a thing were an
Argument of it is not being true then Human Reason will be the Measure of Truth,
and that they that hold the Former ought also if they will be Consistent with
themselves to admit the Latter. But because this is a False Principle, that
Human Reason is the Measure of Truth, therefore, I Conclude again that the
Consequence that Resolves into this Principle is also False, since we may as
well Conclude a Consequence to be False because it leads back to a False
Principle, as a Principle to be False because it is productive of a bad
Consequence. Which still further Confirms and Establishes the Conclusion of the
last Chapter, viz. That the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument of
its untruth, which you see is now proved both Backwards and Forwards, and so
made impregnable on all sides. We have proved it Forwards by showing the
Falseness of that Principle that Human Reason is the Measure of Truth, and by
thence arguing the said Conclusion; and we have also proved it Backwards by
showing that the Contrary Supposition Resolves into that False and already
Confused Principle. And I do not see how any Conclusion can be better proved.

CHAP. VII. That therefore the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no just
Objection against the Belief of it. With an Account of the Cartesian Maxim,
that we are to Assent only to what is Clear and Evident.
1. It Is a Wonderful thing to Consider the Caprice of Human Nature, by what
unaccountable Springs it is Movements are ordered, and how odly and unsteddily
Men act and manage themselves even in the same Circumstances, and in Relation
to the same Objects. Sometimes the Obscurity and Mysteriousness of a thing
shall be a Motive of Credibility, and recommend it the rather to their Belief.
Thus you shall have a great many reject that Philosophy as idle and Chimerical
which undertakes to explain the Effects of Nature by insensible Particles,
their different Bigness, Figure, Contexture, Local Motion, Rest, etc. Merely
because this is a plain Simple and Intelligible Account, such as they can
easily and well Conceive. The very easiness and clearness wherewith they
Conceive these Principles is Made an Objection against them (though indeed it
be a good Presumption for them) and for that very Reason they will not believe
them to be the true Principles of Nature, whose Effects they fancy must be
Resovled into Causes more hidden and Abstruse. And accordingly they find in
themselves a greater inclination to lend attention to those that shall
undertake the Solution of them by the real Chimeras of Substantial Forms,
Qualities, Sympathys, Antipathys, etc. or that shall go to account for them by
the yet more Obscure Principles of the Chemists, striking and filling their
Ears with those great but empty Sounds, Archeus, Seminal Spirit, Astral Beings,
Gas, Blas, etc. which they receive with great satisfaction not for their
Scientific Light (for they are dark as may be, mere Philosophic Cant) but only
because they are Mysterious and Abstruse, and therefore they fancy there must
be somewhat more than Ordinary in them, tho they know not, nor, it may be,
never Considered, what. And herein, as in some other Instances, Men love
Darkness better than Light.

2. But then at another time you shall have them inquiring after Truth as
Diogenes did after an Honest Man, with a Candle in their hands, and not caring
to go a step any further than they can see their way. Now upon a sudden they
are all for Clear and distinct Ideas, Full and adequate Perceptions,
Demonstrative Proofs and Arguments, and nothing will serve or Content them but
Light and Evidence, and they will believe nothing but what they can Comprehend.
Strange diversity of Conduct! Who would think two such vastly distant extremes
should meet together, I will not say in the same Man, but in the same Human
Nature, and that the very same Creature (and such a One as Styles it self
Rational too) should proceed by such uncertain Measures, and act so
inconsistently with it Self; sometimes embracing a thing for the sake of it is
Obscurity, and sometimes again in another Fit making that alone an Invincible
Objection against the Belief of it.

3. But it is plain by the foregoing Measures that it is not. For since Truth
is the general Object of Faith, it is evident that nothing can argue a thing to
be absolutely incredible, or not reasonable to be believed, but that which at
the same time argues it not to be True. For if true, then it is still within the
Compass of the general Object of Faith. But now we have shown already that the
Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument of it is not being true, whence it
clearly and closely follows that it is no Argument neither against it is
Credibility. And if so, then we may believe it Notwithstanding it is
Incomprehensibility, because we may believe whatever is not Absolutely
incredible. So that there is no Necessity that we should discard every thing we
cannot Conceive as unworthy of a Rational Belief, or that what is Above our
Reason should be therefore above our Faith too.

4. It is true indeed that the Incomprehensibility of a thing is in it Self no
proper and direct Argument why it should be believed, and he would be thought
to give but an ordinary account of his Faith, who being ask^d why he believed,
such an Incomprehensible thing, should answer because it is Incomprehensible.
which at best could pass only for a Religious Flourish, much such another as,
Credo quia impossible. And that because the Incomprehensibility of a thing is
not directly and per se a Criterion of Truth (whether it may be per Accidens,
may be Considered afterward) whose Natural and genuin Character is not
Obsecurity, but Light and Evidence. Not that nothing is True but what has this
Character (for we have already shown the Contrary in proving Incomprehensible
Truths) but that as whatever we clearly perceive is True, so our Clear
perceiving of a thing is the only sign from the Intrinsic Nature of the thing
it Self of the Truth of it. Incomprehensibility therefore is none, but as such
abstracts from true and not true, and is equally Common to both. But now that
which may Consist with a thing supposing it false, can no more prove it True,
than that which may Consist with a thing supposing it True, can prove it false,
according to the Tenor of the Fifth Chapter. The Incomprehensibility therefore
of a thing is no proper Argument of the Truth of it, and Consequently no Reason
of it Self, why it should be believed, and that because it abstracts as such
from True and False, and is too Common to Both to prove either.

5. And because it is so, it is also further granted that the
Incomprehensibility of a thing is not only in it Self no proper Reason why it
should be believed, but has also so far the Nature of a Disswasive from
believing, as to be a Caution against a too hasty Belief, till there appear
some other Motive from without either from Reason or Authority that shall
determine the Assent. In the mean while it advises to Suspend. For the
Incomprehensibility of a thing being as such No Reason why a Man should believe
it, it is plain that if he did believe it Considered only as in that State he
would believe it. without Reason. That therefore is a Reason why he should
suspend, a Negation of Reason being enough to withold ones Assent, though to
give it one had need have a positive Reason. When therefore a thing appears
Incomprehensible, that indeed is sufficient Reason to suspend our Belief, till
some prevailing Consideration from without shall overrule that Suspension, by
requiring our Assent. But when it does so, then the Incomprehensibility ought
to be No Argument to the Contrary, and it would be every whit as absurd to
reject a thing now because of its Incomprehensibility, as to believe it before
for that Reason. And that because as the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no
reason for Believing it, so it is no Absolute Reason against it.

6. If it were so it would be in Natural things, the objects of Human and
Philosophic Science, such as belong properly and immediately to the Province
and Jurisdiction of Reason. Here, if any where, the Incomprehensibility of a
thing would forbid all Assent to it. And so it is supposed to do by some who
though far from denying the Belief of Incomprehensible things in Religion, will
yet tell you that in Physical Contemplations, Clearness and Evidence is to lead
the way, and we are to proceed with our Light before us, assenting to nothing
but what we well Comprehend. In Matters of Faith indeed they will allow that
Reason is to be submitted to Revelation, and that we are to believe many things
which pass our Comprehension; but in Matters of pure Reason they will have us
go no further than Reason can carry us. Which indeed is right enough it their
Meaning be that we are to Assent to Nothing but what upon the whole Matter all
things Considered from without as well as from within, we have reason to
believe true, and that we are never to proceed to judge or determine without
some Evidence or other, but then this will equally hold in Matters of Faith
too, which is too rational an Assent to be given at a Venture, and we know not
why, and whose Formal Reason (as has been already discoursed) is always Clear.
But if their Meaning be that in Matters of Reason we must Assent to nothing but
what has an internal Evidence, and what in its self, and by its own Lights is
Comprehensible by us (as they seem to mean, or else their distinction of the
Case of Reason and the Case of Revelation is here impertinent) then I conceive
that they set too narrow limits to our Assent in Matters of Reason when they
allow it to be given only to things which in this sense are Evident to us. For
it is plain that there are many things in Nature which we fee are True, and must
be True, and so not only may, but cannot help Assenting to them, though at the
same time we are not able to Comprehend how they are, or can possibly be.

7. Not that our Assent is then Blind and wholly without Evidence, (for then we
might as well Assent to the contrary as to what we do, and would do better not
to Assent at all) but only that it has none from within, and from the intrinsic
Nature of the Object, but only from some External Consideration, much after the
same manner as it is in ^atch. In both which there may be a Clear Reason, why
we should Assent to an Obscure thing. But then as the internal Obscurity does
not destroy the External Evidence, so neither does the External Evidence strike
any Light into the internal Obscurity; or in other words, as the Reason for
Assenting is never the less Clear because the Matter assented to is Obscure, so
neither is the Matter assented to ever the less Obscure because the Reason for
assen^ing to it is Clear. And yet notwithstanding this internal Obscurity of
the Matter we assent to it because of the prevailing Light of the External
Evidence. And this we do, not only in Matters of Faith (according to the
Restriction of some) but in the things of Nature and Reason too, where we are
oftentimes forced by the pressing urgency of certain External and Collateral
Considerations to assent to things internally obscure and whose very
possibility we cannot Comprehend, as is plain in the great Question of the
Divisibility of Quantity, and other Instances, whereof every Thinking Man's
Obse^^ation cannot but have already furnished him with variety. The
Incomprehensibility then of a thing is non just Objection against our Assent to
it even in Matters of a Rational Nature, much less then is it in Matters of
Faith For if not in Matters that belong to the Court of Reason, and where she
sits as Judge, then much less in things that are not of her proper
Jurisdiction, and if notwithstanding the internal inevidence of an Object we
think fit to assent to it upon Rational Considerations, much more may we, and
ought we upon the Authority of the Infallible God.

8. Indeed if whatsoever is Above our Reason were also (as some pretend) as
Contrary to it, and there were nothing true but what was also Comprehensible,
and so the Incomprehensibility of a thing were an Argument of its not being
true, then I con^ess we could not as Rational Creatures assent to an
incomprehensible Proposition upon any Consideration whatsoever, No not even
that of Divine Authority. It Is true indeed there could then be no such
Authority for Incomprehensible things. But if there were, it is impossible we
should regard it, because we could not have greater assurance either of the
Existence or of the Truth of it, than we have already (upon this Supposition)
that the things revealed are not true. But now if this Supposition be no more
than a Supposition, if to be above Reason does not involve any Contrariety to
it, if there are incomprehensible Truths, and Consequently the
Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument o^ its not being true (all which
has been already proved) then it is plain that what is an incomprehensible may
yet be a Believable Object (because within the Possibility of Truth) and then
to render it actually believed there needs only some External Evidence either
from Reason or Authority. For what should hinder our Assent to an
Incomprehensible thing when we have plain Evidence from without for it, and its
own internal Obscurity is no Argument against it! It Is plain therefore that we
ought to give our Assent. And since we do so oftentimes upon a Ground of
Reason, much more ought we upon that more Firm and Immovable ground of
Revelation. The short is, whatever is no Objection against the Truth of a thing
is none against the Credibility of it, since Truth is the General Object of
Faith (unless you will say that a thing is unfit to be believed upon any other
account besides want of Truth) and therefore since we have already shown that
the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument against the Truth of it, it
visibly follows that it is no Argument against the Belief of it neither.
Therefore an Incomprehensible thing may be believed, and accordingly he that
refuses to believe any thing is bound to give a better Reason for it than
because it is Incomprehensible.

9. If it be said that this is reason enough, because Faith is a Rational Act,
and therefore what is above the Comprehension of Reason is as much above a
Rational Belief, to this, besides what I have already remarqu'd upon this
Occasion in the Chapter of Faith, (...)
I here further reply, that it is true indeed and on both sides agreed that
Faith is a Rational Act, but in what Sense is the Question. There are two very
different Senses according to which it may be said to be so either in regard of
the Clearness of its Formal Reason, or in regard of the Clearness of its
Object. Either because it is founded upon an External Evidence, or Argument for
believing, or because it proceeds upon an Internal Evidence, that appears in
the very Nature of the thing Believed. I^ Faith be said to be a Rational Act in
the latter Sense, the Assertion is then False, for so (that ^s in respect of
the Object) we have sh^wn it to be an inevident Assent. But i^ (...) be said to
be a Rational Act in the former Sense, then indeed it is true, but nothing to
the purpose, since nothing hinders but that this External Evidence may well
consist with an Internal Inevidence, or in other words, that the Clearness of
the Reason for Believing may stand with the Obscurity of the Object Believed.
And therefore though Faith be a Rational Act yet it does not hence ^ollow that
what is Above Reason is also above Faith and cannot rationally be believed,
because the Act of Faith is said to be Rational, Not in respect of the Evidence
of the Object, but only that of its Formal Reason or Motive. And therefore
though there be no Evidence in the Object, yet it is not thereby rendered
incapable of being the Matter of Faith, because the Evidence which Faith as a
Rational Act supposes, is wholly of another kind. There seems indeed a kind of
opposition as to the Sound between Faith's being an Act of Reason, and the
believing what is Above Reason. And this it may be is that which imposes upon
the Minds, or the Ears shall I say, of them that urge it as an Objection. I
cannot imagine what else should, for I Am sure there is no Contradiction in the
Sense. It Is true indeed Evidence in the Act and not Evidence in the Act are
Contradictories, because ad Idem, and so are Not Evidence in the Object and
Evidence in the Object, for the same reason. But there is no Contradiction
between Evidence in the Act and No Evidence in the Object, and therefore these
may stand together, though the other cannot

10. But to lay open the Fallacy of this great and very popular Objection yet a
little more to the Eye (though it must be a very blind one that does not see it
already) I will put it into Form, and give it a Formal Answer. If Faith be a
Rational Act, then what is Above Reason cannot rationally be Believed.
But Faith is a Rational Act, Ergo.
For Answer to this I distinguish. If by Rational Act be meant an Act founded
upon Internal Evidence, or the Evidence of the Object, then I deny the Minor,
Faith is not so a Rational Act. But if by Rational Act be meant an Act founded
upon External Evidence or the Evidence of its Formal Reason or Motive, then
indeed I grant the Minor, but deny the Consequence, which is none at all, for
it does not at all follow because Faith is a Rational Act, meaning by it that
it proceeds upon External Evidence, and that there is a clear Reason for
Believing, that therefore the thing Believ^d may not from within and in its own
Nature be altogether inevident and so above the Comprehension of Reason. For
though Evidence be Contradictory to Not Evidence in the ^ame, yet Evidence in
the Act is no way Contradictory to inevidence in the Object, and Consequently
does not at all exclude it. They may therefore both stand together, and
Consequently what is above Reason may be believed for any thing that this
Celebrated Objection from Faith's being a Rational Act makes to the Contrary;
which truly is so gross and palpable a Sophism, that I cannot but wonder how it
could ever impose upon so many Learned Men as it has done, and some of them
very acute and nice Considerers of things. But I hope the Fallaciousness of it
is by this so plainly and fully detected, that I shall not think those Heads
worth much informing that shall be further imposed on by it.

11. But what then shall we say to that Great and Fundamental Maxim so
pressingly inculcated by Des Castes and his Followers, and not disallowed of by
others, that we are to assent to not^ing but what is Clear and Evident? If to
nothing but what is Clear and Evident, how then to what is Obscure and
Inevident? Or if to what is Obscure and Inevident, how then to nothing but what
is Clear and Evident? Do not these seem flat Contradictions one to the other,
and how then shall we adjust the Matter between them? It must be either by
denying that Cartesian Maxim to be true, or by showing that though it be true
it does not Contradict the Assertion here maintained, but is Consistent with
it. The First way I shall not take. I allow the Maxim to be true, and not only
so, but to be withal of the greatest importance of any that can be given for
the direction of the Mind of Man in order to the avoiding of Error. The only
Remedy and Caution against which is never to let our Judgments prevent our
Conceptions, or to Assent to any thing that we have only a Confuse Notion of,
and where we see only by halves and with an imperfect Light, or perhaps do not
see at all, but to have a Clear Understanding of the Matter before we adventure
to judge of it, and to Maintain an Evidence in all our Reasonings. Which
accordingly is made by M. Malebranche the First of those Rules which in his
Treatise of Method he lays down to be observed in the inquiry after Truth. And
indeed to do otherwise is to make a wrong use of our Intellectual Powers,
particularly of that Liberty we have to suspend Judgment till the fullness of
Evidence requires it, and the want of Observing this Rule is also the Occasion
of most of our Errors and Wrong Assents, Recherche de la Verite. Tom. 2. p.
165.
as the same Excellent Person shows it to have been in particular to the
Authors of the Scholastic Philosophy.

12. I shall not therefore go about to salve my own Assertion by denying Des
Cartes's Maxim, but rather by showing that according to the true Sense and
intendment of it, it does not Contradict it. But first we must see what the
true Sense of it is, or rather in what Sense it is true, though this may be
without much difficulty Collected by any attentive Reader from what has been
already said in several places of this Chapter, wherein I have in great Measure
prevented this Objection. But to Consider it more directly; To verify this
Maxim that we are to Assent to nothing but what is Clear and Evident, the usual
way has been to distinguish between Matters of Faith, and Matters of Reason. In
Matters of Faith, say they, we are to believe many things which we cannot
Comprehend. And here then it seems this Rule must be laid aside. But in Matters
of Reason we must Assent to nothing but what is Clear and Evident. And here
then it seems it holds. Accordingly when it is Objected against certain Articles
of Faith that they are not to be comprehended by Reason, it is usual to reply
that these things do not belong to Reason etc. implying that if they did, then
indeed the Objection would be good, and the incomprehensibility of such things
would be an Argument against assenting to them, which implies again that in
Matters of Reason we must not Assent to any thing but what is Clear and
Evident, though in Matters of Faith we may. But we have remarqu'd already that
even in Matters of Pure Reason we are forced to Assent to many things which we
cannot comprehend, and that even in Matters of Faith we do in a Certain Sense
Assent upon Clear Evidence. This Distinction therefore will not do.

13. In stead therefore of distinguishing between Matters of Faith and Matters
of Reason, I think it will be better to distinguish of Evidence. We are to
Assent to Nothing save what is Clear and Evident, says our Maxim. Very Good.
Now if by Evidence here be meant internal Evidence, and the Sense be that are
to assent to nothing but what in its own Nature, and by a Light intrinsic to
it, is Evident, then the Maxim is False; and that not only in Matters of Faith,
but also in Matters of Reason too, wherein we find our selves often Constrained
to assent to things that have not this internal Evidence, but are (as to what
respects the Nature of the things themselves) altogether Obscure and
Incomprehensible. But if by Evidence here be Meant Evidence at large,
abstracting from Internal or External, and the Sense be that we are to assent
to nothing but what has some Evidence or other, either Internal or External, or
what is some way or other evident to us, and what we see plainly to be true by
a Light shining from within or from without, in short, what we have one way or
other sufficient ground or Reason to assent to, then the Maxim is undoubtedly
true, and will hold Universally, not only in Matters of Reason, but also in
Matters of Faith too, which (as was shown in the Chapter of Faith) is the
Conclusion of a Syllogism, and so a Rational Act, and proceedt upon as Much,
though not the Same kind of Evidence, as any other Conclusion does, And that
even in the Belief of Incomprehensible things, which it would be absurd, nay
impossible to believe, if there were no Reason to believe things above Reason.
According to a saying, as I take it of St. Austin, in one of his Letters to
this purpose, That we could not bring our selves to believe what is Above our
Reason, if Reason it self did not persuade us that there are things which we
should do well to believe, although we are not capable of Comprehending them.
So then in ^hort, if this Maxim that we are to assent to nothing but what is
Evident, be understood of Internal Evidence, then it is False, not only in
Matters of Faith but also in Matters of Reason, wherein things intrinsecally
inevident are assented to. But if it be understood of Evidence at large then
^tis true, not only in Matters of Reason, but also in Matters of Faith, which
(as has been often noted) is reasonable in its Fund and Principle, and whose
Evidence must be Clear, though its Object may be Obscure.

14. In this large therefore and indefinite Sense of the Word Evidence the
Maxim is to be understood. We are to assent to nothing but what is Clear and
Evident, that is, we ought to make use of our liberty of Suspension so far as
not to give our Assent to any thing but what all things Considered and upon the
whole appears Evident to us, what by some Light or other we see and plainly
perceive to be true, and what in one word we find sufficient Reason either from
within or from without to Assent to. According to that well known Sentence
wherewith Des Carts Concludes his wonderful System, Nihilque ab ullo Credi
velim, nisi quod ipsi Evidens and invicta ratio persuadebit. I would have
nothing believed by any one but what by evident and irresistible reason he
shall be Convinced of. And certainly he would be very unreasonable that should
desire more. For to assent without Evidence of one sort or other that the thing
assented to is true, is to assent without a why or wherefore, and to assent so
is to assent without Reason, which again is to assent not as a Rational
Creature; and as Man ought not, so to be sure God cannot require such an
Assent. To assent therefore to nothing but what upon some Consideration or
other is Clear and Evident to us, and what we have good reason to embrace, as
true, is certainly a Maxim of unquestionable Truth, and of universal Extent,
that holds in all Matters whatsoever, whether of Reason or of Faith, in the
former of which an Assent without Evidence would be the Act, and in the latter
the Sacrifice of a Fool.

15. And that this is the true Sense wherein Des Carts intended his Maxim, as
well as the true Sense of the Maxim it self, is plain from the Occasion of it
which as all know who are not utter Strangers to, or very Negligent Readers of
his Books, was the bringing in and obtruding so many things in the Vulgar
Philosophy whereof the Introducers of them had such Confuse Notions and of
whose reality and Existence they had no Firm and Solid Reasons to assure them,
such as Substantial Forms, really inhering Accidents and Qualities and the
like, which served rather to darken than clear up the Science of Nature, and
were the Occasions of a thousand Errors in the Superstructures that were
raised upon those Imaginary and Chimerical Principles. In Opposition to, and as
a Remedy for which, he lays down this Fundamental Maxim, to be Carefully
observed by all the Disciples of Truth in their whole Intellectual Progress,
never to assent to any thing but what is Clear and Evident, that is, to nothing
but of Whose Truth and Reality they are fully assured, and have sufficient
Reason to assent to. This is the true Sense of the Maxim, this is the Sense of
its Author, and in this Sense it is undeniably true. And that without any
prejudice to our present Conclusion, with which (as thus explained) it is very
Consistent. For it is now very easy to discern that we may believe an
Incomprehensible thing, and yet at the same time according to this Cartesian
Maxim assent to nothing but what is Clear and Evident, because the Evidence of
Faith is External, and that there may be an External Evidence to assent to a
thing Internally Inevident is no Contradiction.

16. Which by the way may serve to discover as well the Injustice as the
Impertinence, 1. Of those who make use of this Maxim as an Objection against
the Belief of things above Reason. 2. Of those who take occasion from hence to
traduce the Cartesian Philosophy as favorable to, and looking with a very
propitious Aspect upon Sociniani^^, and indeed as little better than an
Introduction to it, only because it talks so much of clear and distinct Ideas
and Conceptions, and of assenting to nothing but what is Clear and Evident. But
Most of all 3dly. Of those who proceed even to traduce the Author himself as a
secret Friend to the Cause, and no better than a Socinian in Disguise. It would
have been indeed a Considerable Glory and Advantage to that, (or any other
Interest) to have had so great a Master of Reason a Friend to it. But he
Certainly was not, if with his Words he has transmitted to us his real
Thoughts, which would be great uncharity to question, and, with a witness, to
Assent to what is not Evident.

17. He was indeed a great Master in the Rational way, but no Magnifier or
Exalter of Human Reason. So far from that, that he seems to have had the most
inward and feeling Sense of its Infirmities and Defects, and the best to have
understood what a poor little thing it is to be a Man, of any one in the World.
As may be abundantly Collected from several passages in his Writings (besides
that the whole vein of them runs that way) particularly those two final
Sentences wherewith he shuts up his Principles and his Metaphysics, At
Nihilominus memor meaetenuitatis, nihil affirmo etc. and, Naturae nostrae
infirmitas est agnoscenda. Which plainly show what a low debasing Sense he had
both of Himself and of Human Nature in general, as ^tis Natural for every man
to have more and more, the wiser he grows, and the further he advances in
Knowledge, which when all is done (provided you take a good Dose of it) is the
best Cure of Pride and Vanity.

18. And as he had thus slender an Opinion both of Human Reason and his Own, so
he appears to have had also at the same such an high-raised and elevated Sense
of the immense Grandeur of God, and of the Magnificence of his Works, and how
inscrutable the Profundities of both are to such Finite and Contracted Minds as
ours, as can scarce any where be paralleled. Two Characters certainly of
Spirit, that are none of the aptest to dispose a Man to Socinianism. But not to
dwell any longer upon Rational Presumptions, there is a certain plain and
deciding place in the Writings of this Great Man (which one would think had
escaped the Eyes of some) that is enough forever to silence the Calumny of his
being even in the least Socinianiz'd, and to shame those that have so little
Conscience or Judgment as to stain his Memory with it. For who can suspect him
in the least infected with that Head-seizing Disease, which is now become so
Popular and Epidemic, when he shall hear him still Purging and Apologizing for
himself in these Vindicatory words, (...).
Credenda esse Omnia quae a Deo revelata sunt, quamvis Captum Nostrum Excedant.
And again, Ita si sorry nobis Deus de seipso, vel aliis aliquid revelet, quod
Naturales ingenii Nostri vires excedat, qualia jam sunt Mysteria Incarnationis
and Trinitatis, non recasabimus illa Credere, quamvis non Clare intelligamus.
Nec ullo modo mirabimur multa esse, tum in immensa ejus Natura, tum etiam in r^
bus ab ^o Creatis, quae Captum Nostrum excedant. Now how glad should I be to
see all the Socinians in Christendom Subscribe to this Form of Words, and is it
not strange then that he whose Originally they are should be suspected of
Socinianism, and that his Philosophy too should be thought to lead to it. But
the Truth is, the Cartesian Philosophy leads just as much to Socinianism, as
Philosophy in general does to Atheism, and I will venture to say, and be bound
to make it good, that as no good Philosopher can be an Atheis^, so no good
Cartesian can be a Socinian.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein is shown what is the true Use of Reason in Believing.
1. REason being the great Character and Principle of Man, that makes him like
to the Angels above him, and distinguishes him from the Beasts that are below
him, and which therefore only are below him for want of the Rational Power
(being many of them in regard of their Bodily Endowments upon a level with him,
and some beyond him) it is but Just and Natural it should appear in all that he
does, and pre^ide and govern in all his Actions. For as the Conduct of the
Infinitely Wise and All-knowing God does always carry in it the Characters of
his Essential and Consubstantial Reason, even of him who is the Wisdom of the
Father, the true intelligible Light, so should also the Conduct of Man express
in Proportion the Signatures of his Reason, and though he cannot act by such
exact and unerring Measures as his Glorious Maker, nor yet with all that
Perfection of Wisdom that even some Created Intelligences express, yet at least
he should act like Himself, and not by doing any thing absurd or unaccountable
deny his Reasonable Nature.

2. This has served for a Principle to some Scholastic and Moral Writers
whereon to build a very high, and (as some think) very Severe Conclusion, viz.
that there is no individual Action of Man purely indifferent. Which I suppose
may be true enough of those Actions of his which are properly Humane, I mean
that are done deliberately, with forethought and Consideration, every one of
which must, as far as I can see, be either good or Bad according to the
Circumstances wherewith they are Clothed, however specifically Considered in
relation to their Objects only, and as abstracted from those Circumstances,
some of them may be Indifferent. And certainly we cannot suppose any Action of
a more Neutral and adiaphorous Nature than an unprofitable Word, and yet of
such He that is to be our Judge tells us we shall render an Account in the Day
of Judgment. Which plainly shows that there is no such thing as Indifferency in
the Actions of Man as Individually and Concretely Considered, but that all of
them are either good or bad according as the Principle, Manner, End, and other
Circumstances are that attend the doing of them. And that because Man being a
Rational Creature the Order of Reason is due at least to all his deliberate
Actions, which accordingly ought to carry the Characters of a Rational Nature
in them, the want of which will be enough to render any of them evil and
imperfect.

3. But then if Reason ought to pre^ide and direct in all the deliberate
Actions of Man much more ought it in things of the greatest Moment and
Consequence, wherein his Interest and Welfare is more nearly Concerned, and
which accordingly require his greatest Consideration, and the use of the best
Light that he has. And because there cannot be a thing of greater Consequence
and Concernment to him than Religion, upon which both his Present and his
Future, his Temporal and his Eternal Happiness does entirely depend, hence it
follows that the Principal Use he ought to make of his Rational Faculty is in
Religion, that here if any where he ought to Think, Consider, Advise,
Deliberate, Reason and Argue, Consult both his own Light and that of others,
neglect no advantage that may be had from Nature or Art, from Books or Men,
from the Living or the Dead, but employ all possible Means for his direction
and Information, Psalm. 32. 10.
and not be as the Horse and Mule which have no Understanding. For 'twas for
this great End and Purpose that his Reason was given him, and this is the best
Use he can make of it. As for the Study of Nature, that turns to too little an
Account, and as for the Affairs of Civil Life they in themselves and without
relation to another World, are too little and inconsiderable for us to suppose
that our Reason was given us for the Management of them. Religion only bears
proportion to so Noble a Faculty, is most worthy of its Application, and can
also best reward the due Exercise and Use of it, and accordingly it is upon
Religion that it will be best bestowed.

4. Nor is there any thing in Religion that may justly fear to be brought
before the Bar of Human Reason, or to undergo the Test of its severest
Discussion. The Heathen Religion indeed Might, for which Cause those that drew
its Picture cast a Shade upon a great part of it, and would not Venture to
expose it to Common View. And the too much Heathenized Religion of some
Christians may also very deservedly retire behind the Curtain, and decline
coming to the Light, for fear the Absurdities and Monstrous Inconsistencies of
it should be laid open. But certainly there is not any thing, neither Doctrine
nor Precept in that true Religion that is revealed by God, in Evangelical
Christianity, that need fly the Light of Reason, or refuse to be tried by it.
Christian Religion is all over a Reasonable Service, and the Author of it is
too reasonable a Master to impose any other, or to require (as his Vicar does)
that Men should follow him blindfold, and pull out their eyes to become his
Disciples. No, he that Miraculously gave Sight to so many has no need of, nor
pleasure in the Blind, nor has his Divine Religion any occasion for such Judges
or Professors. For it is the Religion of the Eternal and uncreated Wisdom, the
Divine Word, the true Light of the World, and the Universal Reason of all
Spirits, and it is impossible that he should reveal any thing that Contradicts
the Measures of sound Discourse, or the immutable Laws of Truth, as indeed it
is that any Divine Revelation should be truly Opposite to Right Reason (hour
it may sometimes be Above it) or that any thing should be Theologically true,
which is Philosophically False, as some with great profoundness are pleased to
distinguish. For the Light of Reason is as truly from God as the Light of
Revelation is, and therefore though the latter of these Lights may exceed and
outshine the former, it can never be Contrary to it. God as the Sovereign
Truth cannot reveal any thing against Reason, and as the Sovereign Goodness he
cannot require us to believe any such thing. Nay to descend some degrees below
this, he cannot require us to believe, not only what is against Reason, but
even what is without it. For to believe any thing without Reason is an
unreasonable Act, and it is impossible that God should ever require an
unreasonable act, especially from a Reasonable Creature.

5. We therefore not only acknowledge the use of Reason in Religion, but also
that it is in Religion that it is chiefly to be used; so far are we from denying
the Use of it there. And it is a little unfairly done of our Adversaries so
much to insinuate the Contrary as they do. For I cannot take it for less than
such an Insinuation, when they are arguing with us against the Belief of the
Christian Mysteries to run out as they usually do into Harangues and Flourishes
(whereof, by the way, I know none more guilty than the Author of Christianity
not Mysterious) about the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion, and the
Rational Nature of Faith, what a Reasonable Act the One is, and what a
Reasonable Service the Other is, etc. as if we were against the Use of Reason
in Religion, or were for a Blind, Groundless, and Unaccountable Faith, or if
because we hold the Belief of things above Reason, therefore we are for having
no Reason for our Belief. This I say is an unfair Insinuation, and such as
argues some want either of Judgment or Sincerity (I don't know which) in those
that suggest it. For they seem plainly by running so much upon this Vein to
imply as if it were part of the Question between us, whether there be any Use
of Reason in Religion, or whether Faith is to be Founded upon Reason or No. But
Now this is no part of the Controversy that lies between us, we acknowledge
the Use of Reason in Religion as well as they, and are as little for a
Senseless and Irrational Faith as they can be. This therefore being Common to
us both is no part of the Question, and they do ill to insinuate that it is by
so many Popular Declamatory Strains upon the Reasonableness of Religion, and in
particular of Faith, whereas they do, or should know, that the thing in
Question between us is not whether there be any Use of Reason to be made in
Believing, but only what it is, or wherein the true Use of it does Consist.

6. Now this we may determine in a few words, having already laid the grounds
of it. For since the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Concluding Argument
against the Truth of it, nor Consequently against the Belief of it (as is shown
in the three foregoing Chapters) it is plain that the proper Office and
Business of a Believers Reason is to Examine and Inquire* Not whether the thing
proposed be Comprehensible or not, but only whether it be Revealed by God or
No, since if it be, the Incomprehensibleness of it will be no Objection against
it. That therefore ought to be no part of its Questistion or Deliberation,
because indeed it is not to the purpose to Consider whether such a thing be,
when if it were it would be no just Objection. The only Considerable thing then
here is whether such a Proposition be indeed from God, and has him for its
Author or no. And here Reason is to clear her Eyes, put the Matter in the best
Light, call in all the Assistance that may be had both from the Heart and the
Head, and determine of the thing with all the Judgment, and all the Sincerity
that she can. But as to the Comprehensibility or Incomprehensibility of the
Article, this is quite besides the Question, and ought therefore to be no part
of her scruting or debate, since if it were never so much above her
Comprehension it would be never the less proper Object for her Belief.

7. The Sum is, the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument against the
Belief of it, therefore in the believing of a thing, the proper work of my
Reason is not to Consider whether it be incomprehensible. But when a thing is
proposed to me as from God, all that my Reason has to do in this Case is
Seriously, Soberly, Diligently, Impartially, and (I add) Humbly to Examine
whether it comes with the true Credentials of his Authority, and has him for
its real Author or no. This is all that Reason has to do in this Matter, and
when she has done this, she is to rise from the Seat of Judgment, and resign
it to Faith, which either gives or refuses her Assent, Not as the thing
proposed is Comprehensible or not Comprehensible, but as it is either Reveal^d
or not Revealed.

CHAP. IX. An Application of the foregoing Considerations to the Mysteries of
Christianity.
1. HAving thus raised the Shell of our Building to its due ^itch, we have now
only to Roof it by making a Short Application of the Principles laid down and
set^led in the Former Chapters to the Mysteries of the Christian Religion,
against the Truth and Belief of which it plainly appears from the Preceding
Considerations that there lies now no Reasonable Objection. For if Human Reason
be not the Measure of Truth, and if therefore the Incomprehensibility of a
thing to Human Reason be no Argument of its (...) being True, nor Consequently
against its being Believed, and if the only Use and Employment of Reason in
Believing be to Consider, not the Internal Evidence of the thing, whether the
Article be Comprehensible or no, but whether it be truly revealed by God, I say
if these things are so, as we have abundantly proved them to be, then from
these Premises the Clear and undeniable Consequence is that the
Incomprehensibility of the Christian Mysteries is no just reason why they
should not be Believed, and so tha^ we may Believe them though we should
suppose them (what yet some deny) to be Incomprehensible.

2. Nay so far is the Incomprehensible Sublimity of these Mysteries from being
a sufficient Objection against the Belief of them, that Accidentally and
indirectly it may be improved into a Considerable Argument for them, and such
as may serve to recommend them to our Faith, inasmuch as it is a very strong
Presumption that they are of no Human Origin, but have God for their Author,
it being reasonable to suppose that what does so very much transcend the
Capacity of Man to Comprehend, does no less exceed his Ability to invent. And
accordingly the Incomprehensibility of our Mysteries for which some will have
them to be false, is made use of by a very Rational Author as an Argument of
their Truth. And it may be worth while to let the Reader see how he Manages it
in relation to One of the Most Sublime of them. (...).
The more Obscure are our Mysteries. Strange Paradox! the more Credible they
now appear to me. Yes, I find even in the Obscurity of our Mysteries, received
as they are by so many different Nations, an invincible Proof of their Truth.
How, for instance, shall we accord the Unity with the Trinity, the Society of
three different Persons in the perfect Simplicity of the Divine Nature? This
without doubt is Incomprehensibl^, but not Incredible. It is indeed above us,
but let us Consider a little and we shall believe it, at least if we w^ll be of
the same Religion with the Apostles. For supposing they had not known this
ineffable Mystery, or that they had not taught it to their Successors, I
maintain that it is not Possible that a Sentiment so extraordinary should find
in the Minds of Men such an Universal Belief as is given to it in the whole
Church, and among so many different Nations. The More this Adorable Mystery
appears Monstrous (suffer the Expression of the Enemies of our Faith) the More
it Shocks Human Reason, the More the Imagination Mutinies against it, the more
Obscure, Incomprehensib^^ and Impenetrable it is, the less Credible is it that
it should Naturally insi^^ate it self into the Minds and (...) of all
Christians of so many and so distant Countries. Never do the same Errors
spread universally, especially such sort of Errors which so strangely offend
the Imagination, which have nothing sensible in them, and which seem to
Contradict the most Simple and Common Notions. If Jesus christ did not Watch
over his Church, the Number of the (...) would quickly exceed that of (...)
^^^hodox Christians* For (...) in the Sentimen^ (...) that does not (...) the
Mind. And (...) that (...) to our Understandings may establish themselves in
time. But that a Truth so Sublime, so far removed from Sense, so Cross to Human
Reason, so Contrary in short to all Nature as is this great Mystery of our
Faith, that a Truth I say of this Character should spread it self Universally,
and Triumph over all Nations where the Apostles had Preached the Gospel,
supposing that these First Preachers of our Faith had neither known any thing,
nor said any thing of this Mystery, this Certainly is what cannot be Conceived
by any one that has never so little knowledge of Human Nature. That there
should be Heretics that should oppose a Doctrine so Sublime is nothing strange,
nor am I surprised at it. On the Contrary I should be very much if never any
body had opposed it. This Truth wanted but little of being quite oppressed.
It Is very possible. For 'twill be always reckoned a Commendable Undertaking to
attaque that which seems to Clash with Reason. But that at length the Mystery
of the Trinity should prevail, and should establish it self Universally
wherever the Religion of Jesus Christ was received, without its being known and
taught by the Apostles, without an Authority and a Force Divine, there needs
methinks but an Ordinary Measure of good Sense to acknowledge that nothing in
the World is less Probable. For it is not in the least likely that a Doctrine
so Divine, so above Reason, so removed from whatever may strike the Imagination
and the Senses, should Naturally Come into the Thought of Man.

3. You see here how this Excellent Person strikes Light out of Darkness, by
improving even the Incomprehensibility of the Christian Mysteries into an
Argument for the Truth and Credibility of them, and so turning the Artillery of
our Adversaries against themselves. This indeed is a bold Achievement, an^ as
Fortunate a one too, for I think there is a great deal of Force and Weight in
his Reasoning. But I need not push the Matter so far, nor follow so home into
the Enemies Camp, as to plant their own Cannon against them. It Is sufficient to
the design of the present undertaking, and as much as I am led to by the
Principles before Established, to Conclude that the Incomprehensibility of the
Christian Mysteries is no Argument against them. This therefore I insist upon,
and (if my Reason mightily deceive me not) dare engage finally to stand to. For
if (as it has been shown) the Incomprehensibility of a thing in general be no
Conclusive Argument against either the Truth or the Credibility of it, then
since Negative Propositions do separate the Attribut from the Subject according
to all the Extent which the Subject has in the Proposition, what Consequence
can be more Clear than that the Incomprehensibility of our Mysteries is no
Argument against the Belief of them? I Conclude therefore that it is None, and
that they ought never the less to be believed for their being Incomprehensible,
supposing them otherwise sufficiently Revealed.

4. Whether they are so or no is besides my Undertaking at present to examine,
nor need I engage my Pen in this Question, since the Affirmative side of it is
so Obvious to every Eye that can but read the Bible, and has been withal so
abundantly and convincingly made good by those abler hands which have gone into
the Detail of the Controversy, and undertaken the particular defense of the
Christian Mysteries. This part of the Argument therefore being so well
discharged already, I shall Concern my self no further with it than only in
Consequence and Pursuance of the Former Principles to bestow upon it this one
single Necessary Remarque, viz. That as the Incomprehensibility of the
Christian Mysteries is no just Objection against the Belief of them supposing
them otherwise sufficiently Revealed, so neither is it a just Objection against
their being so Revealed, supposing the plain, obvious and literal Construction
of the Words does naturally and directly lead to such a Sense. And that it does
so is not I think offered to be denied, and the thing it self is plain enough
to extort an acknowledgement, but then it is pretended that there is a Necessity
of having recourse to a different Construction, and to understand the words in
another Sense, because of the unconceivableness and incomprehensibleness of
that which their proper and Grammatical Scheme does Exhibit. But by the Tenor
of this whole Discourse it evidently appears that there is no such Necessity,
since to admit an incomprehensible Sense has nothing absurd or inconvenient in
it, and that because the Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument of the
Untruth of it. From whence it plainly follows that it is no more an Objection
against its being Revealed than it is an Objection against the Belief of it
supposing it were Revealed, there being nothing but the untruth of a thing that
can be a reasonable Obstruction against either.

5. We are therefore to take the Words of Scripture according to their proper
and most Natural Sense, and not seek out for Forced and Strained
Interpretations upon the account of the Incomprehensibility of that which is
apparently Genuin and Natural. And if the Revelation be otherwise plain, and
such as we would accept of in another Case, and about matters which we can well
Comprehend, we ought not to think it the less so because the Sense of it so
understood is such as we cannot reconcile to our Apprehensions and Conceptions
of things. For notwithstanding that it may be true, since by this time we may
be sufficiently satisfied that there are many Incomprehensible Truths. The
Incomprehensibility of a thing is therefore no Argument against its being
Revealed, any more than it is against the Belief of it supposing it were. Which
opens an immediate Entrance to the Christians Mysteries, which I doubt not
would be thought sufficiently Revealed were it not for the incomprehensibility
of them, the only Objection that can be pretended against their Revelation.

6. I have hitherto argued upon the Supposition that the Mysteries of
Christianity (those Doctrines I mean that are so called) are above Reason, and
such as do transcend our Comprehension, and have shown that even upon that
Supposition there is no reasonable Objection against the Belief of them, that
they are never the less Believable for their being Incomprehensible. But what
if I should recall this Concession, and put our Adversaries to the proof that
they are indeed above Human Reason and Comprehension. They cannot be ignorant
that there are those that Contend they are not, and with great show of reason
offer to prove it, by endeavoring to render a Conceivable and Intelligible
Account of them. If these Men should be in the right (which I do not think
necessary at present to inquire into) it would be a further Advantage to our
Cause, and such as though I do not now insist upon it, I need not lose the
Benefit of. But if it should prove that they are not in the right, the Cause of
our Christian Mysteries is not much Concerned in the loss of that Pillar, but
can support it self well enough without it, as having another that is
sufficient to bear its weight, since though we should suppose these Sacred
Doctrines to be never so Incomprehensible to our Reason, it does by no
Consequence follow (as from the Argument of this whole Discourse is apparent)
that therefore they may not be due Objects of our Faith.

7. Should any one now be so fond of Objection as to draw one against the
Mysteries of Christianity from the use of the Word Mystery in Scripture, which
knows no other Mysteries but such as before the Revelation of them were
undiscovered, not Considering whether they were in themselves Conceivable or
no, I must tell him that I do not know that ever I met in any Controversy with
a less pertinent Objection, as much as it is made of by a late Bold Writer,
Christianity not My^ter* p. 90.
who heaps together a great many Texts to show the signification of the Word
Mystery in the New Testament, that it signifies not things in themselves
inconceivable, but only such as were not known before they were Revealed. Well,
be it so as this Gentleman pretends (though I believe upon Examination it would
appear otherwise) yet what is this to the purpose? For do we Dispute about
Names or Things? The Question is not whether the Scripture expresses
inconceivable things by the Name of Mysteries, but whether there be not things
in Scripture above our Conception (call them by what Name you will) and if
there be, whether their being so above our Conception be an Argument why they
should not be Believed. Now to these inconceivable things it has been the
Common Use of Church-Writers to apply the Name of Mysteries, which, if the
thing be granted, he must be a great Lover of Cavil and Wrangle that will
Contend about it. But the Learned Bishop of Worcester has already prevented me
in the Consideration of this Objection, Sermon. of the Mysteries of the Christian
Faith.
for which reason, together with the Frivolousness of it, I shall pursue it no
further.

CHAP. X. The Conclusion of the whole, with an Address to the Socinians.
1. AND thus I have led my Reader through a long Course of Various Reasoning,
and perhaps as far as he is willing to follow me, though I hope his Journey has
not been without some Pleasure that may deceive, and some Profit that may in
part reward the Labor of it. I have shown him what Reason is, and what Faith
is, that so he may see from the Absolute Natures of each what Habitude and
Relation they have to one another, and how the Darkness and Obscurity of the
Latter may Consist with the Light and Evidence of the Former. I have also
Considered the Distinction of things Above Reason and things Contrary to
Reason, and shown it to be real and well-grounded, and to have all that is
requisite to a good Distinction. And for the further Confirmation of it, I have
also shown that Human Reason is not the Measure of Truth. From which Great
Principle (which I was the more willing to discourse at large and thoroughly to
settle and establish because of its Moment and Consequence to the Concern in
hand) I have deduced that weighty Inference, that therefore the
Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Concluding Argument of its not being true,
which Consequence for the greater Security of it, because it is so Considerable
in the present Controversy, I have also proved Backwards, by showing that if
the Incomprehensibility of a thing were an Argument of its not being true, then
Human Reason (contrary to what was before demonstrated) would be the Measure of
Truth. Whence I infer again ex Absurdo, that therefore the Incomprehensibility
of a thing is no Argument of its not being true. From this last Consequence I
infer another of no less Moment and Consideration, viz. That therefore the
Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument against the Belief of it neither,
where also I Consider that seemingly Opposite Maxim of Des Carts, that we are
to Assent to nothing but what is Clear and Evident, and reconcile it to the
other Position. Whence my next step was to state the true use of Reason in
Believing, which I showed to Consist not in examining the Credibility of the
Object, but in taking account of the Certainty of the Revelation, which when
once resolved of we are no longer to Dispute, but Believe. In fine, I have made
an Application of these Considerations to the Mysteries of the Christian Faith,
by showing that they are never the less to be Believed for being Mysteries,
supposing^ them otherwise sufficiently Revealed, against which also I have
shown their Incomprehensibility to be no Objection. So that every way the Great
Argument against the Mysteries of the Christian Faith taken from the
Incomprehensibility of them vanishes and sinks into nothing. In all which I
think I have effectually overthrown the General and Fundamental Ground of
Socinianism, and truly in great Measure that of Deism too, whose best Argument
against Revealed Religion in general, is, because the Christian, upon all
Accounts the most preferable of those that pretend to be Revealed, Contains so
many things in it which transcend the Comprehension of Human Understanding. But
whether this Best Argument be really a good one or no, the whole Procedure of
this Discourse may sufficiently show, and whoever knows how to distinguish
Sophistry from good Reasoning, may easily judge.

2. And now you Gentlemen for whose sakes I have been at the pains to write
this Treatise, give me leave in a few words to Address my self a little more
particularly to you, and to Expostulate with you. Whether it be the good
opinion you have of your Cause, or the present Opportunity you have to appear
in the behalf of it that invites you so freely to Come abroad as you have done
of late, you have certainly (to give your Courage its due) taken a very
rational and Polite Age for it, and I hope the Wise Conduct of Providence may
turn this juncture to the Advantage of the Truth, and that the Light to which
you have adventured to expose your Novel Opinions may serve to make you see
their Absurdities, if you do not too Obstinately shut your Eyes against it.
Some of you are Considerable Masters of Reason (otherwise truly I should not
think it worth while to argue with you) and you all profess great Devotion to
it (I wish you do not make it an Idol) and to be very Zealous and Affectionate
Disciples of it. Reason is the great Measure by which you pretend to go, and
the Judge to whom in all things you appeal. Now I accept of your Measure, and
do not refuse to be tried in the Court of your own Choosing. Accordingly you see
I have dealt with you all along upon the Ground of Logic, and in a Rational
way, being very Confident that Reason alone will discover to you your undue
Elevations of it, and the Errors you have been misled into by that Occasion,
if you do but Consult even this Oracle of yours as you ought, and make a right
use of its Sacred Light.

3. But I am afraid you do not. Instead of employing your Reason in the first
place to examine the Certainty of the Revelation, whether such a thing be truly
Revealed, and if so, to believe it notwithstanding its being incomprehensible,
your Method is to begin with the Quality of the Object, to Consider whether it
be Comprehensible or no, and accordingly to proceed in your Belief or Disbelief
of its being Revealed. It Is true indeed you are not so gross as to argue thus,
this is Comprehensible therefore it is Revealed. But you cannot deny but that
you argue thus, this is Incomprehensible, therefore it is not Revealed,
proceeding upon this general Principle that though whatever is Comprehensible
is not therefore presently Revealed, yet whatever is Revealed must be
Comprehensible. But now judge you whether this be not to make your Reason the
Rule and Measure of Divine Revelation, that is, that God can reveal nothing to
you but what you can Comprehend, or, that you are able to Comprehend all that
God can possibly Reveal (for otherwise how is your not being able to Comprehend
any thing an Argument of its not being Reveal^d) I say Consider whether this be
not to set up your Reason as the Rule of Revelation, and Consider again whether
this does not resolve either into a very low Opinion you have of God and his
Infinite Perfections, or an extravagantly high one you have of your selves and
your own Rational indowments.

4. And yet as if this were not Presumption enough, do you not also make your
Reason the Rule of Faith, as well as of Revelation? To be the Rule of Faith is
a very Great thing, and yet so far it is plain that you make your Reason the
Rule of Faith that you will allow nothing to be believed but whose Bottom you
can Sound by that Line, this being an avowed Principle with you that you are to
believe nothing but what you can Comprehend. But hold a little, before your
Reason can be the Measure of Faith, must it not be the Measure of Truth? And I
pray Consider seriously, and tell me truly, do you verily think in your
Consciences that your Reason is the Measure of Truth? Do you think your
Rational Faculties proportioned to every intelligible Object, and that you are
able to Comprehend all the things that are, and that there is nothing in the
whole extent of Science too high, too difficult, or too abstruse for you, no
one part of this vast Intellectual Sea but what you can wade through? If you
say yes, besides the Blasphemous Presumptions and Luciferian Arrogance of the
Assertion, and how little it falls on this side of Similis ero Altissimo, which
banished the vainglorious Angel from the Court of Heaven, because nothing less
would Content his Aspiring Ambition than to be as God there (though by the way
there is more Sense and Congruity of Reason in pretending to be a God in
Heaven, than to be a God upon Earth) I say besides this, I would put it to your
more sober thought to Consider whether it be not every whit as great an
Extremity in the way of Rational Speculation to Dogmatize so far as to pretend
to Comprehend every thing, as to say with the Skeptics and Pyrrhonians that we
know nothing: The latter of which however in regard of its Moral Consequences
may be more innocently and safely affirmed than the Former, since in that we
only humbly degrade our selves, and are Content to sink down into the Level of
Brutes, whereas in this we aspire to what is infinitely above us, and advance
our selves into the Seat of God. And you know an Excess of Self-dejection is of
the two the more tolerable Extreme. But if you say that your Reason is not the
Measure of Truth (as upon this, and the other Considerations there lies a
Necessity upon you to Confess) how then I pray comes it to be the Measure of
your Faith, and how come you to lay down this for a Maxim that you will believe
Nothing but what you can Comprehend? Why, if your Reason be not the Measure of
Truth (and you your selves Care not, and I believe are ashamed in terms to say
that it is) then do you not evidently discern that there is no Consequence from
the Incomprehensibility of a thing to the incredibility of it, and that you
have no reason to deny your Belief to a thing as true merely upon the account
of its incomprehensibility. And do you not then plainly see that your great
Maxim falls to the ground, that you are to believe nothing but what you can
Comprehend? But if yet notwithstanding this you will still adhere to your
beloved Maxim, and resolve to believe Nothing but what you can adjust and clear
up to your Reason, then I pray Consider whether this will not necessarily lead
you back to that Absurd, and withal Odious and Invidious Principle, and which
therefore you your selves care not to own, viz. That your Reason is the Measure
of Truth.

5. But why do you not care to own it? Do you not see at the first cast of your
Eye that you are unavoidably driven upon it by your professed Maxim? Or if you
do not think fit to own it (as indeed it is a good handsome Morsel to swallow)
why do you not then renounce that Maxim of yours which is the immediate
Consequence of it, and necessarily resolves into it? Why will you whose
Pretensions are so high to Reason act so directly against the Laws of it, as to
own that implicitly and by Consequence which neither your Head nor your Heart
will serve you to acknowledge in broad and express Terms? Be a little more
Consistent with your own Sentiments at least, if not with Truth, and be not
your selves a Mystery, while you pretend not to believe any. If you do not care
to own the Principle, then deny the Consequence, or if you will not let go the
Consequence, then stand by and own the Principle. Either speak out boldly and
roundly that your Reason is the Measure of Truth, or if you think that too
gross a defiance to Sense, Experience, Religion and Reason too to be
professedly maintained, then be so ingenuous to us, and so Consistent with your
selves as to renounce your Maxim of Believing Nothing but what you can
Comprehend, since you cannot hold it but with that Absurd Principle; And which
is therefore a Certain Argument that you ought not to hold it.

6. And are you sure that you always do, I mean so as to act by it, that you
hold it in Hypothesi as well as in Thesi? Do you never assent to any thing but
what you can Comprehend? Are there not many things in the Sciences which you
find a pressing Necessity to Subscribe to, though at the same time you cannot
conceive their Modus, or account for their Possibility? But you will say perhaps
these are things of a Physical and Philosophical Consideration, and such as
have no relation to Religion. True, they are so, but then besides that this
visibly betrays the weakness of your ground, since if the incomprehensibility
of a thing were a good Argument against assenting to the Truth of it, it would
be so throughout, in the things of Nature, as well as in the things of
Religion, I would here further demand of you why you are so particularly shy of
admitting incomprehensible things in Religion, why is it there only that you
seem so stiffly and zealously to adhere to your Maxim of Believing nothing but
what you can Comprehend? Since there are so many inconceivable things, or if
you please, Mysteries, in the Works of Nature and of Providence, why not in
Religion? Nay where should one expect to find Mysteries if not there, where all
the things that are Revealed are Revealed by God himself, and many of them
concerning Himself and his own Infinite Perfections? And what deference do we
pay to God more than Man, if either we suppose that he cannot reveal Truths to
us which we cannot Comprehend, or if we will not believe them if he does? Nay
may it not be rather said that we do not pay him so much, since we think it
advisable to receive many things from our Tutours and Masters upon their
Authority only though we do not Comprehend them our selves, and justify our
doing so by that well known and in many Cases very reasonable Maxim, Discentem
oportet Credere. But as there is no Authority like the Divine, so if that Motto
become any School, it is that of Christ.

7. Now it is in this School that you profess to be Scholars, and why then will
you be such Opiniative and uncompliant Disciples as to refuse to receive the
Sublime Lectures read to you by your Divine and Infallible Master, merely
because they are too high for you, and you cannot Conceive them, when at the
same time any one of your that is not a Mathematician (pardon the Supposition)
would I doubt not take it upon the word of him that is so that the Diameter of
a Square is incommensurable to the Side, though he did not know how to
demonstrate, or so much as Conceive it himself. Since then you would express
such implicit regard to the Authority of a fallible, though Learned, Man, shall
not the Divine weigh infinitely heavier with you, and since you would not stick
to assent to things above your Conception in Human and Natural Sciences, why
are you so violently set against Mysteries in Religion, whereof God is not only
the Author, but in great Measure the Object too.

8. You know very well that in the great Problem of the Divisibility of
Quantity there are Incomprehensibilities on both sides, it being inconceivable
that Quantity should, and it being also inconceivable that it should not be
divided infinitely. And yet you know again that as being parts of a
Contradiction one of them must necessarily be true. Possibly you may not be
able with the utmost Certainty and without all hesitation to determine which
that is, but however you know in the general that One of them, indeterminately,
must be true (which by the way is enough to Convince you that the
Incomprehensibility of a thing is no Argument against the truth of it) and you
must also further grant that God whose Understanding is infinite does precisely
and determinately know which of them is so. Now suppose God should Reveal this,
and make it an Article of Faith. It Is not indeed likely that he will, it being
so much beneath the Majesty, and besides the End and Intention of Revelation,
whose great Design is the direction of our Life and Manners, and not the
improvement of our Speculation. But suppose I say he should, would you not
believe it? If not, then you must suppose either that there is no Necessity
that either of the two parts (which yet are Contradictory) should be true, or
that though one of them be true yet that God does not known which is so, or
that though he does know which is so, yet he does not deal faithfully in
revealing that which is the Right, all which are extravagant Suppositions, and
such as Men of your Sense and Reason can never allow. But then if you say (as
you must) that you would believe it, then I pray what becomes of your Maxim of
believing nothing but what you can Comprehend, and why do you so stiffly plead
the incomprehensibility of an Article of Faith against the Belief of it, and
why must there be no Mysteries in Religion? I say in Religion, where if any
where our Reason might expect to find things above its Measure, unreachable
Heights, and unfathomable Depths, and where God is not only the Revealer (as in
the Case now supposed) but also the Object Revealed. For is it not reasonable
to suppose that there are things more incomprehensible in God than in Nature,
and if you would receive an Incomprehensible Revelation of his concerning his
Works, how much rather ought you to admit the same concerning Himself?

9. And this gives me occasion to say something to you concerning the Doctrine
of the Holy Trinity. This great Article of the Christian Faith you have a
particular Prejudice against and will not believe, and that because it so
utterly transcends the Force of Reason to Conceive how the same undivided and
Numerically One Simple Essence of God should be Communicated to Three really
distinct Persons, so as that there should be both a Unity in Trinity, and a
Trinity in Unity. This however, as inconceivable as it seems, some will not
yield to be so far Above Reason but that a Rational and Intelligible Account
may be given of it, which accordingly they have essayed to do by several
Hypotheses. But I decline at present all advantage that may be had from them,
or any other that may be invented to render this an intelligible Article. You
know I Reason all along upon the Contrary Supposition, that those Articles of
the Christian Faith which we call Mysteries are really incomprehensible, and
only go to invalidate the Consequence that is drawn from thence in prejudice of
their Belief. Well then for once we will give you what you stand for, that the
Doctrine of the Trinity is indeed utterly above Reason. You have our leave to
suppose it as incomprehensible as you please. But then you are to Consider
(besides what has hitherto been discoursed concerning the Nullity of the
Consequence from the incomprehensibility of a thing to its incredibility) that
this is a Revelation of God concerning Himself, and do you pretend to
Comprehend the Nature and Essence of God? If you do, then your Understanding is
as infinite as the Divine. But if you do not, then the incomprehensibility of
this Mysterious Article ought to be no Objection with you against the Belief of
it, since if it be, you must be driven to say that you Comprehend the Nature of
God, which I hope you have too much Religion as well as Reason to affirm.

10. And indeed if we meet with so many insuperable Difficulties in the Search
of Nature, much more may we in the Contemplation of its Author, if the Works of
God do so puzzle and baffle our Understandings, much more may they Confess
their Deficiency when God himself is their Object, and if we are not able to
explain Creation, or give an Account how the Material World issued in time from
the great Fountain of Being, much less may we be supposed able to explain the
Eternal and ineffable Generation of his Divine and Consubstantial World. But
what then, shall we not Believe it? Or rather shall we not say upon this
Occasion with the Pious and Ingenious Mr. Wesley, Life of Christ, p. 184.
Ineffable the way, for who The Almighty to perfection ever knew?
But He himself has said it, and it must be true.
Nay to go lower yet, if there be so many things relating to Extension, Motion
and Figure (of all which we have Clear Ideas) which we cannot Comprehend, and
there result from them Propositions which we know not what to make of, with how
much greater reason may we expect to find what we cannot Understand in the
Nature of an Infinite Being, whereof we have no adequate Idea. And indeed we
meet with so many Incomprehensibles in the School of Nature that one would
think we should be too much familiarized to 'em to think them strange in that
of Religion, and God seems on purpose to exercise and discipline our
Understandings with what is above them in Natural things, that so we might be
the less surprised to find what passes our Conception in his own Infinite
Essence. Here then at least you may Confess your Ignorance, and that without
any reproach to your Understandings, which were indeed intended for the
Contemplation, but not for the Comprehension of an Infinite Object. You need
not therefore here be backward to own that you meet with what you cannot
Comprehend (it would indeed be a Mystery if you should not) nor think it any
disgrace to have your Eyes dazzl'd with that Light at the insupportable Glory
of which even the Seraphin Veil and Cover theirs.

11. You may perceive by this that your Denial of the Doctrine of the Trinity
because of the Incomprehensibility of it proceeds upon no good Consequence, but
you are also further desired to Consider the very Bad one that it Naturally
leads to. You refuse to receive this Article because you cannot Comprehend it,
but besides that your Reason for this your refusal is not good unless you could
be supposed to Comprehend every thing, even the Deep things of God. Pray
Consider what the Consequence will be if you pursue your Principle to the
utmost, and Conduct your selves entirely by its Measures. Will it not
inevitably lead you to the denial of all Religion? This perhaps may startle
you, but think again. Will not this necessarily lead you to the denial of God
the Foundation of all Religion? For if you will not believe the Trinal
Distinction of Persons in the Divine Essence because you cannot conceive how
such a thing can be, then may you not for the same reason refuse as well to
believe the Divine Essence it self, some of whose incommunicable Attributes,
such as his Self Existence, Eternity, Immensity, etc. are as Incomprehensible
as any thing in the Notion of the Trinity can be. So that if you will but
follow your Measure from the denial of Three you may be quickly brought to deny
even One. So directly does your Principle of Believing nothing but what you can
Comprehend lead to Atheism, and that with such swift and wide strides, that
were it not for the assistance of the same expedient, your Friends the Deists
would hardly be able to follow you.

12. And now Sirs what do you think of your Principle? Is it not a goodly one,
and richly worth all the Passion and Zeal you have expressed for it? You know
very well that M. Abbadie in his Excellent Treatise of the Divinity of Christ
has shown you that upon one of your grounds ( viz. the denial of that Article)
the Mahumetan Religion is preferable to the Christian, and indeed that you are
Obliged by it to renounce Christianity and turn Mahumetans. This truly was a
home-thrust. But yet you see the Consequence of your general Principle reaches
further, as leading your not only out of Christianity, but out of all Religion
whether Natural or Revealed, even beyond Deism, even into Atheism it self. If
it does not actually lead you thither the fault is not in the Principle, whose
Connection with that Consequence is natural enough, but it is because you are not
so Consistent with your selves as to follow it. And indeed it is a great
Happiness that you do not, (since if you were here better Logicians you would
be worse Men) though it would be a much greater, if for the danger of being
more Consistent with it you would be persuaded to lay it down.

13. And that you may be so be pleased further to Consider, that though this
Principle of yours does not eventually carry you as far as Atheism, because
perhaps the Horridness of the Conclusion may be a Counterweight against the
Force of the Premises (though you see it Naturally tends that way) yet there is
very great danger of its leading you Effectually into Deism, that not being not
accounted nowadays such a very frightful thing. For as long as you hold that
what is above Human Reason is not to be Believed, and upon that Account reject
the Christian Mysteries, because they are above Reason, you lie at the Mercy of
that Argument that shall prove to you that these Mysteries are indeed Revealed,
and that the Genuin and Natural Sense of the Sacred Text declares for them. For
if you once come to be convinced of that, you will then be Obliged in
Consequence of your Principle to renounce that Religion which reveals such
incredible things, that is the Christian, which will be a shrewd (indeed an
invincible) Temptation to you to throw up all Revealed Religion, and so to turn
perfect Deists. And I pray God it may not have that Effect upon you.

14. But as to the parting with Christianity that you will be further tempted
to do upon another account. For when you have by your Principle stripped it, or I
may say rather unbowell'd it of its great and adorable Mysteries, it will
appear such a poor, lank, slender thing to you that you will hardly think it
Considerable enough to be revealed as a New and more perfect, Institution by
God, or to be received as such by thinking and Considering Men. For what will
such find so considerable in Christianity (especially as a new Institution)
what so visibly peculiar and assuredly distinguishing, what that may infallibly
set it above an Humane Institution, if it be once robbed of its Mysteries? They
may indeed think it a good plain piece of Morals, and such as exceeds any other
of a known Humane Composure, but how are they sure but that the Invention of
Man may be able to rise so high, as to Compose such a System as this, if you
set aside its Mysteries? Which therefore I cannot but look upon of all the
things that are intrinsic to it (for I do not here Consider Miracles) as the
greatest Characters of its Divinity. And some perhaps would be apt to think
them such as without which it would hardly be thought worthy of reception
(especially as a New Institution) even with the help of Miracles, which Men are
always ready, and not without reason, to suspect, when the Matters for whose
sake they are wrought bear not sufficient Proportion to them. Which they would
also perhaps be inclined to think to be the present Case. For what (would they
say) is there in the Christian Religion that deserves so great ado, what that
should engage an Omnipotent Arm to introduce it into the World, by such mighty
Signs and Wonders, if there be indeed nothing Wonderful in it, that is, if you
take away its Mysteries. What cannot a good System of Morality (especially if
only a Second, and a little more Correct Edition of a Former) be Communicated
to the World without Alarming Heaven and Earth, and giving disturbance to the
Course of Nature? And if Christianity be no More, what Proportion (say they)
will it bear to its Miraculous Introduction? And what will it be found to have
so very Considerable as either to deserve or justify such an Apparatus? It
must indeed be allowed by all to be a good wholesome Institution for the
Direction of Manners, but what is there so very Great and Admirable in it, what
that either deserves or answers to so many Types and Figures and Prophetical
Predictions, what that so Copiously sets forth the Manifold Wisdom of God, and
the Glory of his Attributes, and the Nothingness of the Creature, and where are
those Deep things of God, that Eye has not seen nor Ear heard, nor have
entered into the Heart of Man (a place which the Apostle applies out of the
Prophet Isaiah to the Revelations of the Gospel) where I say are those profound
things which the Spirit of God only that Searches all things could reveal, 1
Cor. 2. 9, 10.
and which even now they are Revealed the Angels desire to look into. 1 Pet. 1.
12.
You Will hardly find any thing of so raised a Character in Christianity if you
divest it of its Mysteries, which therefore may justly be reckoned as the Main
Pillars of it, without which it will have much ado to support it self. So that
in short Christianity Not Mysterious (how fond soever a Certain Author is of
such a Religion) will make but a very little Figure in Proportion to its Pomp
and External Splendour, and indeed will almost dwindle down into Nothing.

15. It may indeed even without the Mysteries make a shift to subsist as a mere
System of Precepts, and Rule of Life, though even thus Considered it will be
greatly impaired and suffer much disadvantage (as wanting those Convincing
Demonstrations of God's hatred of Sin, and of his Love toward Mankind, and
withal those indearing and persuasive Arguments for their returns of Love,
Gratitude and Obedience toward him, which can only be derived from the
Redemption of the World by the Death and Satisfaction of its Divine Undertaker)
but as a Covenant of Grace established betwixt God and his Offending and
Estranged Creature it cannot possibly stand, but must fall to the ground. So
that though the Moral or Legal part (as I may call it) of Christianity may at a
hard rate Continue after the downfall of its Mysteries, yet its Federal part,
and all that is properly Gospel in it must needs be involved in the Ruin and
Fall with them, that being all built upon the Satisfaction of Christ, as that
again upon his Divinity, which is therefore the very Foundation of the
Christian Religion, as M. Abbadie has by Variety of Demonstration proved it to
be. If then you would have that Divine Institution stand, and if you would
stand fast in it (both which I am willing to suppose) have a care how you
remove its Mysteries, Considering how Fundamental they are to the Building, and
how great a share of its Sacred Weight rests upon them. But endeavor rather to
remove your own Prejudices, to Mortify your Understandings, to study Humility,
and to restrain the too free Sallies of your too curious and over venturous
Reason by still and silent Reflections upon God's Infinite Greatness, and your
own almost as great Infirmities, by which one Thought well pursued you will (by
the Grace of God) come to a better Understanding of your selves than to reject
any of his plain Revelations merely because you cannot Conceive them, and so
leaving Light and Vision to the other Life, will be Content with other good
Christians humbly to Believe and Adore in this.

16. Gentlemen, I beseech you seriously to Consider what with Christian Charity
and all due Civil Respect I have here laid before you, and if upon
Consideration of it you find any weight in it, to let it have its full Force
and Effect upon you. Which if you do I hope it may serve by the Blessing of God
(to whom for that end I humbly devote this Labor) to Convince you, or at least
to put you upon such better Considerations of your own as May. For I pretend
not here to have said all, but to have left many things to the enlargement and
improvement of your own Meditation, Considering the impropriety of doing
otherwise to Persons of your Parts and Learning, which I pray God to Sanctify
and Increase to you. Whereby you may perceive that I am not against your making
use of your Reason. No, I would only have you reason rightly, and that you may
do so would have you by all Human Methods to improve and Cultivate your Reason
as much as you can, being well persuaded that as a half-view of things makes
men Opiniative, Disputatious and Dogmatical, so a Clear and thorough Light
makes them Humble and distrustful of themselves, and that the more Cultivated
and Improved any Man's Natural Reason is, the easier it will be for him to
Captivate it to the Obedience of Faith.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Committing of these Papers to the Press I have had the pleasure to
peruse Mr. Whiston's New Theory of the Earth, for which extraordinary and truly
great Performance I return him all due Thanks, and am very glad to see so great
a Master of Reason and Philosophy express so awful and reverential a regard to
Religion in general, and in particular to the Sacred Mysteries of it, against
which both Human Reason and Natural Philosophy have been of late so abusively
and profanely employed. How far this Ingenious and Learned Author makes good
his great undertaking, or whether this or the Former Theorist be most likely to
be in the right. I shall not take upon me to examine. I only make this
Observation from both their wonderful Attempts that whether they are in the
right or no, as to their respective Accounts of things, yet they have at least
gone so far and offered so fairly toward a true Explanation of them, as to
Convince any Competent and indifferent Reader that the Mosaiek Records
concerning the greater Phenomena of Creation and Providence are not really of
so desperate a Nature as they were once presumed to be, but are in themselves
Capable of, and may perhaps in time actually have (if they have not already) a
true natural Solution. As for Instance, a Universal Flood without a Miracle, or
that the World should be wholly Drowned in a Natural way, or according to the
Laws of Motion already settled, and by a Train of Causes already laid in
Nature, has been hitherto thought an Incomprehensible, and accordingly an
Impossible thing. But now if these two Mighty Genius's who have undertaken to
give a Natural Account of this stupendous Revolution have neither of them
pitched upon the very precise way and Manner whereby it was brought to pass,
yet I think it cannot be denied but that they have said enough between them to
Convince that the thing was naturally Possible, and that a true Natural Account
may be given of it, though they should be supposed not to have hit directly
upon that which is so. That is, I mean, they have represented it at least as a
Conceivable thing, whether they themselves have had the good fortune to
Conceive of it exactly as it was or no. Upon which it is very Natural and no
less pertinent to the Concern in hand to make this further Reflection, that we
should not be Overhasty to pronounce any thing (even of a Physical, much less
of a Religious Nature) to be Impossible, only because it appears to us to be
Incomprehensible. For besides that the Incomprehensibility of a thing is (as
this whole Discourse shows) no certain Argument of its Impossibility, and that
what appears incomprehensible to our Understandings may at the same time be
well Comprehended by those of Angels, not to say of wiser Men, perhaps that
which appears to us at present to be above all Comprehension may in process of
time and upon further Reflection and Experience so brighten and clear up to our
Minds, as to be Comprehended, or at least to be thought of a Comprehensible and
Possible Nature even by our more improved selves. For the Incomprehensibility
of a thing as such being no Absolute Affection or Intrinsic Denomination of the
thing it self from its own Nature, but only such as affects it from without and
in relation to the present Capacity of our Understandings, there needs no
alteration in the Nature of the thing to make that Comprehensible, which was
before incomprehensible, a Change in our Understandings is sufficient, upon
whose greater improvement alone an incomprehensible may become a Comprehensible
Object. So that besides the Nullity of the Consequence from the
Incomprehensibility of a thing to its Impossibility, even the Principle it self
from which that Consequence is pretended to be drawn may be removed, by the
present Comprehension of what passed before with us for an incomprehensible
Proposition. Upon both which Considerations we are admonished to be very
Cautious how we Conclude any thing in Nature, much more in Scripture, to be
impossible, because to us incomprehensible. And it is the very use Mr. Whiston
himself makes of the latter of them in the Conclusion of his excellent Work,
from which I think it worth while to transcribe a Passage both for the
Advantage of the present Argument, and the greater Conviction of the Reader, to
whom, as well as to my self, it must be no little Satisfaction to see the
Sentiments of so great an Author concur with mine.

The Measure of our present knowledge ( says he) p. 379.
ought not to be esteemed the (...) or Test of Truth ( the very Proposition
almost in Terms of my Fourth Chapter) or to be opposed to the Accounts received
from profane Antiquity, much less to the inspired writings. For notwithstanding
that several particulars relating to the eldest Condition of the World and its
great Catastrophe's, examine'd and compared with so much Philosophy as was till
lately known, were plainly unaccountable, and, naturally speaking, impossible;
yet we see now Nature is more fully, more certainly, and more substantially
understood, that the same things approve themselves to be plain, easy, and
rational. It Is therefore Folly in the highest degree to reject the Truth or
Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures because we cannot give our Minds
particular satisfaction as to the Manner, may or even possibility of some
things therein asserted. Since we have seen so many of those things, which
seemed the most incredible in the whole Bible, and gave the greatest Scruple
and Scandal to Philosophic Minds, so fully and particularly attested, and next
to demonstrated from Certain Principles of Astronomy and natural Knowledge;
it is but reasonable to expect in due time a like Solution of the other
Difficulties. It Is but just sure to depend upon the Veracity of those Holy
VVriters in other Assertions, whose Fidelity is so entirely established in
these hitherto equally unaccountable ones. The obvious, plain, or literal Sense
of the Sacred Scriptures ought not without great reason to be eluded or laid
aside: Several of those very places which seemed very much to require the same
hitherto, appearing now to the Minutest Circumstances, true and rational,
according to the strictest and most literal Interpretation of them. We may be
under an Obligation to believe such things on the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures as are properly Mysteries* that is, though not really Contradictory,
yet plainly unaccountable to our (present degree of) Knowledge and Reason. Thus
the Sacred Histories of the Original Constitution, and great Catastrophe's of
the World have been in the past Ages the Objects of the Faith of Jews and
Christians, though the Divine Providence had not afforded so much light as that
they could otherwise Satisfy themselves in the Credibility of them, till the
new improvements in Philosophy. And this is but just and Reasonable. For sure
the Ignorance or Incapacity of the Creature does by no Means afford sufficient
ground for Incredulity, or justify Men in their rejecting Divine Revelation,
and impeaching the Veracity or Providence of the Creator. With which weighty,
and to the present purpose very pertinent words of this worthy Author I Seal up
my own, and leave them both to the Consideration of the Reader.

FINIS.
Corrections.
PAge 176. line 22. after describe read its. p. 250. l. 11. r. confuted. p.
206. l. 17. after Perfections, r. are as. p. 273. l. 1. r. proceeds. p. 287. l.
12. for as his Vicar does, r. whatever his Vicar may do. p. 289. l. 23. after
or, r. as. p. 292. l. 9. r. Scrutiny. p. 303. l. 17. r. Christian.

Books Printed for, and Sold by S. Manship at the Ship in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange.
A Collection of Miscellanies, consisting of Poems, Essays, Discourses and
Letters; in large 8o.

Theory and Regulation of Love; a Moral Essay in two Parts: To which is added,
Letters Philosophical and Moral, between the Author and Dr. More. The 2 d.
Edition in 8o.

Practical Discourses upon the Beatitudes of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
To which are added, Reflections upon a late Essay concerning Humane
Understanding. Vol. I. the third Edition, in 8o.

Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects. Vol. II.

Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects. Vol. III.

Letters Philosophical, Moral, and Divine, to the Reverend Mr. John Norris,
with his Answers in 8o.

Treatises upon several Subjects: Formerly Printed singly, now collected into
one Volume, in 8o. large.

An Account of Reason and Faith, in relation to the Mysteries of Christianity,
in 8o. large.

These eight writ by the Reverend Mr. John Norris, Rector of Bemerton near
Sarum.

A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ. Showing the Ungodly their
Contempt of Christ, in their Contempt of the Sacramental Covenanting: With a
Preface chiefly designed for the satisfaction of Dissenters; and to exhort all
Men to Peace and Unity; in 8o.

An Explication of the Creed, the 10 Commandments and the Lord's Prayer, with
the Addition of some Forms of Prayer, Price 1s. 6d.

A Dialogue betwixt two Protestants (in answer to a Popish Catechism, called, a
short Catechism against the Sectaries) plainly showing, that the Members of the
Church of England are no Sectaries, but true Catholics, in 8o. price 2s.

Poetic Miscellanies, in 8o. price 1s. 6d.

The Christian Monitor, the Nineteenth Edition, price 3d. having already sold
95 Thousand; and those that are charitably disposed may have them for 20s. the
hundred, and so proportionably for a smaller quantity.

These five writ by the Reverend Mr. Jo. Rawlet.

An Essay concerning Humane Understanding, in four Books, the third Edition,
with large Additions, by Io. Lock Gent. Folio.

Malebranch's Search after Truth, complete in 2 Vol. 8o. to the 2 d. is added
the Author's Defense against the Accusations of M. de la Ville. Also the Life
of F: Malebranch. Done out of French by Mr. Sault.

Christian Conferences, demonstrating the Truth of the Christian Religion and
Morality. By F. Malebranch.

Practical Discourses on the Pararables of our blessed Savior. By F. Brag
Vicar of Hitchin in Hertfordshire.

A New Voyage into Italy, with necessary Instructions for those who undertake
the same, by Max. Misson, in 2 Vol. Done out of French, and illustrated with
Sculp.

The Roman History, from the building of the City to the perfect ^ettlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar. By Sa. Echard, the 2 d. Edition with Amendments.

A full, large and general Phrase Book. By VV. Robertson A. M. price 5s. bound.

Reflections on the good Temp^ and fair Dealing of the Animadve^ter upon D.
Sherlock's Vindication or the Holy Trinity, 4o. price 6d.

Essays of Michael Seignieur de Montaigne, in 3 Books. Done into English by C.
Cotton Esquire in three Vol.

A Sermon concerning the Excellency and Usefulness of the Common Prayer. By VV.
Beveridge, D. D. the Eleventh Edition, price 3d Those that are Charitably
disposed may have them for 20s. the hundred.

-- His Sermon before the Queen, price 6d.

A new Voyage to the Levant, containing remarkable Curiosities in Germany,
France, Italy, Malta and Turkey, by the Sieur de Mont. The second Edition,
price 5s.


