A DISCOURSE OF Ecclesiastical LAWS, And SUPREMACY of the KINGS OF ENGLAND, In
DISPENSING with the PENALTIES thereof.

By Mr. PHILIP NIGH.

LONDON, Printed for W. Cross, MDCLXXXVII.

A Discourse of Ecclesiastical Laws and Supremacy of the Kings of ENGLAND, in
dispensing with the Penalties thereof.
CHAP. I. The CASE and STATE of the QVESTION.
THE Kings Power and Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical Affairs may fall under a
threefold Consideration, as 1. Put forth by himself. 2. By Commission granted
to Ecclesiastical Persons, and exercised in those Courts we term Spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical. 3. As such Affairs are managed and ordered by him in
Parliament, and by the Authority thereof.

The form in which these Ecclesiastical Laws are expressed to us, is this; Be
it enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, etc.

Merely to advise and consent implys no more Authority in Establishment of
Ecclesiastical Laws than what was put forth by the Convocation in their
Canons; but it being added by the Authority thus mentioned, may be construed
either relating to the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament; which is a suffrage, and more than our advice or bare consent. For
it implies when Bills are formed, read, debated and assented to by both
Houses, they were then stamped with some kind of Parliamentary authority. Or it
is to be interpreted as relating to King, Lords and Commons; which is likely:
for Consultations of Parliament, although concluded by Vote, yet become not
formally a Law until His Majesty has given his Royal assent.

And in this sense Ecclesiastical Laws and Orders, which are enacted and
established by Statutes, have as formal a Sanction, (being not only by the
Authority of the King; but by Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament) as
other Laws wherein our Civil interests are concerned, namely, by a joint and
not the single Power of either.

This being granted, some may say, it is then needless to dispute those higher
interests; and thence also inferred, That as these Ecclesiastical Laws have
their rise, vigor and strength; so their diminution and abatement from
conjunction of both Powers, and are more fixed and stable than those Canons and
Orders in Ecclesiastical Matters that have their sanction from the King only.

But to this I say briefly, these Powers are not so equal but the King has the
Supremacy, and is enabled thereby to such Acts and Orderings about the
Penalties of our Laws as are peculiar to the Crown and Dignity of a King: as
in mitigating, exempting, dispensing, licensing, pardoning, etc. and all this
more especially in Matters Ecclesiastical as by the following will appear.

This Power and Superiority exercised by the Kings of England with respect to
the Penalties of our Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil shall be spoken to in
these two particulars.

First, That such an Authority and Supremacy is necessary, and ought to be
placed in some hand.

Secondly, That it is a Dignity which has been always in the Kings and Queens
of this Realm.

1. For the former. In all Polities and Forms of Government, as there is a rule
the which is to be the measure to and by which all men's actions that live under
that Polity are ordinarily to be Conformed and Judged; so is there always some
provision made for mitigating the rigor of the rule in Cases which may fall
out and cannot be foreseen by the wisest Legislators: And in such cases to
exercise summum jus would be summa injuria. Therefore there is here not only a
Power to Judge as the Case stands in the strict Letter of the Law; but as there
are Courts of Law, so are there Chanceries, Courts of Equity and Conscience
wherein the Law and Rule it self is dispensed with, and varied from. The
Proceedings there are not according to the strict terms of the Law, but
secundum aequum and bonum, according as the merits of the Case require.

1. For Laws constituted for a whole Nation universally to be submitted unto
by Persons of what quality soever, and how much soever different in their
Conditions, must needs in their strict execution bear harder upon some men than
upon others. Parliaments in their Laws going by the rule of ad ea quae
frequentius accidunt, etc. better a mischief than always an inconvenience. It
is taken for granted that a general Law which has its good and necessity in
respect to the bulk and body of a People, may prove unequal to particular
Persons from the Circumstances of their Condition. In the Commonwealth the
ease and benefit of each particular person of what degree or condition soever
is to be consulted; but where Laws are executed in their full rigor, and no
particular Mercy or Indulgence in special and unusual Cases, it will not be. So
God himself who knows every man's heart, yet some of his Laws which are given
in the general to all, would not prove so equal to each at all times without
exemptions in particular Cases. Hence we say affirmative Precepts bind not AD
SEMPER. To such Laws is that of Mark, C. 2 to be referred in the Case of the
Shewbread.

And the Pope who assumes to himself a possibility not to Err, yet how does
his Republic abound in Courts for Faculties, Dispensation, Indulgences?

2. It is also to be Considered, there are no Societies of men but may err in
their counsels. Laws made in one Parliament come to a review, and often to an
alteration, yea to a repeal in the next. The intervals of those great Councels
are some time long, and if no way of relief were in the mean time, the Subject
would without remedy undergo the Penalty of an unequal Law.

These and the like Considerations make it necessary that besides the
Legislative Power placed in the Parliament, there be some hand or other also by
which upon all emergent occasions, the rigor of a Law as to its Penalty may be
abated, by the means whereof not only men's Liberties and Estates but lives also
are sometimes preserved.

2. For the other, This balance has always been trusted in the hand of and
annexed to the Sovereign Majesty of every State.

For this interest does little vary, but remains in a manner the same in all
States in what form soever they be established. In the State of England being
an Empire, and its Crown in many Acts of Parliament, (especially relating to
these Matters styled Imperial) this Power is inseparably annexed thereunto;
which needs little proof, it being confirmed by the OATH of SUPREMACY. Our
great Lawyers also give in their suffrage hereunto, frequently affirming that
the Statutes relating to the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction are not
introductive of new, but declarative of the old Laws.

When an Act (say these two learned Judges Coke and Rolls) forbids under a
Penalty, in case it may be inconvenient unto diverse particular persons in
respect to Circumstances, the Law gives Power to the King to dispense therewith.

And in like Cases, or upon other Considerations equal, he may dispense,
license, pardon, etc. yea although these Laws have been passed by His Majesty's
royal assent formerly, and (what is more) a Clause inserted in the Act that the
King's License in this or that case shall be void. Yet it will be no BAR to
such Prerogatives as are originally and inseparably inherent in his royal
Person, but he may give License with a NON OBSTANTE thereunto.

A learned Sergeant in his NO MOTECHNIA has these words, The King by a Clause
of NON OBSTANTE may dispense with a Statute Law, if he recite the Statute,
though the Statute say such Dispensation shall be merely void. And he may
license things forbidden as to Coin money, which is made by the Statute
Capital, and was before unlawful, for that is but malum Prohibitum; but malum
in se, as to leave a Nuisance in the High way, etc. he cannot license to do,
but when it is done he may pardon it; but where the Statute says his License
shall be void ( which the Civilians call clausula derogative) there it must
have a Clause of NON OBSTANTE (i.e.) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY STATVTE, and else it
is not good. And (says the same Author) he may in respect of his Supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, exempt some from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary,
and dispense with others in things which the Ecclesiastical Law Prohibits upon
the same ground that they are not, mala in se, but prohibita.

I hold clear, says Judge Hobart, That tho the Statute says, that all
Dispensations, etc. shall be granted in manner and form following, that yet the
King is not thereby restrained, but his Power remains full and perfect as
before, and he may still grant them as King.

The King may remitt the Penalty and Punishment tho not dispense where what is
forbidden by Law is malum in se, says that Sergeant in his forementioned
Discourse: much more then where what is forbidden is but malum Prohibitum. The
Statute indeed of 1 Ed. 2. cap. 7. Enacts that no letter shall proceed from the
King to discharge an excommunicated Person, but where the King's Liberty is
prejudiced: but as this Statute it self proves the late and former practice, so
it takes it not away, since the King's liberty of discharging such Persons used
before is preserved by the same Statute.

CHAP. II. Of the Prerogative and Regal Power in relation to Ecclesiastical
Laws and Matters of Religion.
1. REligion in the moral part thereof, namely, the Precepts and Commandments
of God, the institutions and Ordinances of Christ, these are not subject to any
humane Wisdom or Power. The Apostles that were of higher authority in these
Affairs than any on earth, went no further then as 1 Cor. 11.23. What I have
received of the Lord that I deliver unto you. To make Laws in Spiritual
Matters that are such by the Light of Nature that men may be moved to do and
act according to this Light in duty and our Civil concerns, we yield unto the
Magistrate who is custos utriusque tabulae.

2. There are matters of Circumstance: also these and the like are made by our
Laws to depend upon the power and ordering of the Prince. This distinction you
have laid down as Law by Judge Hobart. These are his words: Though it be jure
divino that Christian People be provided of Christian offices and duties, as of
Teaching, Administration of Sacraments, and the like, and of Pastors for that
purpose, and therefore to debar them wholly of it, were expressly against the Law
of God: Yet the distinction of Parishes, and the form of furnishing every
Parish Church with its proper Curate, Rector or Pastor by the way of
Presentation, Institution, etc. as it is used diversely in diverse Churches, and
the state or title which he has or is to have in his Church and Benefice, is
not a positive Law of God in point of Circumstance. And we know well that the
Primitive Church in its greatest Purity, was but voluntary Congregations of
Believers submitting themselves to the Apostles, and after to other Pastors, to
whom they did minister of their Temporals as God did move them. Government is a
beam of Divine Power, and therefore he proceeds saying, if a People refuse all
Government, it were against the Law of God, but if a popular State will receive
a Monarchy, it stands well with the Law of God. In the Case of Glover and Colt
against the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, page 149.

From all this the Judge seems to confirm his distinction by way of Comparison
thus. As in humane affairs Government in the general and essentials of it, that
one man be subject to another in an orderly way, is necessary, and jure divino,
and not in man's liberty and dispose: Yet for the modes and forms of Government
and like Circumstances, it is left to the choice and wisdom of Men and the
Conduct thereof.

So in Matters of Religion which are not jure divino, our Law judges the
Magistrate has the ordering thereof in each Nation according to the manners
and temper of the People, which is various: And in particular the disposing of
Pastors and People for the more convenient and orderly Service and Worship of
God to be only jure humano, and may be otherwise, and was so in the Primitive
Church in her greatest Purity.

Pastors and People were not then as now engaged by this relation one to
another in this Parochial bond or tie, but enjoyed a Christian liberty
voluntarily to dispose of themselves, under such and such a ministry as they
should make choice of to themselves. The Church is said in that state to be in
greatest Purity. 1. The Congregational way therefore is not a way in this
learned Judge's opinion of disorder, and confusion, as is so frequently
suggested. 2. And that it is in the power of Supreme Majesty to dispense with a
Parishioner as well as with a Pastor or Rector to be a non-resident and take
another Rectory, the division of Parishes being jure humano.

What those things and Matters of Religion are in the judgment of our State
that come under the manage of humane Wisdom and Power, is well expressed in
Queen Elizabeth's Advertisement. These Orders and Rules have been meet and
convenient to be used and followed; yet not prescribing these Rules as Laws
equivalent with the eternal Word of God, and of necessity to bind the
Consciences of our Subjects, in the nature of them considered in themselves; or
as they should add any efficacy or more holiness to the virtue of public
Prayers, and to the Sacraments, but as temporal Orders merely Ecclesiastical
without any vain Superstition, or as Rules in some part of discipline,
concerning decency, distinction and order for the time.

And in the Articles of 1562, It is not necessary that Traditions and
Ceremonies be in all places one or utterly alike, for at all times they have
been diverse and may be changed according to the diversity of Countries and Men's
manners: So that nothing be ordained against God's Word.

It is granted that even these Ecclesiastical Laws ought to be conformable to
the Word of God, and to these general Rules laid down in the Scripture for
ordering the Worship and Service of God in the Churches; as let all things be
done decently and to edification: Give no offense to Jew or Gentile, and the
like, but not to be men's mere inventions.

That distinction which some would make of things against or contrary, and what
is according to the Word of God, as they apply the one to matters of Faith, the
other to matters of Order, is a distinction without a difference: there is more
wit than truth in that interpretation of Christ's words, He that is not with me
is against me; and in another place, He that is not against me is with me,
applying one to matters of Faith, the other to matters of Order. There is no
such distinction to be made, but Rites, Ceremonies, and matters of Order ought
to be according to God's Word as well as matters of Faith. Magistrates are to
judge circa res Ecclesiasticas, de iis si fidei sint dogmata vel ritus and
Ceremeniae: earumque veritatem and equitatem juxta verbi divini normam. Mocket
de Pol. Eccl. Anglicanae cap. 30. And the Power of the King stands not in
forming new Articles of Faith or forms of Religion, and such as were
Jeroboam's Calves, but in defending and propagating that Faith and Religion of
which God in the Scripture is the undoubted Author, faith Mason of Bishops,
cap. 5.

It is evident those holy men our first Reformers made no such distinction; but
that all should be done according to God's Word, laying before them these
general Rules in Scripture, even in retaining that which has been so
offensive; for of the retaining Ceremonies there is this account given by them,
viz. because they appertain to Edification: whereunto all things done in the
Church, as the Apostle teaches, ought to be referred. And our Liturgy says
thus: There is nothing to be read but the very pure Word of God and the Holy
Scriptures, or that which is evidently grounded upon the same. Preface to the
Common Prayer. God be thanked (says good King Edw. 6.) we know both by his
word what is fit to be reformed and have amended, etc. The Bishop of Rome and
his Jurisdiction is taken away and abolished, because is had no ground or
establishment in the Laws of God. Injunct. Ed. 6. So Pil grimages, Offerings,
Beads, Images are done away, being works devised by man fancy, and beside
Scripture.

It is convenient thus distinctly to have insisted upon what we term Religion,
or Matters Ecclesiastical, according to that sense in which the Civil
Magistrate assumes to himself the ordering hereof, and what influence and
authority the Scriptures have, or ought to have in these Rites of the Church,
and matters of Orders as well as matters of Faith. For hereby it appears whence
it is men's Consciences are more concerned in these Laws than in other
municipal Laws of the Nation; and their not being free to submit to these
Ecclesiastical Laws when not formed according to God's Word, is no evidence of
that Seditious spirit that kicks against all Laws.

2. There is a necessity, and that of much greater importance, Provision be
made of Dispensations, etc. as occasion shall be of Laws Ecclesiastical than
Civil.

In Matters of Religion and the Service of God, (1.) Multitudes there are of
loose and profane Persons, and in respect to such neither are the Laws in
themselves, nor in the execution of them, severe enough. (2.) Against POPISH
Recusants the Laws have been severe enough, yet in the Execution, great
Moderation (3.) There are those (and blessed be God great numbers) who are not
only Orthodox in Faith, but of unblameable life in the greater things of the
Law and Gospel. These have fallen under most fevere Laws, and of late with
greatest severity put in execution, and would be utterly ruined, if there be no
means of relaxation. It is in the behalf of these I argue this Necessity of
Indulgence, and from these and the like Considerations.

1. There is a greater proneness in conscientious men to scruple and to be
doubtful in their obedience to the Ecclesiastical, than to the Civil Laws of a
Nation: as before. 2. The great difficulty in forming Laws wherein men's
Consciences are immediately concerned so as not to dissatisfie some, if not
many. 3. If those Laws be not according to Scripture in the apprehensions of
those that are to obey, whatever they are in themselves, it is our Sin if we
obey: it is not so in Civil commands. 4. It is not of so ill consequence for us
to yield obedience to a Civil as to an Ecclesiastical Law, if ill constituted
by the State. 5. From what is found in a manner peculiar in these our
Ecclesiastical Laws, and the administration of them many ways prejudicial to
the subject, there is a necessity some such provision be found on our behalf of
this kind.
1. The real doubts and scruples about our obedience in these Ecclesiastical
Matters, cannot but be more and greater than in other Laws. A man of the
greatest knowledge in these things knows but in part, and the most men have
but a parcel in this part. It is true the Principles and the greater matters of
Religion are in great perspicuity laid down in Scripture, which gives knowledge
to the Simple; but these matters of Circumstance and external order we have for
the most part in the generals only, and hints from Examples and Customs of the
Apostolical Churches, in the interpre. terpretation whereof the most learned
find difficulties and are divided. Now the want of Knowledge is the ground of
scruple and doubts in our practice, 1 C. 8.7. For the working of Conscience is
from the ultimate resolution of the practical understanding, and hence it is
that the same Practice may be not only scrupled, but a Sin to one man, that is
not to another upon the account of different apprehensions. There may
notwithstanding be integrity and sincerity in both, and therefore they are
tenderly to be dealt with as the Apostle requires, which you read in Romans 14.

2. A great difficulty there is to form Ecclesiastical Laws; they being to be
the same (where uniformity is much stood upon) for a whole Nation, so as not to
leave grounds of dissatisfaction to many men's apprehensions, being various
thorough the degrees of Light: in so much as that may be Sin to one man, which
is a liberty to another of a greater degree of light. A little is next to
nothing, and what is indifferent is nearest in likeness to moral Good or Evil.
Hence so frequent mistakings. And as it is with particular Persons, so may it
be with a Society or Company of men: one true Church in these things differing
from another, and the same Church differing from it self upon further
discoveries. A Synod, a Parliament may judge such and such things, that they
who are to submit, may sincerely scruple, and stick at as Sin. If Churches and
Men heavenly enlightened are thus exposed to vary in their apprehensions, we
cannot be confident of any Council or Assembly made up of the most Wise and
Prudent Men.

Parliaments are chosen by the votes of the promiscuous multitudes in respect
(we would hope) to their sufficiency in managing our Civil and Temporal
concernments: but as to their Skill and Ability to discern and judge of such
matters appertaining to Order in the Service and Worship of God, all men have
not this Knowledge: this is little or not at all attended by those that Elect
them; by reason whereof Matters wherein men's Consciences are concerned are not
at all times carried by those who are most Conscientious in that Assembly, who
are not always the Major part; yet notwithstanding are required in their
Consciences to assent and consent to such Determinations being made, although
possibly near one half in number dissented in the passing of them; and it is
unavoidable in all and the best Assemblies that are chosen by the general
suffrage of a Nation.

Again, These matters of Ceremony and external Order are sometimes managed in
part with respect to a Party different in their apprehensions, and who
thereupon form these Laws with respect to Prudence as well as Conscience. In
our first Reformation it was said such Superstitions are taken away, a^time
would serve quietly to do it, and many things were left remaining in our
Liturgy, which otherwise would have been removed in compliance with that form
of divine Service used-before by the Papists, that they may not be provoked but
rather won thereby to our Religion. Women's Baptizing was continued in our
Liturgy, (says the Bishop of Winchester) else the Book would not have passed
the House. [ Conf. at Hampton Court.] King James was once willing that some
Ceremonies giving offense should be removed. But the Parliament then sitting
thought it not Prudence; and our present Sovereign would have done a great
matter for the Ease of Tender Consciences, as appears by some of the
Declarations herein after mentioned; but it stood not with the Prudence of this
House, as they expressed in their Answer, without whose concurrence His Majesty
thought not fit then to do it.

3. From mistaken Principles, as that there can be no Unity without Uniformity,
that there can be no Discipline in a Church without some Ceremonies of humane
Institution; that things in Worship indifferent become necessary, being imposed
by Authority: That things in matters of Order that are once established, and
some time continued in the Church may not with safety be altered. These things
I offer not to derogate from Parliaments in their manage of such Affairs, but
upon this serious account only, To show that as our Civil Laws have made
provision that the Church shall not in their Laws and Canons order any thing
against the Prerogative of the King, or the Laws and Statutes of the Realm in
general, and that such Canons shall not be in force that do. (25 Hen. 8.19.) So
likewise Laws and Statutes in Ecclesiastical Affairs, established by the Civil
Power, if they be found to derogate from the Prerogative of Christ Jesus, or
the Laws and Statutes of his Kingdom ought not to be in force upon men's
Consciences.

As Churchmen being supposed not to be so well understood in secular Laws but
may transgress, so may secular Persons likewise in their orderings about Church
Affairs; therefore there is a like necessity of a Power to review, Judge and
dispense with such Laws as shall be found to disturb the Consciences of
peaceable Subjects, as occasion may urge thereunto. Hen. 8. by Commission
(which was continued by Edw. 6.) appointed 32 Persons, 8 of each Profession, to
peruse the Canons of the Clergy then in force, to the end those might be
removed that were any ways against the Crown and State. These Kings might have
done the like in respect to those Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws enacted in
Parliament, if they were found to derogate from Christ's Commands, or his
Institutes, or if justly offensive to the peaceably Godly, that Dispensations
might be granted for the present, till further Reformation be obtained.

3. The Municipal Laws of a Nation are from and conformed to the Principles of
right Reason and common Justice only, and we have submitted to the Resolutions
of those Wise and Prudent Senators we our selves have made choice of to enact
and establish such Laws for us, and therefore may acquiesce in their
Determinations without further enquiry, having given a kind of absolute
pre-consent to such Laws as shall be enacted by them: but it is not so in
Ecclesiastical Laws entrusted with the same Persons, for they are to be formed
according to God's Word which every man is to take as his immediate Rule, and
not to do or submit to any thing in his Practice about the Notion of Religion,
but what is conformable thereunto; he is to LIVE and act by his own Faith. To
Laws Ecclesiastical therefore made in Parliament we give only a Conditional
Consent, viz. So far as they are agreeable to God's Word, and concur with
Gospelrules; nor is it in the liberty of any man's Conscience or reason to
yield more, nor is there any more by us entrusted with the Representative, the
Parliament. If a man does scruple the reasonableness or equity of a Law
established concerning Civil right, or what is required from such a Statute, he
may notwithstanding yield Obedience without Sin, and ought so to do, rather
than to offend by any appearance of disobedience as Christ himself did, Matthew.
17.26, 27. But in Matters of Religion, even Circumstances Ceremonies or Matters
of Order, or the least thing wherein the Lord has concerned his Word, if there
be a doubt or scruple whether it be lawful and conformable to Scripture; tho it
be from Ignorance, or weakness, yet I sin if I submit in practice thereof, Romans
14.21. compared with 2, 3.

The consequence of Transgression in this kind is more than the loss of Estate,
Liberties, yea, of Life it self. If Laws from Superiors concerning Civil right
be unjust in themselves, or prove unequal from the Circumstances of this or
that man's Case, who cannot be relieved by any indulgence, he may submit
without Sin, and without transgressing any Law of God; nay, it is virtue and
pleasing to God to show our patience in such suffering, 1 Pet. 2.13. compared
with 18, 19. 1 Cor. 6, 7. but not so in the Matters of Religion; for we have it
from Christ to the contrary, that is, not to submit Coloss. 2.20. and God
blames his People by his Prophets, for willingly walking after the Commandments
and keeping the Statutes of Omri, Hosea 5.12. Micah 6.16. the Lord is a jealous
God.

4. If there be not a Power to Judge and Dispense entrusted in some hand, the
People are in a worse condition on these accounts then in their civil interest,
and that upon a threefold account.

1. The Secular Laws and Statutes made in behalf of the Subject are often upon
further Deliberation and Experience of inconvenience altered and repealed,
whereby the Subject has ease. It is ordinarily seen in our Civil concerns,
that some ACTS of Parliament that partly for their severity, or upon some other
account, passed as doubtful whether fit to remain as standing Laws, are
therefore limited to a certain Time, and after which to expire and cease. The
severe Act of 35 Eliz. which in the Process of it reached men's lives when first
passed, was to remain a Law but to the end of the next Session of Parliament:
which in regard of some doubt (it seems) whether in force or not, is declared
by this present Parliament to be so, and that it ought to be put in due
execution. And now at this time there is a Minister of the Gospel under the
Sentence of that Act, and for transgressing that Law had lost his life, had not
His Majesty interposed by his Prerogative. A wise Statesman once advised and
expressed himself thus: I ask why the Civil State should be purged and restored
with good and wholesome Laws made in every 30 or 40 years in Parliament,
providing Remedies as fast as time breeds Mischiefs, and comrariwise the
Ecclesiastical State should still continue upon the dreggs of time, and receive
no alteration. Now for these many years we have heard of no offers of Bills in
Parliament, is it because there is nothing amiss? [ Sir Fr. Bacon.]

2. In that all Proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts are ever to the utmost
rigor and letter of their Canons and Orders. There is no Chancery or Court of
Equity to appeal to for redress, but in some few Cases; as in causes
Testamentary, Matrimony, Divorces, etc. specified 24 H. 8. Matters wherein our
Estates are touched; but in matters of Conformity, and such Cases wherein our
Consciences are concerned, we are left destitute.

3. Men are upon this peculiar disadvantage in these spiritual Courts who are
impeached for Nonconformity to their Canons and Orders, in that their
Adversaries and those that are Parties for the most part are their Judges. This
Sir Fr. Bacon in his Considerations condemns as a great Injustice. So that it
is evident considering the Nature of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and how
managed with us in this Nation; how necessary it is that some Power be placed
somewhere, by which we may be relieved when exposed more than others to such
extremity of rigor. For otherwise as Conscientious men are more disposed to
doubts and scruples in the way of duty in this kind, so to less Mercy and
Indulgence from our Superiors.

CHAP. III. That our relief is from the Jurisdiction and Power in His Majesty
to Dispense and Exempt; for in his hand this balance is placed, which is that
we shall insist upon in the next place.
1. THis Prerogative and Power to exempt from Ecclesiastical Laws is in the
Sovereign: for the confirming whereof, not to insist upon what was acknowledged
by Eleutherius touching Lucius our first Christian King, that he was Vicarius
Dei in regno suo, in reference to matters to be reformed; or what is mentioned
concerning the Laws and Practice of King Edgar, and Edw. the Confessor, namely
of the first meae solicitudinis quieti eorum consulere de quorum moribus
spectat ad nos examen, and of the other from whom it is said much of our Laws
is derived, in describing the King's office, he says, Rex ad hoc est
constitutus ut regnum terrenum, Populum Dei and Ecclesiam regat, ab injuriis
defendat and maleficos ab ea evellat, destruat and penitus disperdat: and much
of the like nature that might be urged from Antiquity; but to come nearer home,
I bring the Testimony of the Clergy in Convocation, or the representative
Church of England, who make it so great a Duty to acknowledge this as they have
expressed their severity thus. Whosoever shall affirm the King's Majesty has
not the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, as the pious Princes of the
Jews and the Christian Emperors obtained, let him be excommunicated ipso facto,
and not to be absolved but by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Canons of the
Convocation, 1603.

I shall join with this Testimony that of another Council (namely that met in
the Star Chamber, 2 Jac.) made up of all the Judges and Persons learned in the
Law summoned by King James for resolution in some Ecclesiastical Cases, whereof
this of His Majesty's Prerogative was one; their resolution you have in these
words. The King without the Parliament may make Orders and Constitutions for
the Government of the Clergy, and punish those that disobey and refuse to
submit, and this their resolution was ordered to to be registered and Recorded
in the several Courts of Justice.

3. And from time to time the Kings and Queens of England have assumed and
exercised this Power.

1. In general, the whole body and systeme of Ecelesiastical Laws and Canons
are published by the Synod of the Clergy from time to time without any
particular Parliamentary Sanction: And yet have not these Canons their
Authority from the Synod or Clergy met in Convocation. For Canons concluded by
the Province of Canterbury only, cannot (as such) oblige the Clergy of the
Province of York, who had no Representatives or Clerks sitting in that Synod or
Convocation that met Anno 1584. 1597. and 1603. and yet its Canons obliged to
subjection the Archbishop and Clergy of York, as well as those of 1640. where
were the Representatives of both Provinces. It is therefore the ROYAL authority
expressed in the Letters Patents affixed to these Canons that gives them Power,
and they are therefore termed Regiae leges Ecclesiasticae.

2. Instances may be produced of several Injunctions, Advertisements,
Declarations, and other Edicts and Requirements from Sovereign Power by His
Majesty's Predecessors.

You have the Injunctions of Edw. 6. 1547. and Queen Eliz. 1559. with Articles
of Visitation thereunto adjoined. They license Ministers to Preach, suspend
also from Preaching.

Edw. 6. also established a Liturgy or public form of Prayer to be used
throughout the Kingdom.

King James likewise gives faculties, confirms a new body of Lecturers
throughout England, Preachers that were neither Vicars, Parsons, nor Curates.

These Instances although not express of what these Powers have dispensed with or
indulged, yet are pertinent upon this account. What Sovereign Power is thus put
forth in Constitutions, Injunctions, and Directions, etc. in Ecclesiastical
Matters, may in like Proportions be exemplified in Exemptions, Dispensations,
etc. as with Parliaments and other Councels vested with Authority the Power to
repeal Laws and Statutes is as large as that Power by which they Enact and
Establish them. For Example, King James might by his Prerogative confirm and
establish a new order of the Clergy, which was our last instance; he might by
the same Power dispense with and license such Preachers which now seem and are
reputed so to be. And it follows also if his Power will extend to indulge such
persons, it will not prove short in respect to hearers, which are as it were
new in the way of their Assemblies, and indulge such as are not in the Ancient
order of the Parochial Congregations of England.

2. The like Deductions might be drawn from other of those Instances. I shall
notwithstanding for further confirmation, add other instances, and such wherein
you have this Power put forth in dispensing and exempting from what has been
burthensom to men's Consciences by Episcocal Impositions.

1. That of Edw. 6. In the 4th year of his reign, Certain Protestants removing
themselves and Families out of Popish Countries into England for the sake of
Conscience, and being not free to submit to the forms of Worship and Discipline
established in this Church, this good King by his SOLE Authority grants them
the Liberty of such a Church Government and form of worship (whereof we shall
say more in its place) as should be most suitable to their own Persuasion. This
being utterly against the Provision and Settlement NEWLY made by Parliament, He
strengthens his Grant by a NON OBSTANTE to the Statute, and strictly requires
all Bishops and Mayors to suffer them to enjoy this Liberty of Conscience.

2. Another instance you have of the same good King, in Hooper being chosen
Bishop of Gloucester; and there being certain Rites and Ceremonies established
by Act of Parliament to be Conformed unto in the Consecration of Bishops
offensive to his Conscience, Edw. 6. requires Archbishop Cranmer to omit these
Ceremonies, discharging him of all manner of Dangers, Penalties and Forfeitures
he should be in danger of and run into in any manner of way by omitting of the
same, and these our Letters (says the King) shall be your sufficient Warrant
and Discharge therefore.

3. The instance you have also of what was done by Queen Eliz. for relieving
Tender Consciences; namely, Her Majesty being informed that in certain places
in this Realm, sundry of her Subjects called to the Ministry, being induced by
sinister Persuasions, are scrupled about the Form of the Oath, which by an Act
of the late Parliament was prescribed to be taken according to the Form
expressed in the Act under the Penalty of being disabled to bear any Office in
State or Church: Her Majesty was graciously pleased by her Power in
Ecclesiastical Affairs to give and declare such a sense and construction of the
words of this Oath, (expressed in other words much different) for their
satisfaction, with a Gracious Declaration that such Persons fit for the
Ministry as could not take the Oath in the Parliaments Form should be accepted
to do it in this sense, and doing so they should notwithstanding be accepted of
her Majesty as good and obedient Subjects, and be acquitted of all manner of
Penalties contained in the said Act, against such as should refuse the same. By
which means, many an able man had freedom to exercise his Ministry, which
otherwise must be laid aside; which Indulgence of hers although against an ACT of
Parliament, yet was owned as done by lawful Authority, and recognized by the
Parliament 5 Eliz. and her Execution assented to and enacted.

4. This renowned Queen, together with King James and King Charles the First,
confirmed the Indulgence and Dispensation granted by Edw. 6. to Strangers; yea,
although it was a Gravamen to the Bishops, as making an evident breach upon the
Laws of Uniformity: for that 'twas granted not only to the Parents, but to the
Children and Childrens Children, which were Natural Subjects to the Realm,
Persons of great Estates, and Purchasers of Lands, and interessed in the Soil;
the number also of these Congregations increasing, and situated in the eminent
and chief Towns and Cities in the Kingdom, there to live and Profess as
separated and divided Bodies, a Discipline and Worship differing from the
Church of England, which was not at first intended as Bishop Laud complains,
there being only that one in London when the first Grant was made, and such
things were frequently suggested against them. Yet these Princes were
graciously disposed ( notwithstanding the Act for Uniformity) from time to time
to Confirm the Grant of Edward 6th. by several Orders past, some of them formed
as having special respect to such Objections. And it will not be amiss for the
Reader's Information here to insert some of them at least.

The Form in which Queen Elizabeth confirmed their Liberties.
Non ignoramus variis Ecclesiis varios and diversos jam ab initio fuisse ritus
and ceremonias: non contemnimus vestras, neque vos ad nostras cogimus.

King James, Oct. 17. About the Dutch at Colchester.
His Majesty granted their Orders, Liberties, etc. in as large and ample manner
to all intents and purposes as heretofore they have been used, tolerated and
allowed unto them, any Provision or Jurisdiction to the Contrary thereunto in
any wise notwithstanding.

An Order of King James under his Signet, Jan. 13. 1616. on their behalf.
These are therefore to Will and Command all our Courts of Justice, and other
our loving Subjects to permit and suffer the said Strangers and their Children,
etc.

The Order of the Council for the Walloons of Norwich, Oct. 10.1621.
Those of Norwich, tho born in the Kingdom, shall continue to be of the said
Congregation and subject to such Discipline as has been by all the time of 55
years practiced by them.

The Order of King Charles the First, Nov. 13. 1631.
We Will and Command our Judges to permit and suffer the said Strangers and
their Children quietly to enjoy all and singular, etc. without any Trouble,
Arrests or Proceedings by way of information or otherwise.

An Order of Council for the Dutch of Norwich, Jan. 7. 1630.
That all those that now or hereafter shall be Members of the Dutch
Congregation, although born within this Kingdom, shall continue to be of the said
Church so long as his Majesty shall be pleased.

These and diverse the like instances might be produced, which sufficiently
evince it as granted on all sides, and constantly supposed to be according to
the constitution of this Realm, that our Kings and Princes have Power in and
from themselves, as an inherent inseparable Prerogative not only to enjoin and
give Laws to their Subjects in Matters Ecclesiastical, (such as are left to
the ordering of any Civil Power) but also to dispense and exempt from Laws of
that kind, tho established by them in conjunction with the Authority of
Parliament.

Nor do we find that Parliaments at any time have taken into Consideration what
was ordered and done by these Kings; and Princes in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as
being their known Prerogative, no not in the time of King James, who assumed
the most in such managements, nor by any Petitions or Addresses to any of those
Princes (which is usual in the concerns of Civil Rights) for limiting or
enlarging the exercise of their Power in these Matters Ecclesiastical: but
rather recognizing and confirming what has been ordered by them, as in 5 Eliz.
and in Car. 2. in the Act of Uniformity, and many other instances, might be
tendered.

CHAP. IV. Of Objections against this Power, and the exerting thereof, with
Answer thereunto.
THere are Reasonings possibly tending another way; the Objections obvious I
shall now mention; having diverse material Considerations pertinent to a more
full and clear stating this Case, which might have been produced in the body of
this Discourse, but are reserved rather to this place, partly because we find
this vulgar way of DIALOGVE lets in Knowledge with less difficulty; and what is
required by way of a Question, engages him that proposes, with greater
attention to observe what is said in the Answer.

If such a Power be in the King, may it not be thence inferred that be has
Power over the Consciences of Men?

off Restraints, as to the outward Duties which the Law requires, and the
pressing such things upon it as are contrary to its light and dictates. And the
Power which Protects Conscience in its external actions, and takes off all fear
and Impositions from it, is so far from being a Power over the Consciences of
men, that it is a necessary requisite for acting of its own Power in obedience
unto God. Neither, 2. does it follow, that if the King may suspend the
Execution of Ecclesiastical Laws, that in the like cases he may make such
Laws: for the Suspension of Laws belongs to the executive, but the making of
them to the Legislative Power, which are distinct; and in the making of Laws
with Penalties annexed, the Liberties, Estates and Lives of the Subject are
concerned; but in the suspension of those Laws no man is damaged in what is
secured to him.

If such a Prerogative be in the King, what need Ecclesiastical Laws be
transacted and established by Parliament?

Majesty is pleased in these Affairs at any time to take in the Advice and
Assent of his Lords and Commons in Parliament, it does not always evidence His
Majesty's Power as insufficient of it self for such actings. Such a favor may
proceed from a Condescension upon the account of a more popular Acceptance:
that our hands may be fastened more firmly in obedience to those Laws and
Commands in the forming whereof they have been assistant. Take it answered in
His Majesty's own words, Declar. of 26. Dec. 1662. to concur with us in making
some such Act as may enable us to exercise with a more universal satisfaction
that Power of DISPENSING which we conceive to be INHERENT in us, or as also it
is by the abovenamed Learned Judge Hobart expressed. These Statutes and the
like were made (says he) to put things in ordinary form, and to ease the
Sovereign of labor; but not to derogate from his Power.

sufficient in themselves may join, and in such conjunction remain entire as
Powers Cumulative, and not Privative, as is evident from what is said in the
Statute of 31o H. 8. cap. 10. The King's most Excellent Majesty, tho it
appertained to his Prerogative Royal to give Honor as shall seem to his
Wisdom, he is nevertheless pleased and contented for an Order to be had, etc.
by this High Court of Parliament, that it shall be enacted by the Authority of
the same, self-distinct from that capacity wherein he stands in conjunction
with his Subjects as their Head; in that respect being in a higher Region
above, and in a greater distance from those Interests, upon the account whereof
his Subjects are many times divided, and Public Edicts become formed according
to the prevalency of a greater Party, to the prejudice of others which are his
Loyal Subjects. Also by Wisdom and Prudence there is a balance by which the
Tranquillity of a Nation is happily preserved, and one Party not overborn by
the other, having this Power to Mitigate and Dispense (as has been discoursed)
with what in his Wisdom with Advice of his Council shall seem equal.

But has not the King's Prerogative been limited in our Laws? are there not
some things which he cannot dispense with, no not with a non obstante?

Prerogative. 2. In what is malum in se in respect of Impiety or
Unrighteousness. 3. When such Dispensations are destructive to the great ends
of a Commonwealth, common Justice, the Proprieties of men, etc.

1. To the first, His Majesty or any of his Predecessors, has not at any time
in any Statute or Law that concerns these Ecclesiastical Matters by any such
special words bound up himself; but rather the contrary, as in those two Acts
wherein more especially our affair lies; that of Uniformity, where that
Dispensation with that Statute granted to Strangers by sole
Prerogative-Authority, is justified. In the Act. 22o Car. 2. by the Proviso
there inserted, the Parliament seems to induce His Majesty's assent in the
recognizing his Prerogative so expressly in that Act, as if they spoke thus, Tho
this Act be very severe, yet if it be found prejudicial, or not to attain the
end for which we judge such severity to be requisite, It is an Ecclesiastical
Affair, and your Majesty may when you please disperse or exempt Persons from
it, for we intend not to abridge your Royal Prerogative.

2. There is nothing transacted in these Affairs by the Civil Magistrate and as
depending on his Authority, but such Matters as in the sense of our Law are
things materially indifferent, and therefore not mala in se: they do not bind
the Conscience of the Subject in the nature of them considered in themselves [
Queen Eliz. Advertisements 1569. Preface.] The keeping or omitting of a
Ceremony in it self is but a small thing, yet the wilful and contemptuous
transgression and breaking a Common Order, etc. [ of Ceremonies why some are,
etc.] So that these Precepts concerning Ecclesiastical Matters oblige not in
their own Nature, as what is either bonum or malum, but as Prohibited or
Commanded.

3. Civil Rights and Claims and Temporal things only are the immediate and
intrinsic concern and interest of all Commonwealths. Dominium non fundatur in
gratia If the just Claim of a Prince may not be interrupted upon the account he
is of this or that Religion and Persuasion, nor may a Subject be justly
Banished, Imprisoned, Confiscated, or ruined upon the mere account of Religion,
or because his Conscience is not cast into the same mould with the Prince or
present Establishment. It is Popery to deny Allegiance to Prince, or Protection
to a Subject, upon the account of any such difference.

Religion and the Worship of God being the great Concern of a Nation, is not
then to dispense with the Penalties in Ecclesiastical Laws, too great a trust
to be reposed in any one hand?

In Answer, I shall endeavor something to unfold, 1. In what sense Religion is
the Concern of a Nation. 2. The Nature of this Trust. 1. How much Religion,
etc. The moment and weight of a Matter in our Deliberation has its proportion
either as under an absolute or respective Consideration; Wisdom is better than
Riches in it self absolutely, but not in respect to the support of present
life; The knowledge of God and Divine things, is better than to know the virtue
of Drugs and Plants; but not so in respect to the study of Physic. So Religion
and the Worship of God is the chiefest and better part in it self considered,
but in its respective Considerations as to the faculty of a particular Person,
to Community of men for the advance of Civil Affairs, there are other
qualifications and inducements of greater Consequence, and more directly and
immediately tending to the being or well-being thereof.

That there be no mistake in this great Concernment, I further distinguish;
There comes under the Notion of Religion the Holiness and Righteousness that
is of the Moral Law, Principles whereof are in all men's natures, and attended
in their actings by a natural Conscience. 2. Gospel Duties directed and ordered
by a supernatural light, no footsteps or Principles whereof are found in us.
For the former, Religion in that first sense, as the Knowledge of God,
Conscience of an Oath, Justice and Righteousness in our dealings, etc. are such
things wherein the well-being of Kingdoms and Commonwealth is much concerned.
But Religion as it stands in exerting supernatural Principles, and in Duties
termed the Commands of Christ (as the other the Commands of God, Jo. 15.) such
as Faith, Repentance, Sacraments, Discipline, and the like Gospel Ordinances:
In the Duties under these Heads considered, and as distinct from Moral Duties,
there is little or nothing directly and immediately contributed by them to men's
Civil interests, further then where these supernatural Virtues are planted in
men's Minds, the Moral Duties of Piety and Honesty do more plentifully abound
and are in exercise. As those Morals do more immediately concern the
Commonwealth, so the Laws thereof are principally drawn forth out of them,
especially Second-table Duties forming and moulding them into municipal Laws
under Penalties and encouragements greater or less; as in the Wisdom of a State
is judged most conducing to the welfare thereof. For these Gospel-Mysteries
it is otherwise, for as they contribute not to us in our Civil Government
otherwise than as beforementioned; so is there little contributed by the
Wisdom or Authority of any State, advantageous to the Gospel, but Protection or
being a defense upon the Glory.

Bishop Bilson states it well; Princes (says he) command that which Chaist the
Sovereign Lord and Head of the Church commands; which is all the Power we give
to Princes. [Supremacy, page 227.] And in the Page before, By Governors in
Ecclesiastical Matters, we do not mean Moderators, Prescribers, etc. but
Magistrates bearing the Sword to permit and defend that which Christ himself
first ordained and appointed; but to return.

If Adam had stood, all Commonwealths had been prosperous and flourishing, and
yet no Christ, no Faith, Repentance, nor any Gospel Worship known or practiced;
and since the fall, you have had well-governed Kingdoms and States among Turks,
Heathens that never received Christ or Gospel Worship. It is with States as it
is with particular persons in Commerce; another man's Estate, or Trade, or
Credit, or any other Civil concern with whom I have to do, is not prejudiced or
bettered by omission or practice of what is a mere Gospel-Duty. If a man I deal
with be unjust, ly, steal, etc. my worldly interest is prejudiced hereby; but
whether he repent for this, or exercise Faith on Christ for forgiveness, and
humble himself, I am neither gainer nor loser in my Civil concern.

Now it is Gospel Worship and Gospel-Religion we profess in this Nation. If
then the Duties themselves performed are of no greater onsequence in respect to
Persons with whom we converse, or the Civil State where we live; the Modes,
Forms and Ceremonies of such Worship cannot be of such moment or trust in the
manage of them. And let me add, much less can there be any such special
advantage or detriment to our State-Concernments in this or that particular
external form of Worship or Government, that one should be retained by us with
so much Zeal and Contention, and from an alteration whereof we should be so
much deterred; which evidently appears in this: how prosperous and flourishing
has this Nation been in their Civil concerns under Episcopacy, Set Liturgies,
Ceremonies, etc. and as great Prosperity in other Christian States where these
have altogether been disallowed.

Nor is this any dishonor to the Gospel, more than to the Kingdom of Christ,
when it was said not to be of this World, or to his Person or Officers that
they contribute no more to the settling of Civil Rights and Interests, Luke
12.13. or to Gospel-Weapons which being Spiritual, and not Carnal, have no edge
to cut off men's Liberties, Estates or Lives.

2. The Nature of this Trust.

The Laws and Institutes by which these Ecclesiastical Matters are to be
managed, are appointed and established for substance by the Wisdom and
Authority of that one Lawgiver Christ Jesus. The Application of these Laws,
in respect of Circumstances for the well and comfortable enjoying Gospel
Ordinances is all that any Humane Wisdom has to do in them, the trust whereof
may be placed in the hand of a Wife and Prudent Prince.

Again there is Liberty of an after-Judgement to be made by him, that is to
practice in whatever is in the concerns of Religion commanded by men; Thence
such Laws require not such simple and peremptory obedience if conformable to
those rules required in the Word. Obedience thereunto is with respect unto God
as well as Man: if otherwise that then ought to be left to the Subject, which
the Apostles claimed Acts 5.29. Now although Matters of Religion and the
Concernment of it be great things considered in it self, and accordingly is the
trust, yet what of it falls under the hand of a Civil Power, is neither in it
self nor in its trust so great.

Because the greatness of this trust sticks generally in men's minds, especially
when in the disposal thereof it depends upon the will of one man, to remove
this or the like stumbling block, we will suppose failings in the management of
the trust, as great as rationally can be imagined. 1. Suppose his Majesty
should refufe either by himself or Parliament to enjoin any thing of Ceremony
or Circumstance about these Externals, in the Worship and Service of God. Or,
2. Suppose he should dispense with all Injunctions, and leave the People of God
to a full Liberty in the observance of them, and call these high defects and
failings in Conduct and Government; yet the Premises last mentioned being
considered, there can be no great prejudice to the Commonwealth or Civil
Affairs thereby. Distinctly we shall weigh both of them. 1. For the Former; If
the keeping or omitting of a Ceremony in it self considered, is but a small
thing, as was mentioned before, and of such a nature, as although at first of
godly intent and purpose devised, yet at length turned to Vanity and
Superstition, and burdening men's Consciences without cause, etc. as we our
selves acknowledge [See Preface to the Common Prayer Book] and of the same
condition are most of those Impositions which have proved burthensom to the
Nation a long time; I say if so, the not imposing of these things cannot be
prejudicial to Church or State. Not to the Church. If these directions for
Gospel Worship in the external Circumstances of it, were not reduced into
Canons and Injunctions, but left where they are to be taken up in practice
according to the light of the Age, as are Gospel-Duties of greater consequence;
Those Scriptures by which States profess themselves to be guided in forming
these Ecclesiastical Laws are entrusted also in the hands of the
Gospel Ministers, for their conduct and direction in ordering Gospel Affairs;
who have gifts and assistances from it in such a measure and degree as cannot
be expected in the ablest Statesman, as such. And the Ecclesiastical Laws are
never so well ordered by Civil Powers, as when they consult with, and take
advice and directions from the Ministers of the Gospel about them. To advise
new Rites and Ceremonies (says Bishop Bilson) is not the Princes Vocation, but
to receive and allow such as the Scriptures commend, and as the Bishops and
Pastors of the place shall advise [of Suprem. p. 226]

2. If there were no such severe Injunctions about the Forms and Modes of
Gospel Worship. (I speak not of such Duties of Religion in which men's natures
are principled) 1. The Nation would not hereby suffer in respect of its Civil
concerns; but the Wealth and Trade would be much more prosperous, the things
being small in themselves, and do become great only upon the account of their
being enjoined, and the greatness of Penalties annexed, being of great
Concernment to the State; that is, to the great prejudice thereof, as has been
apparent in many years sad Experience. What is it of moment to the
Commonwealth, for the quickening of Trade, keeping up of Rents, etc. or any
particular man's concern as Civil, that men kneel, or not at the Sacrament,
Crossing or not Crossing in Baptism?

2. For the other, as dispensing with all Penalties annexed to Ecclesiastical
Laws; where these Penalties are removed, yet these Laws remain as Councels
and Advertisements, and being consulted by the learned Clergy in their Synods,
and commended, are useful in the Administration of Worship. This is as much as
ever was done by the Apostles, when Churches were in their greatest Purity, who
endeavored not so much to establish an external Uniformity, as to preserve
Christian Liberty.

If it be said, they had then no Christian Magistrates, We say the Kingdom of
Christ must come into a Nation before it be Christian; and if it be so
defective in its first address for want of such Magistrate, and of the means we
put so great an esteem upon for the reducing a People, how will the People ever
become Christian? And on the other side, if the Gospel has a sufficiency in it
self without borrowing, to subdue a Pagan Nation to Christianity, much easier
it is being such to preserve them orderly and regular Christians.

Paul having instructed and councelled, left his People free, and to act by the
Persuasion of their own hearts, Romans 14.5. One man esteems one day above
another, another man esteems every day alike, let every man be persuaded in
his own mind. That was but a Council or Advertisement in the Act for Conformity
in 18 Eliz. given to the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that they
would endeavor to perform their Duties in execution of the Act; it was indeed
very solemn coming from the Queens Majesty, The Lords Temporal, and all the
Commons in the Present Parliament, and in God's Name, and as they will answer
before God, for such Evils and Plagues as may be Punishments for the neglect
hereof. There has been no want of obedience hereunto by the Bishops being
fully persuaded in their hearts thereof, as their Duty, of which if they had
not been so persuaded, the severest Penalties would or ought to have been in
vain. King James orders throughout the Kingdom, that the Afternoons Exercise
each Lord's Day be spent in examining Children in their Catechism instead of
Preaching, this is only commended as the most convenient and laudable way in
teaching of the Church of England, and that such Preachers be most encouraged,
and approved of; and how readily was this immediately practiced throughout the
Nation, and is continued in many places unto this day? In the Establishment of
Uniformity, 2o Edw. 6. a Liberty was left in respect to Ceremonies to practice
or omit them according as men were persuaded in their hearts.

By the Synod held 1640. some Rites and Ceremonies there mentioned were
heartily commended by them to the serious Consideration of all good People as
an ancient and laudable Custom of the Primitive Church in the purest times,
and notwithstanding all this extolling those Rites (which indeed was as much as
can be said for any of our Ceremonies) the Cannon concludes thus, in the
practice or omission of this Rite, we desire that the Rule of Charity
prescribed by the Apostle may be observed, which is that they who use the
Liberty, despise not them which use it not, and they who use it not, condemn
not those that use it. Canon 7. 1640. And this their Council and Commending
has not been in vain, but received and submitted unto throughout, by those who
were so persuaded of these Rites as they have commended them. And so would it
have been in respect of other the Rites of our Church. And the free submission
in practice of a Rite, tho but from a fewer number of Grave and Pious Persons,
would have advanced the esteem of such Ceremonies in the Opinions of others,
much more than the forced submission of greater multitudes.

2. As a further Answer, let us consider the Nature of the Crime with respect
to the Penalties; the Crime as expressed in our Laws is a wilful and obstinate
or contemptuous omission as in 19 Eliz. c. 2o. in the Act for Uniformity, where
these words wilful and obstinate, I would think are not descriptive, and to be
understood reduplicative as an aggravation, and as if all omissions must of
necessity proceed from wilfulness and obstinacy; but distinctive, and to be
understood Specificative, some omissions being from wilfulness and contempt,
but there may be omissions that are not so; and being not so full under the
Penalties, as killing a man, and wilful Murder, etc.

That the words of that Act 1o Eliz. and other Ecclesiastical Edicts would so
be understood, there are these Reasons: 1. We would not suppose this Law, to be
grounded on so hurtful a Principle, as this, that where a difference of
Persuasion in relation to a difficult case of Conscience does arise, that one
Party is always wilful and obstinate. There is not a greater uncharitableness,
and more opposite to that Christian love and Peace we ought to endeavor after.

2. It was not so judged by our Governors in that Age when this Act of
Uniformity (o Eliz.) was established, but a more charitable interpretation of
men's scrupling obedience, as is evident from the relief given to such by Queen
Elizabeth, who by the Advice of her Council put forth a Book of Articles to be
enquired of at the Visitation, and Presentations to be made accordingly: and of
56 in Number; there was not among them one about such Rites and Ceremonies then
established, that were offensive, of purpose as some judge to abate the rigor
of that Act, and other Injunctions, which showed they were not all wilful and
obstinate that could not conform. Some merciful Bishops after this Example
framed their Articles of Enquiry with more Moderation, and diverse Ministers
not fully conforming, enjoyed their ministry under them; The more severe Clergy
observing the Liberty enjoyed more in some Diocesses than others, made this
Provision in the Synod 1640. Can. 9. that for the better settling Uniformity,
there should be but one Book of Visatory Articles, that the more moderate and
indulgent Bishops might not have the forming their own Articles. The moderate
Bishops themselves did not judge that all Nonconformity was to be punished as
from wilfulness; nor would those many Dispensations and Exemptions
beforementioned be granted by our Governors, if they had judged those who
came not up to the Establishment, disobeyed out of obstinacy and contempt; nor
suffer some of them as Queen Elizabeth did to Preach before her in her Chapel.

3. That all Ecclesiastical Transgressions, even in Matters that are little in
themselves, are from wilfulness and obstinacy (which this Act supposes it so
interpreted) is a Maxim in Discipline neither Christ nor Christian Churches
were ever acquainted with. Christ in his Ecclesiastical Proceedings against
Sinners, distinguishes between the Sin in it self considered, and as a Sin
wilfully and obstinately committed, and has appointed means for the discovery
hereof; and if the Sin be of infirmity a different proceed, and a more tender
dealing is appointed, Gal. 6, 7. and not to apply Censures and cuttings off;
but upon obstinacy only. We are willing to believe such is (I am sure ought to
be) the Method of our Process in these Matters, and what appertains to the
Worship and Service of God, professing so frequently as we have done, that we
take the word for our guide in establishing these Ecclesiastical Laws.

4. Our Lawgivers judge the purest Churches those of the Primitive times, were
voluntary Congregations of Believers (as we said before out of Judge Hobart)
submitting themselves to Pastors, as God should move them, no Patrons then
imposing upon them; now there is no voluntary Act to which we are moved, but
such motion is upon the account of something that is real or appearing good.
There is no rational man can voluntarily join and become a Member of a Society
or Congregation in such condition within his participation, which is probable
to be more productive of Evil than of Good; It will be so with us if this Act
be interpreted Reduplicative; that is, whosoever omits a Ceremony does it
obstinately, and shall suffer as such an one. I join voluntarily in hopes to be
edifyed in knowledge and real tenderness of Conscience, and where such
seize are there is a greater aptness to scruple obedience to some one
thing or another enjoined, which if we are ruined and undone first or last (so
severe are the Penalties in the Process of them) whether Ministers or private
Christians, it will not be with a man (as the Apostle says, If he will depart
let him depart) to lose the Privilege upon the account whereof we joined, but
must abide upon the place and look on while all be destroyed: what rational man
upon Election and voluntarily will become one in such a Congregation? and this
is the real and justifyable ground of the Separation, upon the account whereof
many thousands of sober and peaceable Persons have departed not only from our
Communion, but their native Country, for the advantage of that purer and
Primitive Order of voluntary and free Congregations.

5. In the Statute of (1 Eliz) it is not simply refusing or not using the forms
there enjoined, but the doing it wilfully or obstinately, as was said, for that
the keeping or omitting a Ceremony in it self considered is but a small thing
as mentioned before, but when Commanded, etc. I grant Matters very small being
made the Subject of a Penal Law, or being enjoined for State-ends, may thereby
become great; the smaller the matter is in it self, in such a Case, the greater
is the wilfulness in transgressing, and so may justly demerit a great
Punishment. But yet a Matter being small in it self, and as it stands, the
Subject of a Political or Civil Law, the same when it becomes the Matter of an
Ecclesiastical Law ought not to be formed with respect to State ends, or in
ordine ad temporalia, tho it be a small Matter in it self, and as a thing
merely Natural or Moral may notwithstanding be very great upon that account,
and greater to the Person who scruples the lawfulness of it, than the greatest
Penalty that can be incurred by refusal. For there is no Circumstance or
Ceremony that has a constant Station and Place in the Worship of God for any
spiritual and designed end (as ours are) but in their relation thereunto are
great, whatever they are in themselves. These Laws therefore being
Ecclesiastical, wherein God and Men's Consciences are so immediately interested;
the not conforming to them cannot be supposed a true measure to judge of men's
wilfulness or obstinacy: it would be a great reflection upon the Prudence (or
the Charity at least) of our Laws and Injunctions so to interpret them.

If the greatness of the Penalty be laid not upon the Crime materially
considered, but in respect of that evil frame wherein we transgress, God only
is the Searcher of Hearts; and although by Overtures and Circumstances something
may be discovered this way by men, yet it is with great difficulty and
uncertainty, especially when we transgress by omission. The reason is, in
Positive acts done by a man, all the faculties of the Soul are concerned and
exert themselves together at the same time; and in the Circumstances of such
acting, there remain such overtures of such a frame of mind, as a more
permanent and exact counterpart thereof. Omissions there are oftentimes, when
the Soul stands as it were, but half bent; the understanding is not clear, the
will undetermined. In an omission there is nothing of the man left on Record
distinctly to be read and considered of by us; so that we can scarcely so much
as guess from what Principles within an omission does proceed, and the
uncertainty is far the greater when it is notoriously known such omissions may
be from a good intention as well as bad. To be able so far to dive into men's
hearts, as distinctly to discover intentions is a work more suitable to the
Word of God ( Heb. 4.12.) then the Laws of Men; we would not therefore
interpret these Laws in such a sense as to render all omissions to be upon
Principles of wilfulness and obstinacy. It would be more charitable, where so
little evidence can be produced, rather to judge the contrary of our Brethren
and fellow Subjects.

6. This Act of Uniformity, not (we hope) in the intention of it, but in such
an Interpretation, has been the Argument of all our Sufferings. If therefore
that be not the true meaning of the Act intimated in His Majesty's gracious
Declaration, namely, That upon what Principles soever men submit not unto it
(tho from tenderness of Conscience in the greatest Evidence) yet thereupon to
be punished with the loss of their Spiritual Promotions; but if it appears from
Obstinacy and Sedition, that such only should suffer so deeply the addition of
further Pains and Penalties as in that Act inserted, is just and equal: If this
yet be not the meaning of the Act, as it seems by constant Proceedings against
Transgressors of it (for what man was ever relieved in any Court Ecclesiastical
or Civil upon such a Plea, He omitted not such Ceremonies wilfully, but of
Conscience;) I say therefore, if that be not the sense of the Act, yet upon
those Considerations but now mentioned, there is evidence sufficient, that this
gracious Dispensation of His Majesty of such redundant Penalties (and of such a
nature are all the Penalties we are exempted from in that Declaration) is to be
judged of as most necessary, just, prudent and charitable.

His Majesty was persuaded that many multitudes (it is his Expression in
Declaration of December. 26. 1662.) suffered, being ensnared in their Consciences,
and not from wilfulness; and his charitable Opinion seems to be most rationally
grounded upon an Observation of his own. It is evident (says His Majesty) by
the sad Experience of 12 years, there is very little fruit of all those
forceable courses.

The will is a more unsteady Principle, and more easily wrought to a change
upon representation of Good or Evil: But Conscience is more fixed and
incorrigible; it not being in our own Power to alter the dictates thereof. As
to be changed from our Natural State was not in our Power, no more is the
change of our Persuasions in Matters of Duty, Conscience being engaged, Phil.
3.15. but God alone does it. His Majesty therefore wisely judged it would be
less injustice, and better for the Commonwealth, that all such Penalties be
removed and suspended, when the Executions of them have been so constantly
misapplyed, and so much to the prejudice and disquiet of his good Subjects. It
is Righteousness (and not Ceremonies) which establishes a Nation.

If the Penalties of Ecclesiastical Laws be removed, these Laws themselves
become impracticable. And when Men are left to Worship in what Forms they
please, will not that Ancient Establishment of our Uniform Worship and
Government to be the same throughout this Kingdom, be utterly destroyed?

Uniformity in the Worship and Service of God, we find no other in the Apostles
Churches, but what arose from inward Principles freely and naturally; these
Principles being in the same, as where there is the same Seed there will be the
same Blade, Stalk, Leaf, Flower; and there is an Uniformity from external
Impressions, as in a Mould or Seal. These are constrained and forced; the
former is from the Lord, a work of his Power, and there is beauty in it, Psalm.
10. The latter is from Princes and States, wrought by the Power of their Laws
and Penalties, and may have much hypocrisy, but little amiableness. The basest
metal as well as pure Gold will conform to the mould into which it is cast.
Such a Conformity is no safe Character to distinguish who is fit, and who is
not for Ministry or Membership; but the other is of great use in the Churches
of Christ.

As the wicked, who are a seed of evil doers, are uniform in their Practice,
being acted from the same inward Principles, ( Ephesians. 4.17.) so the People of God
being baptized into one Spirit, (1 Cor. 12.) they live in this Spirit, and walk
in this Spirit, (Gal. 5.25) and as in other Duties of Piety and Justice; so in
Church Administrations, where People are in the same mind and Principle, they
will all speak the same thing, although not the same words, in Preaching and
Praying, and Officiating in the Service and Worship of God, tho there be no
external Prescripts or force of Humane Laws to bring men to an exact
conscientious Uniformity in the Externals of Worship and Ceremonies. Where
there are various apprehensions, this is not to be effected by external force,
molesting men in their Liberties and Estates, judging or censuring, or indeed
by any Humane Power. God himself that can do it, and establish men in such an
Uniformity, yet for ends suitable to his Wisdom leaves them various in their
actings in this kind; one man observing a day, or the like Ceremonies, another
observes it not; but mostly standing upon Sincerity in those that doing or
leaving it undone, to the Lord, that is, out of Conscience; and this is the
Apostolical Doctrine in Romans 14.5.

That which we term Uniformity, an exact Identity in words, gestures, and
vestments, Nature seems to teach us an example of a Sinless neglect of. Tho
there be a Conformity in every Vine, and every Fig Tree, and the like works of
Nature, one to another in their kind; yet for the modes and outward form and
shape, you have not two of these that are conformable and growable.

2. Nor can we say, but tho all the Penalties (properly such) annexed to
Ecclesiastical Laws are removed; yet there will remain Provision sufficient
left to keep and preserve men in conformity, and to reduce such (whose
Consciences will permit) as are not so. For as His Majesty on the one hand has
been pleased to assure the Orthodox conformable Clergy that they shall receive
and enjoy the Revenues belonging to the Church of England (the richest, most
plentiful and ample of any Protestant Church in the World) and that no Person
(however dispensed with in other things) shall be exempt from paying his
Tithes, and other Duties whatsoever; so on the other hand, that no Person shall
be capable of holding any Benefice, Living, or Ecclesiastical Dignity or
Preferment of any kind in the Kingdom of England, who is not exactly
Conformable. Such Encouragements are also Privative Penalties, and have brought
and kept more to Conformity than all the Penalties removed by His Majesty's
gracious Declaration.

When was it known that a Bishop, Dean, or double- beneficed Parson, left his
Promotion and became Nonconformist? and that others that have been bred up to
literature at great charge, having Gifts and Parts, would be so peevish as to
refuse them, and being thereupon forced to divert from the way of a more free
Education, to some mean Employment to get a Livelihood, or live upon the
Charity of others, (It is the condition of hundreds this day in England:) I
say, can we imagine any men having such Encouragements in their eye, and the
more desirable from sense of their present indigency, would keep off but from
integrity of heart?

His Majesty, as a Common Father, has the same Affections for all his good
Subjects; and never more Prudence and Tenderness manifested by any Prince than
he has done by this gracious Declaration. One Party, such as conform, enjoy
their Consciences with special advantages in Temporal things. The other, they
also enjoy their Consciences with freedom from those severe Proceedings; and
those are satisfied also. And now let not any man's eye be evil, because His
Majesty has been so good to their Brethren.

Let me say again, that His Majesty has in tenderness and Prudence done a
great work, and that which has lain undone to the disturbance of his good
Subjects more or less ever since the Reformation; That is, in satisfying or
laying a sufficient ground for satisfaction to the two great Parties which
divided the Kingdom in Matters appertaining to Religion; that is in the Forms
and Ceremonies of Worship. (In the Profession of Faith and Articles of
Religion, according to the Establishment 13o Eliz. there is an Union in the
acknowledgment of both Parties.) And this without the least detriment or just
prejudice of either Party: those that conform enjoy their Consciences, employ
their Talents, and reap the Encouragements of the established Government,
without any loss or detriment to those that conform not; and this Party enjoy
their Consciences, freedom from Suffering, and a liberty to follow their
Callings, without the least damage to the Conformist.

Is there any necessity His Majesty should exert a sole Power in Affairs of
Religion, when the Peace and Unity of the Nation was herein undertaken by his
Parliament, and many things endeavored that way by them, and purposes, its
likely, of a further progress therein?

answer, it will be necessary to insert here briefly a Narrative of some
passages of his Majesty and his Parliament in these Proceedings. His Majesty
observing how Affairs stood here in this Kingdom and the Distractions that were
upon men's Minds about Religion and Forms of Worship, and considering there are
but two ways supposed ordinarily to reduce a People again to Peace and Unity in
Religion. 1. Either by Severity to discourage or extirpate. Or, 2. By Lenity
and Indulgence to bear with Dissenters: His Majesty considering those forms and
ways of Worship to which Conformity is now required, have not only been much
scrupled and contended against by Learned and Sober men from the beginning ever
since the first Reformation, but of late utterly disfavoured by a
Representative of the Nation, and a Synod of Learned Men: And that different
practices in the Service and Worship of God, had been formerly Patronized and
encouraged; and such that were no other but what were received and observed in
the best reformed Churches abroad, and by the Dutch and French Churches here at
home; upon these and the like Considerations, His Majesty chose upon great
Deliberation the way of Indulgence, it being also most suitable to his
Conscience, and sweetness of his nature.

This his Resolution he professed to all the World, and engaged himself by
Promise to his People, he would endeavor the effecting thereof; which is more
than evident in the many Declarations he made hereof, and repeated again upon
all occasions. He was pleased in a Declaration from Breda, to assure a Liberty
to Tender Consciences; and that no man shall be disquieted or called in
question for differences of Opinion in Matters of Religion, which do not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.

And in his Speech, July 17. 1660. He professes that he owes his being here to
God's Blessing upon the Intentions and Resolutions he had and expressed in that
Declaration. This Declaration His Majesty afterward terms a Promise solemnly
made. This solemn Declaration or Promise is so much upon his Royal heart, that
he tells both Houses, (July 8. 1661.) That so often as he comes to them he
mentions his Declaration from Breda, that himself as well as they might mind
it. In His Majesty's Declaration of December. 26 1662. He tells us, That he
remembered the very words of the Promises made at Breda, concerning Liberty of
Conscience, and the Confirmations he has made of them since upon several
occasions; and as all these things are fresh in his Memory, so he is still firm
in the resolution of performing them to the full; Feb. 10. 1661. In a Speech to
both Houses, One thing more I hold my self obliged to recommend unto you at
this present, which is, that you would seriously think on some course to beget
a better Union and Composure in the Minds of my Protestant Subjects, in Matters
of Religion; whereby they may be induced to submit quietly to the Government,
and most faithfully give their assistance to the support of it.

His Majesty did not only express his purposes for the Ease of tender
Consciences, but from time to time endeavored it: And first of all, By a
Declaration of the 25 October. 1660. To all his Loving Subjects of England and
Wales, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, which mentioning that from Breda,
DISPENSES with the use of diverse Ceremonies formerly enjoined, that were
offensive. March 25. following, he gave Commission to certain learned Divines
to meet at the Savoy, and take the Service Book under Consideration to the same
purpose. May 11. 1661. he frees from their Imprisonment such as suffered for
Conscience.

The King and His Parliament happily joined in the same Pious End, Peace and
Union; yet differed in their apprehensions of the means to procure it, which
was our great unhappiness. The Parliament judged the reducing or rooting out
differences by severe Penalties, to be the means of Unity in the Church, as
they tell His Majesty in answer to his Declaration; pressing the asserting of
the Laws and Religion established according to the Act of Uniformity, as the
more probable means to produce a settled Peace and Obedience throughout the
Kingdom. The Parliament supposing, (and possibly some of them persuaded thereof
from those who never would distinguish between Nonconformity and Sedition) the
dissent of Nonconformists from the present Establishment to be rather from a
Spirit of Faction and Disloyalty, than tenderness of Conscience, proceeded
accordingly. The Act of Uniformity was renewed, and the Service Book enjoined
with no alteration of what was formerly offensive in it, but some Expressions
of greater difficulty to be digested by those that were tender; and nothing
done yet in what His Majesty had promised in way of relief to tender
Consciences.

Hereupon not only multitudes of faithful Preachers of the Gospel in several
Shires in this Kingdom were put from their Employment; but also the Minds of
men are much disturbed and filled with hard Thoughts and Jealousies upon this
account. Insomuch as His Majesty was enforced to Publish that Declaration of
Dec. 26. In which he expresses the surmises of the People occasioned by this
Severity thus: That having made use of such solemn Promises from Breda, and in
several Declarations since, of Ease and Liberty to tender Consciences; instead
of performing any part of them, we have added straiter Fetters than ever, and
new rocks of Scandal to the scrupulous by the Act of Uniformity. To this
surmise and jealousy, His Majesty condescends to make a reply thus: As
concerning the nonperformance of our Promise, we remember well the very words
of those from Breda, etc. and the Confirmation we have had of them since, upon
several occasions in Parliament, and as all these things are still fresh in our
memory, so are we still firm in the resolution of Performing them to the full.
But it must not be wondered at since that Parliament to which those Promises
were made in relation to an Act, never thought fit to offer us any to that
purpose.

The House of Commons took his Declaration into Consideration, and represented
to His Majesty diverse Objections against it; and laid it aside, so that nothing
was effected thereby to His Majesty's purpose, the Parliament being otherwise
minded. And certainly it is not only their Liberty but Duty, to proceed in
reforming Abuses, by such means as are in their Persuasion most suitable and
likely to be effectual; otherwise they would not be faithful in their trust. So
now greater Severities against Nonconformists are provided in several Acts upon
occasion: As the Act against Private Meetings, 16 Car. 2. The expelling
Ministers five Miles from Borough Towns, 17 Car. 2. Especially that Act of 22
Car. 2. entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles; and
all very high and heavy in the Penalties, expressed both upon Ministers and
People; His Majesty notwithstanding condescended to give his Royal Assent to
that Bill: It being judged this Severity was taken up by them from good
intentions, and as the likeliest means of Peace and Union, as also if it proved
not to be so, that they might yet be more fully convinced of the insufficiency
of such a way, having had hitherto for some years experience how little
effectual it has proved.

Yet this Bill containing nothing for Substance but what was proper to his
Ecclesiastical Power, being an ordering the Externals of the Church, and
nothing of immediate concern in Civil Affairs in the whole Act, and His Majesty
having intentions to take the other course, if this of Severity effected not
what was aimed at, a Proviso is inserted in the Act in these words: Provided
also, that neither this Act, nor any thing contained therein, shall extend to
invalidate or avoid His Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs; but that
His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors may from time to time, and at all times
hereafter exercise and enjoy all Power and Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
as fully and amply as himself or any of his Predecessors have or might have
done the same; any thing in that Act, etc. notwithstanding.

As this Act of 22 Car. 2. was very strict and severe in it self, so the
execution of it was with much violence and rigor in most parts of the Nation;
there being Provision made in it that such as even loose, and indigent Persons
may intrude themselves in the promoting thereof with encouragements, not only
of their lusts satisfied in persecuting those they so much hate, but their
Necessities supplied from large rewards, for the same, having Power given to
inform against Justices, Mayors, Constables, and such who are entrusted with
the Execution hereof, who are under great Fines and Penalties for omissions
limited in this Act, and the Informer to have a moiety hereof himself; insomuch
that by the rigorous execution of it Thousands of His Majesty's good Subjects
were utterly ruined: Persons industrious and diligent in their Callings driven
from their Habitations, their Houses broken open, their Goods imbezziled, the
Materials of their Trade, the Tools they wrought with, and the Beds they lay on
seized, and our Trade every where decayed, Rents of Lands falling, Poverty
coming on like an armed Man, Persons haled from these Meetings for the Worship
of God through the open Streets to Prisons, being of the same Faith with us,
and so peaceable and unblameable in their Conversation, as that nothing could
be objected against them, but in the Matters of their God; nor for any thing
upon that account, but their endeavoring to practice as those reformed
Churches we our selves own as such, and hold a brotherly Communion with as the
true Churches of Christ.

The Nation generally being thus distracted and distressed, those in Power
going on still to make Laws to afflict and punish; and others engaged quietly
to suffer whatsoever they should be exposed to for their Consciences; Matters
being at this pass, there was apparent Necessity that some remedy in the case
should be seriously and speedily applied; His Majesty considering they are all
his Subjects, and how much by such Severity the Interest of his Sovereignty is
narrowed; so great a number of his People rendered unworthy of his Countenance
and Protection, and upon no other account or crime, but their being of
different Persuasion in some Externals of Religion; Persons otherwise wise for
Industry, Faithfulness and Loyalty every way qualified to d^ His Majesty and
their Country as good Service as any others of His Majesty's Subjects whatever.

His Majesty also did call to Mind that Prudent caution which his Royal Father
left him in these words, Take heed (says he) that outward Circumstances and
Formalities in Religion devour not all or the best encouragements of Learning
and Industry, but with an equal Eye and impartial Hand distribute Favors and
Rewards to all Men as you find them for their real goodness both in Ability and
Fidelity worthy and capable of them: This will be sure to gain you the hearts
of the best and most too.

It was likewise impossible for His Majesty to imagine that so mamany thousand
in his observation, who have suffered so grievous things with such humble
submission, should daily thus expose themselves and Families to ruin upon no
other or better Principles than a Spirit of obstinacy and stubbornness. Great
Sufferings, and by great Multitudes, yet no Tumults, no resisting; whereas in
the beginning of the Reformation, what Armies in the North and in the West upon
this account, by those of another Persuasion, were raised, although yet they had
suffered but little?

His Majesty (as was said) as a Common Father bears Affection to all his
Subjects; but who of them deserves it, and who not, can nover be discovered by
this indiscriminating Severity; that is, who are Dissenters upon Principles of
Conscience, and who of them so pretending, are notwithstanding of a Seditious
Spirit: These can never be distinguished one from the other, when Dissenters
and such as conform not, be it upon what ground soever, are all of them equally
branded with the same mark of disloyalty, and so represented to His Majesty,
and all the Nation. There is a necessity that this Pretense of Conscience be
removed, and Seditious Persons discovered and left to condign Punishment, and
others (these stumbling blocks being removed) may, by their peaceable Obedience
to all other His Majesty's Laws, justify and vindicate their Integrity: which
can no ways be done while the Righteous are thus condemned with the Wicked, and
no relaxing those Laws which shut up all, both Guilty and Innocent, under the
same Condemnation.

His Majesty, who has had a clear prospect all along of these things, and
thence publicly declared his avowed readiness in that Proclamation of 10 July,
1669. and otherwise, to indulge tender Consciences, has upon these
aforementioned, and the like weighty Considerations, been necessitated to
Publish this his Gracious DECLARATION of March 15. 1672. where he has fully
performed his Promise made at Breda, and so often repeated. Thus His Majesty,
as a Wife and Prudent Prince, whose Station is fixed in an higher Orb (like the
Sun exhaling and consuming, or serving to refresh, and to show the dark Foggs
and Mists here beneath) has by the Light and Liberty, shining forth from his
gracious Indulgence, refreshed multitudes of his good Subjects, and delivered
them from the dark misapprehensions of others: Nor is this their great relief
in any thing prejudicial, either to the Estates or Liberties of men otherwise
minded; nor are such men abridged in any of their concerns Spiritual or
Temporal hereby. His Majesty has made sufficient Provision for the satisfying
their Consciences, in a careful continuing those Ceremonies and Forms of
Worship they have been accustomed to. Let it not be grievous or offensive to
them that their Brethren have obtained from His Majesty, in respect to their
Consciences, the like favor.

Since these Ecclesiastical Laws of Restraint were Enacted by Parliament, the
King giving his Royal Assent, had it not been convenient, if His Majesty had so
pleased, that the dispensing with these Laws had been by Parliament?

Parliament relating to Ecclesiastical Matters; but did yet nevertheless often
exercise their own Power in dispensing with the Penalties (at least) of such
Laws.

A constant acting with others in the exerting hereof might (tho no
Prescription against the King) yet introduce at least into the Minds of Men a
kind of Suspicion, especially in the Vulgar, that such Proceedings of the
Supreme Majesty by his sole Power to be an assuming an Arbitrary Government.

2. The Parliament did still continue in this their former Opinion and first
Judgment; namely, That a way of Severity was the only means to settle Peace and
Unity. They had newly passed the Act for Uniformity, without any abatement of
what was offensive; by reason whereof arose that general Discontent which
before we have mentioned.

His Majesty being sensible hereof, did by that Declaration of December. 26. move
a second time, That an Act might be prepared, etc. not doubting their cheerful
cooperation with him, being a Matter wherein he conceived himself so much
engaged both in Point of Honor, and in what he owes to the Peace of his
Kingdoms; which we profess, says he, we can never think secure, whilst there
shall be a color left to the malicious and disaffectionate, to inflame the
minds of so many Multitudes upon the score of Conscience, with despair of ever
obtaining any effect of our Promise for their Ease. The House returns this
Answer, We your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, who are now returned to serve in
Parliament, from those several Parts and Places of your Kingdom, for which we
were chosen, do humbly offer to your Majesty's great Wisdom, That it is in no
sort advisable, that there be any Indulgence to such Persons, who presume to
dissent from the Act of Uniformity, and the Religion Established; for these
Reasons, etc. whereof this is one, It will in no wise become the graver Wisdom
of a Parliament to pass a Law at one Session for Uniformity, and at the next
Session (the reason of Uniformity continuing still the same) to Pass another
Law to frustrate or weaken the Execution of the former. So that now His
Majesty, had no other Remedy; but either, 1. To retreat from that Pious and
Seasonable Resolution for Liberty of Conscience expressed in Letters to the
Parliament then sitting from Breda, a Resolution so acceptable to them, as the
whole House, Nemine Contradicente, by Letters returned Thanks to him, and
Blessed the Name of the Lord, who put such reconciling thoughts into the heart
of the King. And he himself likewise owned an especial Blessing from God upon
his Affairs, after he had expressed that intention.

2. Of break that Promise he solemnly made, assuring this Liberty, and had
professed to the world upon this occasion in his Speech, May 8. 1661. That he
valued himself much upon keeping his Word, and whatsoever he promised to his
Subjects, and that no man can be his Friend and wish him well, who would
persuade him to consent to the breach of that solemn Promise.

3. Or leave the Nation under greater Distractions and Sufferings about
Religion then he found it: And that upon 12 years Experience of other means,
which extended rather to increase the Distempers.

These dishonorable things, I say, His Majesty must have suffered and
undergone, or make use of that Power GOD and the NATION have entrusted him
withal, tho not with Concurrence of Parliament so much and so often desired by
him, even so often as he came to them: as he tells them in his Speech, July 8.
1661. yet nothing at any time was done to his Satisfaction in Liberty of
Conscience by the Houses, being obliged in their Judgments to proceed in the
other way.

CHAP. V. Of former Examples for Indulgences.
HIS Majesty's- Gracious Declaration contains not a greater Indulgence, although
it be extended to a greater number of Persons, than what was granted by His
Majesty's Predecessors (which before we have mentioned) to the French and Dutch
Congregations.

1. There was an uniform order of Church Government and Divine Service, to
which not only His majesty's Subjects, but all the Inhabitants in His Majesty's
Dominions were to conform, and no man to absent himself. And were enjoined not
to hear or be present at any other Forms of Prayers and Administration of
Sacraments, then what is in that Book prescribed, under Penalties of
Ecclesiastical Censures, Fines to the King, Poor of the Parish, etc.

2. The Dispensation and Exemption was by the SOLE Authority of the Sovereign,
and stands thus; A Liberty to Separate and Absent themselves from the Parish
Assemblies, and to gather themselves into distinct particular Churches or
Congregations, to choose and ordain their own Ministers; also to establish such
a Church Government or Discipline, and Form of Worship and Divine Service as
they amongst themselves judged to be most conformable to the Scriptures;
Established by His Majesty's Patent, as a Corporation within it self, and
independent upon any Superior Jurisd ction Spiritual but His Majesty; all
Bishops, Mayors, Sheriffs, etc. to protect them, and suffer them quietly to
enjoy and exercise these Liberties, with a NON OBSTANTE.

3. The Grounds and Considerations upon which such Liberty and Exemptions were
granted, were these,

1. The Care of Religion that ought to be in all Christian Princes, and to be
showed forth especially in the relief and encouragement of those that are of
the same Religion, in their Sufferings for Conscience of their Duty toward
God. 2. Persons of the same Religion with us, and Sacraments administered by
them according to the Word of God and Practice of the Apostles, ought to be
tolerated in their way of Worshipping of God, tho they differ from us in
Ceremonies and Discipline. 3. The Kindness we found in other Protestant
Countries, when we were forced to leave our Native Soil for preserving our
Consciences. 4. There were also great Advantages in Matters of Trade from their
Skill-and Industry, to the great benefit of this Nation and prejudice of their
own. Lord Herbert, Hist. H. 8.
The Premises considered, we further say,

1. His Majesty's Protestant Subjects to whom the gracious Indulgence is
extended, are generally of the same Religion with others of his Subjects, and
the present Establishment, in respect to Matters of Faith and Worship; in
external Forms and Ceremonies they are not more differing from the Church of
England, then those Congregations to whom the same Indulgence has been granted
by His Majesty and his Predecessors, and is still enjoyed.

And when these Strangers had removed their Families, and come among us, had
not this gracious Indulgence been granted and continued to them, their
Consciences would have engaged them to depart hence, and seek Habitations where
the like Liberty might be obtained. And this also is our Condition, Many
Hundreds of His Majesty's Subjects with their Families have left their Native
Country, and disposed themselves into other Parts of the World upon the same
account.

2. If it be so grateful a Charity, and deserving so solemn an Acknowledgment,
the kind Entertainment our Subjects have found in other Parts, when not
suffered to live in their own Land upon the account of Conscience, doubtless
it is a greater Charity to be so indulgent to our own, as not by Severity to
enforce them for Conscience to become Strangers in other Countries.

And for Matters of Trade, the Advantages have been great by encouraging those
Strangers. But the Disadvantages in the same kind far greater, from Severity,
by which Native Subjects have been so greatly discouraged, and not only those
hands hang down that were most industrious in upholding the Staple Trade of the
Nation, but by reason Artificers removed into other Parts for their
Consciences, the mysteries of our chiefest Manufactures have been made common,
and others therein equalled, if not exceeded us. A great sense hereof His
Majesty has expressed in his Gracious Declaration.



confirmed by Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the First. English
born, and born Subjects of this Realm, they had fully the same Liberty granted
them as formerly, insomuch as the Persons now enjoying these Privileges, are
his Majesty's Native Subjects.

2. The greatest number of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects that have benefit
by this present Indulgence, have (since they had understanding) been trained up
in and acquainted with no other Forms of Discipline and Worship then what was
found among us at His Majesty's return, the other formerly established having
been for many years totally disused. King James himself being educated under
other Forms when he came into England, scrupled many things in our Liturgy and
Rubricks. Conf. at Hampton Court.

Finally, it is more then a Century of years wherein these Dutch and French
Churches have enjoyed this Indulgence, and there has been much quiet and peace
among themselves, following their Callings without Disturbance, neighbourly and
friendly converse with those that are of different Persuasion in Matters of
Religion, no troublesome Disputings or Reasonings about the same, no Judging or
Despising others*: Experience we have found hereof beyond denial, in London,
Norwich, Canterbury, etc. where diversity of Practices in the Forms of Religion
and Worship are constantly held forth in the view of all men, for so many
years. And why should not we expect the like peaceable and inoffensive converse
mutually between those that enjoy now the like Liberty from this Gracious
Declaration, and others of our Brethren, whose practice is otherwise.

And the Lord who has put this in the King's heart, put it also in the hearts
of our Senators to be like minded with him. And as His Majesty has
condescended to them in their way for the space of these Twelve years (as he
tells them,) so it is to be desired that they, if it may stand with their great
Prudence, would concur with him but half so long in the way himself has
chosen for the Peace and Union of his Subjects in Matters of Religious Worship;
or at least, until there be the like evident Experiments of the ineffectualness
of it.

THE END.

