The Plaintiffs CASE upon an Appeal brought in the House of Lords Against Sir
Peter Fortescu Baronet, and Dame Amy his Wife, Relict, and Executrix of Sir
Peter Courtny, Defendants.
Capt. William Noy Executor of Honor Noy Plaint. in one Bill, Humphrey Sarah
Honor Prudence
Children and Administrators of Francis Noy in the other Bill are Plaintiffs.
THat Phillip Noy the said Francis and William Noys late Father deceased, being
possessed of a Term for 99. years absolute of Lands in Cornwall, worth about 200
l. per annum, made Honor his Relict, and the said Francis his Son Excutors.

That in June 1671. Francis Noy dyed, and Honor as surviving Executor entered
and quietly enjoyed the Lands until her Death, which was in April 1675. having
first made the Plaintiff William Noy her Executor, who entered and enjoyed
quietly, until Sir Peter Courtny brought his Ejectment and obtained Judgment by
default, and got possession whilst the Plantiff William Noy (being an Officer
at Portsmouth) was attending his Majesty's service there, above 200 Miles
distant and knew nothing of it; Whereupon the Plantiff William Noy exhibited
his Bill in Chancery to discover the Defendants Title, and to be relieved
therein.

The Defendants by Answer say, that Sir Peter Courtny August, 4. 1649. and one
Holmes as sureties only became bound with Humphry Noy Esquire; (Attorney General
Noy's Son) to Edward Parker Esquire; in a Bond of 1000 l. for payment of 500 l. and
Interest, and confess he had also a Mortgage from Humphry Noy for further
security thereof; and say.

That Francis Noy one of the said Executors by Deed, dated the 28th of November
1651. in consideration of 50 l. mentioned to be paid, assigned the whole Term
of 99. years to Sir Peter Courtny; And believe this Assignment was made for the
consideration of 50 l. and also to Counter-secure Sir Peter against his bond to
Parker (although in truth no such consideration is mentioned in the Deed, as
concerning its being a Counter-security) and that Parker sued Sir Peter, and
got Judgment against him on the Bond in 1655. And that the Defendant Dame Amy,
as Sir Peter's Executor has been since forced to pay 1000 l. for principal and
Interest, besides costs of Suit to Parker upon this Bond.

That the Plaintiff, William Noyes Cause coming to be heard before the late
Lord Keeper Bridgman in 1672. and the Defendants Council finding his Lordship
to declare the said Assignment could be taken at most to be but a security for
the 50 l. insisted that the Administrator of Francis Noy who aliened the Term
ought to be a party to the Suit, before it could regularly be determined;
Thereupon the Court suspended giving Judgment until Francis Noyes
Administrator was made a party and brought to hearing.

That the Plaintiffs the Children of Francis Noy thereupon took Administration
to their Father, and were made Defendants and Answered William Noyes Bill, and
exhibited their Original Bill against the Defendant Fortescue, and the
Plaintiff William Noy to be releived in case the right to the Estate be
adjudged to belong to them.

That both these Causes coming to be heard before the now Lord Chancellor, his
Lordship was pleased to dismiss, the Plaintiff William Noyes Bill with costs,
which are taxed at 100 l. And as to the Plaintiffs the Childrens Bill directed
an Account, and that unless they should pay all the money paid to Parker with
Interest and costs of Suit in Law, and in Chancery, at such time as the Master
should appoint, their Bill also to stand dismissed.

And the Master has by his Report allowed 934 l. for Interest of the said 500
l. which is Interest upon Interest, and 527 l. for costs of suit, in all 1922
l-3 s-7 d. to be paid by the poor Plaintiffs the Children, in Six Months then
next which they not being able to do, and the time being elapsed the said
Judgments, and dismissions in both Causes are signed and enrolled, and the
Plaintiffs, the Children have nothing left but the Kindness and Charity of
their friends to live upon.

By Order on Hearing, which is enrolled by the Defendants, they are only to
have the money paid to Parker with Interest and Costs, but not the 50 l.
mentioned in the Consideration of the Deeds, this not being proved to be paid,
so they have thereby admitted that point to be adjudged against them, and there
is no proof that the Assignment to Courtny was made to counter-secure him
against the debt to Parker, nor any mention of any such thing in the Deed: And
it appeared the Assignment was not made till two years after Sir Peter became
bound to Parker, nor any consideration or reason why Francis Noy should Counter
secure Sir Peter Courtny against a debt that Francis Noy was no ways concerned
in: But it is confessed by the Defendants Answer, that Humphry Noy gave a
Mortgage (besides the bond) to Parker for the 500 l. and that this Mortgage is
also assigned to the Defendants, who are in the Possession, and receive the
profits thereof; and it is proved that Sir Peter Courtny had half the said
Money borrowed of Parker, and that he and the said Humphry Noy had invited
Francis Noy to one of Humphry Noys Tenants houses, and there kept him up 2 days
and 2 nights drinking, and then when he was disguised with drink, got him to
make this Assignment without any consideration moving thereunto.

Note, 1. That the said Defendants examined one Pascho to prove the said
Assignment to be for Sir Peter's Countersecurity, but he being proved by many
Witnesses to be a man of infamous reputation, and guilty of several felonies,
and to be then a Soldier in the Isle of Silly, at the time of Sealing the said
Deeds, and is no witness thereto, though he swears himself present at sealing
thereof; they the Defendants were ashamed to read his Testimony.

Note, 2. The Case as between the several Plaintiffs is only, whether the
Plaintiff William Noy as Executor of the Surviving Executor, or the other
Plaintiffs the Children as Administrator of the Executor that aliened the said
Term (as the Case is) be entitled in Equity to have the premises in question.

It is therefore humbly hoped, and prayed, that the Dismission of the
Plaintiffs Bill be set aside, and that a Decree be made against the Defendant
to re-convey the Premises so assigned by Francis Noy as abovementioned to such
of the Plaintiffs, as shall appear to have most right to the same, and that the
Defendants deliver up the Deeds, Evidences, and Writings touching the premises
and account for the profits thereof.


