New-Englands Duty and Interest, To be an Habitation of JUSTICE, AND Mountain
of HOLINESS.

Containing Doctrine, Caution and Comfort WITH Something relating to the
RESTAURATIONS, REFORMATIONS and BENEDICTIONS Promised to the Church and World
in the latter days; With grounds of Hope, that America in General, and
New England in Particular, may have a Part therein.

Preached to the General Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, at
the Anniversary ELECTION.

May, 25. School.

By NICHOLAS NOYES, Teacher of the Church at Salem.

Published by Order of Authority.

BOSTON in New England.

Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen. Printers to the Governor and
Council. School.

Isa. 1. v. 26. -- Afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness,
the faithful City. Luke 1. v. 75 In Holiness and Righteousness before Him all
the days of our Life. 2 Pet. 1.20. Knowing this first, that no Prophesy of the
Scripture is of any Private Interpretation. Psalm 86.9. All Nations whom Thou
have made shall come and worship before Thee, O Lord. Si est Gens quam non
fecit Deus, Non adorabit eum, nulla est autem Gens, quam non fecit Deus, quia
fontem omnium Gentium Adam and Evam fecit Deus, Omnes ergo Gentes fecit Deus;
Omnes ergo Gentes venient and adorabunt. Augustine. in locum. Psalm 100. v. 1.
Make a Joyful noise unto the Lord all ye Lands. Jam jubilat Domino universa
Terra; et Quod adhuc non jubilat, Jubilabit. Augustine. in locum. The Epistle
Dedicatory. To His EXCELLENCY RICHARD Earl of Bellomont, AND Lord COOTE
Colooney, in the Kingdom of Ireland. GOVERNOR Of New England, New York, New
Hampshire; and Vice Admiral of those Seas.
May it Please Your Excellency!
IT is recorded in the Holy Scriptures, that the Gospel of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, though it was of great importance and concernment to all People;
yet it pleased God that it should by one of the Evangelists be directed in a
special manner to a single Person, called the most Excellent Theophilus, as in
Luke 1.6. I write unto thee most excellent Theophilus, that thou may know
the certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed. Theophilus
signifies, A lover of God. It is conceived by learned and pious Interpreters to
be the proper Name of an Eminent Person, who had been Converted to the
Christian Faith at Antioch, where the followers of Christ were first called
Christians; and the title [Most Excellent] given to him renders it very
probable, that he was in a chief place of Magistracy in that eminent City, if
not Governor of the whole Province; for we read not of that style [Most
Excellent] given to any but such as were Governors of Provinces, such as
Faelix and Festus, who were successively Governors of Judea, as in Act. 23.25.
Claudius Lysias, to the most Excellent Governor Faelix etc. So, why might not
this Theophilus be Governor of Syria? by the special Providence of God raised
up to such a Dignity, that by the influence of his Example and Authority he
might be a means under God for the Propagation and Progression of Christianity
unto many others.

In like manner this Ensuing Sermon containing one great end of the Gospel of
Christ, viz. That all Christians should Serve the Lord in Holiness and
Righteousness before Him all the days of our lives, Luke 1.75. It is now
presented to Your, Self as to our most Excellent Theophilus in concurrence with
all New England, bowing down themselves before You as to our Governor sent
from God and the King. We give thanks to God for Your safe Arrival; Per varios
Casus, Per tot discrimina rerum.

Now as God has been with those Worthy men, whom He has graciously vouchsafed
to bestow on this People, to bear Rule over them; particularly, the Honorable
William Stoughton Esquire. Lieutenant Governor, and our Worthy Patriots assisting
in Council; whose Integrity we cannot but remember at all times with Gratitude:
So we pray for Gods gracious Presence with Your Excellency, and His more
abundant Blessing upon Your Person and Government, that the end thereof may be
attained; that this People may live a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness
and Honesty. The good report of Your Personal qualifications, Your Public
appearing for Securing of the Liberties of our dear England, and Your good
beginnings of Reformation at New York (where You first landed) have filled our
hopes and raised our Expectations, that You are sent from God, and are coming
amongst us in the Spirit and Power of that Excellent Governor Nehemiah, of
whom it was said, He was a man that came to seek the Welfare of the Children of
Israel, Neh. 2 10. W^^ch was a grief to their Enemies, but matter of great
rejoicing to that good People in their afflicted and low condition.

This People of New England are a People whom God has Signally owned and
blessed in our first and former times; our Fathers coming into these ends of
the Earth not upon any Worldly design, but merely on the account of Religion;
they had much of the gracious Presence of God with them in their Planting and
Building Work, and in laying the Foundations in Church and Common wealth, and
in the additional blessings of Heaven and Earth, and Sea and Land; So that from
a day of small things, New England in a few years was grown up to be a thriving
and flourishing Plantation: But alas, we their Successors have not answered the
Lords Expectation, or our own Profession, but as we have been multiplied and
increased, so we have Sinned, and provoked the Lord to anger against us, so
that of late years He has Severely witnessed against us by the variety of His
Judgments in a Successive way, and for a long time; So that we are at present
an Afflicted and poor People, greatly diminished, impoverished and brought very
low, through Oppression, Affliction and Sorrow: as it is in Psalm. 107. from v.
33 to 42. And as yet it was said of the People of Israel, when they were in a
distressed condition, that the Lord gave them Saviors, Neh. 9.27. And with
respect unto the latter days it is foretold, That Saviors shall come up on
Mount Sion, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords, Obad. the last v. This has
been frequently done in these latter times in some degree as might be showed in
many instances; it may Suffice to mention Your Grandfather of blessed Memory,
who was raised up under God with an Heroic Spirit to be the Savior of
Ireland, in the day of their distress in 1641. and we hope in God that He has
sent Your Self amongst us as a Savior to New England, bringing with You an
Olive Branch of PEACE, as a good Omen, that the deluge of our Calamities is
abated, and our hopes increased, that yet New England may live in the sight of
God; and that under the Shadow of Your Government we may yet be revived, and
the work of God amongst us be renewed by degrees unto a more flourishing
Condition than hitherto; that it may be said, the Lord bless thee O Habitation
of Justice and Mountain of Holiness; which is the Subject matter of the
following Sermon.

This Elaborate and Pious Discourse of my Reverend Brother and Colleague in the
Work of the Ministry here at Salem, was Preached at Boston on the Anniversary
day of Election, according to our Custom from the beginning: He was called to
this Service by the Honorable the Lieutenant Governor and Council; and the
Publishing of it was Desired and Ordered by the General Court. There is
something in the Text Prophetical and something Didactical. It is agreed upon
by all Sober Divines and Christians, that we are not to expect a full
understanding of the Prophecies until they be fulfilled, and that there may be
a gradual and partial fulfilling of sundry Prophecies at several times; and yet
some special Time be intended for the eminent and full accomplishment of them:
Also, that not the Prophecies but the Precepts of Scripture are to be the Rule
of our Actions. It belongs to God to fulfill with His Hand what He has spoken
with His Mouth, and that in the times and by the ways and means which are known
unto Him, but unknown to us; it belongs to us to observe His Commandments
concerning our present duties, whatever the case be, leaving all future Events
to God. Deuteronomy. 29 29. Yet are Prophesies a ground of our Faith, Hope and Prayer,
relating to their Accomplishment: and so far Prophesies are doctrinal, Dan. 9
2, 3. And it is the doctrinal part of the Scriptures that mainly concerns us to
direct us in all cases in the way of our duty to God and men, as the Reverend
Author according to the Wisdom and Grace given unto him, has declared unto us
with much Evidence from Scripture light. Hence it is without question the duty
of the Church and People of God to be an Habitation of Justice and Mountain of
Holiness, at all times and in all places of the World: and because God has
foretold and p omised that it shall be Eminently and Conspicuously so at some
times and in some places in these last days that are come and coming upon the
World, therefore we are to aim at it and endeavor after it, in all the ways
of our duty, that it may be so with us in that measure as the Lord shall please
to grant the same unto us; for it is certain, so far as we attain thereunto we
shall be a People blessed of the Lord: For these two, Holiness toward God, and
Righteousness toward men, are like unto the two Pillars in the Temple of God
Jachin and Boaz, which did signify the Strength and Establishment of the
welfare of the Church and People of God, while they continue in the Righteous
and Holy ways of the blessed God.

This duty of endeavoring that New England may be an Habitation of Justice and
Mountain of Holiness, though it is incumbent upon all, yet it is in a special
manner committed to and betrusted with Your EXCELLENCY according to that High
Station which GOD and the KING have set You in: and then it is required of all
orders and ranks of men; both Magistrates, Ministers and People (every one in
their own place) that they move regularly in concurrence with Your Lordship in
all things that may conduce unto that end: Though it may be SIR, You may
sometimes meet with difficulties in Your way, and find things amiss that cannot
presently be amended. So did Solomon, who though he was the wisest of Kings
with a most prudent Council, and a morigerous People; yet out of his Experience
he informs us, that which was wanting could not be numbered, or that which was
crooked could not be made straight: and therefore he gives this advice to
others, Consider the work of God, for who can make that straight which He has
made crooked. Eccl. 7.13. And therefore it will be no wonder if You should find
it so. Yet let me tell You from the Word of the Lord, that the same
Encouragement which the Lord gave unto Joshua, for the Substance and Scope of
it, belongs unto any of His Servants whom He sets in the place of Government
over His People, viz Be thou Strong and of good Courage in observing all the
Commandments of God, so shall thou make thy way prosperous and thou shall have
good Success, for I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, says the Lord.
Josh. 1 from v 5. to v. 10. compared with Heb. 13.5. And when it may be said in
any difficult case wherein there is duty to be done, Arise for this matter
belongs unto thee (as it was said unto Ezra, Chap. 10.4.) I hope in God it
will also be said by all this People (as it was then expressed by some in the
Name of the rest) We also will be with thee, viz. That You will have the Hearts
and Prayers and endeavors, of all the good People of the Land with You in
whatsoever may have a tendency to the making of this our New England, to be an
Habitation of Justice and Mountain of Holiness; the Lord grant that it may be
so.

Finally, being Old and full of days, having se^n all that the Lord has done
for New England, and all the Changes of Times that have passed over it from the
beginning unto this day: and now waiting daily for my own great Change, I
cannot but express my hearts doing and pra^er to God for New England, Return O
Lord, graciously Return to the many thousands of NEW ENGLAND, and cause thy,
Face to Shine upon it, and give unto this thy People a Heart to be continually
returning to thee, and keeping thy Commandments, that thou may make them and
keep them to be for ever, an Habitation of Righteousness and Mountain of
Holiness, blessed of the Lord: And for Your Person. That the God and Father of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST would Bless You with all Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal
Blessings in Christ Jesus, and in relation to Your Government, that He would
pour down His Spirit upon You, and make You a Minister of God for good unto
this People, and give You to be like unto David, who led and fed the People in
the integrity of his heart, and by the skilfullness of his hands; and like unto
Solomon, of whom it is said, in Psalm. 72. In his days the Righteous did
flourish, the Mountains did bring Peace to the People, and the little hills by
Righteousness, and there was abundance of Peace. That in after times it may be
said, Because the Lord loved this People therefore He set Your Lord-ship over
them; and that You left New England better than You found it: And so the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with Your Spirit for ever, AMEN.

YOUR EXCELLENCIES Most Humble Servant in the Work of the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST, John Higginson. Pastor of the Church of Salem. Aetatis. 82.
Salem, June 20. School.
New-Englands Duty and Interest, To be an Habitation of JUSTICE, AND Mountain
of HOLINESS.
JERE. 31.23. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, as yet they
shall use this Speech in the Land of Judah, and in the Cities thereof, when I
shall bring again their Captivity, The Lord bless thee O Habitation of Justice,
and Mountain of Holiness.


WE are here presented with a comfortable Vision in the Prophesies of Jeremiah,
the man who for the most part was filled wi^h bitterness, and had his Pen
dipped in waters of Gall, that like a Comet foretold the fates of Kings and
Kingdoms, that denounced Sword, Famine, Pestilence, Captivity, and such like
Judgments against Judah, for their Apostasy, Impi^t^, Iniquity, Impenitency,
and Incorrigibleness, and made the Cup of Divine Fury to go round among the
Nations, he has now and then a little sweetning put into his mouth, for his
own and the Churches Consolation: accordingly in this, and the foregoing
Chapter he comes with milk and honey in his mouth, and treats Prophetically of
the Restoration of the Jews, the Coming and Kingdom of the Messiah, the
manifestation of the New Covenant, the Gathering and Enlarging of the Catholic
Church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles, with all the happy turns, and returns
of the Church of God in general, and of the Jews in particular, till the time
come, that they shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever. But
I confine my self to my Text. The words read contain a Prophecy, with its
Preface: the Prophecy is in these words, as yet they shall use this Speech in
the Land of Judah, and in the Cities thereof, when I shall bring again their
Captivity, The Lord bless thee O Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of
Holiness. I call this a Prophecy because the matter and scope are especially
Prophetical, yet are there Doctrinal and Historical Hints evident enough in
them, if we consider what is implied, as well as what is expressed; and it
serves our occasion to improve what is Doctrinal, and Historical in them, as
well as what is Prophetical. Let us therefore look over the words again, and
search out the Contents more diligently and distinctly.

1. And then we shall find that these words show forth historically what the
Land of Judea, and more especially Jerusalem, formerly had been, viz. a
Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness.

2. That then they were saluted by men, and blessed of God.

3. That at the time when this Prophecy was written, they were far from being
a Habitation of Justice, or Mountain of Holiness.

4. And that they were as far from being blessed of God and man, as they were
from being a Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness. These four
particulars result from the word (as yet) or yet again, as some read it, for
the particle yet notes not a continuation of something in being, but a
restoration of something that formerly had been in being, but now for some
time had been intermitted.

2. These words show forth doctrinally, what Judea and Jerusalem always should
have been, viz. a Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness. For if while
they were holy and righteous, they were happy and prosperous; and upon their
Degeneration their felicity departed, and woeful miseries ensued; and were like
to continue till their reformation, no doubt in point of duty, they ought
always to have been a Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holin L.

3. These words as they are Prophetical, are also Promissory, they contain a
threefold promise.

1. The promise of a Happy Restoration from their Captivity, in these words,
When I shall bring again their Captivity, that is, their Captives; the Abstract
being put for the Concrete, the Dutch Translation has it, when I shall turn
away their Captivity, the sense is the same with that v. 16. they shall come
again from the Land of the Enemy.

2. The promise of a Holy Reformation of the Jews from their present Impiety
and Iniquity. For when it is said, they shall use this Speech, O Habitation of
Justice, and Mountain of Holiness; it means this Speech shall be duly and truly
used. Jerusalem should not only be called, but really and truly be, what men
shall call her; the phrase is of like import with that, Isa. 48.8. wast called
a transgressor from the womb, that is truly so called, for thou wast a
Transgressor from the womb; so for Peacemakers to be Called the Children of
God, means they shall be so, Mat. 5.9. From the Speech then we may infer, God
promised that Religion and Righteousness should flourish again in the Land of
Judah, and in the Cities thereof.

3. The promise of a Divine Benediction; men should wish it them, and God would
give it them, they shall yet again use this Speech, the Lord bless thee, which
is the instituted form of Blessing contracted; and it intends, that as for
their Sins God had made them a Curse, even to a proverb of reproach and
de^ision, acco^ding as God had threatened them. Deuteronomy. 28.37. so now on the
contrary, ^t should be obse^ved, that they were again in favor wi^h God, and
that he had blessed them, and did and would bless them; and thence men would be
encouraged to bless them in the name of the Lord, or pray to God to bless them;
and that more than man's blessing of them is here intended, is evident by what
follows; for in the sequel, God plainly promised Temporal and Spiritual
Blessings to them, so v. 24 there shall d^ell in Judah, and all the Cities
thereof, Husband men, and they that go forth with flocks: that is, they shall
have peace and plenty. v. 25. I have satiated the weary Soul, and I have
replenished every sorrowful Soul; that is, I will as surely do it as if it were
done already. v. 28. I will watch over them to build and to plant. v. 33. I
will put my Law in their inward parts, I will be their God, and they shall be
my people. v. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and rem mber their Sin no
more. It is manifest by the premises, that the Prophecy and threefold Promise
is not intended so much of what men should say, but of what God would DO for
his people, viz. Restore, Reform, and Bless them. So much may serve to explain
the Prophesy, and what is contained in it. The preface renders the whole
credible, the Doctrine must needs be good, and the History certain; and the
promise and prophesy past all peradventure. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the
God of Israel: The Divine Veracity, Omnipotency and Covenant benignity of God
engages, and stands engaged for the performance of what is promised, and it is
flat Infidelity, not to believe it; for God wants neither power nor good will
to effect what he has promised. So you have the Text explained as it primarily
and nextly stood related to the Jews, before the Coming of Christ; but the Jews
may moreover be considered as a Prophetical Type of the Christian Church in the
times of the Messiah, which times are related to in the very foregoing verse, A
Woman shall compass a man; and this is prefaced with, The Lord has created a
new thing in the earth, a new thing indeed; for a Woman to be both a Mother and
a Virgin at the same time; a new thing in deed, for a Woman to be the Mother of
him that was God, though not of the God Head, yet of the Humane Nature received
into Personal Union with the Son of God. A woman shall compass a man, viz. the
man of Gods Right Hand, for whose sake Redemption should come, and with it
Restoration, Reformation, and Divine Benediction, not only to the Jews, but
also to the Gentiles; for God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself,
not imputing to them their trespasses; and some of the Blessings promised, were
the manifestation of the New Covenant, the Gathering and Enlarging the
Catholic Church, writing the Law in the heart etc. which the Apostle to the
Hebrews refers to Gospel times. Heb. 8 10, 11.12. And the whole by way of
Analogy and just accommodotion may be referred to Kingdoms, Countries and
Places, Nations professing the Christian Religion; thus the New Testament
teaches us to in^erpret, accommodate and apply to our selves, Texts of the Old
Testament. See Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime were
written for our Learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. So 1 Co. 10.11. Now all these things happened unto
them for ensamples, and are written for our instruction on whom the ends of the
world are come So also 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in righteousness. Thus having showed how this text that nextly
concerned the Jews comes to affect us, and concern these last ages of the
professing world: I shall only for further Explication of the Text, show what
intended by Justice, what by a Habitation of Justice, and then what by
Holiness, and what by a Mountain of Holiness; and then proceed to give you the
Doctrines.

Q. What intended by Justice?

A. Sometimes it is more strictly taken for that political virtue whereby such
as are in Authority punish evil doers, and praise and justify them that do
well, and that this sense is herein comprehended is without doubt: but yet it
is intended in a more large sense in this text, for here it is joined with
holiness, and yet distinguished from it; and when it is so, it is taken for
conformity to the second Table of the Decalogue, or six last Commandments: the
word rendered Justice, might as well be rendered Righteousness, they are
Synonimous: and so the same word in the text rendered Justice, is in many other
texts, rendered Righteousness. See Isa. 1.26. Afterward thou shall be called the
City of Righteousness.

Q. What intended by Habitation of Justice, or Righteousness?

A. By Habitation of Righteousness is intended, a City or place that abounds in
Righteousness and excels in it, or that is full of righteous persons: the
Abstract being put for the Concrete: Compare it with Isa. 1.21. It was full of
Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it; that is, Equity, Honesty, Charity,
Chastity, Truth and Justice were not as Strangers in Jerusalem, but
Inhabitants; they dwelt in the Temple, in the Courts, in the Gates, in the
Streets, in their Houses, in their Shops, and in all their converse and
commerce. And of the New Heaven and the New Earth, it is said, Righteousness
shall dwell therein; that is, be not only resident, but eminent, prevalent,
permanent and a^^^dant.

Q. What intended by Holiness?

A. Some times it is taken in so large a sense as to comprehend in it
conformity to the whole Decalogue, but when it is joined with and yet
distinguished from righteousness, it intends conformity to the first Table of
the Law, or four first Commandments: and with respect to the Holiness and
Righteousness mentioned in the text; once for all for preventing mistake, I
declare I intend not only that which is commonly called Morality, but
conformity to the whole Doctrine which is according to Godliness, and that
Obedience to which men are Created in Christ Jesus, and that Grace which men
derive from him through the holy Spirit in Regeneration and Sanctification,
whereby they are enabled to live to God and serve him in Holiness and
Righteousness.

Q What intended by a Mountain of Holiness?

A. As it respect Jerusalem, it means that it should regain its ancient
purity, and be as renowned for Holiness as ever it was; that had not only been
beautiful for its Situation, but for its Sanctification wherein not only Holy
men had dwelt, but the Holy God; there was the holy Temple, the holy Oracle,
the holy Ordinances and holy Assemblies, the beauty of holiness, the habitation
of Gods holiness, the Throne of his holiness, the Courts of his holiness, and
where his anointed ones ministered unto him, something like as the Angels do in
Heaven; it was a Comparative Heaven for holiness, and a Type of the real
Heaven; it had been so, and should be so again. When it is applied to Christian
Countries, it means that they should abound in holiness, and excel other places
therein, as much as Judea did other lands, and Jerusalem did other Cities in
the day that they were Holiness to the Lord So you have the meaning of the
Text, and its words and phrases, both in the literal sense as it nextly
concerned the Jews, and also in its Analogical sense, as it concerns Christians
of all Kingdoms and Plantations to the end of the world. We come now to the
Doctrines that result from the Text thus explained, which are three. The first
from the doctrinal hints in the Text: the second from the historical hints: the
third from the Text as it is a Prophesy.

DOCT. I. That it is the duty of all People or Places professing the Christian
Religion, to abound and excel in Holiness and Righteousness: or to be an
Habitation of Righteousness, and Mountain of Holiness.

DOCT. II. That such People and Places as profess the Christian Religion, may
expect to be Happy or Miserable, according as it goes with them, as to
Holiness and Righteousness.

DOCT. III. That although Places that have been Habitations of Righteousness
and Mountains of Holiness, should become very degenerate, and for their Sin be
made very desolate; yet there is ground of hope that God will again Restore,
Reform and Bless them.

The first DOCTRINE Confirmed by Reasons.

Reason. 1. Because the Moral Law obliges all mankind to holiness and
righteousness, from the beginning of the world to the end of it: for it was no
ways suitable to the Wisdom and Holiness of God to make man a rational
Creature, which is a cause by counsel of his own actions, and so capable of
honoring or dishonouring, of ob^ying or disobeying him that made him, and then
leave it to his liberty, whether he would own and honor his maker, yea or no;
whether he would worship God according to his Institution, or his own, or
another invention. Can it be imagined, that the most wise and holy God would
leave it Arbitrary to men, whether they would sanctify the Great and Dreadful
Name of God, or profane it by Blasphemy, Perjury or Irreverence in his
Worship? Could special worship be due from man to God, and yet no set Time be
appointed by God for it, and separated and so sanctified for that holy end and
use? and when God had by his own Example and Revelation of his will notifyed
what proportion of time for his peculiar Service, was best pleasing to him and
most proper for us: could it be any ways suitable to the Wisdom, Holiness and
Majesty of God to Submit to the pleasure and humor of man, whether he would
religiously observe it, yea or no? Thus it is and could be no otherwise with
man, relating to the first and great Commandment, and there is a second like to
it, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: Man must of necessity be obliged
by this also, seeing we have all on Father; one God made us and made us capable
of being beneficial, or mischievous to our self and one another. It is
determined by our make as well as our Maker, that although all duty was
ultimately owing to God, yet some was nextly owing to our selves and
neighbors: That we who were bound to Love God superlatively for his own sake,
should be bound to love our selves, and our neighbors in Subordination to God
and for his sake. If God had intended, to have sent out man into the world like
the wild Ass free, he would have made him like him: but seeing he made man
after his own Image in holiness and righteousness, he must needs be obliged to
live according to it. Seeing man was made by God and like God, and for God; it
must of necessity be man's duty to live to God and like God: and seeing that the
Moral Law bears the Image of Gods holiness and righteousness, it must needs be
immutable; and till man cease to be Gods Creature, or God cease to be holy
and righteous (which can never be) man's obligation to be holy and righteous, is
as sacred and inviolable as ever; and if no People or place can either fairly
or safely pretend to exemption from the Moral Law, least of all may Christian
Plantations or Countries.

Reason 2. Although the Primitive Apostasy has many ways mortifyed man's
ability to keep the Law, yet it has no ways nullifyed the Laws-authority, or
man's duty. God is God still, as holy and righteous as ever he was, and man is
as much Gods Creature as ever he was; Gods due therefore and our duty as to
holiness and righteousness is the same, and no just exemption or dispensation
can be pretended by any, and least of all by Christians, who are in part
recovered to the Image of God, and have his Law written on their hearts.

Reason 3. From Adam to Moses mankind was held under the direction and
authority of this Law, and although the Covenant of Grace was some way
dispensed though darkly, whereby it appeared that some were exempt from the
Curse of the law, yet was there not the least intimation that any were released
from under the Obligation of it to Obedience. Paul in Romans 5.13. proves
indisputably that the Law was in the world before the Sinai-Promulgation of it,
and the History of Cain, Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, etc. offer irrefragable proof
that God insisted on holiness and righteousness in the old world; though the
old world was destroyed, yet was not the old law abolished: the New world was
equally obliged to holiness and righteousness, if not more, seeing they had
seen one day of Judgment, and the flood come upon the ungodly and unrighteous,
2 Pet. 2.5. Job 22.15, 16, 17. Have thou marked the old way which wicked men
have trodden? whose foundation was over flown with a flood etc. Though the
Language of man was confounded, yet was not the Law confounded at Babel, nor
did the Abrahamitical Covenant, or Gospel as Preached to Abraham discharge him
or his Posterity from the Authority of the Law, requiring holiness and
righteousness: as the History of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and his Posterity
shows.

Reason 4. The peculiar Covenant which God made with the Jews of which Moses
was Mediator, did make them a people nearer and dearer to God than other
people, but did no ways free them from Obligation to holiness and
righteousness; nay it was far from it: as is evident by the fresh promulgation
of the Law, by Gods own Voice, and the engraving it in Tables of Stone by his
own Finger, and the alluring motives to Obedience, viz. the Promises and the
Coercive Sanctions of the Law, viz. the threatenings, and their own personal
obliging themselves to very exact obedience. So far was the law of holiness and
righteousness, from being abrogated, that the Jews had it re-enforced upon them
with new motives from Law and Gratitude, and the judicial proceedings of God
with that people leave it past dispute.

Reason 5. The Gospel does no ways relax the authority of the Royal Law, as it
is a rule of holy and righteous living Our Savior says, Think not that I am
come to destroy the Law; implying that licentious men would be apt to think so,
and pretend Gospel for the transgressions of the Law. See Math. 5.17. Our
Savior asserts the very contrary, that he did not come to destroy it, but to
fulfill it; he humbled himself to be made under the Law, and he honored the
Law by yielding perfect Obedience to it, when we had dishonored the Law, by
disobeying of it. Zacharias his triumph in the prospect of Christ was that we
might serve God in holiness and righteousness all our days without fear, (that
is, without servile and tormenting fear) not without that which is filial, and
reverential, Luke 1.74, 75. And Paul being become a Christian did not account
himself without law, but under the law to Christ, and exercised himself to keep
a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward men. 1 Cor. 9.21. Act.
24.16. Paul was an eminent Minister of Jesus Christ, and Preached the
unsearchable riches of Christ, and yet declares to the Romans, that the wrath
of God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men. Romans 1.18. and in many other texts to the same effect: So that if the
Apostle say less by way of motive from temporal rewards and punishments, it is
partly because that is said already under the old Testament, which is still in
use and force, as to holiness and righteousness; and because that
praetermission is abundantly recompensed, by the frequent mention of eternal
rewards and punishments. 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.

Reason 6. The Christian Profession lays a special obligation on such
professing people to excel in holiness and righteousness. Because they profess
they take the holy and righteous God for their God, and Jesus Christ the
righteous for their Lord and Savior, and devote themselves to him: and by
Baptism, like an Oath of Allegiance, oblige themselves to imitate and obey him,
and constantly to pray to be Renewed after his Image in holiness and
righteousness; and profess themselves moved to holiness and righteousness, by
the Spirit of Christ, the Grace of Christ, the Law of Christ, the Love of
Christ, the Example of Christ, the Name and Honor of Christ, and by the hopes
and fears of the unseen future and eternal World. You have the proof of the
first Doctrine. I proceed to illustrate and confirm the second Doctrine.

DOCT. II. That such People and Places as profess the Christian Religion, may
expect to be Happy or Miserable, according as it goes with them, as to
Holiness and Righteousness.

The weight of it bears upon these four Pillars.

1. That Judea and Jerusalem had formerly not only been called, but had been an
Habitation of Righteousness, and a Mountain of Holiness; and that then they
were Saluted of men, loved, esteemed and prayed for by men, and Blessed by God;
that thus it was once, is evident. Jer. 2.3. Israel was holiness to the Lord,
that is, very holy, the first fruits of his increase: that is, they were
Consecrated to God, as the first fruits of mankind; they were holy to God and
his Service, and not to be devoured by Strangers, but at their peril. In the
Love of their Espousals they followed the Lord into the Wilderness, like to
what is prophesyed of the One hundred forty four-thousand. Rev. 14.1. They
appeared on Mount Sion with the Lamb, and have his fathers name written on
their foreheads: and for purity of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Manners,
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Jerusalem had been a very faithful City,
true to God and his Worship, free from the unchaste embraces of Idolatry and
Superstition, neither was she then polluted with the profanation of holy
things or time. It had also abounded and excelled in righteousness: it was full
of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it. Isa. 1.21. If you had looked for
Charity, Equity Honesty, Verity and fair Dealing, yea Justice Commutative or
Distributive, you might have found them dwelling in Jerusalem. And while things
went thus, they were very happy; the Habitation of their Righteousness was
prosperous: they had peace and plenty, health and safety. This is so evident
that the Lord appeals to themselves whether it was not so. Jer. 22.15. Did not
thy father eat and drink and do Justice and Judgment, and then it was well with
him. So Jer. 2.5. What Iniquity have your fathers found in me? implying that
till they causelessly departed from God, things went well with them. Yet must
not this be so strictly taken as if ever there was a time in Israel, wherein
there was no unholiness and unrighteousness in them; that the Priests, Rulers
and People were perfectly holy and righteous, exactly conformable to the Moral
Law: for they were sinners by nature, and were, at best, liable to humane infi
mities and frailties, yea in their best times, there was something wanting that
could not be numbered, and something crooked that could not be made straight, as
their history shows; and therefore any Expression that may blush otherwise,
must be understood comparatively, not absolutely. So when they are said to have
been happy, very happy, it must not be understood as if they had no Calamity or
Sorrow, but that no desolating destroying evil tell upon them: when in Solomon's
time it is said, that they had no adversary or evil occurrent, it must be
understood Comparatively, and so the sense is, there had been a time when
holiness and righteousness had flourished extraordinarily in Judea and
Jerusalem, and at that time they were extraordinarily happy, enjoyed the favor
of God in very peculiar Instances, and had a very great confluence of Gods
Bounties and Benefits.

2. That in Jeremiah's time all ranks and orders of men were grown very
degenerate and were greatly corrupted, and were become very unhappy, almost as
miserable as misery could make them. In Isaiah's time, which was considerably
before this; the faithful City was become an Harlot, and they were over run and
overgrown with violence and unrighteousness of every kind. In stead of
Judgment there was Oppression, in stead of Righteousness, there was a Cry. Isa.
1.21. and 5.7. But in Jeremiah's time, they were heightened and hardened in all
their wickedness, and were unteachable, imperswadable and incorrigible. The
chief of the Priests and the People transgressed very much after all the
Abominations of the Heathen, and had polluted the house of the Lord; and
despised all the Patience and Compassion of their God, and complied with none
of the methods of his grace to reclaim them; but Stiffned their necks and
hardened their hearts, from turning to the Lord God of Israel. They mocked his
Messengers and Messages, and misused his Prophets, till the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people, and there was no remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15, 16. Then
wrath and ruin of every kind invaded them, and broke in upon them, till they
were taken and carried into Captivity: and Jeremiah was in this, one of the
unhappiest of all the holy Prophets, in that he lived to see his woeful
Prophesies turned into History. The man that did not only foresee, but lived to
see affliction by the rod of Gods Wrath: yea he lived to write doleful
Lamentations over the Accomplishment of his own direful and dismal Prophesies,
and to see the People as miserable as he had seen them sinful.

3. That it was not only so as you have heard in one instance, but it was Gods
way and manner of dealing with his own People the Jews, to deal out happiness
or misery to them, according as they dealt with him, in matters of holiness and
righteousness: whilst they were with God, in ways of duty, God was wont to be
with them in ways of mercy, to bless and prosper them: but when they walk*
Contrary to God, his way was to walk Contrary to them; when it was their way to
grieve him with their impieties and iniquities, it was his way to vex them with
various adversities. See 2 Chronicles 15.2. The Lord is with you while ye be with
him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he
will forsake you. V. 3. Now for a long season Israel has been without the true
God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law. The ten tribes had been so
from their revolt, which was about Thirty years, and for that time, there was
no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, for God did vex them
with all adversity: See the 5th. and 6st. Verses. That God did promise them the
greatest mercies and blessings, on condition of Obedience to his Laws and
Statutes, and threatened them with the greatest curses and miseries, in case of
revolt and disobedience, is ungainsayable, if you read and consider, Levi. 26.
throughout, and Deuteronomy. 28. throughout. And the way of God was accordingly. So
that if a man had known before hand now that People would have acted toward
God and one another, he might have written their History in a good measure,
before things came to pass. Hence they were so condemned for not knowing the
way of the Lord, which means, not only the way of his Doctrine, but of his
Discipline and Providential Dispensations, Jer. 5.4. Therefore I said, surely
these are poor, they are foolish: for they know not the way of the Lord, nor
the judgment of our God. Yet must not this be so strictly taken, as if God
dealt with them according to their deserts; for had they been dealt with
according to the First Covenant, they were never good enough to deserve the
Blessings; they were always bad enough to deserve greater Wrath than ever fell
upon them. They were always less then the least of Gods Mercies; and God always
punished them less than their Iniquities deserved; and upon their Repentance,
Humiliation and Reformation; God was always ready to pardon, and turn their
Curses into Blessings; as upon their Apostacies and Declensions, he turned
their Blessings into Curses: and was wont to distinguish between weakness and
wickedness, between Sins of Infirmity, and Sins of Enormity. His Severities
were for the most part against presumptuous Sinners, and such Sins as violated
the Covenant. There were also at that time by Divine Appointment, Sacrifices of
Expiation and Atonement, not only for particular persons, but for the
Congregation; not only for the Sins of private persons, but of the Priests and
Rulers also. Hence in Judgment God remembered mercy; many a time he forgave
them, and did not stir up all his wrath: and in some instances his Judgments
were unaccountable: but ordinarily they were as the light, and the Equity of
them very discernable.

4. Gods Judicial Proceedings with the Jews before the Coming of Christ, are
instructive to people, and places professing the Christian Religion; that it is
like to fare with them as to happiness or misery, according as it goes with
them, as to Holiness and Righteousness. For the proof of this, I offer to your
consideration the following Arguments, which for brevity, I shall but name.

1 That God is the same now, as he was then, as holy and righteous as ever he
was. Did he then love Righteousness, and hate iniquity? So he does still;
therefore his Way and Discipline is like to be much what the same now, as it
was then.

2. His Church is the same Church now, though not the same people: God has but
One Church, Christ has but one Body; from the beginning to the end of the
World. Cant. 6.9. Ephesians 5.23, 25, 27.

3. This Law requiring Holiness and Righteousness, is the same: not one tittle
of it is passed away.

4. Gods Name and Honor is alike concerned in the ways and behavior of his
people now, as it was then. Did the Sins of the Jews, give occasion to the
Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme? 2 Samuel 12.14. So do the Sins of Christians
now. See 1 Timothy 6 1. That his Name and Doctrine be not blasphemed.

5. They were under the Covenant of Grace as well as we? and we under the
authority and direction of the Law, as well as they. Heb. 4.2. plainly affirms,
that they had the Gospel preached to them, and in James 2.8 it is evident, that
Christians are required to fulfill the Royal Law. When Paul says, Believers are
not under the Law; he means, not under the Curse of the Law; though under the
Command of it.

6. The Apostle speaking of Gods Judicial Proceeding with the Jews in Instances
of Severity, says: All these things happened unto them for Ensamples, and they
are written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are come. 1
Cor. 10.11.

7. The Apostle says, that Godliness has the promise of the life that now is,
as well as of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8. and consequently Ungodliness
has the Threatening of the life that now is, as well as of that which is to
come. And of like import is that, 1 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. He that will love life
and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, etc. for the Eyes of
the Lord are over the Righteous; that is, his Providence is active about them
for good: but his face is against them that do evil, that is, the frowns and
rebukes of Divine Providence are against them that do evil.

8. Gods Judicial Proceedings with his professing people in the Old World, and
afterward, till Moses's time, were much what the same as they were afterward,
as the Book called Genesis, the Book of Job. 2 Epist. of Peter, and Jude
plainly show.

9. Experience has convinced the Christian Churches of this; and many of the
New Testament Promises, Threatenings, Argumentations and Prophesies, show the
truth of it.

10. That this is no new Doctrine, may be seen in the Confessions of Faith, set
forth by the Assembly of Divines, and the New England Confession in the Chapter
concerning the Law of God. Sect. 6. The Threatenings of it. viz the Law, serve
to show what their Sins deserve; and what afflictions in this life they may
expect for them; although freed from the Curse thereof, threatened in the Law.
The Promises of it in like manner show them Gods approbation of Obedience; and
what Blessings they may expect upon the performance thereof; although not as
due to them by the Law as a Covenant of Works.

All this notwithstanding, I would not be understood, as if the Dispensations
of God now did exactly quadrate with his Dispensations to the Jews, before
Christ came. The Church was then in its nonage, and under a certain Tutorage
proper to that time, when the promises and threatenings that relate to the other
World, were more darkly and more rarely mentioned: and temporal promises and
threatenings more frequently insisted on, and the accomplishment more visible
and conspicuous, and Dispensations more Corporal; and God did more visibly
plague Disobedience, and reward Obedience, than now: although he has not left
himself without witness, but makes all the Churches to know, that he searches
the hearts and tries the reins, and renders to his people according to their
works, Rev. 2.23. And the same is evident by all the Epistles to the Churches
of Asia, in which it is manifest, that our Lord Jesus Christ, who has the
Government of the Church, and World, declares that he will deal with them, as
they deal with him.

Obj. Does not Solomon say that all things come alike to all, and that there is
one event to the Righteous and to the Wicked? etc. Eccle. 9 1, 2.

A. Solomon's meaning is not that it is always so, but that it is sometimes so,
and that notwithstanding temporal promises and threatenings, God has reserves
for the display of his Sovereignty, whereby unbelievers will be hardened in
their sin; and good men will be humbled, and their faith and patience
exercised. And although there be not a full discrimination between the good and
bad at present; there shall be at the day of the revelation of righteous
Judgment: And although God's Justice does not always appear to purblind man,
yet it does so often appear, that God is known by his Judgments that he
executes. Psalm. 9.16. So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for
the Righteous, verily he is a God that Judges in the earth.

Thus you have the second Doctrine Explained and Confirmed: I proceed to
Explain and Confirm the third and last Doctrine.

DOCT. III. That although Places that have been Habitations of Righteousness
and Mountains of Holiness, should become very degenerate, and for their Sin be
made very desolate; yet there is ground o^ hope that God will again Restore,
Reform and Bless them.

In the third Doctrine there are three particular^ contained: the two first
more implicitly, the third most expressly.

1. That places that have been eminent for the p^ofession and practice of
holiness and righteousness, may become very degenerate: they may, that is
possibly; not lawfully. Judea and Jerusalem offer^ a woeful conviction of this:
That Kingdom of Priests, that holy Nation, in which Religion and Justice some
time dwelt and flourished, was in Jeremiah's time degenerate, revolted and
gone, all ranks and orders of men had greatly corrupted themselves. This has
been already demonstrated, and the Churches that were of the Apostles planting,
if we compare the Scripture account of them, with Ecclesiastical history
concerning them, and their affairs, it would call for tears, rather than
further testimony. Declension is down hill and natural; Corruption weighs men
down ward.

-- Facilis descensus Averni. The heart of man is deceitful above all things
and desperately wicked. Man has long since forfeited his reputation, being in
honor be abode not, and ever since bears the reproach of being a false
deceitful creature. Surely men of low degree are vanity and men of high degree
are a lie, to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity.
Psa. 62.9. If men deal falsely and basely and treacherously with God, they do
but like themselves. Hos. 6.7. They like men (or like Adam as it may be
rendered) have transgressed my Covenant, there have they dealt treacherously
with me. Besides, Mortality, in a little time, carries off the Stage, the
Rulers, Leaders, Teachers, and best examples of the flock. Degrees of true
Grace may be lost, and the remainders be weakened and obscured: that which only
seemed to be true Grace, may be utterly lost, and that goodness that sprang
from, and depended upon external motive; when the Sun and the wind rise, will
pass away like a morning Cloud: the subtle insinuations of Seducers, a Spirit
of error, the force of evil examples, New temptations and occasions, all, or
many of them some times do as it were conspire to bring on defection and
Apostasy: and when it is so, it is no wonder, if woeful degeneration ensue.

2. Places that are become degenerate, howsoever happy they were before, may
become very miserable, very desolate. It was so with Judea and Jerusalem. The
Lamentations of Jeremiah afford plentiful proof of this, and the desolations
and ruins of the Churches mentioned in the New Testament sufficiently prove it
may be so. If men do but like men, when they make defection, and revolt from
Religion and Virtue; God does bu^ like God, when hi Jealousy burns like fire
against such a People; and he brings sorrows and miseries upon them, even unto
Desolation.

3. Notwithstanding such degeneration and desolation too, there is ground of
hope, that God will again restore, reform and bless such a People. I shall
prove this position by producing the grounds of Hope the Scriptures offer in
this case.

1. God Can do it if he Will. That is not altogether incredible which is not
impossible. What can not Omnipotency do? Unbelief and distrust is many times
bottomed upon scrupling the Power of God. Psa. 78.19, 20. They said, Can God
furnish a Table in the Wilderness? can he give bread also? can he provide flesh
for his people? So that they are taxt with not believing in God, nor trusting
in his Salvation. No wonder they did not believe God would, when they did not
believe God could provide for them. If Abraham had Staggered at the promise
through unbelief of Gods Power, he had not been father of many Nations. But
against hope he believed in hope, knowing that God quickened the dead and called
things that are not, as if they were. He was strong in faith, giving glory to
God, being fully persuaded that what he had promised he was able to perform.
Romans 4 17, 18, 20, 21. Such a degenerate and desolate People, are much in
circumstances for Restoration and Reformation, as the bodies of Abraham and
Sarah were in for Propagation. But what cant he do that quickens the dead? The
belief of Gods power facilitates the belief of his good will: So it was in the
Lepers says; Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean. That which seems
impossible to men because of their impotency, is not difficult to God because
of his Omnipotency: Though this case be very difficult, next to impossible, yet
it is not desperate: for with God all things are possible. The Lord of hosts
can restore, reform, and bless a degenerate, desolate People.

2. God not only can if he will, but may if he please. What may not he do in a
way of mercy, who is mercy it self, and has mercy upon whom he will have
mercy? Romans 9.15. I will have compassion, upon whom I will have compassion.
Infinite mercy can find motive in it self, when there is none in the Creature,
and divine Sovereignty is not to be Counseled or Controlled by any Creature.
If he will have compassion, he will have it. If God be pleased to restore and
reform such a people, whom does he wrong? What Attribute or Word of his, does
he cross or contradict? If then Gods power render him able to do it; may not
his Sovereign Grace, and Mercy render him willing to do it? Once has God
spoken, twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God, also unto thee
O Lord belongs Mercy. Psa. 62.11, 12.

3. God has done so already for his Church and professing People. viz. The
Jews and that more than once, or twice. And that which has been, may be; and
is the more easy to be believed. This sort of Argumentation is used for a help
to faith. Isa. 51.9, 10, 11. Awake, awake, O Arm of the Lord, as in the Ancient
days, art not thou it that has cut Rahab and wounded the dragon? Art thou not
it that have dried the Sea? therefore the ransomed of the Lord shall return to
Sion with singing. So 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death and
does deliver: in whom we trust, he will yet deliver. If God should restore,
reform and bless such a degenerate and desolate people, it would not be the
first time. Though God may seem to have cast off a professing people; yet he
may choose them a second time, it is no more than he has done in the like case.
Zech. 2.12. The Lord shall inherit Judah and choose Jerusalem again.

4. Notwithstanding wrath is come upon the Jews to the uttermost because they
sinned to the uttermost in rejecting and crucifying the Son of God, yet, not
without cause, we believe and expect that God will again restore, reform and
bless them. Though they are Unchurched and Unpeopled and have been miserable as
misery can make them: yet the Oracles of God give encouragement to believe that
they shall again be recovered. It were endless to quote all the old Testament
texts brought by those that write on this Subject; among which my Text and
Context is improved by Dr. Gouge and others, and Paul in Romans 11.27. renders it
indisputable.

Obj. If it be granted concerning the Jews, what is that to the Christian
Gentiles? This text speaks of the Jews, Thus says the God of Israel.

A. That this and many other texts of like import do nextly belong to the Jews,
I have already granted: but that does not prove that by way of Analogy, this
and such like texts do not belong to Christian Churches consisting of Jews or
Gentiles, or both. I pray consider, who are the Israel of God now: Are not all
that believe, Children of Abraham? and heirs according to promise? Is not the
Blessing of Abraham come upon the Gentiles? Is God the God of the Jews only? is
he not of the Gentiles also? Romans 3.29. Although the Ephesians during their
Heathenism were Strangers to the Covenants of promise and aliens from the
common wealth of Israel; yet I hope they were not so after they were Converted
and Christianized. No, they who before were afar off, were made nigh by the
blood of Christ; who broke down the middle wall of partition and made both one;
and now they were no more Strangers and Foreigners, but fellow Citizens with
the Saints, and were built upon the foundation of the Prophets as well as
Apostles, etc. What? is there Jew and Greek, Scythian and Barbarian still?
surely they are all one in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2.12, 13, Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11.

5. There be Prophesies in the New Testament, that contain in them promises of
Restoration, Reformation, and Blessing to Churches, that were formerly Eminent
for Christianity, Habitations of Righteousness, and Mountains of Holiness, but
become in time very degenerate, and very miserable and desolate, first over run
with sin, then with misery; that are either buried in their own ruins, or if
they flourish, it is with Antichristian or Mohammedan Inhabitants for the most
part; yet do Prophetic Scriptures speak of their Resurrection and
Restoration. What else can be the meaning of the Resurrection of the
Witnesses? the Spirit of life from God entering into them after they are
overcome and stain? their standing on their feet? and their ascending into
Heaven? Rev. 11.11, 12. The like may be said of the Congratulatory Acclamations
of Voices in Heaven saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms
of the Lord, and of his Christ; Rev. 11.15. See also, Rev. 15.4. All Nations
shall come and worship before thee. Past all peradventure there is employed in
these Texts, that Kingdoms that belonged to our Lord in Constantin's Time, but
for their Degeneration, were over run with the Romish Idolatry and Tyranny, and
the Imposture and Oppression of the Mahometans, so that they ceased to be the
Kingdoms of the Lord, as they were before, and became the Kingdoms of
Antichrist and of Mahomet shall again be rescued out of the hand of those cruel
Lords, and again profess their Subjection unto Jesus Christ; which implies,
Restitution, Reformation, and Divine Benediction. The Lord Jesus field some
kind of possession of the West Empire during the 1260 years of Antichrist's
Reign, by his Witnesses that Prophesied all that time, though in Sackcloth. He
has held possession likewise in the East Empire, notwithstanding the fury and
cruelty of the Arabian and Saracen or Mohammedan Harpyes: for the Christian
Religion is professed there to this day; though not with that power, purity,
and glory that it some time was, and shall be again. Dr Goodwin makes the
144000 mentioned, Rev. 14 1. to be the Witnesses that prophesied in Sackcloth,
and held possession of the West Empire for Christ; and the 144000 mentioned
Rev. 7.4. to be the Witnesses of Christ in the East Empire, and to be Sealed
for Preservation during the Mohammedan Tyranny, and concludes, that our Lord
has all along held possession of both East and West Empire; and expects
glorious Restaurations and Reformations in both. I have done with the
Explication and Proof of the three Doctrines, and shall crowd the Application
together, with what brevity the present Occasion requires, which will not
permit a full Application of such copious Theams, howsoever useful it might be.

USE I.

Of Instruction, To teach us. That Holiness and Righteousness have an
everlasting amiableness and excellency in them. In God, they are the Essence of
God, in Angels and men, they are the Image of God; they are Essential to the
Being of God, and they are Essential to the Well-being of Angels and men; they
are the best adjunct, and Epithete that rational creatures are capable of. Take
Holiness and Righteousness from Angels, and they become Devils; take them from
men, and they become like Beasts, yea, worse; not only earthly and sensual but
devilish also. The dignity of man's first Estate, consisted in holiness and
righteousness after the Image of God: the ignominy and damnableness of man's
lost Estate, consists in his sinning, and coming short of the glory of God;
that is, of his glorious Image, consisting in holiness and righteousness. The
sanity and felicity of man's best and last Estate, consists in being recovered
to the image and favor of God by Jesus Christ. Whilst man was holy and
righteous, God loved him as his Friend, and when man became unholy and
unrighteous, God loathed him as his Enemy; and although God may love him with a
love of Benevolence and of Beneficence, yet ^e cannot love him with a complete
love of complacency and delight; till he is recovered to holiness and
righteousness again. As Sin is a reproach to any person, people or place; on
the contrary, holiness and righteousness are a credit and honor to them; it
was the glory of the City, that was the joy and praise of the whole earth, that
it was a habitation of righteousness, and mountain of holiness; yea, it is the
glory of the New Jerusalem, it is called the Holy City, and the Holy Jerusalem.
Rev 21.2, 10. it is the peculiar excellency of the New Heavens and New Earth,
that righteousness dwells therein. 2 Pet. 3.13. The unconceivable glory of
the Heaven of Heavens consists more in its holiness, than in its height;
though it transcend in both. It is the throne of Gods holiness, the holy of
holyes, was but a Type of it. The highest excellency of the heavenly Courtiers
that wait round the throne of God, is their holiness: and yet that is dim in
comparison of the HOLY JESUS, who is the Fountain of all the holiness and
righteousness the Saints on earth have. There are some few Saints whose bodies
as well as Souls are already glorified, and the Spirits of just men made
perfect, who have received perfection of holiness. Oh! what a holy place is
heaven, that is full of holiness; yea so full, that it does as it were run
over! The skies pour down holiness and righteousness: there is none upon earth,
but what comes down from Heaven, even from the God of all Grace, and the God of
Glory, who is glorious in Holiness.

2. To teach us what a wicked and woeful estate man fell into, in the primitive
Apostasy. He fell from a state of holiness and righteousness, into a state of
unholiness and unrighteousness. If man had continued in the state wherein he
was created, every Man and Woman and Child, had been a habitation of
righteousness and mountain of holiness. Every Family, every Society, had been a
habitation of righteousness and mountain of holiness: for God made man upright,
or right; that is holy and righteous. Eccles. 7.29. Man was then a Vessel of
honor, sanctified and meet for the masters use. Holiness and Righteousness
were Concreated with, and Connatural to him; but alas! it is far otherwise now.
Though it be our duty to be habitually and actually holy and righteous yet we
are stripped of the moral Image o^ God, empty of G^a^e, bent to act according to
the corrupt Bials we have derived from the first Adam, which warps us away from
God and his holy ways; and strongly inclines us to Unholiness and
Unrighteousness. Instead of being a habitation of righteousness, the heart of
man is become a cage of every impious, unclean and hateful lust, Mat. 15.19.
Men ate by nature since the fall, full of enmity against God; inordinately and
idolatrously in love with themselves; and uncharitable, and injurious unto
others How miserably were our first Parents deceived! Under a pretense of being
like to God, they lost his image and favor.

3. To teach us, That the grace and love of God toward fallen man is very
wonderful, in that God gave his only Son to recover poor lost sinners out of
that wicked and woeful estate of unholiness and unrighteousness, that such as
believe on him may be pardoned and justified freely through the Redemption that
is in Christ Jesus, and that by the Grace of God bestowed on them in
Regeneration and Sanctification, they might be recovered to the Image of God
again, to put off the old man, the corrupt nature derived from the first Adam,
and to put on the new man, the grace and holiness that is from Jesus Christ the
second Adam, whereby they become again after the Image of God in holiness and
righteousness Ephesians. 4 22, 23, 24. There had never been among the Posterity of
fallen man a habitation of righteousness and mountain of holiness, had it not
been for this wonderful love of God in Christ Jesus: for mankind was all gone
aside, they were altogether become filthy, there is none that does good no not
one. Psa. 14.3. If therefore any of the race, do become holy and righteous, and
do good again; we may conclude that they were created in Christ Jesus to good
works; for by nature they are dead in trespasses and sins.

4. To teach us, That it is a vile abuse of Christ and his Gospel, and the
doctrine of the free grace of God, to make as if C^^^stians were thereby freed
from the direction and authority of the Moral Law; or that the motives to
Obedience to it were abated by the Gospel. It is certain that Christ did not
Obey the law, that we might have liberty to Break it; nor did he suffer that we
might have liberty to violate it with impunity: but that we might be saved from
the Curse of the law, and from the dominion of sin; and might be the Servants
of God, and have our fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.
Although the law was never given to fallen man as a Covenant whereby he could
be justified, yet does it continue as a Rule of life. And the Lord Jesus is so
far from abolishing it, that he puts it into the inward parts of believers, and
writes it in their hearts. Jer. 31.33. It was the error of the Jews in the
Apostles time, to think the law was given as a Covenant of Works; by the
keeping of which they might be justified, and have eternal life. Against this
the Apostle argues, that the inheritance, was by Promise, and that God gave it
to Abraham by promise, and the law which was given at Sinai 430 years after,
could not disanul it; and makes it an absurd thing for any to think that
righteousness comes by the law, and if so says he, then Christ is dead in
vain. Gal. 2.21. Gal. 3.17, 18, 21. The Jews took the law in that sense, as
when Luther calls it Moses Mosissimus, a strict Covenant of works; but had lost
that sense of it wherein Luther calls it Moses Aaronicus. A ^^arker
dispensation of the Covenant of grace, a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ.
The Apostle knew now to urge Obedience to the moral law, and to lay men under
obligation to holiness and righteousness by its authority and motives; without
urging a necessity of perfect and personal Obedience to it, in order to
Justification, and eternal life. He could and did urge it, as a Rule of life,
without making it a Covenant of life, and rule whereby men could be justified.
Acts 13.38, 39. Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins,
and by him all that belive are justified from all things, from which you could
not be justified by the law of Moses. He could deny the law to justify: and yet
not make Christ the Minister of sin. He could preach the free grace of God;
without casting any blemish upon the law, or encouraging Sinners to continue in
sin, because grace had abounded. Romans 6.1. Compared with the foregoing Chapter:
and did maintain that the grace of God which brings Salvation agrees with
the law in this, it teaches men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously and Godly in this present world. Titus 2.11, 12.

5. To teach us, That Christians in the times of the Gospel may and ought to
make use of the Scriptures of the Old Testament for their Instruction, Example
and Comfort. Although the Ceremonial law be totally abolisht as to its
Practice, yet forasmuch as it typed out or prefigured Christ; his Graces,
Actions, Sufferings and benefits, and was some way instructive about moral
duties: the understanding of it is many ways useful to Christians; as might be
showed in Apostolical argumentations. So Heb. 9. throughout. 1 Cor. 9.8, 9, 13,
14. The judicial law so far as it was local and peculiar to the Jews, binds
not: yet so far as it was of moral Equity, it ought to be observed in Christian
States; and Caeteris paribus and Consideratis Considerandis, is of Excellent
use to all Lawgivers and Judges to the end of the world: for that People were
under a Theocrasy, and their judicial Laws were of divine legislation, for the
most part. If any were otherwise, they had at least divine approbation. The
moral law is all of it of everlasting equity and amiableness as we have showed;
as Holy, Righteous, and Good, in Paul's time, as in Moses's time. Romans 7.12.
And in our times, as in Moses's or Paul's. For till heaven and earth pass, one
jot or title of the law shall in no wise pass, Math. 5.18. The Assemblies
reflection on this text is, How much more needful is this Doctrine when men
would make all the law void, and not obligatory to believers. Its Historys are
our Examples; either of imitation or caution. 1 Cor. 10. Now these things were
our Examples, that is says the English Annotations, God set the punishment of
those Israelites as a glass or image before us, that we in them might see what
we may expect, if we sin as they did. In the following verses the Apostle
dehorts from Idolatry, ^ornication, Tempting Christ, and the sin of Murmuring;
from ^^amples of caution written of old; But, says the Apostle, they were
written for our Admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come. v. 11 So
Heb. 3.19 compared with Heb. 4.1. So we see that they could not enter in
because of unbelief. Let us therefore ^^ar etc. So Esau's Example of selling
his birth right for one morsel, is urged by way of caution. Heb. 12.16. We have
also Examples of Imitation taken out of the Old Testament, and improved in the
New. So in Heb. 11. The Examples of Antediluvian Patriarchs and Postdiluvian
Patriarchs, and Kings, Priests, and Prophets, Judges and Military Commanders,
all famous for Exploits of Faith, Worship, and Obedience; are set before
Christians for Imitation. And the Apostle argues from them, Heb. 12.1. That
Cloud of Witnesses are to be followed by Christians, as the Cloud was followed
by the Israelites in the Wilderness. So Peter urges the Example of holy Women
of old, and of Sarah in Particular, for to teach Christian Women Subjection to
their Husbands, Conjugal Chastity, and Modesty of Apparel. So Abraham's faith,
and his justification by it, is set forth for an Example to Christians for
their imitation, Romans 4.4. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it
was imputed to him; but for us also to whom it shall be imputed if we believe.
The like may be said of Promises and Threatenings; which are found Originally in
the Old Testament, but improved in the New Testament. Of Promises, some that
seem National, others Personal, are by way of Analogy transferred to Christian
People, as if they had been made nextly and directly to them. So Ephesians. 6.1, 2.
The Apostle Exhorting Christian Children, to obey and honor their Parents,
urges them to this duty.

1. By the Intrinsical Goodness, and Immutable and Eternal Equity is in what he
Exhorts them to. Children obey your Parents in the Lord for this is right.
(...), Just.

2. By the Authority of the fifth Commandment.

3. By the Promise annexed; for this is the first Commandment with promise. i.
e. the first of the Second Table, for the second Command has promise annexed
to it. Showing mercy to thousands, (viz. of Generations) of them that love me
and keep my Commandments. i. e. Ordinances and Institutions, means of Worship;
free from Superstition, men's Inventions, and Will worship. When the Apostle
says the first Command with promise, he refers to those words, that thy days
may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Which words in
their next intention, are directed to Jewish Children; and mean a long and
happy life in the Land of Canaan: but the Apostle writing to the Children of
the Church at Ephesus, that had nothing to do with the Land of Canaan, alters
the words by Analogy, and makes the promise run, that it may be well with thee,
and that thou may live long upon the Earth. So the promise made nextly to
Joshua, Josh. 1.5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee: is by way of
Analogical Accommodation transferred to Christians. Heb. 13.5. So David's
confident conclusion. Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear;
What can man do unto me? is drawn into argumentation. Heb. 13.6. And the words
that Solomon sp^ke to his Son. Prove. 3.11. is said to speak to the Christian
Hebrews. Heb. 12.5. Ye have forgotten the Exhortation, or that consolatory
Exhortation, which speaks unto you as Children; My Son, despise not thou the
Chastening of the Lord. Of Threatenings also applied by Analogy. Heb. 4.7.9, 11.
I shall on this head only further show that Prophesies in the Old Testament are
of use to Christians; they help us in the belief of New Testament Prophesies,
many of them being already accomplished, others also of them agree with Those in
the Revelation, and illustrate one another, as the Text and the interpretation.
So also, 2 Pet. 3.13. We according to his promise look for New Heavens and a
New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness: and many Prophesies in the Old
Testament, that flourish in expressions, literally expressing temporal
felicity; yet were intended as Prophetic Types of Spiritual Blessings under
the Messiah. And they had some kind of accomplishment in Temporal Deliverances,
Peace, Plenty, etc. before the Coming of Christ: but were more fully
accomplished in Spiritual Redemption, and the Spiritual Privileges, Benefits
and Graces, Enjoyed in the Churches of Christ. If we consider what cognation
there is between History and Prophesy, it will not seem strange. For Prophecy
is History antedated; and History is Postdated Prophecy: the same thing is
told in both. If therefore the History of the Old Testament is Example to us,
and instructive to us; so must needs be Prophesy. And many things in the Old
Testament are first set forth in Prophesy; and afterward in History; and either
of them, yea, both of them beneficial to the Church. Besides, Prophesies, for
the most part, contain Promises, or Threatenings in them. And therefore if
Old Testament Promises and Threatenings are of use, and may be, by way of
accommodation, applied to us; so may the Prophesies also. I have insisted the
larger on the foregoing head, not only to show how genuine the Doctrines raised
from the Text, are; and to strengthen the foundation on which I build the
Superstructure of the Application I further intend: but to vindicate the just
Reputation of the Sacred Scriptures of the Old Testament, from the indignity
done them by those that speak of them, as of things formerly useful, but now
antiquated and out of date: as also for the benefit of those that esteem them,
by way of Direction, how to use them; that the Old and New Testament, may be
used by us as two breasts of Sacred Consolation, and we may suck and be
satisfied out of both of them; and milk out and be delighted with the abundant
Consolations they afford. I conclude this Use with saying only this further,
that to deny the forementioned usefulness of the Old Testament Doctrine,
Promises, Threatenings; History and Prophesy, is to Apocrypha the Old Testament
at once; and to confront the New, in a thousand instances; and to charge Non
sequitur upon the Apostolical Argumentation.

U. 6. To teach us, That by how much more similitude there is between the State
and History or Circumstances of the Jews, and the State and Circumstances of
any Christian people or Plantation; so much the more apt and easy will
accommodations be, of Doctrinal, Historical, Promissory, Minatory, and
Prophetical Passages. This is self evident: for where there is par ratio, where
the reason is the same, the consequence will be more evident; and the
conclusion the more cogent. And if so, I conclude such accommodations will be
easy to New England; seeing there is such considerable similitude and agreement
in the circumstances of both. Some of which circumstances and instances of
similitude, I shall modestly propound, in hope that they will be as heartily
taken, as they are honestly intended.

1. The first Planters of the Israelitish Vineyard, or the first Plants
therein, were a noble Vine, a right Seed. Jer. 2.21. The twelve Patriarchs,
were all Godly, and God led them like a flock by the hand of Moses und Aaron.
Israel was Holiness to the Lord. So the first Undertakers, Planters; the
Foundation men of New England were Holiness to the Lord; though not
universally, yet generally so; This Land was planted with choice Vines; Men
Eminent in Piety, and Virtue; that Served God and their Generation, according
to the Will of God.

2. The great End for which Israel went into the Wilderness, and the Land of
Canaan, was that they might Worship God according to his own Institution with
more purity, and less peril, than they could do in the Country where they
were. Exodus 8.1. Let my people go that they may Serve me. Exodus 8.27. We will
go three days Journey into the Wilderness, and Sacrifice to the Lord our God,
as He shall command us. The first Text shows they went out for the Worship of
God, the second shows it was for purity of Worship, according to Gods
Institution. See v. 26. of the same Chapter, and you will see it also to be,
that they might so Worship God with more liberty and safety than where they
were. For Pharaoh would have let them Sacrifice to their God in the Land: but
Moses said, It is not meet so to do, etc. Will they not Stone us? So then, that
they might worship God purely, without giving offense to others, or endangering
themselves; they were willing to go further a field. Even so was the Design of
our Predecessors in coming more than three days Journey, viz. three thousand
miles into this Wilderness, that they might Serve God with pure Worship
according to his own Institution, without offense to others; and with more
liberty and safety to themselves, than at that time could be had in their own
Country. The World knows, that our Predecessors did not leave their Native
Soil, that dulce solum Patriam, for better Accommodations in worldly respects;
they did not come into the Wilderness for Worldliness; but for Godliness sake:
and that the first Rulers and Teachers, and Churches had the Glory of God, and
the liberty and purity of his Worship in their Eye. And their Memory will be
precious in Ages to come, notwithstanding their Ashes have been polluted, and
that with an unusual degree of Impudence and falsehood, by the Rabshakeh
Raileries and Lies of some nameless and shameless Heretics.

3. As the Israelites underwent many hazards and hardships in that Enterprise,
and had special assistance, preservation, provision and protection from the
good Providence of God, that was very peculiar about them for good: So did the
first Comers into New England run many great risks, and grapple with many
difficulties; both of Sea and Land (too many to enumerate) in all which, the
good Providence of God was very circumspect about them, in sending suitable and
seasonable succors and supplies. They cried to the Lord in their troubles, and
he saved them out of their distresses; as the brief Histories of New-Englands
Affairs show.

4. As God made room for the Israelitish Vine, and caused it to take root, and
spread and flourish, so that its boughs went to the Sea, and its branches by
the rivers, its Shade covered hills. Whilst Religion and Righteousness
flourisht among them, they were both numerous and prosperous. And so it was in
New England in a good degree, God blessed them and caused them to multiply
greatly. No Out-going of the English Nation, for the time, can compare with it.

5. As there grew declension and degeneration among that people,
notwithstanding all God had done for them, and notwithstanding all done for
maintaining and transmitting pure Religion to succeeding Generations: so has
it befallen New England. We may with grief and shame read over and meditate
upon some Texts spoke of Israel. as Hos. 4.7. as they were increased so they
sinned. so Josh. 2.7. The people Served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and
the Elders that out lived Joshua, etc. and there arose another generation after
them, which knew not the Lord.

6. As they changed their ways from Good to Evil, and walked contrary to God; so
God changed his ways, from ways of Mercy, to ways of Affliction; and walked
contrary to them. And as was threatened, did them evil after that he had done
them good. So has it also been with us. As for our Degeneracy, it is too
palpable to be denied; and too gross to be excused. It calls for Lamentation,
Humiliation, and Reformation, rather than proof and demonstration; though that
also be needful enough in order to the former. And the Servants of God have in
this place, as well as in others, offered conviction of that, to which I refer
you. As to Gods change of his Dispensations toward his people, from a way of
Mercy, to a way of sore Affliction and Judgment, he is a very great stranger to
the affairs of New England, or one that considers not the Operations of Gods
Hand, that knows not this. Who knows not that our Fields which use to smell
as the Fields which the Lord has blessed, have of a long time been blasted,
that a Fruitful Lord has been turned into Barrenness. Instead of Plenty, we
have had Scarcity; instead of Health, Sickness; instead of Peace, War: and have
been thereby diminished, impoverished, and brought low. Instead of remarkable
divine favor, direction and protection, we have had such trouble, from Heaven
and Hell; from Earth and Sea: and such desertions, frustration and rebukes from
God in things of greatest importance; that who shall consider well of these
things, will with grief and shame say, The countenance of our God and Father
has not been toward us as formerly. Might not much of this have been
prevented, if we had considered what was like to follow upon the degeneration
of Gods Vovenant People: if we had considered, that it must needs be after this
sort; if God should deal with us, as of old he was wont to deal with his
Vovenant People in like cases; as it was most likely he would; so likely, that
we had no ground to think it should be other wise. It is an awful saying of Dr.
Goodwin. As you look for Storms in Autumn, and Frosts in Winter, so expect
Judgments, where the Gospel has been Preached; for the quarrel of the Covenant
must be avenged.

7. We know how that People dealt with God for many Generations, and how God
dealt with them, and what things came to at last: for their Apostasy, for their
Idolatry against the first and second Commandment, their impiety, profaneness,
iniquity, impenitently and incorrigibleness and unbelief: They were ^roke off,
Unchurched, Unpeopled, and seemingly made irreversibly miserable: But we know
only how we have dealt with God, and how God has dealt with us, to this
present time, and know not how we shall deal with God, or how God will deal
with us for the future. Secret things belong to God. Certainly we have cause to
fear, and tremble, lest in the issue, our line should run parallel with theirs
also; seeing there has been such agreement in the premises. And this brings
in sight a twofold danger, which I would not mention without fear and
trembling; and hope that all good men will join with me in praying to the most
Merciful God that we may escape them both, and that the Warning now following
may be one means of it.

U. 7. Of Premonition and forewarning to the People of New England, of two
Eminent Dangers they are in.

1. Of being more sinful yet. As sinful as New England has been, or yet is
(which is very sinful) yet there is great danger lest New England should yet be
much more sinful than ever it was, or yet is.

2. Of being much more miserable then ever yet they were, or yet are.

The first Danger demonstrated.

1. Israel, Gods Professing and Covenant People grew from bad to worse; and
notwithstanding all warnings and methods used to stop their defection, yet they
were bent to backsliding, till the holy People, and righteous Nation, became a
Sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity. They went away backward they
revolted more and more, there was no stopping of them, or reclaiming of them;
Their Reformations were partial; and at best, but of Short continuance; they
quickly returned to folly and did worse than their fathers. We have reason to
fear by their Example, least it should be so with us also; for we, as well as
they, have principles of revolt connatural to us. The Apostle mentioning of
their sin and folly, says, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall: how much more may we that are sensibly falling already, take heed lest
we fall utterly; and take it kindly, that we are warned, before the things that
concern our peace are hid from our eyes.

2. Successless attempts for Reformation, are more than presages of worse
declensions: for that obstinacy that renders such attempts successless, shows
that they are very far gone already, and also merits more divine desertions and
derelictions; and the more persons are left of God, the easier a prey they are
to every Temptation. Although it may be all has not been done by Magistrates,
Ministers, Churches and Synods, that should have been done, to promote
Reformation, and Stopping the progress of Impiety and Iniquity: yet one that
did not know what has been done by Courts, Synods, Ministers and Churches, in
a public way, (besides all private Prayers, Tears, Counsel, and Reproof) would
not think one half has been done, that has; so little fruit of it appears.
Nor is it easy to do so much again: although the event show, much more is
needful to be done.

3. Notwithstanding all the Judgments of God that have come upon us for our
sins, yet we are unreformed. Irreligion and profane neglects of the Worship of
God; Vain and vile Swearing, and profaning the Name of God, and his Sabbaths;
Disobedience to Parents, and family disorders; Violence, unrighteousness,
sensuality, pride, contention, coveteousness, and all manner of carnality and
carnal security, rather increase than decrease. There is the less hopes of
growing better, the more fears of growing worse, when men's endeavors for
Reformation are fruitless: but least of all is the hope of growing better, and
most of all the fear of growing worse, when Divine Endeavors seem frustrate
that aimed at our Reformation, and take not that effect that might be expected.
Isa. 26.9. When thy Judgments are abroad in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the
World will learn Righteousness; That is it may most rationally and justly be so
expected, and how much more may it be expected of those places on which such
Judgments fall: But when after various sore Judgments, God may say, I have
smitten you so, and so, yet have you not returned to me, as Jer. 2.30. in vain
have I smitten your Children, they have received no correction; that is, are
never the better, and as Isa. 9.13. The people turns not unto him that
smites them; and as Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be smitten any more, ye will
revolt more and more; if things be thus with us, (Oh! that they were not so
with us) are we not in great danger of being more sinful yet.

4. When great and good men die thick and fast, it portends declension. Little
does this ungrateful world know, how much of the Religion, Equity, Peace and
Order of a Place, is under God, owing to the Piety, Zeal, Prudence, Activity
and Fidelity of a few men, that God raises up and brings into Office in Church
and Common wealth, and spirits for his Service; however let them guess at it by
the following texts, Deuteronomy. 31.16. The Lord said to Moses, thou shall sleep with
thy fathers, and this people shall rise up and go a whoring after the gods of
the Strangers of the land. And Moses says v. 21. While I am alive with you
this day, you have been rebellious against the Lord: how much more after my
death, Judge. 2.7. The people served the Lord all the days of Joshua. 2 Chronicles.
24.2. Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the days of
Jehojadah the priest. v. 17, 18. Now after the death of Jehojadah etc. they
left the Lord God of their fathers. I have no design for Funeral Sermons on any
in particular, but have with Sorrow observed such deaths of Magistrates,
Ministers, and Military Commanders, and so many of them, that I am afraid of
the Omen. For such deaths are to a people, as Micaiah to Ahab; they never
prophecy good: but either great declension, or great judgment, or both.
Religion has one the less friend on earth, for every godly man that dies: and
sin has one the less enemy. And the Example, Prayers and Tears of many plain
Christians, are like to be more wanted, then they are lamented. Our friend
Lazarus sleeps, says Christ, and wept at his grave. Godly men must die as
well as others, and if their Children and Successors made good their Leaders
ground, it were not so Ominous: But alas! it has been often otherwise in New
England.

5. The lubricity, fickleness, and unsteadyness of men in the true Religion, in
which they have been Educated (not to say born, as well as brought up) it is a
woeful sign of declension; when the Children of the Church, are like Children
tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine: Men run away with a perverse
interpretation of that of the Apostle, 1 These. ^.21. Prove all things:
forgetting the very next words, hold fast that which is good. Alas! men are
more fixed and steady in a false Religion: Has a Nation changed their gods
which yet are no Gods, but my people has changed their glory etc. Jer. 5.11.
It Is a prodigy of Levity and Vanity to see persons that sucked in such Milk as
David, who said, Thou art my God from my Mothers belly, thou have caused me to
hope on my Mothers breasts; that had such Mothers and Grandmothers, as Timothy
had; that have been acquainted with the holy Scriptures from their very
childhood, and by their Godly Fathers, Schoolmasters, and Ministers, were
brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; and it may be, have made
a Personal profession, yet hanker after Novelties in Religion, without regard
to verity; and when reproved for it, think to justify themselves by that of the
Apostle, Prove all things, as if that would justify their running a gadding,
and a madding after such Seducers as pretend to divine inspiration, immediate
revelation, infallible guidance by the holy Spirit; and yet deny the holy
Scriptures to be the word of God, and touchstone of truth; and deny the
Ordinances of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and all Instituted worship. Truly
Sirs, as for them that have lived long under the Preaching of the Gospel, and
cannot see that such doctrine needs not much trying, whether it be sound or no:
will be found to have their Religion to choose, and that they have unsound
hearts, as well as itching ears. They that have long had the offer of Truth,
and yet let it go; will hold fast-Error. They that were so scrupulous about
CHRIST who came in his Fathers Name, and confirmed his doctrine by Miracles,
did as Christ foretold, believe on one that came in his own name. Declension in
Doctrine and Worship, will bring on declension in Manners. They that are not
sound in the faith, will not long be sound in Gods Statutes: they that make
Shipwreck of Faith, will make Shipwreck of a Good Conscience also.

6. The extreme Difficulty of recovering from declension, renders it very
hazardous, whether we shall not yet be more Sinful. If there were no Devil to
tempt, nor no evil Example among men, nor any temptation from a frowning or
flattering World (which is all far otherwise) yet the inbred corruption of men's
hearts, that are deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, is enough
to undo all. This peop^^, says Jeremiah, has a revolting and a rebellious
heart; they are revolted and gone. Jer. 5.23. Such a deceitful, revolting,
rebellious heart can shift off all Conviction, and bear up against all reproof.
Infidelity can despise and disrega^d all Promises and Threatenings; Security can
eat and drink, build and plant, till the flood come and carry all away;
Profaneness can mock at all th s, and more, till there be no remedy. Self-love
can blind men's eyes, in what concerns themselves, so as they shall not be able
to see faults in themselves; though they be very quick sighted in seeing faults
in others. Reformation is the most necessary, but the most difficult thing in
the World, because the Enemy of it is not only in a man's own house, but in a
man's own heart. To cure a long contracted Cachexia, or ill habit of body; to
uphold a tottering Empire, and to reform a declining People, are three very
difficult things: but the last of them is the hardest of them all. These six
foregoing particulars, may serve to show that the people of New England are in
great danger of being yet more Sinful, which is a very humbling and awful
consideration. Who can seriously reflect upon it, and not say as they, Jo^h.
22.17. Is the Iniquity of Poor too little for us, from which we are not
cleansed to this day? The more the Danger is; the more need our care, fear,
prayer and endeavor be; lest we add to the heap of New-Englands Transgression.

Secondly, New England is in danger of being much more Miserable than ever yet
they were, or yet are.

The fore mentioned danger being found real, and impending, this cannot be
otherwise. It unavoidably follows from the premises: for if it be like to fare
with New England as to Happiness or Misery: according as it goes with them as
to Holiness and Righteousness, as has been proved: and that New England is
already very Sinful and in danger of being much more Sinful, there must needs
be the like danger of being more Miserable God threatened Israel three times in
one Chapter, that if after they had Sinned against him, and thereby brought
upon themselves some direful Effects of his displeasure, they did not humble
themselves, return and reform, H^ would punish them yet seven times more for
their sin; which accordingly came at last to p^ss. God did bear and for-bear,
time after time, and many a time forgave them upon their repentance, such as it
was, so as not to consume them; though at several times he sorely afflicted
them for their sin: Yet forasmuch they revolted more and more after their
respits from their trouble; at length they found the threatening executed: and
so may we, if we don't take warning. Before I leave those two last heads, I
will reflect a little on the sayings of some, that (were they true) would
render the fore mentioned Warnings needless and useless.

1. Some make as if New England were already as sinful, as sinful can be; as
bad, as bad can be. To which I reply, I have no design to speak diminutively of
the Sins of the Country; I do acknowledge with grief, and shame, that they
have been, and are very horrible; yet I think such Sayings are not justifyable
in any. Some well-meaning holy men, being of dark melancholy Spirits, and
little acquainted with the advances that Atheism, Idolatry, Superstition,
Profaneness, Iniquity and Sensuality have made in other professing parts of
the World; are apt to think so, and in their indignation against sin and
sinners to say so. But the truth is, Though we have cause to abhor our selves
for being so bad as we are; and to meditate all ways possible to grow better;
yet it cannot with truth be asserted, that as yet we are as bad as bad can be;
for there is real danger of growing worse. There are other designing persons,
that are no great friends to holiness and righteousness, that are of a vulture
Spirit, that fly hastily over all the fair meadows and fields without eying of
them; that they may pitch and prey upon some Carrion. These find nothing but
faults in the Government, Churches, Ministers, and Good people of all ranks:
and Sport themselves with the falls of here and there an Eminent Professor; or
the infirmities and real, or supposed mistakes of men much better than
themselves; These fools make a mock of sin; and it serves their occasion to
blaspheme all the Work of God in the Wilderness; and traduce for Hypocrites,
all those, that their evil example cannot make loose or profane. All I shall
say to this latter sort is. That I have no design to justify our selves; Shame,
and blushing, and confusion of face belongs to us: for we are sinners. Yet if
a comparative goodness would serve our turn (as it will not) we might possibly
pass in this degenerate Age. We acknowledge we are very bad; but yet not so
bad; but we are afraid of being worse

2. Others make and speak as if we were as miserable already, as miserable we
could be. To which I reply, I have no design to speak diminitively of the
Judgments of God. I acknowledge they have been very terrible. At this also my
heart trembles: yet I think we ought not so to pore upon the Judgments of God,
as to forget the Mercies of God; for in Judgment God has remembered Mercy. I am
sure such Speeches forget Thanksgiving. Unhumbled, Unthankful and peevish men,
think to receive only good from the hand of God: and not evil: and under a
merciful, moderate Affliction, say, it cannot be worse But such ought to know
that the holy and jealous God has more, and more terrible miseries and
mischiefs to heap; and arrows to spend upon an Unreformable Vovenant People,
than ever yet, have come upon New England. The Example of the Jews is a
dreadful instance of it. We ought to justify God; yea to praise him that has
punished less than our Iniquities deserve; and to mourn under our afflictions as
they are evidences and effects of Divine Displeasure; and to mourn for our
Sins, and beg the pardon of them for the sake of Christ Jesus, and to reform
our doings; and not murmur at the Judgments of God. And all this to prevent an
experimental Conviction, that there was real danger of being more miserable.

U. 8. To Encourage all good people to hope and pray for the Restaurations,
Reformations, and Divine Benedictions promised to Jews, or Christians; or
prophesied to come to them in the latter days; and that we in New England may
through the Grace of God, have a share in the good things spoken of, that are
to be fulfilled in the latter days. The proof of the Third Doctrine is pat to
this purpose. If God can do such things, may do such things, has done such
things already, and will do such things again for his Ancient People the Jews;
and there be prophesies and promises, that God will do such things; not only,
for the Jews, but for Christian places that are in ruins, overrun with sin
and misery. Why should we not hope and pray for the accomplishment of them?
Besides the fore mentioned Reasons, I shall offer to consideration, three
particulars more, which may animate faith and prayer, and remove impediments
and objections.

1. The Reformation is prophesied of, as well as the Restoration and
Benediction.

2. The Reformation is promised, as well as the Restoration and Benediction.

3. That it is not absolutely necessary, that the Reformation precede the
Restoration.

1. The Reformation is prophesied of as well as the Restoration, etc. Now
prophecy relates to what is future, and properly speaks of Event, not D^ty. If
it speaks of Duty, yet it speaks of it under the notion of Event. Consequently,
if the Prophecy foretells Reformation, than which nothing is more duty; yet it
speaks of it under the notion of what shall certainly come to pass. We must
not therefore be discouraged from praying for it, because we yet see not the
Desolate Countries inhabited as formerly, and see not Religion reviving and
thriving in them as formerly. Were these things come to pass, the prophecy
were already fulfilled. But we must believe it future, because the Holy Ghost
by the mouth of the Prophets has foretold it. Perhaps some could easily
believe, the Restoration, if they could see the Reformation; but both must be
believed to be future; though neither as yet be come to pass: because both are
foretold.

2. The Reformation is also promised. Many speak as if only the Restoration
and Benediction were promised; and look upon Reformation as the condition of
the Promise. And because they see not the condition fulfilled; cannot believe
the Restaurations and Blessings. When the truth is, the promise that is
contained in Prophesy, as such, is absolute and not conditional: When promises
are annexed as Sanctions to the Laws of Christ, they belong to the preceptive
will of God, and so are considered as Conditions. But when Promises are
infolded in Prophesies, they belong to Gods will of Purpose: and therefore must
come to pass. For though Gods Commands are broken; yet his Counsels are not;
they stand for ever, and the Thoughts of his heart to all generations. All such
promises therefore ought to be considered, as absolute; and consequently the
Reformations will certainly come.

3. It is not absolutely necessary that the Reformation precede the
Restoration, or that the Reformation be sensibly advanced before God begin to
plead the cause of his people against their Enemies, and begin their
Restoration: I readily acknowledge that in point of Duty, Reformation ought to
precede, and all the Religion justice and reason in the world oblige those that
have made defection from God, and his pure ways; and are under dreadful effects
of his displeasure; should be speedy and thorough in their Repentance and
Reformation. But so desperataly wicked is fallen man, that if God should not
begin with man, man would never begin with Him, Men are dead in trespasses and
sins, and so cannot; or so habituated and inclined to evil, they will not
return to God, till God is before hand with them. If God bring on Reformation
upon the world that lies in wickedness; be is found of those that seek him
not; and if upon a deeply degenerate people, he stretches forth his hands to a
gainsaying and rebellious people. And the Grace of God must be exerted in a
victorious and irresistible way, before Reformation can advance, either in the
Church or World. Seeing then both Restoration and Reformation depend upon the
good pleasure of God, it is in vain for us to determine which shall precede;
though we know in point of man's duty, which should be first. That which we
affirm is, that we ought not to be discouraged in praying for these
Restaurations, or believing they shall come to pass, till we see Reformation in
good forwardness; but to hope and pray for the accomplishment of all prophesied
to be done in a way of Sovereign grace for the Church or World in the latter
days. If the Restaurations depended on the Antecedency of Reformation, and
Reformation depended upon man's free will, it would be long enough before either
would come to pass. But God having foretold and promised both, our dependence
ought to be on his Grace and Truth and Power. If God can make Children to
Abraham of the Stones of the Street, and make a Church to himself out of the
forlorn Gentiles. When the boughs of the natural Olive were broke off, God
could graft in Gentiles, wild Olives into the same stock, and therefore cannot
be at a loss to graft in the natural branches again. Isa 44.2, 3, 4, 5. Fear
not Jacob, for I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground, I will pour my Spirit on thy seed and my blessing on thine
offspring. The ruinous circumstances of Jews and many Gentile places are such,
as to Sin and Misery, that there is little hope; either of Restoration or
Reformation; were it not for the Prophesy and the Promise. But because of the
Prophecy and Promise, we must against hope believe in hope, and though they
and their circumstances promise little yet God in his word has promised much.
Therefore we should hope for much, and pray for much, though there should be as
little sign of Reformation as there was of Rain, in the days of Elias, when it
had not Rained in 1260 days: yet they that can believe and pray like Elias,
will in the word of God hear the sound of abundance of rain; they will look out
seven times, and pray, and pray again; though there should not appear so much
as a Cloud as big as a man's hand: believing on and praying to the Lord, till he
send Rain on the earth, till he come and rain down righteousness on Asia,
Africa, Europe and America; and the Elect come from all parts, and Quarters of
the World; from East, West, North and South, and Sit down in the Kingdom of
God. He that has promised these things, ^^useth His Sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and his rain to fall on the just and on the unjust, in a way
of common bounty and goodness; and he does no less toward the Elect in a way
of special Grace. And when the time of Reformation is come he will cause the
Sun of Righteousness to shine upon the evil and upon the good, and the Rain of
Righteousness to fall upon the just and upon the unjust; and then bad man will
be come good; and good men will become better: and Restoration and Reformation
will struggle like twins in the Womb, which shall be born first; a Nation shall
be born at once, and the earth shall bring forth in one day. Isa. 66.8. And
deliverance, and holiness shall be on mount Sion together. Obad. 17. We may
confide in this, That all prophesies and absolute promises shall come to pass
in that time, order and manner that God has ordained. And the promised Good is
more certainly known; than the time and manner. It is great Consolation, that
Restaurations and Reformations, and Blessings shall come. Though we know not
the time just when; yet there are signals given whereby the Church of God may
know that their Redemption draws nigh. And as Daniel knew that the Seventy
years of the Captivity was out, or nigh out; which made him set to Prayer: So
we know that some notable Restaurations and Reformations are nigh; though it
may be we cannot tell just how nigh. And I am persuaded, one great reason why
good men's faith is so wavering, and their prayers so few, and no more fervent;
is because they take it for granted, that Reformation must needs considerably,
outrun Restoration. For prevention of which Remissness of faith and prayer; I
desire the premises may be considered; that prophesies, and the promises in
them, falling under the will of Gods purpose, are all certainly future; as
certain to be, as if they were already. And it is utterly uncertain, whether
the Reformations will outrun the Restaurations. Consider the Restoration out
of Egypt; Did the Reformation precede? Did not the Lord say, Let my people go
that they may serve me? Till some Pharaohs of the world are sunk as a Stone in
the Sea: No considerable Reformation can advance. The Church must get out of
the Wilderness, as well as out of Egypt, before the Glorious Reformation of it
can take place. Whilst the Church was in Egypt, God saw the affliction of his
people, and heard their Cry by reason of their Taskmasters; and he came down
to deliver them. Exodus 3.7, 8. The whole Story shows there was no considerable
Reformation antecedaneous to their Deliverance. So for the Deliverance out of
the Babylonish Captivity; it is evident, by the Books of Ezra, Nehemiah,
Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi, that their Deliverance out run their
Reformation. And the Restoration of the Jews in the last days, in the times of
the Messiah, for ought appears to the contrary, is like to be much after the
same sort, in a way that can be accounted for only by the Sovereignty of the
Grace of God, Mic. 5.7. The Remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many
people, as a dew from the Lord, as the Showers upon the Grass, that tarrieth
not for man, nor waits for the Sons of Men. What though the whole house of
Israel say, our bones are dried, our hope is lost, and we are cut off for our
part? yet I know no reason, why Christians may not hope and pray for the
Resurrection of those dry bones. If God will have them prophesied over, and
has promised to op^^ their graves, and bring them up out of their graves, put
his Spirit in them, and said they shall live; Ezekiel. 27.11, 12, 13, 14. He that
has spoke it, will perform it, even the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel. What
if the Four Horns of the Gentiles have scattered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem?
Has not God as many Carpenters to fray them away, Zech. 1.18, 19, 20, 21. and
to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which have lift up their born over the
Land of Judah to scatter it: The good words, and the comfortable words which
God has spoken, give us ground to believe that the Mohammedan Imposture and
Tyranny will not always last; and that the Remnants and Fragments of the
Grecian and African Churches will be gathered up, and restored. What if
Antichrist Exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, and fitteth in the Temple of God, and has done so above a thousand
years; is not that Man of Sin, a Son of perdition? Does not God see; yea and
his people too, that his day is coming? 2 These. 2.3, 4, 8. It were Infidelity
to conclude that God has done with the Protestant People, and his Witnesses in
Germany, Bohemia, Hungaria, France, the Valleys of Piedmont, and many other
places in Europe: where for his Name and Gospel sake they have been Killed all
the day long. What if the Reformed Nations are very much deformed? and the
spirit and power of the First Reformers seemed to die with them? and since has
been a gradual declension till the power and life of Godliness is very much
decayed, and the purity of their Worship abated, and Schisms, Divisions and
Sects strangely multiplied, and Luke-warmness in some, and Profaneness in
others, abominably advanced? Yet we ought to hope and pray that God will revive
his work, and bring on a Second Reformation, which, when it comes, will carry
all before it: and it seems as if it would not be long first. Nebuchadnezzars
Image stands upon his last Legs, and it seems as if both of them had
received a blow from the Stone cut out of the mountain without hands, that
makes them stagger. It is probable, Delay will not be much longer. The Great
Turk, the Oppressor of the Jews and Eastern Christians, seems to be at his
last prayers, and they likelier to reconcile him to Hell, than to Heaven. And
considering what is said of the Kings of the East, Rev. 16.12. and of the
Western Kings, Rev. 17.16. We ought to expect and pray for the coming of the
time, when the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and
of his Christ. Rev. 11.15. At which time (it is past all peradventure) all that
is yet to be fulfilled of the Glorious Things spoken of the City of God will be
accomplished, and the Restaurations, Reformations, and Divine Benedictions
promised to the Jews or Christian Churches, or World, will be accomplished. The
Things that Infidels and Enemies mock at, and good Christians understand but
darkly, and believe but faintly, shall be Gloriously Effected.

And, notwithstanding the present bad circumstances of America, I know no
reason to conclude this Continent shall not partake of the Goodness of God in
the latter days; nor why the Sun of Righteousness may not go round the Earth,
as the Sun in the Firmament does go round Heaven. No Scripture asserts the
contrary: but many seem to favor the Affirmative. I suppose that Christ is not
called the Sun of Righteousness, merely because of his Light, and Heat, and
quickening vivifick Influences: but also because of his Circuition or Circuit
round the World, by the Preaching of the Gospel; and his expanding and
extending his saving Virtue to those that Sit in darkness, and in the Region
and shadow of Death. See and consider Psalm. 19.4, 5, 6. and compare it with
Romans 10.18. Luke 1.78, 79. Mal. 4 2. Methinks men should not be hasty to
Reprobat a Fourth Part of the World, without Express Order from Heaven. I know
not how it came to pass, that Conjectures about America have been so various,
strange and uncomfortable; as to its Rise, State, and final Destiny. Burnet M.
D. affirms that the Americans, in their Progenitors, came not out of the Ark;
that their Progenitors descended not from Noah. And indeed they are beholden to
him, that he let them descend from Adam; and did not bring them out of the
Slime, as he does Gog and Magog. But it is enough to reply to this, that it is
not only Unscriptural, but also Antiscriptural. A late Annotator on the Bible
(who is otherwise a very worthy man; but I think, misses it in this) in his
Preface to the New Testament, in the separate Edition, allows the Americans
to be descended of Noah; but by Cham: and thence gathers that they shall not be
gathered into the Church. To which I reply (1) That it is wholly begged that
they are the Progeny of Cham: and notable Reasons and Authorities may be
produced to the contrary. (2) That if it were certain it were so; yet the
Consequence is no way valid: as the Multitude of Churches that have been in
Africa show; that were undoubtedly, the Posterity of Cham. (3) This opinion is
wholly founded, and the stress of it depends upon a doubtful Interpretation of
a dark Prophecy, Genesis 9.27. God shall enlarge Japheth: So our Version reads
it. But if Cham with his four Sons has filled all Africa, with a considerable
part of Asia; and possess all America besides: he is certainly enlarged more
than Japheth with his Seven Sons; and would vie for Number, with Shem and
Japheth too. If we prefer the marginal Reading; God shall Persuade Japheth, and
he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, this would not gain the point intended:
for the not mentioning of Cham, does not necessarily exclude Cham, no more than
when Shem is called the Brother of Japheth, Cham is denied to be the Brother of
Japheth; or Shem denied to be the Brother of Cham. Besides, Interpreters of
great Note go other ways. The Hebrew Doctors gathered from this Prophecy, that
they should speak Japheth's Tongue; which in the Ages following, was Greek: and
was fulfilled in the Apostles speaking, and writing the Gospel in Greek.
Ainsworth says it may imply the grafting of Japheth's Children into the stock
of the Church; when Shem's Posterity, the Jews should be cut off: quoting for
this, Romans 11.11, 12, 15, 17. As the Reubenites are said to dwell in the
Hagarites tents, after the Hagarites were subdued and fallen. 1 Chronicles. 5.10.
Others read the words, God shall enlarge Japheth, and He, that is, God shall
dwell in the tents of Shem, in the sense of John 1.14 And so make it a famous
Prophecy of the Incarnation of the Son of God; his taking Flesh of the seed of
Shem. Others understand it of God's setting up the Temple, and dwelling in it
among the Israelites descended of Shem. Certainly it is not reasonable to draw
so hard a Conclusion on such a Text, that admits of such and so many various
Interpretations: Seeing it tends to discourage all Endeavors for the
Conversion of the Indians; and so may greatly prejudice the Souls of Millions
of Men, and hinder the enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ. And indeed it
seems many ways derogatory to the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
Savior of the World, John 4.42. 1 John 4 14. If the Angels may be believed,
His Birth was Joy to All People; If the greatest born of Women may be believed,
He takes away the sin of the World, John 1.29. If the beloved Disciple may be
credited, He made an Atonement, or is the Propotiation for the sins of the
whole World. And many other such like Expressions there be, which must
certainly, comprehend Some of All Nations And the Redeemed Church acknowledge
as much in their Song of Praise, Rev. 5.9, 10. Nor can I, possibly, otherwise
understand Christ's Commission to his Apostles, and their Successors in the
Ministry. Mark 16.15. Go ye into All the World, and Preach the Gospel to Every
Creature. Matt. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore, and teach All Nations etc. and lo,
I am with you always unto the End of the World; Which seems as plain as words
can make it, that whatsoever Nation, or Nations shall be discovered to the End
of the World, they are to be Evangelized, and Baptized. That also of the
Apostle to the Gentiles, seems plain and irrefragable, 1 Timothy 2 5, 6. There is
One God, and One Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus: Who gave
Himself a Ransom for all, To be testified in due time. Now although it had not
been testified at that time to the Americans, as it had been to Asians,
Europaeans, and Africans; yet there was a due time to come, wherein it should
be testified to Americans also. Which, through the Grace of God, is now come to
pass. The Bible is made to speak Indian, as well as other Languages. And there
are not only Converts; but Churches, and Preachers of their Own; which are a
First fruits to Christ: Which should make us look for a Harvest, and to pray
the Lord of the Harvest to send forth Laborers into that part of his Vineyard.
God promised to his Son, the Heathen for his lot, and the uttermost Ends of the
Earth for his Possession: not excluding America. It is a part of Christ's
Exaltation Honor, that at the Name of Jesus things Under the Earth shall bow.
Philip. 2.10. Which, although some interpret another way; yet compared with
Rev. 5.3, 13. seems more fairly to be interpreted of the Americans, that were
Under the Earth to the Christians of the Eastern Nations. God gave his Son for
a Witness to the People; not only to the People of the Jews, but of the
Gentiles also; yea, the most remote of them. That in Isa. 55.5. seems to bid
fair for the Conversion of the Americans. Behold, thou shall call a Nation that
thou know not; and Nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee. Compare
it with Psalm. 18.43, 44. Thou have made me the head of the heathen: a people
that I have not known shall serve me. As Soon as they shall hear of me, they
shall obey me. It cannot be, literally, more verified of any, than of the
American Nations. Christ as God, knew all Nations: but, as Man, He did not. He,
as Man, had seen and known Asians, Europeans, and Africans. This cannot be
doubted, if you consider the Concourse of Jews and Proselytes, that was
annually at Jerusalem, at the Feast of Pentecost, Act. 2.5, 10, 11. Now, as for
the Americans, Christ as Man, had never seen or known any of them: neither had
any American ever seen, or known Him. But, according to this Text, He shall
call them, though He knew not Them, and they shall run to him, although they
never knew Him. The Strangers, when they hear of Him, shall submit themselves
unto Him: as is accordingly, in part, already come to pass. I shall finish this
Argument with an allusion to some passages in Luke 15. What ever any think of
America; If the great Shepherd have a lost Sheep in the American Wilderness; He
will go after it till he find it: and the Angels of God will rejoice at the
finding of it, what ever men do. The great Householder of the World will have
every corner of it Swept, before he will loose a Penny: Dram, a Roman Penny,
in value, in English Money, seven pennys half penny.
and at the finding of it, expect that his Friends will rejoice. If the
Merciful Father have a Prodigal Child gone into a far Country, in esteem dead
and lost: When it shall appear that he is Penitent, alive, and found; while he
is a great way off, his Father will run and meet him, and kiss him. He will
call for the best Robe for this naked American Prodigal; and Shoes for this
barefoot Son; and the fatted Calf to fill his hungry belly: and there will be
Music and Dancing; what ever the Elder Brother think of it.

Others have conjectured that America will be the head Quarters of Gog and
Magog; and that it will be Hell it self. This is worse and worse still! But may
be something alleviated by an opposite Conjecture. For there are Others that
ask why it may not be the New-Jerusalem, or a part of it? and this New World
that is Under the Eastern Earth, be the New Heaven, and New Earth. These
Opinions are as wide from one another, as Heaven is from Hell. I count it
sufficient to set them one against the other; without saying which is widest
from the Truth. Only, Who of an American (though only so Natione, non gente)
had not much rather (if it may stand with the Counsel of God) that it should be
the New Jerusalem, than the Old Tophet. Known unto God are all his Works from
the beginning of the World: And He that made this New World, knows why He
made it, and what to do with it; though men do not. It is certain, Antichrist
boasted in his American EYPHKA, and Conquest, when he began to be routed in
Europe, by the Reformation. And who can blame him to provide a New World
against he lost his Old One. But the Son of GOD followed him at the heels, and
took Possession of America for Himself. And this Province, so far as I know, is
the very Turf and Twig He took Possession by; as to the Reformation and
Conversion of the Natives, and gathering of them into Churches. And I am not
without Hope, but that He will hold his Possession; not only to the end of this
World, but to the end of the World: if there be a difference; as there may be
for ought I know to the contrary. And if any of the Indians should happen to
read what has been spoke concerning America, I would commend to their
Consideration that in Act. 17.24, 26, 27, 30, 31. God that made the World and
all things therein, has made of One blood all Nations of Men, for to dwell on
all the face of the Earth; and has determined the Times before appointed, and
the Bounds of their Habitation (i. e. in what Age, or Place of the World men
shall live) That they should seek the Lord if happily they might feel after him
and find him. -- the times of this Ignorance God winked at, but, now commands
all men every where: to repent. Because he has appointed a Day, in the which
he will judge the world in righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead.

Now as for New England, if the First Planters of it had dreamed that the very
Situation or Climate of this Land had been crime enough to make men aliens from
the Covenants of promise; they would not have Sold their Europaean Birtbright,
for a mess of American Pottage. For ought I can see to the contrary, our
Declensions are the worst Omen and Objection against us; and Reformation would
be the best Answer to them: and Hope and Prayer are powerful helps and
inducements to it. Quicken us and we will call upon thy n^^e, Turn (...) again
O Lord God of Hosts, cause thy face to (...): and we shall be saved. Psalm.
80.18, 19. And I will yet add a word or two which I would preface as John does,
1 John cap 2. v. 1. These things I write unto you that ye sin not, What I am
about to speak, I speak that New England sin not; yet if it should so come to
pass, that New England should yet be more sinful and more miserable than now it
is (which God prevent for his Mercys sake, which endures for ever) yet there
is Scripture ground to hope, that after God had vindicated his Holiness by sore
punishments on us, God would again restore, reform and bless New England; and
have a name, and a praise to himself, in the Wilderness, of the Posterity of
his People. If any should say yet, What is become of the Asian, African and
Europaean Churches that are long since desolated? I would give these two
Answers. (1.) That is become of them, that should make New England fear and
tremble: and beware of Idolatry, Superstition, Profaneness and
Unrighteousness: and Remember from whence they are fallen, and do their first
works. We should cry mightily to God, to pardon our sins past; and to reform
all amiss, and prevent our farther declension* that his Jealousy burn not like
fire against us; as it has done against them. (2.) I would also say, that we
ought not to entertain such desperate conclusions; as if all places that have
been Eminent, for the Christian Religion; and are now degen^rate, and in most
ruinous circumstances, are utterly forsaken of God: We ought as well to think
what God will yet do for them; as well as what he has done against them. I
shall not easily be brought to believe, that God has taken his last leave, of
the forementioned places: I think I have proved the contrary already; and that
God will again restore, reform and bless them. And for the same Reasons I
believe, that God will Glorify his Mercy in America, as well as his Justice,
Jealousy, and Severity. For the Earth is full of the Lords Mercy. Psalm. 119.
v. 64. and his tender Mercies are over all his works. Psalm. 145.10. And all his
works shall praise him, in all places of his dominion. Psalm. 103.22. I pretend
to nothing singular in all this. I believe some monitory Expressions of men
much better than my self; have been wrested beyond their Intention: and that
has past for their Opinion; which only was intended by way of Admonition: and
that the same persons hope better things concerning New England: things that
accompany Salvation, even Restoration, Reformation, and Benediction: and I
believe that they are as good Friends to New England as any in the Land; and
daily pray that this Land may be as much, yea, more than ever it was; An
Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness.

Thus much of the Doctrines in general; Suffer me a word or two more, relating
to the occasion of the day, and I Will not abuse your patience any longer.

We have felt the Rebukes of God on our Liberties, and Privileges, and
Government; as well as on other things. God has broken the Pride or Excellency
of New Englands Power. Our Liberties and Privileges, are not just the same
that sometime they have been; although it be better with us still in those
respects; than we deserve. And if things are not just as we would have them be;
yet they are just as God and the King would have them be; which I hope will
quiet the minds of all good men and good Subjects. And if we shall again find
favor in the sight of God, and the King; it may perhaps be some time or other
better with us than it is, or ever was. However, it is our Duty and Interest to
make the best and most of our present Liberties, and Privileges. Thanks be to
God and the King! our Houses and Lands, are our own; without every man's being
at the Cost of a Charter; and yet we have the liberty of our Religion, and the
free Exercise of it, without subscribing to new articles of Faith, Worship, or
Discipline; which is a great favor of God, if we have wisdom and grace to
improve it rightly; and men do not interpret this liberty perversely; and use
it for an Occasion to the flesh; and think they may cast off the Public
Worship, Profane the Sabbaths, neglect the Ordinances; and think to do what is
right in their own eyes, though they confound all Religion, Peace and Order. If
any should so think, and act, I hope they will find themselves mistaken: for
the true notion of Liberty of Conscience, is liberty to lead quiet and
peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty, without restraint from the
Government, or popular confusion, and disturbance. In maxima Liberate est
minima Licentia. The Government also is in a good measure Elective on the
peoples part; and so far as it is so, may be very beneficial, if
conscientiously and discreetly managed; we may if we please, and certainly
ought to Choose such Representatives, as fear God, honor the King, love the
brotherhood; and will be true to the best Interest of all the people, both in
Spirituals and Temporals. And if we so do, the Counselors will be chosen by
the wisest and best amongst us; yea, by our selves in proxy, and consequently
we shall be greatly to blame; if we have not Counselors as able and faithful
to promote holiness and righteousness, as any in the Land. Election being the
work of the day, I will venture to say a word of it. It is Essential to
Election to be free; free from Compulsion, Nundination, and Faction. And such
ought to be chosen as excel in Piety, Probity, and Prudence: and so far as will
consist with our Circumstances, of good Extract, Erudition and Estate; furnished
well for the Service of God, and the King, and their Generation according to
the will of God. And although the Governor and Lieutenant Governor are not
chosen by our selves; yet we have the Consolation and Satisfaction that they
are chosen by the best King upon Earth; Who never yet gave us cause to complain
in that matter: but to rejoice in his Royal Wisdom and Goodness and Paternal
Care; So making the Apostles direction easy; to submit to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King, as Supreme; or unto
Governors, as sent by him; for the punishment of Evil doers, and the praise of
them that do well. And now if I should presume a little farther, and offer a
few things in particular, to such Honorable and Worshipful Persons, as are, or
shall be called to be the Rulers of this People; I hope it would be acceptable
to your Honors; and if it should be so, it would be but according to your
wonted Candor: And although you need not my direction, you will gladly be
minded of what you already know to be your duty; and of your pious disposition,
are willing to do. Though your Honors are the Rulers of this people; yet you,
as well as we, are the Servants of our God: whose Providence disposes you to
your several Seats and Places in the Government, for his own Glory, and the
Good of the people of New England. You are the Ministers of God for our Good,
and you can do nothing more acceptable to God, honorable to your Selves; nor
beneficial to us; than to do your utmost to make this Land an Habitation of
Justice, and Mountain of Holiness. It is a base opinion that would preclude the
First Table of the Law from the care, custody, and concern of the Magistrate.
Your Honors know the Word of God; and the Examples of Holy Kings, Judges and
other Rulers of Israel, better than to be put off at that rate, from the best
part of your Dignity and Duty. The Holy Scriptures call Rulers, Gods; and their
Seats of Government, Heaven. Would they not be strange Gods that should have no
regard to Godliness! And would it not profane their Heaven, if they should
have no regard to Holiness? Our Lives and Liberties, our Names and Estates,
should be very dear to you, as well as to us: but yet in themselves considered,
and as they relate to us, they are a very trifle, in comparison of the Object
of divine Worship, God blessed for ever more: and also in comparison of the
Means, Manner, and Time of divine Worship, as instituted by God for his own
Glory. It Is the Character of a Ruler as bad, as bad can be, neither to fear
God, nor regard man: And the Character of a Ruler as good, as good can be; to
be just and rule in the fear of God. I know not how it comes to pass, that in
vulgar use, one that pretty well, as they think, conforms to the Second Table
of the Moral Law, is called a Moral man; though he have little, or no Regard to
the First Table. Sed been intelligentibus, Utrumque invenitur in Singulis. Nam
et qui diligit DEUM, non Eum potest contemnere praecipientem ut diligat
Proximum: et qui sancte ac spirita^iter diligit Proximum; Quid in eo diligit,
nisi DEUM?

Augustine. in Joan. 13.34 Tractat. 65. col. 415.


Whenas both Tables make but the Moral Law. I am afraid it proceeds from this,
that men generally love themselves and the world more than God and the things
of God. The first and great Commandment is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul etc. And the second is like to it,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And this Land can never be an
Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness, unless due regard be had to
both, in our Courts. If therefore any thing Can farther be done either by
Legislation, or due Execution of Laws already made, that will serve the
Interest of Holiness; I beseech your Honors in your Wisdom to meditate it, and
by your Authority to see it done. The Churches, the Ministers, the College and
Schools of Learning are all under your Inspection and Care: and your
Countenance and Encouragement of them, so far as is meet, will tend to the
advancement of Holiness in the present Generation, and the transmitting of true
Religion to them that are yet to be born. If therefore any thing farther Can be
done in favor of them; for the sake of Religion and good Literature, I
beseech, it may be done. Let the public Faith be very Sacred, and the public
Debts be paid, as well as private ones; Let the Soldiers be duly encouraged,
and some way contrived to satisfy for the Hazards and hardships that they
formerly underwent, or still undergo; that according to John's direction, the
Soldiers may be content with their Wages; and be more voluntary and hardy in
the prosceution of War against the most barbarous, unjust and cruel of Enemies.
If any thing more Can be done for the Suppressing the Indians, and defending
the Frontiers, and Out-Plantations; and stirring up the Inhabitants to more
vigilance and care, that they may not from time to time, fall into the hands of
the Enemy, as Figgs into the mouth of the Eater, at the first shake: it is
highly needful; that the Highways be not unoccupied, and the Villages
Uninhabited; and a Land of unwalled Villages become not extremely miserable. If
any thing more Can be done for the detecting and bringing to condign punishment
Pirates and Sea Robbers, those common Enemies of Mankind, it seems highly
needful to be done; that God be not provoked, that the King be not offended,
and this Government become not guilty and infamous, and that the Youth of the
Country be not ensnared and drawn away from honest ways of living, by those
that say, Come, Let us have one purse; we shall find all precious Substance,
and fill our houses with spoil; their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed
blood; for so are the ways of all those that are greedy of gain, which takes
away the Lives of the Owners thereof. If any thing more Can be done for the
Suppressing the beastly Sins of Sensuality, Drunkenness and Uncleanness; and
for the retrenching of the Pride, and Luxury, and Idleness; and retreiving the
good old fashions of Modesty, Humility, Sobriety, Frugality and Industry of the
Country; that better become men and women professing Holiness: it is very
needful to be done; and would mightily befriend Holiness and Righteousness; and
we should more readily Give to God his due, and to Caesar his due; and quickly
owe no man any thing, but to love one another: and the paring off our
Superfluities, would maintain a force sufficient to secure our selves, and
render us formidable to our Enemies. But if those Enriching virtues be laid
aside, and those chargeable Lusts continued, maintained and daily increased;
these things will both Meritoriously and Efficiently undo us: and we shall
quickly see persons wear their patrimonies on their backs, and by a cursed
chemistry convert all their Coin into Aurum potabile; and dissolve their Houses
and Lands into their Cups, as Cleopatra did her Pearls, and drink them up, when
they have done. But I forget my self, and perhaps, am too bold.

And now I will turn my speech to the Reverend Ministers and Elders, and humbly
propound to them, whether nothing more by them may be done to make this land,
an Habitation of Righteousness, and Mountain of Holiness. I confess I am one of
the Unworthiest of that order, and might I have had my choice, in the sense of
my own Unworthiness, had rather have been at this time behind the door than in
the desk: Yet I cannot forbear saying, to my self, and them, that Ministers of
all men should be Holiness to the Lord; and not only Preach, but Practice
Holiness and Righteousness; Just and Holy are among the Characters of a good
Minister. Tit. 1.8. Such ought to be Exemplary for Holiness, Honesty, Humility,
self Denial and Sobriety; or they will make men abhor the Sacrifices of the
Lord. If any thing more Can be done, by Praying, Preaching, Catechizing,
Exhorting, Reproving, or Discipline, or Synods, to cure the Lukewarmness of
professors, and recover the Power and Life of Godliness in them; and to
Convince, Convert and Reform, Ungodly Sinners, it had need be done, that the
Land become not more Sinful, and more Miserable I beseech also the Churches of
Christ, and exhort them to do their utmost, that this land may be an Habitation
of Righteousness and Mountain of Holiness. They must excel and abound in
Holiness, and Righteousness themselves, or it can not be so. Jerusalem was a
Type of the Christian Church. The mountain of the Lords House, must be a Holy
Mountain. I beseech you walk worthy of your holy Vocation. You are Saints by
Calling, Ephesians. 4.1. compared with Ephesians. 1.1. To the Saints which are at Ephesus.
Phil. 1.1. To all the Saints which are in Christ Jesus at Philippi. Colos. 1.2.
To the Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ which are at Colosse Romans 1 7. To
all that be in Rome beloved of God, called to be Saints. 1 Cor. 1.2. To the
Church of God etc. called to be Saints. You ought to be Holy in all manner of
Conversation, yea to perfect holiness in the fear of God; to be blameless and
harmless, and to shine as lights, in this evil Generation; and by your Example
to show others the Amiableness of the ways of holiness, and righteousness; and
by your extensive Charity be ready to entertain into your holy Fellowship such
whose hearts God shall prepare and incline to seek it. Let the Church of God be
swept and kept clean by the besome of Discipline: Let the hearts and hands of
your Ministers be encouraged in the work of the Lord; Let the Elders that rule
well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they that labor in the
word and doctrine. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your Souls. Keep the Worship and Ordinances of God
pure from humane inventions; as well as from profaneness. And let the Church
be built up in the most Holy Faith, and be a pillar of Truth, and not removed
from her Stedfastness. Walk in your Houses in a perfect way, bringing up your
Children in the Nurture and admonition of the Lord. And for reading the Word of
God, Prayer, Family-instruction, and Discipline, and holy Example; Let your
Houses be as so many Little Churches. Finally, be ye^ followers of God as dear
Children, in Holiness, Righteousness and Charity. Love at Brethren, yea as holy
Brethren partakers of the Heavenly Calling; Love one another; Care for one
another, and the things each of other; Admonish one another, Exhort one
another, Forgive one another, Pray one for another. Let all Ranks and Orders of
men seek the Increase and Advancement of Holiness and Righteousness; and mourn
for, and turn from, and seek the pardon of all our Unholiness and
Unrighteousness, and that through the plentiful Effusion of the Holy Spirit;
the Skies may as it were pour down, and Shower down Holiness and Righteousness;
that this Land may be an Habitation of Righteousness and Mountain of Holiness.

FINIS.
Typographus Lectori.
The Reverend Mr. Grindal Rawson Pastor of the Church in Mendon, and the
Reverend Mr. Samuel Danforth Pastor of the Church in Taunton, spent from May,
30. to June 24. School. in visiting the several Plantations of the Indians,
within this Province. And the Remainder of this Sheet may be well employed in
giving an Account of it.
IN pursuance of the Orders and Instructions given us by the Honored
Commissioners for the Propagation of the Gospel among the Indians in the
American Plantations in New England, and parts Adjacent; We have given the said
Indians in their several Plantations in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay,
a visit: and find as follows.

At Little Compton, we find two Plantations of Indians; who keep two distinct
Assemblies for the worship of God, and (according to the best information we
could have) are constant therein. The first Assembly dwells at Saconet; Samuel
Church alias Sohchawahham has for more than one year past, endeavored their
Instruction; and is best capable of any in that place, to perform that Service.
He has ordinarily forty Auditors, many times more; of these above twenty are
Men: Diverse here are well instructed in their Catechisms; and above ten can
read the Bible. Here are likewise two Indian Rulers, John Tohkukquonnoo and
Jonathan George: the first of which is a man very well spoken of.

At Cokesit in Little Compton, Daniel Hinckley has taught here four years;
twice every Sabbath. Eleven families are his Auditors: Most of the men here can
read, and many young ones (of whom we had an instance) can say their
Catechisms. Of this Company three persons are in full Communion with the Church
settled at Nukkehkummees. A person called Aham is Schoolmaster here, and as we
are informed performs his work well. Here are likewise two persons improved as
Rulers, Preaching here, the two forementioned Teachers at our direction, prayed
very soberly and understandingly: they gave very diligent attendance and were
handsomely clothed in English Apparel.

At Dartmouth, We find two Assemblies of Indians; at Nukkehkummees, William
Simons (ordained by Japhet of Marthas Vineyard, three years since) is their
Pastor. In the Church here, are forty Communicants, part dwelling in
Nukkehkummees, part in Assameeskq, Cokesit, Acushmet and Assawanupset. Here are
many that can read well. The Word is Preached here twice every Sabbath; Twenty
families, in which one hundred and twenty persons at least, are for the most
part constant hearers; almost all their Children can read: Johanan has been
their Schoolmaster, but ceases now for want of encouragement. We propose his
continuance as a person well fitted for the employment. William Simons informs
that here are four persons annually chosen as Rulers. They are well clothed,
and gave good attendance whilst we dispensed the Word to them. Their Pastor
praying with good Affection, and Understanding; and is likewise well reported
of by the English.

At Acushmet, John Bryant their Teacher for five or six years past. Here are
fourteen families, unto whom William Simons once in a month ordinarily comes
and Preaches; some of those who belong to the Church at Nukkehkummees being
here settled: viz. five men and ten women: We find that Scandals are among them
reflected upon; if any exceed the Rules of Sobriety, they are suspended until
repentance is manifested. By the best intelligence we could arrive to from
sober English dwellers on the place, we understand they are diligent observers
of the Sabbath; they are generally well clothed, diligent laborers: but for
want of Schooling, their Children are not so well instructed as at the other
places; though they earnestly desire a Remedy.

At Major Winthrops Island, Mr. John Weeks an English man, teaches them on the
Sabbath. An Indian named Asa chief Ruler among them, and a person well reported
of, teaches them when Mr. Weeks cannot attend it. Here are but about nine
families, most of which can read well, are diligent in their callings, and
generally go well in clothing; three of their Women belonging to the Church
whereof Japhet is Pastor at Marthas Vineyard. An Indian called Sampson attends
their School every Winter, and has the Reputation of the most able among them
for that Service, taking pains in Catechizing their Children every week. Men,
Women and Children are thirty persons in all. Half the Indian Inhabitants of
this Island have dyed in a few years past. Three families living at Saconeset
point, do attend to the meeting at Mr. Winthrop's Island.

At an Island called Slocums Island, we hear of seven families (most of which
can read) being lately removed thither from the Vineyard and other places.

We hear of some Indians at the furthermost Island formerly called Sandfords
Island, where there is an Indian Teacher.

At Marthas Vineyard. viz. At Chilmark, alias Nashauekammuck: Here is an Indian
Church of which Japhet is Pastor: a person of greatest repute for Sobriety and
Religion, and diligent in attending his Ministerial Employment: Unto whom is
adjoined Abel, as Ruling Elder, who likewise Preaches to a part of the Church:
living at too great a distance, ordinarily to attend on Japhets Ministry;
although they come together to attend Church Administrations. In this place we
find two hundred thirty and one persons; threescore and four in full Communion:
their Children well instructed, as we find by our Examination of them in their
Catechisms.

At Ohkonkemme, within the bounds of Tisbury, are threescore and twelve
persons, unto whom Steven and Daniel, who are brothers, are Preachers; well
reported of for their gifts and qualifications. Here we spent part of a
Sabbath, and were joyful Spectators of their decent Christian carriage: the
aforesaid Daniel Praying and Preaching not only affectionately but
understandingly: Unto whom also we imparted a word of Exhortation in their own
Language to their contentment, and declared satisfaction.

At Sebconckqut in aforesaid Chilmark also, which belongs to the inspection of
the aforenamed Steven and Daniel, are thirty five persons, to whom for their
greater ease, either the one or the other dispense the word.

At Gayhead, Abel and Elisha are Preachers to, at least, two hundred and sixty
persons; who have at their own charge a Meeting house already framed. We find
that the Indians here (as also may be affirmed of most of the Indians belonging
to Marthas Vineyard, Chaubaqueduck excepted) are well instructed in reading,
and are well clothed, mostly in decent English Apparel.

At Edgar Town, viz. At Sahnchecontuckquet are twenty five families, amounting
to one hundred thirty and six persons; Job Prossel their Minister.

At Nunnepaog, are eighty four persons, Joshua Tackqunnash their Minister,
Josiah Thomas their Schoolmaster.

At Chaubequeduck, about one hundred thirty and eight persons; Maumachegin
Preaches to them every Sabbath. Josiah is their Schoolmaster, Joshua, by birth
is their Ruler, or Sachim.

At Nantuckquet, we find five Congregations: the Preachers unto which are Joh
Ptuckemuck, who succeeds John Gibs deceased; John Asherman, a person well
reputed of; Quequenap, Netowab (a man highly esteemed by the English for great
Sobriety) Peter Hayt, a well carriaged and serious man. Also Wunnohson and
Daniel Spotso, Codpoganut and Noah (a person never known to be overtaken with
drink, but a zealous Preacher against it.) These are their constant Teachers.
Amongst these there are two Churches who have ordained Officers, in each of
which are twenty Communicants at least; in which a commendable discipline is
maintained, as persons of good reputation on the place have given us
information. The whole number of Adult persons here amount to about five
hundred. Three Schools were wont to be upheld amongst them; though at present
none, for want of Primers. A good new Meeting house is building here; the Frame
whereof at their desire and charge is already procured by the Worshipful Capt.
Gardner. Here we Preached to them in their own Language twice in one Assembly,
unto which they were generally convened upon the Sabbath day: Three of their
principal Preachers were improved by us in prayer, that we might discover
something of their abilities; in which we found them good Proficients: the
whole attending with diligence and great seeming affection.

At Sandwich, here we find two Assemblies of Indians; to one whereof Capt.
Thomas Tupper (an English man) Preaches every Sabbath day: here are likewise
Indian Preachers whose abilities in prayer we tried, viz. Ralph Jones (a person
well reputed of for Sobriety) and Jacob Hedge. These are in number three
hundred forty and eight persons; Men, Women and Children: they are generally
well clothed. Preaching amongst these in a small Meeting house built for them
after the English fashion; we experienced their good Attention and had their
thankful acknowledgments. Their Indian Rulers here are William Nummuck, Ralph
Jones, Jacob Hedge and John Quoy.

At Mahshpah, belonging to Sandwich, we found another Assembly of Indians,
amongst whom the Reverend Mr. Rowland Cotton frequently dispenses the Word,
unto whose good progress in the Indian Language we cannot but subjoyn our
attestation, having heard him dispense the Word to them: amongst whom also we
left a word of Exhortation. They are generally well clothed, being in number
fifty seven families, in which are from ten years old and upward, two hundred
sixty and three persons: diverse of whom have the Character of very sober men.
The Indian Preacher here is Simon Papmonit, a person suitably qualifyed as most
amongst them, for that work. Their Rulers are Caleb Papmonit, Caleb Pohkneit,
Sancohs^n, James Ketah. Here they want a Schoolmaster.

At Eastham and Harwich, Eastharbor, Billings-gate, and Monimoy, are (as Mr.
Treat informs us) five hundred persons.

At Ponanummakut, Thomas Coshaumag, Preacher and Schoolmaster. Their Rulers are
William Stockman alias Quequaquonchet, and Lawrence Jeoffryes: Families here
are twenty two: Moses also teaches School here.

At Eastharbor and Billings-gate, Daniel Munshe, Preacher, Daniel Samuel Ruler;
here are about twenty houses, in some of which are two families.

At Monimoy, in which are fourteen houses; John Cosens, Preacher and
Schoolmaster; their Rulers John Quossen and Menekish.

At Sahquatucket alias Harwich, are fourteen families, unto whom Manasseh is a
Preacher, Joshua Shauntam Ruler.

Many amongst these, almost every head of families are persons capable of
reading the Scripture, as we are informed.

At Plymouth, viz. at Kitteanmut or Monimoint ponds, William Nummuck, has
Preached here sometime, but is removed, and his return earnestly desired. Here
are ten families. Joseph Wanno and John his brother improved by Major Bradford
to decide smaller cases among them. Esther, wife of John Wanno has been
sometime here School-dame, and is willing still to be useful in that way.

Near Duxbury Saw-mills, we hear of a few scattering families, to wit, three
or four.

A like number at Mattakesit.

At Kehtehticut, between Tanton and Bridge-water, are forty two Adult persons,
Charles Ahaz. Preaches to them, and teaches their Children to read.

At Assawampset and Quittacus, are twelve houses, in which are above fourscore
persons. John Hiacoomes Preacher and constant Schoolmaster (the most eminent
for Sobriety of all the Indians in those parts.) Also Jocelyn Preaches at
Assawampset. In this Plantation are seven persons belonging to the Church at
Nukkehkummees.

At Natick, we find a small Church consisting of seven Men and three Women:
their Pastor (ordained by that Reverend and holy man of God Mr. JOHN ELIOT,
deceased) is Daniel Tokkohwompait, and is a person of good knowledge. Here are
fifty nine men and fifty one women, and seventy children under sixteen years of
age: their numbers being increased by the Accessions of diverse families
formerly belonging to Hassinnamisco. We find no Schoolmaster here, the want
whereof has had a very evil influence into the non proficiency of their
children, in those ways of Education which formerly obtained amongst them,
there being but one child that can read here.

At Hassinnamisco, are five families, unto whom James Printer, stands related
as a Teacher: many families belonging unto this Plantation (which before the
Wars was very flourishing, and had a hopeful Church in it) are removed from
thence, some to Natick, and some to other places in hopes of greater security.

There are about Ninty two Indians; Men, Women, and Children, belonging to
Puncapaog, William Habaton teaches them on the Sabbath days. And the Reverend
Mr. Peter Thacher gives them a Lecture in their own Language. Their
Schoolmaster dyed some years ago; and there is not another settled in his room.

We have been credibly informed of a great Mortality among the Indians within
these few years past, whereby some flourishing Plantations of them have been
almost depopulated, and in particular the famous and numerous Indian Church at
the Island of Chaubaqueduck is wholly destroyed, but one of them surviving; and
other Plantations exceedingly thinned.

Signed by Grindal Rawson Samuel Danforth
Preachers to the Indians in their own Tongue.
Boston; July, 12th. School.
THE END.

