THE King's Authority In DISPENSING with Ecclesiastical Laws, Asserted and
Vindicated.

By the late Reverend PHILIP NIGH, A Congregational Divine.

LONDON; Printed for H. N. and Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

TO THE King's most Excellent Majesty, JAMES, By the Grace of God, Of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please Your Majesty;
YOUR Gracious Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, is such an instance of
the tender care You have of each Man that has the happiness to be Your
Subject, that it as well exacts the Service of every one in particular, as the
Universal Applause.

Great Sir,

Having no better opportunity to express my Gratitude, I lay at Your Royal Feet
these Sheets, wrote by my deceased Father, occasioned by his late Majesty's
Declaration. May they be instrumental to promote the Designs of Your Princely
Clemency; May every Individual in Your Kingdoms, enjoy their Consciences and
Property; May your Parliaments serve you in all those healthful Laws which may
appease our Differences, and secure our Peace; so that not only the present
Age, but likewise Posterity, may bless your Reign for introducing so
compassionate an Indulgence. These Blessings for you, and us; and that you may
live long and happily in the pursuance of these merciful and noble Principles,
are the Prayers of

Your Majesty's most obedient Subject, HENRY NIGH.

A DISCOURSE of Ecclesiastical Laws, and Supremacy of the Kings of England, in
Dispensing with the Penalties of such Laws.
CHAP. I. The Case and State of the Question.
THE King's Power and Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical Affairs, may fall under a
threefold Consideration: as, First, put forth by himself; Secondly, by
Commission granted to Ecclesiastical Persons, and exercised in those Courts we
term Spiritual or Ecclesiastical. Thirdly, Or such Affairs are managed and
ordered by him in Parliament, and the Authority thereof.

The Form in which these Ecclesiastical Laws are expressed unto us, is this; Be
it enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, etc. Merely to advise and consent,
imply no more Authority in the establishment of Ecclesiastical Laws, than what
was put forth in the Convocation in their Canons; but it being added, by the
Authority of the same, this Authority thus mentioned, may be construed, either
relating to the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, a
Suffrage more than an Advice or bare Consent; for it implies, when Bills are
formed, read, debated, and assented to by both Houses, they were then stamped
with some kind of Parliamentary Authority: Or it is to be interpreted, relating
to King, Lords, and Commons; and which is likely, for Consultations of
Parliament, tho concluded by Vote, yet become not formally a Law, until his
Majesty has given his Royal Assent.

And in this sense, Ecclesiastical Laws and Orders, which are Enacted and
Established by Statutes, have as formal a Sanction (being not only by Authority
of the King, but by Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament) as other Laws
wherein our Civil Interests are concerned, namely, a joint, and not the single
Power of either.

This being granted, (rather than needlessly to dispute those highest Interests)
and thence also inferred, That as these Ecclesiastical Laws have their Rise,
Vigor, and Strength, so their Diminution and Abatement from conjunction of
both Powers; and are more fixed and stable than those Canons and Orders in
Ecclesiastical Matters, that have their Sanction from the King only.

To this I say briefly; Although Men may be Tenants in Common, yet none can be
joint Tenants with the King. These Powers are not equal, the King has the
Supremacy, and is thereby enabled to such Acts and Orderings about the
Penalties of our Laws, as are peculiar to the Crown and Dignity of a King; as
in Mitigating, Exempting, Dispensing, Licensing, Pardoning, etc. and all this
more especially in Ecclesiastical Matters, as by the following Discourse will
appear.

SECT. 1.
This Power and Superiority exercised by the Kings of England, in relation to
the Penalties of such Penal Laws of both sorts shall be spoken to in these two
Particulars.

I. That such an Authority and Supremacy is necessary, and ought to be placed
in some Hand. II. That it is a Dignity which has always been placed in the
Kings and Queens of this Realm.
I. For the former; In all Polities and Forms of Government, as there is a Rule
which is to be the Measure and Square to, and by which all Men's Actions that
live under that Polity, are ordinarily to be conformed and judged; so is there
always some provision made for mitigating the Rigor of the Rule, in Cases
which may fall out and cannot be foreseen by the wisest Legislators; and in
such cases to exercise Summum jus, would be Summa injuria: therefore there is
here, not only a Power to judge, as the case stands in the strict Letter of the
Law, but as there are Courts of Law, so are there Chanceries, Courts of Equity
and Conscience, wherein the Law and Rule it self is dispensed with, and varied
from; and the Proceedings there are not according to the strict Terms of Law,
but secundum equum and bonum, as the Merit of the Case in it self may require.

1. For Laws constituted for a whole Nation universally, to be submitted to by
Persons of what quality soever, and how much soever different in their
Conditions, must needs, in their strict execution, bear harder upon some Men
than others, Parliaments in their Laws going by the Rule of ( Ad ea quae
frequentius accidunt, etc.) and better an inconvenient Mischief, than an
Inconvenience.

It is taken for granted, that a general Law which has its Good and Necessity,
in respect to the Bulk and Body of a People, may prove unequal to particular
Persons from the Circumstances of their present Condition. In a Common Wealth
the Ease and Benefit of each particular Person, of what Degree or Condition
soever, is to be consulted; but where Laws are executed in their full rigor,
and no Mercy or Indulgence to particular Persons, in special and unusual Cases,
it will not be so. God himself, who knows every Man's Heart, yet some of his
Laws that are given in general to all, would not prove so equal to each at all
times, without exemptions in particular Cases. Hence we say, Affirmative
Precepts bind not ad semper; to such Laws is that of Mark 2.26. in the Case of
Shewbread to be referred. And the Pope, who assumes to himself a possibility
not to Err, yet how does his Republic abound in Courts for Faculties,
Dispensations, Indulgences, etc.

2. It Is also to be considered, there are no Societies of Men but may err in
their Councils; Laws made in one Parliament come to a Review, and often to an
Alteration, yea Repeal in the next: The Intervals of those great Councils are
sometimes long, and if no way of Relief were in the mean time, the Subject
would, without Remedy, undergo the penalty of an unequal Law.

These and the like Considerations make it necessary, that besides the
Legislative Power placed in the Parliament, that there be some Hand or other
also, by which upon all emergent Occasions, the rigor of a Law as to its
Penalty may be abated, by the means whereof, not only Men's Liberties and
Estates, but Lives also are sometimes preserved.

SECT. 2.
2. This Balance has always been trusted in the Hand, and annexed to the
Sovereign Majesty of every State; for this Interest does little vary, but
remains in a manner the same in all Republics, in what Form soever they be
established. In the State of England, being an Empire, and its Crown in many
Acts of Parliament (especially relating to these Matters) styled Imperial; this
Power is inseparably annexed thereunto, which needs little proof, it being
confirmed by the Oath of Supremacy. An Oath is the End of a Controversy. Our
great Lawyers also give in their Suffrage hereunto, frequently affirming that
the Statutes relating to the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, are not
introductive of New, but declarative of the old Law.

When an Act, say both those two Learned Judges, Cook and Rolls, forbids
under a Penalty, in case it may be inconvenient to diverse particular Persons,
in respect of Circumstances, the Law gives Power to the King to dispense
therewith.

And in like Cases, or upon other Considerations equal, he may Dispense,
License, Pardon, etc. Yea, although those Laws have been passed by his
Majesty's Royal Assent formerly; and (which is more) a Clause inserted in the
Act, that the King's License or Dispensation in this or that Case, shall be
void: Yet it will be no Bar to such Prerogatives as are inherent and originally
inseparable to his Royal Person, but he may give License with a Non Obstante
thereunto. A learned Sergeant, in his Nomotechina, has these words, The King
by a Clause of Non Obstante, may dispense with a Statute Law, if he recite the
Statute, though the Statute say such Dispensations shall be merely void. And he
may License Things forbidden by the Statutes, as to coin Money, which is made a
Capital Offense by the Statute, and was before lawful, for that it is but malum
prohibitum; but malum in se, as to leave a Nuisance in the Highway, he cannot
license to do; but when it is done he may pardon it; but where the Statute
says, his License shall be void, which the Civilians call Clausula derogativa,
there it must have a Clause of Non Obstante, that is to say, this Clause
notwithstanding any Statute, else it is not good. And says the same Author, He
may, in respect of his Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, exempt some from
the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, and dispense with others in things which the
Ecclesiastical Law prohibits, upon the same ground that they are not mala in
se, but prohibita. I hold clear (says Judge Hobart) that though the Statute
says, That all Dispensations, etc. shall be granted in manner and form
following, and not otherwise; that yet the King is not thereby restrained, but
his Power remains full and perfect as before; and he may still grant them as
King.

The King may remit the Penalty or Punishment of those Laws, which he has no
power to dispense with, as where what is forbidden by the Law is Malum in se,
says the Sergeant in his aformentioned Discourse of Law, much more then when
what is forbiden is only Malum prohibitum.

The Statute indeed of the 9th of Edw. 2. Cap. 7. enacts, That no Letter shall
proceed from the King to discharge an Excommunicated Person, but where the
King's Liberty is prejudiced: But as this Statute it self proves the Law and
former Practice, so it takes it not away, since the King's Liberty of
discharging such Persons used before, is preserved by the same Statute.

CHAP. II. Of the Prerogatives and Regal Powers, in Relation to Ecclesiastical
Laws, and Matters of Religion.
SECT. 1.
1. REligion in the moral Parts thereof, the Precepts and Commandments of God,
the Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, these are not subject to any Humane
Wisdom or Power. The Apostles, that were of higher Authority in these Affairs
than any on Earth, went no farther, but as 1 Cor. 11.23. What I have received
of the Lord, that I delivered unto you. To make Laws in Spiritual Matters, that
are such by the Light of Nature, that Men may be moved to Duty, and act
according to their Light, we yield to the Civil Magistrate as he is Custos
utriusque Tabulae.

2. There are Matters of Circumstance also, and external Forms in Worship,
tending to Order and Decency: These and the like are made by our Laws, to
depend upon the Power and Ordering of the Prince. This Distinction you have
laid down as Law by Judge Hobart; his words are these: Tho it be de Jure Divino,
that Christian People be provided of Christian Offices and Duties, of Teaching,
Administration of the Sacraments, and the like; and of Pastors for that
purpose, and therefore to debar them wholly of it, were expressly against the
Law of God; yet the Distinction of Parishes, and the Form of furnishing every
Parish Church with his proper Curat, Rector, or Pastor, by the way of
Presentation, Institution, etc. as is used diversely in diverse Churches; and the
State or Title which he has, or is to have in his Church, or Benefice, is not
a positive Law of God in point of Circumstance. And we know well that the
Primitive Church in its greatest Purity, were but voluntary Congregations of
Believers, submitting themselves to the Apostles, and after to other Pastors,
to whom they did minister of their Temporals as God did move them. Government
is a Beam of Divine Power, and therefore he proceeds, saying, If a People will
refuse all Government, it were against the Law of God; but if a Popular State
will receive a Monarchy, it stands well with the Law of God. In the Case of
Glover and Colt, against the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield.

From all this the Judge seems to confirm his Distinction by way of Comparison
thus; As in Humane Affairs, Government in the General and Essentials of it,
(that one Man be Subject to another Man in an orderly way) is necessary and
Jure Divino, and not in Man's Liberty or Dispose; But for the Modes and Forms
of Government, and like Circumstances, it is left to the wisdom and choice of
Men, and the conduct thereof. So in Matters of Religion, what is not Jure
Divino, such external Forms and Rites tending to a more orderly and decent
administration in the Worship and Service of God, our Law judges the
Magistrate has the ordering hereof in each Nation, according to the Manners
and Tempers of the People, which is Various.

And in particular, the Disposing of Pastors and People, for the more
convenient and orderly Service and Worship of God, to be only Jure Humano, and
may be otherwise, and was so in the Primitive Church in her greatest purity.
Pastors and People were not then (as now) engaged in this Relation, and one to
another, by a Parochial Bond or Tie: but enjoyed a Christian Liberty,
voluntarily to dispose of themselves under such or such a Ministry as they
should make choice of to themselves. The Church is said in this State to be in
greatest purity. The Congregational-way therefore is not a way (in this learned
Judg's Opinion) of Disorder and Confusion, as is frequently suggested.

2. And that it is in the Power of Supreme Majesty to dispense with a
Parishioner, as well as with a Pastor or Rector, in such a Case, that is, to
remove from his Parish to another, for more suitable Enjoyments, as for a
Rector upon his Majesty's Dispensation, to be a Non-resident and take another
Rectory, the division of Parishes being Jure Humano.

What those Things and Matters of Religion are (in the Judgment of our State)
that comes under the Manage of humane Wisdom and Power, are well expressed in
Queen Elizabeth's Advertisement. These Orders and Rules ensuing have been meet
and convenient to be used and followed; yet not prescribing these Rules as
Laws, equivalent with the Eternal Word of God, and as of necessity to bind the
Consciences of our Subjects, in the nature of them, considered in themselves;
Or as they should add any Efficacy, or more Holiness to the Virtue of Public
Prayer, and to the Sacraments, but as temporal Orders, merely Ecclesiastical,
without any vain Superstition, and as Rules in some part of Discipline,
concerning Decencies, Distinction and Order for the time. And in the Articles
of 1562, It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all Places
one, or utterly alike; for at all times they have been diverse, and may be
changed according to the diversity of Countries and Men's Manners, so that
nothing be ordained against God's Word.

It is granted, that even these Ecclesiastical Laws ought to be conformable to
the Word of God, and to those General Rules (laid down in the Scriptures for
ordering the Worship and Service of God in the Churches) as, Let all things be
done decently and to Edification; Give no offense to Jew or Gentile, and the
like, and not to be the mere inventions of Men.

That distinction some would make of things against, or contrary, and what is
according to the Word of God, the one they apply to Matters of Faith, the other
to Matters of Order. It is a Distinction without a Difference; there is more
Wit than Truth in that Interpretation of Christ's Words, He that is not with
me, is against me; and in another place, he that is not against me, is with me;
applying the one to Matters of Faith, the other to Matters of Order. There is
no such distinction to be made, but Rites, Ceremonies, and Matters of Order,
ought to be according to God's Word, as well as Matters of Faith. Magistrates
are to judge, Circa Res Ecclesias de iis si Fidei sint dogmata, Vel ritus et
Ceremoniae earumque Veritatem et Equitatem; juxta Verbi Divini normam (Mocket
de pol. Eccl. Angl. cap. 3.) And the Power of the King stands not in forming
new Articles of Faith, or Forms of Religion, such as were Jeroboam's Calves;
but in defending and propagating that Faith and Religion, of which God in the
Scriptures is the undoubted Author, (says Mason of Bishops, lib. 3. cap. 5.)

It is evident those Holy Men, our first Reformers, made no such distinction,
but that all should be done according to God's Word, laying before them these
general Rules in Scripture, (even in retaining what has been so offensive).
For of the retaining Ceremonies, there is this account by them given, Because
they appertain to Edification; whereunto all things done in the Church, as the
Apostle teaches, ought to be referred. And of our Liturgy, thus; There is
nothing to be read but the very pure Word of God, and the Holy Scriptures, or
that which is evidently grounded upon the same, (Preface to the Common Prayer
Book). God be thanked (says good King Edward the 6th) we know both what by his
Word is meet to be reformed, and have amended, etc.

It is convenient thus distinctly to have insisted upon what we term Religion,
or Matters Ecclesiastical, according to that sense in which the Civil
Magistrate assumes to himself the ordering thereof: And what influence the
Scriptures, and Authority of God, has, or ought to have in these Rites of the
Church, and Matters of Order, as well as in Matters of Faith; for hereby it
appears whence it is Men's Consciences are more concerned in these Laws, than in
other Municipal Laws of the Nation. And that the not being free to submit to
these Ecclesiastical Laws, when not formed according to God's Word, is no
Evidence of that Seditious Spirit that kicks against all Laws.

SECT. 2.
There is a necessity, and that of much greater importance, Provisions be made
of Dispensations, etc. as occasion shall be, in respect to Laws Ecclesiastical,
than in Civil.

In Matters of Religion, and the Worship of God: 1. Multitudes there are of
loose and profane Persons; in respect to such, neither are the Laws in
themselves, nor in the execution of them, severe enough. 2. Against Popish
Recusants the Laws have been severe enough, yet in the execution great
moderation. 3. There are those, and blessed be God great Multitudes, who are
not only Orthodox in Faith, but of unblamable Life in the greater Things of Law
and Gospel. These are fallen under most severe Laws, and of late with greatest
severity put in execution, and utterly ruined, if there be no means of
relaxation: It is in behalf of these I argue this Necessity, and that from
these and the like Considerations. 1. There is a greater proneness in
Conscientious Men to scruple and to be doubtful in their Obedience to the
Ecclesiastical, than to the Civil Laws of a Nation, as before. 2. Great
Difficulty in forming Laws, wherein Men's Consciences are immediately concerned,
so as not to dissatisfy some, if not many. 3. If those Laws be not according to
Scripture, in the apprehensions of those that are to obey, whatsoever they are
in themselves, it is our Sin if we obey; it is not so in Civil Commands. 4. It
is not of so ill Consequence for us to yield Obedience to a Civil, as to an
Ecclesiastical Law, if ill constituted by the State. 5. From what is found (in
a manner peculiar in these our Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Administration of
them) many ways prejudicial to the Subject, there is a necessity some such
provision of this kind be found on our behalf.



1. The real Scruples and Doubts about our Obedience in these Ecclesiastical
Matters, cannot but be more and greater than in other Laws. The knowingest Man
in these Things knows but in part; and the most Men have but a parcel in this
part. It is true, the Principles and great Matters of Religion, are in great
perspicuity laid down in the Scriptures, which give knowledge to the Simple, but
these matter of Circumstance and external Order, we have for the most part in
Generals only, and hints from Examples and Customs of the Apostolic Churches;
in the interpretation whereof the most Learned find Difficulties, and are
divided. Now the want of Knowledge is the ground of Scruples and Doubts in our
Practice, 1 Cor. 8.7. for the working of Conscience is from the ultimate
Resolution of our practical Understanding. And hence it is that the same
practice may be not only scrupled, but a Sin to one Man which is not to
another, upon account of different Apprehensions; there may be notwithstanding
Integrity and Sincerity in both, and therefore tenderly to be dealt with, as
the Apostle requires, Romans 14.

2. A great Difficulty there is to form Ecclesiastical Laws (they being to be
the same where Uniformity is much stood upon for a whole Nation) as not to
leave grounds of Dissatisfaction to many; Men's Apprehensions being various
through the Degrees of Light; insomuch as that may be Sin to one Man, that is a
Liberty to another of a greater degree of Light. A little is next to nothing,
and what is indifferent is nearest in likeness to moral Good or Evil; hence so
easy and frequent Mistakings: And as it is with particular Persons, so may it
be with a Society or Company of Men. One true Church in these Things differing
from another, and the same Church differs from it self upon further
Discoveries. A Synod, a Parliament, they may judge such and such Things to be
indifferent, that those that are to submit may sincerely scruple and stick at
as Sin. If Churches and Men, savingly enlightened, are thus exposed to vary in
their Apprehensions, we cannot be confident of any Council or Assembly made up
of the most wise and prudent Men. Parliaments are chosen by Vote of the
promiscuous Multitude, with respect (we would hope) to their Sufficiency in
managing of our Civil and Temporal Concerns, but their Skill and Ability to
discern and judge of Matters appertaining to Order in the Service and Worship of
God, all Men have not this Knowledge, this is little or not at all attended by
those that elect them; by reason whereof, Matters wherein Men's Consciences are
concerned, are not at all times carried by those that are most Conscientious in
that Assembly, who are not always the Major part, yet notwithstanding are
engaged in their Consciences to assent and consent to such Determinations being
made, though possibly near one half in number dissented in the passing of them;
and it is unavoidable in all and the best Assemblies that are chosen by the
general Suffrage of a Nation.

3. Again, these Matters of Ceremony, and External Order, are sometimes managed
in part with respect to a Party different in their Apprehensions, and thereupon
form those Laws, with respect to Prudence as well as Conscience. In our first
Reformation, it is said, such Superstitions are taken away, as Time would serve
quietly to do it. And many things were left remaining in our Liturgy, (which
otherwise would have been removed) in compliance with that Form of Divine
Service, used before by the Papists, that they may not be provoked, but rather
won thereby to our Religion. Women's baptizing was continued in our Liturgy
(says the Bishop of Worcester) else the Book would not have passed the House,
(Conference at Hampton Court). King James was once willing, that some
Ceremonies giving Offense should be removed; but the Parliament then sitting
thought it not prudent. And our Gracious King would have done a greater Matter
for the Ease of Tender Consciences, (as appears by some of the Declarations
herein after mentioned) but it stood not with the Prudence of the House, as
they expressed in their Answer; without whose Concurrence his Majesty thought
not fit then to do it.

4. From mistaken Principles: As that there can be no Unity without Uniformity;
there can be no Discipline in a Church, without some Ceremonies of Humane
Institution. Things indifferent become necessary in Worship, being imposed by
Authority; what Things in matters of Order are once established, and sometimes
continued in the Church, may not with safety be altered.

These Things I offer not to derogate from Parliaments in their manage of such
Affairs, but upon this serious Account only, To show, that as our Civil Laws
have made provision that the Church shall not in their Laws and Canons, order
any Thing against Prerogative of the King, or the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm in general, and that such Canons shall not be in force, (25 H. 8.19.) So
likewise Laws and Statutes in Ecclesiastical Affairs, established by the Civil
Power, if they be found to derogate from the Prerogative of Christ Jesus, or
the Laws and Institutions of his Kingdom, ought not to be in force upon Men's
Consciences. As Churchmen being supposed not to be so well understood in
Secular Laws, but may transgress; so may Secular Persons likewise, in their
ordering about Church Affairs: There is therefore the like necessity of a Power
to review, judge, and dispense with such Laws as shall be found to disturb the
Consciences of peaceable Subjects, as occasion may urge thereunto. Hen. 8. by
Commission (which was continued by Edw. 6.) appointed thirty two Persons, eight
of each Profession, to peruse the Canons of the Clergy then in force, to the
end those might be removed that were any ways against the Crown and State.
Those Kings might have done the like, in respect to those Canons and
Ecclesiastical Laws enacted in Parliament, if they be found to derogate from
Christ or his Institutions, or justly offensive to the Peaceable and Godly,
that Dispensations might be granted for the present, until farther Reformation
be obtained.

SECT. 3.
The Municipal Laws of a Nation, are from and conformed to the Principles of
Right Reason and Common Justice only; and we have submitted our selves to the
Resolutions of those wise and prudent Senators we our selves have made choice
of, to enact and establish such Laws for us, and therefore may acquiesce in
their Determinations without further inquiry, having given a kind of absolute
pre-consent to such Laws as shall be enacted by them.

But it is not so in Ecclesiastical Laws entrusted with the same Persons, for
as they are to be formed according to God's Word, which every Man is to take as
his immediate Rule, and not to do or submit to any thing in his practice that
has the Notion of Religion, but what is conformable thereunto, he is to live
and act by his own Faith. To Laws Ecclesiastical therefore made in Parliament,
we give only a conditional Consent, that is, a Consent to them so far as they
are agreeable to God's Word, and concur with Gospel-Rules. Nor is it in the
liberty of any Man's Conscience or Reason to yield more, nor is there any more
entrusted by us with our Representative, the Parliament. If a Man does scruple
the Reasonableness or Equity of a Law concerning Civil Rights, or what is
required from it, he may notwithstanding yield Obedience without Sin; and ought
so to do, rather than to offend by an appearance of Disobedience, as Christ
himself did, Matthew. 17.26, 27. But in Matters of Religion, even as
Circumstances, Ceremonies, or the least thing wherein the Lord has concerned
his Word; if there be a Doubt or Scruple, whether lawful and conformable to the
Scriptures, tho it be from Ignorance or Weakness, yet I sin if I submit, Romans
14.1. compared with 23.

The Consequence of Transgression in this kind, is more than loss of Estates,
Liberties, yea or of Life it self. If the Laws of Superiors, concerning Civil
Rights, be unjust in themselves, or prove unequal from the Circumstances of
this or that Man's Case, who cannot be relieved by any Indulgence, he may
submit without Sin, without transgressing any Law of God; nay, it is Virtue,
and pleasing to the Lord, our patience in such suffering, 1 Pet. 2.13. with
verses 18, 19. 1 Cor. 6.7. but not so in the Matters of Religion, for we have
from Christ to the contrary, that is, not to subject, Col. 2.20. And God blames
his People by his Prophets, for wittingly walking after the Commandments, Hos.
5.12. and for keeping the Statutes of Omri, Micah 6.16. the Lord is a jealous
God.

SECT. 4.
If there be not a Power to Judge and Dispense entrusted in some Hands, the
People of God are in a worse condition on these Accounts, than in their Civil
Interest, and that upon a threefold account.

1. The Secular Laws and Statutes made in the behalf of the Subjects, are
often, upon further Deliberation and Experience of Inconveniences, altered and
repealed, whereby the Subjects have ease: But Acts of Parliament, wherein
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and Men's Consciences are concerned, are seldom or never
revised or altered, much less repealed; no not for the space of an hundred
Years can we give an Instance hereof. So far are we from repealing Acts made in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, as is ordinarily in our Civil Matters, that some Acts
passed partly for their Severity, or upon some other Account, doubtful whether
fit to remain as standing Laws, therefore are limited to a certain Time, after
which to expire and cease: the severe Act of 35 Eliz. that in the Process of it
reached Men's Lives, when first passed, was to remain a Law but to the end of
the next Session of Parliament, which in regard of some Doubt it seems made
whether in Force or not, is declared by the present Parliament to be in Force,
and ought to be put in due execution. And now at this time there is a Minister
of the Gospel under the Sentence of that Act; and for transgressing that Law,
had lost his Life, had not his Majesty interposed by his Prerogative. A wise
Statesman once advised and expressed himself thus: I ask why the Civil State
should be purged and restored, with good and wholesome Laws made in every three
or four Years in Parliament, providing Remedies as fast as time breeds
Mischiefs; and contrariwise, the Ecclesiastical State should still continue
upon the Dregs of Time, and receive no Alteration now for these many Years? We
have heard of no offer of Bills in Parliament; is it because there is nothing
amiss? Sir. Fr. Bacon.

2. In that all Proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts, are ever to the utmost
rigor of the Letter of their Canons and Orders; there is no Chancery or Court
of Equity among them to appeal unto for Redress; but in some few Cases (as in
Causes Testimentary, of Matrimony, Divorses, Tithes, etc. specified, 24 H.
8.12. Matters wherein our Estates are touched), But in Matters of Conformity,
and such Cases wherein our Consciences are most concerned, we are left
destitute.

3. Again, Men are upon this peculiar disadvantage in these Spiritual Courts,
who are impeached for Nonconformity to their Canons and Orders, in that their
Adversaries, and those that are Parties, for the most part are their Judge;
this Sir Fra. Bacon, in his Considerations, condemned as a great Injustice: So
that it is evident, considering the Nature of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and
how managed with us in this Nation; how necessary it is that some Power be
placed somewhere, by which we may not be exposed more than others to such
extremity of Rigor; for otherwise, as Conscientious Men are more disposed to
Scruples and Doubts in the way of Duty in this kind, so to less Mercy and
Indulgence from our Superiors.

CHAP. III. That our Relief is from the Jurisdiction and Power in his Majesty,
to Dispense and Exempt; for in his Hand this Balance is placed; which is that
we shall insist upon in the next place.
SECT. 1.
THIS Prerogative or Power, to Dispense and Exempt from Ecclesiastical Laws, is
in the Sovereign; for the Confirmation whereof, not to insist on what was
acknowledged by Pope Eleutherius touching Lucius our first Christian King, that
he was Vicarius Dei in Regno suo, in reference to Matters to be reformed; or is
mentioned touching the Laws and Practice of King Edgar, and Edward the
Confessor named the First; Meae solicitudinis est quieti eorum consulare, de
quorum moribus spectat ad nos examen. And of the other (from whom it is said
much of our Law is derived) that describing the King's Office, he says; Rex ad
hoc est constitutus ut Regnum terrenum, Populum Dei and Ecclesiam regat, and ab
injuriis defendat, and maleficos ab ea evallat, destruat, and penitus
desperdat, and much of like nature that might be urged from Antiquity. But to
come nearer Home.

The Testimonies of the Clergy in Convocation, the Representative Church of
England, who make it so great a Duty to acknowledge it, as they have expressed
their Severity thus; Whosoevor shall affirm the King's Majesty has not the
same Authority in Cause Ecclesiastical, as the pious Princes of the Jews, and
the Christian Emperors obtained, etc. let him be Excommunicated, ipso facto,
and not to be absolved but by the Archbishop of Canterbury. (Canons of the
Convocation, 1603.)

2. I shall join with this Testimony, that of another Synod or Council, namely,
that met in the Star Chamber, (a. Jac.) made up of all the Judges and Persons
learned in the Law, summoned by King James for Resolution in some
Ecclesiastical Causes, whereof this of his Majesty's Prerogative was one; their
Resolution you have in these words; The King may, without the Parliament, make
Orders and Constitutions for the Government of the Clergy, and punish those
that disobey or refuse to submit. And this, with other Resolutions in
Ecclesiastical Matters, were ordered to be registered and recorded in the
several Courts of Justice.

3. And from time to time, the Kings and Queens of England, have assumed and
exercised this Power, and there has been no matter or thing so Sacred, and of
such Concernment in these Affairs ordered by Parliament, but the like, and of
as great importance by the King alone, with advice of his Council, Instances
whereof you have many.

1. In general; The whole System and Body of Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons are
published by the Synods of the Clergy from time to time: These Laws have no
Parliament Sanction, or dependence upon Authority thence derived an their
Constitution. Nor yet have these Canons their Authority from the Synod or
Clergy met in Convocation; for Canons concluded by the Province of Canterbury
only, cannot oblige the Clergy of the Province of York, having no
Representatives or Clerks sitting in that Synod; such was the Synod or
Convocation met Anno 1584, 1597, 1603, and yet obliged to Subjection, the
Archbishop and Clergy of the Province of York as well as those of 1640: where
were the Representatives of both Provinces? It Is therefore the Regal Authority
expressed in the Letters Patents affixed to these Canons, that gives them their
chief Power, and are therefore termed Regiae Leges Ecclesiae: And whatsoever
Cannons or Laws published by Convocation would have been of the same Force and
Efficacy to oblige the Subject, if only by the King with the Advice of his
Council.

2. In particular; The several Injunctions, Advertisements, Declarations and
other Edicts and Requirements from Sovereign Power by his Majesty's
Predecessors, you have in the Injunction of Edward 6.1547, and Queen Elizabeth
1559, with Articles of Visitation thereunto adjoined. They license Ministers to
preach, and suspend also from preaching. There were Articles in the Time of
Edward 6. for establishing an Agreement in Religion, and the rooting out
Discords in Opinion 1552, and by Queen Elizabeth 1562. Also Edw. 6. established
a Liturgy, or public Form of Prayer, to be used throughout the Kingdom 1547,
30 Eliz. after there had been an uniform Order of Divine Service, and to be
used only in the English Tongue, established by Parliament as the only Form,
and no other, or otherwise: the Queen Anno 1560, by her Sole Authority
published a different Form for Funerals, with Liberty to say it in the Latin
Tongue, with a Non obstante in respect to the former Establishment.

There were also Sermons or Homilies, a part of Divine Service, required to be
read by the Minister, which being a matter of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, were
appointed by Edward 6, and Queen Elizabeth, and not by Authority in Parliament.

4. King James by his Sole Power, without Authority of Parliament, gives out
Directions for Preachers under Penalty of Suspension, ab officio and beneficio,
wherein many great and necessary Gospel Truths are forbidden to be preached by
any under the Degree of a Bishop or Dean. Some Truths may not be preached by
way of positive Doctrine, but only by way of Use and Application; no Sermons in
the Afternoon throughout the Kingdom to be preached from any Text, but what is
taken out of the Catechism, Lord's Prayer, Creed, or ten Commandments.

He gives Faculties, and confirms a new Body of Lecturers, or Preachers,
throughout England, that be neither Parsons, Vicars, nor Curats.

These Instances, though not expressed of what these Powers have dispensed with
or indulged; yet are pertinent upon this Account: What Sovereign Power thus put
forth in Constitutions, Injunctions, Directions, etc. in Ecclesiastical
Matters, may in like proportion be exerted in Exemptions, Dispensations, etc.
As with Parliament, and other Councils vested with Authority, the Power to
repeal Laws and Statutes is as large as that Power by which they enact and
establish Laws: For example, if King James (which is our last Instance) might
by his Prerogative confirm and establish a new Order of the Clergy, he may by
the same Power dispense with and license such Preachers as now seem and are
reputed so to be. And it follows also, if his Power will extend to indulge such
Preachers, it will not prove short in respect to Hearers, that are as it were
new in the way of their Assemblies, and indulge such as are not of the ancient
Order of the Parochial Congregation of England.

SECT. 2.
The like Deductions might be drawn from other of those Instances. I shall
notwithstanding for further Confirmation add other Instances, and such wherein
you have this Power put forth in dispensing and exempting from what has been
burdensome to Men's Consciences from Parliamentary or Episcopal Impositions.

1. That of Edw. 6. in the fourth Year of his Reign, certain Protestants
removing themselves and Families out of Popish Countries into England for their
Consciences Sake, and being not free to submit to the Form of Worship and
Discipline established in this Church: This good King by his Sole Authority
grants them the Liberty of such a Church Government and Form of Worship (as
we shall say more to in its place) as should be most suitable to their own
Persuasion: This being utterly against the Provision and Settlement newly made
by Parliament; he strengthens his Grant by a Non obstante the Statute, and
strictly requires all Bishops and Majors, etc. to suffer them quietly to enjoy
their Consciences.

2. Another Instance you have of the same good King; John Hooper being chosen
Bishop of Gloucester, and there being certain Rites and Ceremonies established
by Act of Parliament to be conformed unto in the Consecration of Bishops,
offensive to his Conscience: Edw. 6. requires Archbishop Cranmer to omit these
Ceremonies, discharging him of all manner of Dangers, Penalties and Forfeitures
he should run into, and be in any manner of way, by omitting of the same; and
these our Letters (faith the King) shall be your sufficient Warrant and
Discharge therefore.

3. The Instance you have also in what was done by Queen Elizabeth for relief
of tender Consciences, namely, her Majesty being informed that in certain
Places of this Realm, sundry of Her Subjects called to the Ministry, being
induced by sinister Persuasions, are scrupled about the Form of an Oath, which
by an Act of the last Parliament was prescribed to be taken according to the
Form expressed in the Act, under Penalty of being disenabled to bear any Office
in State or Church. Her Majesty was graciously pleased to assume by her Power
in Ecclesiastical Affairs, to give and declare such a Sense and Construction of
the Words of this Oath, expressed in other Words (much different) for their
Satisfaction, with a gracious Declaration, That such Persons fit for the
Ministry, as could not take the Oath in the Parliament-Form, should accept it
in this Sense, and doing so, they shall notwithstanding be accepted by her
Majesty as good and obedient Subjects, and acquits them of all manner of
Penalties contained in the said Act, against such as should refuse to take the
same. By which means many an able Man had Freedom to exercise his Ministry,
which otherwise must be laid aside: which Indulgence of hers, although against
an Act of Parliament, yet was owned (as done by Lawful Authority) and
recognized by the Parliament 5. Eliz. and her Exposition assented to and
enacted.

4. This renowned Queen, together with King James and King Charles the First,
confirmed the Indulgence and Dispensation granted by Edw. 6. to Strangers, yea
though it was a Gravamen to the Bishop, making an evident Breach upon the Pale
of Uniformity; for not only the Parents, but the Children, and Childrens
Children which were natural Subjects to his Realm, Persons of great Estate, and
Purchasers of Lands, and interessed in the Soil. The Number also of these
Congregations increasing, and situated in the eminent and chief Towns and
Cities in the Kingdom, there to live and profess as separated and divided
Bodies in Discipline and Worship from the Church of England, was not intended
by the first Grant: so Bishop Laud complains (there being only that one in
London when the first Grant was made) such things were frequently suggested
against them, yet these Princes were graciously disposed notwithstanding the
Act for Uniformity from time to time to confirm the Grant of Edw. 6. by
several. Orders past, some of them formed as having special respect to such
Objections which will not be amiss, for the Reader's confirmation, here to
insert some of them at least.

The Form in which Queen Elizabeth confirmed their Liberties.
Non Ignoramus variis Ecclesiis varias and diversas jam ab initio Christianae
Religionis semper fuisse Ritus and Ceremonias non contemnimus vestras, neque
nos ad nostras cogimus.

King James, October. 17. 10 Jac. to the Dutch at Colchester.
His Majesty granted their Orders, Liberties, etc. in as large and ample
manner, to all Intents and Purposes, as heretofore they have been used,
tolerated, and allowed unto them, any Provision or Jurisdiction to the contrary
thereto in any wise notwithstanding.

An Order of King James, under his Signet, Jan. 13. 1616, on their behalf.
These are therefore to Will and Command all our Courts of Justice, and other
our loving Subjects, to permit and suffer the said Strangers and their
Children, etc.

The Order of the Council for the Walloons of Norwich, October. 10. 1621.
Those of Norwich, though born in the Kingdom, shall continue to be of the said
Congregation, and subject to such Discipline as has been by all the time of
fifty five Years practiced by them.

The Order of King Charles the First, November. 13. 1631.
We Will and Command our Judges, etc. to permit and suffer the said Strangers,
and their Children, quietly to enjoy all and singular, etc. without any
Troubles, Arrests, or Proceedings, by way of Information, or otherwise.

An Order of the Council for the Dutch of Norwich, Jan. 7. 1630.
That all those that now, or hereafter shall be Members of the Dutch
Congregation, although born within this Kingdom, shall continue to be of the
said Church, so long as his Majesty shall be pleased, etc.

These and diverse the like Instances might be produced, which sufficiently
evince it as granted on all sides, and constantly supposed to be according to
the Constitution of this Realm, that our Kings and Princes have Power, in and
from themselves, as an inherent and inseparable Prerogative, not only to injoin
and give Laws to their Subjects in Ecclesiastical Matters, (such as are left to
the ordering of any Civil Power) as also to dispense and exempt from Laws of
that kind, though established by them in conjunction with the Authority of
Parliament.

Nor do we find that Parliaments at any time have taken into Consideration,
what was ordered or done by those Kings and Princes in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
being their known Prerogative; no not in those of King James, who assumed the
most in such managements; nor by any Petitions or Addresses to any of those
Princes, which is usual in the Concerns of Civil Rights, for limiting or
enlarging the Exercise of their Power in these Ecclesiastical Matters, but
rather recognizing and confirming what has been ordered by them, as in 5 Eliz.
and Car. 2. in the Act of Uniformity; and other Instances many may be produced.

CHAP. IV. Of the Objections made against this Power, and the executing
thereof, with Answer thereunto.
SECT. 1.
THere are Reasonings possibly tending another way in stating this Case: The
Objections obvious I shall now mention, having diverse material Considerations
pertinent to a more full and clear stating this Case, which might have been
produced in the Body of this Discourse, but are reserved rather to this place,
partly, because we find this vulgar way of Dialogue, lets in Knowledge with less
difficulty; and what is required by way of a Question, engages him that
proposes, with greater attention to observe what is said in the Answer.

QUEST. I. If such a Prerogative be in the King, what need Ecclesiastical Laws
be transacted and established by Parliament?
Answ. 1. That hinders not but that his Majesty's Power is sufficient of it
self to do many things relating to such Laws without them; take it in his
Majesty's own words, Declarat. of 26 December. 1662. To concur with us in making
some such Act as may enable us to exercise with a more universal Satisfaction,
that Power of Dispensing which we conceive to be inherent in Us. As also it is
by the aforementioned learned Judge Hubbard expressed, That these Statutes, and the
like, were made to put things in ordinary Form, and to ease the Sovereign of
Labor, but not to derogate from his Power.

2. Powers sufficient in themselves may join, and in such conjunction remain
entire, as Powers Cumulative, and not Privative; as it is evident from what is
said in the Statute of 31 Hen. 8. cap. 10. The King's most excellent Majesty,
though it appertained to his Prerogative Royal, to give Honor as it shall seem
to his Wisdom; he is nevertheless pleased and contented for an Order to be had,
etc. by this High Court of Parliament, that it shall be enacted by the
Authority of the same, etc.

3. The King is a kind of Corporation in himself, distinct from that Capacity
wherein he stands in conjunction with his Subjects as their Head: And in that
respect, being in an higher Region, above, and in a greater distance from those
Interests, upon the account whereof his Subjects are many times much divided,
and public Edicts are formed according to the Prevalency of a greater Party,
to the prejudice of others that are his Loyal Subjects also; by his Wisdom and
Prudence there is a Balance, by which the Tranquillity of a Nation is happily
preserved, and one Party is not overborn by the other, having this Power to
mitigate and dispense in the Matters under our consideration, as in his Wisdom,
with Advice of Council, shall seem equal.

SECT. 2. QUEST. II. But has not the King's Prerogative Limits in our Laws?
And are there not some Things which he cannot dispense with, no not with a Non
Obstante?
Answ. I grant it, and in several Cases.

1. He may, by special Words in the Statute, bind up himself from making any
use of his Prerogative. 2. In what is Malum in se, in respect of Impiety or
Unrighteousness. 3. When such Dispensations are destructive to the great Ends
of a Commonwealth, Common Justice, the Proprieties of Men, etc.
1. To the first; His Majesty, or any of his Predecessors, has not at any
time, in any Statute or Law that concerns these Ecclesiastical Matters, by any
such special Words bound up himself, but rather the contrary, as in those two
Acts wherein more especially our Affair lies: That for Uniformity, where the
dispensing with that Statute granted to Strangers, by sole
Prerogative-Authority, is justified. And the Act of 22 Car. 2. by the Proviso
there inserted, the Parliament seems to induce his Majesty's Assent in the
recognizing of his Prerogative, so expressly in that Act, as if they spoke thus:
Though this Act be very Severe, yet if it be found prejudicial, or not to
attain the End for which we judge such Severity to be requisite; it is an
Ecclesiastical Affair, and your Majesty may, when you please, dispense and
exempt Persons from it.

2. There is nothing transacted in these Ecclesiastical Affairs by the Civil
Magistrate, and as depending on his Authority, but such Matters as in the sense
of our Law are things materially indifferent, and therefore not Malum in se,
they do not bind the Conscience of the Subject, in the nature of them,
considered in themselves, (Q. Eliz. Advertisements 1569, Preface) the keeping
or omitting of a Ceremony in it self, is but a small thing, yet the wilful and
contemptuous transgression and breaking a common Order, etc. So that these
Precepts concerning Ecclesiastical Matters, oblige not in their own Nature, as
what is either Bonum or Malum in se, but as prohibited or commanded.

3. Civil Rights and Claims, and in Temporal Things only, are of the immediate
and intrinsic Concern and Interest of all Republics, Dominium non fundatur in
Gratia; if the just claim of a Prince may not be interrupted, upon the account
he is of this or that Religion or Persuasion; nor may a Subject be justly
Banished, Imprisoned, Confiscated or Ruined, upon the mere account of Religion,
or because his Conscience is not cast into the same Mould with the Prince or
present Establishment.

SECT. 3. QUEST. III. Religion, and the Worship and Service of God, being the
great Concernments of a Nation; Is it not then to dispense with the Penalties
in Ecclesiastical Laws, too great a Trust to be reposed in any one Hand?
Answ.

1. In what sense Religion is the Concern of a Civil Republic. 2. The Nature
of this Trust.
1. The Moment or Weight of a Matter in our deliberation, has its proportion,
either as under an absolute or respective Consideration; Wisdom is better than
Riches in it self, but not in relation to the support of present Life; the
Knowledge of God, and Divine Things, is better than to know the Virtue of Drugs
and Plants, but not so in respect to the study of Physic: so Religion, and the
Worship of God, is the chiefest and better part in it self considered; but in
its respective Consideration, as to the faculty of a particular Person, to a
Community of Men for the advance of Civil Affairs. There are other
Qualifications and Inducements of greater consequence, and more directly and
immediately tending to the being, or well-being thereof.

That there be no Mistake in this great Concernment, I further distinguish;
There comes under the Notion of Religion, the Holiness and Righteousness that
is of the Moral Law, Principles whereof are in all Men's Natures, and attend in
their Actings by a natural Conscience.

2. Gospel-Duties directed and ordered by a Supernatural Light, no Footsteps
or Principles hereof are found in us. For the former; Religion in that sense,
as the Knowledge of God, Conscience of an Oath, Justice and Righteousness in our
Dealings, etc. are such Things wherein the Well-being of Commonwealths is much
concerned. But Religion, as it stands in the exerting Supernatural Principles,
and in Duties termed the Commandments of Christ, (as the other the Commandments
of God, John 15.) as Faith, Repentance, Sacraments, Discipline, and the like
Gospel Ordinances: In the Duties under these Heads considered, and as distinct
from Moral Duties, there is little or nothing directly and immediately
contributed by them to Men's Civil Interests, further than where these
Supernatural Virtues are planted in Men's Minds, the Moral Duties of Piety and
Honesty do more plentifully abound, and are in exercise. As those Morals do
more immediately concern the Republic, so the Laws thereof are principally
drawn forth out of them; especially Second-Table Duties, forming and moulding
them into municipal Laws, under Penalties and Encouragements, greater or less,
as in the Wisdom of a State may conduce most to the Welfare thereof. For these
Gospel-Mysteries it is otherwise; for as they contribute little to us in our
Civil Government, otherwise than as before mentioned; so is there little
contributed by the Wisdom or Authority of any State, advantageous to the
Gospel, but Protection, or being a Defense upon this Glory. Learned Bishop
Bilson states it well; Princes (says he) command, that which Christ the
Sovereign Lord and Head of the Church commands, which is all the Power we
give to Princes. (Of Supremacy, page 227.) And in the Page before, thus; By
Governors in Ecclesiastical Matters, we do not mean Moderators, Prescribers,
and Magistrates bearing the Sword, to permit and defend that which Christ
himself first ordained and appointed.

But to return;

If Adam had stood, all Commonwealths would have been prosperous and
flourishing; and yet, no Christ, no Faith, nor Repentance, nor any
Gospel Worship known or practiced: And since the Fall, you have had
well-governed Commonwealths of Turks and Heathens, that never received Christ,
or Gospel Worship. It is with States, as it is with particular Persons in
converse; another Man's Estate, or Trade, or Credit, or any Civil Concern with
whom I have to do, is not prejudiced or bettered by my omission or practice of
what is a mere Gospel-Duty. If a Man I deal with, be unjust, lie, steal, etc.
my worldly Interest is prejudiced hereby; but whether he repent for this,
exercise Faith on Christ for Forgiveness, and humble himself, I am neither a
gainer nor loser hereby, in the sense we speak of.

Now it is Gospel Worship we profess in this Nation, Gospel-Religion. If the
Duties themselves performed are of no greater consequence in respect to Persons
with whom we converse, or the Civil State where we live, the Modes, Forms, and
Ceremonies of such Worship, cannot be of such moment or trust in the manage of
them: And let me add, much less can there be any such special advantage to our
State-Concernments, in this or that particular external Form of Worship or
Government, that it should be retained by us with so much Zeal and Contention;
which evidently appears in this, how prosperous and flourishing has this
Nation been in their Civil Concerns under Episcopacy, set Liturgies,
Ceremonies, etc. and as great prosperity in other Christian Republics, where
these have been altogether disallowed.

Nor is this any dishonor to the Gospel, more than to the Kingdom of Christ,
when it was said not to be of this World, or to his Person, or Offices, that
they contribute no more to the settling of Civil Rights and Interests, Luke
12.13. or to Gospel-Weapons, which being Spiritual, and not Carnal, have no Edg
to cut off Men's Liberties, Estates, or Lives.

2. The Nature of this Trust.

The Laws and Institutes by which these Ecclesiastical Matters are to be
managed, are appointed and established for Substance, by the Wisdom and
Authority of that one Lawgiver Christ Jesus: The Application of these Laws, in
respect of Circumstances, for the well and comfortable enjoying
Gospel Ordinances, is all that any Humane Wisdom has to do in them, the Trust
whereof may be placed in the Hand of a wise and prudent Prince.

Again. There is liberty of an after-Judgment to be made by him; that is, to
practice in whatever is of the Concerns of Religion, commanded by Men. Thence
such Laws require not such simple and peremptory Obedience, if conformable to
those Rules required in the Word. Obedience thereunto is with respect to God,
as well as Man; if otherwise, that choice ought to be left to the Subject,
which the Apostle claimed, Acts 5.29. Although Matters of Religion, and the
Concerns of it, be great Things considered in themselves, and accordingly is
the Trust, yet what of it falls under the Hand of a Civil Power, considered
in it self, is not so.

Because the greatness of this Trust sticks generally in Men's Minds, especially
when in the disposal thereof it depends upon the Will of one Man. To remove
this or the like Stumbling Block, we will suppose failings in the management of
the Trust, as great as rationally can be imagined.

1. Suppose his Majesty should refuse, either by Himself or Parliament, to
enjoin any thing of Ceremony, or Circumstance about these Ceremonies and
Externals, the Worship and Service of God.

Or, 2. suppose he should dispense with all Injunctions, and leave the People
of God to their Liberty in the observance of them: the Premises last mentioned
being considered, there can be no great prejudice to the Commonwealth, or
Civil Affairs thereby. Distinctly we shall weigh each of these.

1. For the former; If the keeping or omitting of a Ceremony, in it self
considered, is but a small thing, as we mentioned before, and of such a nature,
as although at first 'twere of Godly Intent, and purposely devised, yet at
length turned to Vanity and Superstition, and burdened Men's Consciences without
cause, etc. as we our selves acknowledge, (See Preface to Common Prayer Book).
And of the same condition are most of those Impositions which have proved
burthensom to the Nation a long time; and if so, the not imposing of these
things cannot be prejudicial to Church or State. Not to the Church; if these
Directions for Gospel Worship, in the external Circumstances of it, were not
reduced into Canons and Injunctions, but left where they are to be taken up in
practice according to the Light of the Age; as are Gospel-Duties of great
Consequence. Those Scriptures by which States profess themselves to be guided
in the forming of these Ecclesiastical Laws, are entrusted also in the Hands of
his Gospel Ministers, for their conduct and direction in ordering
Gospel-Affairs; who have Gifts and Assistances from Christ, in such a measure
and degree, as cannot be expected in the ablest Statesman, as such. And the
Ecclesiastical Laws are never so well ordered by Civil Powers, as when they
consult with, and take advice and direction from the Ministers of the Gospel
about them.

To advise new Rites and Ceremonies ( says Bishop Bilson) is not the Prince's
Vocation, but to receive and allow such as the Scriptures commend, and as the
Bishops and Pastors of the Place shall advise. ( Of Suprem. p. 226.) 2. If
there were no such severe Injunctions about the Forms and Modes of
Gospel Worship, (I speak not of such Duties of Religion in which Men's Natures
are principled.) 1. The Nation could not hereby suffer in respect of its Civil
Concerns but the Wealth and Trade, etc. much more prosperous. The Things being
small in themselves, and become great only upon the account of their being
injoined, and the greatness of Penalties annexed, become of great concernment
to the State, that is, to the great prejudice thereof, as has been apparent in
many Years sad experience. What is it of moment to Commonwealths for the
quickening of Trade, keeping up of Rents, etc. or any particular Man's Civil
Concern, that Men kneel or not at the Sacrament, crossing or not, crossing in
Baptisin? etc.

2. For the other; A dispensing with all Penalties annexed to Ecclesiastical
Laws; where these Penalties are removed, yet these Laws remain as Counsels and
Advertisements, and being consulted by the Learned Clergy in their Synod, and
commended as useful in the Administration of Worship, this is as much as ever
was done by the Apostles, when Churches were in their greatest purity, who
endeavored not so much to establish an External Uniformity, as to preserve
Christian Liberty.

If it be said, They had then no Christian Magistrates. 1. We say, The Kingdom
of Christ must come into a Nation, before it be Christian; and if it be so
defective in its first address, for want of such a Magistrate, and of the Means
we put so great an Esteem upon, for reducing a People, how will the People ever
become Christians? And on the other side; if the Gospel has a sufficiency in
it self, (without borrowing) to subdue a Pagan Nation to Christianity, much
easier it is, being such, to preserve them orderly and regular Christians.

Paul having instructed and counseled, left his People free, and to the
persuasion in their own hearts, Romans 14.5. One Man esteems one day above
another, another Man esteems every day alike: let every Man be fully
persuaded in his own mind. That was but a Counsel or Advertisement. In the Act
for Conformity, in 1. Eliz. given to the Archbishop, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they would endeavor to perform their Duties in the Execution
of that Act; it was indeed very solemn, that is, from the Queen's Majesty, the
Lords Temporal, and all the Commons in the present Parliament, and in God's
Name, and as they will answer before God for such Evils and Plagues, as may be
punishments for the neglect thereof. There has been no want of Obedience
hereunto by the Bishops, being fully persuaded in their Hearts hereof as their
Duty; of which, if they had not been so persuaded, the severest Penalties would
or ought to have been in vain.

King James orders, throughout the Kingdom, that the Afternoon's Exercise, each
Lord's Day, be spent in examining Children in their Catechism, instead of
Preaching. This is only commended as the most convenient and laudable way of
teaching in the Church of England, and that such Preachers be most encouraged
and approved of: And how readily was this immediately practiced throughout the
Nation? and is continued in many places to this day.

In the Establishment of Uniformity, 2 Edw. 6. a Liberty was left in respect of
Ceremonies, to practice or omit them, according as Men were persuaded in their
Hearts.

By the Synod held 1640, some Rites there mentioned are heartily commended by
them, to the serious consideration of all good People, as an Ancient and
Laudable Custom of the Primitive Church in the purest Times. And
notwithstanding all this extolling those Rites, (which indeed is as much as can
be said for any of our Ceremonies) the Canon concludes thus; In the practice or
omission of this Rite, we desire that the Rule of Charity prescribed by the
Apostles may be observed; which is, That they who use their Liberty, despise
not them which use it not; and they who use it not, condemn not those that use
it. (Can. 7. 1640.) And this their counsel and commending has not been in
vain, but received and submitted unto throughout the Nation, by those who were
so persuaded of these Rites, as they have commended them: And so would it have
been in respect of other the Rites of our Church. And the free submission in
practice of a Rite, though but from a fewer number of grave and pious Persons,
would have advanced the Esteem of such Rites and Ceremonies in the Opinion of
others, much more than the forced submission of greater Numbers.

2. As a farther Answer, let us consider the Nature of the Crime, with respect
to the Penalties. The Crime, as expressed in our Laws, is a wilful and
obstinate, or contemptuous omission, as 1 Eliz. cap. 2. in the Act of
Uniformity; where these words, wilful and obstinate, I would think are not
descriptive, and to be understood reduplicative as an Aggravation; and as if
all Omissions must of necessity proceed from Wilfulness and Obstinacy, but
distinctive, and to be understood specificative, some Omissions being from
Wilfulness and Contempt; but there may be Omissions that are not so, and being
not so, fall not under the Penalty, as killing a Man, and wilful Murder, etc.

That the words of that Act, 1 Eliz. and other Ecclesiastical Edicts, would so
be understood, there are these Reasons.

1. We would not suppose this Law to be grounded upon so hurtful a Principle as
this, That where a difference of Persuasion, in relation to a difficult Case of
Conscience, that one Party is always wilful and obstinate, there is not a
greater uncharitableness, and more opposite to that Christian Love and Peace we
ought to endeavor after.

2. It was not so judged by our Governors in that Age, when this Act of
Uniformity (1 Eliz.) was established, but a more charitable Interpretation of
Men's scrupling Obedience; as is evident from the Relief given to such by Queen
Elizabeth, who, with the Advice of her Council, put forth a Book of Articles to
be enquired of at the Visitation, and Presentations to be made accordingly; and
of 56 in number, there was not among them one about such Rites and Ceremonies
then established, that were offensive of purpose, as some judge, to abate the
Rigor of that Act, and other Injunctions, which showed they were not all
Wilful and Obstinate that could not Conform. Some Merciful Bishops, after this
Example, framed their Articles of Enquiry with more moderation; and diverse
Ministers not fully conforming, enjoyed their Ministry under them: The more
severe Clergy, observing the Liberty enjoyed more in some Diocesses than in
others, made this Provision in the Synod, 1640, Can. 9. That for the better
settling of Uniformity, there should be but one Book of Visitatory Articles,
that the more moderate and indulgent Bishops might not have the forming their
own Articles. The moderate Bishops themselves, did not judge that all
Nonconformity was from Wilfulness; nor would those many Dispensations and
Exemptions beforementioned, be granted by our Governors, if they had judged
those who came not up to the Establishment, disobeyed out of Obstinacy and
Contempt, nor suffer some of them, as Queen Elizabeth did, to preach before her
in her Chapel.

3. That all Ecclesiastical Transgressions, even in Matters that are little in
themselves, are from Wilfulness and Obstinacy, (what this Act supposes, if so
interpreted) is a Maxim in Discipline, neither Christ nor Christian Churches
were ever acquainted with. Christ in his Ecclesiastical Proceedings against
Sinners, distinguishes between the Sin it self considered, and as a Sin
wilfully and obstinately committed, and has appointed Means for the discovery
hereof; and if the Sin be of Infirmity, a different Procedure, and a more
tender Dealing is appointed, Gal. 6.1. and not to apply Censures, and cutting
off, but upon the account of Wilfulness and Obstinacy; only we are willing to
believe such is (I am sure ought to be) the Method of our Process in these
Matters, and what appertains to the Worship and Service of God, professing so
frequently as we have done, That we take the Word for our Guide in the
establishing these Ecclesiastical Laws.

4. Our Lawgivers judge the Purest Churches, those of the Primitive Times, were
Voluntary Congregations of Believers, (as we said before out of Judge Hobbart)
submitting themselves to Pastors as God should move them, no Patrons then
imposing upon them. Now there is no voluntary Act to which we are moved, but
such motion is upon the account of something that is real or appearing Good.
There is no rational Man can voluntarily join and become a Member of a Society
or Congregation in such condition within his Partioipation, which is probable
to be of greater Evil than of Good: It will be so with us, if this Act be
interpreted Reduplicative, that is, whosoever omits a Ceremony, does it
obstinately, and shall suffer as such an one. I join voluntarily, in hopes to
be edified in Knowledge, Zeal, Tenderness of Conscience; and where such
Seize are, there is a greater aptness to scruple Obedience to some one
Thing or other injoined; which if we do, we are ruined or undone, first or
last, so severe are the Penalties in the Process of them, whether Minister or
private Christian: it will not be with a Man, (as the Apostle, if he will
depart, let him depart) to lose the Privileges upon the account whereof we
joined, which is the Liberty enjoyed in all Corporations and Societies, but
must abide upon the place, and look on, while all be destroyed: What rational
Man upon Election, and voluntarily will become one in such a Congregation? And
this is the real and justifiable Ground of Separation, upon the account whereof
many thousands of sober and peaceable Persons have departed, not only from our
Communion, but their Native Country, for the advantage of that purer and
primitive Order of a Voluntary and free Congregation.

5. In the Statute of 1 Eliz. it is not simply the refusing, or not using the
Forms there injoined, but the doing it wilfully or obstinately; Or, that the
keeping or omitting of a Ceremony, in it self considered, is but a small Thing,
as we mentioned before. I grant, Matters very small, being made the Subject of
a Penal Law, or injoined for State-Ends, may thereby become great; the smaller
the Matter is in it self in such a Case, the greater is the wilfulness in
transgressing, and so may justly demerit a greater Punishment: But yet a Matter
being small in it self, and as it stands the Subject of a Political or Civil
Law; the same when it becomes the Matter of an Ecclesiastical Law, ought not to
be formed with respect to State-Ends, or in ordine ad Temporalia, though it be
a small Matter in it self, and as a thing merely Natural or Moral, may
notwithstanding be very great upon that account, and greater to the Person who
scruples the Lawfulness thereof, than the greatest Penalty that can be incurred
by refusal; for there is no Circumstance or Ceremony, that has a constant
Station and Place in the Worship of God for any Spiritual End designed (as ours
are) but in their relation, and respect thereunto, are great, whatever they
are in themselves. These Laws therefore being Ecclesiastical, wherein God and
Men's Consciences are so immediately interested, the not conforming to them
cannot be supposed a true measure to judge of Men's Wilfulness or Obstinacy; it
would be a great reflection upon the Prudence (or the Charity at least) of our
Laws and Injunctions so to interpret them.

If the greatness of the Penalty be said, not upon the Crime materially
considered, but in respect of that evil Frame wherein we transgress, God only
is the searcher of Hearts; and although by Overtures and Circumstances,
something may be discovered this way, yet it is with great difficulty and
uncertainty, especially when we transgress by Omission: the reason is, in
positive Acts done by a Man, all the Faculties of the Soul are engaged, and
exert themselves together at the same time; and in the Circumstances of such
acting, there remains those Overtures of such a frame of Mind, as a more
permanent and exact Counterpart thereof. Omissions are many times when the Mind
stands but half-bent, the Understanding not clear, the Will not determined; in
an Omission there is nothing of the Man left upon Record distinctly to be read
and considered of by us, so that we can scarcely so much as guess from what
Principles within an Omission does proceed. And the uncertainty is far the
greater, when it is notoriously known, such Omissions may be from a good
Intention as well as a bad. To be able so far to dive into Men's Hearts, as
distinctly to discover Intentions, is a Work more suitable to the Word of God,
Heb. 4.12. than the Laws of Men; we would not therefore interpret these Laws in
such a sense, as to render all Omissions to be upon Principles of Wilfulness
and Obstinacy: it would be more charitable, where so little Evidence can be
produced, rather to judge the contrary of our Brethren and Fellow Subjects.

6. This Act of Uniformity (not we hope in the Intention of it, but in such an
Interpretation) has been the Original of all our Sufferings. If therefore that
be not the true meaning of the Act intimated in his Majesty's gracious
Declaration, namely, That upon what Principles soever Men submit not unto it,
though from tenderness of Conscience in the greatest Evidence, yet thereupon to
be punished with the loss of all their Spiritual Promotion: but if it appear
from Obstinacy and Sedition, that such only should suffer so deeply, by the
addition of further Pains and Penalties as are in that Act inserted, what is
more just and equal? If this yet be not the meaning of the Act, as it seems by
constant Proceedings against the Transgressors of it; for what Man was ever
relieved in any Court Ecclesiastical or Civil, upon such a Plea, he omitted not
such Observations wilfully, but of Conscience? I say therefore, If that be not
the sense of the Act, yet upon these Considerations but now mentioned, there is
Evidence sufficient, that this gracious Dispensation of his Majesty, of such
redundant Penalties (and of such a Nature) are all the Penalties we are
exempted from in that Declaration, is to be judged of as most Necessary,
Prudent, Just, and Charitable.

His Majesty being therefore persuaded, that many Multitudes (it is his
Majusty's Expression, Declart. of Dec. 26. 1662.) suffered, being ensnared in
their Consciences, and not from Wilfulness; and his Charitable Opinion seems to
be grounded upon an Observation of his own: It is evident (says his Majesty)
by the said Experience of twelve Years, there is very little Fruit of all those
forcible Courses. The Will is a more unsteady Principle, and easily wrought to
a Change upon Representation of Good or Evil. But Conscience is more fixed and
incorrigible, it not being in our own Power to alter the Dictates thereof: as
to be changed from our Natural State, was not in our Power; no more is the
change of our Persuasions in Matters of Duty, Conscience being engaged, Phil.
3.15. but God alone does it. His Majesty therefore wisely judged it would be
less Injustice, and better for the Commonwealth, that all such Penalties be
removed, and suspended, when the execution of them have been so constantly
misapplied, and so much to the prejudice and disquiet of his Good Subjects. It
is Righteousness, and not Ceremonies, that Establish a Nation.

SECT. 3. QUEST. IV. If the Penalties of all Ecclesiastical Laws be removed,
these Laws themselves become impracticable; and when Men are left to worship in
what Forms they please, will not that Ancient Establishment, of one Uniform
Worship and Government to be the same throughout this Kingdom, be utterly
destroyed?
Answ. 1. For that which we term Uniformity in the Worship and Service of God,
we find no other in the Apostolical Churches, but what arose from inward
Principles, freely and naturally, these Principles being the same: as where
there is the same Seed, there will be the same Blade, Stalk, Leaf, Flower. And
there is an Uniformity from External Impressions, as in a Mould, these are
constrained, and forced. The former, is from the Lord, a Work of his Power, and
there is beauty in it, Psalm. 110. The latter is from Princes and States,
wrought by the Power of their Laws and Penalties, and may have much hypocrisy,
but little amiableness. The basest Metal, as well as pure Gold, will conform to
the Mould into which it is cast. Such a conformity is no safe Character to
distinguish who is fit, and who not, for Ministry or Membership; but the other
is of great use in the Churches of Christ.

As the Wicked, who are a Seed of Evildoers, are uniform in their Practice,
being acted from the same inward Principles, Ephesians. 4.17. So the People of God
being baptized into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. They live in this Spirit, and walk
in this Spirit, Gal. 5.25. And as in other Duties of Piety and Justice: So in
Church-Administrations, where Men are of the same Mind and the same Principle,
they will all speak the same things, though not the same Words, in Preaching,
in Praying, and Officiating in the Service and Worship of God, though there be
no external Prescripts, or force of Humane Laws, to bring Men to an exact
conscientious Uniformity in the Externals of Worship and Ceremonies, where
there are various Apprehensions; this is not to be effected by the molesting of
Men in their Liberties and Estates, judging or censuring, or indeed by any
humane Power; God himself that can do it, and establish Men in such an
Uniformity, yet for Ends suitable to his Wisdom, leaves them various in their
actings in this kind; one Man observing a Day, or the like Ceremonies, another
observes it not; but mostly standing upon sincerity in those that practice,
doing, or leaving undone, to the Lord, that is, out of Conscience; and this is
the Apostolical Doctrine in Romans 14.5.

That which we term Uniformity, an exact Indentity in Words, Gestures, and
Vestments, Nature seems to teach us an example of a sinless neglect of; though
there be a conformity in every Vine, and every Fig Tree, and the like works of
Nature, one to another in their kind, yet for the Modes, and outward Form and
Shape, you have not two of these that are conformable, and grow alike.

2. Nor can we say, but though all the Penalties (properly such) annexed to
Ecclesiastical laws, are removed; yet there will remain provision sufficient
left in our Establishment, both to keep and preserve Men in Conformity, that
are so, and to reduce such as are not so: for his Majesty has been graciously
pleased, as on the one hand, to assure the Orthodox-conformable-Clergy, that
they shall receive and enjoy the Revenues belonging to the Church of England,
(the richest, most plentiful, and ample of any Protestant Church in the World)
and that no Person, though dispensed with in other things, shall be exempt from
paying his Tithes, and other Duties whatsoever. And on the other hand, That no
Person shall be Capable of holding any Benefice, Living, or Ecclesiastical
Dignity or Preferment of any kind in the Kingdom of England, who is not exactly
conformable. Such Encouragements are also Privitive Penalties, and have brought
and kept more to Conformity, than all the Penalties removed by his Majesty's
Declaration.

When was it known that a Bishop, or Dean, or doublebeneficed Parson, left his
Promotion and became Nonconformist; and others that have been bred up to
Literature, at great Charge, having Gifts and Parts, would be so peevish as to
refuse, being hereupon forced to divert from the way of a more free Education,
to some mean Employment to get a livelihood, or live upon the Charity of
others? (It is the Condition of hundreds this Day in England); And can we
imagine any Men having such Encouragements in their Eye, and the more desirable
from sense of their present Indigency, keep off, but from Integrity of Heart?

His Majesty, as a Common Father, has the same Affections for all his Good
Subjects, and never more prudence and tenderness manifested by any Prince, than
be has done in this his Gracious Declaration. One Party, such as Conform,
enjoy their Consciences with special Advantages in Temporal Things; the other,
they also enjoy their Consciences, with Freedom from those Severe Proceedings,
and these are fatisfied also. And now let not any Man's Eye be Evil, because
his Majesty has been so good to their Brethren.

Let me say again, That his Majesty has in Tenderness and Prudence, done a
great Work, and that which has lain undone, to the disturbance of his good
Subjects, more or less, ever since the Reformation; That is, in satisfying, or
laying a sufficient ground of Satisfaction to the two great Parties which
divided this Kingdom, in the Matters appertaining to Religion; That is, in the
Forms and Ceremonies of Worship, (In the Profession of Faith, and Articles of
Religion, according to the establishment 13. Eliz. there is one Union in the
acknowledgment of both Parties) and this without the least detriment or just
prejudice of either Party; Those that Conform, enjoy their Consciences, employ
their Talents, and reap the Encouragements of the established Government,
without any loss or detriment to those that conform not; And this party, enjoy
their Consciences and Freedom from suffering, and liberty to follow their
Callings, without the least damage to the Conformist.

SECT. 5. QUEST. V. Is there any necessity his Majesty should exert a sole
Power in Affairs of Religion, when the Peace and Unity of the Nation herein was
undertaken by his Parliament, and many Things endeavored that way by them, and
Purposes (its likely) of a further progress therein?
Answ. For Answer, it will be necessary to insert here briefly a Narrative of
some Passages of his Majesty and the Parliament in these Proceedings.

His Majesty observing how Affairs stood here in this Kingdom, and the
Distractions that were on Men's Minds about Religion, and Forms of Worship; and
considering there are but two ways supposed ordinarily to reduce a People again
to Peace and Unity in Religion; (1.) Either by severity to discourage and
extirpate; Or, (2.) by lenity and indulgence to bear with Dissenters. His
Majesty considering those Forms and Ways of Worship, to which Conformity is now
required, have not only been much scrupled, and contended against by Learned
and Sober Men, ever since the first Reformation; but of late utterly
disfavoured by a Representative of the Nation, and a Synod of Learned Men. And
different practices in the Service and Worship of God, by the present Powers
that then were encouraged; and such which were not other but what was received
and observed in the best Reformed Churches Abroad, and by the Dutch and French
Churches here at Home. Upon these and the like Considerations, his Majesty
chose, upon great Deliberation, the way of Indulgence; it being also most
suitable to his Conscience, and sweetness of his Nature.

This is Resolution he professed to all the World, and engaged himself by
promise to his People, he would endeavor the effecting thereof; which is more
than evident in the many Declarations he made hereof, and repeated again upon
all Occasions. He was pleased, in a Declaration from Breda, to answer a Liberty
to tender Consciences; and that no Man shall be disquieted, or called in
question, for Differences of Opinion in Matters of Religion, which do not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom. And in his Speech, July 17. 1660. professes
that he owes his Being here to God's Blessing, upon the Intentions and
Resolutions he had and expressed in that Declaration. This Declaration his
Majesty afterward ( May 8. 1661.) terms a Promise solemnly made: This
Declaration or Promise is so much upon his Royal Heart, that he tells both
Houses, ( July 8. 1661.) that so often as he comes to them, he mentions his
Declaration from Breda, that Himself as well as they might mind it. In his
Majesty's Declaration of December. 26. 1662. he tells us, That he remembers the
very words of the Promises from Breda, that concern Liberty of Consciences, and
the Confirmations he has made of them since, upon several occasions; and as
all these Things are fresh in his Memory, so he is still firm in the Resolution
of performing them to the full. Feb. 10. 1661. in a Speech to both Houses; One
Thing more I hold my self obliged to recommend unto you at this present, which
is, That you would seriously think on some Course, to beget a better Union and
Composure in the Minds of my Protestant Subjects in Matters of Religion;
whereby they may be induced to submit quietly to the Government, and most
faithfully give their Assistance to the support of it.

His Majesty did not only express his Purposes for the ease of Tender
Consciences, but from time to time endeavored it. And first of all, by a
Declaration ( October. 25. 1660.) to all his Loving Subjects of England and Wales
concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, mentioning that from Breda, dispenses with
the use of diverse Ceremonies formerly injoined, that were offensive. March 25.
following, he gave Commission to certain Learned Divines to meet at the Savoy,
and take the Service Book under consideration to the same purpose. May 11.
1661. frees from their Imprisonment such as suffered for Conscience.

The King and his Parliament happily joined in the same pious End, Peace and
Union, yet differenced in their apprehensions of the Means to procure it; which
was our great unhappiness. The Parliament judged the reducing and rooting out
Dissenters, by severe Penalties, to be the means of Unity in the Church, as
they tell his Majesty in Answer to his Declaration; Pressing the asserting of
the Laws and Religion, established according to the Act of Uniformity, as the
more probable means to produce a set led Peace and Obedience throughout the
Kingdom: Supposing (and possibly some of them persuaded thereunto, from those
that never would distinguish betwixt Conformity and Sedition) the dissent of
Nonconformists from the present Establishment, to be rather from a Spirit of
Faction and Disloyalty, than Tenderness of Conscience, proceeded accordingly.
The Act of Uniformity was renewed, and the Service Book injoined, with no
alteration of what was formerly offensive in it, but some Expressions of
greater difficulty to be digested by those that were Tender, and nothing done
yet in what his Majesty had promised in way of relief to Tender Consciences.

Hereupon not only multitudes of faithful Preachers of the Gospel in the
several Shires of this Kingdom, were put from their Employment, but also the
Minds of Men much disturbed, and filled with hard Thoughts and Jealousies upon
this Account. Insomuch that his Majesty was enforced to publish that
Declaration of December. 26. in which he expresses the Surmises of the People,
occasioned by this Severity; thus, That having made use of such solemn Promises
from Breda, and in several Declarations since, of Ease and Liberty to Tender
Consciences; instead of performing any part of them, we have added straiter
Fetters than ever, and new Rocks of Scandal to the Scrupulous by the Act of
Uniformity. To this Surmise and Jealousy, his Majesty condescends to make Reply
thus; As concerning the Nonconformance of our Promise, We remember well the
very words of those from Breda, (repeating the words) and the Confirmations we
have made of them since, upon several Occasions in Parliament; and as all these
Things are still fresh in our Memory, so are we still firm in the Resolution of
performing them to the full. But it must not be wondered at, since that
Parliament to which those Promises were made in Relation to an Act, never
thought fit to offer us any to that purpose.

The House of Commons took his Declaration into consideration, and represented
to his Majesty diverse Objections against it, and laid it aside, so that nothing
was effected thereby to his Majesty's Purpose; the Parliament being otherwise
minded, and certainly it is not only their Liberty, but Duty, to proceed in
reforming Abuses by such Means as are in their Persuasion most suitable and
likely to be effectual, otherwise they could not be faithful in their Trust.
Greater Severities against Nonconformity are provided, in several Acts upon
occasion, as the Act against private Meetings, 16 Car. 2. The expelling
Ministers five Miles from Borough Towns, 17 Car. 2. Especially that Act of 22
Car. entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles; An Act
very high and heavy in the Penalties expressed, both upon Ministers and People,
his Majesty notwithstanding condescended to give his Royal Assent to that Bill.
It being judged this Severity was taken up by them from good Intentions, and as
the likeliest means of Peace and Union; as also if it proved not to be so, that
they might be yet more fully convinced of the Insufficiency of such a way,
having had hitherto, for some Years, experience how little effectual it has
proved.

Yet this Bill containing nothing for substance, but what was proper to his
Ecclesiastical Power, being an ordering the Externals of the Church, and
nothing of immediate Concern in Civil Affairs in the whole Act: And his Majesty
having intentions to take the other Course, if this of Severity effected not
what was aimed at, a Proviso is contained in the Act, in these words; Provided
also, that neither this Act, nor any thing herein contained, shall extend to
invalidate or avoid his Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs; but that
his Majesty, and his Heirs and Successors, may from time to time, and at all
times hereafter exercise and enjoy all Powers and Authorities in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, as fully and amply, as himself or any of his Predecessors have, or
might have done the same, any thing in this Act notwithstanding.

As this Act of 22 Car. 2. was very strict and severe in it self; so the
execution of it, was with much Violence and Rigor in most parts of the Nation,
there being Provision made in it, such, as even loose and indigent Persons may
intrude themselves in the promoting thereof, with encouragement not only of
their Lusts gratified in persecuting those they so much hate, but their
Necessities supplied from large Rewards for the same; Having Power given to
inform against Justices, Mayors, Constables, and such as are entrusted in the
Execution hereof, who are under great Fines and Penalties, for Omissions
limited in this Act, and the Informer to have a Moiety hereof himself. Insomuch
that by the rigorous execution of it, thousands of his Majesty's good Subjects
were utterly ruined. Persons industrious and diligent in their Callings, driven
from their Habitations, their Houses broken open, their Goods imbezeled; the
Materials of their Trades, the Tools they wrought with, and the Beds they lay
upon, seized and sold; Trade every where decayed, Rents of Land fallen, Poverty
coming on like an Armed Man; Persons haled from these Meetings for the Worship
of God, through the open Streets, to Prisons, being of the same Faith with us,
and so peaceable and unblameable in their Conversation, as that nothing could
be objected against them but in the Matters of their God; nor for any thing
upon that account, but their endeavoring to practice as those Reformed
Churches, we our selves own for such, and hold a Brotherly Communion with as
the true Churches of Christ.

The Nation generally being thus distracted and distressed, those in Power
going on still to make Laws to afflict and punish, and others engaged quietly
to suffer whatsoever they should be exposed to for their Consciences: Matters
being at this pass, there was apparent necessity that some Remedy be speedily
applied.

His Majesty considering they are all his Subjects, and how much by such
Severity the Interest of his Sovereignty is narrowed, so great a number of his
People rendered unworthy of his Countenance and Protection, and upon no other
Account or Crime, but their being of different Persuasions in some Externals of
Religion, Persons otherwise for Industry, Faithfulness, Loyalty, and every way
qualified to do his Majesty and their Country as much Service as others.

His Majesty also calling to mind that prudent Caution which his Royal Father
left him in these words; Take heed (says he) that outward Circumstances and
Formalities in Religion, devour not all or the best Encouragements of Learning
and Industry, but with an equal Eye, and impartial Hand, distribute Favors and
Rewards to all Men, as you find them for their real Goodness, both in Ability
and Fidelity, worthy and capable of them; this will be sure to gain you the
Hearts of the best, and most too.

It was likewise impossible for his Majesty to imagine that so many thousands
(in his own Observation) who have suffered so greatly with such humble
submission, should daily thus expose themselves and Families to ruin, from no
other or better Principles than a Spirit of Obstinacy and Stubbornness; great
Sufferings, and by great Multitudes, yet no Tumults, no Resisting, whereas in
the beginning of the Reformation, what Armies in the North, and in the West,
upon this Account, by those of another Persuasion, were raised, tho as yet they
suffered little?

His Majesty, as a Common Father, bears Affection to all his Subjects; but
who of them deserves it, and who not, can never be discovered by this
indiscriminating Severity; that is, who are Dissenters upon Principles of
Conscience; and who of them so pretending, are notwithstanding of a Seditious
Spirit?

These can never be distinguished one from the other, when Dissenters, and such
as Conform not, be it upon what ground soever, are all of them equally branded
with the same Mark of Disloyalty, and so represented to his Majesty, and all
the Nation: There is a necessity that this Pretense of Conscience be removed,
and Seditious Persons discovered, and left to condign Punishment; and others
(these Stumbling Blocks being removed) may, by their peaceable Obedience to all
other his Majesty's Laws, justify and vindicate their Integrity; which can no
ways be done, while the Righteous are thus condemned with the Wicked; and no
relaxing those Laws, that shut up all, both Guilty and Innocent, under the same
Condemnation.

Of these Things his Majesty has had a clear prospect all along, and thence
publicly declared his avowed readiness (in his Proclamation July 16. 1669. and
otherwise) to indulge Tender Consciences; and has, upon the aforementioned,
and the like weighty Considerations, been necessitated to publish this his
Gracious Declaration of March the 25th, 1671, wherein he has fully performed
his Promise made at Breda, and so often repeated. Thus his Majesty, as a Wise
and Prudent Prince, whose Station is fixed in an higher Orb, (like the Sun
exhaling and consuming, or turning to refreshing Showers the dark Fogs and
Mists here beneath) has, by the Light and Liberty shining forth from his
Gracious Indulgence, refreshed multitudes of his Good Subjects, and delivered
them from the dark misapprehensions of others. Nor is this their great Relief
in any thing prejudicial, either to the Estates or Liberties of Men otherwise
minded; nor are such Men abridged in any of their Concerns, Spiritual or
Temporal, hereby; his Majesty has made sufficient Provision for the satisfying
their Consciences, in a careful continuing those Ceremonies and Forms of
Worship they have been accustomed to; let it not be grievous or offensive unto
them, that their Brethren have obtained the like favor from his Majesty in
respect to their Consciences.

The Apostle requires, That we neither judge or despise those that differ from
us, in Matters of the like Nature; but to leave a Man without molestation from
us, to his own Master, to whom he stands or falls; his being in the right,
or in the wrong (upon this account) is a Matter of his Master's concern, What
is it to us? What have we to do to discipline another Man's Servant, for what
his Master is pleased to bear with him?

SECT. 6. QUEST. VI. Since these Ecclesiastical Laws of Restraint were enacted
by Parliament, the King giving his Royal Assent, had it not been convenient, if
his Majesty had so pleased, that the dispensing with these Laws had been by
Parliament?
Answ. 1. The Kings and Princes of this Realm, his Majesty's Predecessors, did
Establish many Things and Orders by Parliament, relating to Ecclesiastical
Things; but did yet nevertheless often exercise their own Power in dispensing
with the Penalties of such Laws. A constant acting with others in the exerting
hereof, might (though no Prescription against the King) yet introduce at least
in the Minds of Men a kind of suspicion, especially in the Vulgar, that such
Proceedings of the Supreme Majesty by his sole Power, to be an assuming an
Arbitrary Government.

2. The Parliament did still continue in this their former Opinion and
Judgment, namely, That a way of Severity was the only Means to settle Peace and
Unity. They had newly passed the Act for Uniformity, without any abatement of
what was Offensive; by reason whereof, arose that general Discontent which
before we have mentioned.

His Majesty being sensible hereof, did, by that Declaration of December. 26.
move a second time, That an Act might be prepared, whereby he may be enabled
with a more universal acceptance, to exercise the Power of Dispensing, which
is inherent in him, not doubting their cheerful cooperation with him, being a
Matter wherein he conceived himself so much engaged, both in point of Honor,
and in what he owes to the Peace of his Kingdoms, which We profess (says he)
we can never think secure, whilst there shall be a color left to the Malicious
and Disaffected, to inflame the Minds of so many Multitudes upon the score of
Conscience, with despair of ever obtaining any Effect of our Promises for their
Ease. The House returns this Answer, We your Majesty's dutiful and loyal
Subjects, who are now returned to serve in Parliament, from those several parts
and places of your Kingdom, for which we were chosen, do humbly offer to your
Majesty's great Wisdom, That it is in no sort advisable that there be any
Indulgence to such Persons who presume to dissent from the Act of Uniformity,
and the Religion established, for diverse Reasons, whereof this is one; It will
in no wise become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at one
Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the Reasons of Uniformity
continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or weaken the
Execution of it. So that now his Majesty had no other Remedy, but either.

1. To retract from that pious and seasonable Resolution for Liberty of
Conscience, expressed in Letters to the Parliament then sitting, from Breda, a
Resolution so acceptable to them, as the whole House, Nemine contradicente, by
Letters returned him Thanks, and bless the Name of the Lord, who put such
reconciling thoughts into the Heart of the King; and he himself likewise owns
an especial Blessing from God upon his Affairs, after he had expressed that
Intention.

2. Or break that Promise he solemnly made, assuring this Liberty; and had
professed to the World upon this Occasion, in his Speech May 8. 1661. that he
valued himself much upon keeping his Word, and whatsoever he promised to his
Subjects, and that no Man can be his Friend, and wish him well, who would
persuade him to the consent of the breach of that solemn Promise.

3. Or leave the Nation under greater Distractions and Sufferings about
Religion than he found it in; and upon twelve Years experience of other means
used, which tended rather to increase the Distemper.

These dishonorable Things, I say, his Majesty must have suffered and
undergone, or make use of that Power God and the Nation have entrusted him
with, though not with concurrence of Parliament, so much and so often desired
by him, even so often as He came to them, as he tells them in his Speech of July
8. 1661. Yet nothing at any time was done by the Houses, in respect to Liberty
of Conscience, being obliged in their Judgments to proceed in the other way.

CHAP. V. Of former Examples for Indulgence.
SECT. 1.
HIS Majesty's Gracious Declaration contains not a greater Indulgence; tho it
be extended to a greater number of Persons, than what was granted by his
Majesty's Predecessors (which before we have mentioned) to the French and Dutch
Congregations.

1. There was a Uniform Order in Church Government and Divine Service, to which
not only his Majesty's Subjects, but all the Inhabitants of his Majesty's
Dominions were to conform, and no Man to absent himself: And not to hear or be
present at any other Forms of Prayers, and administration of Sacraments, than
what is in that Book prescribed, under Penalties of Ecclesiastical Censures,
Fines to the King, to the Poor of the Parish, etc.

2. The Dispensation and Exemption was by the sole Authority of the Sovereign,
and stands thus; A Liberty to separate and absent themselves from the Parish
Assemblies, where they had their Habitations, and to gather themselves into
distinct particular Churches or Congregations, to choose and ordain their own
Ministers; also to establish such a Church Government, or Discipline, and Form
of Worship and Divine Service, as they amongst themselves judged to be most
conformable to the Scriptures, established by his Majesty's Patent as a
Corporation within it self, and independent upon any Superior Jurisdiction
Spiritual but his Majesty's: And all Bishops, Mayors, Sheriffs, etc. to protect
them, and suffer them quietly to enjoy and exercise these Liberties, with a Non
Obstante, etc.

3. The Grounds and Considerations upon which such Liberty and Exemptions were
granted, were these: 1. The Care of Religion that ought to be in all Christian
Princes, and to be showed forth especially in this, the Relief and
Encouragement of those that are of the same Religion, in their Sufferings for
Conscience of their Duty toward God. 2. Persons of the same Religion with us,
and Sacraments administered by them, according to the Word of God, and practice
of the Apostles, ought to be tolerated in their way of worshipping God, though
they differ from us in Ceremonies and Discipline. 3. The Kindness we found in
other Protestant Countries, when we were forced to leave our Native Soil for
preserving our Consciences. 4. There were also great Advantages in Matter of
Trade, for their skill and industry, to the great benefit of this Nation, and
prejudice of their own. L. Herbert's History of Hen. 8.


The Premises considered, we further say;

1. His Majesty's Protestant Subjects here spoken for, to whom this Gracious
Indulgence is extended, are of the same Religion with others of his Subjects,
and the present Establishment, in respect to Matters of Faith and Worship in
external Forms; also they are not more differing from the Church of England,
than those Congregations to whom the same Indulgence has been granted by his
Majesty and Predecessors, and is still enjoyed.

And when those Strangers had removed their Families, and come among us, had
not this gracious Indulgence been granted and continued to them, their
Consciences would have engaged them to depart hence, and seek Habitations where
the like Liberty might be obtained. And this also is our Condition; many
hundreds of his Majesty's Subjects, with their Families, have left their Native
Country, and dispose themselves into other parts of the World upon the same
account.

2. If it be so grateful a Charity, and deserving so solemn an Acknowledgment,
the kind Entertainment our Subjects have found in other Parts, when not
suffered to live in their own Land, upon the account of Conscience, doubtless
it is a greater Charity to be so indulgent to our own, as not by Severity to
enforce them for Conscience to become Strangers in other Countries.

3. And for Matter of Trade, Advantages have been great by encouraging those
Strangers; but the Disadvantages in the same kind far greater by the late
Severity, by which our own Subjects have been so greatly discouraged; not only
those Hands hang down, that were most industrious in holding up the staple
Trade of the Nation; but by reason of Artificers removing into other Parts for
their Consciences, the Mysteries of our chiefest Manufactures have been made
common, and others therein become equal, if not exceed us: A great sense hereof
his Majesty has expressed in his Gracious Declaration.

Object. If it be said, These be Strangers, Objects of Charity, being driven
out of their own Country, understood not our Language, they were Educated and
accustomed to other Forms of Discipline and Worship.

Answ. 1. It Is true, the first Grant of this Liberty was to such; but in
process of Time, these Churches were increased and spread throughout the
Nation; and this Grant being confirmed by Q. Eliz. K. James, and K. Charles I.
to their Children, English born, and born Subjects of this Realm, they had the
same Liberty granted them as formerly was mentioned; insomuch, as the Persons
now enjoying this Liberty, are his Majesty's Native Subjects.

Answ. 2. The greatest number of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, that have
benefit by his Gracious Indulgence since they have had understanding, have been
trained up in, and been acquainted with no other Forms of Discipline and
Worship, than what was found amongst us at his Majesty's return, the other,
formerly established, having been for many Years totally disused. King James
himself being educated under other Forms, when he came into England, scrupled
many Things in our Liturgy and Rubricks. Conference at Hampt. Court. Finally;

It is now more than a Century of Years, wherein these Churches have enjoyed
this Indulgence; there has been much peace and quiet among themselves,
following their Callings without disturbance; neighbourly and friendly Converse
with those that are of different Persuasions in Matters of Religion.

No Disputings or Reasonings about it, no Judging or Despising; experience
hereof we have, beyond denial, in London, Norwich, Canterbury, etc. where
diversity of practices, in the Forms of Discipline and Worship, are constantly
held forth in the view of all Men for so many Years. And why should not we
expect the like peaceable and inoffensive Converse mutually between those that
now enjoy the like Liberty, from this Gracious Declaration, and others of our
Brethren, whose practice is otherwise.

The Lord, who has put this into the Heart of the King, may put it also into
the Hearts of our Senators to be like-minded with him. And as his Majesty has
condescended to them in their way for the space of these twelve Years, (as he
tells them); so it is to be desired that they (if it may stand with their great
Prudence) would concur with him but half so long, in the way himself has
chosen, for the Peace and Union of his Subjects in Matters of Religious
Worship; or at least until there be the like evident Experiments of the
Ineffectualness of it.

FINIS.
The same Author has published a Book, entitled, The Lawfulness of the Oath
of Supremacy, and the Power of the King in Ecclesiastical Affairs, etc. With a
Vindication of Dissenters, proving, That their particular Congregations are not
inconsistent with the King's Supremacy. With some account of the Nature,
Constitution, and Power of the Ecclesiastical Courts. Sold by Jo. Robinson, and
Sam. Crouch.


