Royal coat of arms. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.



THE SEDITIOUS Principle, Viz. That the Supreme Power is inherent in the
People, and that perpetually as in the proper Subject; [Upon which the late
lawless Actings against the KING were grounded; and from which the long
Thraldom and Misery of the three Nations did ensue.]

Examined and Confuted.

By JOHN NOVELL. B. D.

LONDON, Printed for Sarah Bartlet at the Gilt Cup in Westminster Hall. 1662.

Perlegi hunc Tractatum cui Titulus [ The Seditious Principle, etc.]

Examined and Confuted, Quem and Lectu and Typis dignum judico.

M. Franck S.T.P. R. P. Epis. Land. a sacris domesticis.
Feb. 26.1661/2
May it please Your Majesty,
THis unhappy Posthumus was intended to kiss Your Majesty's hand before the
Authors death, but by some ill fate has trewanted by the way, till now of late
it came to me, who (having had a former acquaintance with it) in loyalty to
Your Sacred Majesty, duty to my Country, and obedience to the Authors meaning,
whom I had the honor to call Tutor) dare do no less than publish and present
it; nor could I have abused this opportunity without a tacit condemnation of
my self as accessory to this horrid Principle. The Dregs whereof hang too much
in the heads of many mistaken moderate persons, and still continues lurking in
corners, and building strong holds in secret and seditious Conventicles. And to
give it an honorable Pedigree, they make it of kin to that ancient frontispiece
of the Common Laws of England, Salus populi suprema Lex: Where, without doubt,
the King in good manners must needs be understood in the first place as Head of
the people, and in case our Divisionmongers shall take the King and people as
distinct Estates, it can bear no other meaning than that the health and welfare
of the people is the strength of the King, who is the life of the Law: But
their crooked constructions are like bad constitutions, that turn the best of
meats into the worst of humors. And to give this popular principle the more
formality and privilege, it must be denizon'd by the Tail of that
Serpent-Parliament (the memory whereof is only happy in the Act of Oblivion)
and laid up in their Journal as a perpetual magazen for the fifth of November
or a recruit in tail to the black and dismal day of our late Kings murder,
Your Majesty's Royal Father: Though our late combustions by Your Majesty's
Providence and prudence are alayed for present, yet it is justly to be feared
they will never be extinguished so long as this Principle has one spark of
life or being in the hearts and heads of your Majesty's subjects: To which the
Author most humbly offers this expedient.

And if Your Majesty shall please to give a second life to him by a countenance
of these lines with Your gracious acceptance, without doubt You will find them
bear a very considerable part in Your Majesty's Lifeguard.

But my duty to him forbids me all Encomiums, knowing how little he loved them,
and how much less he needs them. Now may it please Your Majesty, since Your
Pardon has prevented the utmost darings of all men's askings, I shall not be
desperate of mine for assuming this boldness, being the real effect of a heart
brim full of affection and loyalty to Your most Sacred Majesty, and upon that
confidence shall presume to beg leave to write my self

Your Majesty's most humble and Loyal Subject, JOHN SHADWELL.

TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
THat ingenuous and true Loyalty which is due to your most Sacred Majesty (if
it can yet be as duly rendered) is the truest and surest foundation of the whole
peoples civil happiness and safety.

That which is most opposite to that true Loyalty, is the late unchristian
policy, most perniciously practiced in these Nations, upon the false ground of
this most erroneous and seditious Principle, That the Supreme Political power
is both originally from, and still inherent in the People.

In the Confutation whereof (which may by some other be much more irrefragably
done.) All these persons that have from the very beginning of our late
miseries) in any Way, or in any Capacity acted (directly or indirectly) against
your Majesty's Royal Father (of ever blessed and most precious memory,) and
against your most Sacred Majesty's own Person and just Right, will find
themselves not a little concerned. They will easily see, that, if this
Principle be proved false, the only pretense of lawfulness for all their
lawless actings is utterly taken away. For even to themselves and to all other
men it is most apparent, (if duly considered,) that from this Principle arose
the Confidence or Pretense of lawfulness so, the most unlawful usurping of the
power of the Militia, their taking Arms by their pretended Authority from the
People, their making pretended Acts of Parliament without the Royal Assent,
their most impudent accusing and most sceleratious condemning of Your Majesty's
Royal Father expressly in the name of the People, and (which was the root of all
the evil) their first Covenanting to alter the fundamentals of Government, and
to abolish that which stood fully established by all the Law of England without
any Concurrence of the Royal Authority, and in a forcible and violent
opposition against it; their Ejecting the whole House of Lords, and most
unrighteous banishing of Your most Sacred Majesty, upon pretense of sole
Sovereignty in the People, whose Representatives they would (even in despite
of the People) be then esteemed; For all which unrighteous practices, and many
other, most nefariously perpetrated against all Law Divine and Humane, the
Authors, Actors, Abettors, and Approvers have no other pretense of Apology, (by
which they yet continue in impenitency,) besides their own Opinion or
Dissimulation of this most false, Antiscriptural, and most seditious Principle.
Therefore any confutation of this, will, perhaps, irritare crabrones, too much
irritate the whole nest of Hornets, with all their disloyal and Antichristian
Faction; there being but little hope of more than forced Repentance from them
that have sinned wilfully after they had received the knowledge of the truth;
and hence it is, there is so little appearance yet of any such thing. How
seasonable therefore such a Corrosive may be to that old Sore that is but newly
skinn'd, it is not easy for any private person to determine. Yet the
Conscience of my necessary duty to serve God and Your Majesty, and to defend
Your most Sacred Authority (in my way) to the uttermost of my power has
enforced me to this Endeavor; which I most humbly submit to Your Majesty's
Censure, pleasure and Pardon, as becomes

Your Majesty's most devoted Servant and lowest Subject, JOHN NOVELL.

A Short Account of the danger of this PRINCIPLE
THis popular and loose Doctrine was easily learned, and greedily swallowed by
many undiscerning People. And by this were they soon flattered into their own
undoing, and made very active Contributers to their own destruction. They were
told that Power was but derivative in the Prince, and that, of right, the
Sovereignty was theirs, as properly inherent in them; And, that they could
never recover their native Liberty, but by casting off the yoke of all
subjection to the most ancient and only lawful Government of the Nation; till,
having lost the benefit of it, and protection by it, the pretended Liberty
showed it self in its proper and true Colors of perfect bondage and misery.
The truth of this they have very long and very severely been schooled into:
Nevertheless it is probable, that many of them are not yet aware, that, so
long as this pernicious Principle is where it was, uncondemned, and perhaps,
undiscerned by many, the common danger of future Mischief by it is not yet
removed. Idem qua idem semper facit idem. If this, and this only has been the
(...), the main leading Cause (as indeed it has) of the slavery and misery we
have long endured, there can be no absolute and perfect Cure of these Evils
with prevention of future danger, without a total and timely removal of that
Cause.

This Principle then had need be fetched out of the hearts and the heads of the
Obstinate by a more powerful and effectual Confutation than that which is but
verbal, though never so Logical or Apodictical: Argumentum baculinum, or a good
severe Law against it, were perhaps (at such a time as this) no more than
necessary. But all they that have any thing of good in them will certainly, by
arguments truly and logically deduced from the Oracles of God, effectually be
wrought upon: Especially considering, that so long as this Principle remains in
any credit and uncondemned [That the proper and perpetual Right to the power is
the Peoples;] Whenever the multitudes of Seditious Spirits that are still
(though dispersed) where they were, and the same men they were, and may
secretly grow to be yet more in number, can have the opportunity to rally and
(by Conspiracy) get into a Body, though they be not the fortieth part of the
Nation, they will by and by call themselves the people: And then (next to the
grand Cheat and Mockery of seeming Sanctimony) by a false pretense of standing
up for the Peoples Right, bring the whole People (many of their own party not
excepted) into that (or a worse) ruin and desolation (if they can,) which no
humane wisdom or power without the immediate helping hand of God, could have
now rescued and redeemed us from.

That damnable Principle is therefore the most pernicious and dadgerous
Cousenage that ever any people was abused and deluded by. And if this were all,
it were not so fit for one of my profession to have meddled with it: But, it is
also a Principle of Infidelity, and of Rebellion against God; as being
expressly repugnant to the general Torrent of the Testimonies and Instances
contained in His written Word. And upon that precise account, there is here
endeavored a Confutation of it.

AN Introduction Touching the state of the QVESTION, WITH A Brief Explication
of the Terms.
IT is the new and strange Doctrine of some of the late Jesuits, (more lately
reduced into Practice by Persons professing the greatest Enmity and Opposition
to those Innovators) That the whole Political Power is not only originally
from, but formally inherent in the People. Nota, hanc Potestatem immediate esse
tanquam in Subjecto, in tota Multitudine, says one Bellar. lib. 3. de Laicis.
c. 6.
; Note, that this power is immediately in the whole people, as in the Subject
of it: And, Pendet a Consensu multitudinis; It depends upon the Agreement of
the people, says the same Author. And, Potestas secularis est a Deomediate;
quia Natura and Recta Ratio dictat, and hominibus persuasit praeficere
Reipublicae Magistratus, says another Caanel. a Lapide, in his note upon Romans
13.1.
; i. e. The secular power is of God, but mediately; because Nature and Right
Reason, which is of God, does dictate, and has persuaded men to set up
Magistrates over the Commonwealth: But, (says the same Author,) Potestas
Ecclesiastica immediate est a Deo instituta; The Ecclesiastical Power is
ordained of God immediately: This is true; and so indeed, must also that
Original Power of Paternal Regality needs be, which God by the Law of Nature
has ordained, and by positive Institution settled, (of which his written Word
gives us clear, and certain Instances; by which also He has governed the world
universally in the first ages of it; and, unto which He expressly commanded
obedience to be yielded by one of the special Precepts of his moral and eternal
Law, then, when there was no other kind of Civil Power extant in the world.

But this Device of Mediate derivation of the Civil Power, and immediate
Institution of the Ecclesiastic, is invented and obtruded by these deceitful
Workers to exalt the Pope to an absolute Sovereignty over all Kings and
Princes; and that not only in Spirituals, but (by the help of that Distinction
of not directly, but indirectly, which is just as good as this of not
immediately, but mediately,) in all temporal and secular things and Causes too,
as well as in Spiritual. In order to this Design intended by these Authors, and
in prosecution of many other far Different Ends designed by the Anabaptists
and others, the Foxes have their tails tied together in this false Principle,
equally common to both: which is that Firebrand that did for so long a time
put these Nations into one general Combustion.

The self-same Principle was once delivered by one Dr. Dorislaus (of infamous
memory) in the Schools at Cambridge in my hearing about thirty years since: And
had he then been punished (as he was complained of) according to his high
Demerit, and his dangerous Doctrine publicly condemned (if it could have been)
by a just Law, perhaps the mischief that has since ensued of it, (in which the
very same Man had a hand) might have been prevented.

It has also been more lately asserted by the Author of a seditious Pamphlet
set forth about the beginning of our late fatal War, entitled, OBSERVATIONS
upon some of His Majesty's late Answers and Expresses; wherein the Observators
Fundamental Thesis confidently presumed and never proved, is in these express
words; Power is originally inherent in the People: And, Power is but secundary
and derivative in Princes, the fountain and efficient Cause is the People. And
last of all, the Author of the Armies Plea (as 'twas called) affirms, That
Kings have no power and authority, but what they have from the People. Still
the People are colloqued with, and made believe all is their own, till they are
left Owners of Nothing, but at the pleasure and allowance of their Covetous
Undoers: Why should I make these petty instances, when this principle is become
so National, as to have the Countenance of a Vote in that which was called a
Parliament, as you may see in their Preparative to the High Court of Justice,
Jan. 4. 1648. and the eigth of January, 1648. you may see the same Dorislaus
appear in his Colors, as one of the Chief Architects of that most Horrid
Structure.

But, That there can be no other Fountain and efficient Cause of Civil Power
and just Authority, but God: That it is derived to Princes immediately from
God, and not solely or chiefly from the People: That the Special Right and
Title to it, is from God alone; And, That God never gave his own glory to men,
to have the giving of this Power, is that which is here endeavored to be made
apparent.

But first, a little explication of Terms, (such as shall here occasionally be
mentioned,) will not be amiss. When the word [Magistrate] is used, not every
one that is vulgarly called by that Name is meant. The inferior Minister of
Justice, having no inherent power, but deriving all his authority by Commission
from the King, is not the Magistrate here spoken of. The King alone is the
Magistrate (properly so called,) who only is that Supreme Person whose
Authority is not Commissionary, but original, formal, inherent, and inexistent,
as created in Him of God, by communicating to Him the Image and Title of his
Own Dominion and Power, by which He Himself Governs the world: And it is of the
same Nature (but more eminent) with that authority which a Father has over his
sons; which depends on no Act or Deed, much less on any Concession or Grant of
theirs.

And by this it also appears what must needs be meant by the Supreme Political
Power and Authority; to wit, that Paternal and equitable, and (yet) full and
uncontrollable Dominion over the free people of the Land, whose freedom
consists in this, that He Rules and Governs them, as the Minister of God, in
true judgment and justice according to the known Laws, ancient Customs, and
fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, and that for the Common Good, and
Universal Benefit of all: As, a Father uncontroulably governs his Children, yet
for the equal and common Welfare both of Him and them.

What is meant by immediate Derivation of this Power from God, (which is often
mentioned,) is next and last to be unfolded. Things may be said to be of God,
or from God, diverse ways. 1. By his immediate Influx into the Essence of every
thing, as he is the Universal Cause of all things that have a Being. 2. By his
immediate Instinct, Motion, Special Help and Exciration, as He is the Father of
Lights, and Giver of every good and perfect Gift; and thus he gives to his
Special Minister the Supreme Magistrate, special grace, wisdom, counsel,
courage, justice, love to his people, and a tender care of their Welfare. 3. By
his own proper Donation, Grant and Conveyance of just Right, Title and
Interest; And thus the Right and just Title to Supreme Government and Political
Power, comes immediately from God to the lawful Magistrate; As every private
Right, Title and Interest to or in any thing, must needs come to him that
receives it immediately from the only just possessor and proper owner of it;
Such as God must needs be of all Dominion, Government and Rule over the Nations
of the world, as their Sole Creator and Upholder. For, God (of his own right)
being the only King, and (by his own Act) the immediate Governor of and in all
the actual Governments and Kingdoms of the world, it incommunicably belongs to
him to have the giving and conveying of the Right of Government to them that
justly possess it: And, it incommunicably belonging to him to have the giving
of that Right, from him immediately must it needs come.

This way of Derivation and Collation of Civil Authority and the Right of it
directly and immediately to the Supreme Magistrate from God, the proper
Fountain, and formal Owner, and actual Possessor of it, (who imparts it to the
Supreme Magistrate, not by alienation from, but by communication with himself;)
these ensuing Arguments, by virtue of that high Principle upon which they are
founded, the Word of God, will (it may be hoped) sufficiently prove and
manifest to all, but such as are given to change, and are led by the Phanatick
Spirit to Despise Dominion, and to count all just Authority, tyranny, if they
be not allowed to take the liberty to control it at their pleasure, to use the
Lords Anointed as execrably as they have lately done, and to shed the blood of
the chief Nobility also, to satisfy their filthy Lust.

I. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy
People, [or, the Prince among thy People.]
GOD gives his own Name and Title to the Prince; which were utterly incongruous
and incompetible, if he did not also communicate to him a competent proportion
of his own authority and power. But, if God had given the whole civil Authority
to the People, and the People only (and only upon their own account) had given
it to the Prince, by such a mere extrinsecal Commission of authority from Men,
how could Princes be styled Gods, when those men themselves could never be
styled so?

I have said, Ye are Gods, likewise says the Psalmist, The reason whereof is
expressly and purposely rendered by our Savior in the Gospel Psalm. 82.6. John
10.34.
; Because, to them the Word of God came. Which can signify no less than that
their Civil Power is given and conveyed to them by the express Word of God. For
it is God himself that says by the mouth of David, I have said, Ye are Gods.
Therefore, Dicit Christus Reges vocari Deos, quod munus sustineant divinitus
sibi injunctum, says Calvin rightly, upon those words; that is, Christ
affirms, that Kings are therefore styled Gods, because they bear an Office by
Divine Injunction: Who will say, that the Peoples Election or Commission
(unless they were all Prophets) is Divine Injunction? Or who will say (in
express contradiction to the Text) that, not the Word of God, but only the word
of the People it was that came to them? Where a Kingdom is by Custom elective,
the Case differs not. For, in this, the Act of men is only instrumental to God:
In their electing who have right to elect, God alone gives the right, and the
just Power to govern: Which is apparent, because this right and power the
Electors themselves never had, and therefore could never give it.

Briefly thus,
Whosoever can have the giving of Supreme Political Power, can likewise have
the giving of Gods own Name and Title;
No mortal men nor Angels in heaven can have the giving of Gods own Name and
Title;
Therefore no mortal men nor Angels in heaven can have the giving of Supreme
Political Power.
The Major is evident, because God has said to Princes, I have said, Ye are
Gods, and directed his Prophets to call them Gods, for no other reason, but
because they communicate with God in that Supreme Power of Government, that
principally and properly is his peculiar. Whence also the Minor is manifest,
because none but God, whose only peculiar the Power is, can, upon the account
of communicating thereof to Princes, be the Giver of his own Name and Title.
And therefore, says our Savior, To them the Word of God came: that is, It was
God himself that said thus to them, I have said, Ye are Gods: And if he had not
said it, who ever durst or could? The conclusion therefore is certain; He who
alone could say, Ye are Gods, could really make them such; that is could really
communicate to them of his own Power, for which he so entitles them.

II. Romans 13.1. Let every soul be Subject to the Higher Powers; or, to the
Supreme Power.
TO say a Derivative Power is Supreme, is a contradiction. Therefore Nero's
Power was not then Derivative, but (under God) Original and Inherent in
himself; which it could no otherwise be, but by his communicating therein with
God, whose Minister (the Apostle says) he was; whereby it became as properly
his own (against all other men) as wisdom or learning, or any other quality
(which God also is the Giver of) is his that has it.

Upon occasion of the Sedition of Judas of Galilee (mentioned, Acts 5.37.) the
Romans were ever apt to suspect that Christ and his Apostles (being also
Galileans) were ill-affected to Caesar, and to the Roman Empire. Hence it was
that the Pharisees sent their Disciples with the Herodians to Christ, thinking
(with flattery and hypocrisy) to discover it to be his Opinion, That it was
not lawful to acknowledge the Authority of the Roman King over Gods people to
be taxed by him, or to pay Tribute to him; in that it might seem a betraying of
their Liberty, as they were the seed of Abraham: The pretense whereof,
specious, and very taking, was that that drew so great a multitude after the
Galilean Rebel.

For this Cause, our Savior himself, and his holy Apostles, were as watchful
upon all Occasions to wipe off this unjust Aspersion cast upon them.

Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, said our Savior, Matthew.
22.21. Thereby declaring not only the lawfulness, but the justness and duness
of Caesar's Tribute, even from Gods own people, the Jews; which is plainly
notified by Caesaris, and Reddite, Render it. Now if the Civil Power over the
land of Judaea had been of Right in the People, that whole Nation, and all the
World besides, Luke ^. 1.
could not have been taxed to pay it (as they were) against their Wills,
without manifest Injustice: The Tribute had in no wise been due to Caesar, till
it had first been granted by the full and free Consent of the people. It was
not their own Act, but only Caesar's Decree, that drew it from them; yet, by our
Saviors own words was this Tribute just and due to Caesar, which manifestly
shows that Caesar's just Power was not depending on any Act, Grant, or Consent
of the People.

[That now Taxes are not ordinarily raised in this Christian Monarchy without
the Peoples own Act and Consent in Parliament, has grown into an ancient and
obliging Custom now, which took its beginning (no doubt) from those Christian
Principles in our Christian Kings, which are of greater perfection, than what
the Rules of mere Civil Justice do require, which infers not any dependence of
the Kingly Office and Authority on the Consent or Will of the People.] And as
Christ himself, so his Apostle Paul writing here to the Romans, endeavors in
like manner to evidence to the World, That Christians were no way guilty of the
Galilean Heresy (as the Ancients called it:) And therefore does here
effectually move the Christians to yield Obedience and Subjection to the Roman
King, though then an Infidel, and afterward For this Epistle was written in
Quinquennio Neronis
a fierce Enemy, and a Persecutor of the Church. To this Duty he stirs them up
by diverse convincing Arguments, whereof the first is to this effect.

All Power that is of God must every soul be subject to. But the Power of the
Roman King is of God: Therefore, The Power of the Roman King must every soul be
subject to.


Here, our later Politicians could (for a need) have helped the Christians (if
they had had a Will to Rebel) to such a near distinction upon the Minor, as
should have utterly repelled the force of the Apostles Argument; viz. Power is
of God two ways; either mediately or immediately: And would have taught the
people to apply it thus; If Caesar's Power were of God by immediate derivation
of it from himself, then indeed it were not for men to reverse it, or to
disobey it: But since it is of God (according to the new discovery) but only
mediately, that is, only by and through the agreement of the people, to
transfer that Power to the Magistrate, which God had first and originally given
to them alone in this case (O Paul!) the Power of our King being no otherwise
from God, but thus, We the people that gave it to him, and still have it
inherent in our selves, as in the Subject of it, may not only disobey it in
him, but take it from him if we think good (as they that can grant a
Commission, can recall it when they will) and then give it to whom we please,
or take it into our own hands again.

Whosoever therefore will believe there is any thing in that distinction, and
that God who gives life, health, strength, wisdom, grace, goodness, and every
thing else immediately by himself, does not give this so too, will (by an
avoidable consequence) make but a weak Logician of the holy Apostle.

But the Wisdom of God by which the Apostle was directed, has so ordered his
words, as to prevent this furilous Evasion! For, he so affirms the Power of
the King to be from God, as (withal) expressly to deny it to be from any other:
The words run thus; (...). Which can be rendered, strictly and ^^^batim, no
otherwise but thus: The Power is not, but from God: Or, There is not Power, but
from God: Which is a flat denial, that the Power there spoken of, is at all
from men. And therefore, to say it is not only from God, but also, and more
immediately from the people, is not only the express Contradictory to the
Apostles Assertion, but quite destroys the Reason involved in it: For, if the
Supreme Power of the Prince be from the people, and no more directly and
immediately from God, then these things are that come by second Causes, That
there is no Power but of God, is no more a Reason why every soul should be
subject to the Power of Caesar, than to the command of a Robber; for this also
is mediately from God, in that the man's Nature and Reason is from him by which
he commands.

III. Romans 13.4. He is the Minister of God.
IF the Supreme Magistrate be Gods Minister, then is he not the peoples; as he
needs must, if he received his power immediately from them: Then also the whole
people themselves must needs be principal (under God) in the governing of their
own Civil Body; and consequently all Government must of necessity be
Democratical. For even in a simple Democracy (if any such be) the whole people
being utterly incapable of doing any Act of Government themselves (in their
universal Body) must needs govern by some One, or some few deputed and empowered
by them. If then in an ancient and lawful Monarchy, the King or Monarch were
but the peoples Minister or Deputy, and only by them empowered, Monarchy and
Democracy were formally the self-same, and no real, or so much as formal
difference between them; which were manifestly false and contradictory.

Whosoever has his Authority to govern from the people, is the peoples
Minister in governing themselves. The Minister of God in governing the people,
is not the peoples Minister in governing themselves: Therefore, The Minister of
God in governing the people has not his Authority to govern from the people;
[But consequently, from God himself.]


If this Minister of God were the peoples Minister, then not only God, but the
people were principal in inflicting death; which no Angel nor man, but as Gods
Minister only, is any more capable of than of giving life. God only is the Lord
of life: Therefore, as the whole people cannot give to one man life, so neither
can the whole people have a just power to take it away. None can justly destroy
Gods image, but God, let the Cause be what it will: And the power which the
people have not, they cannot give. It is therefore God alone, and not the
people, that gives to the Supreme Magistrate, the Power to execute wrath, and
to punish with death.

IV. Judge. 7.20. The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon.
IN the whole Word of God there is neither mention nor intimation of any such
thing as the Power of the Sword in or from the people: But as here, The Lord
and Gideon; so the Lord and the chief Magistrate (such as Gideon was then made)
are only mentioned in Scripture to have any interest in that Power.

Whatsoever power is in the people, is in them either principally or
ministerially. The power of the Sword is not in the people either of these
ways. Therefore, it is not at all in them.


The disjunction is undeniable: The Minor is apparently true in respect of
both; for the principal power of the Sword can be in none but God; and the
Ministerial power of it can be in none but Gods Minister.

The Conclusion therefore is infallible, The power of the Sword is not at all
in the people.

And if this power be not in them, which all political power does either
consist in, or depend upon, what other power can be, where that of the Sword
cannot.

Yet the Phanatick Spirit had of late taught many weak people to believe, That
the peoples Representative (though really not that) was the only Supreme
Authority of the Nation (as they commonly called the late Authors of our
greatest evils.)

But if (what was phansied) the peoples Representative by their own choice,
were the only Supreme, and the only just Authority in every Nation; and
consequently, the Kingly Office and Government in it self unjust, and
inconsistent with Liberty; (as all out Republican Zelots commonly asserted)
then all these consequences are inevitable; viz.

First, That if Justice did everywhere obtain, which God does everywhere
command; that is, If Gods own Will were done, he must needs lose his own glory
to be King of Kings; for there would be never a King in all the World beside
himself.

Secondly, That God, no less the Worlds immediate Governor, than its Creator,
having generally goven'd it ever since the Creation of it, by the Monarchical
(which is really the same with the Paternal and Patriarchal) power, has been
all this while to seek how to govern it in the only just and good; that is, in
the pure Democratical, or simple Republican way, or by Successions of
Representatives, or no man knows what; for which there has never yet been one
Example in the World.

Thirdly, That all the good Kings of Israel (as well as the bad) and all those
Kings and Queens over Christian Nations, who God did promise should be nursing
Fathers, and nursing Mothers to his Church, were, and are (all and every one of
them, even Queen Elizabeth among the rest) wicked and unrighteous persons; that
is, Tyrannical, and unjust Invaders of the peoples Right, and Subverters of
their Native Liberty.

Fourthly, That Gods promise in that particular, must, or of right ought to
have been totally disappointed.

Fifthly, That God himself was then the Author of injustice and Tyranny, when
he sent his Prophets to anoint Saul and David, and Solomon, and Hazael, and
diverse other Kings.

These, and many other irrational and intolerable consequences must unavoidably
follow, if it were true, That the peoples just Right and Liberty did only and
formally consist in having the Supremacy of all Civil power in their own hands,
or at their disposal.

Another vulgar Error consequent to the former was, That the good of the
people is not at all concerned in the Supremacy of power residing in the
Prince; and that the Kings Prerogative is to them no privilege; but (in all) a
prejudice (as they were senslesly made believe) to public Interest and Liberty.

The Kings Majesty, in virtue of His Supremacy, has the Prerogative power as
well of dissolving, as of calling Parliaments. If such a Parliament should come
(which God avert!) as should begin to do what the late long Parliament has
done, the Nation would then scon learn to believe, That the Kings Prerogative
to dissolve such a Parliament, would do them no harm.

The great end of Government, and of the Supreme Kingly Prerogative and power,
is (doubtless) the general Welfare of the people. Therefore most assuredly, in
such an anciently constituted Kingdom, and after so many Laws and Charters,
securing for ever the peoples Interest and Liberty; no understanding man will
now be made believe (after the late horrid delusion) That there is any ancient
and legal Prerogative or power belonging to the King; but is certainly (though
not visibly to all) conducing directly to the general good and welfare of the
people.

If the due Administration of Justice by the power of the Sword, and of the
Laws of the Land, against all wrong-doers, and against all perturbators of the
public Peace (in what place of capacity soever) be for the general good of the
whole people, then assuredly, the greater the Supreme Governers power and
Prerogative is, the greater is the whole peoples present safety, and future
security. And for this cause it is, that God has given (not another, but) his
own Sword to his sole Vicegerent, the Supreme Magistrate. The Sword of the
Lord, and of Gideon.

V. Numb. 27.16, 17, 18, 19. Let the Lord, the God of the Spirits of all flesh,
set a man over the Congregation, which may go out before them, and which may go
in before them, and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in, that
the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd. And the
Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, etc. And set him
before Eleazer the Priest, etc.
FRom all which words it is apparent, First, That the Lord is the immediate
Author and Donor of the Civil Power and Authority: Secondly, that (because this
authority is derived immediately from God to the Prince,) the Prophet and the
Priest were here appointed the special Ministers of God in the actual
Conferring of it. As (in token that God is the proper fountain of this Power)
Christian Kings have usually had the Crown set on their Heads by the
Metroplitan Bishop, as the chief Minister of Christ, who is (now, as man) the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Thirdly, that the Civil Authority and just
power of Government could not be given by the people. For, the Lords setting of
a man over them, is here represented as the sole Expedient, by which they could
escape that fatal Evil, of being as sheep that have no Shepherd. From whence
the illation is evident and certain, That (if God had left them to themselves,)
they had been vested with no Civil power, which they could (of themselves) have
transferred to One or More. For being in themselves (without a Prince) in a
state of actual Anarchy, they were no more united in a Civil Body, (without
which there can be no Civil Power) than Sheep can be one Flock in one Fould
without a shepherd.

Nevertheless, the Authors of the new Policy well enough discerning how hard
it would be to maintain, there could ever, in any time in which the mere
imaginary founding if Authorities is dreamed of by some,) be any real and
formal power of Magistracy inherent in a people (without a Prince;) and the
impossibility of a peoples conferring that to Others which they never had
themselves; to prevent (if they can) a manifest Conviction, think to make their
Escape by a nice Metaphysical distinction of Act and Habit; and answer, That
the people (indeed) never had the power in Act, but yet, in habit they had, and
ever have it.

But, (if this be so) when they come actually to confer it, (which is a
dream, and never done,) can they do that Act by it, and yet have it but in
habit only?

Or, may not this prove a Distinction without a difference? For here indeed,
the Dispute is not of the actual administration and practice, but, of the power
it self; that is, not of the power in actu secundo, or Execution, (which on
both sides is confessed to be only in the Magistrate,) but of the power in astu
primo, or Existence in it self; and in this there can be no difference at all
between Act and habit; And therefore to say, the people have it in habit, but
they have it not in act, is an unavoidable Contradiction, They have it, and
they have it not.

What the people never had, could never by them be transferred to the Prince.
But the Supreme authority the people never had; Therefore; The Supreme
authority could never by them be transferred to the Prince.


Consequently, the Sovereign Prince must needs receive it immediately from God.

The truth of the Major appears by a manifest Rule in Philosophy and common
Reason it self; Nothing can give what it self has not, either formally, or
Eminently. The Minor is also apparent, in that the people have not, nor ever
had the Supreme authority either of these ways; not Eminently, because it can
be eminently competible to none but God. For the Supreme Civil authority is
eminently contained in the Divine, and in no other; Not Formally, unless they
could (at once) be Prince and people too; that is, unless it were possible for
them to be the formal Governors of their own Selves, in their whole collective
Body. Therefore they no way have, nor ever had it; And Consequently, it never
could by them be transferred to the Prince.

VI. Prove. 8.15. By me, [or, in me] Kings reign.
IF the Supreme Civil power were in the people or any way depending upon their
will and pleasure, it must necessarily follow, that this special Ordinance and
work of God, should be as mutable as the minds of men, and liable to be put by
and disappointed upon every alteration of the most unstable Opinion of the
giddy Multitude; especially, of the more subtle, active, ambitious, and
busie-headed party. If these will translate the Supreme power for rather the
Empty Name and Shadow of it,) from the King to the two Houses (that had sworn
subjection to it,) and then from two to one, and then from that one to a
(falsely called) Protector, and then (repenting of that) turn it into other
hands, God must (all along) wait upon their unconstancy (even in their foul
iniquity,) not only with his Providence permitting, but also with his Ordinance
legitimating whatsoever new or no form of Government the wickedness of some,
and the weakness of others shall put them upon.

That which supposes the special Ordinance and Operation of God to depend upon
the inconstancy of men in their unrighteous ways, is impious and false;

But, that Kings reigning by the special Ordinance and Cooperation of God,
should have their power of reigning from the pleasure of the people, supposes
the special Ordinance and Operation of God, to depend upon the inconstancy of
men in their unrighteous ways, Therefore,

That Kings reigning by the special Ordinance and Operation of God, should have
their power of reigning from the pleasure of the people, is impious and false.

The major cannot at all be doubted of, nor yet the minor, by such as will
oblerve, that Solomon reckons it for one of the Glories and Special
Excellencies of God, that, By him, Kings reign. And this can signify no less,
than that the reign of Kings is by the special Operation and Ordinance of God;
(as S. Paul says it is.) If then the Reign of Kings were penes populum, in the
Power, and at the pleasure of the people, so were also that special Operation
and Ordinance of God by which they reign; which, as it is apparently false, so
were it gross impiety to imagine it to be true.

VII. 1 Samuel 24.5. It came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him,
because he had cut off Saul's skirt.
YET, when our late political (that is, Atheistical) Parricides spared not to
cut off their Kings head, their wicked hearts were never troubled at it: Nor
have many, if any of them, or of their close Adherents and parties to the same
faction, yet professed any remorse or sorrow for what they have done: but still
seek to cheat the world and their own souls with the mere form of Godliness
and pharisaical Ostentation of more than ordinary Sanctimony, and still hold on
in their old way of justifying themselves, in their far greater by condemning
some (smaller) sins in others, (as they account the setting up of a May Pole,
the mere drinking of a health, and the like;) As if our Savior had never
condemned this soul hypocrisy, of spying motes in the eyes of others, when huge
beams are in their own.

But, Observe the words that follow, verse. 6. And David said unto his men. The
Lord forbid, that I should do this thing unto my Master, the Lords Anointed, to
stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord.

Here the people had all the Cause in the world (if any cause could, or can
be,) to withdraw their Allegiance, and to call home the Sovereign Power into
their own hands, if there had been any such thing to be done. Saul their King
was then a wicked man, a Tyrant, a Persecutor of holy David, a man forsaken of
God, and evidently acted by the Devil; Yet here we see no deposing (much less
murdering) of him. Nay, David, who was now in Saul's stead anointed King, durst
not here stretch forth his hand against him, to imprison him, or to do him any
harm; (his heart quaked when he had but only cut off the skirt of his Robe.)

What would our new Politicians have done in the like case? They would have
looked upon the Opportunity as a Divine warranty to do the mischief; and have
told the world afterward, That God put it into their hands; and, it was set
upon their spirits; and their prosperous success in it was the good hand of
God, and the answer of prayers; (Three or four of the best of the new Rules of
seeming Righteousness, fitted for the justification of all their Lawless
acting by that wicked Principle we here dispute against.)

But (here in the text) we find all tenderness showed by David to Saul; though
God had put it into David's hand, and it was set (by the Devil) upon the spirits
of David's servants to destroy him. And all this care which David took to stay
his servants from rising against Saul, was, because Saul (however then rejected
of God) remained still the Lords Anointed; -- seeing he is the Anointed of the
Lord.

Now, if Kings be the Lords Anointed, and their special anointing be that by
which they are formally made Kings, then nothing can be more manifest than that
they are made such immediately by God. For, the outward anointing (of old) was
but a Ceremony; the real and substantial unction by which Kings then were (and
now are) formally constituted, the Lords Anointed, could be (or can be) no
other but the formal Authority and supreme Power inherently vested in them.
And, To signify the derivation of this from God immediately, the outward
unction was ever ministered by a special messenger immediately sent from God;
(the people doing nothing in it, nor knowing of it,) But since it is apparent
that the Authority it self is the real anointing, (though the Ceremony be never
had) the King is thereby formally constituted the Lords Anointed. Consequently
all Christian Kings at this day are the Lords Anointed, as well, and as really,
as those that were anointed with outward oil by Prophets sent to m God. And
this, though manifest enough in it self, is also proved by the example of
Cyrus; who though never anointed by a Prophet with outward oil, was
nevertheless the Lords Anointed. Isa. 45.1. Thus says the Lord to his
Anointed, to Cyrus, etc. He was the Lords Anointed, as having the supreme
authority of a King, by which he was enabled to be a powerful deliverer of Gods
people; Much more then are all Christian Kings the Lords Anointed, as having
the same Kingly power by which they are enabled to be the nursing Fathers of
the Church.

Whosoever are the Lords Anointed, do receive their unction immediately from
God. All Kings are the Lords Anointed. Therefore, All Kings do receive their
unction immediately from God.


The Minor is confirmed by as many clear Testimonies of holy Scripture, as the
most of those Divine Verities which we undoubtedly believe. And it is evident
in it self, That in as much as those Kings that are recorded in Scripture to be
the Lords Anointed, were such in no other capacity, but as they were Kings, all
Kings must needs be such by the known Rule.

Nor can the Major be doubted of, since it is not at all (or not only) the
outward, but the inward and immaterial unction of Sovereign Authority, by which
Kings are really and formally the Lords Anointed; and that which is inward and
immaterial, God only can be the immediate Giver and Creator of.

VIII. 1 Samuel 8.4, 5.
WHEN the people of Israel desired a King, they never so much as pretended to
any Sovereign Authority in themselves, which they would transfer in aliquem
unum (as is said) and so set up a King of their own making. If the people had
had any such original power in themselves, they were then in a twofold
disposition to make use of that, without any more ado.

For first, They were Gens Prophetica, beside their natural Sagacity, they were
a Learned and Prophetic Nation, and could not be ignorant of Jus naturate, of
any natural right and power they had of themselves to set up a King, had there
been any such.

Secondly, They were in this very thing rebellious against the Lord, and
therefore not over-scrupulous of adventuring of themselves to set up a King, if
they had known themselves to have had original power of their own so to do.
But, though they met with a strong Repulse, by which they had occasion to plead
their Right, they never so much as mentioned any such Right or power of their
own; but they only went and made their Address to God, That he would set a King
over them; and accordingly, Behold (said Samuel) the Lord has given you a
King, 1 Samuel 12.13.

Whatsoever is incommunicably in God, is not at all in men. The Original and
only Right of erecting a Monarchy, and setting up a King, is incommunicably in
God. Therefore, It is not at all in men.


The Major is evident: And the truth of the Minor also is clearly seen in that
famous instance, and in many other; as in Gods anointing and setting up David
(afterward) by his own immediate Act, to be King instead of Saul. This he did,
not at second hand, but immediately by his own, without and before any Act of
the people touching that Affair, as appears, 1 Samuel 16.1, etc. especially, ver.
12, 13. And this appears also by Gods giving (without the consent of the
people, and before they knew it) the Kingdom of the ten Tribes to Jeroboam, 1
Kings 11.31. and ver. 35. and ver. 37. and also Chap. 12.24.

Therefore though it be said that the people made David King, 2 Samuel 2.4. and
so Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.20. yet we see how apparent it is, that those Kings had
their Right from God, without and before any consent or knowledge of the people.

IX. Dan. 2.21, 22. He changes the times and the seasons; He removes Kings,
and sets up Kings; He gives Wisdom to the Wise, and Knowledge to them that
know understanding; He revealed deep and secret things; He knows what is in
the dark, and the light dwells with him.
THAT which is principally intended by the Prophet here (as the Context
evidently shows) is to celebrate the praise of God, as the only Author of
setting up in Succession the several Monarchies of the World: And to make it
evident, that to do this, belongs to none but God, he compares it with these
other Prerogatives of his, which are apparently belonging so to him, as that no
other can have any thing to do in them: For who can have any thing to do in
changing the times and the seasons which God has put in his own power Acts 1.7.
? Who but God alone can be the Giver of Wisdom and Knowledge? Who can reveal
Secrets, that are absolutely such (such as the knowledge of the future
Monarchies, and the meaning of a forgotten dream concerning them) but God
alone? Who besides him, or with him, can tell what is in the dark? Who then (if
Daniels parallel here made be true) can have the right or the power to remove
Kings, and to set up Kings, but God alone? His meaning must necessarily be,
that men can have no more to do in this, than in those other special
Prerogatives of God, in any of which they can be (at most) but instrumental;
which signifies nothing to the purpose, save that it infers a necessity of Gods
immediate Essiciency, as of the principal Cause, without whose immediate
Concurrence, the Instrumental operates nothing at all.

And if the people cannot be principal, or other than merely instrumental in
the Fact, they can have no pretense of interest in the Right. The Right
therefore, that is, the lawful Power and just Authority of removing Kings, and
setting up Kings, can in no wise belong unto them, but precisely and
incommunicably to God alone.

No proper Right, and special Prerogative of God is at all belonging to men:
But, The just power to remove Kings, and set up Kings, is the proper Right, and
special Prerogative of God. Ergo.


The Major is evident in it self; the Minor is clearly evinced by the Text
alleged; the Conclusion then is certain and infallible; viz. The just power to
remove Kings, and set up Kings, is not at all belonging to men.

From whence it follows, That if a whole people, and much more, if a
prevailing Party (against the will, and to the extreme regret of the whole)
shall (de facto) not only remove, but murder their lawful King (all the
aggravations of that Monstersin duly weighed) they can be no less wicked, than
the worst wickedness can make them, except that of desperation, and final
impenitency: For in that wilful, deliberate and affected Anomy, wherein all
Law, Divine and Humane, is knowingly transgressed (beside the greatest wrong
done to the Best of men) they boldly assault Heaven, and invade the proper
Right and special Prerogative of God: From hence the justness of the severest
punishment of those horrid Offenders, is most evident to all understandings,
and even to their own consciences (if they have, or ever had any.)

X. John 19.11. Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were
given thee from above.
THAT this was the Civil Judiciary and just power, it is apparent; otherwise,
when Pilate evidently spoke of this, Christ's answer had been equivocal; and the
Supreme power of life and death it was; which, though formally competible to
none but to the Supreme Magistrate, is yet here by Christ attributed to Pilate,
because the Supreme Magistrate, and his immediate Minister, are in a moral
sense but as one person; to wit, the latter sustaining in the exercise of this
power, not his own, but precisely the person of the former.

And the Magistrate (says Christ here) can have no power at all, except it be
given him from above: Consequently, all his power is from God alone.

That which is not given to the Magistrate, but from above, is given him of God
alone. The Supreme power is not given to the Magistrate, but from above:
Therefore, The Supreme power is given to the Magistrate of God alone.


Here all is manifest and certain; from whence every one must needs conclude,
That what hand soever men may have in making a King de facto, or restoring a
King to the exercise of His Kingly Office, the formal Authority, and Supreme
Kingly power, and the just Right to exercise that power, is not at all from
men, but from God alone.

Therefore also they that have interrupted, and sought to annihilate this power
and right which God alone has created, have not only sinned against God, as
sinners usually do; but have striven to show themselves stronger than he, to
overthrow what he alone (without them, and without all men) has only by his
own Ordinance and Act established.

XI. Acts 22.27. The Jews which were of Asia stirred up all the people of
Jerusalem, and they laid hands on Paul; And Chap. 22.22. They lifted up their
voices, and said, Away with such a Fellow from the earth, for it is not fit
that he should live.
FROM this unjust sentence of that whole people, the Apostle made his just
Appeal to Caesar, Chap. 25.11.

If it be true, which is averred, That Kings have no Power and Authority, but
what they have from the people; St. Paul's Appeal from the whole people to the
single person of the King, was apparently unjust; and he a manifest Abettor of
Tyranny, in owning a power in Caesar's person, above the power of the collected
Body of all the people.

But the holy Apostle well knew where, and in whom the highest power (next and
immediately under God) was found; and therefore declined to be censured by the
peoples universal Vote, or to go up to Jerusalem where the peoples
Representative was, to be judged there; but made his just and last Appeal to
Caesar.

Every just and last Appeal is to the highest power next and immediately under
God. St. Paul's just and last Appeal was to Caesar. Therefore Caesar was the
highest power next and immediately under God.


The Major must needs be true, unless it could be lawful and just to Appeal
from the highest Authority under God, to mere violence and force; for Inferior
power against the Superior, from which it is derived, can be nothing else.

The Minor is found in the express words of the Text; the Conclusion therefore
is certain, That Caesar was, and so every Caesar, or Sovereign Prince is, the
highest Power next and immediately under God: And, that the King is solo Deo
minor, less than none but God, is a Maxim in the Common and Fundamental Law of
the Land: So grossly and palpably false is that Seditious Assertion, That the
King is singulis mojor, sed universis minor; only greater than the single
persons, but less than all together.

XII. 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit you selves to every humane Creature. Which signifies,
that every Man that is a Magistrate, is of God himself created such; and
therefore to be readily submitted to, (...), for the Lords sake. But the words
that follow are chiefly to be noted, (...), Whether to the King as Supreme.
THe King then is Supreme, by the express Word of God. And, there being none
superior to him that is Supreme, it is impossible and contradictious that any
other pretended Authority should justly overtop and control the Supreme
Imperial Power of the King. From hence it must follow, That every Insurrection,
or levying of War against the King, by what persons soever, Subjects of the
same Kingdom, or in what capacity soever, must of necessity be that unlawful
Resistance which God threatens with damnation Romans 13.2.
. For, To say, that the levying War, and taking up Arms, within the Kings
Dominions, without the Kings Commission, against the Kings Armies which have
his Commission, is no levying of War against the King, is but a sad Apology,
and too weak a Plea, for all the hope of those men's salvation (who scorn to
repent) to rely upon. For, in this Text, the weak and wicked principle, from
which that grand Mistake, and all the Mischief that has ensued is most
expressly confuted: For, if the King be Supreme, the People, or the Peoples
Representative is not; unless it were true, That the People, or their
Representative, is the King. For,

Whosoever is Supreme, is the King: The whole People is not the King;
Therefore, The whole People is not Supreme.


The Major is apparent, because the Apostle ascribes the Supremacy to the King,
and to no other: unless, in one Kingdom there could be two, or more Supremes;
which would infer a manifest contradiction. He that denies the Minor, must be
sent to Bedlam. Therefore the Conclusion is unavoidable; The whole People is
not Supreme: Much less their Representative, (though virtually the whole;)
Least of all, a Party, apostatizing from their faith given to the People, and
their promissory Oath to the King, joining with, and approving the Armed force
and violence which excluded their Fellow Members (that were more in number, and
so, of greater authority than themselves) out of that House into which they had
been legally called by the King, and sent by the People. Yet, how gloriously
those Apostates could arrogate to themselves the Title of, The Supreme
Authority of the Nation! Which was frequently given them also by their close
Adherents, and some other ignorant and besotted people.

XIII. Exodus 20.12. Honor thy Father, etc.
THat the Civil Magistracy and Paternal Authority are really the same, (though
not gradually,) and so, the former as well as the latter immediately derived
from God, (and not at all from Man,) it most demonstratively appears, in that
Obedience is commanded to both, by one and the same precept, and signified by
one and the same word in this moral and eternal Law of God. For if the
Authority of all Magistracy be not established upon this moral precept, what
ground is there for it? How comes it to be morally lawful to be any Magistrate
at all, especially so far as (in any case) to be a Revenger, and to punish any
person (especially for less than Murder) with death, (since it is God alone
that is the Lord of life?)

If then the Civil Authority be established only upon the same precept of the
Moral Law, (which is the proper foundation and the adequate measure of all just
Laws and lawful actions,) and the Magistrate there included in that word
Father, which the Paternal Authority it self is only grounded on; both that
and this must necessarily be the self-same power, and cannot differ really, but
only modally or gradually, in the different Object and Execution.

And, at that time when this Law was only in the hearts of men, and afterward
(with the whole Decalogue) delivered to Moses, (and long after that too,) there
was no Government in the world beside the Regal. And this appears by the words
of the people to Samuel; Make us a King to judge us like all Nations 1 Samuel 8.5.
; and also, by all Instances that can be named. Therefore the only
Magistratical Authority established at first of God himself, upon this moral
precept of his eternal Law, was Regal.

And, the Regal power being the same really and originally with the Paternal,
it certainly follows, That the People do no more authorize their King, than
Children their Father, to have dominion over them. And it must needs be as
lawful (if not much more) for Children to call their Natural Father to an
account, to depose him, or to put him to death, as for any People to do so to
their Civil Father, the King, the LORD'S Anointed.

FINIS.

