illustration attributed to Michael Burghers; caption is from the Aeneid, Book
IV, l. 232 Accendet Tantarum Gloria Rerum
MBurghers scu^


A DISCOURSE UPON THE Nature and Faculties OF MAN, IN Several Essays: With
some CONSIDERATIONS Upon the OCCURRANCES OF Humane Life.

BY Tim. Nourse, Gent.

London, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judge's Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street, 1686.

To the Right Honorable, GEORGE Marquess of HALLIFAX, etc. Lord President of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
THe Greatness of my Presumption in making this Address, would appear more
legible from the Greatness of your Character, did not the Subject, here treated
of, hold some Proportion with the Person, whose Patronage it implores: In
prefixing therefore your Lordships Name to the following Treatise, after the
Example of most Writers, I do in the very Front show the Sum and Abridgement of
the whole Discourse, not of what I have writ, but of what really is possible to
be written of the Worth and Excellence of Man's Nature. There are two Things
which do more eminently denominate a Man; Capacity, and Courage; of which, one
lays claim to the Head, the other to the Heart, but both to your Lordship.
This those can witness, who have had the honor to stand within the Circles of
the Court, and to be privy to the Debates of the Royal Council, over which you
now preside. Nay, the whole Nation can witness it, your great Virtues having so
often shown themselves upon the greatest Theater, and to the Universal Benefit
of this Kingdom, so that there is no man can be so blind as not to see them,
nor so ungrateful, if he has any sense of his own, or of his Country's Safety,
as not to own an Obligation to them.

The Quarrel which your Lordship did espouse, as it was the justest, so was it
the greatest of the Age, whether we consider the Quality, the Number, and above
all the Exquisite Contrivances of the adverse Party, amongst which the old Sham
of pretending Religion seemed to be most Popular, which was no other than the
Policy of the Algerines, who most design the Slavery of Christians when they
hang out Christian Colors.

Insolence flew high when Faction was prosperous, which was at the Point of
breaking forth into open Rebellion, so that a more Hellish Combustion had like
to have subverted the Parliament House, than that designed by the Powder Plot,
had not His Majesty of Blessed Memory timely separated the Firebrarnds. Before
which time, even then when the Royal Cause lay most ableeding, 'twas a piece
doubtless of great generosity in one of such a Patrimonial Fortune, as that to
which your Birthright did entitle you, to espouse and defend it, for in case
of Defeat your loss had been most considerable, and in case of Success, you
could not expect an increase of Fortune from any Office of the State; So that
no consideration of your own Interest, but that only of Loyalty and true Honor
could invite to Action: And yet let the Fortunes of Subjects be as great as the
Exigences of Princes, the latter cannot be out of a capacity of giving, nor the
former of receiving suitable Rewards, and Marks of Bounty; This your Lordship
has in some measure tasted of in the Hereditary Honors conferred upon your
Blood, such a Reward being justly due to one, who with such Courage, Constancy,
and Success did vindicate the Hereditary Rights of the Blood Royal, and the
just Descent and Prerogatives of the English Crown. Your Counsels were Loyal,
and (what is yet more rare) prosperous not only in the effect they had, but
also in the Benefit we all enjoy, since it is not to be doubted but that they
smoothed the way to the glorious and peaceable Succession of the wisest and
most just of Kings, under whose Reign we cannot but expect Felicity.

The Preservation of Monarchy amongst so many Treasons as threatened it and the
Kingdom, was as great and miraculous as its Restoration; the Memories of those,
who were eminent herein, will be Sacred to Posterity: You had both of you the
same Name; a Name which may it ever be auspicious, as it has been ever tutelar
to this Kingdom, being now famous without a Fiction for destroying the Monster,
which was to be fed with nothing less than Royal Blood. The Monster of the Age,
which had the Ravenous Wolf always gnawing in his Bosom, had foresight good
enough of what your Counsels would produce, when he prevailed with the worst
part (I had almost said the Rump) of a House of Commons, to list you among
those five ever Honorable and Noble Peers, whom they petitioned to be removed
from attendance on His Majesty of Sacred Memory, for no other Reason, but
because your great Abilities made you capable to discover, and your great
Courage made you resolute to oppose the Pernicious Practices of that Desperate
Cabal.

But as your Lordship has given ample Proof of the greatness of your Mind
toward the correcting of Public Misdemeanors, I shall now crave leave to
make trial of the same Magnanimity in Pardoning private Faults; And for this
your Lordship will find sufficient matter, if you give your self the trouble to
read the following Discourse, which how much soever it may be beneath your
Acceptance, will not be found, I hope, beyond your Pardon, which if I can
obtain, next to your own Safety and Felicity is all that can be wished for by

Your Lordships Most humble, most faithful, and most Obedient Servant, Tim.
Nourse.

The Sum of the following Discourse, wherein
Man is considered under these two states of Formation and Maturity.


Man's Formation consists of these two general Parts, his Generation and
Education.


Of the Generation of Man, as also of the Frame and Fabric of his Body,
together with the Original of the Animal, and rational Faculties Chap. 1.

Man's Education consists in Erudition Chap. 2, and 3. Exercise Chap. 4. Travel
Chap. 5.


In Man as under a state of Maturity, we consider the Perfections or Gifts of
Body, Mind, Fortune.


The Perfections of his Body are Health Chap. 6. Strength Chap. 7. Beauty Chap.
8.


The Perfections of Man's Mind considered in 1. The dependency of the Soul on
the Animal Faculties Chap. 9. 2. Instruments of the Soul External, viz. the
five Senses Chap. 10. Internal, Memory and Imagination Chap. 11, and 12.
3. The Principal Faculties of the Soul, viz. The Will and Passions. The
Intellect.



Of the Will and Passions in General Chap. 13.

In Particular Of Love and Hatred, Jealousy and Envy, Desire and Dislike Chap.
14. Of Hope and Fear, Presumption and Despair Chap. 15. Of Joy and Sorrow Chap.
16. Of Anger and Clemency, or Mildness Chap. 17.


Of the Intellectual Operations in General Chap. 18.

In Particular of Science Chap. 19. Contemplation Chap. 20. Judgment Chap. 21.


Of the Goods of Fortune in General Chap. 22.

In Particular of Birth Chap. 23. Riches Chap. 24. Great place Chap. 25.
Friendship Chap. 26. Fame and Reputation Chap. 27.


With some Corollaries touching the most remarkable Occurrances of Life. Viz.
of Conversation Chap. 28. Solitude Chap. 29. Employment Chap. 30. Study Chap.
31. Marriage and Single-life Chap. 32. Death. Chap. 33.


The Conclusion. That it is in the Power of every man to advance his own
happiness.

Courteous Reader,
THe Hand in which these Papers were writ, being something difficult to be
read, has occasioned some Errors, which if uncorrected will render the sense
in many places very difficult to be understood; as for mispointings and
mispellings, being such mistakes as are incident to the Press, it is hoped they
may be pardoned by your Candor.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 4. for thire, read there, p. 9. l. 7. f. entail them upon, r.
entai upon them, p. 15. l. 23. f. whom thire, r. whose, p. 21. l. 29. f. mere
r. mean, p. 33. l. 12. r. intends to deal with, p. 41. l. 18. f. Bodies r.
Body, p. 85. l. 7. f. light r. lights, p. 86. l. penult. dele of, p. 88. l. 16.
f. Notion r. Notions, p. 89. l. 20. f. Proportion r. Proposition, p. 112. l.
24. f. Andronicus, Comnenus r. Andronicus Comnenus, p. 124. l. 8. f. Conquest
r. Coquette, p. 130. l. ult. f. Coercion r. Aversion, p. 150. l. 8. f. merit r.
mind, p. 155. l. 15. f. Lucius, Sylla, r. Lucius Sylla, p. 156. l. 3. f. by r.
of, p. 176. l. 14. f. vices r. views, ibid. l. 17. f. the r. a vast, ibid. l.
22. f. Art r. Act, p. 177. l. 1. f. How r. Here we, p. 190. l. 5. f, Name r.
War, p. 198. l. 27. f. and a Confessor r. and a Cordelier, p. 210. l. 9. f.
lives r. levies, p. 212. l. 21. f. reserved r. relieved, p. 212. l. 24. f. seem
r. seeming, p. 224. l. 11. f. other r. the other, p. 232. l. 21. f. has won r.
is won, p. 237. l. 25. f. as are r. as were, p. 245. l. 4. f. step r. slip, p.
246. l. 3. f. gives rest to r. grows into, p. 254. l. 22. f. serve r. serves,
p. 257. l. 16. f. favors r. favorites, p. 260. l. 29. f. unsaw r. unsow, p.
263. l. 13. f Monsieur Facet r. Mons. Faret, p. 265. l. 6. f. the moral virtues
r. their moral virtues, p. 267. l. 22. f. another r. another, p. 268s l. 23.
f. and to give r. and will give. p. 273. l. 20. f. several Sciences r. liberal
Sciences, p. 275. l. 20. f. Actions r. Actors, p. 278. l. 13. f. does not r. do
not, p. 286. l. 29. f. fanatic clowns r. fanatic Clans, p. 315. l. 10. f. and
then tames, r. and then values, p. 319. l. 6. f. Valerius r. Vatinius, p. 323.
l. 22. f. came of the Seas, stands r. came of the Seas, he stands, p. 333. l.
10. f. continuing r. continual, p. 334. l. 2. f. Carrier r. Courier, p. 340. l.
14. f. by a right measure r. by weight, measure, ibid. l. 16. f. compute the
face r. compute the force, p. 341. l. 9. f. Alterations r. Altercations, p.
344. l. 26. f. yet men, r. that men, p. 369. l. 5. f. over the best r. over the
list, ibid. l. 14. f Gueft r. gift, p. 373. l. 1. f. Remarks r. Remora's, p.
383. l. 21. f. such litt^e r: such like, p. 385. l. 13. dele to be, ibid. l.
23. f. Peasures r. Pleasures, p. 389. l. 24. f. do toe Intellctuals r. do to
our Intellectuals, p. 381. l. 13. f. Seats r. Sects, p. 401. l. 5. f. causes
the Name r. carries the Name, p. 404. l. 29. f. Equity r. Equality, p* 399. l.
14. f. Necessary goods r. accessory goods, p. 408. l. r. f. taught the same
sentence r. taught to pass the same sentence, p. 409. l. 1. f. cheer and
whereas r. cheer; whereas, p.ult.l.penult. f. in the open sig^t r. in the open
light. p. 388. l 23. f. Examinion, r. Examination.

CHAP. I. Of the Generation of Man, as also of the Animal and Rational
Faculties.
MAN the Subject of this following Discourse, is the Subject also of our
Wonder, if we consider him either in his first production, or in the
continuance and propagation of his Race: After that Almighty God had in a wise
and wonderful manner framed the World, in the last place he creates Man after
his own Image, and gives him Power and Dominion over all living Creatures: By
this signifying that the Heavens and Earth with all their glorious Bodies, then
in their greatest Luster and Perfection, were all made for the Sake and Service
of this one noble Creature, with which he summed up the whole Creation. But
waving these Considerations, together with the Consequences of that happy State
(of which our Nature was deprived) as things of which we are informed only by
Divine Revelation, it will be more suitable to the scope of this Discourse to
consider Man as he now stands in a state of Nature, subject to Generation and
Corruption, and obnoxious to all the Changes incident to a mortal Life; and
under this Capacity we may consider him, as consisting of two parts, of a Soul,
and of a Body.

First for his Body, and the Generation of it. It Is certain that humane Race is
propagated by the same way as that of bruit Animals. It would be a laborious,
tho not a tedious Curiosity to trace Nature in its several advances from the
imperfect state of an Embryon, to that of a mature Offspring, contained in a
just and full formation of all its Parts. But it is Entertainment sufficient for
our present Thoughts, if we consider the great variety of Parts which serve for
the Constitution of a humane Body: Some are useful for Life, others for
Nutrition, others again for Motion. Let us but consider a little the
Receptacles of Images, the Regions of Imagination, the curious formation in all
the Instruments of Sense; to which we may add the activity and subtlety of the
Spirits, the delicate Contexture of the Nerves, the various Articulations of
the Voice, the Harmony of Features, together with the proportion of Members in
a humane Body, any one of which Considerations is sufficient to engross the
Study of ones whole Life, and is many times the subject of a Volume.

Many nice and subtle Questions are started by the Curious, concerning the Use
and Frame of each particular Organ of the Body, as also how the Blood,
Nutrition, and Sensation are made. No less inquisitive have they been about the
first Principle of Life, which sets the Wheels of this curious Engine on Work;
As first, Whether there be one or more Souls in Man conformable to the Animal
and Rational Faculties: Also whether the Rational Soul be propagated in the
same manner as that of other living Creatures: Or, whether it be immediately
Created and Infused by God? For the better Understanding of which Questions, I
shall first give my Sense and Notion of that which we call a Sensitive or
Animal Soul, which I conceive to be nothing but an Ethereal Mass of Spirit, or
Flame rarefied, which the Almighty in the first Creation of Things, infused
into every living Creature after its Kind, ordaining also a seminal Power in
each of them, to propagate the same to new Ofsprings successively. As soon as
ever the Parts begin to be formed by Nature, this Animal and active Principle
begins to exert its Heat and Force, being lodged in the Heart as in the Center
of the Body, from whence, as the Vessels begin also to be formed, it
distributes it self toward the extreme Regions, communicating its Vital Heat
by the Ministry of the Spirits; which Spirits also are nothing but Particles of
that Original and Ethereal Flame, which is contracted and united in this
Center: The boiling Heat which flows from the union of so many Spirits, begets
a Motion in the Heart, to which the Arteries being fastened, the same Pulse or
Motion is communicated to them also; and least the Spirits should be made too
Volatile, the wise Framer of Nature has ordered the Blood to be their Vehicle,
being of a liquid and glutinous Substance, and so most fit both to retain and
to distribute them together with its self into the remoter parts of the Body:
all which is extremely facilitated by the continual Operation of the Lungs,
whose Function it is by attracting fresh Supplies of cool Air to refrigerate the
Heart, and to communicate thin and subtle Matter to make the Blood more florid
and fluid: Now because the Blood by reason of the great Volatility of the
Spirits which are mixed with it, is continually wasting; this Loss is repaired
by Nutrition, or a fresh supply of new Spirits from the Aliment we take in,
which after several percolations becomes Blood also, and is then conveyed to
the Heart, and so into the Arteries, where it becomes the Vehicle of Life, and
carries along with it new Spirits, by undergoing the same Circulations of
Nature. Whosoever therefore shall duly weigh this Order, and consider the
Fabric of each Part, will easily be able to give a rational Account of
Nutrition, Respiration, Motion, Sensation, with all the other Faculties
belonging to a Sensitive or Animal Body.

Now because we observe in Man some Operations more refined, and such as cannot
be derived from a mere Sensitive Nature, we are taught to conclude that there
is another Principle into which such Operations are resolved, which we call a
Rational Soul. Indeed, whosoever considers the curious Inventions of Wit, the
vast Comprehension and subtle Inferences of the Understanding, the wonderful
Sagacity and Prospect of Prudence, the noble Endowments and Speculations of the
Mind, the quick Transitions and Successions of Thoughts, together with the Bent
and Subserviency of the Passions, in relation to the Circumstances of humane
Life: I say, whosoever thinks on these, must readily conclude that the Spring
from whence such Motions are derived, must be something more Celestial than
that Etherial Spirit which gives Vigor to the Animal Faculties.

True it is, the Rational Soul, if I may speak it without a Solecisme, is so
incorporated into the Animal, that it seems to have its Birth and Growth with
it. How does Reason exert it self by little and little, what Helps and Arts are
there used to make the Flower open and show it self to the World? What
Struglings and Conflicts are there betwixt the Animal Inclinations, and the
more masculine Dictates of Reason? A sure Demonstration that they cannot
proceed from one and the same immediate Impulse of Nature. The Sense and
Notions we have of Reputation, of Justice, of Commerce, of Patience, and
Moderation, with infinite other things relating to the moral Capacity, have no
analogy with the Actions and Sentiments of Beasts, tho never so sagacious and
well instructed; what then shall we say of the Intellectual Operations, and of
the immense Capacity of the Mind?

But do we not see that some Men who have rational Souls, and such as are
reputed of as good Education as the best, how they act upon the same Principles
of Sense and Bestiality with other Creatures. It Is not therefore from Nature,
but from foreign and adventitious Helps, that others make a different and more
refined discovery of themselves. It Is true, we find some Men acting at a very
extravagant rate, not only by following the Propensities of Sense, but by
transgressing even the Dictates of Nature in Beasts, by their Ingratitude and
Infidelity toward those they are obliged to; nay, sometimes in killing
themselves, either Gradually by Intemperance, or more compendiously by the help
of a Sword, or of a never-failing Halter. So far therefore is this
Consideration from destroying my Assertion, that it does exceedingly confirm
it, since it establishes that Liberty and Arbitrary Power of the Will, which
is incommunicable with Beasts, and is one of the chiefest Prerogatives of a
humane Soul. The grand Instruments by which the Understanding works, are Memory
and Invention: Now, since these Faculties have their foundation in the
sensitive Capacity, as this Prop is withdrawn, the Understanding must of
Consequence be more clouded and obscure. Nay, tho the rational Faculties in, or
a little before the moment of Death seem totally extinguished, (because we are
not sensible of any effects they make) neither yet is this any Argument of the
Souls mortality: For when a man is profoundly asleep, or (what is almost as
natural to some) profoundly drunk, their is a seeming extinction of all the
rational Powers; and yet for all this we find that where Nature is once
delivered from such oppressions, the Soul is the same in being as it was before.

As therefore the Reasonable Soul is in Nature and Operation distinguished
from, and transcendently superior to the Animal, so in the next place it is
very probable that it has not its Original from the course of Nature, but from
the immediate hand of God. This was a great question heretofore betwixt St.
Augustine and St. Hierome; and was prosecuted by the later with so much heat,
as made him seem to transgress the bounds of Christian Charity: But it is not my
business in this Discourse to make use of Theological Arguments, or to
interpose betwixt the Fathers in their Disputes; they are at rest, and let
their works follow them: Thus much is obvious to our Observation; That in the
Generation of Bruits, we find every Animal does beget its like, not only in
specie or kind, but in disposition and inclination of Nature. Fighting Cocks
will beget a race like themselves, so will Dogs, Horses, etc. and so constant
and regular is Nature in those productions, that it seldom or never varies; but
in the Generation of Man we oft-times experiment the contrary: simple men are
frepuently the Fathers of great Hero's, and wise men may leave their Goods and
Lands to their Sons without being able to Entail them upon the better part of
their Possessions. Solomon had a Rehoboam, and an Achitophel may have an Idiot
for his Son: From whence it follows that such different dispositions must
proceed from some Principle, which lies not within the compass of Generation,
and the ordinary course of Nature. It Is true; Education does many times change
the course and stream of Nature: Nevertheless we observe, how vicious
inclinations are so predominant in some, that no Example nor Precepts of
Virtue, no hopes of Honor, no Culture of Art can ever reclaim them: But let
the force of Education be what it will, in drawing men from their Natural
inclinations toward Vice or Virtue, it is certain that men vary extremely from
other Animals in the Propagation of their Race. It has been reported of a great
Family in this Kingdom, that Father and Son have alternately been wise and
weak, and this for several Generations; and which is something more remarkable
also, those who passed under the character of being men of parts, had all of
them one and the same Christian Name, as those of the contrary denomination
happened all of them to have another. Now in this and many such like cases it is
evident, that this difference of Nature could not proceed from Education, since
all had the same means of Instruction and Breeding; nor yet from Generation,
since all Animals produce others of the same Natural propensities with
themselves: It remains therefore that it was derived from some other Principle,
from whence all Moral and Intellectual acts proceed, and such as was superior
to the Agents of Nature, which could be no other then the Rational Soul, formed
by the hands of God, and infused into the living creature. Now these
Imperfections are not intrinsic, but accidental to the Soul, nor do they argue
its corruptibility or mortality, any more than the spots and clouds we see in
some Diamonds, do prove them to be less durable then others which are more
limpid and transparent.

From these two Propositions, that there is a difference betwixt the Sensitive
and Rational Soul, and that the latter is infused immediately by God, may be
deduced a third, viz. that this Soul is immortal. The Immortality of the Soul
cannot be inferred so fully from immediate Topics of Reason, as from divine
Revelation, and from the consent and practice of civilized Nations. All people
who were ever polished either by Literature or Morality, as they ever believed
the Existence of the Soul after death, so was their practice conformable to
this Belief. Those whom they looked upon as Hero's in their life, they invokt as
Deities after death, allotting also Torments to the Wicked, as well as Joy and
Rest to the Good. What therefore is thus built upon the Universal consent of
Ages, and was confirmed by the Suffrages of all Mankind, I mean of all who had
their Reason illuminated, must be looked upon to be founded in the Law of
Nature, which being ordained by God, carries on it the stamp and characters of
Eternal Truth.

CHAP. II. Of Education in General.
THE Pearl has this Prerogative above all other Jewels, that whereas they
require form and luster from Art, the Pearl only is perfected by Nature. Its
color, roundness, smoothness and bigness (in which consists its whole beauty)
are all framed in its Mothers womb; but Man is a Jewel of another Nature; like
the Diamond though he brings his perfection from the Bed, nevertheless it is
rough and unpolished: much pains and Art must be used for the fashioning; and
the more great and excellent the Stone, the more labor and diligence is
required for the polishing, and indeed maugre all the Art and care of the
Workman, some Diamonds can never have their flaws concealed or mended by the
help of any foil whatever.

Having already given some short account of man as to the parts of which he is
compounded, I shall now consider him as an Infant brought into the World,
exposed to dangers, and standing in need of others help and assistance. The Air
and Climate in which men are born, has been ever looked upon as a thing which
has a great influence upon their Genius, and the inclinations of their future
lives. They who are pent up among high Hills where the Sun can hardly reach
them, are generally simple, as in Savoy: So likewise are the Switzers of gross
Intellectuals, but withal they are very faithful and valiant. The Florentines
live in a Barren Country lying open to the Hills round about them, and are
exposed to a sharp Air, for which reason they are reported to be more subtle
and cunning than the rest of the Italians. The Scotch likewise, from the cold
and barren Countries they inhabit, are more cunning far than the English, and
upon even ground will overreach them.

Whether Nurses may be used for the nourishing of Infants has been a great
question; it is certain that the Milk which the Child draws from the Mothers
Breast, and the blood with which it was nourished in the Womb differ only in
color, and therefore must be much more natural, and may be more easily
converted into the substance of the Infant, than any foreign nourishment
whatsoever, but because we have greater choice of Nurses then we have of
Mothers; some Women, those especially who are more delicate and tender of their
ease, recommend this important duty of Nature to some mean ordinary person,
which certainly can never be approved of but in case of infirmity, Melancholy,
or of some natural defect. we may observe of Beasts which are guided by the
instinct of Nature, how solicitous they are to feed their Offspring, till such
time as they can shift for themselves; And even Birds which are the most timid
of all Creatures, will lament bitterly, and expose themselves to danger for the
Preservation of their Young, which at other times will take wing upon the sight
of a man; nay some will make resistance and assault any thing which comes near
them, as Geese, Hens, and the like, which when they have nothing to care for
but themselves, will upon any approach fly away. This shows what impression
Nature has left upon the weakest Creatures to exert their utmost force for the
Preservation of their young ones, which Nature has taught them to prefer before
their own; but amongst Women this gentle and easy way of setting out their
Children to Nurse as it is more unnatural, so is it a means of diminishing the
Mothers love and affection for them, as experience tells us, and as manifest
reason does evince; for why do Mothers love their Children more, tenderly and
passionately than the Fathers, but because they endure greater pangs in their
Birth, and greater troubles in the Education of them, which affection toward
them is half destroyed by suffering strange Nurses to share with them in their
Office. No woman knows the state and circumstances of another body so well as
of her own, nor can be assured of her being so careful as herself: some great
Persons have direly suffered upon this account, as King Philip the Third of
Spain, who was all his lifetime of a very languishing and sickly temper, which
he sucked from his Nurse who was too much French. It Is true Cyrus and Romulus
the Founders of two great Monarchies, were both exposed in their Infancy, the
one being said to be nourished by a Bitch, the other by a Woolf, that is, as I
suppose, amongst Shepherds and Savage people, whom their natures and
dispositions little differed from the wild Beasts amongst which they lived: or
perhaps such Fables were invented only to make their Actions to seem more
extraordinary and prodigious. Whatsoever there were in such reports, certain
it is; that great regard is to be had both to the temper of the Mind, as well as
to the state and condition of the body of her who gives the Breast; let her be
of a cheerful humor and temperate as well as healthful, and abounding in Milk;
but this more properly concerns the Mother, let us look a little to that which
concerns the Father, and that is, the Breeding and Education of his Children,
which is a great and weighty duty.

Parents for the future good of their Children, would do well to place them
forth as early as may be in a wholesome piercing Air, and by this means inure
them to hardship by times. The old Germans were wont to plunge their Children
into the Rhyne as soon as they were born, to bring their bodies to a stronger
temper. Ladies we see of the most delicate Constitutions, by using to have
their Breasts and Arms naked from their childhood, receive no injury by the
weather be it never so cold, whereas the strongest man should he attempt to do
the like, might be in danger of his life. Let a Child therefore be accustomed
to course Diet, to thin Clothing, hard Lodging, and to much Toil; and when he
arrives to Manhood, his Constitution will be much more vigorous; he will be
more hardy to undertake, and more strong to conquer any difficulty. He will
enjoy a more prosperous health of body, and by consequence will be able to
pursue any work, wherein the Brains and Thoughts are engaged with great
Alacrity, Constancy, and Courage: and indeed since the Occurrances of life do
still cast a man upon the more painful side, it is best to make hardship to grow
up with our Natures, by accustoming our selves to it when our blood is
Youthful, when we are free from distempers, and at such a season also when the
least impressions grow into a habit, and many times become indeleble.

There is one great fault which Parents generally commit in the Education of
their Children, viz. in laboring to bring them to habits of good Husbandry and
Frugality, by cutting them short in their allowance: By this means many a young
Gentleman is taught to keep mean Company; and gets such habits of shifting and
shirking, as shall for ever render him contemptible: others there are of this
Tribe who spend without measure, upon the prospect of their Fathers death, so
that when they come to their Estates, all they have will be too little to
satisfy their Creditors; for such are ever sure to lend the young Squire
freely, and make him indebted to them for twice as much as he borrowed, upon
pretense forsooth that the old Gentleman may outlive the Son, and then all is
desperate. It Is generally seen that none are so extravagant and profuse when
they come to their Estates, as those who in their Fathers lifetime were kept
shortest of Money. The more the Fire is pent in, the more violent will be the
Eruption; but in all cases it is certain, that too great a restraint on Youth
does make them wish their Parents death, and does engender those ill humors in
a Son as end commonly in Defiance and Rebellion.

Upon the walls in the Court of the Jesuits College at Lions, where they have
a great School, there are many ingenious Emblems painted in Fresco, of which
this I remember to be one, an Eagle flying toward the Sun with her Young ones
in her Talons, casting those away as spurious which would not endure the Light,
with this Motto, a teneris luce imbuit. It Is easy to observe, but sad to
consider what little care many Parents take in this particular; so they can but
beget and keep their Children it is sufficient. They are many times very
industrious in improving their Estates, and in cultivating their Lands; but for
their Children they let them converse with the Poor ones of the Village, or
with Plow-men or Servants of their own Family, and by this means they get many
times such habits, both of clownish speech and carriage; as also of rudeness
and of an abject Mind, as no future Education though it were bestowed upon
them, will ever be able to wear away. We see a straight Tree when it is young
and tender, will easily be bowed aside, and grow so too beyond recovery if it
be let alone a little; as also another which is young and crooked, may by
little and little be in a great measure rectified, and by cutting away the
superfluities may become fruitful. As for those who are to follow the Plow, or
any Mechanic and Laborious course of life, (and such there must be) as their
Means and Opportunities are small, so neither do their Circumstances require
any thing more then to be instructed in the Principles of Religion and of
Morality, and in the Duties of Obedience, and to be able to Write and Read: for
there is nothing more ridiculous, then to have a Bumkin or Shopkeeper, pretend
to State-matters or Divinity: Nor indeed is there any thing so dangerous to
Church or State, as these half headed and conceited Fellows, who are generally
most Impudent, Ignorant and Factious. The Education therefore which I here
discourse of, is such as I would have in those who would be accounted
Gentlemen, as having some Privileges both of Birth and Fortune, above the
Common sort of Men, which Education of theirs may be reduced to these three
general heads, viz. Erudition, Exercise, and Travel.

Of Erudition. CHAP. III.
ERudition extends it self not only to Literature, but to Precepts of Life, the
former serves for the information of the Understanding, the later for the
direction of the Will, and for regulating the Passions, to both which things
all civilized Nations have ever had a special regard. The Chinese boast
themselves to be the only civilized People upon the Earth, looking upon all
other Nations as Barbarians, which considering the little or no advantage they
have had by Commerce with other parts of the World may be in a great measure
admitted. In this particular they are a reproach to the Europeans: for there is
no Art nor Industry omitted by them, which may serve for the Information and
Education of Youth: All Public places whether Civil or Military, are bestowed
on such Persons only, as have undergone the Test and Appprobation of their
Doctors, in which charge they are not perfunctory and superficial but severe.
They have no Offices or Titles of Honor, but what Learning does procure them,
and such Reverence and Veneration have they for their Preceptors, that in case
a Scholar be advanced to a higher place of Trust and Dignity then his Master,
yet he never sits with him cheek by jole, but at a little distance behind, and
on a lower seat, giving him the Style and Compellation of Master all his life
after.

It Is far otherwise in this our Native Country, so much civilized and polished
as we pretend to be. There is nothing so despicable as the Name of a Pedant, a
Fellow who can Teach a young Gentleman to scrape a Leg, or perhaps a Fiddle,
for generally they go together, such a one I say shall have a better Reception
and Salary then he who has the Institution of the Young Squire in the Methods
of Learning, and in the Precepts of Life. Whether it be that we have really a
less value for breeding then other Nations I know not, more probable it is that
the mere ^^alifications of him who undertakes this Work begets contempt of the
Person, which afterward seldom fails to be Entailed upon the Office. However
it is still our own faults, for were there sufficient Encouragement, and such
Honor had for this grand Employment as really it deserves; Men of Birth,
Learning and Education, and enobled with the best Qualities, would easily be
invited to undertake this duty, but it is far otherwise: Our Schoolmasters
generally are descended of the Dregs of the People; they are such who being of
wretched Education, do by a Collection among Friends, or by the Bounty perhaps
of some young Gentleman, make a shift to creep to the University, where after
four years Drudgery for Meat and Drink, and living generally a scandalous and
idle Life, they become Domini's, and must then shift anew for themselves. Some
there are of this Poorer sort, who being men of Parts find means to make their
Fortunes, and become afterward brave Men; but generally they are such as I
here describe: for being forced for want of Maintenance to run like Vagabonds
seeking where to live, at length they Farm some Parsonage to halves, and patch
up the rest by keeping of a School. Now because the meaner sort of People by
whom they live, are commonly Fanatic^ and Factious, these Teachers also being
for the most part of the same Race, and that they may the better insinuate into
the favors of those by whom they are maintained, do imbue their Children with
the same Principles. Moreover being Persons, who have no sense of Breeding
themselves, nor of the temper and springs of Youth, they commit infinite
absurdities, either by dampning the Spirits of the more remiss by indiscreet
Corrections, or at other times by their own licentious Examples procuring
Contempt on themselves; by which means their Scholars as they grow in years
and Understanding, begin to loath Reproof, which in a little progress of time
renders Youth rude, obstinate and incorrigible: it is true, some few public
Schools there are which being well endowed are honored with Learned men, and
send forth as hopeful Wits into the World, as are anywhere to be found: But
this alas is but a very small Proportion to the whole Body of the Kingdom: so
that I take the forementioned defects to be the cause why so many miscarry, and
to be of great mischief to Church and State.

The Jesuits certainly are well worthy our imitation in this particular: Nor is
there any Art by which they create themselves a greater interest in the
Countries where the live, than that by which they undertake the Education of
Youth. They who are deputed for this Employment, are not of the meanest
quality; they are usually Gentlemen, Men of mature years, and such who have
been well versed, not only in Ancient Authors, but in the Practice and
Conversation of men, and in the methods of business: Their way is, by
familiarity and softness to insinuate into the Affections of the Scholar, and
to draw him on to diligence rather by hopes, then to whip him forwards by
Punishments and Fear: And yet where Negligence makes Correction a duty, they do
it rather by inflicting some light disgrace, than by Corporal chastisement, a
thing opprobrious to Nature, and which rather dulls than quickens the
capacities of Youth. One thing they practice frequently which is really of
wonderful use, and that is, their accustoming their Scholars to Act their
Parts in Plays. This inures them to a Manlike speech, and to a steedy Spirit
and Address. I like Tragedy better than Comedy, where the Argument commonly is
light, and is such as requires much of the Buffoon, whereas the former being
great and Masculine, will be sure to leave a Tincture of something Noble upon
the Mind of him who personates the Hero. Learning ought to be infused into the
Scholar like spirits into a Bottle, by little and little, for whosoever
attempts to pour in all at once, may in all likelihood spill a great part, and
in a great measure fill the Vessel with Wind and Air. The Vessels it is true
which have the streightest Necks will not so readily receive the Liquour, but
then they will preserve what they once receive with much more certainty and
lastingness of spirit. It Is so many times in the capacities of Youth: they who
can receive any impression like the Virgin-wax, will as easily suffer a
defacement unless it be hardened and matur'd by Time: whereas others who are
hard to be wrought upon like Steel, retain the Images which are Engraven on
them with much more beauty and perpetuity.

As for the Method of Erudition in Literature, that seems to me to be most
rational, which begins with those Sciences which are founded in Memory and
Imagination, such as learning of Tongues, Grammar, and Poetry: For certain it is
that Memory in Youth is infinitely more ready than in men of riper years, as
appears from their different capacitys in learning of a Language; and then for
Invention which always builds out of the Storehouse of Memory, it is then most
perfect and various when the Spirits are most airy, and in their greatest
Circulation. Some are for Teaching young Scholars the Mathematics, upon
pretense of fixing their Thoughts, and of keeping them constant to one Subject,
for upon the least roving they loose sight presently of the demonstration, and
must begin anew. But I like not this Method; for it is too tedious, serious and
puzling for young Capacities to strugle with: for tho the progress be most
natural and convincing, and the deductions of Theorems from one another, though
they may ravish the Contemplative, yet it requires a man to have a complex
Apprehension of many Propositions at once, so that the least startings and
wanderings of the Mind, disorder the whole clue and series of thoughts. As for
Oratory, I think it not so proper for Youth, unless it be so far only as the
Exercise thereof comprehends Repetition or Rehearsal: For by this we endeavor
to persuade men, which we cannot do but by Topics taken from the consideration
of humane Affairs, from the Examples of past Ages, and of Foreign Countries, to
which must be added knowledge both of the Times and Persons we Converse with,
and of the temper and inclination of their Passions, as also of the Nature of
the Passions themselves, all which require much Reading, Judgment and
Experience, and do suppose a man to be in some state of Maturity far above the
Stations of Youth; Nevertheless the use of Declamations and Panegyricks, with
such lesser Exercises as consist in Ornaments of Wit and Fancy, are not
improper for them, as the performance and rehearsal of them begets boldness and
a good address.

History as it is pleasing and requires a good Memory, so it requires a mature
Capacity to understand the scope and integrity of the Writer, to judge of all
the the Circumstances of Things, Persons and Times, as also to fathom the
depths of Counsels, and to discern the secret Resorts which set the Wheels on
work. Logic serves for little but to assist men to reduce Reasoning into forms
of Argument, and is therefore more proper for men fraught with Reason and of
riper years. Natural Philosophy is easy, copious and delightful. Metaphysics
serve only to subtilize the Wit and to fill the Brain with abstract Notions,
and thus far also it may be useful too, for he who is able to raise mighty
Speculations, and to distinguish of Universalities, Quiddities, Perseities,
Entities of Reason, non-Entities, that is to say, non-Sensities, and to talk
profoundly of nothings, will be acute and quick sighted enough when something
real shall occur: For which reason 'twas that the Lord Strafford, as I have
heard, was wont always to read Suarez's Metaphysics, even then when he sat at
the Helm of public Affairs; which he did for this end, as I suppose, that he
might be furnished with distinctions, and that he might have his Reason always
sharpened with Subtleties. But I omit the Prosecution of these, and such like
Branches of Universal Learning, as falling under the Methods of our public
Universities, where they flourish in Perfection.

I come now to consider the other great Branch of Erudition, as it extends to
precepts of Life and of Morality. This, tho it be not so Ornamental, is much
more useful than the former, by how much the Faculty of doing well, exceeds
that of knowing well: The Devils are capable of the latter, but to understand
all things, and to pursue the best, is proper only to Angelical and Divine
Natures. The Turks make little account of Learning, but as to their Morals,
it is a Reproach to us, that they far exceed Christians in the Virtues of
Temperance, Obedience to Superiors, moderation of Passions, and fidelity to
their Words. How rigorous and severe is the Institution of the Janissaries, and
by what Industry and Methods are the Youths of the Seraglio (those especially
of a more noble Genius) wrought upon and improved, till at length being
advanced to Office, they find an open Field for Merit to raise it self, and by
degrees arrive to places of the highest Trust and Honor. In this particular
they much resemble the brave and ancient Spartans, who tho they did not forbid
the knowledge of Letters, yet they little esteemed them, in respect of those
Duties and Precepts by which Life was to be governed, which were generally
these: First, To reverence Old Age. Secondly, Obedience to the Commands of
their Superiors, especially in time of War. For endurance of Pain and Hardship,
none were ever comparable to the Spartans, for their Youth would emulate one
another in this particular, and he only was accounted Heroical who could suffer
the sharpest Torments without change of Countenance. Their Diet and Apparel was
course, and in their Behavior they were most modest and submissive, insomuch
that they would never look up in public, nor role their Eyes about, nor show
the least sign of being transported, looking only upon what was before their
Feet, and drawing up their Hands within the Pligs and Foldings of their
Garments; and yet these were the bravest Soldiers the World ever had,
accounting this to be the grand and indispensable Duty, to which they were all
obliged, viz, in fighting either to Conquer or to dye. Virtue and Civility are
the surest Badges of Valor. Ruffians and Bravo's may kill, but the most
Victorious Nations, and the bravest Generals, were ever those whose Minds were
polished, whose Arms received a Luster from Virtue, and who could command their
own Passions.

Virtue has this Excellency, that it is able to gain the Commendation of its
Enemies: They who condemn it in their Practice, are forced to applaud it in
their Judgment. In matters of Morality the Will is easily cotrupted, but it is
not so with Reason. Some perhaps out of a wantonness of Wit, or to excuse their
Extravagance, may show themselves good at the Burlesque; but we shall never
meet with any so impudent as seriously to attaque Virtue. Prudence, Justice,
Temperance, and Fortitude* are four Fortresses in Morality, which no Obloquy
can blow down, nor Subtlety undermine. Vice therefore can never make a Conquest
of Virtue, tho it may of Virtuous Persons, by tempting them from their Duty,
under the false colors of Pleasure: But the Victory which Virtue gains is
entire: It not only subdues the vicious Person, but the Vice too, by begetting
an utter Horror and Detestation of it. A grave and seasonable Reproof does many
times prostrate the most profligated Person.

Besides the Precepts of Philosophers, we have the Practice even of Brutes to
instruct us in the Duties of Morality: For if we attentively consider it, there
is scarce any Creature of this Denomination but is able to reprove and to
direct us. And first for Temperance, We see how the Horse, the Ox, with all the
rest of the Animal Tribe, are most regular in all the Functions of Nature, nor
will any one of them be forced to drink more than what is sufficient to
extinguish their Thirst, so that whilst they live by Sense, they act by Reason
which says, that whatsoever exceeds the Exigence and Necessities of the Body,
is but a Surcharge to Nature, and will turn to Surfeit and Disorder in the end.
Nay that Creature which is looked upon generally as the vilest of all, as being
the most ignominious Name we can give to any Man, I mean a Dog, will upon a
just Consideration be found to be the greatest Emblem of Heroic Virtue, being
eminent for these three noble Qualities, Fidelity, Gratitude, and Courage.
There is no Allurement, Blandishment, or Sufferance whatsoever, which can make
him desert his Master, no not Hunger it self, which is the greatest Pain this
Creature can suffer, as being by Nature of an Appetite most craving and
insatiable. He fawns and expresses all Joy upon the approach of his Master, he
takes all Correction at his Hands with Patience and Submission, he will
accompany him wheresoever he goes, he will defend him with the peril of his own
Life, and will venture upon anything, tho never so difficult and dangerous,
when he is encouraged by one who can protect and reward him. Such then is the
force and power of Nature, and such too as is sufficient to instruct those who
are not under the Customs of a vicious Education.

But for our better improvement in this most necessary and important Duty of
Education, I shall consider this part of Erudition which concerns Life and
Practice, as reducible to these two general Heads. First, Things Moral.
Secondly, Things Civil; and this according to the two Notions we have of the
double Capacity of Man: For every Man may be considered either absolutely, and
in himself, and so he is a thing of an entire Nature and Perfection, and in
this Capacity, he is the Subject of Moral Actions: Or Secondly, He may be
considered Relatively, and as he stands in conjunction with others, where he is
considered only as a part, and in this Capacity he is the Subject of civil
Actions. Now both these Capacities, as they have their several Virtues, so are
there several Methods by which the Mind of Man may be made perfect in them.

I begin first with Moral Actions: And here it is no way to be doubted, but
that he who would work an Alteration on the Mind of Man, ought well to be
acquainted with the Bent and Genius of that Person he intends to d^^l with, as
also of the Force and Nature of the Passions, together with the proper Motives
to excite them; and this not only with relation to Men of riper Years, but of
such more especially who are under the Methods of Instruction: Now the common
Motives to Virtue, are such as these, viz. Reputation, Honor, Preferment, and
consequently Riches, with such things as have an Influence upon Man, under the
Notion of Reward: As on the contrary, Shame, Disgrace, loss of Interest or
Office, danger of Estate or Life, all which being in the nature of Punishments,
are of great force to dissuade us from Vice; to which also I may add Company,
Exercise, Examples, and Studies, all which things also are of great Force to
incline Men's Minds to Good or Evil.

But waving these and such like Topics as fitter for Rhetoric, and such as
would Swell this Chap. into a Volume, I shall only propose three practical
Rules to such as have the Care and Institution of Youth; of which the first is
this. Look what Vice a Man is naturally inclined to, endeavor to make him love
the Vice which lies in the other Extreme: for there is no danger of his falling
into it; but by drawing him to the contrary side, it is probable he may stay at
the Golden Mean, like a crooked Stick which is made much more easy to stand
straight, by being bent as much the other way. We may apply this Rule also to
the amendment of many Defects of the Body; for I account a Person who is
ill-Shap'd, Splay-footed, and of an untowardly Gate, to be the fittest Person
living to learn to Dance; not because he is most apt for such an Exercise, for
Nature intends nothing less, but because by putting a force upon Nature he will
acquire some Habit of Carriage and Presence, which will make his Deformity
appear less visible.

Another Rule is this: If Custom and Nature has got such an Ascendent over the
Mind, that it cannot be removed, the best Expedient is to join Issue with
Nature, by pushing it forwards. Thus we see that Fevers are best Cured by
raising the Distemper, and the most rational way to expel the purulent Humors
of the Body, is to drain them forwards into one great Issue of corrupt and
putrid Matter. We find that many intemperate Persons have been reformed into
Sobriety, by the effects of one substantial and round Debauch: And if one who
is of a Choleric Disposition, will not be persuaded by Reason to contain, it
will not be the worst Method to help him forwards in his Extravagance, which in
all likelihood may purchase him a good Beating, and this in all probability
will make a greater Impression on him, than all the Reproofs of moral
Philosophy, tho never so forcibly inculcated; but if this Method prove
unsuccesful, the last Remedy to which Prudence can have Recourse, is to make
Vice shift it self a little into the Quarters of the next neighboring Virtue;
for so it is, that many Vices have some Virtues or Courses of Life, which are
of the same Complexion under which they lurk and disguise themselves. Thus, if
a Man be inclined to Cruelty, let him follow the Chase, if he be Choleric and
Revengeful, let him follow the War: for tho such Persons will never make
Commanders, yet they are useful Tools enough in some Rencounters, where Men of
richer Mettle are not to be thrown away. Thus also, if a Man be Talkative and
Litigious, let him follow the Practice of the Law, for such a one will still
find quarrelsome matter of other Folks, ready cut to his Hands, on which he may
discharge his Heat, without being the Author of any new Combustions himself,
besides that, his Eagerness and Heat will carry some show of Zeal for the
Cause, and Interest of his Client. In like manner Prodigality, by having some
Superfluities lopt off, may pass for Hospitality; so Ignorance and Cowardice
will with little Alteration pass for Gravity and Sageness.

I come now to speak of Man in his Civil Capacity, or as he stands in Relation
to others; and here the Duties are many, such as those betwixt Parent and
Children, Husband and Wife, Master and Servants, to which I may add Traffic,
Negotiation, and the Obligations every Man has in his particular Calling, with
many other Duties which accompany an active Life. I shall only make a Cursory
Remark upon one grand Duty, being that which every Man is obliged to, I mean
the Love and Service which he owes to his Country, not as some factious Men
pretend, who would appear its Patriots, on purpose to draw on the Ignorant
Multitude to herd with them, under the Banner of Liberty, when in reality they
design nothing but their own private and ambitious Ends, the Subversion of the
Government, and consequently to reduce their Country to Confusion and Slavery.
By the Duties therefore, which we owe to our Country, I understand the
Obligations we have upon us to live in Obedience to its Laws and Government,
and to Sacrifice all our private Fortunes for the Preservation of the same; for
since the common Good is nothing but the Union or Combination of so many
particular Men's Concerns, the Universal cannot be destroyed, but the Parts of
which it is Compounded, must share also in the Ruin. The Hand and the Foot may
think the Stomach to be an Idle and Unprofitable Portion of the Body, and yet
if they refuse to feed it, the Damage will fall upon themselves: For this
Stomach which seems to devour all, and to do nothing it self, if it be deprived
of Nourishment, all the rest of the Members will soon languish with it and dye:
For let Men look upon Princes, as Persons living in Idleness and Luxury, yet in
the Body Politic, they are the Stomach which does Digest all, and distribute
that Chyle of which the purest Blood is made, and by which all the Members are
kept alive. There is also a Love and Duty which a Man owes to his Country in
general, in respect whereof every Man's private Life is no way to be reguarded;
we have Instances of this amongst the Worthies of old, such as Curtius and the
Decii: But more remarkable was that known Example of Themistocles, who being
banished by the Athenians, fled to the Persian Court for Relief and Shelter.
The King raising an Army against the Grecians, appoints Themistocles to be
General, which he knowing not well how to Avoid, or how to Accept of, he
desired Leave to Consult upon it by a Sacrifice: A Bull was Slain, of whose
Blood Themistocles drinking a hearty Draught, died himself a Victim at the
Altar, and by this means ended the Conflict betwixt the Duties which he owed to
his Ungrateful Country, and to his Merciful Protector. The Importance of that
Duty which every individual Person owes to his Prince and Country, ought well
to be considered by those who have the Institution of Youth, for as much as
that is the Age of Ductility, and that the Impressions are then easily made,
and will be lasting too, as growing daily up with Nature.

CHAP. IV. Of Exercise.
HAving spoken in the foregoing Chapter of the Improvements of the Mind by
Erudition, it follows of Course that we speak of the Improvement of the Body by
Exercise. Indeed a Vigorous and Athletick Habit of Body, does extremely advance
the like Disposition and Ability in the Mind; Since all Intellectual Exercise
and Travel of Brain depend much upon the Activity of the Spirits, and these
upon the good Temper and Strength of the Constitution. Upon this account it
was, that Solon the Athenian Lawgiver, and the wisest Man in his Age, ordained
that the Grecian Youth should be trained up to Wrestling and Music, the one
for the strengthening of their Bodies, the other for the Polishing of their
Minds. Strength, if it be not softened, is Savage and Brutal, but where it is
joined with Courtesy it is Ravishing.

Sports and Exercises serve not only to Recreate those who are the Actors, but
those also who are the Spectators of them. The Greeks had solemn Times set
apart for those more Man-like Exercises represented in the Olympic Games,
besides their daily Divertisements of the Theater. The like also had the
Romans; that of the Gladiators was something too Inhumane, the other
Performances of the Circus were much more Innocent, Diverting and Healthful,
and even the more Indigent Sort were so wedded to these Shows, that they were
contented only to live upon Bread and Water, so they might but be admitted
sometimes to be Spectators at them, duas tantum res anxius optat, Panem and
Circenses. But above all, their Triumphs were stately Things, and were designed
not only to divert, but to encourage Men to brave Atchivements of Honor. In
the best constituted Governments it has been always looked upon as a piece of
Policy, to indulge the People in such Recreations, as well because they render
Men quick in their Motions and Bold to Attempt, as also because they extremely
conduce to alleviate the Cares and Burdens of the Mind, and to divert the
Thoughts from seriously Reflecting upon the heavy Weight which is oftentimes
cast upon them by the Exigences of the State. For which Reason we may observe
that where the People are most oppressed with Gabells and Impositions as in
Italy, there they enjoy the greatest Liberty in their Recreations, which are
generally Races, Plays, Opera's, Feats of Agility, the Fooleries of Ciarlatans,
Sports of the Carneval, Cavalcades, Academies of Music, to which I may also
add Ecclesiastic Ceremonies and Divertisements, such as Processions, the
Feasts of particular Saints, as also the Canonization of Saints and Martyrs,
with many other Shows both of Pomp and Activity, by all which they endeavor as
much as possible, to sweeten the sourness and tediousness of Life.

As to the Exercises of the Bodies, in relation to particular Men, some are of
great Use for Man's Preservation, as Running, Vaulting, Fencing and Wrestling:
But withal they are sometimes Incommodious to Health, because they call upon a
Man to exert his utmost Strength, which weakens Nature, insomuch that those who
were best at the Performance in their youthful Days, feel the Smart in their
declining Years, and are much weaker than other Men of the same Age: Besides,
such Exercises are many times dangerous to Life, especially when Man and Man
cope together. There are other Exercises which are less useful for a man's
preservation, but withal they contribute to health, by exciting the Spirits to
a quick Circulation, and are looked upon also as parts of Accomplishment, such
as Dancing, Tennis, and Riding the great Horse; Justs and Tournaments were
things of great Bravery; but they are now antiquated, and Masks are for the
Entertainments only of Ladies. Bowling end Shooting in the Long-Bow are less
violent and more safe, because they excite a moderate warmth, and are not apt
to betray men to the dangers which follow excessive heats. But above all the
Chase has been ever looked upon as a Noble and Manlike Divertisement, it
recreates and pleases the Fancy whilst the Body is in Exercise: it is lasting
and sociable, and withal it inures the Body to hardship without too much
fatigue or hazard, and never fails to procure a good Appetite which is the best
friend to life. These are the chiefest Exercises of the Body by which man's
Nature may be rendered more perfect.

As for Music it may more properly be reckoned amongst the Recreations of the
Mind, if it be not the sole Recreation of that most Excellent and Noble
faculty, when the Passions are languishing and almost spent, this is able to
animate and Exalt them, and at other times when they are too exorbitant and
impetuous, it is able to create a Calm, and to reduce the Soul to its due
Temper and Serenity. It Is strange what is reported amongst the Ancients of its
wonderful power and force. It Is well known they had their several Moods and
Measures, which were able to produce very different and strange effects in men.
When the Trumpet sounds we see not only Men but even Beasts are animated with a
generous and Martial fire, and upon this Consideration doubtless 'twas that the
Lacedaemonians (who were the bravest men of Greece) tho they were most severe
and rigi'd in their Manners of Life, took special care to have their Children
Educated in Music, not that soft and puling Music which consists in
Passionate and Effeminate expressions, in Affected sighs and melting Notes, and
in a languishing and dying posture of body, but their Music was Manlike and
spritely, and such as served to excite the Mind to generous and brave Attempts.
The Composition for the Matter consisted generally of two Parts: The first was
Panegyric, being a Commemoration of those who dyed for their Country; the
other was Invective, being in Dispraise of those who were Cowards and
degenerate, all which they did express plainly without any invention or
ornament of Wit. Now as Music served to raise their thoughts to noble Actions,
so they looked upon it also as very useful to sweeten the Toyls and Labors of
Life: upon which account the Arcadians who were Shepherds and inhabited a
barren Country, being by their course of life, obliged to expose themselves to
all the hardships and inconstancy of Weather, had recourse to their Pipes, as
the only Remedy against the inconveniences to which Nature had laid them open;
taking care that not only their Children, but their Young men also should be
Exercised therein even to the Thirtieth Year of their Age. Nor were the Poets
ignorant of the force of Music, when they feigned Orpheus drawing Trees and
Beasts after him, and Amphion Stones to build the Wall of Thebes: thereby
signifying that it was capable to civilize the most Savage Natures, and to
Establish Cities and Governments. Then for the Philosophers, let Socrates serve
as an instance, who when he was well advanced in years, thought it no
diminution to his Gravity, to spend an hour or two every day with Conus the
Musician in Learning to Sing to an Instrument, though it is not improbable that
he did it also, to soften the noise of a louder Instrument, and which was far
more difficult to be tuned, his Wife. This is certain, that when a man is
oppressed with care and anxiety, and is under any disturbance of Spirit, there
is nothing in the World does so much revive him as Music, witness Saul, who is
said in Scripture to have been haunted by an Evil Spirit, which was no more but
this; Saul finding his Government uneasy, and that things did not succeed and
prosper according to his wishes, fell into Melancholy which (as it is obvious
to all the World) does often times betray men to very extravagant fits of
Jealousy and Fury, which Evil Spirit of Readiness could not be conjured by any
other Art but of David's Harp. Some have endeavored to represent Music more
powerful and persuasive than Rhetoric it self, from the Fiction of vigilant
Argus, who could not otherways be overcome but by the charms of a Pipe.

There are some things notwithstanding in the Practice of Music, which seem
much to derogate from its Worth and Virtue: As first, that it is Mercenary, and
that it is usually prostituted in Taverns and Bawdy-houses, and serves
frequently to usher in the meanest Shows. It is frequently pretended to by the
meanest Artisans, and taken up as a livelihood by Vagabonds, and such as are
most ignorant and indigent. In the next place, many of those who pretend to be
Masters of it, are commonly of a morose and untunable Nature themselves,
capricious and fantastical: Besides, there is no person so simple and
ridiculous but will pretend to be a Judge of Music, and will censure the
peformance. But all this while these are not the faults of the Art but of the
Professors of it, and by the same Reason Poetry might be condemned, because it
is profaned by every Dogrel and Rhiming Ballad-maker; and Painting too, because
it is pretended to by every Dawber of a Sign-post. Though it be an
Accomplishment in a Gentleman to be well skilled at an Instrument or Voice, and
though he may make use of both for his own divertisement, yet he ought to
practice but rarely in Company, unless there be others of his own degree to
bear a Part, for it comes too near Fidling to strike up at another pleasure,
and to do it of ones own accord, unless it be amongst familiar Friends, is
affectation and fantastical: But above all, Princes and great Persons ought to
be careful not to spend much Time this way. Nero was an Excellent Master, but
by playing Publicly, was played upon by others. Much more discreet was the
Emperor Alexander Severus who Painted admirably, and Sang to Perfection, yet
never entertained himself in Practices of this kind, but when he was in private
only, and amongst his Pages.

Of all sorts of Music that is most graceful and diverting, where the Gests of
the Body correspond to the Nature of the Air, and both to the Ditty and
Argument, which I call Acting Music: For Singing is nothing but a more
Harmonious way of speaking, which when it is performed without too much
breaking of the Voice, so that the Articulation of the words be not lost, and
being accompanied with a suitable and decent motion, it is most Charming, and
this we rarely meet with but in Opera's, then which no shows under Heaven can
be more Magnificent and pleasing to the Senses. To conclude, it is enough for a
Gentleman if he perform his Part Alla Cavalaresca, looking upon Music as a
Remedy against oppression of the Spirits, either by too much business, or by
too little, which ever tends to solitude and Melancholy. Moreover Music is a
Preservative against the Anger and fierceness of Nature, it is sociable and
exceeding helpful to Devotion; upon all which accounts it must be esteemed
worthy a man's Study and Practice, and ought to be looked upon also as part of an
Ingenuous Education.

CHAP. V. Of Travel.
THE Benefits which arrive to men by Travel are many; and first in respect of
Communities or of a Nation in General. By this men are taught to know the way
to Foreign Countries, to understand their Productions and Arts, and to Exchange
their own Commodities, all which cannot but excite to Ingenuity and Industry,
and purchase Riches. By this we are taught to know the Strength and Interest of
Foreign Princes, their Arts of Peace and War, with whatsoever concerns Civil
Negotiations. By this the most remote Parts of the habitable World are linkt in
bonds of Alliance, and by this we understand the Transactions of both the
Indies, as well as of our Neighbor Nations. But to pass by these
Considerations, I shall only Discourse of Travel in relation to Individuals,
and in relation to the benefit which every particular Person may reap unto
himself, and first in respect of Health: for a man by accustoming himself to
different Climates and Seasons, to different sorts of Lodging and Diet, to rise
early and to have his Body in a constant Exercise; I say, by such like Methods
as these (which are the ordinary Companions of Travelers,) he cannot but
acquire a Robust Constitution, patient of fatigue, and fit for duties whether
of Business or War, provided a man live temperately, for otherwise he will
miscarry in a State of the greatest repose and ease, nay such a state is most
apt to betray men to Excess and Surfeit.

But the Benefits which arrive from Travel are yet more considerable in respect
of the Mind, especially if the Person be under the Conduct of one who knows to
introduce him into good Society: here by little and little he will be taught to
wear off that Clownish Habit, to which a homebred Education does usually
expose him: Those who are too sheepish and bashful, will by a daily practice
with new Persons, and those of different circumstances of life, acquire a good
Address and Presence. As for my young Master, the Hopes and Heir of the Family,
he is commonly such a one, who knows no other saces but those of his Fathers
Tenants, by whom he is Squir'd up and flattered, and where like a little Tyrant
he swaggers without control; but how soon will this poor Bubble be evaporated
and blown away, when it is once exposed to the open Air? His impudence and
impertinence serve only to make him Ridiculous and Scorned, or perhaps
Corrected, till by farther progress, and often reprehensions, as well from his
own Reason as others Examples, he finds his Error, and by little and little
also finds that if he will be acceptable, he must be Affable and Courteous. In
a word, Travel teaches a Man to be able to suit himself with Persons of all
Conditions, to understand the Laws of Civility, and what to give as well as
what to challenge. And the views of Foreign Courts, Embassies, Habits and
Ceremonies though never so transient, cannot choose but leave some traces upon
his Mind, which will grow up with Nature and render him perfect and acceptable.

Then for those Gentiler Exercises, as of Music, Arms, Dancing, Riding the
great Horse, the Discipline of the Camp, Fortification, besides Languages,
Modes, with all the Airs and Ceremonies of Gallantry, all these I say are
learned abroad with infinite more ease and less Expense than in a man's own
Country. As for Towns, fine Houses, Gardens, Inventions of Art, Antiquities,
shows, with all the Ornaments and various Productions of Countries, as also the
several Occurrences of a man's own or of another life, they are things which
serve chiefly for Discourse and Entertainment, and as a man will learn them
infinitely better, and in a greater Measure from his own Observation, than from
the reports of others; so what he sees with his own Eyes will make a more
durable impression than what he hears from others; and as they will procure a
more favorable attention, so may he with better Confidence and Grace relate
them too; for besides that one man does observe what another does not, so
cannot a man be so secure of the impartiality and diligence of another, as he
is of what is presented to his own Senses.

But it will be objected, That as there may be much Good learned abroad, so may
a man learn much Evil, and Youth being naturally more prone to Liberty and Vice
than to Virtue, the probability of being debaucht is greater than that of being
instructed: We find this to be many times true, I confess, by too sad
Experience; but all this while have we not Courtesans and Diseases at home,
have we not our fantastical homebred Fops, whose Heads are of as light a
sraight as those which come from beyond Sea laden with Feathers? and have we
not as many Gaming-houses, certainly more Tipling-houses which are the
Nurseries of Idleness and Sottishness, and the ruin of Health, Reputation and
Estate? Drunkenness is scandalous in all parts of the World except Germany,
Holland, and the Nothern Countries, to which few Gentlemen repair for Breeding:
and perhaps I shall not exceed, if I affirm that this single vice of
intemperance, to which we are so habitually addicted, is as mischievous to man
as all the Debaucheries of other Countries put together. It Is no Disparagement,
but rather a Commendation of the fertility of the Ground, that it produces
Poisonous Plants as well as Medicinal: if a man instead of smelling to the Rose
will put his Nose to the Prickle, he must blame his own foolish choice, not
Nature. Those who are of Virtuous dispositions will reap much more benefit
abroad than at home; others who are Vicious are many times reclaimed by
Example, and if some few miscarry, their loss is not so considerable as the
benefit which accrues to others.

Whosoever will Travel to purpose, ought to Travel twice; first in his Youth,
for then is he most capable of learning Languages, and of improving himself by
Exercise: afterward in his maturer years, when youthful heats are spent, and
all the Crudities of Nature digested, so that his Judgment being then strong
and vegete, he is able to distinguish betwixt Good and Evil, to understand men,
and to correct former omissions. In this particular private Persons are happier
than Princes, who living in Emulation cannot enter into one another Countries
without leave, and perhaps danger; besides the greatness of their Quality
carries too great a Train and Embarrass with it, and the Punctilio's of
Ceremony on which they stand, will not only make their Voyage very troublesome,
but will occasion sometimes great jealousies and disgusts. Nevertheless we may
observe that such of them as have Traveled, have proved also the greatest
Hero's of their Age; and such were Gustavus Adolphus, Solomon the Manificent,
and Charles the Fifth, who made nine Expeditions into Germany, six into Spain,
seven into Italy, four into France, ten into the Low Countries, two into
England, as many into Africa, besides eleven Seavoyages. It Is true; he did not
this as a Traveller, but sometimes as a Soldier attended with his Army, and
sometimes in pursuance of his Civil Affairs, which led him into distant
Countries which were under his Dominion: Nevertheless it is not to be doubted,
but that he gained great Experience thereby, and though his Son Philip were a
Politic and wise Prince, yet being of a Sedentary and Thinking Nature, and
consequently managing all things by Lieutenants, he was less Prosperous, which
cost him no less than the Revolt of the Low Countries, one of the fairest
Jewels in the Spanish Crown.

There are two sorts of Persons equally absurd in the Judgment they make of
Travel: The first are those who cry up nothing but what is Foreign, French
Servants, French Manufactures, French Artificers, French Phrases, French Games,
and perhaps French Diseases. Others think they cannot show themselves true
English but by crying up their own Country as the Paradise of the World, and by
disparaging all others, and these for the most part understand little beyond a
Pack of Dogs, a good piece of Beef, a Pipe of Tobacco, and a Barrel of Ale. But
he who designs his own improvement will judge impartially of what is good both
at home and abroad, and accordingly will make his choice, he will not be lavish
in commending the one, nor in undervaluing of the other.

'Twas generously and prudently done of Queen Elizabeth, who gave order for
choosing yearly out of both the Universities several young Students, such as
were of hopeful Parts, and destitute of Fortune, whom she maintained abroad out
of the Revenues of the Exchequer, and took care also to dispose of them after
their return in such Offices and Employments of Trust, as might make them able
to display their Gifts, and to open a passage to greater Fortunes: For though
all could not be provided for, yet as in a Race where one obtains the Price,
all notwithstanding would set forwards with speed, and by the course of Merit
endeavor to be capable of obtaining Honor.

CHAP. VI. Of Health.
HAving in the pecedent Discourse taken a survey of Man, as well in his first
Production, as in his Growth and Education, it follows of course that we
consider him now in a state of Maturity, and as under a twofold perfection of
Body and Mind: And first for the Perfection of his Body, it consists in these
three things, Health, Strength and Beauty.

Health is not only in it self one of the greatest Blessings of Life, but it is
such a one too as gives life and sense to all other Endearments whatsoever. We
are least sensible of this Blessing whilst we enjoy it, for such is the
depraved gust we have of things, that we understand their value more by the
want than by the possession of them. The Voluptuous man whilst he is in the
height of frolic and delight, whilst Nature is vigorous in all its functions,
and his blood runs peaceably through every Vein, never thinks of what he
enjoys: He never considers how easy it is for him to forfeit his Felicity by the
least start of Intemperance, and how difficult it is for him to recover it
again; no, he thirsts after untasted pleasures, and is still lanching forwards,
and spreading wide his Arms to embrace fresh Contents, till at length his
imaginary happiness betrays him to real Misery. One who melts under the
burnings of a Fever, or of (what is more scorching and dangerous) the
distempered flames of Love, finds little comfort in Treats and Visits, in rich
Clothes, Furniture and Attendance, nor in the more innocent Sports and
Recreations of the Field. All those Objects with which he formerly entertained
himself, do but help to aggravate his Misery by informing him how short and
empty they were in comparison of health, or if he has any remaining
inclinations for them, 'twill be a Torment to him to find them present to his
imagination, and he himself to be out of the reach of enjoying them: such a one
would readily exchange conditions with the meanest Peasant, who lives by the
sweat of his Brows, to whom Labor gives not only Appetite, but the sweetest
repose and rest, both which are the Essential parts of Health.

But passing by these Moral reflections, if we consider Health in that Natural
relation it has to man in his flourishing Age, we shall find it to be
determined in a regular observance of these following Circumstances, viz. Air,
Exercise, Evacuation, Repletion, Sleep, etc. to all which whosoever lives with
due regard, cannot but enjoy one of the greatest Gifts in Nature. They who are
blessed with great Health of Body, are not always men of the longest life; for
presuming upon the strength of Nature, they run into many disorders and
excesses, whereas others of a more delicate Constitution standing always upon
their Guard, avoid the occasions of Irregularity and Intemperance. Nevertheless
the rule is good, that men should by little and little accustom themselves to
small irregularities, such as eating at all hours, and of Meats less curiously
prepared: also exposing ones self to all sorts of Weather, to hard Lodging,
Watchfulness, thin Clothing, with many other inequalities to which men of
business are obnoxious: for he who lives by Weight and Measure, when Action
calls him forth of Doors is presently overtaken with disorder; every storm of
Rain, or an hours Riding in the Night, is able to make him send for the
Physician, who will be sure to purge his Purse as well as his Body.

It has been observed that men have always been most healthful where there have
been fewest Physicians: whether it be that the healthfulness of the Country be
a discouragement to their Practice, or that the want of them be the cause of
Health I shall not determine. Certain it is, that they are not to be recours'd
to but in cases of Extremity, since the Medicines by which Nature is assisted,
are for the most part compounded of many Ingredients of different qualities, so
that any ignorance of their Virtues, any defect in the mixture, or any Error in
the Application, is able to put Nature into great disorder. Or let the
Application be never so exact and rational, yet there will remain some dregs of
Heterogeneous parts, which will still he lurking in the Body, and will be ever
and anon breaking forth into new Fermentations. But then the case is much more
dangerous, when we consider the uncertainties upon which this Art is founded,
viz. our ignorance of the Frame and Fabric of the Body, as also the Functions
of each Organ in relation to Nutrition, Sense and Life, together with our
ignorance of the Age, Temperament, Course of life, and Circumstances of every
individual person. And the difficulty will still increase, when we call to Mind
the alterations and percolations which Medicines undergo in the Body, as also
the Obstructions they will meet with before they can arrive to the part
affected, to which we may add also our great ignorance of the Nature of most
Diseases, of their Causes, Progress and Effects: all therefore which Physic
can pretend to, is at the best, but Conjectural or Empirical; but when the
whole Management of Health and Life, falls into the hands of some ignorant
Undertaker, (and such they are generally who pretend to this Faculty) what real
dangers must then attend the miserable and diseased party? The Art therefore of
preserving Health is much more to be valued than that of restoring it; besides,
it is more easy and secure, as being in every man's peculiar Power.

CHAP. VII. Of Strength.
STrength is another Perfection belonging to Man's Body, which tho it be not of
such Importance as the former, is of great account nevertheless, being one of
those Excellencies with which Angelical Natures are Endued, they being above
all Creatures eminent for Activity and Power. There is a twofold Strength; the
first Military: This consists in Men, Money, Discipline, Conduct and Counsel,
for by these Means Empire is both acquired and enlarged; but Strength of
Government goes further, for tho Conquests may be made by Force, yet they will
never settle into Empire, but by a free Commerce, sound Counsels, and a
faithful Administration of Justice, with many other things relating to Civil
Economy. There is also another Strength of the Body Natural, which consists in
a healthful Constitution, and a strong and compact Formation of Muscles, Bones,
and Sinews: That which consists in brawny Members, and in a bulky Mass of Body,
is less to be accounted of, as being natural to the baser sort, such as
Laborers, Porters, and generally to all Men of Drudgery. Passive Strength, or
to be able to undergo Fatigue, is that, to which Persons, even of the best
Character, ought to be accustomed: But the active Strength, which consists in
Nimbleness and Vigor, is most Ornamental, and was in greatest Reputation
amongst the Greeks, as appears from their Institution of the Olympic Games,
where Youths of the best Quality and Extraction, did usually contend with one
another, and strive for Victory. As for the Romans, they had such Exercises in
less Esteem: For Wrastlings and Combats, whether betwixt Men and Men, or
betwixt Men and Beasts, were the Employments only of Slaves, or of condemned
Persons, or of such as were Mercenary; so that all the Use they made of them,
was only to entertain the Spectators with Pastime and Divertisement; and even
at this Day, those who are most eminent in this Kind, are generally Infamous,
such as Rope-Dancers, Tumblers, common Wrastlers, Sword-Players, etc. And yet
it is commendable in a Gentleman, or any Person of civil Quality, to be able to
Run, Wrestle, Vault, and to use his Weapon with Strength and Address; nay such
Abilities may sometimes be of great Benefit and Advantage: But for such a one
to make show of them, or to set a Value upon himself for these Performances, is
Vain and Ridiculous, as the frequent use of them is many times Dangerous and a
shortner of Man's Life: For we may frequently observe that those who in their
Youthful Days were most Lusty and Active, are more Broken and Decrepit in their
old Age than other Men, by reason of the many Blows, Bruises, and Surfets,
which usually attend such Violent Exercises.

Strength therefore is an excellent Gift of Nature, if it be rightly managed,
and besides the Succors it gives a Man in many Rencounters of his Life, it is a
Badg also of Royalty, when it is Accompanied with Courage, upon which account
the Eagle amongst Birds, and the Lion amongst Beasts, challenge the Sovereignty.

I doubt not but that in the first Herdings of Mankind into Troops and
Companies, he who was the Strongest and Stoutest Fellow amongst them, obtained
the Rule over all the rest; Men being naturally taught to submit to him, who
was most able to Hurt and to Protect them, which thing also we see even at this
Day amongst the Indians. It Is true, this Method was not of any long
Continuance, for there being infinite Numbers of Men, who were all equally
Confident of their own Strength of Body, they thought they had as good a right
to Rule as others, from whence arose perpetual Fightings, Robberies, and
Murders, not only betwixt Company and Company, but amongst those also who were
of the same Gang; all which tending to the Ruin of Mankind, and to the utter
Subversion of Society, Men at last were forced for their own Preservation, and
by common Consent, to circumscribe Power by such Laws as had the greatest
Regard to the common Good, and were to be of greater Validity, and of a longer
Continuance than Might.

CHAP. VIII. Of Beauty.
THE last Perfection belonging to the Body is Beauty, whose Conquests are more
Universal then those of Strength, for what this cannot Subdue by Force, the
other does Win by Surrender. Beauty, if it be not accompanied with other
Virtues, is but like a fair Sign to an ill Inn, it may invite Strangers to
enter in, but as soon as they find the bad Entertainment and the ill Furniture
of the Place, they will quickly quit so ill an Habitation: And yet we find that
this is the Goddess which most adore, as did the Trojan Youth of old, who
preferred her before Wisdom and Honor. All the Words and Actions of a handsome
Woman, seem to have a Charm; all Men admire such a person upon the first Sight,
and as they have Opportunities of Approach, they will not fail to Cajole her by
Flatteries, and to Commend her Wit in the most Lushious and Insinuating
Expressions they can Invent. But when once the Flower begins to wither, and
Beauty to Decay, then is it that she seems to be degraded beneath the
Qualifications of others. Her mimical and wanton Gests, her affected Lispings,
her pretty Repartees and modish Words, her turnings up of the Corners of the
Lips, and the windings of the Neck, not forgetting the languishing, or rather,
the half opening Eyes, together with her Stories of Fashions, of Romances, of
Amors, and of the Court, will then look most wretchedly Bald and Antique, and
when such Persons by a long Habit, shall become unable or unwilling to leave
this artificial Beauty, they must of necessity be exposed also to Laughter and
Contempt.

Beauty of Body does consist of three Parts; Complexion, Feature, and Shape,
and lastly, a graceful Motion or Address. Complexion or color of Skin is of
little Value, it being easy to be lost, and as easy to be counterfeited: It may
be bought in the Shops for six Pence, and may be sold again face and all for as
little, saving that the Purchaser many times pays a dearer price for what is
given him in the Bargain. Shape and Feature are nobler parts of Beauty, which
cannot be counterfeited by Art, and are therefore Real, nor can they be defaced
but by old Age, and are therefore Solid. But above all, a graceful Presence and
Address is the absolute Consummation of Beauty, as resulting from many
excellent Qualities of the Mind, such as Courage, Bounty, Affability, Modesty,
and willingness to Oblige, all which Concentring in the Mind, and being lodged
in a Body generously Born, and of excellent Shape, create a Harmony, and by
some secret Emanations send forth their Rays, and give a Lusture through all
parts of the Body. This indeed is a piece of Beauty which is really magnetic,
which charms Men, and is also durable and Heroic: It is a piece of Beauty
which the Pencils of the best Artists can rarely Express. A Vivacity and
Serenity of Looks, the Airs of Motion, together with the sweet Articulations
and Cadencies of the Voice, are the three Perfections under which true Beauty
is defined, such as are really difficult (if not impossible) to be shadowed out
by Colors, and must be acknowledged therefore to have a Resemblance with
something that is Celestial and Divine.

It Is true, this sort of Beauty is in some measure Artificial, as being
acquired very much by Breeding and Imitation; but for all this, we see that
some Persons are so fashioned by Birth, that whatsoever they say or do carries
with it such a Native Grace and Elegance, as gains Applause with all Men. They
speak with their Eyes, and being silent persuade. This Beauty therefore of
Presence and Motion, has much the Advantage above the Airs of Feature and
Complexion; for we shall rarely see many Persons to agree in the same Opinion
of a handsome Face, one dislikes the Nose, another the Lips, a third the Eyes,
and so on, so that Feature and Complexion are only relative Perfections, and
are only deemed Beautiful, so far as they bear a Conformity to the Fancy: Now
the Fancies of Men being always different and Irregular, there must be the same
Inequality in the things they Measure; whereas the Beauty of Behavior and
Address, is Amiable to all, it Reconciles every thing it meets with to its
self, which shows that it reaches further than the Imagination, and penetrates
to the Soul, which is a Principle far more permanent and solid. Upon this
Account also it is, that even Deformity of Body, where it is not accompanied
with Obliquity of Manners, becomes less Offensive, the more we are acquainted
with it; and Beauty of Body, destitute of Wit and good Humor, the more we
Converse with it, the less it becomes Acceptable: for the Mind of Man, into
which all things enter leisurely and by degrees, being of a Spiritual, Subtle,
and Discerning Nature, cannot take up its Repose with any thing but what is
suitable to its self. This Correspondence therefore of Mind meeting in some
common Inclinations of Nature, is that which makes an intimate and lasting
Union betwixt Persons, and creates Harmony and Beauty.

Persons who are less Beautiful, amongst the many Arts they have to set off
themselves, think it not the least to have recourse to Deformity it self, as to
a Foil, which will render an ordinary Face acceptable. Beauty of Body, as it is
relative, and bears respect for the most part, to the Opinion of the Beholder,
so also is it but a Comparative Excellence: For Janus-like, it has two Faces,
with one of which it looks toward something worse than it self, in respect
whereof it may be denominated Beauty; with the other Face it looks toward
something which is above it, which is more curiously fashioned, or as they say,
more divinely made, in respect whereof 'twill pass only for a thing common and
indifferent; so that of two Persons standing together, if one of them be more
Beautiful and Brillant, the other will seem more Vulgar and Inconsiderable,
like as in the Arms of a Balance, where the raising of one must be by the
depression of the other: It Is prudently done therefore of those in whom the
Gifts of Nature are less Orient, to have their Blacks always at their Elbow.

And yet for all this, Deformity many times is even with Beauty: For where the
former cannot advance it self to the Esteem and Reputation of the latter, it
will endeavor notwithstanding, to pull it down to its own Pitch and Level, I
mean by Desamation, for it is quick-sighted enough either to spy Blemishes of
another kind, or Malicious enough to invent them; and this holds good not only
in Competition about natural Endowments, but also where one Person has the
advantage above another, either in Civil Employments, or in the Favors of
Fortune. Upon this account also it is observed by the Learned Lord Verulam, that
deformed Persons are generally bold and witty: Bold in their own Defense, as
being exposed to Scorn, from which they will seek to free themselves, either by
Virtue or Malice, both which require some degrees of Wit in the Management.
'Twould be good therefore for Persons who are obnoxious this way, to begin
first to Jeer themselves, and Droll upon their own Defects, which would be a
good Disappointment to another Design of doing the same: For there can no Wit
be shown in saying the same thing over again, especially when I must be obliged
for it, to the Fancy of him whom I intend to play upon. In fine, the best
Remedy for one who is adorned with the Gifts of Nature, not to be envied, is
not to despise another who is deformed; for as Envy is natural to the latter,
so Pride oftentimes accompanies the former. Youth, Strength, and Beauty, are
proper to Angelical Natures, for as much as the Excellencies of these glorious
Creatures are usually painted and represented to our grosser Capacities, under
the appearances of such material Forms; and yet such was the Deformity of
Pride, that it converted these glorious Creatures into hideous Devils:
Whosoever then would be Angel-like, let him join Humility and Sweetness of
Nature to the forementioned Blessings of the Body.

There is a Beauty also of bruit Animals, amongst which those are esteemed to
have it most, which are most swift and Nimble, such as Greyhounds, Deer,
Horses, Cats, and the like, so that Aptness of Motion seems to go a great way
in the Definition of Beauty.

CHAP. IX. Of the Dependency of the Soul on the Animal Faculties.
THE Soul is to the Body, as the Jewel is to the Cabinet: The Cabinet we see is
many times Embellished with great variety of Colors, and wrought with curious
Artifice, but its Beauty being only Superficial, Men care not to dwell long in
the Admiration of it, especially when they are to have a sight of the Riches
which are within. Upon this Consideration I have given but a transitory Glance
at the outward or Ornamental part of Man, as being that which first offers it
self to Sight, the Body: That which is more worthy our fixed Admiration, is the
Jewel it contains, a Jewel of inestimabl Value, the Soul, which tho it enjoy an
absolute Freedom in its own Nature, yet when it is in a State of Conjunction,
as the Schoolmen speak, it is very much influenced, and in a manner determined
by the Inclinations of the inferior Animal Faculty, not only as to the
Individuality, but also as to the specification of its Actions; that is to say,
the Body as it is the Subject of Life and Sense, does not only contribute its
Assistance to the Soul in the forming of a particular and internal Act, but
does very much dispose it as to what sort and kinds of Acts it shall apply its
Power, and this not only in matters of Morality which reguard the Will, but
sometimes in matters of Thought and Study, such as have relation to the
Understanding.

Since therefore the Actions of Man do follow the Passions of the Mind, and
these the Temper and Disposition of the Body, whosoever would discourse
rationally of the former, ought to enquire into and survey the Constitutions of
the latter. Let us run over all the Circumstances of Life, let us view the
Varieties of every Age of Man, together with the several Dispositions of
Climates and Countries, and we may easily observe that Nature does always act
in Conformity to this Principle. The Inclinations and Desires of Childhood are
not the same with those of maturer Years, nor those of maturer Years the same
with those of old Age. The moist and tender Constitutions of Youth, like the
Virgin Wax, are capable to receive any Impression, and as apt to lose it. Its
Nature is Fluid and Unconstant, prone to Pleasure, and impatient of Hardship
and Delay. Men of riper Years, standing as it were in the middle Region of
Life, and comparing things present with past and future, form their Actions
accordingly, and can easily comply with present Wants and Disappointments upon
the large returns of Time and Expectation: They can smother less Resentments,
and dissemble Fears upon a Prospect of Interest and Gain.

And as in the several Ages of Man, so is it in the difference of Climates,
that Men's Propensities are determined easily, according to the Temperament of
the Air and Region in which they live. They who inhabit the low Countries, are
of a grosser Disposition, and of a more bulky Frame: Their Spirits move
heavily, being charged with too much Humor and Repletion: This makes them more
difficult to apprehend, but where they do attempt, they are indefatigable in
the Pursuit, and Retentive of what they learn. This we see most apparently in
the Dutch, in whom the want of more refined Spirits is abundantly supplied by
Industry: They move but flowly, yet they are patient of Fatigue both in Council
and Commerce, and in matters of Learning, tho their Conceptions are not so
gentile and polished, they are nevertheless useful, and by their great
Collections and variety of Readings, with which their bulky Volums swell, they
demonstrate to the World their invincible Constancy in what they undertake.
Those who inhabit the colder Clime, are forced to supply the Defects of Heat
with Drinking, which cannot but expose them to Bestiality and Indiscretion, and
must have a great influence upon their Moral, as well as upon their Natural
Capacities. Hence it is, that tho they are generally quarrelsome, and exposed
to all the Effects of Sottishness and Intemperance, nevertheless they are less
Revengeful, at once discharging both their Surfeit and their Choler. That
freedom and openness of Thought which accompanies their Drinking, makes them
incapable to Conceal or Premeditate any thing against the Government, as we see
in the Germans, who notwithstanding their Intemperance, and the infinite number
of little Principalities, notwithstanding that mixture and confusion of
Governments, and the variety of Religions which are amongst them, live in
better Accord with one another, and with a more regular Subjection to their
Superiors, than others of their Neighbors who are more refined, which Boccatin
very ingeniously observes in the Defense they made before the Tribunal of
Apollo. The Inhabitants of Islands are generally more Rebellious and Unconstant
than those who live upon the Continent, witness Britain, Ireland, and Sicily.
We may observe the like Diversity of others, as to Morals and Politics, from
the respect they have to the Heaven under which they live. Those of a dry and
hot Country are born with quicker Wits than others, and obliged to greater
regularity of Life, from the Dangers and Diseases which are derivable from Heat
accompanied with Excess.

Thus much is true in the general: But if we descend to Particulars, we may
continue the Observation further, and show, that the Bent and Inclination of
every Man's Life, does hold Analogy with the individual Crasis and Constitution
of his Body: There are some it is true, who go farther and assert; that from the
Anatomy of the Brain a Man may demonstrate the diversity of the Passions, and
discern the subtle Springs and first resorts of the Soul, but those are but
Chimera's, the Inventions of Impertinence, or an ingenious Madness. Was there
ever Man that could assign the Cells of Anger or Love, of Joy and Sorrow? Or
could he show their different Figures and Dimensions, and by any Dissection of
the Brain discover which was a wise Man, and which a Fool; from the different
Traces left upon it? Nor is this Theory only ridiculous, but destructive also
to the fundamental Articles of Religion, viz. The Souls Immortality, and the
Liberty of the Will: For tho it be true, that in Bruits all things move in a
certain Tenor, and as it were by Impulse, as it happens in a Watch, where the
Wheels are set in order, and the Springs wound up; nevertheless, so great is
the variety of Actions in a Rational Soul, so sublime are its Speculations, and
so predominant its Resolves above all the Reports and Tendencies of Sense, as
shows sufficiently that there is a Faculty in Man independent on it, and tho it
be oftentimes inclined by it, yet is it able to disengage it self, and to
exercise a sovereign Authority over Nature: Whereas those who assert the
contrary, do not only involve themselves in palpable Absurdities, but do deny
the very Existence of their own Souls, when they define all the Faculties of it
to be nothing but a Motion of the Animal Spirits proportioned to some certain
Organs and Instruments, all which are annihilated by Death. This then is true,
that every Man has a power derived from his own Soul to control the Motions of
Nature, but then it is true too, that this must be Understood only in Men of a
Masculine and of a disciplined Reason. Most incline to Nature, and choose the
Methods which Passion does propose; nay even in Intellectual Operations, and in
matters of Opinion, how willing are we to delude our selves being biased by
Interest and that Interest accommodated only to Sense and present enjoyments.

But to leave humane Actions whether Intellectual or Moral, let us consider
those which are Natural, I mean the Passions, of which it is certain beyond all
dispute and question, that they depend entirely upon the Disposition of the
Body. No sooner does an Object strike upon the Eye, for instance, but the Image
is conveyed immediately to the common Storehouse of the Senses, the
Imagination, and accordingly as it appears agreeable or displeasing, so does
the Imagination make the impression upon the Animal Spirits, which with
imperceptible quickness and subtlety are transmitted by the Nerves to the Parts
principally concerned, and excite Motions of desire or dislike, with all the
Train of Actions subsequent thereto; if we make an Impression on the Water by
casting in a Stone, or upon the Air by striking of solid Bodies together, we
find a kind of Undulation, by which as by a succession of multiplied
Impressions, the Image is conveyed to a considerable distance faster, or
slower as the Medium is disposed. It Is the same in our Bodies as to the Images
of Sense, though it be performed after a manner, which is far more quick and
delicate; hence it is, that as men live with more or less Regularity and
Temperance, their Senses are more or less refined to receive the Images of
things, and in Conformity hereunto the Passions move with greater or less
justness and order.

These Considerations being premised, I come now to discourse upon the Actions
of the Mind, as they fall under these two Grand Faculties of the Soul, the Will
and the Understanding; and because both these Faculties receive their
Informations from certain Instruments, I shall in the first place inquire into
the Nature and Constitution of these Instruments, and they are either External,
contained under the five Senses, or Internal, viz. Imagination and Memory.

CHAP. X. Of the Senses.
ONE who is confined to a close Prison, in which are some few Chinks, only for
the conveyance of Light and Air, though he may have an ability to see all the
variety of Objects which are in Nature, notwithstanding this can actually
discern no more, than what lies directly opposite to the straight passages of
the Walls, in which he is imprisoned. Just so the Soul of Man is confined to
the Body as to a close Chamber or Prison, from whence it happens, that though
it be capable in its own Nature, of knowing all things within the Compass or
Sphere of Creatures, yet it falls out, that whilst it is in this state of
Confinement, all the informations it can receive of what is transacted in
Nature, is conveyed to it by those narrow Passages or Casements of the
Senses; so that were it once delivered from this imprisonment, and exposed to
the open day, it would then be able to take one great Prospect of all the
wonders and glorious Objects of Heaven and Earth, with which this World is
beautified.

Of the five Senses, three serve more immediately for the Operations of Nature
and Life, viz. Feeling, Tasting and Smelling; the other two viz. Seeing and
Hearing are Instrumental to the Operations of the Understanding: For so it was,
that men by the Instinct of Nature were first taught to express themselves and
their Conceptions of things by certain Articulate Sounds, which by the help of
Art were afterward formed into Words. Now these Words if we consider the
Letters or Characters of which they are Compounded, do represent the things
contained in them by the Sense of Seeing, but if we consider them with relation
to the Organs of Speech, and the Sounds they make in the Pronounciation, they
conveigh their signification to us by the Sense of Hearing.

If we consider the Senses altogether, perhaps man enjoys them all in as great
perfection as any particular Creature whatsoever: but if we consider them
apart, as they are to be found in several sort of Animals, it is certain there
are many of them which have their Senses more acute and per^t than Man. Birds,
especially those of Prey, as Hawks, Eagles, and the like, are of wonderful
Sight, whether we consider the distance at which they see, or the sudden
discovery they make of Objects, or lastly their great force and strength in
looking against the Light of the Sun. Also Birds and Beasts of Prey, being such
as feed on Flesh are wonderful sagacious in their Smell. It is reported of
Eagles, that after a Battle they have smelt the Carcasses at a hundred miles
distance, and have come the next day from all Quarters to feed upon the dead
Bodies, which they could not possibly do were they not guided to it by their
Scent, for they never flock together but upon such occasions of Prey. I once
Dissected a Dog, and having washed my hands very clean, and whetted my Knife
bright, being at Supper some hours after, I offered a Greyhound some meat from
my Plate, which smelling to he refused and went away though he were at that
time very hungry. The reason why Birds and Beast of Prey are more acute in the
sense of Smelling, proceeds from the extraordinary heat and abundance of
Spirits, with which these Creatures are replenished, so that they require a
grosser Nutriment and frequent Supplies; though it be true with all th^^ all
Creatures have their Senses most ^cute when they are fasting, if it be not too
excessive, for in such cases Nature grows weak and languishing. Now that
Creatures when they are hungry should have their Senses more acute than at
other times, is plain; for in a state of Repletion the Spirits are clouded with
such gross Vapors, as rise from the Stomach to the Brain, the Region of Sense,
by which means their Motion is retarded, and from which inconvenience they are
never more free than in a state of fasting and abstinence. Now because Beasts
of Prey by reason of their extraordinary heat endure hunger with greatest
impatience; therefore is it, that their Senses are more vigorous and acute
whilst they are under that necessity.

If there be any Sense in which man has the Pre-eminence above other Creatures,
it is that of Hearing, though in the Sense of Seeing as well as in the other of
Hearing he has this advantage, that he makes the Objects of both these Senses,
to be capable of conveighing Rational Notions to the Mind, by the help of words
either spoke or written (as I have already noted) which is the chifest means by
which Knowledge is propagated. This must certainly be acknowledged to be a
great privilege of our Nature, and such to which no other Creature, though
never so sagacious can ever arrive to. For though Elephants and Dogs are very
docible, yet they can never be brought to understand the signification of
Letters in any degree, and for words spoken it is very little which they
understand also, being taught with great patience and difficulty to perform
some few Motions upon certain words of Command. It Is wonderful to consider how
Nature in many cases provides for our Necessities, making one Sense to supply
the Defects and Wants of another. I have seen some who being born Deaf, and
consequently Dumb, have notwithstanding been extraordinary Ingenious in
speaking by Signs: by the quick motions of their Eyes they would penetrate into
another Thoughts, and by the nimble motion of their fingers express their own.
I once saw a Gentleman who by some accident became Deaf, yet had his Sense of
Feeling so accurate, that by laying his hand only upon the Table in a Room,
where was a Consort of Music, he would distinguish the Measures of the Air,
and would tell frequently what Tune was played.

There are many cases in which our Senses may be deluded: I shall instance only
in that of Seeing, which yet of all others seems least subject to be deceived.
Now the Deception of the Sight proceeds from some of these Causes; as first,
the Indisposition of the Organ: to those who have the Jaundice all thing seem
Yellow, and to others who are over-taken with Drink, the light seem double. Men
that are in a Fever imagine they see Birds, Beasts, and Flowers exactly drawn
upon the Curtains of their Beds; and any violent Blow upon the Eye represents
sparks of Fire. A second cause of the Deception of the Sight proceeds from some
alteration of the Medium: when the Air is thick and Foggy, Objects seem much
bigger than the Natural, but when it is serene they are seen far more
distinctly and at a greater distance. By the reflection and refraction also of
Images and Light, things are represented also in the Air, insomuch that the
Images of a few Horsemen have been multiplied into Armies, as we see the Image
of one man by the reflection of two Glasses may be multipled into a Multitude.
Sometimes we seem to see three or four Suns or Moons at once, all which are so
alike that it is hard to distinguish the true one from the false. The Sun and
Moon at their rising and setting are five thousand Miles more remote from our
sight, then when they are at their Meridian, and yet they seem twice as big at
their rising or setting, as they do when they are directly over us. The reason
is from the refraction of their Beams through the many Vapors and Exhalations,
which be betwixt the Horizon and our sight, which are far more gross, and
possess a thousand times more space than those which be betwixt our sight and
the upper Region of the Air above us: Should a man who was born blind be
suddenly restored to sight, he would doubtless believe the Images which he saw
in a Mirror to be a solid Substance, in the same manner as other Creatures
judge which act only by Sense, as we see also in little Children. The Dog
thought it had been real Flesh he saw, when he caught at the Shadow of it in
the Water. A third Cause of the Deception of the Sight, is the disproportionate
distance of the Object; hence it is, that the Stars which many times exceed the
Earth in bigness, seem to us no bigger than the sparklings of a flame; Towns
which lie in the same line seem many times contiguous, though they lie a mile
or more asunder, and Clouds also at distance seem like Rocks or Mountains. Nay
in Objects with which we daily do Converse, and where there is no defect of
Organ or Medium, or of any undue distance, I much doubt whether two Persons
looking upon the same Object do not many times receive very different
impressions from it: and my reason's this: The great Object of Sight is Color,
and Color being nothing but a certain refraction or reflection of Light mixed
with Shadow, there will different Colors arise as the Light falls variriously
upon the same Object; so that two persons looking upon it in different
Stations, and by different degrees of Light, it must appear to them under
different Colors, a thing to which Painters have a special regard. And to
evince this Point thoroughly, I shall only propose two Examples. The one is
this; let a Man match two Colors never so exactly by Candle Light, they shall
appear another thing by the Light of the Sun. Another Instance is this; Take
any Stuff Red or Blew for the purpose, and look upon it by the Sun-light, and
afterward hold the same betwixt the Sun and the Eye, and it shall appear of a
far more Orient Tincture by a refracted than by a reflected Light. From all
which and a thousand other Instances of this Nature, it appears that the
Evidence of any one single Sense may be undemonstrative and fallacious. The
certain way therefore to judge of the reality of a thing, is when several
persons concur in the same judgment of it, and when the Truth of its Existence
is made out to more Senses than one. Thus the Truth of our Saviors
Resurrection was confirmed not only by the Sense of Seeing, but by those others
of Hearing and Feeling; and this too, not with reguard to one individual
Person, but to many who saw him and conversed with him at the same time.

It Is a Maxim in Philosophy, That the Operations of the Understanding do
depend upon those of Sense, which may be understood two ways. First That the
Intellect does in its actual Exercise depend immediately upon Sense: Or,
Secondly, That it does mediately depend on Sense; in as much as the first
Notion it had of things, were Originally derived from the informations of
Sense. If we interpret the Maxim the former way it is certainly false, for so
far is the Intellect from a dependence upon Sense in the actual Exercise of its
Faculties, that there is nothing which does obstruct it in its Functions more
than these outward Objects with which we do Converse. Upon which account the
Understanding is never more employed in the search of Truth, then when it is in
profound Silence, and actually withdrawn from all things sensible, which like
so many Messengers are always ready to disturb it by fresh reports. But if we
interpret the Maxim in the later sense, it is most true: But then it is as true
also that those first Informations or Rudiments of Sense, have no more
resemblance with the Masculine Inferences and Conclusions of Reason, than the
Letters of the Alphabet, which are also the first Rudiments of Speech, have a
resemblance with the sublime Orations of Tully or Demohestnes. From what has
hitherto been said, some infer, that the force of demonstration can have no
greater certainty than the Evidence of sense, our Senses being as it were the
first Principles upon which the Understanding proceeds to act. Now the evidence
of Sense being proved in many Cases to be fallacious and uncertain, the
Conclusions of Reason how demonstrative scever they may seem to be, must needs
be uncertain also. To this I answer; that this Proportion, for instance [a line
of four Inches is twice as long as a line of two inches] is as certain and
demonstrative as any in the World: for though my sense might err in some
Observation when it first represented the figure of a line to my understanding,
nevertheless the Proposition is of an unalterable verity, as being built not
upon the Image of a line as it was at first drawn upon my Mind, but upon that
Principle of Proportion by which all the Parts taken together are equal to the
whole, which is a first Principle, such as is born with our Natures, and
independent upon any antecedent discoveries of Sense.

Sensation may be described after this manner. The Image of an Object arriving
to the Organ of Sense, it makes the impression upon the Nerves which are there
terminated for that use, each of which is so Curiously formed, and is of such a
certain specific Contexture as makes it capable only to receive the Images
belonging to some one particular Sense, as for instance of Seeing, Feeling,
Hearing, etc. The Nerves are the Channels wherein the Animal Spirits which are
of an Etherial substance next to Spiritual, are running always up and down with
a most impetuous and subtle Motion. Now the Nerves terminating in the Brain as
in their Center, the Spirits also which are the Vehicles of all sensible Images
do by the guidance of the same Nerves convey these Images to the Brain also
where they all meet as in one common Receptacle.

CHAP. XI. Of Memory.
MEmory is a Noble Branch of the Soul, and one of the Principal Internal
Instruments of the Understanding as well as of the Will. It Is like a faithful
Steward to whom the immense Treasure of Images is committed, all which it
receives by the Ministry and Dispensation of the outward Senses. It keeps an
account also of all things that have been transacted, and is always ready to
produce out of its Storehouse whatsoever the Superior Faculties shall
require. The Seat and Region of Memory is in the Brain, but where it makes its
residence I leave to Anatomists to determine. Some are of Opinion that it is
seated in that Meditullium or void space in the middle and Center of the Brain,
where as in a capacious Cave or Receptacle, it lies remote from Noise. Others
hold that the Images of all sensible Objects, are laid up in the Concavities of
the Brain, and that those delicate and numberless Partitions, which we see
dispersed over all the whole Mass with such astonishment and wonder, are as so
many Cells in which the Images of things are distinctly conserved, according to
their several Species: which latter Opinion seems to be more probable, because
we see that those who have the greatest Heads, have generally the best
Memories; besides, many Persons have received great Decays in their Memories,
and others have lost them utterly by reason of some great blows or wounds in
the Head, which could not be possible did the seat of Memory reach so far as to
that vacant place before spoken of, which lies too remote to receive injury by
such Accidents: For should the hurt extend so far, it is impossible but it
should be attended with present death. It is somewhat strange what is reported
of Pope Clement the Sixth, that whereas he was a person of a bad Memory by
Nature, by receiving accidentally a great blow upon his Head, his Memory became
very good ever after; which shows that by the violence of the Percussion, his
Brains were struck out of their former Station into a more convenient
Situation, and such as served for the better retention of the sensory Images.
As for that void Concavity which lies in the middle of the Brain, it seems to
be destined for the Reception of the Noblest and most sublime Faculty of the
Soul, the Understanding: for what other Function it should serve for, the most
curious Anatomists could never yet discover, there being nothing to be found in
it after all their Observations but a little thin and watery substance. Besides,
it being in the Center and most remote from from all External violence and
disturbance, and being always in one even temper, it must be allowed to be the
most Natural and proper place for Cogitation, and that sedateness with which
Reason ought to act, so that it is like the Head of an Alembeck always cool, and
serves to unite the Spirits, which are the immediate Instruments of Sense and
Motion.

There are two sorts of Memory, of which one consists purely in Rehearsal. This
sort of Memory is useful to Preachers, Orators, and such as are obliged to
deliver themselves in set Forms, and in this kind some men are very happy. It
is reported of Cardinal Perron, that he was able to recite any thing upon the
first hearing of it, and of this he gave an Instance before the King of France.
A certain Poet had in a solemn Audience harangu'd Henry the Fourth by the
Rehearsal of a long strain of Verses, which the King and all the Court much
commended: The Cardinal told them that the Verses were stolen, and to make this
good he recited them verbatim in the same order as they had been before
delivered. Hereupon the Poet began to change Countenance, and had fallen into
perpetual disgrace, had not the Cardinal declared that what he did was only a
Trick, to show the strength and force of his own Memory. Others there are who
will run over a Muster-roll of hard Names which they never heard of before in
the same order as they are recited by another. This reciting Faculty though it
may beget some little Admiration in the Hearers is really of little benefit,
for what is learned this way is as easily forgotten. There is another kind of
Memory which consists in a firm and a steady Retention of what we have either
seen, heard, or read of, and such as is always ready to furnish us with matter
upon any Exigence: This must be acknowledged to be of great use, both at the
Council Table and at the Bar: For such Persons are obliged ever and anon ^o
hunt after Presidents, and to ransack Ancient Records: It concerns them
therefore to know the Transactions of former Ages as well as of the present,
and to have Examples always in store. They are obliged to state the Cases of
Persons with all their circumstances, and to make reply to all things which may
be urged to the contrary. This kind of Memory also is wonderfully serviceable
in Conversation, especially amongst those who take delight in telling News, or
in rehearsing of some Tale for divertisement: It is then only of bad use, when
it is employed in the recital of past injuries, and in relating passages which
tend to the shame and disparagement of these who have no way offended us.

Memory though it may be useful to judgment by proposing Examples and
Consequences, which have happened formerly upon like Circumstances, with these
under which we lie at present, nevertheless it happens often that the variety
of Instances pro and con with which a great Memory is always furnished, does
but retard the Judgment, and make it more wavering and irresolute: Besides,
Persons who have great Memories, do love to display their Gifts, so that
generally they are great Talkers, a quality not very commendable, and such as
is no way consistent with Judgment which weighs its Counsels with Maturity and
Silence.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Imagination.
AFter the Consideration of Memory follows that of Imagination as being a
Superior Faculty, for so it is that the Memory out of its own Storehouse of
Images, does furnish the Imagination with Materials to work upon. Imagination
therefore is a Power of the Soul, choosing at pleasure such Images as Sense and
Memory, has drawn upon the Mind, and uniting them together in such a form as
seems to represent some new Compound, not yet existing in Nature. It is an
imitation therefore of that Omnipotence in the great Creator of the World, who
produced all things from those Idea's which he first formed within himself. The
pleasant descriptions of Poetry, the Pomp and Ornaments of the Theater, the
Curiosities and Magnificence of Buildings are all but the Productions of the
Imagination; all charming Notes of Music, the rare designs of Painting and
Sculpture, together with all the ingenious Inventions of Artists, are derived
from hence. To this we owe all those Modes and Fashions of Apparel with which
we are so much delighted: To this we owe all the Pleasures of the Palate, all
the Recreations and Divertisements of Life, and in a word, whatsoever tends to
the advancement of Arts, and to the Ornament of Nature; when the Imagination
therefore does form an Idea of a thing, the Will presently apprehends it,
either as Desirable and Good, or as Evil and Distastful: Hereupon the
Understanding goes immediately to work, and by Rules of Reason judges of the
Convenience, or Inconvenience of what is proposed. This then seems to be the
Method of the Souls Acting. First Sense and Memory present us with the simple
Images of Things, the Imagination makes the Composition, the Will Desires or
Dislikes; and lastly, the Understanding does make its Judgment of it.

Some Nations are naturally addicted to some particular Fancies above others.
The French being generally of a gay and jovial Humor, their Imaginations lead
them to be Amorous; and in pursuance hereof they have a particular Genius for
Romances, and Histories of Gallantry, as also for Loveing sports, Balls,
variety of Modes, forms of Complement, with such like Entertainments as seem to
cherish that wanton Passion. The Italians who are of a Temper a little more
Saturnine and serious, have their Imaginations generally carried away with the
Love of Music, Painting and Sculpture, all which require a pregnant Fancy to
Invent, and much time to perfect what they do design. Men who are of retired
and serious Inclinations, are less volatile and luxuriant in their
Imaginations, but withal they are most resolute in the prosecution of
whatsoever they are addicted to: They will never desist till they have brought
their matters to maturity, and generally all great Designs owe their Birth and
Perfection to Men of this Temper. The Dutch naturally are a heavy slugish
People, symbolizing with the Air, or Water rather in which they Breath: Hence
it is, that they are flow at Projection, but what they do once attempt,
especially in matters which concern their Interest, they are most obstinate to
bring it to Perfection. On the contrary, the French living in a pure and
subtle Air, abound with more Spirits, but then they are unapt to prosecute any
thing which implys Difficulty and Patience. Their great abundance of Heat still
suggesting to them Varieties of new Expedients, they presently quit their first
Designs upon the apprehension of Difficulty, which in Conclusion renders them
very Unconstant and Wavering. The Flemmings, as they are betwixt them in
Country and Situation, so do they partake with them too in their Genius and
Inclinations, being both good at design, and happy in the Improvement of all
sorts of Manufactures.

There is another sort of Imagination which consists merely in Apprehension,
and is found to have a wonderful Influence upon the Person that is the Subject
of it. We may observe some Persons that they daily fall sick and die by the
force merely of Imagination. I knew a Family in which there were many Brothers,
all hopeful Gentlemen, of which, one dying of the small Pox, all the rest,
being four or five in Number, excepting one only, fell sick of the same
Distemper in some short space after, and dyed, tho they were at distance from
one another, and out of all reach of Contagion. In order to Health, Imagination
is of great Force and Virtue: When a Man has a good Opinion of his Physician,
and of what he gives him, his Heart seems to dilate it self with a kind of Joy:
This gives an easy Circulation to the Humors, and makes them more capable to
entertain the Medicine. Besides, the Spirits which before were drooping, upon
the apprehension of Safety summon up themselves, and Nature does its utmost
efforts to help on the Delivery. The Spirits are the Vehicles of Life, and move
slower or faster, according as the Imagination is possessed upon which they do
depend. Women great with Child are very subject to strange effects of
Imagination. It is said that the Antipathy which King James had to a naked
Sword, proceeded from the Fright which the Queen his Mother took when she was
big with him, at such time as David Rizius was pursued by Assassinates with
naked Swords, and villanously Murdered in her Presence. It is strange what is
reported of Apollonius Tyanaeus, who being banished by the Emperor Domitian,
that Disgrace made such an Impression on him, that the Tyrant seemed present
always to his Imagination. In the midst of an Harangue which he made to the
People of Ephesus, he began to deliver himself more soft and slowly than
ordinary; at length, making a Pause, he abruptly quitted the Subject he was
upon, and retreating three or four paces, he looked on the Ground with an
intent and menacing Countenance, and uttered these Words; Smite, smite the
Tyrant, which he spoke with that Force and Agony, as seeming to be present and
assisting at the Act: At which the Audience being amazed, Apollonius like one
recovered out of a Trance, cried out, Courage my Friends, the Tyrant is slain
this Day, nay rather, this very instant, so help me Pallas, which as
Philostratus (the writer of his Life) reports, proved to be the same day and
hour that the Emperor was Murdered. Many Instances of this nature occur of the
Force of Imagination in knowing Transactions done at distance; I shall not here
pretend to give a natural Reason for such Prodigies, nevertheless this is
certain, that Imagination has not only had a great Ascendent over the Spirits
and Actions of particular Men, but even of Multitudes and Armies. Alexander
finding his Soldiers dismayed at the difficulty of passing the River Granic,
consults with Aristander the South-sayer, how he might keep up the fainting
Spirits of his Army: Aristander being then about to sacrifice, with a certain
Juice secretly writes in the Palm of his Hand these Words, with the Letters
Invers'd [the Gods have granted that Alexander shall be Victorious] which he
had no sooner done, but taking the Victims Liver into his Hand, the foresaid
Inscription was so attracted by the Blood and Heat of the Beast's Liver, that
the Letters appeared in their natural Order and Figure inscribed upon the
Entrails, which showing to those who were about him, they all cried out a
Miracle, in which Confidence the Soldiers took Courage, and passing the River
became Victorious.

Melancholy Persons are subject to strong Imaginations. Some have fancied
themselves to be Ghosts, Birds, Wolves, with a thousand such Extravagancies,
and to speak the Truth, the whole World is upon the matter governed by this
Idol. He who is actually a King, and the Madman who fancies himself a King,
have both of them, upon the matter, the same Enjoyments. One tho he really
tastes the Fruits of Grandeur, yet if we examine the matter thoroughly, all his
Enjoyments do terminate in Fancy: And if his Palate be more acute to relish the
Pleasure, so is it more sensible of the Bitterness and Anxiety which does
accompany that State; whereas the other by fancying himself Happy, is really
so, since he feels no want. Hunger nor Cold never afflict him, he complains not
of Treachery and ungrateful Ministers; he meets with no potent Factions at
home, nor Confederacies abroad, to disturb his imaginary Government: He fancies
that he Rules without Control, he makes Laws, he creates him Noblemen, he
displaces Officers at his Will and Pleasure, and in the strength of his
Persuasion he passes away his Life merrily, Singing and Applauding his own
Felicity and Power; thus fares it with the happy Lunatic, whilst many others
who would be thought to be in their right Wits and Senses, are really Mad,
those I mean, who upon every little Cross or Capricio fall into a raving
Passion.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Will and Passions.
AS Imagination follows the reports of Sense, so the Will with its Passions
follows the Bent of the Imagination. The Will therefore is nothing but a Power
of Election or Reprobation of things either agreeable or displeasing. The
Passions by which it acts are chiefly these, viz. Love and Hatred, Desire and
Aversion, Joy and Sorrow, Anger and Complacency, Hope and Fear, etc. As to the
Seat of the Will, as also of the Passions it is without dispute in the Heart.
This appears most evidently from Blushes and Paleness, from that quick
Circulation and boiling of the Blood, and from those beatings and that
deficiency which at other times affect that Noble part, with such alterations
as immediately seize the Blood. Upon occasions of Sorrow, Fear, or Despair, we
feel an Oppression and Contraction of the Heart; upon the report of Good News
we feel a certain dilatation of the Spirits, all is open, and those Fountains
of Life run smooth and calmly in their several Channels. The Passions therefore
are as it were the resorts and Springs of Life, without which all things would
move dead and heavily.

The Stoics it is true, were Men of another belief: they rejected the Passions
as useless, they taught that a Man ought not to be sorrowful for the Calamities
of his Friend, nor rejoice at his Welfare, upon this persuasion, that a Wiseman
enjoyed all things within himself, and was therefore incapable of being made
better by Fortune or worse by Injury. From whence it followed that whosoever
did Defame, Rob, wound a Man, did him no Injury; and if so, then 'twould follow
likewise that whosoever should commit such an Outrage, would commit no crime;
as also, that all sorts of Violence offered to another, whether Slander, Theft
or Murder, would be equally indifferent and inoffensive, for where there is no
Injury done, there can be no degrees of offense. Thus these Philosophers whilst
they endeavored to raise a man above the Stars and Clouds into the Sphere of
the Moon, did really degrade him into the Region of Beasts, or rather of Stocks
and Stones, when they described him as a Creature stupid and senseless, without
Heat and Motion. But whatsoever those airy Notions were with which they
endeavored to delude their followers, it is certain that when they came to put
their Doctrine into practice, they soon changed the Natural Philosopher into
the Natural man; for besides their Pride and Covetousness for which they were
so notorious, we find them also to have been Morose and Cynical, violent in
their Invectives, and subject to all the transports of Choler and Intemperance.
The Rules of their Profession were for the most part measured by a Cloak and a
long Beard, of which the loss in the Fictions of Lucian, was a thing of such
importance as was capable to draw Tears from the greatest of them.

But to leave these Philosophers and their Beards, we have Arguments of better
Authority to prove that Passions are useful, and consistent with human Nature
in its highest Perfection, witness our Blessed Savior who was seen to Weep, to
be Angry, to be Compassionate, and tender, with such like alterations as argued
a perturbation of Spirit. Nay God Almighty in the Divinity, though he be free
from all alterations and disturbance of Passion, is pleased nevertheless to
appear to Men under theseveral shapes of Love, Pity, Anger, Jealousy, Hatred,
etc. to the end he might Create in us the like Passions for Good and Evil. How
is it possible to persuade a Man to embrace Virtue, but by representing it
Clothed with all those Beauties which may create a Love, and then a desire of
it? How is it possible to dissuade a Man from Vice, as Drunkenness, for
instance, but by representing it as injurious to Reputation and Estate, as
destructive of Health and Natural Parts, as loathsome and painful to the Body,
and as punishable with Eternal Misery hereafter? all which cannot choose but
create in us a fear of the Punishment, as well as a hatred of the Guilt. The
Passions are like Winds, when they are regular and moderate they fill the Sail,
and carry on the Ship to the desired Port, but when they are interrupted and
violent, they serve only to raise a Tempest, and menace nothing but danger and
ruin. It Is the business therefore of reason to give them their measures, and
this it does these two ways, first by fixing them on the right Objects, and
this is done when we love that which is truly virtuous, brave and honest, and
when we hate that which is really loathsome, unjust and shameful, etc.
Secondly, By assigning them their proper degrees, and not suffering them to run
out into Extremity, we may be Angry, but not be transported with Fury; we may
desire but not with impatience: All Transports of this kind argue weakness of
Judgment; they are injurious to our selves as well as to others, and hinder the
due accomplishment of what we do design. Is a Man prone to Love, let him fix
his Love upon such an Object as is most Beautiful, most durable, and most
beneficial to him, I mean the great Creator, from whom he receives Life with
all its Comforts; and with respect to him, let him love Man his Image, and such
especially as merit our Gratitude: if a Man be prone to Anger, let him cherish
his Passion against the Enemies of Religion and Virtue, and against Atheism,
Oppression, Fraud, Hypocrisy, Perjury, Faction, and such like Vices as are
every where popular and insulting.

The Passions of unconstant Persons, as is excellently well described by
Causin, are for the most part eager and ardent at the beginning, but are of
little duration, for such men are presently tired with what is present, and
always look after things to come, being never where they are, and being always
where they are not, nor never can be; they are every day at the beginning of
their life, even then when they should be at an end, and the good Actions which
they do, they do them not but by halves, being never at leisure to finish their
works by reason of their precipitation; the diversity of desires which
interchange, drawing them sometimes here and sometimes there, and ruining all
the designs and level of their Spirit. One may observe in them a great thirst
after Novelty, and continual changes of Manners, Study, Habit, and Course of
life, as also of Speech, Converse, Sports, Exercise, Counsels, Amors and
Friendship, with mouths breathing both hot and cold at once. In short, their
life is nothing but a continual flux and reflux, being replenished with
shadows, giddiness and illusions which, in effect makes them most miserable,
and is usually attended with disesteem, grief and tediousness of life, and with
great Naufrage of Spirit and Reputation: Thus he: Indeed a Passionate man does
at the same time desire and languish, he hopes and yet fastens on nothing: He
rejoices and repents, and oftentimes contemns the Possession of a thing which
he a thousand times desired. His Pretensions are Contradictious: He Conjures by
Heaven, and detests the Earth; He Curses men and all living Creatures, and is a
burden to himself, and Contemptible to all the World.

This Consideration then of the great Variety of the Passions, and of the great
Contrariety to one another, makes me willing to subscribe to their Opinion, who
hold that Man at present is a more Excellent Creature than he was in the State
of Innocence: for then he had all the means of safety in his own power; his
Understanding was pregnant and clear, his Will was most free and unbiased, and
all his Passions were in a quiet and dutiful Obedience thereunto; so that there
was little Prudence to be then shown in his Actions, which were so well fenced,
and as it were hedged in on all sides from Danger and Error: Whereas now all
his Faculties being obscured and in perpetual disorder, and he having very
fallacious and imperfect means to inform himself in his Courses, and being
surrounded also with infinite Temptations and Difficulties, it shows a generous
Courage in him to attempt, and as great Conduct in him to persevere in the ways
of Virtue. It Is no hard matter for a man to be Victorious, who is encompassed
with a Puissant, Vigilant and well disciplined Army; but he who can overcome
whilst his Soldiers are in Mutiny, and whilst he lies Entrenched amongst the
Snares and Stratagems of his Enemy, he indeed deserves the Name of a brave
Commander. As that Constitution of Body is best which can endure all Changes
and Extremities, so likewise that health of Mind, is most to be accounted of,
which can overcome the greatest Temptations and Disorders. They therefore who
can curb themselves when they are running upon a Precipice, and (in my Lord
Verulam's phrase) give the Mind (as we see in Horsemanship) the shortest stop
or turn, are really Men of true Abilities and Art: What that great and Learned
man has in his Excellent judgment taken notice of, is most worthy a serious
Consideration, viz. that this Combat of the Passions with one another is of
special use in Moral and Civil matters: For by this we are taught how to set
Affection against Affection, and to master one by another, even as we use to
hunt Beast with Beast, which we could not otherwise so easily compass. Upon
this Foundation is erected that Excellent use of Proemium and Poena by which
Civil States consist; employing the Predominant affections of fear and hope,
for the suppressing and bridling of the rest: For as in the Government of
States it is sometimes necessary to bridle one Faction with another, so is it
in the Government within. Thus far he.

Men who are not subject to the transports of Passion, whether of Love, Anger,
Fear, Sorrow, etc* have great advantages above others in many respects. And
first in matters of Deliberation and Counsel. A man of this Temper can calmly
and patiently hear all that is alleged pro and con without being shaken:
Another Passion does not move him, he lays hold of his Extravagancies and
delivers his own Sense without hesitation and stammering, and without giving
any ground of advantage to him, with whom he is in debate: His hand holds the
Balance without trembling, and he takes steady measures of the Mark; all which
it is impossible for one to do, who suffers his Reason to be disturbed by the
unseasonable and immoderate Exercises of some rebellious Passion. Statesmen
above all others ought to study this Art, as having the Eyes of many secret
Enemies always on them, and where a small Extravagance of words may be the
ruin both of their Counsels and of themselves. In the next place, in matters
purely of Conversation, the even tempered Man has much the advantage: He is
agreeable and inoffensive in all Companies, he rarely provokes others to Anger,
and if he meets with any thing which is provoking, he either slights it, or
puts the best disguise and sense upon it that the matter will bear. He
chastises the frowning Countenance of another with a smile, and turns that
which was designed as an Affront into Mirth and Drollery. But withal it is
observable in Men of this Temper, that they are bad for Execution, and that
they* are generally Hypocrites. They are the worst, of Friends in as much as
they are never touched Passionately with their Friends Concerns, and they are
the worst of Enemies too, as never giving notice of the mischief they intend:
Such a one was Tiberius of old, and such also were Andronicus, Comnenus, and
King Richard the Third of England, all which were great Dissemblers, and
pursued most Bloody and Malicious designs under the appearance of Mildness and
Affability.

Contrary Passions are found generally in the same subject and to the same
degree. He who is prone to Love a thing excessively will with the same Excess
hate any thing that does oppose him, he who is immoderate in his Joy, will be
as immoderate also in his Sorrow upon the privation of that which gave him
matter of delight.

I shall not here confine my self to the Method of the Schools, who reduce the
Passions to Iraseible and Concupiscible: I shall rather range them under these
two general heads of Love and Hatred, conformable to the two grand Motives of
the Will, which are the Universal and Comprehensive scope of all our Actions
Good and Evil: for to these two all the other Passions are reduced. First for
Love, if the good be only in prospect it is called Desire, but if the
attainment of it be attended with uncertainty it is called Hope; if it be in
our actual possession, it procures Complacency and Delight; if there be danger
of another getting it from us, it begets Jealousy; And lastly, if it be
beneficial to us, and if we have a certainty of obtaining it, the consideration
of it begets Joy. Therefore Hatred, if the Evil be future, and only in prospect
it is called Dislike or Slight, if there be a probability that it will happen
to us, it is called Fear: If it actually happen to us, and there be an
inclination to oppose it, it begets Anger: If it consist in the want of
something which we cannot obtain, and which is in the possession of another, it
begets Envy; And lastly, if it be such as we believe cannot be remedied, or
such as we believe cannot be prevented, it begets Sorrow. These are principal
Affections and Dispositions of the Mind, to which all others are reduced. Now
when I speak of Good and Evil, as the grand Motives of our Affections, and the
ultimate end of all our Actions, I do not intend really what is Good or Evil,
but what we apprehend to be so: For many times we pursue a real Evil under the
form and appearance of something Good, and we decline a real good upon the
apprehension we have of its being Evil: Good and Evil therefore are not here to
be understood Morally and in themselves, but with respect to the Imagination of
him who wills.

CHAP. XIV. Of Love and Hatred, of Jealousy and Envy, of Desire and Dislike.
I Begin with Love which is the Noblest Passion of the Soul, and a Ray of the
Divine Nature. God when he made the World pronounced of all things in it, that
they were exceeding Good: Now goodness being the Measure and Object of Love, it
follows that whatsoever God made became the Object of his Love; the more
therefore we love, the more resemblance we have to that Divine Goodness.
However Love as it is attributed to God, differs very much from that which is
in Men: First then they differ in respect of their Nature; in Man it is Passion
attended with Desire, Hope, Fear, Sorrow, and such like alterations as are
accompanied with great disquiet, and imply imperfection in the person who is
the subject of them: But in God it is one perpetual Emanation of Goodness
derivable on others without disorder or dimunition of store: In the next place
they differ in respect of their several ends: Man's Love always terminates in
himself; if we love Creatures of the same Nature with our selves, we do it that
they may love us again, or if we transfer our Love to things inferior to our
Nature, whether Animate or Inanimate, we do it upon this account, that they may
be some way beneficial to us, either in respect of Pleasure or Service. But if
we place our Love upon the supreme Object from whom we derive our beings, we do
it either that he may continue his Blessings to us, or upon the hopes we have
of receiving new Measures of his Bounty. It Is true, Schoolmen may talk of a
Divine Love, and so forth, but when we come to Examine our Affections to the
bottom, we find self-interest to be the Center of our Desires; and those who
pretend to love Virtue for Virtues sake, will at length be forct to acknowledge
that they do so upon the account of that Reputation which accompanies, or of
that Reward which follows the practice of it: from whence it follows that our
own advantage and felicity has a great share in the Duty, whereas the Love of
God is carried directly upon the Object without any desire or possibility of
receiving benefit from it: Like the Sun, it is continually streaming forth its
benign Influence upon the Earth, without ever receiving any recruit or
recompense.

Some men's Love is more particular and ardent, exerting as it were all the
Force and Powers of the Soul, for the obtaining of some one Object, with which
it afterward seems incorporated by strictest Unions of Complacency and
Delight: This is many times Conspicuous in those more Sacred Ties of Matrimony
and Friendship. Others there are who love with a more remiss and general
Affection, distributing that stock on many which they refuse to appropriate to
one; hence it is that those who profess Celibacy are generally better natured
than others, whose Love is engrossed by one: Also Religious men who are cut off
from particular Endearments, seem to have a more general Concern and Tenderness
for Mankind.

Love, as Causin observes, from the diversity of its Objects has several Names,
if it move directly toward God, and reflectingly on our Neighbor as his
Image, loving one for himself and the other for his Author, it is called
Charity; if it diffuse it self on diverse Creatures, sensible and insensible,
being such which serve for Pleasure or Commodity, such as Horses, Jewels,
Birds, Pictures, Books, Medals, Flowers or the like, it is nothing but Appetite
or simple Affection; if it applies it self to humane Creatures, by way of
reciprocal Benevolence, it is called Friendship; if it level at bodily
Pleasure, it is a love of Concupiscence, which being immoderate even with
intention of Marriage does not cease to be Vicious: If it be regulated by
Bounds prescribed by the Law of God, it is called Conjugal Love, if it
overflows into sensual Pleasures, it is called Luxury.

There are twelve Marks given by Jo. Picus Mirandula, by which we may judge of
a true and real Love: The first is to Love one and one only, and to Contemn all
other things in Comparison of him. Secondly, To think himself unhappy when he
is not with the Person he loves. Thirdly, To be willing to suffer all things,
even Death it self that he may serve him. Fourthly, To adjust himself in such a
manner as may render his person acceptable to the Party he loves. Fifthly, To
be present with him so far forth as he is able, if not totally at least in
thought and desire. Sixthly, To love his Friends, Kindred, House, Clothes,
Pictures, or whatsoever else does any way relate to him. Seventhly, To desire
his Praise and Reputation, and to be impatient at his disgrace; to rejoice at
his good Fortune, and to grieve at his losses. Eighthly, To believe him Master
of the greatest Perfections, and endeavor to draw others to the same belief.
Ninthly, To be always in a readiness to suffer for his sake, and to think such
sufferings sweet. Tenthly, To weep often upon his account, through Grief if
absent, through Joy if present. Eleventhly, To languish always and expire in
desire after him. And Lastly, to serve him readily and cheerfully without hopes
of Reward.

Love if it be not reciprocal, is commonly requited with secret Contempt and
Scorn: whosoever therefore feels this Passion growing on him, if he finds he
cannot get ground, let him retreat betimes, for although Importunity may tire
out a Person to make a condescension, yet there being a kind of force which
goes along with it, Nature will quickly spring back to its former bent as soon
as the force does cease: and upon this account we see, that the first
Interviews of Persons do usually make the deepest and the most permanent
Impressions.

Martial men have been always addicted to Venus: and as the Romans derived
their Original from her Son Aeneas and from the Trojans his Companions, So the
greatest Hero amongst the Romans, even Caesar, owned Venus for his Tutelar
Deity, invoking her in Fight, and making her the Symbol and Watchword of
Battle: It was to Venus he ascribed the Victory over Pompey in the Plains of
Pharsalia, where he built a Temple to her: in the Spanish War he Marched under
her Colors against Pompey the Son: his Devices had all of them allusion to
her, he bore her Figure upon his Armor, and all his Letters and Dispatches
were Signed with her Image. But whether he had this Honor for her as she was
the Goddess of Love, is not so certain; It Is more probable he did it for the
glory of the Julian Family, which descended from Julius Ascanius her Grandson,
so that his Medals might have born the Inscription of Veneri Genetrici, but he
chose that rather of Veneri Victrici, or Venus the Victorious: for so she was
more properly over him, being subdued by the Beauty and Eloquence of Cleopatra,
but not so entirely as was Marcus Antonius, who preferred the Beauty and
Dalliance of that Mignonne before Honor and Empire. Augustus also his
Competitor who Governed the World in great Felicity, and the longest of any
Emperor, was himself a slave to the Passions of Livia; so that as Women for
the most part (Hippia-like) affect Swordmen; so these make it some part of
their Glory to extend their Conquest over the other Sex, tho it is seldom that
they are infatuated with Love in such a measure, as those are who live an idle
and Voluptuous Life. The former make it but a Divertisement, and for the
Recreation of their Spirits; the latter an Employment: The one tastes of it only
as Sauce; the other feeds upon it as a standing Dish.

Love is much indebted to Romances and Poets for its Beauty, and yet the latter
represent it many times in a very undecent Figure: They make Cupid blind,
thereby showing the Errors and Dangers they are exposed to who follow its
Guidance, and when they describe Hercules spinning at Omphale's Distaff, and
she laughing at him, they do not only tell us that it is able to enervate the
greatest Virtue, but that it makes the bravest Men ridiculous, and exposes them
to the Scorn and Derision of the weakest: For indeed what can be more
ridiculous than to see a Man, otherwise of Sense and Understanding, reduced to
the miserable Condition of seeking all his Felicity from a Mistress? How does
this Knight errant hug himself in the apprehensions of his imaginary Purchase?
How does he swell in his Feathers, and fancy himself to be the most
accomplished Cavalier breathing? He dreams of his fair Lady by Night, and meets
with her in his most watchful Thoughts; he haunts her Walks, and bribes those
who are about her, to be instrumental in his Pretensions: He thinks every Hour
a Year till he gets into her Lodging, where with invincible Patience he expects
her Sight, thinking she is very tedious in her coming, and yet dreads the
Onset, and fainting under Palpitations of Heart, he begins to wish himself off
again: At last he does approach her with much Humility and studied Complements,
which he utters not without some Trembling and Confusion: He waits upon her
Eyes, he lays hold of every Glance, and shapes himself to all her Motions and
Discourse: He caresses her with Amors and wanton Sonnets, with flattering
Poems, and with Stories of Intrigue and Gallantry. He swears she is divinely
Fair, that she is the most charming Creature Breathing, and will be ready to
fight another who is not of the same Belief. One while he assaults her with a
brisk Gayety, at another time by Feigning a Retreat he hopes to draw her after
him, and to take her by Surprise. But if these Arts fail, he attempts to melt
her into Compassion by Sighing, Languishing, or by writing passionate and dying
Letters. He fancies her to be all Angelical; a knot of Ribbond, a lock of Hair,
or any such like Excrement, is a thing of inestimable Value, and has a Virtue
more than Magnetic. In short, by these and a thousand other such Love Stories,
he hopes to win her Favor, and when he thinks he is upon the point of taking
Possession, all is blasted by one coy Look; and a Frown is able to calcine him
into Dust. Then with Tears, and with a vile and humble Submission he lies
prostrate at her Feet, and will dye unless she lend him a Smile, which is
sufficient to recall him to Life again, and then he acts over all his former
Follies. But all this is nothing to the Miseries which a passionate Lover
suffers in his Mind: One while he is intoxicated with Hope, by and by he is
cast down with Fear: This Hour he is in a burning Fit, and nothing but Fever;
anon all his Blood is congealed to Ice, and a Trembling seizes upon every
Nerve: His Voice fails him, his Countenance grows pale, and he suffers under
palpitation of Heart, and desertion of Spirit. One while he storms and rages at
his Disappointments, a little after he repents, and puts on Resolutions of
enduring all things with a Stoical Courage, swallowing all Affronts, digesting
all Delays, and flattering most when his Heart is ready to burst with inward
Anguish and Disdain. Thus he spends his Life betwixt Fancies of Fruition and
real Disappointments; he courts the imaginary Graces, and is torn in pieces by
real Furies; but above all, the Thoughts of a Rival fill him with a thousand
Torments; and here it is that the Conquest shows her greatest Art and Cruelty
in putting her Lover upon the Rack: He is tortured at the pleasure of his
Mistress, who takes delight to kill him and to revive him, tho it be but to
show her own Power and Omnipotence, till at length the poor Man grows sottish,
Melancholy, and Distracted, he Converses with Solitude and Shades; or if he
comes into Company, his Speech is broken and incoherent, talking ever and anon
of his dearly Beloved, at a most extravagant and fulsome rate; and by this
means renders himself not only Contemptible in the sight of his Mistress, but
of his Acquaintance also, and of all Mankind besides, to the great Reproach of
his Reputation, and to the utter Ruin of his Health and Fortune. And thus do
many Men betray themselves to perpetual Miseries, in Courting that Goddess,
which when obtained proves but a Cloud within the Arms, and such a one as is
many times made up of nothing but Storms and Thunder.

Jealousy is the Canker of Love, like a Canker it is bred by too much Fertility
of the Soil; it springs from an exuberant Affection, and creeping on by little
and little, it never ceases Fretting and gnawing upon the Body, till it withers
and dies. Every Man therefore who embarques after Love, ought well to examine
the Temper of his own Nature, especially if he be concerned with a celebrated
Beauty, for such a one will attract the Eyes and Caresses of all Men, nor is it
in the Power of a Woman to hear herself cajoled, and not return some reciproque
Smiles, and obliging Regards on him who pays her Honor. The Diamond, tho it be
the most Beautiful and the hardest of Jewels, will be dessolv'd, they say, by
the warm Blood of a Goat. A lascivious Speech or Touch may make the most
adamantine Nature relent and yield. Where Service and Respect are tendered, a
Woman may make a suitable return of Acknowledgment without blemish to her
Virtue: And yet in him who loves passionately, this is able to beget Suspicion,
which always views things at the worst Advantage: For as Courtship and an
insinuating Address cannot but incline Nature to be favorable, so the more
subtle and refined Gallant does attaque always in Masquerade, and under the
disguise of Urbanity and of a readiness to oblige. Strange was the Jealousy
which I have somewhere read in Guicciarden, of an Italian Gentleman who married
a very beautiful Woman, and such a one as he himself believed to be most Chaste.
One Night after he had embraced her with all tenderness of Love imaginable, he
told her that one thing troubled the repose and quiet of his Life; for tho he
had no reason to distrust her Virtue, that yet being so extremely Beautiful and
Eloquent as she was, he believed she would be solicited, and be persuaded by
another Love, in case he died before her; nor could he endure to think that
any other Person should ever enjoy so fair a Creature. To prevent all which, he
told her that he had provided an Expedient, and forthwith drawing out a Dagger
which lay concealed behind the Pillow, as he embraced her with one Arm, he
stabbed her with the other, and then stabbed himself upon her Body. The wretched
Husband died immediately, but the unfortunate Lady lived some hours to make a
report of this sad Tragedy, and then died also.

Hatred is a Passion of the Rational Soul, which how opposite soever it be to
the gentler Passion of Love, has its Rise from it: For he that loves a thing
with vehemence, does with as great vehemence hate whatsoever, is destructive of
the thing he loves. If therefore our Love be regular and well grounded, our
Hatred of what is contrary thereunto will be no less Commendable: But of all
sorts of Hatred, that is least allowable which terminates upon the Person,
especially when a Man is so fat transported as deliberately to contrive his
Ruin; and of this kind we meet with too frequent Examples amongst great
Persons and Ministers of State.

Calumny is nothing but a more disguised and Artificial Hatred: But of all
Calumnies that is the most venomous which seems to be accompanied with some
show of Kindness; it licks only that it may have the better advantage to bite.
Of this kind, is that of those who shall give a List of the several Virtues of
a Person, but in the Close they shall tell you of some ill Quality which
defaces all that was said before; and this in all likelihood will gain Belief
and Credit with the Hearer, forasmuch as the Relator seems to be very well
affected toward the Party of whom he speaks. Others there are who attribute
all the praise of a good Action to Fortune, or diminish from its Worth, either
by a silent Shrug, or by comparing it with that of some Person of greater
Excellency, in respect whereof 'twill appear very Diminutive and
Inconsiderable. There is a Detractor who seems much to lament the Failings and
Imperfections of him he intends to traduce: Have you heard, says he, what a
Disgrace is fallen to such a Man? I am heartily sorry for it, in troth, for I
had a great Kindness for him, and I will tell it you as being my particular
Friend, upon Condition you will keep it secret. Now the Knave by this means
does not only take away all suspicion of Hatred, and so makes the Report to
seem more True and Impartial; but by enjoining Secrecy, he begets a greater
Curiosity in the Person he speaks to, to inquire into it, and makes him more
uneasy till he has revealed it to others under the like Seal of Secrecy, and
thus at length it comes to be whispered every where, without any possibility of
ever tracing out the Original of the Rumor.

As Jealousy is the worst part of Love, so is Envy the worst part of Hatred.
Hatred has something generous in it, for as much as it dares avow it self to
the World, and bids Defiance to the party it is offended with: Whereas Envy is
Timorous, and consequently Treacherous: For Men envy those only whom they dare
not attaque openly, and such as are above them upon some account or other,
whether of Nature or Fortune: Hence we see that old Folks, deformed Persons,
Bastards, with such like Persons as are subject to the Defects of Nature, are
most prone to Envy: Also those to whom the World has been less favorable, are
inclinable to envy others who get above them. Likewise Women are more liable to
this black Passion than Men, especially when there is matter of Competition,
whether it be for Beauty or Bravery. Envy therefore is a tacit Indignation of
the Mind toward those whom we believe to enjoy more good Things than they do
deserve. Now the things which properly kindle this Passion, are not the Goods
of the Mind, for we do not say that such a one is unworthy to be Just, or
Temperate, and soforth, but they are the Goods of Nature, and of Fortune, as
Beauty, Strength, Honor, Riches, Preferments, and the like. We are apt to be
moved with great Indignation, and sometimes not unjustly too, when we see Men
rise to great Place without Industry or Merit, but merely by Flattery,
Corruption, or some such base Means; so that generally speaking, all sudden
Translations from a low to a high state of Life, whether by ways Honest or
Dishonest, do naturally move us to Envy, which does seldom or never disquiet
us when we look on those who have for some time enjoyed the Favors of Fortune;
Time and Possession seeming to give them a just Title: So that Envy in its own
Nature does imply Imbecility as well as Malignity; but the greatest Mischief
which it works, is commonly on the Party it self in whom it Reigns; for it
never ceases to Torment and Prey upon him, till like a Viper it at length gnaws
through the Bowels in which 'twas bred.

Emulation seems to have some Analogy with Envy, but it differs in reality from
it, for as much as Envy is an Indignation against another merely because he
possesses something which is good: But Emulation does not so much envy another
the Good he enjoys, but is rather angry with it self, because it cannot arrive
to the like: Upon which account it kindles in us many Virtuous Actions to
obtain the same; so that those who are subject to Emulation, are generally
young Men of great Hopes and Spirit, and such as are Endued with many noble
Qualities.

Desire and Aversion are Branches of Love and Hatred, and both of them imply
the Absence of their Object: Desire being nothing but an Inclination or
Tendency of the Will toward something which pleases in Prospect; as on the
contrary a Coercion is an Abhorrence or Dislike we have of a thing upon the
first Appearance: So that Flight or Aversion do suppose a Man to have never had
a feeling of what does dislike him, for otherwise it is Hatred: Whereas Desire
may be of something we have once Enjoyed and is now withdrawn, as well as of
something we never yet tasted of. As Joy does always presuppose the Presence of
its Object, either in Reality or Imagination; so Desire is a Motion or Passage
toward an Object which is not yet obtained, and yet nevertheless Desire is
frequently accompanied with Joy, from that Power of the Imagination which many
times does represent the thing as already obtained: Nay this Joy of Desire is
sometimes more Affecting than that of Fruition, not only from the small Relish
we have usually of things we are actually possessed of, but from the Force of
Imagination, which does show things greater to our Thoughts than they are in
Effect.

CHAP. XV. Of Hope and Fear, of Presumption and Despair.
HOpe and Fear are Passions of the Soul which have their Conversation only with
things to come; of which the former is an Apprehension of a future Good, with a
Probability of obtaining the same; the later an Apprehension of some future
Evil, with a probability of its falling on us; which Evil may be Twofold,
either of Sense and Pain, or of being denied something which is in our present
Possession, or what we may hereafter enjoy. So that both these Passions always
give motion to two other Passions, as their Instruments, viz. Desire and
Aversion, or that which the Schools call Flight.

If we consider the Persons who are subject to these Passions, we find that
Youth is very prone to Hope; those of this Age being Vigorous, and having
little or no Experience of Business, or of the Impediments which do cross it,
conceive they are able to Conquer any thing they undertake, and this many times
without ever adjusting the Means to the end, or ballancing the Difficulties
with the Possibility of effecting what they do design. Hope therefore in them
when it is in the Excess, and beyond all natural Causes for Encouragement,
becomes many times Presumption, tho we usually call such Persons desperate, but
improperly: for Desperation is a Quality diametrically opposite to Presumption;
being the desertion of a Design, accompanied with an utter Ruin and Despondency
of Spirit. Moreover Presumption acts Spontaneously, Desperation by Constraint.
The Romans in their Moneys described Hope under the form of a young Virgin,
whose Garment was long, thin, and loosely flying in the Wind, holding a green
Herb of three Leaves only in her right Hand, and standing on Tiptoe; all which
did amount to this Signification, that she did belong to Youth, that she was
Volatile or in Motion, and of a Nature which was ever Verdant, Springing, and
rising up on high.

Fear is the effect of Pusillanimity, and incident to old Men: For besides that
Rest which is natural to that Stage of Life, we find that such from the long
Experience they have had of the World, and of the Disappointments they have met
with, are very scrupulous in weighing all the Circumstances of Action, and
their Nature also being cold, sluggish, and unapt for Execution, they are
presently apprehensive of Difficulty and Danger, and by Consequence of Fear.
It Is true, the Deliberation and Experience of old Age, when it is joined with
the Courage of Youth, cannot choose but raise a well grounded Hope; and yet we
find Examples sometimes, where Boldness in the Undertaker has supplied Conduct
and Counsel. Such was the Undertaking of Charles the 8th. in his Invasion of
Italy: He was a Prince but of twenty three years of Age, and therefore of no
Experience; He was destitute of Money, for he was forced to borrow a hundred
thousand Livers of a Banker of Genoa, before he could march out of France;
after that being at Turin, he borrowed the Jewels of the Duchess of Savoy, and
at Casal, those of the Marchioness of Monferrat, both which he pawned for
Eighty thousand Crowns, all which was spent presently. He was destituted of
Men, having but eight Thousand in his Army, and lastly, he was destitute of
Counsel, following only the Persuasions of Stephen de Verse, who had been
sometimes his Valet de Chamber, and one Brissonet, as obscure a Fellow as the
former. In this ridiculous Posture did he March, having no other General in the
head of his Army, but his own impetuous and youthful Spirit. All the World
stood amazed at his bold Attempt, but they were much more amazed when they saw
him entering into Florence, Rome, and Naples, in a Triumphant manner, Routing
the Venetians also, with all the Confederate Strength of Italy, in the Battle
at Fornova, where three thousand Men lay dead upon the place, with five Princes
of the House of Gonzaga; all which was bought with the loss only of thirty or
forty French. The Conquest which Alexander made of Asia, was better projected;
for he was provided with well disciplined and Veterane Soldiers, with Money,
and all other Military Equipage, and yet the Means held no Proportion with the
Event. It Is true, such early and precocious Blossoms, never arrive to any great
Maturity and Growth, and are subject to infinite Hazards, for twenty miscarry
for one that succeeds: Nay we find that Necessity and Fear do many times
atchieve greater things than Hope. Such was the brave Action of Xenophon, who
tho he were not bred a Soldier, yet with a handful of Men, made his Retreat
good against all the Forces of Persia, the Difficulties of unknown Ways, and
the Miseries of a Winters March; and such was the Victory which King Henry the
Fifth of England had over the French at Argencourt, where all the Terms of
Peace being refused him, and all means of safety cut off, there remained
nothing but the certainty of Destruction to give Courage. Courage when it is
surrounded with inevitable danger, by a kind of Antiperistasis takes heat from
cold, and uniting its force turns to Lightning and Thunder.

Fear is said to be a betraying of the Succors which Reason offers. Upon this
account some are bad Sollicitors of Business: they dare not say or contradict
any thing, and if they be upon the necessity of making a Request, they do it
with so ill a Grace and sneakingly, that by demanding they teach men to deny.
Others, as Causin very well observes, are timid in Conversation, and feel a
Consternation upon the Approach and Presence of qualified Persons. Their
Discourse is without Connection, their Words are broken, their Voice is
trembling, their Color changing, and their Countenance shrunken and dejected.
This happens oftentimes to Young People, those especially who are of little
Experience, and timerously Educated, and yet in such it is for the most part no
more than bashfulness, and will wear off upon advance of years; though we may
observe sometimes that Men of Parts and Courage, when they happen into the
Company of others, who are of more Eminent Worth than themselves, feel a damp
upon their Spirits, and upon the sudden turn Cravens. This was that which the
Egyptian Augur endeavored to make Marcus Antonius believe, that though he was
daring and brave enough, yet his Genius became degenerate and impotent whilst
Ostavian looked upon him; and therefore he advised Antonius to quit Rome, and
all occasions of seeing him; though it is probable this fancy was laid hold of
by Cleopatra, that she might make her Paramour the more willing to continue
with her.

It has been observed that great Assemblies have been apt to raise a fear in
Men of greatest Abilities. Cicero who moved and turned the most August Audience
of the World, with the volubility of his Tongue, trembled always and was pale
when he began his Harangues. The great Importance of the business which did
depend upon his management, might probably cause his Fear. Demosthenes is said
to have had the like defects, and had scarce power to raise his Spirits.

Boldness of Speech must be confessed many times to be of great force in
Popular Assemblies, for the empty Vessel will make the greatest sound; we may
observe of many how they begin like Thunder, seeming as it were to swell with
Ostentation, and Triumph in the Pomp and Tours of their Orations, and yet in
reality their Notions are generally very trivial, being set off with Gest and
Twang; whosoever therefore is bashful and of a timid Address, and yet carries
the Cause, must be acknowledged to be a Person of singular Abilities; and such
a one was Pericles, who Labored always under much Confusion when he began to
speak in Public, fearing lest any Impropriety of Phrase might slip, or any
word be misplaced, and yet Pericles was one of the most absolute Orators Athens
ever produced. At this day the greatest Preachers beyond Sea, are in greatest
dread when they are to Preach before a Convent of Nuns; for such Religious
Women being generally Persons of an Ingenuous Education, and employing much of
their time in Reading, become mighty Critics of Language, and (according to
the humor of their Sex) stand more upon the Delicacies and Punctilio's of
Words, with Elegancy of Expression, than upon pertinent and solid Notions.

Fear as it is the most Slavish, so is it the most Commanding Passion of the
Soul. Hope, as I said before, does raise it self upon the prospect of Fruition
and Rewards, but Fear's encite us upon the apprehension of loss and pain: Now
the apprehensions of Pain being far more quick and lasting than those of Reward
(for Good is scarce perceivable in the very Fruition) it follows Naturally that
Men are far more apt to be biased by the former than by the later. It Is
painful to endure, 'twill deprive you of Liberty, and of all Worldly
Enjoyments, 'twill destroy your Health and Life, are Motives far more pathetick
and prevailing, than to say, it 'twill make you Rich, it is Reputable, 'twill
make your Name famous to Posterity. And upon this account I am persuaded, that
the Gallows makes more Men honest than all the Moral Lectures or Considerations
of Credit and Fortune whatsoever; where a good Action may Entitle a Man to
certain loss, some there are indeed but not many of that Metal, who will
Embrace the later, for the Reputation which attends the former.

Fear which is destitute of all Hope turns to Desperation; and here the
Necessity does many times put Men upon very extraordinary and hazardous
Attempts. It Is not safe therefore to force an Adversary to the Walls. There is
scarce an Animal so fearful but will turn again when all ways of flight are
stopped; and the bitings of dying Creatures we know are not without Venom.

CHAP. XVI. Of Joy and Sorrow.
AS Hope and Fear follow Desire and Aversion, so Joy and Sorrow follow Hope and
Fear; all the former Passions of which I have hitherto discoursed, seem to fix
in these two as the ultimate Scope and Consummation of all their Motions. Joy
therefore is nothing but a diffusion or dilatation of the Spirits upon the
fruition of what it did hope for and desire; as Sorrow is a Contraction or
Fixedness of the same Spirits, upon the arrival of something for which Nature
has a Fear and Aversion: This is very visible from the Circumstances of those
who are affected with these Passions.

And first for Joy, we see it is expressed by a cheerfulness and vivacity of
Countenance, by sudden and pleasing Vibrations of the Eyes, by a readiness in
a Tongue to deliver the Thoughts of the Heart, but strangled in the Utterance
by too great an Inundation of tenderness. In short, the Body is lightsome, the
Heart gay, and the whole Man seems to be nothing but Soul and Exultation. It Is
true, such vehement and sudden Alterations of Nature as these are not usual,
nor are they without danger sometimes. It Is known how Sophocles contending with
another of his own Profession in an Argument of Tragedy, was in great suspense
and fear of the Event; but at length the Victory being adjudg'd to him by the
Applause and Cries of the whole Theater, he died immediately with joy. Such was
the Fate of a Young Woman lately in France, who after many Difficulties at last
obtained her Parents consent of Marrying one she had a long time Loved; but
being to sign the Instrument of Contract, she had no sooner writ the first
Letter of her Name, but with Excess of Joy she immediately swounded, nor could
she ever be recalled to Life again. Effects of this kind are not rare, and of
which the Reason's this, Joy as I said before is nothing but a diffussion of
the Spirits, so strong and vehement indeed, that it seems to carry away the
Soul with it, and endeavors to break as it were the Prison of the Body. By
this means the Heart which is the Seat of the Vital Spirits, and the Center of
Life, is left abandoned and destitute of strength, so that the Spirits not
being able suddenly to recollect themselves, and to return to their former
Station, there follows presently a deficiency of Heart, which concludes
sometimes in a total Expiration. Great Joy is incapable of Moderation,
especially in Persons of weak Capacities, for People in these Circumstances
give themselves all the Liberty in the World: Their Joy many times overflows
with such fond Repetitons, and with such a perpetual Torrent of Babble and
Impertinence, as shows sufficiently that the Mind is in some Disorder and
besides it self.

To sudden and exuberant Joy there many times succeeds great Pensiveness, by
reason of great Expense and Perspiration of the Spirits which do accompany it;
like the Heart from whence it springs, as it has its Diastole or dilative
Faculty, so has it its Systole or Time for Contraction.

There is another sort of Joy which is more sedate, and consequently more
lasting, and such is that which results from a a reflection upon the courses of
a Virtuous life. This kind of Delight is more Natural to Religious and Persons
who are addicted to Contemplation, and generally to all those who confine their
Appetite within the narrow Limits of Retreat; not but that I believe Men of
Business are capable of them, such as were Seneca, Boethius, and some others:
Nay the benefit which the Public reaps from their Actions, cannot but augment
their Content; Nevertheless Morally speaking, as the great Temptations which
lie before their Eyes, whether of Corruption or of Ambition, will not suffer
them to use the Means; so where they are Men of Integrity, the great hurry and
distraction which attends their Life, will not suffer them to collect the
fruits of those delights I am now discoursing of: For as for Honor, Command,
Riches, and the like, they do not belong to the Blessings of the Mind, but of
Fortune, and are found more frequently to be the Rewards of those who trouble
the Government, than of others who really endeavor to serve it.

Sorrow or Dolor is an Affection which as to its Moral Nature, is nothing but
an act of the Mind, reflecting upon some Evil as already happened beyond
Remedy; and this may be either upon the account of some Good we are actually
deprived of, or of some Evil we actually suffer; But if we consider this
Passion as to its Natural Cause, the Notion we have of it is this: The
resentment of the Mind for any loss, especially when there is no Prospect of
Releif, begets Languor and Dejection; for the Vital Spirits or Blood retiring
to the Heart, by reason of too much Oppletion do suffocate and strangle that
Noble Organ, whilst the outward Parts being robbed of their Natural heat, become
weak and seeble. Nature many times to deliver it self from this Oppression
summons up all its strength, as appears from those violent Concussions the Body
suffers by Sighs and Tears, by beating of the Breast, wringing of the Hands,
with such like Symptoms as do demonstrate a great Agony and Perturbation. And
yet upon occasion of Extraordinary Grief, we find sometimes very little or no
external Commotion, for in such cases all the Faculties of Nature seem
stupefied and totally extinct. I have heard of one who took the loss of his
only Child which he loved most tenderly with great silence, who yet upon the
Report of a Servants death, for whom he had but a small or no Concern, burst
forth presently into Tears: he seeming in this particular to be like a Vessel
filled with Water to the Brim, which upon the least Infusion of any new load
immediately runs over. There is a difference betwixt Grief and Sadness; it is
Sadness when we have a Prospect of the Evil to come, but Grief when the Evil is
actually upon us.

As Joy is not without its Clouds of Sorrow, So Sorrow is not without its lucid
Intervals: at least any dawnings of Comfort affect the Person very much, who is
the Subject of Sadness. One who has for a long time pined under a dangerous
Distemper, is more affected with the smallest returns of Convalescence, than
another who does pass his Life in a Prosperous course of Health. As Spring
naturally follows Winter, so the smallest refreshments of the one, are made far
more sensible by the smartness and tediousness of the other. Upon which account
the wisest of Men have ever studied to set off their Delights by a voluntrary
search of something that was painful and laborious, and he seemed to be
something more than a Heathen or a Philosopher, who having spent a whole day
without any trouble or disaster, began to be sorrowful, and to expostulate the
Gods for his Misfortunes, as believing that so great a Felicity must inevitably
be allayed with some remarkable Disaster. Sorrow which is occasioned from the
sense we have of another Misfortunes, is called Pity or Compassion, which
always implys Love. This though it be a Commendable Quality, as being founded in
Humanity and good Nature, yet to be too much overcome by it argues Weakness:
For he who is touched with every Man's Calamity, will never want occasion to
afflict himself, and to make his Life miserable.

Persons who are placed in the Extremities of Fortune are said to be very unapt
to be Compassionate, and they are of two sorts. First, Those who live in the
height of Prosperity; for they think themselves exempted from the Calamities
which fall usually upon other Men, so that they can have no sense of that which
they never felt, nor which they believe they shall never feel; as being out of
all appearance of being reduced to the same Terms of Misery. The other sort of
Men who are destitute of Compassion, are those who are overwhelmed with
Calamities; they think their own hard Fate is sufficient for them to bewail;
nay they rather take Comfort to themselves, when they meet with others who are
Companions with them in the same distress. They then who are in the middle
Region of Fortune are most prone to this Passion, and they are either such who
have sometimes suffered the same Disasters they condole in others, or such as
fear at least to be in a possibility of falling into the same themselves. The
Motives which excite this Tenderness are usually two: either the Consideration
of some heavy and unusual Calamity which falls upon another, or a Consideration
of some unjust Punishment inflicted upon an Innocent Person: for as for those
who are Criminals or of an Infamous and lewd Life, we little regard their
sufferings.

CHAP. XVII. Of Anger and Mildness.
ANger like the other Passions, according to the several Objects and Degrees of
Provocation, may be either Good or Evil. First then we ought to have regard to
the Nature of the Provocation, which may be small or none in respect of the
Persons who give it: For if it be not accompanied with a Malicious Intention,
or if it be given by such as are destitute of Sense and Understanding, we ought
to make little account of it: hence it is that we are not much concerned at the
Distastful and Opprobrious Words of Old men, Madmen, Women, Children, Sick
People, and the like; because such Persons have either really a less share of
Reason than others, or else being under Distempers or Defects of Nature, their
Reason is in a great measure extinguished, so that they deserve our Pity rather
than our Indignation.

In the next place the Provocation may be very inconsiderable in respect of the
thing it self, and upon this account it is, that the greater part of Mankind
are really Fools or Madmen, such viz. who upon every little Triflle fly out
into Passion and Complaint. This Lady because her Woman by leaving the door
open let out the little Dog, frets and laments her Unhappiness, Crying out that
never any one was plagued with such Servants. That Gentleman because his Man
brings his Perrique when he calls for his Cravat, falls a Cursing and Swearing
at him, and perhaps Reforms him with a Kick. The misplacing a pair of Gloves,
or a Key or some such trifle, is sufficient to make many to bemoan their
Misfortune and the Tediousness of Life.

In the last place the Provocation may be considerable, and yet our Anger
become vicious by too vehement a Transport* This makes the most Beautiful
Features to appear Deformed, it makes the Veins to swell with Poison: It Is this
ferments the whole Mass of Blood into a Fever, and strains every Vein with
Vengeance. Morally speaking, a Man may and ought to resent a deliberate and
wounding Injury. He who patiently suffers one, 'twill not be long before he
rececive another: For malicious Men (and such make up the greater part of
Mankind) will still Assault where they find the least Resistance, and he who is
only Eminent for Passive Fortitude, will not only be esteemed a Coward which is
the greatest Obstacle to any glorious Action; but by being that Tame-fowl, from
which every one may pluck Feathers, he will at length be made Naked and
Miserable, and be Obnoxious to perpetual Torment of Life. To prevent which
Mischiefs, a Man ought sometimes to chastise an Injury, yet so as not to run
out of the Pale and Circles of Reason, by yielding up himself to the
Indiscretion of the Furies. In this Case an Enemy has a double Revenge upon
him, for besides the Injury he offers him, he cannot but take Pleasure to see
him foaming at the Mouth, to behold him Raging with Indignation, and as much as
possible to turn his own Executioner, so that the Stoics were much in the
right, that the Evil which a Man does create to himself by Anger, is much more
hurtful to him than the Injury which he receives from another. He therefore who
can command his Passion, does not only procure great ease to his own Merit and
Spirits, but gives a Wound also to his Adversary, who is then most afflicted
when he finds that he makes the least Impression: for he levells his Arrows
against an Impenetrable Rock, by which they are shivered to pieces, without
other damage save that the Splinters are many times repelled back upon his own
Face who shot them. Pyrrhus the famous Fencing-Master of old, when any
Scholars came to learn his Art, proposed this to them for their first Lesson,
viz. To Combat and subdue their own Anger, giving them this Reason: For Anger,
says he, looks only where to strike, but not where to defend. Every good
Swords-man will play always to a Guard, that so his Weapon may be ever in a
posture to save him, though he miss his blow. The truth of it is, an Angry Man
as he is the most incapable of all others to defend himself, so is he for the
most part very unable to offend another; for breathing nothing but present
revenge, he has no leisure to think of the most suitable means for it, or to
respite the Execution to a convenient Time. Moreover by discovering his
Intentions by Menaces, he gives his Adversary notice to provide himself.

As Anger formed into Choler is most disadvantageous to the Person in whom it
rages, so does it render him also more ugly and deformed in the sight of the
beholder than any other Passion whatsoever. His Eyes like those of a Serpent
are Red and Fiery: his Countenance either Pale, or Flaming, his Lips are
foaming, trembling and livid; his Voice shrill, his Words inarticulate, and his
Speech abrupt. He smites his Hands one against the other, and the Ground with
his Feet. In a word, all the Features and Airs of his Countenance are miserably
defaced, all the Motions of his Body are undecent, and all the Thoughts of his
Soul Brutish and Savage; so that as a Man can never fall into these Fits
without great Torment to himself and loss of Reputation, so let it be observed
also, that these Fits never go off from a Man, but they leave him miserably
drooping and dejected. This High-Tide has a Low-Ebb ever succeeding it: For the
Spirits having spent themselves in those vaporous and fuming Exhalations there
follows nothing but Lassitude and Cowardlike Disposition, in so much that the
nicking time to fall upon a Man is immediately when his Choler is over.

As old Age and Sickness do very much incline to Choler, so also does overmuch
Fasting: It may Mortify other Vices, but it feeds this: For we may observe how
that the same Man who at another Time would be all pleasant and good humored,
has a kind of Acrimony and Eargerness upon his Spirits, and is most impatient
under the sharp hazards of Thirst and Hunger. There is no coming near a hungry
Lion, which when full can hardly be provokt. Those therefore who have known
themselves liable to this Infirmity, and when they have been to enter upon any
disquieting business, have looked upon it always as the best expedient to
replenish themselves to satiety beforehand, that so their Spirits might have
something to feed and fasten on. This may serve as an Antidote and for
Prevention, but in Case a Man shall actually be exasperated, the best Remedy is
to suppress the inward Commotion as much as possible, or to give the Distemper
an easy Vent, and 'twill wear away by degrees. His Conceit was not unpleasant,
who being asked by another that was over subject to Anger, by what means it
might be Cured, sent a Bottle of Water with assurance, that by holding some of
it in his Mouth one quarter of an hour, it would have a good and infallible
effect. The Party tries it and finds it true, and being very solicitous to know
its Composition, his Doctor told him smilingly; that 'twas not from any Virtue
in the Water, which was only Common and Elementary, but from the Silence and
the Compression of the Mouth, which did accompany the taking: For by that
little cessation Anger was Precipitated, and Reason in a great measure restored.

It Is Remarkable what is Reported of Theodosius the Emperor, who upon an
Affront which he received by the Inhabitants of Antioch in pulling down the
Statue of the Empress Placilla, gave Order to his Officers to take a most
severe Revenge. Upon the point of Execution one Macedonius an old Hermit, who
Inhabited in the Mountains, and a Man very mean for Personage and half Naked,
but of great Sanctity, speaks to them after this manner: Go, pray, and tell the
Emperor who sent you; that as he is an Emperor, so also that he is a Man:
therefore let him not look altogether at the former, but let him cast his
thoughts a little toward the later and consider; that as he is a Man, he does
rule others who are partakers of the same Nature with himself; let him consider
also, that Man is formed after the Image of God, and that the Indignity offered
to the Image, does by reflection fall upon him that Made it; so that if he had
reason to be incensed for the Indignity offered to the Statue of his deceased
Wife, much greater reason will God have to be incensed at the Injury which
shall be done to his own Image; let him also Consider the vast difference that
is betwixt a living Image and one of Brass, as also that it was in their Power
to make a thousand Statues in the place of that one which was defaced, but that
it was not in the Power of the Emperor, nor of any Mortal man breathing to
make a Hair of the Head, much less to restore Life to any one who should dye by
his rash Decree: All which being Reported to the Emperor, his Anger was
appeased, and changing his Resolution he received all to Mercy.

The bravest Hero's of the World have been ever those who could subdue their
own Anger. Hannibal was a bold and brave General, but withal Bloody and Cruel,
whereas Scipio who overcame him would by no means hearken to the suggestions of
Revenge, which might have prompted him indeed to have turned his Arms
immediately against his Enemy, but by a vast Conduct he transferred the same
into Africa, and was so slow in all his Marches, that some stick not to
Reproach him with Sloth and Cowardice, and yet by this diversion he both
preserved his Country in forcing Hannibal to follow him, and in the end totally
Defeated the Carthaginians. Lucius, Sylla and Catiline, were men of undaunted
Souls, and made up of Fury; they valued not being hated, so they might be but
feared, nor cared they to sacrifice all Mankind to Revenge, and to bury the
World in Ruins, so it might help Ambition into the Throne, which though they
failed of, yet they obtained their Ends, I mean their own Destruction; whereas
Julius Caesar and Augustus no less Ambitious than the former, carried all
before them, for besides their Martial Prowess they were men of great Clemency,
and so obtained to the Empire of the World by that which they had over their
own Wills and Passions. They were always in a Condition to take Counsel, and to
choose the fittest means, Conquering more by their Courtesy than by their
Swords: For it was observed by Caesar, that he measured his Bounty ever by his
Victory, ex qua nihil sibi vindicavit nisi dispensandi potestatem.

The Injuries which Men generally resent most, are either such as concern,
First, their Persons; 2ly. Their Estates, or lastly their Reputation, any one
of which is sufficient to impress Nature with a vindicative Inclination,
especially when there is some Salt of Wit mixed with it, such as carries a show
of Contempt, than which nothing can be more piquant and stinging. And yet some
brave Men have had that Ascendent over themselves, as really not to be
concerned for such Affronts: which calls to my Remembrance the behavior of that
brave General, I mean the late famous Marshall of France, Monsieur de Turenne,
who passing along one of the Streets of Paris, his Coachman being something
careless drove so near upon a Gentleman, that he received some small prejudice
by the Dirt that was cast upon him by the Horses: This provoked him to give the
Coachman the Bastinade; whereupon Turenne looking out, the People all flockt
about him bare-headed, withal telling the Gentleman who it was that he had
affronted, and what Punishment he might expect; at which the Gentleman nothing
daunted, made his defense by laying the fault upon the Coachman. Such an
Affront and especially in France would have obliged a meaner Person than that
General, to have taken a severe Revenge, which yet he did not; but without
alteration either of Voice or Countenance, he suffered the Person who offered
him the Injury to depart, with a Caution only to be more circumspect for the
future.

And as touching private Persons it is good for them upon occasion of
Provocation to make it known to the World, that their Patience proceeds not
from Cowardice or Pusillanimity, but from real Virtue: For if there be any
thing of the former in it, 'twill draw on infinite Injuries. It Is better
therefore to own a Resentment betimes, than by receiving Continual Provocations
to give Encouragement for more without End or Measure; when a Man's Metal
therefore is once proved, it is Magnanimity not to suffer himself to be beaten
out of his Repose by Anger (especially if he be his Inferior who does provoke
him) nor indeed will there be such frequent Causes for it.

There are two Considerations by which a Man may in a very great Measure allay
the Extravagance of this Passion. The one is, by reflecting upon his own
Actions for the Time past, and upon the occasions which kindled this
Intemperance and Heat: For by this means he will certainly find that generally
they were but trivial; that he himself was very much in fault; he had too vain
an Opinion of himself, and too mean Thoughts of another: yet the Words and
Actions which he himself returned back were greater than the Provocation, and
all about nothing, or at the most but some small inconsiderable disgust, which
he might have qualified with very small address, or at least, that it could
never put him in such Disorder should the like occasion ever happen again. And
then let him be assured also, that whatsoever seems troublesome to him at the
present, will after the Expiration of a few days appear altogether as Foolish
and Irrational as any little past disgust; and thus by rating things present by
what is past; he will be able to discern what Measures to take, there being the
same Reason and Proportion in both. Another Consideration upon which a Man may
be drawn to moderate his Anger, is for him to view himself in the behavior of
other Men under the same Circumstances, and there he will easily see how
Extravagant most Men are under such Disorders, which his own Treacherous Fancy
will not suffer him to Consider in himself.

As for Revenge, it is not a Species of Anger, but the Execution of a Design
which Anger had premeditated and formed: If it be Prosecuted by the hand of a
Public Magistrate, it is not so much Revenge as Justice; if it be done by open
force with respect to the foregoing Injury, it is simple Vindication only,
which may be more or less Evil according to the several degrees of Provocation;
but if it be done openly with show of Pleasure and Content, it is Cruelty: and
if it be done secretly and under a disguise, it is Treachery.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Intellectual Operations.
FRom the Will and Passions proceed we to the other Capacity in which the
Blessings of the Mind principally consist, as being the Noblest Faculty of the
Soul, the Understanding. The Gifts and Properties which I have hitherto
Discoursed of, are in a great measure common to Beasts: They have Sense and
Memory many of them in very great Perfection; they are Capable of Love,
Jealousy, Anger, Revenge and Fear, etc. as well as Men, and are excited
hereunto, as most Men are, by a kind of Impetus from the Images, which several
Objects draw upon the Imagination. Nay there are many Instances to prove that
they have a Power of Election and Rejection; but for Intellectual Gifts they
are of a Sublimer Nature: For by these Men are in a great Measure qualified
with the Perfections of Incorporeal Substances. The Understanding has the vast
World for its Object; it searches into the Nature of every thing from the dark
Center of the Earth to the highest Heavens; it enquires into the Motion, Native
Form, Dimensions and Effects of those Glorious Luminaries: It stands upon the
Unequal of the World, and looks into that vast Abyss or Expanse of Imaginary
Space which surrounds whatsoever is finite, and is it self immensurable: it
follows Angels in their Motions till it arrives with them to that first Pure
and Eternal Original of all things, the ever Glorious and Immense Creator.

Now the Operations of the Understanding are either Solitary, and such as rest
barely in a Knowledge of the Nature of things; or else Directive, when like a
Sovereign it Commands the Inferior Faculties, and appoints them what to do.
It Is true, as the case now stands, the Inferior Faculties do for the most part
Rebel: they either follow their own Inclinations, or if they do impart them to
the Understanding, they do it only as to a Confident not as to a Counselor.
Whereas the Method which Nature does propound is this: When an Object excites
the Will, the Will presents it to the Understanding to consider of it, and
according as the Understanding makes the Judgment, so the Will proceeds to
Execution by the Ministry of such Passions as are conducing thereunto.

The Operations of the Understanding are infinitely more Sublime and Perfect
than those of the Will, not only for their Spirituality, and for the Greatness
and Variety of their Objects, but also for the Tranquillity which goes along
with them. The Will cannot act without great Perturbation and Conflict of
Passions; but the Acts of the Understanding are retired and without Noise,
though they be not without Difficulty, Considering the fallacious Informations
we have of things. They are reduced to these three general Heads. First,
Science. Secondly, Contemplation. Thirdly, Judgment. The first consists in a
particular Disquisition of the Nature of things. The Second in a more Confused
and Universal Survey of Nature, the last in guiding the Will and Passions in
the Affairs of Life.

CHAP. XIX. Of Science.
SCience is of two sorts. First, Philosophical which consists in a Theory of
the Nature of things Considered purely in themselves; for Example, of the
Heavens, of the Elements, of the Production of Meteors, of Winds, Earthquakes,
Plants and Minerals, and, in a word, of whatsoever else comes within the Region
of Nature. A Second Branch of Science is that which is called Logical, or
Ratiocination, being nothing but an Art of proving one thing from another by
such suitable Mediums as are apt to win upon the Mind and Reason of the Hearer.
And first for Philosophy plain and Obvious as the Principles of Nature seem or
ought to be; so it is, that all our Errors and Misapprehensions of things, are
reduced to this one Ground and Fundamental Error, viz. our Ignorance of their
first Causes: Witness that great Diversity and Extravagance of Opinions
touching the Original matter of all Sublunary Bodies. Thales the Milesian,
Pindar, and the Egyptian Priests would have it to be Water: Anaximenes affirmed
it to be Air: Parmenides and the Stoics are for Fire: Pythagoras resolved all
things into Numbers, Empedocles into the four Elements; Plato into God and
Matter, the Peripateticks into Matter and Form; and last of all Epicurus and
Democritus held that the four Elements, together with all the variety of mixed
Bodies, were derived from the Fortuitous Conflux of numberless Atoms, all which
being of diverse Figures, after a long and impetuous Fermentation, met at last
into one Mass or Globe of Matter.

From this Obscurity of the first Original of things, it happens that even the
plainest Informations of Sense, which are as it were the Foundations of all our
Knowledge, become very intricate and desputable upon a strict and subtle
research of Reason: what is more obvious to our Senses than Quantity, yet what is
more imperceptible to our Understanding than Extension, or the Composition of
continuance: for either it is divisible into infinite Parts, or into finite
only; if into infinite Parts then must it contain infinite Parts, but for the
finite Quantity of an Inch for Instance, to contain infinite Parts is
impossible. If we say it is divisible only into finite Parts; let us suppose
for Example the whole Number of Minute Parts or Atoms into which a Line of an
Inch may be divided, to amount to one thousand: Now let us enquire of the
first, second or third Parts, and so of the rest, whether they possess the same
Individual Space or no? and if any two of them do possess the same individual
Space, then can they make no Extension, and consequently the second and third,
as also the third and fourth Parts, and so the rest of them can make no
Extension, which destroys the Hypothesis. But if any two Parts as A. and B. for
instance, touching one another possess a larger Space than either of them
severally, then it is plain that some part of B. does not touch A. and
consequently B. and so the rest may be subdivided into other minute Parts
(contrary to the Hypothesis) viz. those by which they touch, and those by which
they do not touch, which Subdivision may be Multiplied in infinitum; since we
can never resolve the Composition into that definite Number of Parts,
concerning which the same Difficulty will not return as at the beginning: From
all which these Absurdities will seem to follow; first that an Inch is as long
as an Ell, or a Part as big as the Whole, since both are Eternally divisible
into infinite Parts. Secondly, That the Finger or Needle of a Watch which moves
the breadth of a Barley Corn, and a Ship which sails a League in the same space
of an hour, move both of them with equal Swiftness, since the breadth of a
Barley Corn is divisible into as may Parts as the length of a League, and there
being the same common Measure of an hour for both these Motions, they must be
equally swift; for things are said to be equally swift when they measure equal
Parts of Space in equal Parts of Time. Upon such like Subtelties as these it
was, that a Philosopher undertook to prove there was no Motion, Arguing thus;
Whatsoever moves, moves either in the place in which it is, or in the place in
which it is not: not the the later, for Motion is in the thing moved, which
cannot at the same Time be in the place in which it is not, without a
Contradiction; nor yet the former, for Motion is a Transition from one place to
another, which cannot be whilst the Body remains still in the same inidvidual
Circumscription of Space; but the Sophister having a Bone put out of Joint, was
made sensible of his Fallacy as well as of his Pain, when the Surgeon told him,
the Bone was not out of its place, for either 'twas put out of the place in
which it was, or out of the place in which it was not; not the former, for
nothing can be out of the place in which it is; nor yet the later, no more than
a Man can be said to be put out of Rome where he never was.

Again, what is more Universally diffusive and obvious than Light, yet what is
more difficult to be understood, viz. whether it be something or nothing? It
cannot be an Accident according to the Notion of Aristotle's Philosophy: For
either the same Numerical Light which was in the Sun, is derived to us by way
of migration which this Philosophy explodes, or else there are so many new
Generations, as there are Points of Space in that vast Tract of Ether, which
lies betwixt the Sun and us, both which ways of Propagation are utterly
inconsistent with that Swiftness of Motion by which the Light is conveyed to
us, some hundred thousand Miles in an Instant. Besides, the Sun Beams being
either refracted or reflected from a Glass do generate Fire, and therefore must
challenge the Nature of a Substance, for no Accident can acquire the Nature and
Property of a Substance by Condensation. But if we say that Light is a
Substance, the same Difficulty will still return concerning the imperceptible
Time, in which it is propagated so many thousand Miles: We shall be at a loss
also to understand how the Sun by such a continual Communication of its
Substance over so vast a Sphere should not be diminished; also, why upon the
Suns Setting the same Substance does not continue visible; also being Material
how it can possess the place of other Substance without Penetration, with
infinite other Impossibilities which follow what way soever Reason turns it
self. The same Difficulties also occur in our Enquiry into the Nature of
Colors, of Visionary Images, and the like.

In the last place for Sensation, we generally describe it to be the Impression
which an Object makes of its Image or Species upon the Nerves where by the
Administration of the Animal Spirits, it is conveyed to the Brain or Common
Storehouse of the Senses. This at first sight seems plausible enough to
describe the manner by which these Operations are made; and yet upon a closer
pursuance of Reason, 'twill appear to be nothing but Juggling and Jingle; For
if we enquire how the Impression of Touch, for instance, is made upon the
Nerves we are at a puzle: As for the Modi Entium and such like Terms of Art,
they are but Words of Conjuration, which serve only to make the thing more
Mysterious and Obscure. Our Sense tells us, whether the thing we touch be hard
or soft, hot or cold, moist or dry: Now if Sensation be nothing but an
Impression upon the Animal Spirits, I would gladly have a Description of these
different Impressions of hard and soft, etc. wherein they do consist; and
whether the Spirits thus affected fly immediately to the Brain, or whether they
Consign over their Impressions to other Spirits, or these to others, as it were
conveighing the word from hand to hand till they arrive at length to the last
Sentinel of Sense. From all which it is Evident, that the further we dive into
Nature, the more we are in the Labyrinth. Now if things with which we are so
well acquainted, such as Extension, Motion, Color, Light, Heat, and all the
Objects of Sense, all which are looked upon as the first Principles of Nature,
and are to be judged consequently so obvious to our Knowledge, as to be
understood upon the very Proposal of them, as it is in the Principles of
Geometry; I say, if these things be so obscure and inextricable, no wonder if
the Observations which we draw from them be many times fallacious, since the
Premises naturally are more clear and certain than the Conclusions which are
derived from them, and yet how many rare Discoveries in Physic, in the
Matkematicks, in Experimental Philosophy, in Husbandry, and in the whole
Latitude of Arts and Sciences are deduced from these Beginnings, which shows
the Excellency of humane Reason, that with admirable Art and Industry, is able
to Erect such great Fabrics upon such uncertain Principles.

But besides all this, there is another Branch of Science in which the Sagacity
of humane Reason is highly engaged, viz. Ratiocination. Its Method does
commence from some known Maxim to which all Men do assent, and from thence by
a Rational Progress of Connatural Mediums, we proceed to further Inferences,
till at length we arrive to the Mark proposed: I shall give an Example in
Divinity; would I prove Man to be a free Agent, I would Argue thus; God is
Just, therefore he is Just in the Distribution of his Rewards and Punishments,
which cannot be true, unless we have a Power to obtain the Rewards and avoid
the Punishments, which also cannot be unless we have a free Power to Act or not
to Act. This way of Arguing is demonstrative and direct. Now the same thing may
be proved in another Form by the way of Resolution, thus: If the Will be not
free, then is it vain to Attempt to do Good or abstain from Evil: If this be
granted, the Rewards for the Good to which we are necessitated are undue, as
the Punishments inflicted for the Offenses we are obliged to commit are also
unjust; And Lastly, if this be granted, then God who Rewards the one and
Punishes the other must be also unjust; but God is Just, therefore all these
Consequences are false; therefore the Will is free.

Logic or the Art of Ratiocination has two Parts: The first is called
Invention, where the Understanding hunts after such Topics or Mediums as are
suitable to prove the Point. The other part of Logic Consists in such a
Management of the Mediums as is likely to gain Assent, and this is done by
reducing the Matter to some certain Forms of Argument, which we call
Syllogisms, by which the Understanding is so drawn by the Links of Reason, that
it cannot possibly start away, nor be liable to Error. There is also another
Property of Ratiocination, which is to Consider the Condition and Capacity of
the Person to whom it makes Application, since the same Topics will not win
Belief upon all alike: but this Consideration more properly belongs to
Rhetoric, whose Office it is to persuade, and which works rather upon the Wills
and Passions of Men though not without some Mastery upon their Understanding;
hence it is that these two Sciences are near Allied, the one furnishing Matter,
the other Ornament for Reason, both which are high Points of Knowledge, and
require Men of mature Years to make Profession of them; so that to begin with
these Arts in the Instruction of Youth is very Preposterous; for as it has been
observed by Learned Men, there being no Ripeness of Understanding in that green
Age, all the Precepts of Art will degenerate only into puerile and crude Forms
of Sophistry and Cavil.

It seldom happens where three or four are in Company, but that they have
different Sentiments of the same thing, when yet the Object is indifferently
represented to all. All indeed will pretend to the same Light of Reason, and
all of them make the same Application of one to the other, so that the same
Rule being applied to the same thing, there ought to be the same account of the
Measure, but it falls out otherwise, and chiefly for these four Reasons: The
first is Emulation. There are few Persons but take a Pride to display their
Feathers, nor can the heat of Conversation be long supported but by banding the
Point from one to another. A second Reason is, the Inequality of Men's
Intellects, which differ according to their several Educations, Temperaments
and Ages. Now Truth being nothing but a Conformity of a thing to the
Understanding, the Inequality of this Rule must render the Lines which are
drawn by it many times very unlike and unequal also. A third Reason is,
Prejudice, which is either founded in Affection or Hatred, or in an overvalue
of what we are related to, whether they be our Friends, or our Native Country,
but above all, the Prejudice we have from Custom and Education seems
invincible. A fourth Reason is, Interest, which is of wonderful Influence to
biass Men in Matters of mere Belief, witness the several Engagements they lie
under from the several Opinions of Religion.

The Art and Mastership of Reason consists Principally in these two Points.
First, A quick Notion and Apprehension of a thing. Secondly, A Faculty to make
the same Notion inteligible to others. As for that desultory Wit which leaps
from one thing to another, it is not of so great use; it seems to render a Man
accomplished, and being Natural to those of Younger years, is taking in Company
if it be not managed out of Time, and with Affectation. Some Men are of so
happy Parts, that upon any Emergency their Invention will supply them with
Matter to enlarge upon, so that they cannot hold, but like a Torrent they let
fly to give room to new succeeding Notions; and in this kind we find many
Eminent Persons amongst those of the long Robe, as Preachers, Orators, and
Lawyers, who tho they sometimes deliver themselves in set Harangues, yet those
of them are rather Excellent in their way, who can make an Address to any
Person or Auditory as occasion does require; which Extemporary Performances are
very Charming, especially when delivered by a Person of good Presence and of a
twanging Tongue. Nor can a Man make so solid a Judgment of these Performances
being obliged to let go what is before him, that he may receive new Informations
from the Speaker, whose voluble Tongue flows upon him in fresh utterance, of
Sense without pause or respite. Nevertheless such Discourses when they come to
be received at leisure by the Eye, are found to be thin, Superficial and
without Sinews and Connection, whereas others who digest their Conceptions by
long and continual Meditations, are infinitely more solid and accurate. Phidias
was some years in making of a single Statue, but then he wrought for Eternity.

CHAP. XX. Of Contemplation.
ANother Grand Operation of the Soul is Contemplation, which though it be a
Pleasure which is to be found only in Solitude, yet is it not a solitary
Pleasure, being accompanied with two other, viz. Health and Tranquillity. They
are the two Handmaids of this Mistress, not only for their perpetual
Attendance on her, but by reason also of their Virgin Purity and Innocence. All
other Delights are adulterate, being for the most part acquired with Expense
and Hazards, and such as weaken Nature, and nauseate in the very Fruition;
whereas these render the Constitution more Vigorous, and never disaffect the
Appetite by any mixture of Bitterness, or by being too Lushious: they are
adequate to all the Dimensions of Man, Health being the greatest Felicity of
the Body, and Tranquillity the greatest Blessing of the Mind. He who feels
himself in an even Temper and enjoys an equal distribution of his Native Heat
without pain and languishing; he whose Passions are all appeased, or, what is
better, in Subjection: He who is remote from the noise of Business, or from
what is more clamorous, the Terrors of an Evil Conscience. He who is at peace
with all the world and with himself too; He, I say, is the only Man, who is
capable to taste the Pleasures of a Contemplative or rather of an Angelick Life.
When the Sea is in Agitation, and when Clouds and Vapors hover over it, the
Vices we have are but short, undelightful and obscure; but when all is clear
and serene, then is it that the same Sea looks like the Vast Plain of Crystal,
there is a luster in its Surface, and the distant Clouds and Promontories which
we see add a Beauty to the Prospect. Contemplation then is an Art of a becalmed
Mind, beholding several Objects at once with delight and wonder. Here we see
the admirable Order and Economy of Nature in all its Productions and Periods,
in all its Seasons and Revolutions: By this we Consider the Celestial Bodies,
how they are almost infinite in Beauty, Number and Greatness, how they are
wonderful in their Influence, and how they are most Rapid, Regular and
perpetual in their Motion. How we may Contemplate the great Variety of
Creatures, their several Virtues and Properties, and their mutual Subserviency
to one another. We may observe one great Concordance and Harmony which runs
through all the Parts of the Universe, and how things inanimate and senseless
are most Regular in all their Tendencies, whilst man the Masterpiece of the
Creation, is for the most part Brutish in his Desires, Extravagant in his
Actions, and many times most miserable in his End.

By the help of this Prospect we may observe the various Methods of Providence
in Governing the World, in forming Good out of Evil, and in making
Circumstances of little Moment to be able to give Birth and Progress to the
greatest Actions; we may observe how wicked men for the most part flourish, and
how the good are commonly despised and miserable, from which inequalities of
Rewards and Punishments in this Life, we are incited, to take a Prospect of
another; it being rational to Conclude, That the Just and Supreme Governor of
all Things, who has Circumscribed his meanest Creatures with such Laws of
Nature as may not be Transgressed, will not be negligent to rectify Disorders
of greater Moment, and since he does not do it in this life, it remains that
there is another State where Prosperous Impiety shall be Chastised, and a
Persecuted Innocence be Crowned. By this Scale of Visibles, Contemplation leads
us to some thing that is Invisible, viz. to that Supreme Power which gave the
first Being to every Creature, and which is as it were the first Spring which
sets the Wheels in Motion: for since no Creature has a Being from it self, but
from something else, we must either make an Infinite progress in assigning
Efficient Causes, which is impossible, or else ascending by all the Links and
Gradations of the Creation, resolve our Enquiry into some one First Cause,
which is in it self without Beginning, and consequently must be Infinite, which
can be no other than God.

Now from the Order, Beauty and Perfection, which we observe in the whole Frame
of Creatures, the Contemplative Person has some Dawnings of the Transcendent
and Superlative Beauty which is Natural to the Creator. The truth of it is, our
humane Weakness, and the dependence we have on Sense, can give us but a faint
apprehension of things Immaterial and Invisible: But could we once break
through those Clouds which surround the Soul in this State of Imprisonment, I
doubt not but that we should find the Luster of the Divinity to exceed the
Brightness of the Sun, by infinite more Degrees than the same Sun Transcends
the pale light and Glimmerings of a Glowworm. Could a Man who was born blind be
restored to Sight, with what wonder and delight would he behold that variety of
Objects with which Nature is adorned, but when he should consider that all the
Beauties which lie before his Eyes, are conveyed to him by the light of the
Sun, and that all the Productions and Orient Colors of Nature, receive their
Original from its Beams, with what admiration and ravishment, would he
endeavor to fix his sight upon this glorious Luminary of the day? Such
doubtless will be the surprise of the Soul in relation to the Divine Beauties
of its Maker, when it shall be freed from those gross Organs of the Body by
which it is now confined. One while 'twill melt with langour and aspiration, by
and by 'twill spring forth into Ecstasy, and as it were lanch it self toward
this Object of Immense Perfection. 'Twill presently forget all these
flowery-fading Pleasures it met with in the Body, 'twill plunge it self into
the Abyss, where Fruition will not exclude Appetite, because the Faculty will
still be enlarged to re-receive greater Measures of untasted Joys, and so by an
infinite Progress and Succession of new Beatitudes, 'twill ever advance it self
into Perfection, till like a drop of Wine cast into the Ocean, it seems to be
made Immense by its Diffusion, and to be rendered Consubstantial with the very
Divinity. It Is with good reason that the Schoolmen determine the Beatitude of a
separate Soul to consist in the new Measures of Knowledge 'twill meet with by
looking upon God, who is as it were the Center of Repose and Rest in which all
the Rays of Objects meet, or rather that Mirror in which all the Images of
things whether possible or Created, are represented at once without Confusion:
For since the noblest Faculty of the Soul, is the Intellect, the Felicity of
the Soul must be measured by something which bears a Proportion to this Noblest
of Faculties, which can be nothing but Knowledge. Now if it be true, that the
Soul in seeing God as in a Mirror, sees all the Images of things both past and
future as present to the Divine Mind, what an Infinite variety of Objects must
there be to entertain an Illuminated Spirit, all which can never be represented
to us under less than an infinite Duration? Such will be the Entertainment of a
Beatified Soul after Death, and of which we have a foretaste in this life by
Contemplation, the effects whereof have been sometimes so dazzling, that many
Holy men have Prayed to God to moderate such Favors, the weakness of Nature
not being able to sustain the luster of such Illumination. But these are to be
looked upon as the extraordinary Privileges of an Elevated Mind, and such to
which Men cannot easily arrive by their Natural Abilities and Strength.

CHAP. XXI. Of Judgment.
THE last grand Operation of the Soul is Judgment. One who has a Speculation of
Things, and of the Methods for effecting of them, may yet want Courage and
Address to Execute. No Man therefore can be said to be judicious, who knows not
the Art of Management, nor can a Man know this but by actual Experience and a
just Application of the several Wheels of Business to one another. Judgment
therefore in the Notion I here propose, is nothing but a rational estimation of
some End for the attaining whereof we make use of suitable Means, Glorious
Actions being ever the productions of Deliberation and Thought. Now Judgment
differs from Ratiocination: For first, it considers its Object as invested with
the Notion of being good and eligible, and consists in some Moral Action,
whereas Ratiocination rests only in the Verity of what is proposed without any
relation to Good or Evil: Besides, Ratiocination is a solitary Act of the
Understanding only, whereas Judgment is an Act of the Understanding
deliberating upon what is proposed to the Will, and directing it in its choice:
This therefore must be allowed to be the greatest and Noblest Act of the Soul,
even greater than Contemplation, which though it be Conversant about a higher
Subject, yet is it but general and confused. It does not weigh things with that
exactness and attention, and is beneficial only to the Person who Contemplates;
whereas this weighs things against things, and by a minute Consideration of all
their Circumstances, makes a Calculation of their Value: It summons up all the
Faculties of the Soul, and sets them upon Duty, and like a Sovereign it does
Encourage and Control them in their Motions, and in conclusion it is useful to
the Public by being the Standard of Justice, and the very Basis upon which all
Laws are founded.

The Judgment which we make of things Good and Evil is either such as relates
to the private use and benefit of him who Judges, or such as relates to the
good and welfare of the Public. In relation to a Man's particular Concerns, I
give it the Name of Prudence; in relation to the Common good of others, I call
it Government. Now such is the State and Condition of Man in this life, that we
cannot but consider him as surrounded with an Infinite variety of Objects,
clothed in the Colors of Good and Evil, all which the Will either embraces or
avoids according to the several bents and propensions of the Passions. Some Men
there are indeed (if I may call them Men) who let fly at every thing that
occurs to Fancy. Not considering the fatal Consequences to which their Brutish
and giddy Appetite does expose them. The enjoyment of a momentary Lust may
gratify a present sally of Nature, when the Miseries depending on it are many
times perpetual. Others deny themseves in present Enjoyments in order to a
future good, which Method though it be prudent and rational, yet if the thing
proposed be dishonest and unlawful, the Judgment deviates in the choice of its
end, how Cautious and Prudent soever it may be in projecting at the Means. Thus
he who rises up early and sits up late, who Travels from place to place, and
eats the Bread of Carefulness, that he may obtain his Neighbors Lands by
Circumvention and Fraud, or that he may prosecute Revenge upon his Enemy, tho
he manage his business with never so much Prudence and Circumspection, is
really a Fool as well a Knave, since the Pleasure or Profit proposed will never
make amends for the trouble he undergoes to arrive to it, much less for the
Penance he must endure after the expiration of his Enjoyment. He then is really
Prudent who measuring his End by the Rules of Honor and Honesty, and making a
just computation of the force of his own Abilities, as also of the
discouragements he shall meet with, notwithstanding sets forward upon his
Journey, and maugre all the Pleasures which may retard him, and the pains he
actually endures, does pursue his Course through all the Windings and
Intricacies of Fortune, with a steady Courage, till at length he arrive to that
which first gave life to the Undertaking. Now the more remote such an Object is
from our view, and the more difficulties there are to struggle with, the more
Generous and Heroic is the Enterprise. We drink the bitter Potion with a Gust
upon the belief we have that it will procure us Health. And the Soldier, the
Mariner, and generally all sorts of Men, each of them endures hardships in his
several Course of life, nay they make such hardships to be the Subjects of
their choice upon the prospect they have of a durable Enjoyment. Now if Health,
Honors and Profit can inspire us with Noble Resolutions, Virtue certainly
ought to have as great an Influence upon our Wills, whether we consider the
Pleasure which accompanies its Exercise, or the Reward which follows the
performance of it.

There is another sort of Judgment which the Mind of Man makes of things in
relation to the general good of others. This does not consist barely in a
knowledge of what is beneficial for Mankind, but it implies a Practice and
Execution proportinable to that knowledge which I call Government. This is of
two sorts, either Civil which consists in the Institution and Preservation of a
Kingdom by wholesome Laws; or else Military which consists in the defense of a
Kingdom by strength and force; for as for those who Fight for the Enlargement
of Dominion, for Empire and Glory, as did Pompey, Caesar, Alexander and others,
how brave soever they may seem to be, they are but more illustrious Robbers,
compared to them who engage to defend their Country against a forcible and
foreign Invasion. I shall therefore make a more particular description of the
Virtues of such a one, I mean a General of an Army, whose charge doubless is
the most weighty and Heroic of which humane Nature is capable, being such as
does require a constant travel of Body and Mind, a vigorous Intention of every
Nerve and Faculty of the Soul, and a perpetual Conversation with danger. What a
vast Prospect ought such a one to have of the Expense and Issue of the War,
what diligence ought he to show in making his Levies, and what Providence in
his Disbursements? At the same time he thinks how he may conveigh his
Provisions from remoter Parts, and how he may intercept, or at least hinder the
Recruit of his Enemies; and in order hereunto he thinks with himself what
Allies are to be Embraced, what Posts to be secured, and what Instruments are
fitted for every Attempt. He Considers what Advantages or Disadvantages may
arise from the Wind or Sun, from Hills, Woods or Rivers* A small despicable
Eminence or Declivity of Ground, is sometimes the safety or the ruin of an
Army. He is swift but regular in his Marches, and deliberates how to Entrench
himself sometimes in one Form, and sometimes in another, according as the
Circumstances of the Place or the Approach of the Enemy do require; but above
all before he begin to Fight, he ought to conquer, I mean himself, by not
suffering his Thoughts to be discovered by any Transports of Passion, or
Alteration of Countenance, taking heed not to lose the Affection of his Army by
showing too much Rigor, nor yet their Obedience by too much Easiness and
Clemency. He ought to use all Address and Artifice to discover the Counsels of
the Enemy, and to conceal his own; his Resolutions must be steady and quick,
but withal they must be mature: He must observe every Critical Opportunity of
Action, he must use a thousand Stratagems, and all this must be attended with
perpetual Watchings, Marches, and Fatigues of Hunger and Thirst, of Cold and
Heat; besides the Miseries of Sickness, Mutinies, Robberies, with infinite
Disorders which follow a Campaign. Now for a Man to sustain the whole Weight
and Necessities of an Army upon his own Shoulders, to strugle with all these
Difficulties, and at one and the same time to have his Judgment exercised on
several Things of greatest Moment, and such as seem destructive of one another,
I say all this requires a Soul as well as a Body of vast Abilities: So that the
danger of Death, and an actual Engagement in Fight, is really the least part of
this Employ. And yet what Art is requisite in drawing up an Army to Battle,
conformable to the Advantages of the Place, and the Posture of the Enemy; at
the same time he both deliberates and executes, he rallies and divides: He
gives Orders in the midst of Noise and Confusion, and many times repells the
whole Choice of the Enemies Forces, and the Flight of his own; by his single
Conduct and Valor. In fine, he defies Death it self amidst all it pompous
Terrors of Thunder, Smoke, Fire and Blood, amidst Cries and Groans, amidst
Noise and Confusion. Now he that does all this and more than this, ought he not
to have a Mind of immense Comprehension, ought he not to have a long foresight
of all these Circumstances, together with an Elevated, I may say almost, with
an Omnipotent Sagacity, by which to take his Measures, amidst such a
Complication of Difficulties, and a suitable Courage to Execute? so that if
there be any Theater in Nature, on which Judgment joined with Practice, or
Reason with Experience, can display themselves, it is here. Such a one was
Scipio the Great, who when his Country was at the last Gasp, recovered it to
Life again, by defeating four great Generals with their whole Armies, of which
one of them had the most Victorious Army, and was himself one of the bravest
Generals, the World ever knew, and this in four ranged Battles successively:
and not by punick Stratagem, or the Hazards of Fortune, but by open Prowess and
Conduct, which made Hannibal confess that he was overcome, not only in Battle,
but in the Name, and in the very Military Art and Science. Now if Scipio
deserved the name of Great for his Wisdom and Heroic Actions, he deserved that
Compellation no less for the benefit derived on Mankind by them: if he who
saves a single Person from Death, ought to be remembered by him who receives the
Benefit, with eternal Gratitude and Honor, what Altars, what Pyramids must he
deserve, who saves Millions of People from Ravage, and turns their Captivity
into Triumph?

There are yet others who in their little Spheres are beneficial also to the
Public, by managing their Actions according to the Measures and Directions of
Judgment, as Physicians, whose Practice depends upon a Theory of the Body's
Fabric, as also of the Nature of Medicines, together with a just and rational
Application of one to the other: But the little Fees of toties quoties by which
these Benefits are measured, has something in it which looks mean and sordid.
The same also may be said of Lawyers, with this further Abatement only, That by
virtue of their Profession, they are obliged to defend the Cause of their
Clients, though never so Wrong, with all the seeming Arguments of Equity and
Reason; by which means Oppression many times triumphs, whilst Innocence is
condemned. As for Orators, it is their Business to Commend and to Dispraise,
which naturaly runs them into Flattery and Invective; however, in this, as well
as in the other Functions of the Bar, it is certain that the Professors of them
endeavor to insinuate their Usefulness to the Public, by having recourse to
all the Topics of Reason, endeavoring also to influence the Lives of men, by
proposing Pleasure, Profit, and Honesty, with such like Motives as sway and
govern the Passions, which cannot be done, but by a ready and thorough
Conception of all things tending thereunto, together with a seasonable and
accurate Accommodation of them to all the Circumstances that lie before their
Eyes.

There is this difference between Art and Judgment: The former imployes it
self about some Manual Subject only, and is acquired by long Practice and
Imitation, and requires Labor of Body. A Watch, a Picture, a House, with such
like Mechanic Works as are derived from the Mathematics, may be made exactly,
and yet the Workman may understand but little of the Reason of Proportions, in
that way as they are taught by Mathematicians. But Judgment has for its
Object, something Great, as the Ultimate End of Man, Moral Actions, and the
Universal Benefit of Humane Nature: nor does it conform it self to this or that
Method, but accommodates the Conceptions, drawn upon the Mind to all the
Occurrences of Persons, Place, and Time, and with great Conduct and Patience
attempts to bring its Imaginations to a real Existence and Perfection. As for
those who rest only in Theorems, and in the Ideas of things, their Operation
may be called Design or Projection, but not Judgment: since it offers to
effect nothing, and since these Projections many times when they come to be put
in Practice, are found very Defective and Dissonant to the Rules of Reason.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Goods of Fortune.
FRom the Internal Perfections and Indowments of the Mind, pass we on to
discourse of the External Gifts and Favors of Fortune, which, tho they are
infinitely inferior to the former, as to real Worth and Dignity, nevertheless
in the Opinion of Men they have the Precedence, and are courted at a higher
rate. For such is the prejudice of Custom, and so great are the Defects of our
Understanding, that in all our Definitions, or the Judgment we make of things,
we take our Estimate from the Superficies or Color, rather than from what is
Solid: For although Merit and Natural Indowments are able to create themselves a
good Opinion in those who do converse with them, yet they will hardly gain
Respect unless they be well attended. Rich Furniture and Habits, fine Liveries,
and a numerous Train, tho they have little Affinity with the Virtues and
Qualities of the Persons they do belong to, do nevertheless more affect the Eye
of the Beholder, and do procure greater Veneration, than all his Personal
Endowments, tho never so great: Such then are the Goods of Fortune, compared
with the othet Gifts of Nature, of which we have hitherto discoursed.

Fortune in the Table of Cebes is represented as a Beautiful Woman, standing
upon a Globe, and of a Caressing Countenance, but withal Deaf and Blind: about
her stand Throngs of Suitors, upon whose Heads she showers down her Gifts
promiscuously, viz. Scepters and Swords, Diadems and Halters, Glory and Infamy,
Riches and Poverty, etc. Those on whom the good Gifts fall, give her the
Compellation of Good Fortune, but the others of Bad. She is Blind and Deaf, to
show her Inability to Discern, and she stands upon the slippery point of a
Globe, to show she is Unconstant: the Gifts therefore of Fortune are such,
which as for the most part they are not within the reach of Humane Virtue to
obtain; so neither is it in the Compass of Humane Power to preserve them, being
generally such as these, viz. Birth, Riches, Great Places and Offices, Friends,
Reputation and Fame.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Birth.
I Begin with Birth, which is a Privilege entailed upon Blood, and is no more
in a Man's own Power, than the very Act of Nature by which he is generated. Nay
Royal Majesty it self, which is the Fountain of Honor, and in a great measure
of all the Favors of Fortune, is not able here to supply an Original Defect.
It Is true it can impress such a Stamp upon a Man, as shall make him capable to
derive Nobility to Posterity, but it can cast no Luster backwards, by making
that to be of a Generous Descent, which was Ignobly Born. He therefore who
comes into the World with this Tincture on him, has made the Advantage over
others, not only upon the account of Precedence and Respect, but in relation
also to the further Endearments' of Fortune. It sets him half way onwards in
his Pretensions to Public Employments, and to the Favors of the Court. Let
two Men, in all things else of equal Merit, appear upon the Stage, when it is
known that one of them is born a Gentleman, the other not, the former will
quickly meet with a kind Reguard from all, he will find an easy Entrance to
their good Opinions, and at the very first Step get that point of Credit, which
the other shall not attain to but with much Difficulty and Address; and be his
Conduct never so good, he will be forced, in many Rencounters of his Life, to
hang down his Head, not without Confusion in his Eyes, and some Dejection of
Spirit. Upon this Consideration many Persons who are obscurely born, being
advanced to Honor, and Places of Public Trust, endeavor to carry it with a
haughty Air, and to overtop that Contempt which the Meanness of their Family
might cast upon them. This Method certainly is not good, for whether or no such
Deportment be able to suppress Scorn, sure I am it will raise Envy, which is
infinitely more pernicious than the former; for those who Despise do seldom
Hurt us: besides, Contempt will wear away in time, for tho at the first Rise of
such a Man, we look upon him as Undeserving, yet being accustomed a little to
see him in the same Station, our former Prejudice against him is taken off, and
from his constant Possession, we are at length brought over to believe, that he
has a Title to his Place: Whereas Pride even in a Person of the greatest
Extraction, will be sure to beget Hatred, which in the end will open a Passage
to Revenge.

We have two Examples in Roman History, relating to this point of Conduct. The
first is of Macrinus, who being by Nation a Moor, and by Dignity a Knight,
arrived to be one of the Generals of Antoninus Caracalla, whom having caused to
be slain, he afterward by the Favor of the Soldiers, procured himself to be
saluted Emperor: Knowing therefore what Prejudice he was exposed to from the
Meanness of his Birth, he writes to the Senate in the most submissive Style
imaginable. He observed to them, That such as ascended to the Throne by
Inheritance, looking upon Empire as their Patrimony, were ofttimes tempted to
abuse their Power, and such a one was his immediate Predecessor Antoninus, as
was also Comodus; whereas others, who received Authority from the Senate, were
under perpetual Obligations of Gratitude. For his own Part, that he was
resolved to act nothing without their Advice, calling them his Princes and
Counselors; and that he would propose for a Pattern of Government, M.
Aurelius, and Pertinax, who were both of them of Private Extraction, concluding
withal, That it was much better to give Honor to Posterity by a Glorious
Beginning, than by Corrupt Manners and Degenerate Actions, to fully the Luster
derived from our Ancestors. By this Letter he won the Hearts of the Senate, and
of all the People, who welcomed the News of his Election with loud Acclamations
of Joy, and with Imperial Honors. The other Example of Maximinus, who from a
Keeper of Cattle in Thrace, after a long Series of Military Commands, was
advanced also to the Roman Empire: Knowing therefore that the Obscurity of his
Birth, would make him odious to the Senate, he resolved with a Barbarous and
Rough Hand to level all before him. It Is true both these Emperors were
murdered by their own Soldiers, nevertheless, the former, tho his Reign was
short, did by his Modest Demeanor, take off that Reproach which lay upon him
from his Birth, whereas the other, by his Imperious and Proud Deportment was
execrated by all the World.

In later Ages we have not a more remarkable example of good behavior, then
Cardinal Ximenez, who being of base Birth, and a Confessor, became Confessor to
Isabel Queen of Castile; afterward being proposed by the Queen to the
Archbishopric of Toledo, with great constancy he refused it, alleging that by
the Acceptance of that great Charge, he should purchase the hatred and envy of
all the Grands of Spain; hereupon the Queen makes it her request to the Grands
themselves, that they would do their endeavors to win him over to accept it.
By this retreat Ximenes made the pursuit more hot and eager, till at length he
Condescended, upon the assurance which the Grands gave him, of their good
opinion of him: In fine, besides that Archbishopric, he was Inquisitor
general, and Cardinal, and became the sole great Favorite or Minister of State.

It Is true most of those who being of low Birth, and are advanced to high
Place, like men brought suddenly out of a Dungeon to the open Day become Blind,
or rather are like to those who being accustomed always to walk upon the Earth,
when they climb to the Pinnacle of some high Tower, all things under them seem
very diminutive, whilst they themselves being advanced above their Level, and
being not accustomed to stand so high, are giddy in their heads, and are ready
every moment to fall down and break their Necks. But for all this, where
Persons of mean Extraction join Prudence to their Natural Abilities, they ever
prove the bravest Men; for they are upon a necessity to make the greatest
Improvements of their Parts, and to use their utmost Industry, being destitute
of Money, Family, Friends, and such like advantages, by which other Men of far
meaner Virtues, make an easy passage to their Fortunes; so that all the success
they can expect must be derived purely from Merit. We have pregnant Examples of
this truth in all the Records of Antiquity, not only in Military Persons which
are infinite, but in the sagest Men, and in the greatest Wits of the World; so
that not only they who had Gygantick Bodies, but those also who had Gygantick
Souls, were many of them to be accounted but as Terrae Filij, or Men basely
born. And indeed if we have regard to the Names of some of the most renowned
Roman Families, such as Cicero, Fabius, Lentulus, Piso, and the like, we may
easily guess at their Extraction, that it was from the Plough, and from the
Spade.

I shall give some few Instances more of the eminent Abilities of Persons
meanly born, confining my self to Examples of the last Age, and to such only as
lie within the Ecclesiastic Pale. If we travel into Italy we shall find Sixtus
5tus. who was the Son of a Hog-herd, and from a poor obscure Friar, arrived to
the Popedom, and really managed matters with that public Spirit and Prudence,
as did declare that he had a Soul large as that of the Empire he pretended to.
For considering the Shortness of his Reign, he exceeded all that were before or
after him; if I should put them altogether, I think I should not speak too
wide. If we pass over into Spain, besides Ximenes we have Cardinal Granvel,
whose Grandfather was but a Blacksmith, or some such base Artisan, yet he by
his Wisdom and Integrity acquitted himself with great Applause, through a long
Train of Court-Imployments, and to his dying day preserved himself in the good
opinion of his Prince, who was one of the wisest that ever issued out of the
house of Austria. If we cross the Pyreneans, and visit France, we have Cardinal
Mazarine who was descended of obscure Parents, and was called Mazarine, from
the Town Mazara in Sicily, where he was born. He was said to be a Captain of a
Company, in the Popes Guards at Avignon, and coming in the Train of the Nuntio
to Paris, he was taken notice of by Richlieu, and so by Degrees became the
greatest and the most prosperous Minister of State that ever that Kingdom knew;
for as for Richlieu, he had more of Machiavel in him, nor was his Death
lamented by the Prince and People as was that of Mazarine. If we return home
into our own Country, since the Reformation, we have that great Prelate
Archbishop Laud for an Example, who though he died a violent, did not dye an
untimely Death, since he obtained Immortality by suffering for the Interest of
his Prince, and of the Church, and like John Baptist, was but the Forerunner to
his Masters Martyrdom. As for Wolsey his Parts were great, his Power greater,
but his Pride greatest which brought him to his Ruin.

I have hitherto considered the advantages of Birth with relation to the
particular Persons, who are denominated by it. I shall now consider Nobility a
little as it is a State and Portion of the Commonwealth. The two greatest
Empires at this day extant in the World, viz. the Ottoman, and that of China,
allow no Privileges to Birth; for by this means all Men Study by the way of
Merit to apply themselves to the service of him, who has the sole Power of
distributing Rewards; whereas those who are nobly descended, seem to come into
the Word with some Characters of Sovereignty, and will not consequently be over
ready to take pains, for that which they are already possessed of, and of which
they think they cannot well be deprived. Whether this policy of theirs be good,
I shall not dispute; this is certain, that in a defensive War, there cannot be
a greater Obligation upon the Subject to make a vigorous Resistance, and to act
in Consort with his Prince, than the consideration not only of his own personal
Interest, but of the perpetual Interest and Inheritance of his Family being
laid at Stake, which happens only where Titles of Honor, and Estates are made
hereditary; so that here the Turkish Policy fails, and I doubt not but that the
effects would answer it, were the Christians once the Aggressors. But then for
Civil discords which may arise within the Bowels of the same Government, it is
certain that Men will not be inclinable to rebel nor forfeit their present
enjoyments, upon hopes of such a future Fortune, which they are sure can never
be entayled upon their Offspring. Hence we find few or no Civil Wars in Turkey;
subject they are indeed to Mutinies, as are all tyrannick Powers, which are
supported by an Army, and this in the Progress of another Age, will in all
probability make a gap for the Christians to break in upon them.

Governments therefore which are Arbitrary and Tyrannical, as were always the
Eastern Monarchies, destroy Nobility, endeavoring to bring all under an
absolute subjection and dependence, and to engross all respect and honor to
themselves. Also in Democracies Preeminence of Blood is odious, as seeming to
qualify Men for a Preeminence of Authority; hence it is that the Gentry are no
where in less Esteem and Number th^n amongst the Switzers and the Dutch. The
latter indeed have some few ancient Families amongst them, but their Interest
is nothing, nor do I know whether they assume to themselves a Power of
enobling. If we look into the Athenian Commonwealth of old, we shall find
Miltiades, Aristides, Themistocles, and Phocion, four of the bravest Men Greece
ever produced, all of them to die either in Prison or Banishment by the Command
of their ungrateful Citizens, whom they had so often preserved, tho for no
other Reason but because their extraordinary Services challenged a place of
Honor above the rest. In Aristocracies where all things are governed by
Senators, as in the Roman Commonwealth of old, and in that of Venice at this
present, we shall find the Nobility to be in very great Power and Splendor,
but withal much more unsafe, than under a Monarchy; for among so many Equals,
there cannot but be strong Emulation and Competition, and if a Man get but ever
so little above others, either in Point of Fortune, or by his glorious Actions,
he gives occasion for Jealousy, and is in most apparent danger to be ruined.
This is evidently the Case of the Venetian Nobility, and if we look into the
Roman Commonwealth, we may see Coriolanus, all the three Scipio's, and Cicero,
all of them banished ignominiously by that City, which they had so miraculously
saved from utter Ruin and Destruction.

Nobility therefore is safest under a limited Monarchy, especially where there
is a Subordination of lesser Nobles under them, such as in our Language we call
Gentlemen, tho in the Language of other Countries, these also are styled Noble.
These several Degrees or Orders are not only Ornamental but useful to Monarchy,
it being observed that they help to break the rage and sury of the Mobile
Vulgus, before it can arrive to Majesty. The Rabble or common People which are
as it were the main Body of the State, are always apt to envy the Gentry, as
the Gentry are always apt to envy the Nobility; so that these two orders, are
like two Moles, which keep off the tempestuous Ocean, or at least rebate its
force very much before it can arrive to the seat of Empire, which otherwise
would lie too open to the wide shocks of the boundless Floods, when any wind of
Sedition should blow upon the Unstable Waters But then in case the Nobility
should grow too Powerful and Insolent, the Sovereign may have recourse to the
inferior Gentry or common People, who will be sure to take Part with him; for
Men ever hate those who are immediately above them; by this means the balance
will easily be kept even, and the Sovereign Authority be preserved; and this
seems to be the Constitution of our English Government. Moreover where the
Commonalty is not in some Degree considerable, Monarchy is but precarious as in
Poland, where the Nobility or Palatins, are in very great Authority, and the
King little more than the best Man amongst them, depending as well in his
Government, as in his Election on them, whilst the Nobles trampling on the
Common People as on their Slaves, and Vassalls, do upon the matters erect so
many petty Tyrannies, as there are Palatinats; nor can the King any way relieve
them, as being himself tied to the Stake, and allowed to walk only within the
Rounds and Circles of his Chain. The Prince therefore who would really preserve
his own Authority, ought not to advance the Nobility to too high a Pitch, for
then they will eclipse Majesty, and insult over the inferior Subjects; nor yet
ought he to let them sink too low, for then the Inferior Subjects, who are
most numerous and intractable, will grow insolent toward them, and at length
presume to confront Sovereignty. It Is best therefore to settle them in the
middle Region, subject to their Supreme, yet so as to be able to bridle the
Unruly Multitude.

There are two ways by which Nobility, and consequently the Royal Power, is
much disparaged. The first is, When Titles of Honor are prostituted for Money,
or conferred upon Mean, Unqualified Persons, as Tradesmen, Artizans, rich
Contrymen, or such whose Professions or Study no way suit with the
Obligations of Knighthood. Another way of debasi^g Nobility, is when every
Bumpkin, or petty-Fogger, or mean Mechanic shall usurp the Style of Gentleman,
and perhaps the Coat of some Famimily of the same Name; by which means Honor,
which is one of the greatest Rewards, by which Kings keep their Subjects in
Dependence on them, by being common, becomes contemptible, and there will be
but few who, by the way of Merit and Service, will sue to Majesty for that
which they can have for taking up, and possibly without Stooping, paying only
such Demands and Fees as those shall please to impose upon them, who are
appointed to visit in the several Districts of the Kingdom, for Remedy of which
Abuses, 'twere much to be wished that there were a Court of Honor.

The Original of enobling and distinguishing Families by Coat Armor; seems to
be no ancienter than the Times of the Holy War: for the men at Arms, who were
called Knights or Milites, and listed themselves in this Expedition, every one
beautified his Shield with some Device or Bearing, which was afterward
transmitted to Posterity, as a Badge or Cognizance of their Ancestors they were
descended from. There are a sort of Gentlemen in the World, who will glory much
in their Pedigree, when perhaps their Family took Rise from some Vintner or
Tailor, or if they be well descended, they seem not to retain the least Relic
of their Progenitors Honor, but the naked Escutcheon; a Race of lazy and
degenerate Drones, who look Big only by thinking of another's Actions, and
whilst they envy those that ascend to Honor by ways of Industry and Virtue,
they themselves, for the most part, conclude their Lives with Shame and
Beggary. He then is truly Noble, who draws a Generous Blood from a Series of
Ancestors, who were Honorable and Eminent in their Times, Serviceable to their
Countries, and whose Virtues he makes to be the Pattern of his Actions.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Riches.
IF the universal Consent of Ages, if the constant Practice of all Conditions
of Persons, if the bent of Desire, and the strength of men's Affections, be able
to make a thing Sacred, all these concur in Riches, so that Riches may
challenge a Temple no less than Honor, as having not only a greater Number of
Votaries, but being able to purchase both Honor, and almost all the other
Blessings of Fortune, and is that Deity, which does upon the matter, command
the World. If we consider the Events of War, we shall find this soft Mettle to
have subdued as many Cities as the Sword, and if we regard the Transactions of
Peace too, we shall find it is this which dos unlock the Cabinets of Princes,
it is this that does debauch their bosom-Favourites, and does undermine and blow
up their Counsels.

Riches may be considered in relation either to particular Proprietors, or in
relation to the Public. In relation to the Public, it is certain, That the
State which is most wealthy, is in the greatest capacity to suppress Civil
Factions, and to extend Dominion, provided there be no want of Industry, or
decay of Discipline. The designs of War are made and carried on at a vast
Expense, whether we consider the Lives of Men, or the Provisions of the Mouth,
together with the several Engines, Magazines, and all the Military Equipage:
But there is this Mischief which does usually attend rich and flourishing
States, viz. The Plenty and Abundance in which they live, does usually tempt
them to Idleness and Luxury, in which case the Prey inviteth, and the decay of
Discipline and Virtue, makes the Conquest more easy. Thus also the ancient
Roman Empire, under the dissolute Governments of Arcadius and Honorius, was
torn in pieces by the Hunns, Goths, and those other Northern and barbarous
Nations, which thronged in daily through the Frontiers: And thus the vast
Empire of Asia, though extremely rich, and abounding in all good things, by a
long and prosperous Enjoyment of Peace and Ease, became so effeminate, as
encouraged the poor and savage Tartars to invade and conquer it. The Conquests
which are made by people who are poor, are rather by Irruptions than Wars; like
a mighty Torrent they come suddenly in, and carry all away before them, but if
once they be repelled, they must return for some time to recruit, being
destitute of the means to carry on a long and expensive War. But
notwithstanding these and such like Examples, the Nation which is richest,
caeteris paribus, will have the upper hand over those who are about them; and
therefore it is not true Policy for a Prince, when he finds his Neighbors to
increase in Power, if he cannot keep pace with them by his Industry, to follow
them with his Sword, lest peradventure he be at length forced to beg for his
own, and perhaps be stripped of all, having no other Guard to stand upon, but
that poor Suffering Posture of crossed Arms.

Riches are of two sorts: First such as consist in the Possession of Lands,
Cattle, Corn, Fruits, with such natural Productions of the Earth, as contribute
to the use and sustenance of Man, to which I may add all sorts of Manufactures,
and the works of Art. Or by Riches we may understand, Money. In former times,
things were bought and sold by Barter and Exchange, but this way of troquing,
proving very troublesome and incommodious, all men had recourse to Money, as to
the common Standard by which the Value of Things is to be estimated, so that he
that has Money, is upon the matter, Master of all those things which Money can
procure. It concerns therefore every Man to look well to his Purse, but
especially a Prince, not only because he has infinite ways, and those very
large ones, of spending, but because he has great Enemies, both Foreign and
Domestic, of which the later are far more dangerous. When a Princes purse is
at a low ebb, Insolence will be high and touring, and want of Money does draw
him many times to such dissimulating, and compliance, as detracts much from the
Luster of Majesty, which in a short time will bring it under Disability and
Contempt. The seasons of Action are lost, whilst he is seeking after the Means,
and what is worst of all, it is seldom Princes are thus reserved in their
Extremities, but by suffering their Wings to be robbed of the fairest and
strongest Plumes, they seem for a great while after, but to flutter on the
Ground.

Their Customs in many places beyond Sea of having Mounts or Banks, is of great
advantage to the Government, and well worthy our Imitation. All persons who
have a mind to put out their Money, may put it into the public Treasury, at a
moderate Interest, by which means there is always a vast Sum in readiness, upon
any sudden and extraordinary occasion; whereas when Money is to be raised by
way of Tax, and with the Consent of the Parties or Representatives, besides the
forementioned Inconveniences, half is lost before it can come to the State,
what with the Falacies of the Collectors and Officers, and what with the
intolerable Exaction of Brokers and Bankers upon present Advance. To which we
may add the Delays, which attend such Supplies, as well in the Grant as in the
Levy, so that coming oftentimes too late, the Government, by this Means, lies
betrayed to inevitable Danger. And as this Expedient of Mounts or Banks is
beneficial in respect of the State, so is it in the next place as beneficial in
respect of the Subject: For there will be less occasion of having Recourse to
the disgustful Remedy of Taxes, and for the Creditors that shall place out
their Money this way, it is certain that they will never loose the Fruit of it,
for want of an opportunity to place it out, and it is as certain too, That the
Security of the State, will be much better than what they can expect from the
personal Security of Bankers, or of private men, (who break every hour) or from
the Honesty of Scriv'ners, or from any Land-Security, where the Title is for
the most part entangled, and the Lands themselves preingaged by Judgments, and
Mortgages, and many such like statutable Snares and Fetters of the Law, as may
make the poor Creditor spend the Remainder of his Life in fruitless and
vexatious Suits: so that I dare affirm that the fourth part of the Quarrels
depending in our Courts, are derived from this unlucky Head. Now for the better
Security of every one who shall become a Creditor to the Public, 'twere not
amiss if some Branches of the public Revenue, in such States where the people
have a Suffrage, for instance, If some Portions of the Excise and Customs, or
any such like Impositions, should stand engaged for the paying of Interest and
Capital; tho it is not much to be doubted, but that a Prince who values his
Honor, or at least his Interest, will be punctual in Discharging such
Engagements, considering that if once his Credit should fail, it would not only
put a stop to all such Recruits, but it would create such a Distrust and
Jealousy amongst his Subjects toward him, as would totally alienate their
Affections, and probably their Allegiance and Duty from him. It Is their
Practice in some of the Banks beyond Sea, for the Creditor to give two or three
per Cent. at the putting in of his Money, and as much at the taking of it out.
It Is their Custom also in some places, not to repay the Creditor in specie, but
those who have occasion for their Money, do assign or fell over their share in
the Bank, to some other persons who have a desire to place their Money there,
by which Means the Exchequer will never be exhausted by the Creditors, and
there will be still Sums of Money flowing in toward the Increase and
Greatning of the Bank.

Great are the Advantages of Navigation as to the enriching of a Nation with
Money. 'Twas Navigation that taught us the way to the East and West Indies, so
that they who are most industrious in this way, will be certain to possess the
greatest Treasure. Hence it is that the Dutch are thought, by some, to have as
much Bullion lying by them, as all the rest of Europe. Indeed their prodigious.
Disbursements during the late Wars, toward the Maintenance of the Spanish and
Imperial Armies, for two whole Campaignes, as also their own vast Expenses both
by Sea and Land, against the whole Force of Europe upon the matter, is a
pregnant Demonstration of this Truth; for so it was that their Allies and
Friends were more chargeable to them than their Enemies. The Spaniards, who
possess the inexhaustable Treasures of Mexico and Peru, are really the poorest
of all Nations, for being little addicted to Navigation, and being naturally
Proud and Haughty, they think it beneath their Grandeur to follow Merchandise,
Husbandry, or any Mechanic Arts, though they be ready to starve; and those who
have Gold, are forced to exchange it for the Commodities of other Countries, of
which they stand in need, having little or no Provisions of their own, much
less any Staple-Manufactures to barter. The Nation therefore which makes
Profession of Traffic, ought well to provide that the imported Goods exceed
not the Value of the exported, for otherways they must be forced to balance
the Overplus with Money, to prevent which Inconvenience there cannot be a
better Expedient, than for the People to live Temperate and Frugal: for by this
means they will stand in less need of Foreign Superfluities, and consequently,
what they send forth into other Countries, being more than the imported Goods
they spend, the Overplus will come Home to them in ready Coin; and this is
certainly one of the greatest Policies, by which the Dutch have raised their
Wealth and Commerce to such a vast State: for Wasting nothing of Foreign
Commodities but what is necessary, and having little or nothing of their own to
export, save Fish, Butter, Cheese, Earthen Ware, and some such inconsiderable
Merchandise, they betake themselves to a way of Trade from Port to Port, and so
carry the Commodities of one Country into another, till they at length make
the last Return in Money. Another way by which the Money of a Nation may be
preserved, is, by a Severe Prohibition of those Superfluous Ornaments and
Expenses, by which the Property of the Metal is totally wasted, such as
Embroideries, Gold-Lace, all manner of Gildings, as of Coaches, Leather,
Swords, Picture-Frames, with infinite other things of like Nature.

Things may be said to be Dear or Cheap, not only from the Scarcity or Plenty
of them, but also from the Scarcity or Plenty of the Money which we give in
their Exchange. If we give a little Money for a Thing, we commonly say it is
cheap, when yet perhaps this does not proceed from the Abundance of that Thing,
but from the Scarcity of the Money which is valued against it. Likewise when we
give a great deal of Money for a little of Commodity, we conclude it to be
dear, when peradventure it is not from the Scarcity of such a Commodity, but
from the great Plenty of Money: So that in this Age all things seem ten times
dearer than they were some Ages past, when yet this does not happen from a
greater Scarcity of such things, but from that great Inundation of Silver which
comes in daily on us, since the Discovery of the Indies.

In the next place let us consider Riches, as they may be appropriated to
particular Persons. As for those who reduce all things to a Level, we referr
them to Vtopia: For as long as Men are Men, some will be Industrious, others
Negligent; and the Industrious will still be Richer than the Others. To take
away therefore what is gotten by Industry, and to bestow it upon the
Undeserving, is utterly to banish Virtue, and to encourage Vice; for no Man
will Sow in the Sweat of his Brow, that another may Reap the Fruits of his
Labor for nothing. Many are the ways of Getting Riches, some Honest, and more
Dishonest; but of all Professions, the Retailing Merchant seems most obnoxious
to Cheating, as being supported by Lying, affirming his Wares to be Good, when
he knows them to be Bad, and with Oaths protesting that they cost him so much,
when they did not stand him in half the Price; to which we may add the Deceit
of Weights and Measures, false Bills and Reckonings of the Book, with infinite
Frauds by which they labor to adulterate and disguise their Wares. All that
can be said on their Behalf is this; That they are Obnoxious many times to
great Hazards, and Commodities being spoiled, or lying dead upon their Hands,
they ought to make good their Losses out of the Remainder, which they cannot
do, but by Demanding more than the just and true Value. What is got by
Husbandry, and the Improvement of the Productions and Fruits of the Earth, may
be looked upon as the most Innocent of all Gains, it is accompanied with
Industry and Health, and tends to the Perfections of Nature: And if we look
into Histories, besides the Patriarchs of old, we shall meet with many Brave
Men, who have be took themselves to this Course of Life.

There are two sorts of Men in the World, both of them in great Esteem for Wit,
which are rarely Rich. The first are Poets; these for the most part are Rich
only in Fancy, for being Airy and Pleasant their Company is many times sought
after, which cannot but divert them from the Pursuit of any Solid Undertaking.
Besides, being naturally Prone to good Liquor, as the proper Instrument to
Highten Fancy, they get such Habits of Expense, as does much impair that Stock
of Fortune they were born to; but above all, affecting Idleness and Ease, for
the Muses ever haunt the Warbling Fountains, and Solitary Shades, any
Counter-change of Business, shuffles all their Thoughts into Disorder; For
indeed who would ever worry himself amongst the Thorns of a busy Life, who can
be admitted, when he pleases, to the Banquet of the Gods, drink with them in
Nectar, and make them to descend in Golden Showers? Poets, in the very midst of
Winter, can Translate themselves into Elysium, they can build stately Palaces,
and furnish them too, with the Expense only of a few Verses. There is another
Sort of Men reputed to be of good Capacity, who seldom become Rich, and they
are Projectors. These Men are of a Genius clear contrary to Poets, for they are
of a Working Brain, always concerned in Undertakings, and leaving nothing
Untried. They will stick at no Expense, still propounding some Unknown,
Compendious Way of getting Wealth, till at length being exhausted in their
Purses, or discouraged by unfortunate Difficulties, or the Fertility of their
Invention casting them ever and anon upon new Projects, they leave their former
Designs Imperfect, which some secund Person undertakes frequently with good
Success: for by avoiding the former's Miscarriages, and entering on the Work
with fresh Spirits and a full Purse, he does not only improve the Invention,
but brings it, many times, to a mature Issue.

As for them who place all their Felicity in the Possession of Gold, they are
as great Slaves as those who are condemned to dye for it in the Mines. They are
always handling the Ore, but have never the power to use it. It Is observed of
such Misers, That they are ever most Griping, the nearer they are to their
Ends, whereas methinks, they should then choose rather to spend it in procuring
such things, as might make the Remainder of their Life Comfortable; but so it
is that they cleave fastest to their Money, when they are nearest to leaving
it, as we ever give the closest Huggs to our Departing Friends. The Reason why
they act in this manner, how Extravagant so ever it may seem to be, is not
Unnatural: For seeing the adequate Object of the Soul's Desire must be
something Infinite, they who place their greatest Happiness in the Possession
of Treasure, the more they have, the nearer Approaches do they seem to make
toward that Imaginary Infinity, which is the ultimate Term of their Desire;
and consequently they will labor with greater Eagerness to engross what
remains, as we see all Natural Motion, is ever more Impetuous and Swift, the
nearer it comes to its Center or Place of Rest.

He therefore is truly Happy amidst his Riches, who knows how to use them, for
besides the Comforts they yield in procuring all things Necessary, and
Delightful for Humane Life, they put us also in a Capacity to relieve the Wants
of others, and to do many Acts of Charity, and Works of Public Benefit. And as
to External Respect, the Ignorant Multitude will ever worship the Golden Calf:
For let a Man be never so meanly furnished with the Virtues of the Mind, if he
be but Rich, most who are of a lower Rank, will stand in terms of Compliance,
some out of Hopes of Getting; others, out of Fear of Losing by him, for in all
Disputes, he that has the greatest Purse, has odds upon his side. Gold, tho it
be said to Cure some Distempers of the Eyes, is capable to Blind the Sight of
Justice, and as being the Heaviest of Metals, may be imagined to be of
sufficient Weight to Turn its Scales. It can procure a Friend at Court, and
what is much more to be relied on in a time of Need, it can procure a
Throgh-pac'd and Trusty Evidence. In a word, tho it be not Immense, it is in
some measure Omnipotent.

CHAP. XXV. Of Office and Great Place.
AN Ability to do Good and Hurt, has ever been looked upon as a Branch of the
Royal Prerogative, which, as it begets in the Minds of Men a certain Awe and
Veneration for the Person in whom it is lodged, so must it render his Influence
great, and the Person himself a Favorite of Fortune. This Power, when it moves
by Springs of ones own Inclination only, is conversant about Acts of Grace, but
when it moves with Regard to the Merits of another Person, it is called
Justice, and is conversant about Rewards and Punishments. Now although the
latter Faculty is that which constitutes a Magistrate, yet so it is, that Men
who are invested with Power, do many times act in an Arbitrary Way, by
following the Bias of their own Wills and Passions. But be the Motives and
Considerations, upon which they act, what they will be, it is certain that the
Character is derived from a higher Authority, tho that which places Men in the
Eye of that Authority, is not always Merit, but sometimes Fortune.

Offices are of two kinds, either such as have relation to Justice, or such as
regard the Court and Service of the Prince. From the former sort of Offices,
Men are denominated Magistrates, from the latter they are called Ministers of
State, tho these Ministers are many times Transcendently above other, both in
Dignity and Power. In a Magistrate there are these Four Qualifications
requisite, of which the First is, Capacity or Understanding, for tho Justice
ought to be Blind as to the Merit of the Person, it must not be so as to the
Merit of the Cause; and here it is that a Fool may be more Dangerous than a
Knave: The later may and will sometimes Act justly, for there was never yet so
great a Knave in Office, but he did many things Commendable, whereas he that
wants Understanding, can never distinguish betwixt Truth and Falsehood. A Crack
in the Brain is never to be mended, being a Fundamental Error, which draws many
others after it, whereas Corruptions of Will, and ill Habits of Life, may be
and are often actually reformed. They do not hinder Men's Knowledge of what is
Right, and there are few to be found, who will act always in Contradiction to
what they think is Just. Hence it is that Bad Men, have many times proved good
Kings, and made Wholesome Laws, whereas Good Men have sometimes proved Bad
Kings, by too much Softness, Facility and Ignorance. To Capacity of
Understanding, we may join Experience in a Magistrate, for no Man can well tell
the Issue of things Future, who has not made Trial of the like for the time
Past. Another Qualification requisite in a Magistrate, is Conscience or
Integrity, this is placed in the Will, as the other in the Understanding.
Partiality of Affection, or Bribery, are two dangerous Temptations to Men in
Place. The Judges of Athens (called Areopagites) were wont always to hear
Causes at Midnight, and in the Dark, to the Intent that the Profound Silence of
that Season might fix their Thoughts, and that they might not be drawn to
Partiality by the sight of Persons. But withal I know not whether they might
not feel better in the Dark, sure I am that there is more Corruption proceeds
from the Hand, than from the Eye. A Third thing requisite in a Magistrate, is
Conduct, and this not only, in the Order and Management of Business, but of
himself also, by keeping his own Passions under due Obedience. Transport of
Passion does puzzle the Understanding, pervert the Will, and precipitate
Judgment: by it Innocence is many times oppressed, and Oppression encouraged.
Besides nothing can bring the Person of a Magistrate under greater Contempt,
than to see him indulge himself in his Follies: or how can he be thought able
to reconcile the Weighty Difference betwixt others, who in the very Act of
Judgment, cannot compose his own little Capricious Humors? The last Character
of a Magistrate, is Courage: He is the Representative of his Prince, and
therefore as he ought to be Deliberate and Circumspect in Judging, so ought he
to be Bold and Resolute in Executing what is once Decreed. He ought not to
accommodate the Rule to the Thing, but to try the Thing by the Rule. Indeed the
Rule of Justice which ought to be made of Steel, is many times made of Lead,
not only of a Metal which is Dull and Base, but of such a pliable Temper, as
will be fashioned to any thing, tho it be sure to leave a Smutty Tincture
behind it. No, no! It Is he only deserves the Scarlet Robe, who dares oppose it
against Enormities of the same Dye.

Offices of State are Flattering Things, such as all men court, but few obtain.
And here it is that Fortune shows her self to be a very False Mistress, one
while Wanton and Caressing, anon Coy and Scornful, but always Unequal and
Unconstant. Some men tumble headlong upon Preferments, as it were in Despite
of their Stars, or rather of their own Sublunary Mixture. Others, let them
Conjure by all the Constellations, and let them Calculate for all Meridians,
and let them be furnished with all Natural Parts imaginable, are still but the
same poor Solitary Ciphers: like a Dog in the Wheel, they are ever Climbing up,
but yet remain still in the same Numerical Place, as at the first; the Wheel on
which they rely casts them down again, and the Reward they meet with for all
their Drudgery, is no other but the Dropping of the Spit. They make their
Rounds from this Great Man to that, and after many a Servile Turn, perhaps the
only Place they can procure, may be at my Lord's Table, where they may be
filled with good meat, or with what is less Substantial, with Promises, which
are but an Airy kind of Diet, being such as will make a man look Puffed and
Big, but will rarely make him Fat.

Boccalins Fiction is Ingenious and Pleasant, when he brings in certain
Politicians presenting a State-Compass and Chart to Apollo. In the former were
described all the Winds, by which a Courtier ought to Sail, in the later all
the Roads and Landmarks were accurately described, together with all the Rocks,
hidden Banks of Sand, and Gulphs, with such like Dangers to which men are
Obnoxious in a Voyage. Great was the Joy in the Court of Apollo, for this rare
Invention, and happy was the man that could first make Trial of it; long it was
not before a Virtuoso rigged out his Vessel Top and Top-gallant, well furnished
he was with all things, and set forth too with a Prosperous Gale: scarce had he
got a League to Sea, but he falls amongst Rocks hid under Water, out of which
being escaped with Loss and Difficulty, he instantly runs upon a Bank of Sand,
whereupon having Recourse to his Chart, he found neither of these Passages
marked: scarce had he escaped this Danger likewise, but he was assaulted with a
Sudden and Violent Wind, neither was this Disaster noted in his Sea-Compass,
but so it was that he was beaten back again into the Port, so miserably
shattered, that he was adjudg'd to be no good Pilot, and to be incapable of
setting out to Sea ever after. After him comes another Politician, who was
looked upon as a more experienced Pilot than the former: having paid a
profound Adoration to Apollo, he desires his Permission to try his good
Fortune, but his Success was worse than that of the first, for his Vessel was
wracked, and he himself had much ado to escape naked to the Shore: In fine,
three or four more having tried to sail by the Direction of the foresaid Chart,
were all of them Split or much disabled. At length came a Bold, Ignorant
Fellow, whose Vessel was ill Built, and worse Furnished, who craving Leave of
his Delphick Majesty, to see what Fortune he could meet with, easily obtained
his Request, not without the Contempt and Laughter of the whole College of
Politicians: He takes no Notice of State-Chart or Compass, but following the
Course of his own Capricious Humor, he not only avoided those Dangers which
the others fell upon, but was attended all along with a favorable Wind, and
made a Fortunate Voyage. This unexpected Accident amazed not only all the
Virtuosi of the Delphick Court, but even the Sacred Majesty of Apollo, who
presently gave Command that the State-Chart should be examined with more
Curiosity and Exactness, which when they had performed, they found at length
that it was nothing but a Chimera Fantastical and Ridiculous, and such as would
betray men to Inevitable Danger, should they return to be guided by it,
whereupon by common consent, they threw both Chart and Compass out of Doors.

This Fancy of Boccalins, tho it be Witty, and in some measure True, yet it is
as true too, That men duly qualified, may by a good Address and Conduct, very
much contribute to the Advancement of their own Fortunes. By men duly
qualified, I understand, Privileged by Birth, Education, Personage, Parts,
Carriage, Reputation, Friends, and the like, most of which where they meet in
one Subject, like a Constellation of Virtues, do prognosticate an easy Passage
to future Greatness, by following some certain Maxims. It was the Observation
of that Great and Unfortunate Statesman in his Essays; That as in Nature things
move Violently to their place, and Calmly in their place, so Virtue in Ambition
is Violent, in Authority Settled and Calm. All rising to great Place is by a
winding Stair, and if there be Factions, it is good for a man to side himself
whilst he is rising, and to balance himself when he is placed: Thus far he.
This is certain, that the Art of keeping a Place is very different from the
getting it, and withal much greater. As to ways of getting into place, these
following have been ever observed to have been of some Importance.

First, A man ought to search all fair Occasions of being presented to the Eye
and Notice of his Sovereign. They who are descended from Parents, who have born
Office in the Court, or from such Families, whose Rank and Quality gives them
the Honor to be always in the Presence, have their Work half done to their
Hands: but for others who come out of the Crowd or common Mass of people, they
have no other way to recommend themselves, but by their Merit and Actions, and
this too will hardly suffice, unless they have some sure Friend, well versed in
the practices of the Court, who may own them at their first Appearance, and as
it were, to lead them by the Hand through that thick Press and Throng which
usually surrounds Majesty: For the truth of it is, whosoever seeks to make his
Fortunes this Way, will be sure to have Spies upon his Actions, and such as
will make it their Business to blast him in the Blossom; for generally
Courtiers, how Smiling and Obliging soever they seem to be, are in this like
some other Animals, who will be still driving away a Stranger, tho of their own
kind, when he offers to join himself to the Herd. When a man therefore has once
found the Grace to be a little known, his next Business is to study the Genius
and Inclinations of his Prince, and thereunto to conform himself: Similitude of
Humor will create an Affection, and by being in the Eye of Majesty, he will be
always in the way when any thing shall fall, and will have an irreproachable
Witness of his good Conduct and Behavior, against all the Accidents of
Calumny; but above all, let it not appear to proceed from Flattery, but from a
sincere Duty, and from a real Affection to his Service.

There are others who proceed a way quite contrary to what is here delivered,
laboring to arrive to the Favors of the Court, by openly Opposing the Designs
and Inclinations of their Prince, which Method is found but too successful in
mixed Monarchies, where the Power in many things is interwove with the Suffrages
of the people. I know there is this to be admitted, That a person who has won
from the Contrary Party, upon hopes of Preferment, is equivalent to two, for as
he makes the Party he goes over to, to be stronger by one, so he makes the
Opposite Faction to be one less: besides, he who quits a Faction, may be of
great Use for Suppressing the same, by Discovering Persons, and all their
Secret Cabals and Contrivances to which he was privy: But yet there is this
fatal Mischief in the Case, That for one Evil Spirit that is conjured off in
this way, there will succeed seven more and worse than the first; for when men
(who are but too apt to oppose Authority) shall find such Courses Prosperous,
the more the Royal Bounty is exhausted, the more will be the Opposition, upon
the like Hopes of being taken off with further Gratuities and Rewards; nay even
those, who are otherways of Loyal Principles, will be under strong Temptations
to forsake the good old Road, for the new compendious Way, which will bring
them safer and surer to their Journey's End.

Boldness has been ever looked upon as a Quality, very requisite in one who
would make his Fortune in the Court; for where there is a Crowd, a man must
thrust himself a little forewarder to get in, or else be contented to stand
without. He must not desist for the first, second, or third Repulse, but always
offer himself with the same Assurance: And if he cannot get in in at the Gate,
he must try to enter at the Backdoor; but with Boldness too there must be
joined great Discretion and Address, as well in respect of Persons, as of the
several Circumstances in Place and Time: he ought well to understand the
various Interests and Dispositions of the Parties to whom he makes his
Application.

And because the Court is compounded of all Sorts of People, and all sorts of
Affairs are managed in it, he who makes his Advantages this way, ought to be
well versed in all sorts of Business, as well to make him Capable of any
Employment which shall fall, as also to render his own Credit greater, and
himself useful to others. Moreover, he ought to be of a strong Constitution of
Body, being to accommodate himself to all Companies and Seasons, where the
Occasion of Converse will sometimes draw him into Irregularity and Excess: He
must learn to Flatter, not only Great Men, but their Servants also, to the very
Grooms and Footmen, he must make his Attendance at all hours, he must brook all
Delays, and where he is repulsed, he must by all Expressions imaginable
testify his Obligation; he must many times dissemble Affronts from Great Ones,
and make a Show of being Thankful: He must meet those who hate him, or (which
is all one) those whom he himself hates, with a cheerful and open Face, and
when he seems to be most Negligent and Remiss, then must he keep the closest
Guard upon his Words and Actions; but above all, he must never suffer the
Thoughts and Passions of his Mind, to be read in his Countenance. He certainly,
who does not weigh his own Abilities, and examine his Passions by these
Measures, will never be in Prospect of great Matters, unless perhaps some
extraordinary Merit and Accident shall make his Service necessary, or perhaps
his Person and Humor be sound agreeable to some particular Fancy of his
Prince. Some men are apt to fall into Choler upon every little Provocation:
Others cannot abstain from unseasonable Railery and playing the Satyr: Others
again are Impatient under Delays: Others cannot refrain their Tongue, but speak
any thing of any Body, and before any body. To men of this Temper, Retreat and
a Private Life, would be far more Profitable than Business, for let them be
assured, they will never make their Fortunes, but on the contrary, they will be
in a great probability of Losing what they were before possessed of, and of
Ruining themselves.

The Rules by which Statesmen preserve themseves in the good Graces of a
Prince, are many and difficult, amongst which these Four are indispensably
requisite. First, In Conversation and Discourse, never to contend with him for
Mastery, or to gain the Point. No man willingly yields his Reason to be
Inferior to another, much less a Prince, for this would set him at a low
Rate. In Matters therefore of Argument, or in any thing which may create
Emulation, it is good to leave him in Possession of the Victory, or at least to
decline the Contest before it comes to Heat. Asinius Pollio the Poet answered
Wittily and Wisely too, who being called upon by his Friends, to answer some
Verses that Augustus wrote of him, answered them: Non tutum est Scribere contra
eum qui potest Proscribere.

The second Rule relates to Secrets, and here the Notes are two: First not to
be Curious in knowing his Masters Secrets, for he who knows another's Secrets,
has an Awe upon him, and has a Power to do him Mischief. No Man, much less a
Prince, would willingly leave himself at another's Malice or Indiscretion. In
the next place, if Secrets be once imparted, let him be most Religious and
Faithful in Concealing them, so that it as highly concerns him to keep them
close, as it is important for him sometimes to know those of another; and this
is done usually some of these Ways, viz. In Drink, by Sports and Plays, in
Choler, or lastly, which is the surest Way of all, by telling another some
Passage of small Importance, in a way of Secrecy, or by Feigning some Story or
other, which may have some Affinity and Similitude with the thing he labors to
Discover, of which having got some loose Ends, 'twill not be difficult to Spin
it all out.

The third grand Point in which the Conduct of a Statesman is concerned, is
Counsel. The Wisest Men have ever shown themselves Cautious and Timid in this
particular. Peremptory Advice lays Arrestment upon Majesty, and besides the
Disgust it is apt to give, by making a Subject to seem Wiser than his Master; if
the Advice succeeds well, it forces a King to commend the Wisdom of his
Teacher, and to become a Debtor to his Creature; but if ill, it will not fail
to procure the Disgrace, if not the Ruin of him who gave the Counsel. By a due
Observation of this Point, it was that Cardinal Granvel flourished to the last,
in the good Graces of King Philip the second, who certainly was a Wise and
Politic Prince. He proposed Matters in that way, as 'twas always free for the
King to make his Choice: For he so tempered his Reasons, and weighed the
Arguments of both sides in such a Measure, as are sufficient to Incline the
Mind, yet so that the Resolution should ever seem to be the King's proper Act.
By this Conduct, two very considerable Points are gained: First, A Firm
Interest in the Affections of ones Prince: Next, By making the Prince to be
Author of the Proposal, a Man stands sheltered against all Popular Storms, in
case his Counsel shall have bad Success.

The last Rule which the Wisest Statesmen have ever observed is this: Never to
affect Pomp and Ostentation in their Actions and Life, but to make Show ever of
Modesty, and in case they be Happy in what they undertake, to attribute the
Success to Fortune, as also all their Honors to Royal Bounty, and not to
Private Merit. Sejanus stands upon Record as an Example of Subtlety, for when
he was most Intriguing, he seemed to be very Indifferent and Cold, he was
always in Repose, yet always Acting, and when he appeared Drouzy, he had ever
the greatest Objects in Pursuit. It has ever been adjudg'd the highest Policy,
for a Man to make others the Instruments of his Ends, and yet make them
Ignorant of his Designs, or who it was that set them first on Work: Herein
imitating the Wisdom of the Almighty, which in the Course of Providence, does
work Effects contrary to the Intention of those by whom they are produced. As
for them who make Parade, and affect Glory in all they undertake, they will
never want Envy, and generally the End is this: Such as do design their Ruin
will make the greatest court to them, and pretend to depend wholly upon their
Grace and Bounty, which cannot but create Jealousy in a Prince, and make him
embrace the first Occasions to remove them. Examples of this kind we have in
Cardinal Spinola, under Philip the second, and of late in Monsr. Fouquet.
Moreover, it often happens, That those who make the greatest Ostentation of
their Policy, besides the Envy that they draw upon themselves, are found most
Defective even in the Management of their own Designs, as appeared by
Machiavel, who, with all his Trains of Maxims, was most Unfortunate in his
Conduct: For it has been observed, That Men of his Temper are always subject
to two things, which are most Destructive of all good Counsels. First, they are
ever upon the Ferment, and a Working, and draw upon themselves a greater Mass
of Business than they are able to Discuss. In the next place they always float
in a great Abundance of Reasons and Inventions, which hinder the Prosecution of
one another: Nor can they have Patience to pursue one thing home, the Fertility
of their Invention ever and anon Suggesting to them some new Expedients.
Besides the foregoing Observations, it is requisite that a man should be well
Instructed and Practiced in these Points, viz. Assiduity in Attendance, a
Respectful and Obsequious Deportment, Facetiousness in Stories and Converse,
and a Conformity to the Humors and Recreations of his Prince, for by these we
are sure to gain Affection, which is the surest Title to Favor.

Negotiation or Embassy, which is a principal Branch of a States-man's Duty,
require him to be versed in all sorts of Business; to be Vigilant and Active,
to be Bold and yet Discreet, to be Close and Insinuating, and yet carry a Show
of Frankeness, and to be able to suit himself with every Genius. A man who can
frame himself to all these Circumstances, will not want Occasions of being
employed.

But besides the Duties which every Statesman ought to practice toward his
Superiors, whether abroad, or within the Circles of the Court, there are other
Duties toward his Inferiors, which he ought to have regard to in the
Execution of his Office. First, He ought to receive all Suitors with an Open
and Unprejudiced Countenance, yet not to be forward to engage his Interest but
upon Special Occasion. Nevertheless general Promises are ever to be made, for
they keep men in terms of Observance and Devotion, and in case of Success, the
Obligation will seem greater as exceeding Expectation, and in case of Failure
the Discourtesie will seem less, and in all Cases he reserves his Liberty to
the last, being free to act one way or another, as further Circumstances shall
require him. It is a Maxim amongst Politicians, That it is a Diminution of
Authority to do that which a man may afterward be forced to undo, so that it is
always more prudent, to strangle an ill formed Design at the Beginning, than be
obliged afterward to Disown it in Public, or to feed it with pernicious
Resolutions and Blood.

In the second place, every Wise man ought to take more Regard not to do
Injuries, than to confer Favors, for the later will soon be forgotten, whereas
the former make a durable Impression, and will be requited with Interest, when
men are least aware; which thing is seriously to be considered by one in great
Office, who will be sure ever to find more Enemies, than Friends. In the next
place, such a one ought never to Exert the utmost of his Power, but to Manage
matters by such Degrees, that his Puissance may be unlimited, by being able
always to do more, and to surpass himself, for a Power which is Indefinite,
will in some measure seem Infinite. In the last place, let him make himself to
be esteemed a Protector of the Poor, by some remarkable Acts of Justice and
Grace: For (as Tully very well observes) upon the Defense of a Great Man, the
Benefit terminates either in himself alone, or at the utmost, in the Effects it
has upon his House and Family, but in the Protection of a Poor Man, who is
Innocent and Honest, there is an Interest made in all the rest of that Tribe,
which is no Inconsiderable Party of a Nation.

By these and such like ways it is, that Men are observed often to rise to
great Place, and to make good their Station. There yet remains a third Grand
Point, in which the Wisdom of a Statef-man most discovers it self, being indeed
of greater Moment than the two former, and that is, To know when to Withdraw.
Tho a man enter upon the Stage with a great Flourish, and act his Part well,
yet it is the last Scene of the Play, and a Graceful Coming off, which shuts up
all, and gains the Plaudite. He who has prosper'd long in the Favors of a
Court, and has acquired his full Measure of Riches and Honors, when he sees
Fortune turn her Reverse or Backside on him, ought to think of Retiring, and
not presume upon his own Conduct, in withstanding the higher Destinies. No
Merchant who has a Vessel richly laden, and a fair Gale to carry him Home, will
be so Mad as to stand out to Sea, when he sees a Storm approaching, and there
contest it with the Winds and Rocks, and leave his rich Cargo with himself to
the Disasters of one Fatal Hour. The most Cunning Gamesters will ever go off
upon the Winning hand, and yet the Chances of State are more hazardous than
those which do depend on the Wind, or the Falling of a Dye. Besides the
Contrivance of Secret and Potent Enemies, besides the many real Miscarriages,
which a Man of long Employment must needs contract, besides the Casualty of a
Prince's Death, which seldom fails to put a Period to the Fortunes of a
Favorite, besides these, and many such Accidents, this will still be certain,
That Princes, at their several Stages of Life or Age, are of several Passions
and Inclinations, so that the Humor and Disposition being changed, upon which
a man was first taken into Favor, he ought in Reason to expect a Change in
Fortune, especially considering that great Crowd of fresh Pretenders (men of as
great or greater Merit than himself) which are always importuning Majesty, and
ought also to have their Turns. It Is Cowardice and Baseness, I know, for a Man
in times of Danger, to desert the Service of his Prince, upon the account of
Securing the Fortunes he received from it: No, here he ought to Sacrifice all;
but withal, it is high Presumption in him, to think his own Abilities always
Necessary, as it is Folly and Madness for him to withstand a Prince, when he has
once changed his Judgment and good Opinion of him. But were there nothing of
all this, even the Indispositions of Sickness, the Infirmities of Age, the
Thoughts of Settling one's Private Family, but above all, the Thoughts of
Settling a man's Self, ought to make him think of a Retreat. He who Rises early
ought to go to Bed betimes, nor are the Shades ever so Pleasant, as to one who
has been for a long time in the Sunshine, and is tired with the Travels of the
Day. 'Twas a Great and Wise Saying of that Officer, who demanding his Conge of
Charles the V. was asked by him the Reason why he would quit his Service, being
then in his highest Grace and Favor, to whom the good Soldier replied; That
there ought to be an Interval of Time, betwixt the Business of Life, and that
of Death. There ought indeed to be a time of Recollection, and indeed none
require it more than Statesmen: They Rise leisurely, and Step by Step, but
they do not Fall so. The higher they Climb, the more subject they are to be
Giddy, and if they stand more open to the Sunshine, so it is as true too that
they stand more open to the Winds, so that here the smallest Step may probably
prove a Precipice. It Is better for them therefore with the good Leave and
Liking of their Prince, to go down softly, and so out through the Gate they
came in at, than staying longer, to be turned out of Doors by the Officers, or
perhaps be thrown Headlong down the Stairs.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Friendship.
MAN, who is not born to be a Solitary Creature, but to be a Member of Society,
is under an inevitable Necessity of Communicating, not only the Actions of his
Life, but the Secrets of his Heart, with others of the same Nature with
himself. This reciprocal Dependence which one Man has upon another, besides the
Natural Inclination which things of the same kind have to Associate together,
begets Familiarity and Confidence, which by frequent Exercise and mutual
Offices, at length creates a certain kind of Alliance, and gives rest to that
Union of Affections, which we call Friendship. But then so various are the Ends
of men, and so different from their secret Intentions, that what we call
Friendship, is, for the most part, nothing but Falsehood in Masquerade, and
therefore the Italian is Wise, if he be not Devout, when he prays to God to
Defend him from his Friends, for from his Enemies he is able to Defend himself:
For certainly the Italians, of all men living, have most reason to understand
this Character, there being no Nation more Close or Dissembling in managing
Revenge than they,: So that when any Kindness is tendered them, which they are
not sensible to have Merited, they presently suspect a Snare, and stand upon
their Guard.

There are a Sort of Men, who seem to fall under the Character of Friends,
being such as would be thought Willing to Oblige the whole World. Men they are
of much Familiarity and easy Access, making always pompous Overtures of
employing their Power for the Service of him that makes Suit to them; nay so
forward are they, that they will prevent the Application, offering to spend and
to be spent before they are addressed to. These generally would be thought to
be Popular, and are of a Close Aspiring Nature. But Unhappy certainly is the
man who relyes upon them; for when once they are pressed to perform their
Promise, they will find twenty little Shifts to put off the Execution, hoping
at last to weary out their Patient, and yet would be still thought to be very
Affectionate and Cordial. And if it happen that the Request (tho never so
Equitable) be such as shall any way distaste a third Person, they will never be
brought to the Stake of Fidelity to their Words; but by a kind of Trimming and
Cajoling, sometimes with one Party, and sometimes with another, they hope to
gain the good Opinion of both, tho in reality of neither: For long Attendance
and Expectation, is able to cancel the Acknowledgements which may be due upon
the Performance of a real Civility: Now instead of this, when a Man, after all
the Alurements of Hope granted upon another Word, and after he has digested
all Delays, shall find himself be-jaded, by meeting a total Disappointment in
the Close, with what Execrations will he resent the Dissimulation and Treachery
of such a Politic, Perfidious Friend. A Wise and Honest man will be cautious
to Engage his Word, much less to give Encouragement to pursue a Request which
he is either Unwilling or Unable to answer.

There is another sort of Friends which a man meets with every where, especialy
in fair Weather, called Parasites or Timons Friends. These are wonderful
Officious and Fawning, always saying what another says, doing what he does, and
endeavoring to divert him by a thousand little Stories and Jests. They are
most Lushious in their Flatteries, and most Lavish in Protestations of Service
and Honor. The Italians call them Calcanti, from their beating it on the Hoof
from House to House about Dinnertime. They will hunt a Venison Pasty upon a
burning Scent, with greater Eagerness and Stanchness too, than when the Dogs
killed it, and will devour it with the same Appetite; so that in this sense
they verify their Title to Friendship, according to the Letter of the old
Roman Proverb, By eating with their Friends many Bushels of Salt, tho when any
Storm or Wind does rise, away go these Butterflies. But not to spend time in
Dissecting such Despicable Insects, which by Blowing only, are able to Taint
and Corrupt the thing they feed upon, I shall now come to consider Friendship
under other Qualifications, and such indeed as are more worthy to be enlarged
upon.

Friends then are of two sorts, first, such to which we have Recourse for
obtaining some Grace, and these generally being in a higher Degree of Power and
Interest than our selves, are called Patrons, and of this kind a man may find
some in the Courts of Princes, by the Help of one sure Friend called Money.
It Is good for a Man to have Friends of this kind to support his Interest and
Credit, and the more he has of them it is the better. Another sort of Friends
are such to whom we have Recourse for Counsel, and whom we admit into our
Cabinet Thoughts; these we call Confidents, and the fewer a Man has of them
it is the better. One is absolutely necessary to make Life Comfortable; an^ here
it is true, That Friendship, at the same time that it Unites two into one,
Divides one into two: For he who lives with another in the Bonds, or rather the
Liberties of Friendship, must of necessity make him a Sharer in the Counsels of
his Breast, as well as in the Affections of his Heart.

To understand the Benefits of Friendship, we ought to consider the several
Qualifications of a Friend, and the ways by which he may be Useful, of which
the first is, For Advice and Counsel, upon which account he ought to be
Discreet, Wise, and Faithful, and consequently to be advanced in Years, Younger
Persons are Airy and Unconstant, whereas those of Maturer years are more fixed
in their Inclinations, and of greater Experience, and so more fit to be relied
on. In the next place, A Man ought, as much as possible, to contract Friendship
with those of equal Quality with himself. They who are Inferior will be apt to
Flatter, and they who are above will expect many times to be flattered, at
least they will stand upon such Punctilio's, and require that little Deference
and Condescension, as will hold some Resemblance with State.

Another Use a Man has of a Friend, is for Society, and for the Recreation of
his Spirits. I know Solitude has sometimes produced great Effects, but
generally we find that Men, when they aree too much alone, their Spirits will
either feed or prey upon themselves, which turns to Melancholy, and makes
Nature Degenerate, or else they will seek to ease themselves of the Burden of
their Thoughts, to such mean and despicable Persons, as shall occurr to them in
the ordinary Course and Circumstances of their Lives, which must needs turn to
the Detriment of Reputation. And because the Thread of Talk is apt to draw out
all the little Passages and Follies of a Man's Life, no Man in Discretion ought
to make another his Companion, of whose Secrecy he has not a good Assurance.
Suitableness of Humor and Disposition seems essentially requisite to Cement
Affections: Melancholy Men are many times Suspicious, and not over Complaisant:
They who are Gay and Airy, are apt to Ridicule the most Serious Occurrenees,
and have little Compassion for another Misfortunes. Choleric Men are apt to
be Injurious, and in their Heats, will not only be Reproachful, but are apt to
Reveal the Secrets of their Friends. Talkative Persons, out of an Itch of
Vanity, will be telling all and more than they know, both of themselves, and
others. He therefore who is of a Mixed and Even Temper, is really the best,
being such a one as can relieve the Oppressed Spirits of another by his own
Alacrity, or else partake of his Burden by Condolence, and so accommodate
himself to the others Condition in all its Circumstances. If they be of such a
Profession, by which one may help another, or if they incline to the same
Studies, or delight in the same Divertisements and Sports, this also must needs
give them an easier Passage into one another's Acquaintance, and make their
Conversation more durable; but in case they be separated by particular Offices,
Correspondence by Letters is a most Effectual Means, not only to Preserve, but
to Improve their Friendship.

The last grand Use of a Friend, is to Solicit Business. A Man many times
shall be reduced to such Circumstances, as 'twill be inconsistent with
Discretion and Modesty, to act Openly in his own Concerns; especially in such
Cases, as do depend upon the Character of a Man's Personal Merit and Qualities;
as also where Bashfulness and want of Experience, may betray him to
Absurdities. I know a Man may meet with those, who will be ready to do all
Friendly Offices, but for the most part they are like Aesop's Friends in the
Apologue of the Lark, who never thought her Young Ones in Danger to be
destroyed, whilst the Husbandman depended on his Friends and Kindred, to cut
the Field of Corn in which she had made her Nest, but when she heard that
Husbandman, upon the Disappointment he met with from his Friends and Kindred,
was resolved to do the Work himself, she thought it then high time to provide
against the Danger, and be gone Of all the Tempers and Dispositions of Men,
there is none more Inconsistent with the true End of Friendship, than that of
one who is pron'd and addicted to his Pleasure: For although such a Man, in the
Heat of Wine or of Conversation, or upon the Prospect he has of another's being
Serviceable to his Ends, may make Protestations of Kindness, yet be assured
almost, he will deceive thee, when thou shall most depend upon his Interest and
Activity. For Men of this Denomination, making their own Ease and Pleasure to
be the Level of all the Measures of Life, let a Friend but Importune them in a
thing which shall give them a little Trouble, and they shall presently look
Coy, speak Coldly, and shall find Excuses to disengage themselves; but if
Solicited pressingly, they will not stick to Reject their Friend for an
Importunate and Impertinent Fellow; but if he be reduced to any Degree of
Poverty and Want, 'twill be a shame, they think, to own any Acquaintance with
him. Whosoever therefore falis into the Conversation of a Man of this
Complexion, would do well to try his Metal betimes, by feigning some Necessity
of using his interest, that so he may know what Stress to put upon him, in a
Case of real Exigence. But let such Supercilious and Sordid Spirits know, That
he who is not a true Friend himself, will never find one of another, for let a
Man's Natural Parts be never so Great, or his Fortune what it will be, he will
find that he is not always able to stand alone, and when such a one shall
require another's Help, perhaps of his Abused Friend, he may expect a Grimace,
or some Compendious and Disdainful thing from him, whom he never faithfully
obliged.

For the Generality of our Friends, they are full only of little Complements
and Ceremonies, and are indeed to be treated much after the same Rate, with a
few Cringes, and Impertinent Repititions of, Tour Humble Servant Sir, and now
and then with some small Scraps of News; but for the Use a Man may have of
them, it is but like that of a Campagne-Coat, to be put off or on for the
present Occasion: They will serve for an hour or two to keep him Warm, but to
have them always hanging at one's Back, or about one, would be an intolerable
Encumbrance. No, no, a true Friend, like my Shirt, is to be worn always next my
Bosom, and serve to cover my Nakedness, with this only difference, That it
ought never to be c^ang'd. To him it is that I have Recourse in the hour of
Trouble, and to him I pour out my Sorrow. Here then is that sweet Fruit of
Friendship: if my Condition be bad, the Evil becomes less by having a Partner;
if good becomes greater by being communicated. If my Friend be well, I am
better from the Joy and Content I find in his Welfare, if he be ill, tho his
Condition may create a Trouble, yet 'twill be a Comfort to me if I can relieve
him; if not, it is some ease to me to condole with him: For really it is greater
Pleasure to suffer with a Friend one dearly loves, than to enjoy most things
without him. When I am wearied out with Business, or (what is more tiresome)
perhaps with Idleness, I go to my Friend, my faithful Companion, and with him I
refresh my Spirits, and we labor to divert each other with all innocent
Converse; and although the Absence of Friends does many times minister cause of
Anxiety and Troble, yet the hopes I have of seeing him, or of hearing good News
from him, does seem to promise me some future Content I have not yet attained
to, and so I am in a state and condition which will be changing for the better:
In fine, if I have any Suit depending, I acquaint my Friend with it, I boldly
crave his Advice, and perhaps his Assistance, he frankly tells me of my Errors,
not in a Reproachful way, but with that Tenderness and Affection, as proves
sufficiently his Sincerity and his Readiness to help me.

And here it is that the Condition of Subjects, is much happier than that of
Princes* For first, Kings cannot contract a true Friendship with their Equals.
Policy and State oblige them to keep at distance from one another, not
suffering them so much as to make an Acquaintance, and if at any time they
meet, it is with so much Precaution of Danger, with such Preparations of State,
with such Punctilio's of Honor and Precedence, with such an Encumbrance of
Retinue, with such Diffidence and Jealousy, and with so many Ceremonies and
Formalities, as cannot choose but render such Interviews very Uneasy,
Expensive, and many times Mischievous; and upon this account they happen but
seldom, and are very short. Nay, so far are Kings from communicating their
Secrets to one another, which yet is the chiefest point of Friendship, that it
is the greatest part of their Policy to conceal them, and therefore they are
forced to have secret Spies upon one another Counsels, even then when they
seem to be in perfect Concord, so that all the Endeavors of Friendship are
sacrificed to Pretensions of State, and even these Alliances hold no longer
than Interest will give Leave. Nay, though they endeavor to strengthen them by
Oaths, or, what is more durable, by Matrimonial Vows, all is of little Force; for
upon the first small Exigence, or Jealousy of State, it is all dissolved, so
that, as they are solemnized for the most part, by the Proxy of a naked Sword,
so War seems to be the surest Issue of such Marriages. This we see in France
and Spain, which notwithstanding their near Mixture of Blood and their constant
Intercourse of Marriages, are in perpetual Hostility, which probably will never
have an End, but in the Ruin of one of these two Monarchies. And as Princes
cannot make a true Friendship with their Equals, so neither can they always do
it safely with their Inferiors, for in the first place, Over great Familiarity
and Friendship betwixt Princes and Subjects, may be dangerous to the Subjects
themselves. Extraordinary Favors are ever the Objects of Popular Envy. The
Miscarriages of Government, whether Real or Imaginary, will be charged upon
them, and sometimes they are delivered up to appease the People, tho in Effect,
the Removal of one great Favorite, does but make way for another to run the
same Destiny. Hence it is, that many give Ambiguous Advice, and study rather to
accommodate themselves to the Genius of a Prince by Compliance and Flatteries,
than to their real Service by intrepid Resolutions, and by faithful and steady
Counsels: For where Effects will many times judge of Counsels, and since the
best designs may sometimes find a contrary Effect, all men will not venture
their present Fortunes upen so Hazardous an Issue. In the next place, over
great Familiarity betwixt Princes and Subjects, has proved sometimes
disadvantagious to Princes themselves, tho certainly there are none who stand
more in need of Friends, and faithful ones too, than Princes, whether we
consider the vast number and weight of Affairs which lies upon them, and of
which they can have no Information but from others, or whether we consider the
real Danger which attends them, either from Faction and secret Conspiracies, or
from Sensual Temptations and Pernicious Flatteries: And if it be their
Misfortunes sometimes to be abused by their Confidents, it is their Happiness at
other times, to receive Faithful and Loyal Service from them, so that upon the
whole, they are such Instruments, without which Government cannot long subsist,
nor a Prince long enjoy his own Repose.

There is nothing more odious, than to stand obliged to some men, who presuming
upon the Performance of some good Offices, take the Liberty to do ill ones,
which is all one, as if a Man should put forth his hand to save me from
Falling, and at another time take the Boldness to trip up my Heels: where a man
therefore does receive an Obligation, he ought to study a convenient time to
make requital, not too suddenly, lest he seem to throw back his Kindness at
him; nor yet ought he to deferr it too long, lest he be thought to be Forgetful
or Ungrateful. Moreover, in ways of Friendship it has been ever held Prudence,
for a Man not to be over-forwards to Oblige, or to make Show of his Affection
by Promises, lest failing, he be thought to want either Power or Honesty to
make good his Undertaking. Besides, men of this Temper, being apt to engage
their Interest to many, are always under a Necessity of disappointing some, and
these will certainly be more disgusted, when they find themselves deceived,
then others can be pleased by any Kindness that shall be conferred upon them.

There is no Enmity so Irreconcilable as that betwixt Persons who were
sometimes the greatest Friends. It Is not with them as with broken Bones, which
are many times stronger by being set again; but it is like a Rupture in the
Heart, where there is no Balsam sufficient to cure the Wounds. To prevent
therefore so fatal a Solution, 'twill not be amiss to propose some Rules, of
which the first is this: To emulate thy Friend in Kindness, and study to do the
same things to him, as thou would he should do to thee; as for Frothy
Complements, Fond Embraces, and Modish Forms, they are not to be practiced
amongst Friends, they are Childish and Effeminate, but let a Man endeavor to
demonstrate the Truth of his Heart, by the Reality of his Actions. The next
Rule is this, For a Man not to flatter his Friend to his Face, but to make him
Sensible, that in his Absence, he has a tender Reguard for his Concerns and
Reputation. Thirdly, Not to believe every ill Report of him, whether it relate
to himself or others; and in case he give a Provocation, not to reply in Heat,
but upon cool Blood, to see whether it amount to a real Injury, or whether he
will come to himself again, by acknowledging the Offense; or whether a Man's
self did not give the first Occasion. But in case the Stabbing Blow be once
given, I hold it almost Superfluous ever to attempt a Reconcilement: For where
men have been Privy to one another Concerns, there will still be some little
Treachery on one side or the other, and this is a Point so Delicate and Tender,
as surpasses all other Injuries. It Is the best way therefore in such cases to
Unsaw Friendship, and not to tear it assunder. The injured Party may withdraw
from the other by little and little, but he may never rip up his Failings: For
such a one will never find a Friend. A Wound may be bound up, And after
Reviling there may be a Reconciliation, says the Wise man, but he that
bewrays Secrets is without Hope: Nay, tho he should not fall to this Degree
of Baseness, yet where there has been a Trust committed, one will live in
perpetual Jealousy and Distrust of the other, as having the Means always in
his Hands to do him Mischief, which cannot but create a secret Fear, and
consequently a Hatred.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Reputation and Fame.
AMongst the Blessings of Fortune, some are in our own Possession, as
Preferment, Honor, Birth, and Riches, some are in the Possession of others,
and amongst these we may reckon Reputation and Fame. Now although the former sort
of Goods seem more desirable, being such of which we may promise to our selves
a more lasting Security, nevertheless the later are of greater Importance, as
being the very Foundation of all Civil Actions, and Glorious Undertakings.
Reputation is a Jewel highly to be valued, being got with Difficulty, lost
Easily, and being once Lost, is hardly or never to be Retrieved. It is the
Opinion which the World has of a Man's Merit and Virtue: Like Letters of
Credit, it procures a Man Respect wherever he comes, and is ready every where
to supply his Occasions. I know it is something Slavish and Hazardous to depend
upon the Breath of others, for the Opinion of Men being many times grounded
upon Prejudice and Partial Affection, False Informations, and Vulgar Fame (all
which are very Unequal and Fallacious Measures) it may fall out so, That one
who is really Deserving, may have the Misfortune to be Cried down, and to be
Trampled in the dust, whilst some Inconsiderable, but Fortunate Fool, shall be
saluted every where with a Prosperous and Healthful Air. To this purpose it is
not Impertinent to relate a History, which Monsieur Facet tells us of a certain
Gentleman in France, who, tho he had as good a Genius for Poetry as any of his
Time, could never gain any Credit upon that Account; at length to convince the
World of the Unjustice done him, he made use of this Expedient. It happened
that there was much Enquiry amongst the Beaux Esprits, after a piece of
Malherbe, a certain Poet in Reputation amongst those of his own Profession. The
foresaid Gentleman, having had the good Fortune to meet with this Work of
Malherbe, he composes something of his own in the same way, and in Imitation of
his Argument, which he made public to the World, avouching it to be the Work
of that celebrated Author. The Critics had no sooner cast their Eyes upon it,
but they presently seemed ravished with Joy, lifting up their Hands and Eyes at
every Verse, making long Pauses at every Stanza, and breaking forth ever and
anon into Admiration of the Divine Spirit and Excellency of that Auth^r, and
had much ado to recover themselves out of the Ecstasy. After this, the foresaid
Gentleman shows these Critics the True and Genuine Piece of Malherbe,
pretending that it was something of his own, which he composed in Imitation of
him, as having Affinity with the same Argument. But see the Effects of Opinion
and Prejudice! No sooner had they tasted of three or four Verses, but they
presently began to look Sour, and Cavil at them. The Sense, says one, is Low
and Trivial, the Expressions, says another, are Flat and Ridiculous, the Words
were Improper, hardly one of them good French, and most absurdly misplaced,
cries a third. After they had Anatomized and Tortured half a dozen Verses at
this Unmerciful rate, they thought it but lost Labor to proceed any further,
and so threw down the Paper, deeming the Author to have had the Style and
Genius of a Switzer rather than of a Frenchman. In fine, when they once came to
understand the true Authors both of one and of the other, they were not a
little surpised at their own Partial Judgment, and ever after held the
Gentleman in that degree of Reputation, which was due to his Merit.

Men acquire Reputation several ways: First, Upon the account of their Natural
Perfections, whether of Body or Mind. Next upon the account of the Moral
Virtues; and lastly, upon the account of their Civil Capacities, such as
Prudence in the Administration of Business, Justness in Commerce, Ability and
Integrity in Office, in all which Faculties, there is required something of
Artifice and Address. Some Men are very Lucky in vending their Counterfeit
Ware, but when the Imposture is once discovered, they are blasted ever after,
so that even their real Virtues will gain them but little Credit; for indeed
there is no Man under Heaven more Ridiculous and Odious than a Hypocrite.

Applause is a thing very near of Kin to Reputation, only it is of a Nature more
Momentany, as requiring always fresh Supplies from new Actions. The ways of
getting it are chiefly such as these, viz. Liberality, Affability, giving of
Respect, Officiousness, or a Promptness to Oblige. But the surest way, is, To
make a Show of having a Public Spirit, without the least Biass of
Self-Interest, and especially by undertaking the Protection of an Inferior
against a Superior; which Method is ever more Plausible and Winning, the
Greater the Person is with whom we do contend, or the Greater the Party is
which it does endeavor to Support: This is called Popularity, which when it
looks asquint at Government, (as we may find perhaps in Modern Examples) it is
of Pernicious Consequence, for the greatest Traitors have been ever those who
have endeavored to Cajole the simple Multitude, and to draw them on to act a
part in their own Ambitious Designs, by pretending to espouse their Grievances.

There is a Sly sort of way by which many labor to win Applause, that is, When
they think they Deserve well, they will be still Discommending themselves, and
their Actions, to that Degree, as shall put a Force on others to commend them:
For when a Man is so Copious in Undervaluing himself, and withal affects a
kind of Modesty in Reporting his own Performances, no man can be so Rude and
ill Bred, as not to help him at such a Lift; but realy this way is so Common,
Gross and Fulsome, as cannot choose but Nauseate the Hearer, and render the
Relation very Impertinent and Ridiculous. Some Men have a Knack of Commending
others to their Faces, to the Intent they may repay them in the same Goyn,
which is no other than that Horse-Civility of Nab me, and I Will nab thee. It Is
something more Artificial for a Man, To Commend that in another, in which he
knows himself to be in some measure Eminent; tho really a Man speaks his Merit
best by Silence, unless it be in such Cases where the Truth of his Actions is
Questioned or Defamed, for here a Man may openly assert his own Merit, where
Silence would be accounted Cowardice and a Confession of Guilt.

Reputation is a Purchase which every Man ought by all fair Means to Perserve,
not only for the Credit and Luster it gives to all the Actions of his Life, but
for the great Difficulties of Recovering it again when once it is Lost. If this
happen through a Man's Misdemeanour, 'twill be a long time before he recover
his former Station, nor will this be brought about too, but by many Proofs of a
real Amendment. If it happen through another Default, as by Slander and
Defamation, I know not how the Detractor can fairly make Reparation for such an
Injury: For tho an Honest Man's Credit will not easily be blasted amongst those
who know him, yet a False Report being once let loose into the open Air, it
flies every where, and is in an hundred Places at once, where the Injured Party
is not known, and where it is Impossible he should be Present to make his own
Defense, or suppose the Slanderer should have so much Conscience as to Confess
his own Guilt (which rarely or never happens) yet it is a thousand to one if
such a Confession does ever arrive to the same Persons, who are prepossessed
with former Reports. Besides, the Majority of Men being Malicious, and Prone to
Believe, or, for Talks-sake, to Speak all the ill things they hear of others, I
conceive it almost Impossible, to make an Adequate Satisfaction for such an
Injury, by Washing out the Blots of a Defamation which is Artificially managed,
and with a Show of Probability. I know not whether Machiavel's Rule holds
always, which is, To throw Dirt enough, and be sure some will stick: I rather
incline to the Opinion of Favorinus; That Strong and Violent Calumnies are not
the most Injurious: Because Men of Judgment will conclude that they proceed
from Malice, and to give little Credit to them, whereas he who faintly Commends
another, is many times more Mischievous, for he seems to possess Men with an
Opinion that he is his Friend, from whence they will conclude, that it is want
of Merit that sets him at so low a rate.

Our Laws, Methinks, seem a little too Remiss against Defamations. It Is true,
the Peerage is well secured, or perhaps they are a little too Rigorous on their
Behalf; but for the Gentry, who are many times Equal to Peers, both as to
Family and Fortune, they may not hope for any such suitable Reparation; but in
this Case they are Levelled with the Meanest of the People, nay, in some Sense
they are Worse: For Injuries of this Nature, if they be offered to a Gentleman,
are measured by a Verdict of Twelve Men, who being generally Clowns, or mean
Yeomen, and having an Aversion or Hatred for the Gentry, are very Incompetent
Judges of Honor. It Is not every Opprobrious Word which ought to be brought
before a Tribunal, this would be Trivial and Endless, but certainly, there may
be some Slanders so contrived, and of that rank Malice, as may prove as
Injurious as Death it self, and for which, a Man might expect from some Juries,
such a Consideration of Damage, as would expose the Complainant but to further
Contempt and Scorn; whereas he who does but Forty Shillings Injury in Stealing
of a Beast, shall lose his Life. I do not justify the Use of Duels, but this
seems Consonant to Common Reason, that when the Laws of a Country do not give
a Man Relief, by the Law of Nature he may relieve himself, so that in some
Circumstances, if the loss of Reputation be Equal to that of our dearest
Enjoyments, and if Reputation may be ruined by Lies, as well as by real
Misdemeanors, I think they are not to be looked upon as the most Guilty of
Criminals, who endeavor to vindicate an Injured Innocence with their Lives: To
prevent all which Mischiefs, there cannot be a better Expedient, than the
Establishment of a Court of Honor.

As for Fame it is of two Sorts. First, That which is Vulgarly so called, which
is the same with common Rumor or Report: This kind of Fame is Inconsiderable
and Base, and with good Reason is called Mendax, hence all Scandalous and
Defamatory Libels are called Famosi. But there is another Sort of Fame, of a
far different Nature, being the Product of an Extraordinary Merit, confirmed by
the Suffrages of Mankind, and by the concurring Testimonies of Time.

Fame and Reputation differ very much, First in respect of the Subject:
Reputation may belong to Private Persons of Mean and Common Merit; but Fame
belongs to those of a greater Genius, such as in Ancient Times were called
Hero's: Next they differ in respect of Extent, the Sphere of Reputation is
properly circumscribed within the narrow Territories of a Man's own
Acquaintance, but Fame reigns where a Man never was, nor never can be. In the
last place, they differ in respect of Duration: Reputation properly belongs to
the Living, for it is nothing but the Credit which a Man gains in the Opinion
of men, by his Actions and Conduct, so that we cannot say with any Congruity,
that Achilles, Alexander, or Phidias are now in Reputation, but we may say that
they are at this day Famous: For Fame is not terminated with Life, but does
rather Commence after Death, and so by a continual Propagation through all the
Succession of Ages, Crescit Eundo, it grows greater by the Progress, not only
in Degree, but in Dimension: So that I doubt not, but that the Fame of Homer is
now much greater, than when the seven Towns contended for his Birth, I say
greater, not only in the Opinion of men, but in the Universality and Extent:
For what was then celebrated in the narrow Cantons of Greece, is now diffused
through the vaster Circles of the Universe; and so we may say of the rest of
the Ancient Worthies, whose Fame will be Celebrated to the last Moment of Time.
We cannot blame Men therefore, if they be more than ordinary desirous, to
purchase this Treasure, which will not only Embalme their Memories, and make
them Fragrant, but also render them Immortal.

Fame seems to marshal Men in this Order. In the first place are Lawgivers;
such as Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus, etc. These reduce Mankind into Civil
Society, and leave them those Maxims by which Kingdoms grow and flourish. In
the next place, are the Founders of Nations, such as Cyrus and Romulus: these I
place after the other, the later seeming only to make the Body, but the former
give the Soul to Government: For Kingdoms once founded, if they be not
preserved by found Laws, will quickly run to Ruin. In the third place, are the
Preservers of Commonwealths, and these are of two Sorts: First, such as by
Military Prowess deliver their Country from Invasion and Ruin, and of this
kind were Themistocles, Scipio, and some others of old: Or secondly, they are
such, who by their Vigilance and Conduct, preserve the State from Civil Discord
and Conspiracies, and such a one was Cicero. As for those who fight for the
Enlargement of Empire and Glory, tho they pretend to make Fame the Motive, they
have really the least Title to it of any, unless it be in the same Sense as
Herostratus had, who, to get himself a Name, burnt the Ephesian Temple, with
this further Addition only to the Impiety, that they make all Mankind the
Sacrifice: For, besides the Wast and Desolation of Places not only Profane but
Sacred, they are never Satiated with Humane Blood, and all to get the Style of
Glorious; whereas indeed the Best of them, come short of many Bruits, in a true
Generous and Martial Valor: And if fighting an Equal or a Stronger Enemy, be a
thing which may deserve an Altar, I know not but Cocks and Dogs may, after the
Egyptian Rites, be Deified, since they far Exceed the proudest Hero's in
Bravery and Courage. They who challenge the next Rank in the Court of Fame, are
the Founders and Restorers of several Sciences, and of other Professions
Beneficial to Mankind, as Galen, and Hippocrates for Physic; Vlpian for the
Laws, Euclid, Archimedes, Proclus, etc. for the Mathematics; Socrates, Plato,
Zeno, Epicurus, and others for Philosophy; with Infinite more of later Date. As
for Aristotle, his Genius would have suited well with the Ottoman Government,
since he endeavored to acquire Empire in Learning, by Strangling his Brethren.
To these I might add the Patrons of Learning, but that their Quality and other
Merits, place them, many times, in a higher Degree of Fame: For such a one was
Augustus Caesar of old, and King Francis the first is Celebrated amongst the
Princes of this later Age, for a great Cherisher of Learning and Learned Men.
Nor may we ommit to mention the Founders of Colleges and Hospitals, and of
other Public Works, whether of Charity, or of Civil Benefit. The last Order of
Men who deserve a Place in the Register of Fame, are the Inventers of Arts, as
of Navigation, Painting, Sculpture, Printing, with Infinite other Mechanical,
Natural, and Experimental Discoveries, and here I know not, whether that
Society lately Instituted in England, might not be Entitled to further Honor,
besides that of being styled the Royal, were the first Design of that Company
duly followed and encouraged.

As for those who endeavored to make their Names Perpetual, by Stupendous and
Expensive Works, as by Pyramids, Obelisks, the Colossus of Rhodes, with many
such like Prodigious and Vain Designs, though they might give occasion for their
Names to be remembered in after Ages, they had no just Pretensions to Fame, The
Emperors Trajan and Antoninus, did really Acquire and Transfer greater Glory
to Posterity, by the Styles of Optimus and Pius, than by their Columns at this
day extant, tho beautified with their Trophies, and other Figures representing
their Heroic Actions. A Pillar or Temple, tho of Marble, cannot be so
Polished, nor so Solid and Durable a Monument, as a Public Work, which shall
render after-Generations Happy; so that the Universality of the Benefit, is
that which gives Life, Amplitude, and Perpetuity to Fame. Ostentation and Vain
Glory are false Colors of Fame, and under this Head we may reduce those, who
hope to get a Name by Pompous Shows, Rich Furniture, Splendid Retinues, and
Profuse Entertainments, all which, when they exceed their due Circumstances, do
indeed make the Actions talked of, but it is in such a way, as 'twere much better
to be ever in Obscurity: For such generally are Condemned by Wise men,
Flattered by Sycophants, Cheated by Knaves, and are the Companions of Fools.

There are some who Acquire Fame, by endeavoring to Shun it, as tho like a
Shadow, 'twould fly from those who follow it, but follow those who fly it. Of
this Nature we have many Examples, amongst Religious Persons of the Primitive
Times: We may judge the Best of them, and that their Behavior proceeded from
Christian Modesty, tho otherwise we find them to be many times Men, that is,
Subject to Ambition and Passions as well as others. Also amongst the
Philosophers, we may meet with some few, who, like Diogenes, became Illustrious
by affecting Obscurity. However, it is certain that the most Subtle and
Ambitious of Persons, do most times make the greatest Show of Humility. There
is one who may make Profession of being Servus Servorum, who in Reality,
declares himself to be Dominus Dominorum; so that the Lower the Shaft is drawn,
the Higher is the Flight designed. This Method, whether it proceed from
Hypocrisy, or from a real Apprehension of Self-Insufficiency, it is certain that
it makes after-Fame more Great; for most men will attribute the Change to
Merit. Things which seem to rise above the Level of their Natures, carry with
them some Show of Miracles, which will be sure to create Admiration, which is
the Mother of Fame. Besides, in an Obscure State, lesser Virtues are more
discernable, than in a state which is more Conspicuous, like a Candle which
shines in the Dark, but makes no Appearance at all, when it is set amongst
greater Lights, and exposed to the open Day.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Conversation.
HAving, in the foregoing Chapters, considered this Great and Beautiful
Creature Man, in all the Organs and Perfections of Body and Mind, let us now
take a general Survey of him as one Consummate and Entire Piece, and as he
stands exposed to View, in the several Postures and Circumstances of Life. He
who would judge aright of a curious Statue, considers first, With what
Exactness every Member is framed and polished, then he considers the Air and
Symmetry of the Whole, and the Correspondence of the Parts to one another. He
takes his several Stands, and when he has surrounded the Figure, and seen it
well in all its Direct and Side-views, and finds all to be Uniform and Natural,
then is he ravished with a real Pleasure in Contemplating the Genius and
Ingenuity of the Artist. First then, we will view Man in the several Figures
that he makes, when he stands in Concert with others of his own Nature, and
when he stands Solitary and alone. Whether it be a Defect, or a Perfection of
Man's Nature, to be obnoxious to Change, is not worth our Dispute; it is
sufficient for our present Purpose, to consider that God who has made all
things in the wisest manner, has made them subject to Vicissitude, and contrary
Dispositions. Thus Summer and Winter, Day and Night, Labor and Rest, Repletion
and Want, with all the Alterations of Life, does not only serve to Embelish
Nature in General, by a grateful Variety, but they are useful also in the Sense
and Relish which they give to one another. For our Purpose, Man, tho he be
intended by Nature for a Sociable Creature, and be Capable of great Improvement
and Pleasure, by Converse, yet were he obliged always to be in Company, his
Spirits would soon be Exhausted. And on the other hand, tho Solitude be very
Beneficial, by giving him Leisure to recollect his Thoughts and Spirits, and to
review his Actions in Silence, yet he nevertheless, who is reduced to a
perpetual Retreat, except he be furnished with Extraordinary Abilities of Body
and Mind, will, for want of new Objects to employ his Thoughts, find himself
assaulted with Legions of his own Phantasms, all which will create in him
greater Distraction, than the confused Noise of an Impertinent and Importunate
Crowd.

As to the Subjest which is before us, in this, as in many other Cases of Life,
the Opinion and Practice of the Majority ought by no means to give the Rule,
and to pass for the Suffrage of Reason. By going into Company men generally
understand nothing else, but going to the Alehouse, or in the Gentiler Phrase,
the Tavern. I know that the Generality of Mankind is of another Sentiment: This
Vice is only National, and being so of Course, it requires a Commentary in an
English Style. And because, Gentlemen of this Denomination, would be thought to
be Merry, I will be men I with them for once. Let us suppose then a Club of
Honest Fellows, to meet together in some such place of Reputation for good
Liquor: After a familiar Hug or two, down they sit, and, with wonderful
Civility, they drink one another's Healths, and the Healths of their
Mistresses: From thence they pass to His Majesty's, and think they act the
Part of Loyal Subjects, by prefixing his Name to a Debauch, many of which could
as well part with their Blood, as pay their Proportion in a Subsidy, when it is
really for His Majesty's and the Nation's Safety, tho perhaps the Sum
required of them does not amount to one single Share in a Reckoning. After His
Majesty's Health, it is fit we should drink the Health of our Friends, for
Example, of the L. Lieutenant of the County, and of some of his Deputy
Lieutenants: This Knight, that Esquire, that honest Fellow must not be
forgotten, tho he be unknown to me by any Obligation, and probably as very a
Sot as any in the Company. No sooner has one performed his part with a good
Grace, but another succeeds, and does Right to the Friends and Acquaintance of
the first; then a Third and a Fourth come on: By this time they begin to be
Mellow, and to Contest; this man has not ha^ it, that man's Glass was not full,
and to make up the Harmony, one sings a drunken Song, a second Dances, another
talks Obscenely, a fourth begins to be Abusive. This man swears Oaths of a
deeper Tincture, than that of the Wine he drinks; that Man pretends to be a
Wit, and spouts Poetry by Enthusiasm; another goes a strain higher, and spits
Atheism and Blasphemy. Here one Lies more Profoundly than he Drinks, Bragging
of the Quarrels he has had with Men, and of the Favors with Women: There
another does nothing but Curse and Damn the Drawer, for bringing up bad Wine.
Here is a Politician, who is for securing the King's Person against Treasonable
Plots, in the Sense as a Man would secure the Person of his Enemy, by Confining
him, and by depriving him of all Means and Liberty to Act; another is for
Settling Religion, for Purging the Clergy, and Rooting out of Popery. And
amongst such a Medly of Humors, it is much if there be not one who would be
thought a downright Honest Fellow, by discovering what he knows of his
Friend's Concerns, and of his own; and to let you see, he shows you all that is
within him, he Vomits out whatsoever is lodged in his Stomach, and in his
Breast too, which proves many times the more Loathsome of the two, I mean his
Unclean Thoughts; to all which let us add the Smoke and Ordure, the Confusion
of Tongues, the Clattering of Pots, and the Knocking for Drawers, with many
other Disorders, of which any one would be sufficient to break the Brains of
any Sober person. In fine, after five or six Hours sweet Refreshment in this
way, the Company begins to Rise up, or rather to Fall down one after another,
and in the midst of Stink, Darkness and Confusion, every one Staggers his
several way, and by the help of Servants are laid to Kennel, where for the
rest, it is fit only to be known by a Scavenger. It Is true, all good Fellows do
not make Merry to this Depth of Bestiality, tho it is seldom, but they arrive to
some Degree or other of it; and he who comes off best, will have but too much
Reason, I fear, to lament his Loss: For admitting such a Conversation shall
become Habitual, as it seldom falls out otherwise, they will in Time be
Sensible of a Notable Decay, First, in their Natural Parts, Secondly, in their
Reputation, in the next place in their Health, and lastly in their Estates,
which are the four great Blessings so Essential to man's Felicity, that the
Loss of any one of them is sufficient to make him Miserable. And it is certainly
but a Sad thing, when a man, upon the Close of his Days, in stead of looking
backwards upon the Virtuous Actions of his past Life, and forwards upon the
Rewards which do attend them in a Future, shall have nothing to entertain his
Thoughts with, but his past Surfeits, his present Pains, and his future Misery;
or if there be any Spark of Sense or Reason yet Unquench'd, 'twill serve only
to discover to him his Irrecoverable Loss, and to make his Condition more Sad
and Deplorable. I have known many, who, whilst they have enjoyed all the
Advantages of a Vigorous Youth, and of an Ingenious Education, whilst they have
lain in the Bosom of Arts and Literature and have had all the Encouragements of
present Maintenance, and of future Preferments, notwithstanding all these, have
stifled all their Natural Endowments, together with their present Enjoyments,
as also all the Hopes of a Future and Solid Happiness, insomuch that at the Age
of Thirty, when a man Naturally is in his greatest Strength and Beauty, when
his Parts are most Florid, his Spirits in the highest Circulation, and all the
Faculties of Body and Mind, are in their full Flower and Luster, then I say,
they have with great Expense and Pain, arrived, if it be not Improper to say
so, to the lowest Sink of Sottishness and Stupidity.

I am not of so Morose Principles, as utterly to banish all good Fellowship in
this kind: The many Occasions of Life, and the frequent Rencounter of Friends,
do invite, if not force Men, sometimes to take this Liberty. That which is
justly Taxable is Frequency, and above all, that Gentile Ceremony of drinking
Healths, with Provocations to others to do the same, tho their Constitutions of
Body be never so Repugnant. I know the drinking of Healths is a Custom, in its
own Nature, Inoffensive and Indifferent: For me to Drink, is an Act of Nature,
and to Remember my Friend, is an Act of Moral Virtue, now in Drinking of a
Health, these two are joined in one. Notwithstanding it is a certain Rule in all
things of this Nature, That where the doing of an Act, can produce little or no
Good, but is probable to produce much Evil, it is Safest to omit it, and of this
kind is the Drinking of Healths without dispute as being the Cement of
Drunkenness, and consequently the Source of all those Fatal Mischiefs, and of
that Beastliness which attend it. And to show the Absurdity of this Ceremony, I
would gladly know, Why we may not as well Eat as Drink one another Healths,
since Eating contributes as much to Life and Health as Drinking; and why all
Persons maugre the Reluctance of their Appetite, and the Weakness of their
Constitutions, should not be forced to Eat so many Slices of Powdered Beef, to
the Good-health and Prosperity of so many Ladies and Gentlemen, as a
Trencher-Champion shall be pleased to name. Nay further; Exercise, no doubt,
contributes to Health as well as Drinking, such as Riding for the Purpose,
which is not only terminated in the Benefit of the Rider, but of another
Person, to whom, I may be, and am oft-times Serviceable by this Exercise, which
I cannot be by Drinking. Let us suppose then a Company of Gentlemen, to meet
together for their Recreation, would it not seem strange and Extravagant, if
these Gentlemen should be obliged to Ride one another Healths, and the Healths
of their Mistresses; and that tho one be Corpulent, another Gouty, a third
Aged, yet maugre all Impediments, every one must Mount and Ride at the same
Tantarrah, tho it were down a Precipice, to show their Courage? This Frolic of
Riding would certainly seem very Extravagant and Ridiculous, and yet it is less
Extravagant than Drinking Healths to Excess, for in this Engagement, most, if
not all, are certain to break their Brains, whereas in the other Exercise, some
one or two only, is but in a Probability to break his Neck. Besides, Estate,
Credit, and Natural Parts are not in so great Danger here, as under Drunkenness
and Intemperance, nor is the Performance attended with so much Nastiness and
Brutality, as in the other Engagement, and may therefore pass for the more
Rational Divertisement.

'Twere much to be wished, That as we follow the Vices, so also that we would
imitate the Virtues of other Nations in this Particular, of those, I mean, who
are blessed with the Warmer Influence of the Sun: They never resort to these
Common Houses, but as they do to other Common Houses, into which all enter in
case of Necessity, and then away; but in stead of Drinking-Clubbs, they have
Academies, either for Music, for Refining their Language, for Exercises of
Oratory, or for Conferences about the Improvements of Art and Nature. Indeed
our Royal Society was a Noble Institution, and is better esteemed of by
Foreigners, than by the Generality of our Natives. It Is Pity but it had a due
Encouragement, and were propagated with a Succession of Inquisitive and
Ingenious Persons, and by a daily Addition of new Discoveries. 'Twere to be
wished also, That some such like Societies as those above mentioned, were
encouraged in other Cities of this Kingdom. They have also in Roman Catholic
Countries, Religious Companies and Sodalities, some of which are very Useful
and Beneficial to the Public. The like also might be Countenanced in England,
without Danger of Popery, and would be found to be less Destructive to
Government, Religion and Property, than many of our Factions Coffee-Houses, or
those Secret Assemblies and Fraternities of Fanatic Clowns; and so I have done
making Merry with my Good-fellows, and shall return to my serious way again.

Whosoever associates himself with another in a way of Familiarity and
Converse, ought to propose one or both of these two Ends, viz. Either to
Communicate or to Receive Benefit, which may be as well by Improving our
Knowledge, as by Refreshing our Spirits, over tired with Business, Labor and
Study, in an Innocent Liberty of Pastime and Discourse. And to this end, Every
man ought to have a Jealousy of those Discontented and Saturnine Tempers, who
are ever apt to interpret all things in the Worst Sense, and if any Miscarriage
happen to be discovered, in the Heat and Confidence of Conversation, they are
not over Candid in their Comments, nor over Faithful in Concealing them,
especially if there be any thing of Interest which may tempt them to be
Persidious.

Could a Man be exalted to that Perfection, as at one View to Survey all the
several Humors, Passions, Designs and Follies in the Inhabitants but of one
City only, 'twould appear doubtless to him, to be a greater Chaos, than that
out of which Nature was at first formed, and it would increase his Pleasure and
Admiration, to consider, That all these Creatures, acting by Different and
Irreconcilable Principles, do notwithstanding all pretend, or at least should
pretend, to act in Conformity to one standing Principle of Nature, viz. that of
Humane Reason. Indeed nothing under a Faculty Divinely assisted, is able to
look upon such an Infinite Number of Contradictions at once. However, it is not
Difficult for an ordinary Capacity, severally to behold a great Number of them,
by entering into the Company and Conversations of Men. I shall not enter upon
the detail by descanting upon the Humors of Rhodomants, of Foplings and the
like, they are too Trivial and Ridiculous, in every place, as well as upon the
Stage. I shall only give my Reader a Taste in two Sorts of Men, which we meet
with in all Company, and which are the Pest of all Innocent Converse. The first
is the great and Impertinent Talker. He is nothing but Drum and Noise, like an
Impudent Domestic Intelligence, he pretends to know all the Affairs of City
and Country, and vents nothing but Impertinence and Lies: He runs from one
thing to another without any Coherence of Subject, Order of Words, and with
great Precipitancy and Confusion of Tongue. And if a Person offer to fasten on
any loose Thread of his Jargon, he replies upon him, Pray Sir, hold give me
Leave to speak but a Word Sir, and I have done, and then runs he on at his
former Carier of Nonsense and Impertinence, and so toties quoties, till at
length he has so stupifi'd and stunned his Hearers, with his continual Rattle
and Tautology, that like men amazed, they know not what it was that began the
Discourse, nor what has been said all the while, nor what to reply; and if they
recover their Senses a little, and enter upon a new Subject, this Drone with
his Buzz puts them all to Silence, and then tames himself upon his
Extraordinary Abilities in Discourse. There is another Sort of Men yet more
Troublesome than the former, I mean the Opiniaster, who to show his Parts, upon
every little Opposition will take up the Cudgels, and fall to Contradiction,
and this too with so much Sweat and Resolution, with such Preambles and
Hypotheses, with such Pompous Expressions, and with such a Supercilious and
Magisterial Mien, as tho an Article of Faith, or the highest Point of Interest
and Honor were brought upon the Trial; whereas the Subject perhaps is some
poor Trivial thing, as, Whether a Cloak or a Campaigne Coat be more Convenient,
which puts me in mind of a great Dispute raised in Holland, which was, Whether
the Hook caught the Fish, or the Fish the Hook: Upon which Grand and Weighty
Question, the Company was divided, but soon fell together again, I mean by the
Ears, and in Conclusion the whole City took the Alarm, and many men lost their
Lives in the Tumult before the Knotty Point could be decided.

Whosoever would gain Applause in Conversation, ought at least to pretend to
Modesty, and to observe the several Critical Minutes of Speech: he ought to
Introduce himself rather by Adding some new Reasons, to confirm the Discourse
of him who spoke last, and so Insinuate into the good Opinion of his Hearer,
than by a Dogmatick and Insolent Contradiction, force the other to stand
stiffly upon his Guard, and to give him a Defiance. If it happen at any time,
that a man gain the Point upon another, he ought by all means to avoid
Ostentation, which looks like an Insult. They who are the greatest Masters in
this Art, will seem at least to make some Ingenuous Submission to him they
engage with, or else with great Dexterity, divert the Discourse to another
Subject, which does not only leave them in the good Opinion of him they do
contend with, but acquires to them a general Applause and Esteem of Courtesy.
Let a Man's Natural or Acquired Parts be never so great, there are two sorts of
Persons, with which a Man ought not to Contest, for the sake of Argument: The
first are those who are much above us in Authority and Power; for besides the
Indecency of Pressing upon our Betters, such Persons, when they find themselves
subdued by another's Reason, will find a time to make him Sensible that they
are above him at other Points, which may prove, if not more Acute, yet more
Wounding than his Arguments. Another Sort of Men, with which we ought to avoid
Contention, are such as are much our Inferiors, for by Coping with them, a Man
renders them Equal to himself, and in case he gets the Better, 'twill be no
Credit, and in case he be Foiled, 'twill leave a Mark of Shame and Reproach
upon him: So that here, as in many other Cases of Life, a Man ought not, in
Prudence, to enter upon such Actions, where the Miscarriage will be far more
Injurious and Detrimental, than the Success can be Beneficial. It Is no small
piece of Art also, for a Man to make little or no Show of that in which the
World knows him to be Skilful: For by this means, his real Ignorance of many
things, will be Concealed, whilst men conclude, his Silence in them, to proceed
from the same Stock of Reservedness and Modesty.

The Knack of telling facetious Stories, if they be not often Repeated, and too
Romantic, is much more Taking in Company, than close and pressing Reasonings;
for these seem to put the Audience too much upon the Rack, and many times force
them to rally all their Strength to make good the Counterpoint, which is a
thing too Serious for a mixed Company, whereas the former Method leaves all men
in a calm Repose, and by a Soft and Gentle Progress, gains upon the Hearers
Fancy, and the pleasant Representation of Passages by Fables, or some Witty
Emblems and Allusions, will not fail to make a firm Impression upon his Memory.
There is another sort of Entertainment, much used in better Company, which is
Railery, being nothing but the sudden Sallies of a pleasant Wit Animadverting
upon the little Faults and Passages of another, with some Tartness mixed with
Pleasantness, being such only as rubbs the Skin, and seems to quicken the
Spirit of him who is the Subject of it, to make use of the same Weapons. He who
uses this Liberty, ought to be well acquainted, with the Persons he sports
with, and to beware of the Satyr; but above all not to make the great and
notorious Miscarriages of another, as also his Blemishes in Body or Reputation,
to be the wanton Subject of his Wit, tho it be clothed in Sense never so
Ambiguous, and the Fancy be never so Pleasant, lest his own Defects be brought
upon the Stage, in which case all the Spectators would be glad to see the first
Aggressor put out of Countenance. 'Twas prudently done of Valerius, who being
Crooked, and Splay-footed, would, by way of Prevention, still begin to Droll
upon himself, and when he had said all the Abusive things to which such a
Deformed Body was obnoxious, and had left nothing for another Wit to work upon,
then would he begin to fall upon the Company, and make them the Subject of his
Sport. Railery seldom goes beyond the third Repartie, without pricking to the
Quick, and he who finds himself to be mastered at this Point, will easily be
wrought upon to make his Repass, with something that is more piercing than his
Wit. Those who are much addicted to Mirth and Railery, are Subject to one
Inconvenience, viz. To have their Words doubtfully Interpreted: For speaking
always in the same Merry Air, we know not when they are Serious, which, in a
further Progress, will beget a Habit of Artifice and Dissimulation, a thing by
no means to be practiced amongst Friends, as being of far less Repute, than a
plain and frank Expression. There is also a kind of gross Railery, in use with
those of a meaner Education, being nothing but a Rustic and Clownish Jeering,
accompanied with some Smutty Phrases, and with Excessive Laughter: This for the
most part proves no other but Abuse, and is never pretended to by any Person of
Breeding and Ingenuity.

Ceremonies are to be avoided in Private and Familiar Society. Some little
Forms of Complement are useful, to Usher in Converse, but whatsoever is Studied
or Pointed, looks Pedantick, and would be as Comical and Ridiculous as to see a
Man with a Spanish Tread, with a Paste-board Collar, and starcht Whiskers, to
make his Entry, and after a profound Reverence, to Invite the Company to a
Collation; or (to pursue the Metaphor) to see the same Collation Consecrated by
the long and solemn Ejaculations of a Groaning Brother. He also who enters into
Company to Divert, and to be Diverted, ought not to have his Countenance
embarrass'd, and his Business to be read by every one in his Forehead: Such a
one, like a piece of Leaven, will quickly make the whole Lump Sour. A Frank
and Cheerful Air, without speaking a word, does, many times, dispose the
Company to Mirth and good Humor, tho, in Persons who frequent the Court,
something more of Artifice is requisite: Such generally are Souple, and are
always ready to accommodate themselves to others Fancies, by some Formalities
of an Obliging Stamp, and by performing little Offices of Kindness, and by
promising Great ones. The Guard, which such ought to keep always upon their
Words and Actions, makes them generally Dissemblers, such at least as conceal
their own Sentiments and Counsels, by a thousand Disguises, which is a thing in
some measure Commendable in all Persons, but is Essential to a Courtier, who
also, by the humble Applications he daily makes to the great Favorites and
Ladies, gets such a Habit of Cringing and Cajolerie, that he cannot divest
himself of such Formalities, when he comes into the Campany of Inferior
Persons.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Solitude.
AS Multitude and Company contribute much to the Refreshment of Nature, and to
the Recreation of our exhausted Spirits, so it sometimes proves more safe, and
less Expensive to seek the same Effect from Solitude. To illustrate this Point
a little, let us suppose a man, who for a-long time has been harrass'd and
wearied with the Prosecution of a Vexatious Suit, of such a one, for Instance,
who, being in some Subordinate Figure of the Government, and who, Attending the
Irregular Motions of greater Bodies, where he meets with nothing but Repulse,
and what is worse, Delay, is at the same time baited by others of Inferior
Quality, who, as they are more Numerous, so are they generally more
Importunate, and Unseasonable in their Applications. To this, let us add the
continual Noise and Ordure of the Town, the bad Accommodation he meets with,
and probably, the disproportionable Expense he is obliged to lie at, for the
Bribing Ministers, and perhaps for the Conveniences of Life: When a Man, I
say, has for a long time lain under all the Tortures of Purse, Body and Mind,
and is upon the matter, at the last Gasp; let us suppose such a one to make a
Truce with his Cruel Assassinant Business, and to seek his Recovery from some
Remote and Solitary Retreat. No sooner is he arrived to this place of
Refreshment, but he finds a Benefit in the Change, he who before was in a
continual Circulation, and hurried about with the Rapid Motion which is annexed
to the Circumference of Fortune's Wheel, is now in his Center. Every Breath of
Air he sucks, is like Balsam to a Bleeding Wound, his Passions Cool, his Blood
runs Calmly, and within the Banks, and all things tend to Tranquillity and
Rest. Like a Man who lately come off the Seas, stands upon the Promontory, and
sees the Dangers he has escaped: He compassionates the Miseries of others, who
are struggling with the Waves, and are every moment in Danger to be swallowed
up. He beholds the Foaming Monster coming on toward him with a roaring Noise,
but his Footing is sure because he stands upon a Rock, and is above the Reach
and Menaces of the Raging Element. And as his Station gives him Security, so
does it afford him Pleasure, when he compares the Tempestuous Ocean under him,
with the Expanse of Heaven over him, of which he has so clear a View, such as
is infinitely more Immense, and is ever Beautiful and Serene. Now tell me what
Herizon is like to this, where things so contrary and Distant, are at once
represented to the Eye, and seem to terminate in one another. The Emblem
reaches my Intentions, when I would compare the Storms and Agitations of this
present Life, with that state of Stability, of which, Retreat and Solitude
gives us so fair a Prospect. Besides the Delight of such Contemplations, let us
consider the Advantage which a Man of Business has, when he can in Silence
review his past Errors, and take new Measures without Disturbance. All things
suggest themselves to his Memory faithfully and in order; so that Multiplicity
of Affairs do not distract, nor false Informations blind his Judgment.

From hence it was that the Founders of Religion and Government,
Archimedes-like, have always drawn their Schemes with a profound Silence, and
in places most remote from Conversation. Moses retired to a Mountain apart,
when he received his Laws from Heaven. In like manner Numa and Mahomet, who
were the Founders of two vast Monarchies, did frequently retire from all Humane
Consort, that they might Project without Interruption; and to draw on the
Credulous Multitude to yield Obedience to their Laws; they pretended to have
secret Conferences with an Aegeria or a Gabriel. Whether the Sybils received
their prodigious Hints from Divine Information, or from a profound
Contemplation, I will not dispute, certain it is that they lived recluse, and in
perpetual Solitude: The dark Grotta's or Caves in which they lay, gave them a
clear Sight of Remote and Future Things. They who would see with more
Exactness, contract their Optics, and he which looks through a Chink or little
Hole, will take a better Aim at the Mark, than one who gazes by an open Light.
As for Spiritual things, and the Glories of another Life, it is certain that
Retreat is of infinite Advantage. He who is in the bottom of a deep Well, has a
distinct Prospect of the Stars which are above him, of which he could not have
a sight were he above ground and in the Sunshine.

To prosecute a little my Considerations upon this Subject, let us make a light
Draught of that Innocent Pleasure and Satisfaction, which a Man finds when he
is alone, if he may be said to be alone, who is surrounded with all the
pleasant Scenes and Beauties of the whole Creation, with what Gust does he taste
the chaste Delights of Nature? How Acute are his Senses, and how Sincere does
every Object present it self? At once he sees all the Varieties of shady Woods,
of lofty Trees, of fruitful Fields, and of flowery Meadows, together with
distant Mountains, and their various Mixtures of Rocks and Valleys, of Light
and Shadows, all which make a confused, but withal a most agreeable and
charming Object. How Orient and Unsullied is every Flower, how admirable in its
Contexture and Color, and how untainted in its Smell? How refreshing is it to
him to sit down at a Fountain Head, to hear the confused Melody of Birds,
together with the Murmuring of the Crystal Waters; and to consider with what
Purity they spring and issue from the Womb? How Fragrant is the Earth, how
Temperate is the Air, how Clear and Gentle are the Streams, how Spotless and
Virgin-like does every thing present it self? and what a charming Languor
surprises him, and makes him a willing Prisoner to his own Felicity? All his
boiling Passions are here extinguished, Revenge is evaporated, and he fears not
to be prosecuted by Treachery and Envy. The Rage of Ambition does now begin to
leave him, and he finds the Torments of Love give place to the chaster Charms
of Nature. Here he may turn and toss his Thoughts with Safety, and give Vent to
the Troubles of his Breast: Here he may expostulate the Injuries of Fate
without Danger of being overheard, and without the Terrors of an Arrest; in a
word, here Pleasure and Security, here Health and Tranquillity do reign. 'Twas
with good reason that Epicurus made choice of Gardens to teach in, when he
proposed Pleasure for the chiefest Good; and let any Man of Sense tell me, tho
never so Sensual, whether a state of Solitude, so Innocent and Delightful, so
Calm and Sedate as that which is now present to our Thoughts, be not infinitely
beyond all the Recreations which Drink and Good-fellows can pretend to, nay
beyond the Delights of Courts, where we meet with many Disgusts, and little
Entertainment but Ceremony and Noise. Upon this Consideration doubtless 'twas,
that two of the greatest Monarchs that ever reigned, Dioclefian and Charles the
Fifth, abandoned the Pomp of Empire in the midst of all its Fortunes and
Flatteries, that they might enjoy the Pleasures of Solitude; and were I in
Circumstances to make my Choice, I would prefer the Garden and little
Partitions of a Carthusian's Cell, before the Walks and spacious Appartments of
the Royal Palace. The Heathens certainly were sensible of this, when they
consecrated the Owl to Minerva, which Bird living in perpetual Solitude and
Obscurity, is a pregnant Emblem of the Way, by which we must attain to Wisdom.

Such then are the Benefits of Solitude, which is to be enjoyed so far only, as
may serve to compose Nature, and to add new Vigor to the Spirits, but is not
to be looked upon as that State of Life, in which we must abide for ever. Man
is born for the good of others as well as of himself, and is of an Active as
well as of a Contemplative Nature: It Is requisite therefore that he sometimes
change the Scenes, lest, living always in a perpetual Tenure of Life, that Ease
should at length degenerate into a Stupidity and Lethargy. Besides, Regard is
to be had to the Different Constitutions and Tempers of Men's Bodies. He who is
of a Melancholy Nature, tho he dream of nothing but Elysium, will in progress
of time find his Dreams turn to Spectrums and Illusion. Every moving of the
Leaves will be an Ambush, and every Worm a Serpent. Every living Creature he
sees, will be a Wolf, a Dragon, and the soft Whispers on the Tree tops, will be
like the Rattling of Spears and Lances; such then is the Constitution of our
Nature, that it cannot long continue in the same Post, but that which once was
its Torment and Vexation, after some short Returns of time, becomes its
Refreshment.

CHAP. XXX. Of Employment.
IT being necessary for every man to be either in Company or alone, conformable
to these two Stations, Divine Providence has proposed to him two different
Courses of Life, viz. Employment and Study, the one being the Entertainment of
the Sociable, and the other of the Solitary Person; and this it does with
regard to the two grand Functions of Nature, Action and Cogitation, without one
or other of which Man soon degenerates into a Beast. Thinking is so essential
to our Nature, that when the Thoughts have nothing Solid to feed upon, like
Eager Spirits, they either feed upon themselves, or rather than starve, they
fasten upon some unsuitable Nutriment, which ripens into Vice. One who has
neither Books nor a Calling, to employ himself upon, is infinitely more tired,
than he who groans under all the Fatigues and Encumbrances of Life. How tedious
does the time appear, as tho it had lost its Wings? The constant Flux and
Intervals of Day and Night, look like that Imaginary duration before the World
was made, the Light of the one makes no new Discoveries, and the Shades of the
other yield no Refreshment, Men's Parts, if they be not Exercised, like
standing Water, will soon Corrupt. How many are there in the World, who, for
want of a due Exertion, languish hourly, they become Negligent and Supine, and
are at length extinguished in utter Stupidity. Others, when their Spirits are
Evaporated, as soon they will be, when there is no Recruit by a substantial
Aliment, retain nothing but the Caput Mortuum, some dry, adust Relics of
their former Flames, which, turning to Melancholy, fills their Minds with a
thousand Vanities and Terrors. Others, who are of a Temper a little more
Mercurial, replenish their Imaginations with various Images, they form this or
that Representation of things, and cloth their little Productions, with all
the Beauties that Fancy can create: After this, they contrive how to give Birth
to their Chimera's, and to try whether there be a real Pleasure in the things
themselves; and thus they pass from the false Pleasure of Thinking, to the real
Pain of Practicing their fond Extravagancies. There is yet another Sort of Men,
who, being of a Restless Disposition, entertain a vain Opinion of their own
Abilities, and to prosecute their Animosities upon the Public, for some
imaginary Disgrace, they dream of nothing but new Modeling the Government, of
Displacing Corrupt Ministers, of Redressing Old Grievances, and of making new
Alliances, viz. Betwixt those old Friends, which have been so Constant always
to one another Interest, Sedition and Treason. There are yet others who fly at
a lower quarry, their chiefest Studies being Pastime and Recreation: Visits,
Plays, Balls and Games, whether of the Field or House, are pretty Amusements to
fill up the vacant Intervals of time, which generally are those that fall
betwixt the hours of Rising and of Going to Bed; but they who are for a more
Masculine Divertisement, take their way to the Alehouse or to the Tavern.

These and many other such ingenious Inventions, are the serious Employments of
the greater part of Mankind, and are of wonderful Virtue to sweeten those
severe Thoughts, which by the impartial Representation of some Important Duty,
would go near to Strangle us. It Is foolish for Men to think, That because they
are Great, they may be therefore Lazy: The glorious Luminaries of Heaven are in
perpetual Motion, and are always streaming down their benign Influence upon
this lower world. The Turks, who, in point of good Economy and Policy, are
many times Clearer sighted than the Christians, are very Remarkable in this,
that even their Emperors, are obliged to make Profession of some Art or other,
to be the subject of their continuing Occupation, as well as a President for
others to imitate. We feed most heartily of the Game which is of our own
Killing, and he doubtless, who eats of the Fruit of his own Labor, and drinks
of the Wine which his own Hands have Planted, tastes with a better Relish and
Appetite, than another who is nourished only by the Sweat of his Neighbors
Brow; and as his Labor finds him Meat and Sauce, so does it contribute to his
Rest, the Nights seem sweet and short, because they pass away in one sound and
continued Sleep.

There is a Race of Men in the World, Men of Business they call themselves,
they are in a continual Hurry, and beat always upon the Hoof. If we offer to
salute a Man of this Denomination, he cannot possibly stay, he must speak with
this Lord and with that Gentleman, the time of Assignation is almost past, and
should he fail, 'twould be of some hundred pounds Damage. Whosoever considers
this Carrier, how he Trotts, Sweats, and Pants, and Ladders at the Mouth, would
really believe that the very Government were in an Agony, and yet at the end of
his Journey, he is not one Step further advanced upon his way, than when he
first set forth, and like the Horse in the Mill, though he walk about from
Morning to Night, he is still in the same place and round, and is perhaps as
poor and blind too. These then are the Flies which, sitting on the Chariot
Wheel, admire themselves, and imagine all the Dust they see, to be raised by
the fluttering of their little Wings. There are yet other busy Flies too, whose
Property it is to vex all they fasten on, not only by buzzing always about their
Ears, but by stinging them too by their unseasonable and importunate Offices:
Such a one pretends great Friendship to every one he meets, and will be a part
of his Confidence whether he will or no, and having little or no Business of
his own to do, he will be giving Advice always in another's. If his Affairs
succeed well, he arrogates all the Glory to himself, by telling the World that
'twas he who put him in the way; but if they succeed ill, he will not fail to
reproach his pretended Friend, in all places wherever he comes, saying, That
had he hearkened to my Advice, it had been otherwise with him, but he may thank
himself. Miserable is the Condition of the Man who falls amongst such Insects,
and yet they swarm in so great Plenty every where, especially in the time of
Sunshine, that it is almost impossible to avoid them.

The first Entrance into Business, is attended generally with some
Discouragements; the Threshold is the place at which we are most apt to
stumble: Whosoever therefore would enter upon a Course of Life, by which he
would make his Fortunes, ought to guide himself by the Advice of others who are
well advanced in Years, and have, for a long time, been accquainted with the
Road he is about to travel in, otherwise he will be still changing Measures,
and be ready to quit his Design upon every little Difficulty. Having conquered
this Pass, his Journey will seem Pleasant, and 'twill be as difficult for him
to leave the way, as it was at first to find it: Frequent Practice will beget a
Habit, and when he begins to taste of the sweet Fruits of Industry, viz.
Profit, and perhaps Honor, these, like Whip and Spur, will make him double his
Pace. By constant Exercise the Man is always kept in breath, and feels a vital
Heat in the quick Circulation of his Spirits: Every Faculty stands Sentinel,
and does discharge his Duty upon the first Alarm; so that his Conversation is
Polite, his Parts are Florid, and the whole Contexture of his Actions is
Nervous and Masculine. But if he be a Person who has a public Charge and
Figure in the Government, the Respect that salutes him in Places where he is
present, and the Fame which proclaims him in Places more remote and distant,
and the public View of all, to which he is exposed, cannot choose but create in
him a firm and generous Resolution, to preserve himself in the same honorable
Station, by all laudable and noble Actions. The Truth of it is, If there be any
thing which may make Ambition a Virtue, it consists in Using the Opportunities
it gives us to Oblige and to Reward, and yet this Inclination would become
Abortive, were it not advanced upon the Theater, and surrounded with
Dependencies.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Study.
THey who are qualified with public Employments are few in number, compared
with others, who, tho of equal Merit, by reason of some cross Influence under
which they lie, seem condemned to Obscurity and to perpetual Retreat. However
it is, there is not that person living, who has the Soul and Spirit of a Man,
but by the Improvement of his Natural Parts, he may reap Benefit from his
Private State, and may be useful also to the Public if he please, I mean by
the way of Study and Learning. By Study, I do not understand that Amusement of
Thought, which consists only in Contemplation, and in a calm Review of the
several Accidents of Life, which kind of Reflection is in it self very Innocent
and Pleasant, and is most useful also to Devotion; but by Study I intend
something more Severe, as being an Obstinate Investigation and Research of
Truth, (yet unknown) by the Help and Assistance of such Natural Mediums, as
Reason does suggest; a thing, which tho it consist in a Sedentary and Unactive
Life, is really more toilsome, than the grand Employ of managing an Intrigue of
State, amongst all the Cross Interests and Counsels of Foreign Courts: Witness
the constant Vigils, that Consumption of Spirits, and the many Languors and
Diseases which attend those, who bend all their Nerves and Faculties, and
travel through all the Labyrinths of Argument, that they may at length arrive
to some new Discovery. And let Men think what they please, they who are
Successful herein, are as Beneficial to the World, as those who are in the
perpetual Circles of an Active Life. The Influence of a Minister of State,
rarely extends beyond the Limits of his own Government, and his Abilities
determine with his Life: whereas a Learned Man, by the Help of Printing, is
present in a thousand places at once, he extends his Power to Foreign Kingdoms,
he makes his Conquest over all that is called Rational, and the Benefit derived
on Mankind, is as durable as the Books and Monuments in which it is Registered.

To illustrate this Argument a little more particularly, I shall consider the
Benefit of Study, either in respect of the person, who makes it his Profession,
or in respect of the Public. In respect of a Man's self, its Fruit is
Knowledge, which is a Ray of the Divine Perfection, such as at the same time
that it does illuminate the Organ, does draw it upwards also toward the first
Fountain of Light, whose Brightness can never diminish, and whose Emanations
are Infinite. The Mind of Man, Eagle-like, the more it is Irradiated, the higher
still 'twill be Rising toward the Sun. 'Twould be infinite to expatiate over
all the Fields of Knowledge; I have already touched upon Natural Philosophy and
Metaphysics, or Contemplation; I shall for Illustration sake, only mention two
Branches more of Humane Knowledge, viz. the Mathematics and History.

First for the Mathematics; if there be any Knowledge can charm a Thinking
Man, it is this. It lays its Foundation upon Principles very easy to be
understood, but withal most Firm and Solid. The Progress is most Natural,
being nothing but a Chain made up of so many Links or Propositions, of which
one draws on another, so that Reason here finds the greatest Freedom and
Pleasure imaginable, in being tied to give Assent. If it be true what some
Philosophers have with great Plausibility delivered, That the chiefest Good
consists in having and Desiring, or in such a Fruition as does beget a further
Appetite, and that Appetite a further Fruition, and so in infinitum. The
Mathematics certainly make the greatest Show of teaching us this Summum bonum:
For no sooner can a man arrive to the Knowledge of one thing, but that thing
does discover another, and this again gives him a Prospect of a third, and so
on; the Understanding still diffusing it self over infinite Regions of new
Discoveries, till by a right Measure and Number, it is at length able to
compute the Face and Greatness of the Universe. Here then Satisfaction and
Appetite are still interchang'd, whilst we drink we thirst, whereas in all
other Enjoyments, be they never so great and affecting, we find there is a
Satiety, after which we begin to nauseate and reject them. Alexander thought it
to have been his greatest Glory to Subdue the World, which when he had brought
to pass, to his own thinking, he then grew sad and wept, that there was not
another for him to conquer. Another great Benefit which we gather from this
kind of Knowledge, is the Certainty of its Truth; it bears the Understanding in
a full and clear View of it; there are no Falacious Shadows of verisimilitude,
there is no Suspicion of any latent Mistake, turn and wind the Proposition
which way you will, the Mind is in a full Acquiescence, and in a most secure
Possession of its purchase. All other Knowledge how pleasant soever, is but
Conjectural and Litigious, subject to perpetual Alterations, and leads the
Enquirers, many times into Infinite Perplexities, and endless Contentions with
one another: Whereas all are reconciled in this; Stoic and Peripatetick,
Catholic and Heretic, will all agree in a Mathematical Demonstration, which
is yet a further Demonstration of the great Beauty and Excellency of Truth.

Next for History, this must be confessed to come short of the Mathematics, as
to Method and Certainty: Besides the Mistakes of Time and the Errors of MSS. we
are led many times into the dark, by the Ignorance and Partiality of the
Writers themselves. No man can tell what was done in the Age past, but with
some Uncertainty, nor what is done in his own Age, but with Danger. So that
those who are most Faithful, are many times less Knowing, and they, who have
most Knowledge of Transactions, are generally least Faithful, being drawn,
either by hopes of Reward, to flatter the Person, or by fear of Misfortune, to
suppress the Truth. But notwithstanding this, Transactions in the Gross are
well enough transmitted to Posterity, and where they are Defective in some
Circumstances, there remains sufficient for Instruction, and to entertain the
Reader with Pleasure. Here I talk familiarly with the wisest Philosophers; I
have their Precepts for my Direction, their Lives for an Example, and their
Deaths for my Encouragement. Here the grand Affairs of many Ages and Kingdoms,
are at once offered to my View: Here I converse with great Hero's, whom, in
their Life time, I might not salute so much as with my Eye. Here I am admitted
Confident to the greatest Statesmen; I know all their Consultations, and more
than what they themselves for the most part knew, I mean their Issue and
Events. I hear Demosthenes and Cicero Haranguing it in full Senate. I see and
hear Augustus and Trajan speaking to their Armies, with the Courage and Bravery
of Soldiers, and with the Cheerfulness and Clemency of Princes. I see them
riding in their Triumphant Chariots. I see them casting down their Gifts upon
the People, who at the same time return them again, by sending up their Vows
and Prayers for their Life and Felicity. Great and Infinite are the Images
which History makes upon my Mind, and such, in Comparison of which, whatsoever
can be represented unto me by my own Sense and Observation, is most Trivial and
Contemptible; how wretched then must the ordinary Accidents and Occurrences of
Life seem to be, when they obtrude themselves upon such Noble Thoughts? All
these privileges I arrive to without Attendance and Crowding, without Bribery
and Flattering: I have Recourse to my Books as often as I please, and when my
Mind is Distracted with little Impertinencies, I divert my self with the
choicest Company, and with my most faithful Counselors. Reason is the
undubitable Birthright of every Man; in this both Prince and Peasant have a
common Interest, and although some acquire a larger Possession of it than
others, yet all, by Nature, have the same Right and Title to it; so that I may
challenge an Interest in whatsoever is Rational, whether Foreign or Native, or
whether it be tendered to me by the Living, or coveigh'd to me by the Works and
Monuments of past Ages.

But the Benefit of Study and Learning, will appear to be yet further
Considerable in respect of the Public. It is to History that the Lawyer has
Recourse for Presidents, and the Statesman for Counsel: It is from History
that a General may learn what Stratagems to use, what Dangers to avoid, and
what Advantages or Disadvantages may arise from Woods or Hills, from Winds and
Rivers, together with what Countries are fittest to be made the Seat of War,
and what Measures are to be taken with Allies, with whatsoever else relates to
the Military Art. It is from History that Princes take their most secure
Directions: Here they will find the cunning Arts, by which Popular Faction and
Rebellion may Usurp upon them, and by what Methods they may be Suppressed. Here
they may learn what Dangers may arise from Sensual Pleasures and Flatteries,
from too much Security and too much Remissness. In a word, here they may find
the whole Art of Government, and if they will not make, at least they may read
their Fortunes in the Examples of others: For tho Men die, and one Age succeeds
another, yet we find through all the Revolutions of Time, that the same Causes,
still return, and yet Men are still swayed by the same Lusts and Passions. The
Inclinations of Men in this Age, differ no more from those of others in the
Precedent, than the Productions of this year's Spring, differ from those of the
former year, that is to say, in Time only, not in Nature. So that tho they seem
to vanish and dye, yet a new Concurrence of the same Causes, will not fail to
produce the same Effects.

Next for Natural Philosophy, it is this which penetrates into the Causes of all
Productions, it understands the Mixture and Virtues of Bodies, whether Plants
or Minerals, with their several Qualities and Uses. It unfolds the Secrets of
Rarefaction and Condensation, of Light, Heat and Motion; it searches into the
Fabric of Man's Body, and understands the use of every Organ, as also the ways
by which Generation, Nutrition, and Sensation are brought to pass, so that
whatsoever Physic can contribute to Life or Health, is derived from hence. In
the last place, for the Mathematician, it is he who teaches a General the Art of
Fortification, and Encamping, as also all the Figures of an Army, with all the
Military Engines of Death and Battery. An Archimedes sitting in his Study, was,
with his Rule and Compass, able to Defend Syracuse against the Roman Army. It Is
the Mathematician who supports Commerce and Traffic, by teaching Navigation;
he measures the Ocean by Longitudes and Latitudes, he bridles the Overflowing
Sea, and upon the Dangerous and Unstable Waves, marks out Roads to all Parts of
the World. He gives the Figure and Dimensions of the Heavens, he divides the
Earth into Climates, and fixes the Boundaries of Kingdoms. To him the Merchant
has recourse in all his Calculations, to him the Husbandman's obliged for all
his Instruments, and by him he is taught to Level and Survey. It Is he who gives
Directions, for raising stately Palaces, for Designing of Triumphal Arches, and
for the Building of useful Bridges, and Aquaeducts. It Is he who gives the
Symmetry of Sculpture, the true Distances of Perspective, with the Proportions
of Figures and Feature. In a word, all Mechanical Works with the Curiosities of
Art, together with whatsoever else is useful and Ornamental, are the Effects of
his Invention. 'Twould be endless to run through all the Liberal Arts, or to
speak of the Usefulness of Ethics, of the Power of Rhetoric, of the sweet
Delights and Charms of Poetry, with all the Benefits which acrue to Man and
Nature from Study. It is sufficient only to have pointed out some General
Instances, from whence it does appear, That all the Blessings of Nature, as
also all the Ornaments and Comforts of Life, are derived from the Solitary and
Thinking Man.

It has been observed indeed by some, That Learned Men are not fit for
Business, being taken up with general Speculations, and that they never descend
so low, as to the Infirmities and Defects of Nature. The sweetness of Repose
makes them shun Labor, and if at any time they enter into Business, the Noise
Deafens them, the Diversity of Humors Disgust them, continual Thoughts, Labor
and Anxiety wearies them, and the Multiplicity and Weight of Affairs, does at
length overwhelm them to the Ground. It Is observed also of such, That being for
the most part of an Innocent Conversation, they judge of others by themselves,
and so coming into the World, they take false Measures of Men, and find their
Error when it is too late. Besides, living a Sedentary Life, and withdrawn from
Company, they are Timorous and Soft in their Looks, which ought to be as firm
as Steel, being to confront Men of Impudence, and to curb the potent
Corruptions of the Times. It Is true, there are many bookish Men of a Cold and
Phlegmatic Temper; their constant Application to Study, makes their Blood
restagnate, and they are so far from discovering any Capacity to govern others,
that they know not how to manage themselves in ordinary Conversation, being
Mopish, Sneaking, and Speaking always in Counter-time. The least Form of
Complement puts them into Confusion, and makes them commit a thousand
Absurdities. Their Gests, Habits, and Expressions are all Comical and
Ridiculous, and any brisk Attaque puts them out of Countenance. These and such
like are the Disgraces, to which hard Study, and easy Nature, do many times
betray Men.

But notwithstanding this, as it has been already in some measure
demonstrated, so will it further appear, That Learning, in its due Extent and
Latitude, is extremely requisite even in Civil and Public Employs. Learning,
properly, is not a perpetual Poring upon one Topic, it is not a piece of
Pedantry; it is a Theory of Men, as well as of Nature, and its Object is as
Large and Universal, as the Notion of a Being. It considers things in their
remoter Causes, and by a Methodical Train, and Connection of Consequences, it
draws the Judgment to assent to something which was unknown before. It Measures
and it Computes: It Multiplies and it Divides: It Unfolds the Signification of
Languages, and Comprehends the Transactions of former Ages: It Understands the
Diversities of Climates and Countries, and can make a Discovery from thence of
the several Inclinations, Interests, and Dispositions of Men. It knows the Bent
and Fabric of the Passions, and in Conformity to them, it teaches us to frame
our Actions, and to form our Expressions. These and many others are the
Benefits of Learning, and such as I take to be Essentially requisite, in one
who is Qualified with any considerable Trust in Government: It Is true, with all
this there must be joined Experience, which cannot be acquired, but by entering
into the several Conversations of Men; to which let me add, a just Balancing of
things with things, an impartial Survey of our own Capacities and Defects, a
sagacious Prospect of what may hinder or advance our Counsels, an exact
Accommodation of the Wheels to one another, together with a steady Patience and
Resolution, which, like a Spring, sets the Engine going, and keeps it in Motion
to the end.

'Twas with great Signification that the Poets feigned Minerva, to be the
Goddess of Arms, and the Patroness of Arts; for if we have Recourse to
Examples, we shall find that Learning and Empire, did ever grow up and flourish
together: This we find verified in the ancient Thebans, and in all the
Principalities of Greece, excepting Sparta. Amongst the Romans, when was Empire
in greater Glory, than in the Times of Augustus? yet when did Arts flourish
more? And even his Predecessor Julius, the greatest Hero that ever lived, and
Founder of that vast Monarchy, at the first was but a Pleader at the Bar: And
Scipio, one of the greatest Generals the World ever had, was ever in his Study,
and at his Book, when he could but gain a few minutes Respite from the Duties
of War, conversing always with Polybius, and Panaetius, the two great Masters
of that Age, for Humanity, and all Polite Literature. From the times of Nerva
down to Commodus, we find a Succession of Wise, and most of them Learned
Princes, and the happiest Age that ever that Empire knew, whether we consider
its vast Extent, or the great Felicity and Peace in which 'twas governed.
Amongst the Goths there was none so Famous as Theoderick: After many Ages of
Confusion and Barbarism, he made Italy again to flourish, and this chiefly by
the Conduct of that great and learned Man Boeuml;thius. But not to run beyond
the Limits of our own Kingdom, who amongst the Saxons was a greater Encourager
of Learning, than King Alfred? yet who was more Victorious in Arms, or more
Wise and Regular in the Administration of State? And to come nearer to our own
Memory, when was the English Nation so Happy, as under the long and glorious
Reign of Queen Elizabeth? who was known to have been not only the most Learned
of all her Sex, but to have exceeded also, in this particular, all the Monarchs
and Princes of Christendom then living, and was not Inferior to the Best of
them in Wisdom and all Princelike Virtues.

In this later Age, we may observe two very remarkable things, which have much
advanced Learning, of which the first was the Art of Printing. This most
Ingenious Invention (tho sometimes of Pernicious as well as of Useful
Consequence) presently set the Wits of that Age a-work, in searching Libraries,
and publishing good ancient Authors, with all Correction imaginable; whereas
for many Ages before there was nothing to be heard of in the World, but the
Jarrs of Scotists and Thomists, of Nominals and Reals, with such like
Impertinencies: And how Industrious soever these Authors seemed to be, their
Learning was little, and their Benefit less, except it were to create Disputes
and Niceties about Religion, which afterward turned to their own Damage. Great
indeed are the Advantages we enjoy from Printing; for by this means Men's
Thoughts are presently diffused through all Parts of the World, and this too in
a Character which all Men can read. A Man may now procure a whole Library at a
Cheaper Rate, than formerly a Volume; besides, the Minds of Authors are more
certainly known when they are published in this way, than when they are Copied
from hand to hand, by thousands of Persons, and so transmitted down through
several Ages, in which case there must needs be great Errors, from the
Ignorance, Negligence and Partiality of Transcribers. But not to defraud
Antiquity of what is justly due, their Industry certainly deserves Praise and
Commendation, who, upon such great Disadvantages, did perform so much. 'Twas a
matter of great Expense then, for a Man to buy a Book or two, and the Work
almost of his Life to transcribe them: And even they, who had the Benefit of
Public Libraries, could not meet with the tenth Part of that, which every
common Shop is now furnished with, tho it must be confessed withal, that if
this Invention has produced more Wheat, so has it produced more Tares and Trash
too.

Another Remarkable thing, which occasioned the Reformation of Learning, was
the Divisions about Religion: This happening not long after the Invention of
Printing, Men's Wits, as well as their Pens, were by Reciprocal Provocations,
sharpened, so that with all Industry they applied themselves to review the
Fathers and Counsels, with other Monuments of Antiquity, and to Examine one
another's Writings, with all Imaginable Exactness. Many Great and Learned Men
appeared on both Sides, and amongst those who adhered to the Papacy, there were
none more Eminent than the Jesuits, who, to give them their due, have left
infinite Monuments of their Indefatigable Industry and Learning, not only in
Matters of Controversy about Religion, but in Relation also to Humane
Literature.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Marriage and Single Life.
I Shall not here discourse of Celibacy and Marriage, in relation to the
public Benefit, for it is most certain that the latter has much the Advantage
of the former, as being that, without which, Mankind would soon decay, and be
extinguished. The Measures therefore which I take of these two States, shall be
with respect to the particular Parties themselves. Should a Man only single out
and expose to View, all the Advantages of which one State is Capable, as also
the Inconveniences only to which the other is Liable, 'twere not Difficult to
make either of them appear Happy or Miserable, according to the Fancy and
Partiality of the Writer: Therefore I shall put them both into the Balance, and
with an Indifferent Hand, weigh them with all their Circumstances, whether Good
or Evil. The different Rites and Ceremonies of Marriage, according to the
Difference of Countries, have been almost Infinite, and cannot therefore be
spoken to, without exceeding the just Limits of an Essay. As for the Ends for
which Marriage was instituted, they are either Natural, as Pleasure, and the
Propagation of Mankind; or else Civil, as mutual Society, Augmentation of
Fortune, Procurement of Friends, by the Access of new Relations, with many such
like Considerations and Advantages.

As touching the Propagation of Humane Species, the Eastern people ever
esteemed of precose and early Marriages, excepting only the Spartans, who being
a Warlike Nation, conceived that Men of Maturer Years, were fitter for Conjugal
Duty, and would beget a more lusty Race. On the contrary, the Romans Married
Young, and by the Papian Law, those who abstained till the Age of 25. or
there-abouts, were incapable of Receiving or Giving Legacies, and degraded also
from many Civil Privileges. Polygamy is a kind of Matrimony, which, how
pleasing soever it may be to Nature, is no way consonant to Civil Society: For
besides the Emulation or Jealousy, which must needs arise amongst many Wives,
to the utter Disturbance of a Family; it is certain also, (how great a Paradox
soever it may seem to be) that it is a great Hindrance to Increase, as appears
to this day by the Turks: For tho their Country be so Vast and Spacious, yet is
it in a manner Desolate, compared with some Parts of Europe, and yet the
Inhabitants of Turkey, are above two thirds of them Greeks and Jews. The Reason
hereof is not Difficult to give; for admitting there is an equal Number both of
Men and Women born into the World, let us suppose, for our purpose, that there
be one hundred of each Sex. Let five Men therefore take but five Wives a-piece,
there will remain by this Account, but seventy five Women, to be Married to
ninety five Men, so that twenty Men must of necessity want Wives: And the
Proportion is the same in any number whatsoever, tho never so great. It Is true,
we read of old, That the Jews, to whom Polygamy was indulged, were very
Numerous; but this certainly proceeded not from that Institution, but from the
particular Temper and Constitution of that People, or from some other secret
Cause, for even at this day, tho they be made to conform in this particular, to
the Nations amongst whom they live, yet are they more Numerous than ever they
were in their own Country, so that, were they united into one Body, they would
exceed, in Number, any Nation now extant upon the Earth.

The Celebacy of the Clergy in Roman Catholic Countries, must be admitted also
to be some Hindrance to Increase, tho not so much as is pretended: For we see
in France, notwithstanding their numerous Clergy, and the many thousands of
Religious Houses, that they are still exceeding Populous. It Is true, it is not
so in Italy, but there are other Reasons to be given for this, besides the
Celibacy of the Clergy. For besides their frequent Castrations, and besides
that Abominable and Unnatural Lust, to which that Nation is addicted, by means
whereof, the other Sex is less made use of; it is observed also in many Places,
especially in the State of Florence, that the Elder Brothers do usually give
themselves over to Liberty, and to the Pleasures of their Mistresses, leaving
the Cadets to inherit their Estates, whom they look upon as noot her than
Stallions, upon the matter good for nothing, but to marry, and to keep up the
Family: It being a thing for the most part Indifferent with them, whether the
Propagation be from themselves or others, so it be from some, who are of the
same Stock; so that Nephews and Neeces, are held with them in the same Degrees
of Affection, as Sons and Daughters.

Mutual Comfort and Conversation is another End of Marriage. For a long
Acquaintance cannot choose but create a great Confidence, and where the Tie is
Indissoluble, there is a Necessity of adhering one to the other. They therefore
who enter into these Engagements, ought well to understand one another
Humors, and to pitch upon something, which shall be a Lasting Cement to unite
Affections, and to render Life Sociable, and this may be either from some
Charms of Person; or what is infinitely more Solid and Durable, from some
agreeable Inclinations and Consent of Nature and Disposition. They therefore
are not in the happiest Condition, who Marry only upon Report, as do the Turks,
where all the Account they have of one another, is from some of their
Relations, who are of the other Sex, and may freely converse together, and
discourse the Point without Jealousy and Disturbance. One thing generally they
take heed to, viz. to procure some of their Relations, who are of the same Sex,
and of an Acquaintance with the other Party, to get a Sight of the naked Body,
which by the Opportunity of Baths, is not Difficult; and by this means, all
Deformities and Sores are exposed to View, which otherways would lie concealed
under the various Arts of Dress: A thing certainly which ought to be inquired
into discreetly, and as far as Modesty will allow, since the Deformity or
Diseases of the Parents, leave a Blemish and Taint, many times, upon their
Issue; so that besides the Content which every Man may propose to his own
Fancy, he ought at least to be as careful of his Race, as he is of that of his
Horses, where the Fairest and most Beautiful are made Choice of for Breed;
which thing, tho it be practiced amongst the Vtopians, might be admitted also
as useful in a real Government, under some Circumstances. And here again it is,
that Princes are much more Unhappy than their Subjects: For by Marrying with
their Equals, it is evident that the Greatness of their Quality, must allow them
but a very narrow Compass to make their Choice in, and these peradventure such
as they never can see, till the Knot be tied and all be consummated. Reasons of
State force them many times to marry such, whom the Dictates of Nature would
Repudiate, tho it seldom happens, that even those Politic Considerations to
which they sacrifice their Private Enjoyments, are of any lasting Benefit.

Increase of Riches is looked upon by most, to be a good Inducement to
Marriage. It Is known to what a Greatness Spain has grown by observing this
Maxim, Tu Foelix Austria nube. They have gained more by the Distaff, than ever
France could conquer by the Sword. And even amongst us now adays, he is
accounted Fortunate and Discreet who marries a Rich Wife, tho perhaps the fair
Lady, to whom the Courtship is made, with all the Protestations of Love and
Honor, be nothing but some Warped, Toothless and Withered Hagg. Let a
Gentlewoman be well Born, let her be Modest and Ingeniously Educated, if she
has not Money, she must in all Probability die a Dry, Old, Discontented Maid,
or else marry with some mean, inconsiderable Person: But if she be Handsome,
it is possible she may be preferred to be a Miss; a Course of Life, as the World
now goes, which many value before the Fortunes and honest Enjoyments of the
Marriage Bed. It Is true, in Foreign Countries, there is another third way for
those, whom either Fortune or Nature, have made less liable to be Courted, I
mean Religious Houses, where all such Persons may, without Reproach, pass away
the Remainder of their Lives in a Creditable Retreat; but such Expedients suit
not with the temper of this Climate: If Fortune and Phillis be not allied to
one another, there is probably no other Road for her to travel in, but the
common High Way, unless she can draw in some Rich young Fop, who must by all
means have Spurs clapped upon him, that he may make the greater Jingle.

Marriage, by the Access of new Relations, many times becomes the Instrument of
Raising Men's Fortunes. He who marries the Daughter or Niece of a great
Clergyman, or of a Man in Office, needs not dispute a Portion, and even in the
State, as well as in the Church, we may observe one fourth at least, of those
who are the Mignons of the Times, to hold their Places by Lady-Service: So that
what some have noted, That he who has Wife and Children, has given Hostages
to Fortune, is true only in a Restrained and Qualified Sense, in as much as
single Persons are less Distracted with Thoughts of Providing for others; and
are in a far greater Freedom also, to take up their Quarters in whatsoever
Place, or with whatsoever Persons shall suit with their Occasions: So that
having their Spirits in greater Vigor, and having in a manner all the
Circumstances of Living, within their own Command, they seem to be much better
prepared for choosing all due and proportionable Means, and to be much abler
for Execution: And yet I know not, why one, who chooses the one meet and
necessary Help beforementioned, may not be accounted as Sage and Prudent as
another, who, by Courting diverse Humors, and by a long Train of Services, and
of obsequeous Applications, does at length make his way to Preferment; tho
there seems to be this Difference between them, that one Walking by a borrowed
Strength, when once that Support is withdrawn, if he be not a Man of much
Personal Merit, he is in great Danger of Falling, or at least of being stopped in
his further Progress; whereas the other, like a Man of Health and Maturity,
walks by his own Strength: He relies not upon Crutches, nor has he Leading
Strings fastened to his Shoulders to keep him from Falling. He treads his Ground
with a good Assurance, and will, in all likelihood hold out his Journey to the
End.

As to Riches or Patrimonial Fortune, Single Men, living in Ease and Liberty,
are commonly Profuse, and outlive their Estates; whereas the Married Man, by
reason of his Charge and Family, is obliged to live Frugally, and to pursue
some Industrious Course or other, which in the end puts him in the Road of
Getting, and acquaints him with all the Ways and Arts, of those we call notable
and thriving Men. so that as married Men are still generally more Interested
and Subtle in their Dealings than others, so are they less Sincere in their
Affections and Friendships. Great is the Alteration betwixt the same Man
married and single: For it has been observed that, the Change does not only
touch the Man, but also his Cloths, his Hat, his Periwig, his Linen, all is
Married; every thing about him looks a little Over-worn and Smutty, so that the
Man himself seems to be nothing but a Second-hand Garment, and what is worst of
all, he commonly declines the Conversation of his old Friends, either out of
Sullenness and Discontent, or what is more probable, by reason of some secret
and malign Influence of his Wife; for many Women think that all Love is lost,
which falls not into their own Bosoms. But the Case is otherways with those who
profess Celebacy; for it being Natural to most or all Men, to Love to some
Degree or other, they whose Affections are not limited to one Object, are prone
to Compassionate Mankind in general, as has been observed in such who live
under the Obligations of Religious Vows, as Priests and Friars. Love is like a
Torrent, which, when it is not confined to one Chanal, does diffuse it self
over all the Neighboring Fields, and glides along with a more soft and even
Course; which kind of Love is far more Generous and Beneficial to the Public,
whereas the other tends only to a Man's Private Solace and Content. And upon
this Account also it is that a Single Life suits well with the Profession of a
Clergyman, for such a one being constituted as a Spiritual Father, over many
thousands peradventure, he can never have that Tenderness and Care over so
numerous a Family, who chains his Affections to his Domestic and Conjugal
Concerns. Besides, the married Man cannot exercise that Hospitality, nor
perform those Works of Charity as the other, much less can he, who is always
Sollicitous about the Maintenance and Fortunes of his Children, have his
Thoughts free, nor pursue his Duty without great Distraction, a thing which is
a little unpleasant, and utterly Unsuitable with Men of abstracted Meditations,
and with the abstruser Studies of Divinity. As for the Objection which is taken
from the Scandals, which are sometimes given by the Unmarried Clergy, it is
frivolous: For if we consider the matter Impartially, we shall find more
Examples and greater Scandals amongst the Married, than amongst the others,
whether, they be Laymen, or of the Spiritual Order. However 'twould be a thing
extremely conducing to the Splendor of the Ecclesiastic Function, and
consequently Beneficial to the whole Church, that Celebacy should be annexed,
if not to the Persons, at least to the greater Dignities of the Church; for by
this means no man would be restrained from Marriage, only in case he should
think it Expedient to change his Condition, he might be obliged to quit his
Dignity, and not rob the Altar of what is Consecrated to God, by converting it
to the Use and Benefit of his private Family, though perhaps it be to maintain
them only in a Secular Luxe and Splendor. Nor would this be a greater
Restraint, than what those lie under, who enjoy Academick Preferments, which,
tho of less Consequence, are enjoined in Prudence to be Inconsistent with a
Conjugal Estate. But leaving these and such like Considerations, to another
Place, it is certain, That either State of Life has its proper Comforts and
Troubles; so that the Circumstances of particular men, differing from one
another, there can be no certain Standard proposed in the matter, but every Man
ought to be accounted Wise and Prudent, who chooses that which is Suitable to
his Genius, and most conducing to his own true Content and Happiness.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Death.
THere are three Things which make the Consideration of Death very necessary.
First, its Certainty; next, the Uncertainty of the Time, Place and Manner; and
lastly, its Consequence. In Accidents of this Life, to which we are obnoxious,
we are many times Remiss and Negligent about them, by reason of their
Contingency, being such as may happen or not happen to us; and in case they do
not happen, all our Thoughts about them are misspent. But it is not so betwixt us
and Death; this will certainly seize us, and therefore we ought to be always
ready to meet it, least it coming on us at unawares, we fall into greater
Streights and Disorders. It Is a Tribute we all owe to Nature, it being as
necessary for a Man to die, as to be born. Flowers, Leaves and Fruits live we
see, but for a Year; they Spring forth, Ripen, and then drop off, whereas the
Plants which bore them, may continue yearly to bring forth anew, tho after a
certain Flux of Time, these also are cut off, or of their own natures Wither
and Dye. Individual Men, who are, as it were, the Fruit of a Tree, are of a
much shorter Duration, than the Family or Stock they are descended from, and
yet we see that the Stock it self must at last decay: For Families which have
flourished for many Ages, are at length reduced to their Primitive Obscurity
and Dust: Nay the stately Cedars, whose Wood is said to preserve all other
things from Worms and Corruption, must at length fall; even Kingdoms and
Empires, how deep soever they be rooted, and how wide soever they extend their
Arms. It Is in the Power of Art sometimes to prolong Life, but it is more the
Practice of Art to Shorten it, but whatever Benefit there be, it is but a
Reprieve at best, whilst the Execution is certain.

There goes a pleasant Story of a certain Emperor of China, who, amongst his
other vain Designs, had a great Desire to make his Life Immortal. A certain
Knavish Physician of the Court, who pretended to be well skilled in preparing
Drinks, gained Credit and Interest with the King, by giving out that he had a
Secret, a curious Divine Elixir, which would not only Prolong Life, but Secure
him from Death. The Potion was prepared and presented to the King, in the
presence of all his great Officers and Ministers of State. One amongst the
rest, endeavoring by all means possible, to divert the King from his foolish
Fancy, but nothing prevailing, he made no more ado, but catching up the
Immortal Cup, drank it roundly off. The Emperor fell immediately into a Rage;
for believing that he was robbed of Immortality, he presently took Counsel what
Death the bold Offender ought to suffer: At which the Daring Courtier, nothing
daunted, told him Smilingly; Sir, take heed what you do, for it is not in your
Power to kill me, being now made Immortal, but if I am yet capable to suffer
Death, there is no reason for you to be angry with me, since I have not robbed
you of the Immortal Cup, but undeceived you only, and by my own Experiment,
delivered you from the Lies and Fraud of an Impostour. At this the Emperor was
well pleased, and commended the Prudence and Behavior of that Courtier.

Let Kings flatter themselves, or be by others flattered, with the Styles of
Glorious, and Invincible, they will yet find themselves to be but Mortal, and
more Mortal perhaps than other Men. Nor can any Man upon sight of a Scull say,
This was the Head which Love or Victory did Crown, or show a Difference betwixt
Common and Imperial Dust. If we look over the best of the Roman Emperors, we
shall find but few of them, to go off the Stage with dry Veins; nevertheless
many of them found a way still to make themselves Immortal, for 'twas but for a
Knight of the Post or two to Swear, That they saw the Soul of the Departed,
carried up to Heaven, and he was presently Consecrated. So great and sacred is
the Guest of Perjury, that if it be sometimes Capable to take away Men's Lives,
so it has been at other times as Powerful, and more Bountiful in giving Life
and Immortality to others, and to make them Gods.

Another Consideration of Death, is that of its Uncertainty, in relation to the
Circumstances of it, and of this we have Infinite Examples from all Places,
Histories, and Ages. There are a sort of Knaves in the World who, by I know not
what Acquaintance with the Stars, pretend to Predict the Destinies of Men; and
there are a sort of Fools too, who are so Simple as to Credit them. Such
Predictions are shot at Rovers, and if one of a thousand come near the Mark,
it is presently the Work of Art, tho if we examine such Reports, a little
strictly, besides the manifest Falsity of almost all of them, the rest depend
much upon the Fancy of the Hearer, and upon the Invention of the Reporter, who
must make it seem something Strange, to gain Attention and Applause. Indeed it
so falls out sometimes, that it is not Difficult to Foretell the Death of a Man,
as in the case of some Diseased Persons, Malefactors, or where Designs are laid
against another's Life, for here the Immediate Causes, whether Moral or
Natural, are within our Sight; but to foretell such Events from General or
Remoter Causes, or by any secret Instinct, is certainly vain. Strange Accidents
indeed have sometimes happened, as that of Calphurnia's Dream, the Night before
her Husband was murdered, etc. But this concludes nothing, it being no Wonder,
if amongst Millions of Dreams and Predictions, some one or two should happen to
be true. I know not whether he did well or ill, who when a flattering
Astrologer made a Proffer to Calculate his Nativity, asked him whether ever he
had calculated his own, be told him yes; and that 'twas his Destiny to live
many years, etc. To whom the other replied that he was mistaken, and that he
knew better than the Stars, that it was his Destiny to dye within an hour; for
he presently commanded him to be put to Death, and by this means made the
Confutation of his Imposture to be his Punishment.

The last Consideration of Death, has Relation to the State which follows it.
They who are instructed in the Belief of future Rewards and Punishments, as
also of their Nature and Duration, must needs have a mighty Concern upon their
Thoughts, at the Approach of Death, which tho it may be very Inconsiderable, if
we consider it as a Tribute to Nature: yet when we look upon it as a Passage to
Everlasting Happiness or Misery, it cannot choose but appear Terrible. Of all
Men, they seem to be best prepared for this Hour, who have a good Assurance
from the Justness of their Actions, and the Integrity of their Lives. But above
all, such who think they die for the Confession and Defense of what they do
believe, to be a Religious Truth, are of all others less liable to Fear, and do
in an eminent manner Challenge a Crown; on the contrary they rejoice, and many
times seem transported with Ecstasie, when they come to their Executions, and
these are called Martyrs. Infinite was their Number, and great was their
Courage and Constancy, in the Primitive Church, and even in later Times, we
have many Examples in Men of all Persuasions, who have maintained their
Opinions by Dying for them, and who seemed to leave the World with great
Appearance of present Comfort, and of future Happiness. Jerome of Prague's
Behavior at his Death, made his very Enemies to pity and admire him; and the
Anabaptists of Germany, by the Testimony of Florimond Raymond their Adversary,
out-did those of the Roman Catholic Communion; nay that execrable Impostour
and Blasphemer, John of Leyden, might compare with any of the Primitive
Martyrs, for Patience under his Torments, which yet were Exquisite enough, tho
short of his horrid Impieties. We can draw therefore no good Argument to prove
the Truth of any Doctrine, from the Constancy of the Martyr: For, where Men are
once persuaded they are in the Right, tho it be never so great an Error, such
a Persuasion shall be as Powerful as the Truth it self, and they will with Joy
meet Death which as it puts a Period to their present Calamities, so does it
promise to open to them a Door to Eternal Felicity. Sometimes wefind that even
good and pious men have been Timorous when they came to Dye. The Endearments of
Life are strong Remarks, and the Considerations of Guilt and Punishment, which
the best of Men ought to have before their Eyes, are able to shake the stoutest
Courage.

They who suffer by the Hand of an Executioner, seem in some Respects to have
an Advantage over such as die a Natural Death. First, they dye generally with
less Pain, and the Pain they undergo is of less Duration, than that of those
who pine away by Sickness, unless it be in case of Torture. In the next place,
they retain their Senses and Faculties, Entire to the last, so that they can
fix their Minds upon their Future State, with more Strength and without
Distraction. They can quit the Stage of Life with good Thoughts, tho the Infamy
which sometimes attends such a Death, as also the Calamities it entails upon
Posterity, cannot choose but make it Bitter. We have many Examples of the
Moraliz'd Heathens, who suffered a Violent Death with all Imaginable
Resolution: Some out of an Heroic Bravery; others upon the Apprehension they
had of being in a more happy State; but generally upon a Persuasion of being
reduced to the same Condition they were in before they were born, believing no
other Immortality than that of Fame, nor no other Rewards after Death, than the
Praise due from after Ages, upon the Remembrance of their Virtuous Actions. And
certainly with Men of this Belief, 'twas no such Daring matter, to stare Death
in the Face, and to Conquer all its Terrors by a Voluntary Submission to it;
for 'twas no more but for a Man to close up all the Travails, Pains and
Misfortunes of Life, with one Sweet and Eternal Sleep. Hence came these
Reasonings of theirs; if there be any Sense after Death, the Soul then cannot
but exult and triumph, for its Deliverance from the straight Imprisonment of
the Body: That which immediately before was a Captive, is now set at Liberty,
it is advanced on high; it has a free and a full Prospect of all the Glorious
Sights in Nature: Here it looks down upon all humane and Mortal things, with a
kind of Pity and Contempt, it sees all the Follies and Transactions of past
Life at one View, and beholds those Divine Mysteries clearly and distinctly,
whose Knowledge formerly it had so often sought in vain. But on the other hand,
if there be nothing which survives the Body, he cannot be miserable who ceases
to be: For if he has lost much, it is yet much more which he does not fear. He
is now at everlasting Rest; the Fears and Miseries of Poverty, the Anxiety of
Riches, the Vexations of a Process, do not devour him. He is not tormented
with the Furies of Lust or Anger, he is not Envious at another's Felicity, nor
Sollicitous about his own. No public nor private Calamities disturb his
^easures, no Scenes of Blood appear before his Eyes, no Dreams or Terrors of
the Night discompose his Sleep: He does not hang in Suspense upon the Event of
future things, which fall out always for the worse, he does not fear the
Calumnies of the Base, nor the Frowns of the Great; he does not fear the
Assaults of the Perfidious Assassinant, nor yet the more Dangerous and Mortal
Wounds of a Perjured Tongue. In a word, the Evils he is delivered from, are
greater than the Good things he is deprived of, and he is arrived to that
Station of Security, from which he cannot be driven by Force, nor drawn off by
Terrors. Why therefore should any one be Sollicitous about another's Death,
which will either make him Happy, or reduce him to his first Nothing? If Happy,
it is Envy to deplore him; if Nothing, it is Folly. It Is Death which delivers the
Prisoner from his Fetters, and the Slave and Captive from his Chain: It Is Death
which rescues the Servant from the endless Toyls of a Laborious Life, the Poor
from Oppression, and makes the Beggar equal with Princes. Here Desperation
finds a Remedy, all the Languors of Disease, all the Frustrations and
Tediousness of Life, all the Infirmities of Age, all the Disquiets of the
Passions, and all the Calamities of Fortune, with whatsoev^^ can make a man
Miserable, vanish in these Shades. Such as these were the Notions, which many
of the more learned Heathens had of Death: But for all this we find it Natural
to most men, to seek the Prolongation of Life by all means possible. The Poor
man in the Fable, when he had drudg'd all day in cutting and carrying Thorns,
at last, spent with Heat and Labor, he threw away his Burden, and sitting down
upon the Ground, calls on Death to deliver him from his wretched Life: Grim
Death presently appears with his Javelin in his hand, and asked him what he had
to say; Nothing, replies the good Man, but that you will be so kind, as to help
me up again with my Burden. Tho we often cry out of a weary Life, yet when once
that ghastly Adversary appears, most men desire to return to their former
Burden, and to toil longer amongst the Briars and Vexations of Life.

The best Course therefore that a Man can take, to fortify himself against the
Terrors of Death, is, To think often of it. The Wolf in the Fable, when he
first saw the Lion, was ready to die with Fear; the next time he saw him, he
was afraid indeed; but the third time he grew Bold to draw near, and to
converse with him: Hence it is that Soldiers, who converse always with Wounds
and Dying Men, are no ways concerned at the Fall of others, or at their own
Danger: But this kind of Hardiness proceeds rather from Custom, than from a
well settled Consideration. Naturally speaking, that which makes Men dread
Death, is the evil of Privation rather than of Pain. The Separation of Soul and
Body, in which consists Death, is probably without Sense, and whatever Pains
precede it, they are short of the Dolours of many Diseases, and of other
Disasters which every Man meets with, some time or other of his Life. But to
bid an Eternal Adieu to Wife, Children, Friends, Pleasures, Pomps, Preferments,
with all the Blandishments of this World, is uneasy to most Men, and to this
Condition must the greatest Favorite of Fortune be reduced. The best
Consideration therefore in this Case, is that of Epictetus, who compares the
Course of Man's, Life to that of a Passenger at Sea, where the Patron or Master
of the Vessel, being to take in Fresh Water, or some such necessary Provision,
sets his Passengers ashore for Refreshment: To pass away the time a little,
some fall to gathering Cockles, others Reeds, or some such Toys they meet
with, yet so as to be always ready to leave them, whenever the Master calls
his Men aboard: So in this Life, instead of a Shell or Bulrush, thou may
have a Wife, a Child, or some such fond Endearment: But when the Patron of the
Bark calls upon thee to leave the Land, be ready to quit such Fancies, and run
speedily to the Ship, lest being left behind, thou fail to arrive at the
desired Haven: But if thou art Old, beware thou do not wander far from thy
Vessel, lest thou be not able to reach it, when thou art called away. The Evil
which comes unlooked for, is most Astonishing, but when it is foreseen, it is
half Digested before it touch us. Let a Man remember that he is born Subject to
the Law of Nature, and that, as no Man dies, who did not sometimes live; so no
Man lives who shall not sometimes dye.

Aemilius Paulus had two Sons of great Hopes and Virtue; of which one dyed four
days before his Father's Triumph, the other, who rid with him in the Victorious
Chariot, dyed the third day after; two sad Attendants to Usher in and close a
Triumph, upon which, he made this Reflection in his Harangue to the Senate.
When our Felicity was at the highest Pitch, I feared that Fortune would quickly
change, and that Heaven had some Calamity in reserve; whereupon I made my
Prayers to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, That if there were any Misfortune
hanging over the People of Rome, that they would divert it from them, by
inflicting it upon my own House and Family. It Is well therefore with us Romans;
for the Gods, by being Propitious to my Prayers, have so ordered it, that you
should grieve at my Loss, rather than I should lament yours. Here was true
Roman Metal, or rather Christian, had the Object of his Devotion, been as good
as his Intention. No Man will ever be fit to die, who in his Lifetime cannot
be Content to part with all Temporal Enjoyments, nor can any Man be thus
prepared, who is not Moderate in the Use of them, and Disengaged in his
Affections for them; and indeed he who is thus disposed, does really enjoy
most: For over strong Desires and Delights leave Men subject always to great
Jealousies and Fears; so that the very Pleasure of Fruition; is lost in the
Thoughts of being deprived of what we have in our actual Possession.

The CONCLUSION.
With some Considerations directing every Man toward the Attainment of his own
Felicity.
HAving, in the foregoing Chapters, Discoursed of Man, under the several
Occurrences of his Life, I shall by way of Conclusion, sum up the precedent
Considerations, by applying them to the State and Circumstance of every
particular Person. This I shall endeavor to do, by showing, That all the
Blessings of Fortune, how dear soever, are no Essential Part of Man's Felicity,
but that his Happiness must be derived from other Principles, and such as lie
within our own Power. I shall not amuse my Reader nor my self, by Commenting on
the Opinions of the Ancients, touching Man's Ultimate Happiness or Good.
Amongst the old Philosophers, the Stoics determined it to consist in a
Tranquillity of Mind, free from all the Perturbations of the Passions: Others
would have it to consist in a perpetual and interchangable Succession of
Fruition and Desire. Amongst the Schoolmen, some would have it to consist in
Intellectual Operations, because Man's chiefest Felicity ought to be seated in
the Noblest of Faculties: Others, since good is the Object of the Will, refer
Felicity to this Faculty, making it to consist in Action, and in the Exercise
of Virtue. From all which Variety of Opinions we cannot draw a definition, but
collect only a description of Man's Felicity by borrowing Light from each of
the forementioned Seats. I conceive it therefore to consist in perpetual
Returns of New Desires and New Enjoyments, accompanied with a Constant Serenity
and Health of Mind. Neither do I limit the Object of Desire to things purely
practical, since whatsoever is the Object of Knowledge, is the Object also of
Desire; so that Desire must extend to all Perfections and Objects of the
Understanding as well as of the Will. Now because the Objects of Knowledge and
of Desire are Infinite, and Infinite Objects cannot be at once present to the
Thoughts of any thing that is Finite, there must be an Infinite duration
allowed to Man to make him Capable of receiving whatsoever may be the Object of
Desire, which can never consist with this State of Nature, where all is
momentany and uncertain, and even the greatest and most Permanent Productions
are Circumscribed by the Finite Periods and Revolutions of Time.

Waving therefore this Ultimate Felicity of Man, which implys an Immensurable
or Eternal Duration, I shall determine the Consideration of Man's Felicity, as
it falls under the Circumstances of Life, and shall Endeavor to demonstrate
that it is in the Power of every Man, Acting after the Principles of Natural
Reason, to advance his own Felicity; and here I must borrow from the Stoic;
for tho it be Impossible for a Man to arrive to that upper Region of Serenity,
which lies above the Winds and Tempests of the Passions, nevertheless I believe
it to be in the Power of a Man to defend himself from their Rage, to correct
their violence, and to confine them within their proper Circles, which I take
to be one great step toward that Felicity I am now Discoursing of. Then for
the Alternate Vicissitudes or Returns of Appetite and Fruition, it is a thing
no way attainable in this Life, for we desire Infinite things, which we never
shall, nor are ever capable to Enjoy. The use to be made of such a
Consideration then, is this, that if a Man's Enjoyments do not reach the
Measures of his Mind; let him bring his Mind to the Measures of his Enjoyments,
for whether the Hill come to Mahomet, or Mahomet go to the Hill, matters not
much, so they do but meet together: and I dare be bold to say, that he who
Frames his desires to the Circumstances of his Life, and to the Objects which
lie before him, is really as happy as one that is in a warm Pursuit of all
those things, which lie within the Immense Prospect of Man's Imagination. We
have an Eminent Instance of this Truth in that famous Interview, betwixt
Alexander and Diogenes, of whom the latter certainly better deserved the Name
of Conqueror in the Dominion he gained over his own Desires and Appetite, and
did enjoy more within the narrow Circumscription of his Tub, than the other
could ever meet with in the vast Circles of the Universe. But leaving the
Improvement of these and such little Considerations, to the close of this
discourse, it shall be my present business to enquire, whether amongst that
great Variety of things, which Men generally pursue, there be any which Answer
the Real Ends proposed by them, and are such as can Denominate them truly
happy. I do not speak of that Ultimate or Objective Happiness of the
Schoolmen, which is said to replenish all the Capacities of the Mind (for this
can never be attained to in this Life) I shall confine my Discourse only to
that Inferior or Subordinate Happiness, which is the highest Perfection of
this present Mortal State, and this requires these two Conditions. The first
is, that it must lie within a Man's own Power, not only to acquire, but also to
keep; for whatsoever good lies within the Command of another, is liable also to
be taken from him, which must needs leave a fear upon the Mind, and such a fear
can never consist with true Happiness: it must be therefore durable. The next
Condition of Man's Happiness, is, that it be not depraved with Evil, it must be
therefore sincere. Moreover I shall consider Happiness with Regard to these two
Extremes. First, I shall compare it with such things as are commonly reputed
good and desirable amongst Men. Next I shall compare it with such things as are
commonly reputed Evil and Hateful amongst Men. The things after which Men's
Desires are usually carried, are reducible to these two Heads, viz. Sensual
Enjoyments, and the Goods of Fortune, which are supposed always to be attended
with profit.

I shall first begin with Sensual Enjoyments: I shall not insist upon the great
and many Disappointments we meet with in our Pursuit of them, nor of the many
Tempests of our Passions, together with the Conflicts betwixt Hope and Fear,
and the great fatigue, hazard and Expense they often undergo, who endeavor to
purchase them: Neither shall I enlarge upon the Fruits and Consequences of
these Delights, being for the most part such as end in Diseases, and in a
consumption of Reputation and Fortune. I will therefore State Sensual Felicity,
with all the advantages that Imagination can represent it under; I will suppose
a Man to enjoy his fill, and to sit to be Arbitrator of Luxury and Delight: Let
us suppose him to look backwards on what is past; and whilst he exults in the
Remembrance of it, let us suppose him also to be entering upon fresh contents,
and to be raising his Hopes and sharpning his Appetite for the perception of
them; and thus whilst his Body fattens or rather Surfeits under present
Fruition, let his thoughts run forwards in the quest of new and untasted
Peasures, which let us suppose to flow in as easily upon his Soul as Wishes,
and as the productions of thought upon the Mind. This certainly is the greatest
Heaven which the Voluptuous Man can Fancy: yet then, Helas! how far short will
these Pleasures fall of that Beauty, which Imagination Clothed them with? how
soon are we tired with them? and when the Sense is satiated, then do we begin
to Nauseate the Object, which when it is withdrawn, how drooping and dejected
are the Spirits? how Flat and Damp are all the thoughts? not so much for its
absence, as for the Frustration we meet with in the Enjoyment, till by the
Prospect of some new Delights which fancy offers, we whet our Appetites, and
then run into the former Labyrinths of desire and disappointment; so that if
whatsoever sensual thing we actually enjoy, is only so far good, as it suits
with Imagination, and if Imagination does show things greater in Expectation,
than under Fruition, it follows most closely how great a Paradox soever it may
seem, that they who are under the Wants and Expectation of their Sensual
Endearments, feel the greatest Ticklings of Pleasure. However it be, this is
certain, that the Returns of want and Pain, are Indispensably Requisite to
Enjoyment: and hence it is; that the Voluptuous Person, for Gusto's sake, does
Eat what is Bitter, to give his Wine a Relish, and has Recourse to sour Sauces,
that he may make his Meat more Palatable.

From Sensual Pleasures, let us pass on to consider the Goods of Fortune, such
as Riches, Office, Honor, and the like: These indeed are the things which the
greatest usually make Court to, as such, from whence they promise themselves
all Felicity. And first for Riches, if we look upon Man's Happiness to consist
in an accumulation of Temporal Enjoyments, we must needs confess that they go a
great way in the Purchase. Money is the common Measure of all things necessary,
or Ornamental to the Life of Man. It Conveys to us the Riches of Foreign
Countries, with all the Productions of Industry or Nature; It furnishes our
Tables with Exquisite Wines and Meats; It raises stately Houses, with all the
Ornaments belonging to them; It Clothes us with whatsoever is found curious in
Nature, or made so by Art; It procures us Offices, and if it cannot purchase
Honor, 'twill at least obtain us Titles, and Adorn us with the Liveries of
Virtue; It wins us Friends, it subdues our Enemies, and makes a Conquest over
Beauty. These with Infinite other Blessings, are the fruits of Riches, And yet
if we consider them well, we shall find them to be like those Medals, which
represent many times a Beautiful Face on the one side, and a Beast on the
Reverse; let us therefore turn them on the other side, and see whether they
have the same Figure and Beauty throughout. I will not speak of the Difficulty
a Man meets with usually in getting Wealth, nor of the Dangers and Temptations
to which his Conscience is sometimes Obnoxious. I will imagine his Coffers
filled, and that his Reputation is Stamped with as fair Characters, and with as
Noble an Image as his Coin; and yet such a one certainly, if he be of a
Provident Disposition, cannot choose but be disquieted with thoughts, how to
Dispose of his Treasure; if it lie by him in his Chests, it is no further
Serviceable, than so much Earth, and lies ever in the way to Bait others to
break in and Rob him, not only of his Gold, but Peradventure of his Life: if he
leave it with the Banker, He has no other Security than the Word of another
Man, who if he Fail either in Honesty or Sufficiency all is gone; and how many
there be who are Defective this way, is but too Legible upon the Walks of all
the Burses of Europe. If he purchase Lands, what Application must there be made
to Scriveners? what Examinion is there of the Title? and when he thinks all
safe, up starts a Judgment or some Concealed Mortgage, which has been Sleeping
for many Years: then comes in the whole Cry of Lawyers, and after all the
Methods of a Vexatious and Expensive Suit, the Poor Client, if he be not
Totally Defeated of his Purchase, will nevertheless find this after-game to be
the dearer Bargain: for when he has spent the best part of his Subsistence
amongst his Advocates, he then will understand their meaning when they promised
to make it out that he had a Clear and Naked Title; so that in the end he must
be forced perhaps to clog the same Estate with a new Incumblance, that he may
have wherewithal to satisfy his Creditors, for the Money which he borrowed to
carry on the Cause, and so leave the same Cursed Bone for some after-Purchacers
to gnaw upon, which certainly is the Case of many a Person.

But admit a Man be yet so happy to be free from these Perplexities, and that
he enjoy all the Blessings which Wealth can Compass without Care and Disquiet;
if he be such a one as does Indulge himself in his Plenty, how easily is he
betrayed to Sensuality, and to all that Train of Diseases, which follow
Intemperance? Habits of Eating and Drinking plentifully, besides the injury
they do to Intellectuals, and the Stupidity which goes along with them, are
ever attended with Surfeits, Feevrs, and Dropsies. The Gout seldom fails to
visit such as live in fullness and ease; nor the Pox, those who live in
Wantonness and Promiscuous Pleasures: But then, if a Rich Man live to the Rules
of Temperance and Sobriety, what Natural Benefit has he above another, who tho
of an Obscure and mean Condition, wants nothing necessary for his Sustenance,
or Conducing to his Health? The Necessities of Nature, and the Enjoyments of
Life lie within a Narrow Circle, so that whatsoever exceeds it, is not only
Superfluous and Expensive, but affords matter for Distemper. Great Men, and
especially Princes, the Wider is their Dominion, the more is their Liberty
Circumscribed and Limited: State and Grandeur will not allow them to appear,
but in few Places, nor this at all times. For the purpose, a Prince may delight
in Beautiful Gardens, or the like; and yet there is scarce a private Subject,
but may enjoy the Pleasures of them no less then He; Every Gentleman may Walk
in them for his Recreation, and Entertain his Fancy in Viewing the several
Beauties of Trees, Walks, Fruits, Flowers, Fountains, Grotto's, Statues,
Shades, with infinite other Curiosities, with which such places are usually
adorned, and all this at another Man's Expense, and when he has done, he may
pass over if he please into the Countries of other Princes, and see the like or
greater Rarities, together with the Structure of their Palaces, and the Order
and Fashions of their Courts, so that this Pleasure and Delight, be it what it
will be, it is certainly such wherein the Subject has much the advantage of any
particular Prince, who upon Considerations of Government, may not pass beyond
the Limits of his own Kingdom, nor enjoy his private Recreations without
Encumbrance and Restraint. And yet the Pleasures of the Eye have been ever
Esteemed some of the greatest and the most Innocent Delights of Life. Let the
Benefit of Riches be as great as Fancy can represent them, this is certain,
That he, who does not enjoy Contentedness of Mind, will ever be Miserable, and
perhaps more Miserable the more he does possess: For Appetite becomes more
boiling the greater fuel it meets with, and even that which is Actually in a
Man's Power, will ever be subject to Chances, and give him continual occasions
of disquiet. They who spread wide their Sayls, and Desplay all their Bravery
upon the Deck, as they must expect to meet with Storms, so they may be as
certain too, that so great an Embarras will serve for little but for the Winds
and Tempests to fasten on, which may end perhaps in the Subversion of the Ship.
When Showers of Arrows fall thick, it is the safest way for a Man to Contract
himself into the narrowest compass that he can, and decline their force by
Shrinking to the Earth.

Greatness of Place or Honor, is another Branch of the Blessings of Fortune.
It is a kind of Diminutive Sovereignty, for it Impowers Men to do Good and
Punish: It raises the Admiration of the Vulgar, and Creates Dependences. It
gives Men a Preeminence above others, and is Accompanied in all places with
Marks of Pomp and Grandeur. These indeed are Colors Glorious as those of the
Rainbow, nor is the Figure less Beautiful: Nevertheless if we make but a
little near approach, we shall find the Orient Scene to be nothing but
Apparition, or a thin Vapor which is attended generally with a Storm, and
Vanishes in an Instant. That some Men should be advanced to Places of Trust,
and Honor, is absolutely necessary for the Support of Government, but withal,
were it not for the Ends which such Men do or ought to Propound to themselves
of being Serviceable to the Public, and were there not an inward Joy and
satisfaction of Mind upon the performance of Duty, as well as a Reputation and
outward Respect justly due to good Actions, I know not what it is that could
invite Men to come out of a private and secure Station, to be tossed about
under a Hazardous and Restless Course of Life: For here it is that they
area-bridg'd, not only in their Recreations, Freedom of Speech, Conversation
and Private Studies, all which are things in which Man's Temporal Felicity is
absolutely concerned, and are the sincere Fruits of liberty, but many times
they have scarce Leisure for the Refreshment of Nature, and for the
Recollection of their Spirits. They are in a manner thronged wherever they go,
and tired with Impertinent Complements, Tedious Ceremonies, and Formal Visits.
Nay even in their Closets and places of Retreat, they are many times Haunted
with Petitions, and Importuned with distastful and unseasonable Addresses.
Their Tables, where Men usually lay aside the Burden of thoughts to Indulge
themselves a little in honest Mirth and Freedom, are made their Snares: Such
Men are under Circumstances of Eating always in a public way; and amongst
those who are invited, it seldom happens but there are some who come with an
Intention to Devour something more than what is set before them. There is no
Place where a Great Man is in so much Danger as at his Meat. In the midst of
Wine, and Feasting Men are easily Tempted to cast off their Masks, and as
they fill their Bellies, so they empty their Breasts, by opening their
Passions, and by giving their Tongues a little liberty. Now what can be more
uneasy than to have a perpetual Spy upon all the Words and Actions of a Man's
Life, to be forced to Flatter others, and perhaps be Poisoned by Flatteries
himself? To be one while defamed by Scandalous Libels, and at another time to
be Murderd by secret Whispers and Informers? To be one while baited with loud
Clamours and Obloquy, and to be by and by Arraigned by Popular Passions, for
his ill Administration and Evil Counsels, because unprosperous? What can be
more Tiresome than to be harassed always with Multiplicity of Business, and to
be Tortured with Petitions, where there are many Competitours perhaps for the
same thing, and where one only can be Gratifyed, which must need put a Man
under a Necessity of Disgusting all the rest, and lay him open to their
Defamation and Envy, and Envy seldom fails to procure Revenge? That which is
but a small Imperfection in a private Person, is a great Deformity in a
Statesman; and the Eminence on which he stands makes him more Conspicuous. All
his Actions lie open to the Day, and every little Folly will set him at a lower
Value, and will never want Aggravation. If Crystals have little Bubbles in
them, it matters not much, but the least Cloud or Flaw in a Diamond does very
much Debase its Price. How painful and almost impossible is it for such a Man
to carry a Cheerful and Serene Countenance, whilst he feels the Vulture Gnawing
at his Heart, whilst he Travels with Suspicions, and finds his Measures
Crossed? When he is most Solitary and Retired from Business, then are his
thoughts most Agitated: he then feels the Sting of his secret Enemies, and the
Blows and Wounds of his open ones, and casts about every way to defeat their
Contrivances. He is jealous of his Confidents and Servants, and is ever and
anon changing Resolutions. He Groans within himself when he considers his
Perplexed Condition, and is ready to Burst upon the Apprehension of his Ruin;
but if he once begin to Totter, off drop his Followers and Favorites like
Leaves from a Tree, which is Nipt by the Frost, and Blown upon by the Wind, and
in their places comes in the Turba Remi, the Canaille or Rascality of the
People, who according to their wonted Generosity, ever Trample upon those whom
Fortune has Abandoned; a Brutish sort of Creatures which delight to Prey on
Blood, and herd together like Vultures to feed upon a Mangled Carcass: And
this, God knows, is the Fate of many a Great Man, or if they do not fall into
this Extremity of Misfortune, at least they fall into Disgrace. Nor is it the
least part of their Torment to see their Enemies rejoice at their downfall,
whilst they themselves have nothing but the Melancholy Remembrance of past
Greatness to feed upon, and this will prove Infinitely more bitter, than if
they had never tasted of Honor: For if there be a Pleasure and Satisfaction in
Grandeur, the greater it is, the greater will be the Misfortune to be deprived
of it; so that it is a Madness to Pursue athing where the Evil of Privation
outweighs the Pleasure of Enjoyment; but if there be no such Pleasure in the
Enjoyment, it is Equal Madness to follow that with so much Eagerness, which is
so empty in it self, and is Compounded of so many Calamities and Disasters.

And thus we see that greater Fortunes are really more incapable of Happiness
than the mean; by reason of their large Retinues, and that vast Extent of
Appurtenances which Surround them, they are too much Exposed to Hazard: their
Felicity is made up of a Million of Members, so that the Multitude is a Burden,
and the Defect or Mis-carriage of one only, is enough to Embitter other
Enjoyments. Upon this Account we may observe that even Kings themselves, when
they would taste the Sweets of Innocent Pleasure, do divest themselves of
themselves, and that they lay aside all the Badges of Royalty, that they may be
capable to descend to the Conversation of private Persons They esteem
themselves most happy, when Incogniti they can refresh themselves with those
common Recreations, which are the ordinary Divertisements of other Men; and yet
can they not enjoy even this small Portion of Happiness without danger
sometimes, nor rarely without Detriment to Majesty: for besides the Contempt
which too much Familiarity does Naturally draw along with it, they by this
means give occasion for others to Note their Extravagances, and to spy into
their Dispositions, and to discover their Secrets. For as Men are most open in
the heats of Sport, so is it observed that the greatest Traitors will ever mix
themselves with those who do Accompany Princes in their Pleasures.

In the next place let us consider such who effect Greatness upon the score
purely of Ambition and Glory, and we shall find them to be much more Miserable
than the former: For Ambition is a Fire which the more it finds to feed upon,
the more it Rages, and when it has Reduced all things to Ruin, does it self
Evaporate into a Smoke, and even its more durable Parts are Reduced to Ashes.
Is it possible for any Man even in the most Prosperous Course of Fortune, to
live without a Competitor, and if he overcome one, will there not succeed
another, who will give him Fresh and Stronger Disquiet? Had Pompey dyed of the
Sickness which Seized him at Naples, he might have had Sulla's Title superadded
to his own, and have been Pompey the Happy, as well as Pompey the Great, but by
attempting to gain the further Graces of Fortune, he lost both; and even his
Rival had scarce five Months Respite from his Glorious Toyls, for returning to
Rome in October, he was Murdered the following Ides of March. I doubt not but
that many Princes amidst their serious thoughts have had Reflections of this
Nature; and would follow their true Felicity by a Voluntary Retreat, did not
Considerations of Public Duty make them prefer Labor before Repose, with
Considerations also of their Honor, which might in after-Ages be Stigmatized
with Characters of Laziness and Stupidity. Nevertheless some of the greatest
and of the most Fortunate Princes of the World, as Dioclesian, and Charles the
Fifth, have preferred Retirement before Dominion: their Victorious Hands were
employed in Planting Flowers, which aforetime gathered Laurels, and 'twas with
them a matter of Choice not of Necessity, to leave their Triumphant Legions,
that they might Erect an Empire over the Vegitable Sect.

From what has been said it appears abundantly; that neither Sensual
Enjoyments, nor the Goods of Fortune do any ways Answer the Conditions of
Happiness. Since therefore it is not to be found in any of these things which
lie without us, but in the inward Gifts and Capacities of the Soul, I Determine
its Nature principally to consist in a constant serenity of thought, looking
upon outward Comforts only as necessary Goods. Now how far it is in a Man's own
Power to acquire this Serenity, will best appear by looking toward the other
Extreme before mentioned, viz. the supposed Evils which accompany this Mortal
Life.

I shall begin first with the Evils of Pain, which whether they proceed from
outward Violence, or from Natural Distempers, certain it is that they Create
Anguish, yet are they not such as leave us without Examples to support them, or
deprive Reason of the means to overcome them. I shall not speak of the Courage
of Martyrs under Tortures (where the Prospect of a future Reward may be allowed
sufficient to give them some Extraordinary Assistance) since amongst the
Heathens we have abundant Presidents for Imitation. The goodness of Providence
does so order Matters, that the sharpest Dolours are for the most part of
shortest Continuance, but where they are of any Duration, we find even the
Continuance of them to be a Remedy. It Is the first shower that wets, and it is
the first Incision of the Lancet which smarts, those which follow do rather
Stupify than affect the Sense with sharpness. The Miseries of a Gally-slave are
great, and yet we see that when he finds himself under a Necessity of
indurance, he ceases to complain, and Rallies up his Spirits to suffer that
with a Cheerful Patience, which he cannot repel with any Armed Force. And when
he is sometime Inured to that Slavish Condition, Custom by little and little,
makes it Supportable and Natural. But whatsoever there be in this or any
Dolours of Life, the more Acute they are, the sweeter are the thoughts of
Death, whereas to one who makes Pleasure his End, the greater it is, the more
painful are the thoughts of quitting Life; so that as the latter is in a
Condition of making his passage into Misery, the other is always in a Passage
to a better State.

From the Evils of Pain, let us go on to consider the Evils of Privation, such
as loss of Liberty, of Riches, of Friends and Relations, of Reputation with the
like. Loss of Liberty must be Confessed to be a great Calamity, not only in its
self, as it causes the Name of Restraint and Confinement, but in respect also
of all other Comforts: for it not only deprives Men ordinarily of the Benefit
of Friends, but does expose them to great Wants and Necessities, and what is
worst of all it becomes many times Destructive to Health. Exile seems something
more uncomfortable than Imprisonment: for besides that Divorce which it makes
betwixt the dearest Relations, Men Naturally have an affection for their Native
Country, especially when they are out of it, which Affection will be ever apt
to beget Sorrow. But for all this, let us but Examine matters a little by
detayl, and see whether Reason does not furnish us with sufficient Remidies.

Loss of Liberty like all other Evils which befall us, is greatest in the
beginning: Birds, when they are at first put into the Cage, do Flutter and
Struggle, and refuse to feed, but after a little Time, they return to their
former Natures and Sing. Then for the Exigence of Nature it is easily supplied,
the Body requires no more but to be preserved from Cold, and a little is
sufficient to satisfy Hunger, and to Extinguish Thirst, whatsoever exceeds
these Measures tends to Surfeit, and makes Provision for Diseases. Seneca
observes well of those who Indulge their Palats, that it is not so much the
Taste and Relish of the Meat, as the Rarity and Price which makes it Delicate.
Now there is not the Place scarce upon the Face of the Earth, which does not
afford Sustenance for Life. To want that Variety of Delightful Objects, with
which Men daily are Refreshed is no great Misery, for it is in a Man's own Power
to bring their Images into his thoughts, which is altogether as Recreative as
the External Objects themselves; and if Confinement be so great a Misery, then
are they as unhappy altogether, who by Office or any other Circumstances of
Life, are obliged to perpetual Residence, and so in a manner Circumscribed
within one constant place. Then for Separation from ones Country, it is not so
great a Misfortune as it at first appears, for to whatsoever place a Man is
Banished, tho seemingly never so Unhospitable and Desolate, he may observe
great numbers of Persons resorting thither daily of their own Accords; so that
what is made the Subject of Men's choice, cannot be so Incommodious and
Intolerable. Nay, let a Man go into what City soever he please, he shall find
great numbers of Strangers, who live Contentedly and happy; which yet they
could not do, were absence from ones Native Country so great a Misery.

Privation of Friends and Acquaintance has been ever looked upon as a great
Misfortune, and such as leaves too great a damp upon the Spirits. But there is
a Remedy against this too, for tho some Men have been denied the Conversation
of the Living; yet there was never any man deprived of the Society of the Dead;
of those I mean whose Works and Monuments are Replenished with all Variety of
Learning for the Entertainment of his Thoughts. Here I am instructed how to
behave myself under all the Calamities of Fortune; here my Soul is filled with
bright Idea 's, and with Notions of true Morality; and above all, here I meet
with Examples of the bravest Men, who have endured the same, or greater
Miseries with Invincible Courage, and by so doing have Consecrated their
Memories to after-Ages. Amongst the Greek and Roman worthies, we shall meet
with few but were disgraced by Fortune, and ended their Mortality in Exile.
Instead of Repining at fate, they employed their Thoughts and Pens in Writing
excellent Books of Morality, and by this means made themselves most Public,
when they were under the greatest Restraint; and when they were in the nearest
approaches to Death, then did they advance most toward Life and Immortality;
and such were Seneca and Boethius of old, with infinite others of later date.
That Condition therefore cannot be miserable, which is so familiar to the
bravest Souls, and which gives life to such excellent Productions.

It Is too usual for men to compare themselves with others who are above them,
and in respect of these they many times seem unhappy: but let them come and
measure themselves by the Majority of Mankind, and such as really are more
Afflicted with outward Discomforts, and then they will find themselves to be
truly happy; For things are good and Evil only by Compa^^son; so that what is
Evil in respect of something that is better, may be styled good also in respect
of something that is worse than it self; and he that is happy in one Capacity,
may be Miserable in another, and so the contrary. From whence we may take
notice of the Infinite Wisdom and Providence of Almighty God, who does so mix
Good and Evil through all Conditions of Men, and carries them on in such a
manner through all the Stations and Circumstances of Life, as seems to reduce
all Men to a certain State of Equity, such as makes up an universal and perfect
Harmony. The Great Man enjoys Titles and Honor, the Poor Man Health: The Great
Man lives in rest and Repose of Body, the Poor Man has the better rest and
Repose of Mind; he is never vexed with Affronts, nor Cracks his Brains to
contrive Revenge. He fears not to be degraded from his Place, nor is he
Solicitous to make an Interest at Court, neither does he live in Jealousy of
those who are about him. He Rises early to his Work, and merrily passes away
the Day, and at Night meets with a full reward of his Labor, in the sweet
Refreshments of Sleep. If Humility depress the one, so is Nobility a Burden to
the other; large Retinues and Numerous Dependences are but Clogs, and are a
real weight to him on whom they lie; if one feels Hunger, the other feels
Surfeit; if one may be despised, the other may be Affronted: so that upon a
Serious and Impartial Survey, the Misfortunes which attend the great, are
really more unsupportable than those to which meaner Persons are usually
exposed; and what is yet a further Aggravation, they are also more public and
lasting. Now whether the Chain be of Gold or of Iron, or whether it be fastened
upon the right Arm or upon the left, makes little difference, since in both
Cases there is the same restraint and Weight.

Contumely is generally looked upon as an injury, and such as is apt to Create
disturbance and disorder in our Passions; and yet we may observe that the
greatest part of those who pretend to receive injury this way, are really
disquieted at their own Shadows and Fantastic Chimera's. This Man being
invited to a Feast, thinks he is disparaged because he is placed beneath one
which he esteems of meaner quality than himself. That Lady is Mortally injured
because her Visit is not returned. The Squire is ready to quarrel because he
has not his title given him in the Superscription of a Letter, or because his
talk is little regarded. These with Infinite such little Humors we find in all
the Rencounters of life, such indeed as are the effects only of Idleness, and
are incident to those who being of a delicate and Effemminate nature, growing
wanton from the want of a real injury, form to themselves Imaginary Evils, that
they may have wherewithal to feed their peevish temper. But the greatest part
of Mankind make themselves Miserable, not so much upon the sense of whatthey
have lost, as of what they do not enjoy: And here their Infelicity is as great
and Boundless as their Appetite; they desire things which are impossible to be
obtained, and so it is impossible but they must be Miserable. Others suffer
their Passions to fasten on future Enjoyments, which perhaps are Innocent in
themselves: but peradventure also such as may never be obtained; or if obtained
probably such as may make them more miserable than Happy. This man desires
Honor and Preferment, which should he Arrive to, it is as probable he may prove
a Traitor as a Protector of his Country. Another man thinks he may be happy in
a Wife and Children, and yet it is probable his Wife may prove a Curse, and his
Children if Legitimate, besides the constant thoughts and care for their
Education and maintenance, may prove a Scandal rather than an Ornament to his
House.

The Advice therefore of the Heathen Satyrist, may pass for sound Divinity,
when he Counsels us not to be too Solicitous after the Endearments of this
Life, but to leave the Issue of things to the Providence and Wisdom of the
Gods; because Carior est ipsis homo quam sibi. Children we see are pleased with
Apples and Nuts, and if they have not their fill of them even to Surfeit, they
grow Stubborn and Cry, when they are a little further advanced in years, they
leave such Childish Toys, and follow Plays and Sports; and yet even these too
are forsaken and despised by them, as they Arrive to further Judgment and
Maturity. Now if a man as he Grows older and older, does condemn his past
Extravagance, and finds thosethings wherein he once placed his chiefest
Pleasure to be Foolish and Contemptible, why may he not be taught the same
Sentence upon his present Delights, when he shall recollect his thoughts and
consider; that as God is infinitely better and more Wise than Man, so it is
evident that he does Govern all Things in a course of Providence Transcendently
more perfect than all the Contrivances of the most Exquisite and Consummate
reason? so that what seems good and desirable by us may bejudg'd by him to be
really detrimental, and what seems Evil and Hurtful to us may be known to be
really good and Beneficial in the Wisdom of that unerring and Universal
Governor of all humane Actions. Nay if Man in his Calmer Thoughts does many
times Condemn as hurtful, what at another time he did pursue with all
Imaginable Passion, he must needs grant that his own present Appetite is no
firm Standard of his real Felicity; and although the Child may be Sullen and angry
with his Parent for denying him his Fancy, yet in the end he will find how much
he is obliged to his Paternal Goodness in withholding it, as also for Curbing
his loose desires with a due Correction.

Men, to sweeten the Cares of their ordinary Course of Life, and so to render
the places of their constant Habitation more comfortable, have recourse usually
to some Pastimes, or labor to refresh themselves, by seeing fine places, or by
visiting Houses of Hospitality and good cheer and whereas on the contrary they
would Recreate themselves more sincerely, would they have recourse to
Severities, and take up sometimes with places of worse Accommodation than that
of their own Habitation: for by this means home and a Man's ordinary way of
Life, would appear much more delightful after his return to it, and it is at
home where every Man must spend his Days: so that according to the former
Method, he who intermits his Domestic concerns for something abroad, which
seems more pleasant, instead of recreating his Mind will find himself more
dissatisfyed at his return than before: for Men are never more out of Conceit
with their own Condition, than when they come from others, who live in greater
Plenty and Splendor than themselves.

Prosperity and Adversity are like the two Arms of the Balance on which the
Life of Man does turn; Reason is the Hand which ought to hold it; let us
therefore consider the great and sudden Vicissitudes to which all things are
subject, and that as Prosperity is not without Fears and Troubles, so Adversity
is not without Hopes and Comforts. When Fortune therefore is most Caressing,
believe her not. This Coquet Smiles most when She intends to Delude: Embrace
her therefore with Distrust, and thou shall not be troubled when she Changes
Countenance, and proves Coy. Whosoever duly considers the uncertainties which
attend Prosperity, will neither be lifted up under its Favors, nor be dejected
under its Frowns: he so considers his good Fortune, as one who Hourly expects
the contrary, and so submits to his Evil Fortune, as one who is in constant
Hopes of changing for the better. Let him make the best use therefore of what
lies before him, and leave future Contingences to the higher Powers: by this
means his Mind will be kept in a constant evenness: he will suffer no Violent
Surprises either of Joy or Sorrow, but instead thereof he will feel one equal,
Solid and durable Pleasure, and such as will leave the Mind in perpetual peace
and Tranquillity. Thus far Reason will help him forwards toward his own
Felicity, but if he be a Christian to whom these Considerations shall Occur, he
may receive further Assistance, by Remembering, that as there is a God who
presides over all the Revolutions of the World, and even in this Life makes
what is seemingly hurtful to be really Benificial; so there is a future State
too, where all the Actions of a past Life shall be exposed in the open Sight,
and where an unfortunate and Prostrate Innocence shall have a full Reward.

FINIS.

