AN ANSWER TO A PASSAGE IN Mr. Baxters Book, ENTITLED, A Key for Catholics:
Beginning page 321. concerning the KING'S being put to Death.

By John Nanfan Esquire

LONDON, Printed for John Jones Bookseller in Worcester.

To the Reader.
I Know not why I should endeavor to please or satisfy concerning this, that I
throw it abroad, which was solitary, and private to me in the worst of times,
or any such Apologies, or endeavors, or essays, to take off censure. It were
too much submitting, and subjecting to others; let the matter and subject it
self speak for it, and let others condescend their Judgments to it, and that is
all that is desired: It has no end out of it self. Particular Reasons I have;
as that there is as good warrant in me to take off Mr. Baxter's presumptive,
violent, injurious Arguments against Kings, and Governments, as he to assert
them; the cause is his: he the assailant, I am but the Defendant: The sally out
into the World, and into so great an Interest as Kings Governments, and terms
of submission to them, and when in some cases, the people to kill, and slay,
and destroy all; these great exorbitant, monstrous considerations come from Mr.
Baxter: he has stated cases, fixed them to Posterity, that they may be
fruitful to generate in the World; mine but an Arrest upon him, both to redeem
truth, and likewise to let the World know that great Writers may contain much
iniquity in them, and how the World is to beware of them.

But why do I entertain the Reader at the Porch, or without the Door, and seem
to entreat him to like the structure within, which he is to behold? Therefore I
give it off, only this, that it speaks that time, that disconsolate condition
then it was made to: and making it now another thing, is not my end, but to
show and represent the same; for every thing has its rectitude in respect of
the point it tends to.

And this good in it, that though the subject sad, yet it raises more
considerations out of it, and from it; for we have our enjoyment from good
times, but our information more from bad: And besides, these considerations are
general, so as no time o^^^ them; truths that are not particular in their
nature, have an eternity in them. And for ought we know, there is as great a
Wisdom required to retain our Government as to attain to it: that lay but in
one design, and easily done, because not discerned in the doing; this is of a
perpetual providence, and perpetual danger, and enmity against it, and we are
to betake our selves to all considerations wherein our good and evil is
contained: and public good is the great end, the wheel, and sway, and compass
to all motions, all particulars but considered in it.

AN ANSWER TO A PASSAGE IN Mr. BAXTERS Book; ENTITLED, A Key for Catholics;
Beginning, page 321. concerning the Kings being put to Death.
HE begins thus, Concerning the Death of the King, I shall not meddle at this
time with the cause, nor meddle with the Reasons brought for it, or against it.

Answ. It will appear, by so much as concerns me to answer to, whether Mr.
Baxter meddle with the Cause or not. This pretended abstemiousness, is but to
make it pierce the deeper, and to ^ake his strength more considerable: He is as
great an Assertor of it, as possibly he can find matter to make it
speculatively true, though in fact he keeps out of it.

Whilst he vies Interests with the Papists, he takes upon him to hold the
Balance; this of murdering the King, in manner and form of it, in one end of
the Scale; and that of the Popes cursing Kings, and consequently murdering of
them, in the other: and he finds his leighter by much, which is the triumph of
his cause; and to this he does abet all his strength to make it good, which is
by making the evil of it less; so as this is the very state of his Cause, and
you shall see him appearing in it by degrees, like a winding stairs, till he
comes up to the top. I shall take all his by way of Objections, and answer to
it.

Object. The Providence of God has so contrived it, that nothing but
ignorance, or blind malice, can lay it upon the Protestants, Episcopal, or
Presbyterian, that strove so much against it, and suffered so much for it as
they have done.

Answ. In this he does confound Interests, to join the Episcopal with the
Presbyterian; I am very confident the Episcopal would not mix with any other
Interest in such a defense; and to piece them to the Presbyterian, is an abuse.
It is a kind of Policy to defend a corrupt cause, by taking into it that which
cannot be denied to be just, and clear in it self, and under color of that to
cry up the whole.

Not that I mean to condemn the Presbyterians directly for the Kings Death; I
leave that to particular Arguments as they fall out, and to be understood in a
just medium in it, relating to Presbyterians and Protestants both, that acted.
But his further,

Object. When many on the other side charged the Scots, and the Imprisoned
Ministers of London, with those that were put to death, for going too far on
the other side, in manifesting their distasts; of which I take not on me to be
Judge, but mention it only as Evidence that clears them from the Deed.

Answ. How cautious Mr. Baxter is, that he will not take upon him to be Judge,
who were in the right of those two parties, one the Presbyterians that disliked
the putting the King to Death, and the other that acted it, and were angry with
them for disliking, and expressing their dislikes. He is very wary in this
here, with his reserves and savings, that he does declare it only as matter of
fact; so tender is he not to engage too far, to judge or conclude any thing in
it. This makes me doubt, that in some passages hereafter, where he calls it
odious, and detestable, that he has a latitude in those expressions; for an Act
may have those epithite^, and yet possibly be lawful: Now whether there may not
be some thing of this in it, though he declares against the fact; I may doubt,
because of his denying here to condemn it. Certainly, he that in his Soul has
not a full abhorrency to it, is of the infection of it; and no other
construction can be made. He goes on,

Object. To vindicate the Protestants openly before all the World, and to all
posterity from that fact, it is most publicly known, that both Houses of
Parliament, in their protestations engaged themselves and the Nation to be true
to the King.

Answ. This was but in order to the War, which they were forming against the
King; It was made the very means of raising the People by whom the War must be
acted. Upon a plain downright way of fighting against the King could have had
no color with the People; who are always in such popular confusions to be
deceived and abused, to serve to others ends.

Object. That they openly professed to manage their War for King and
Parliament; not against his Person and Authority, but against Delinquents that
were fled from Justice, and against evil Councellers.

Answ. Mr. Baxter would make their War just, That it was professed and engaged
to be managed for King and Parliament; Certainly, they did no more in this then
all Subjects ever did that made War against their King, that is, to
disstinguish the King's interest from the cause of the War: A less pretension
cannot be for a Rebellion; Rebellion in the nature of it, is so much a Monster,
as it seeks the best cover, and never has the face to pretend against the King.
The fallaciousnesse of this, he himself evinced in his following, by saying, or
at least concluding, That a subdued King is never fit again to rule over the
People that subdued him: We need no other evidence now then the things
themselves, so as we are to argue a posteriori, from the ends and issues, back
to their causes; that is, that all War taken up by Subjects upon any pretense
whatsoever, or by whatsoever caution, or limitation evermore, in the nature of
it, intends the destroying of King and Kingdom.

Object. That the two Nations of England and Scotland, did in the midst of the
Wars, swear in the Solemn League and Covenant, to be true to the King.

Answ. Still this was but the same thing to strengthen the confederacy; when at
any time there should be a fainting or scrupling by the People, a new
engagement, or profession to public ends, and to common preservation, whereof
the King was the Head, would give new life to it. And this was all the use that
ever was made of that Covenant; It never served the King at all, but to beat
him down and destroy him.

And all bringing the people into a body by Covenant, is unlawful; because
Government merely consists in having no contracts of the people acting of
themselves.

And likewise the Covenant was not absolute, as a Kings preservation should be,
but had a loose in it, that made it nothing; It was with a so far, as consists
with Religion, Laws, and Liberties: The King's life, and his Rights were not
absolutely covenanted; O God forbid, there should not be an exception, as to
Religion, Laws, and Liberties! and this a destroying power would be interpreter
of. So as this Covenant was like Nebuchadnezzar's Image; the upper parts of
Gold and Silver, the lower parts of Iron, and baser stuff; but the truth is,
when men Covenant things contradictory, as to fight against the King, and to be
true to him; they cannot be expected to perform better: for truth is of that
Nature, that though men abuse it ever so much, yet it is unalterable: Effects
are certain to their causes, and own their true Parents.

Object. The Committees, Commanders, Ministers and People, thorowout the Land;
professed openly to go only upon such terms as managing but a defensive War
against the King's miscariages, but an offensive against delinquent Subjects.

Answ. There is no such thing in Nature, as a defensive War against a King, by
Subjects; as I shall more clearly demonstrate in due place. But in this Mr.
Baxter grants, as far as is possible, to make it defensive, necessary, and of
mere necessity on the King's part: It was offensive against delinquent
Subjects, as much as to say, it was a War on the Parliaments part, to the
destruction of the King's Subjects, and the King must be unconcerned in it, sit
by and be idle; withdraw all protection, and become immediately out of
possession. For such is the Nature, and being of a King, when an armed power is
acting, and the King sedentary, and not resisting.

In a Kingdom, a War cannot be against any party, and not against the King; for
it deprives the King, of his governing power.

Consider but what the Nature of a War taken up by the People is (for his
Senate signifies nothing, he shall find the whole is but King and People);
First, when it once becomes powerful, it gains from its very unlawfulness, a
liberty to be governed by none; for in unlawful actions they are all equals. No
obligation can arise but where there is a primary justice to fix it to, and we
see in this, every thing that prevails never disputes right; and the reason is,
because the whole is unlawful. And I present this to Mr. Baxter's reason, as it
is visible to his observation, to show him that such a kind of War can be
wicked, but cannot find a Justice to govern it; and his first of rebelling with
caution, and condition, was a mere fiction. His next is a Narrative only.

Object. In that it was known that the Army was quite altered, not only by a
new modelling, but by an intestine Jesuitical corrupting of multitudes of
Soldiers, before this odious Fact could be done. And it was known, that the
corrupted part of the Army, though the fewer, did so excel the rest in Industry
and Activity, that thereby they hindered their Opposition: And it is known that
the Jesuited party, that afterward so many of them turned Levellers, did draw
unto them the Anabaptists, Libertines, and other Sects, upon a Conjunction of
Interests, and by many sly pretenses, especially tying all together by the
predicated Liberty for all Religions. And yet after this, the World knows they
were fain, before they could accomplish it, to master the City of London, to
master the Parliament, to imprison and cast out the Members, and to retain but
a few that were partly of their mind, and partly seduced or overawed by them,
to join with them in the work.

Answ. It is incident always that when a King's Power is dissolved, all
Wickedness, and all manner of Factions and Divisions, do grow up in the place
of it; for want of that Power to retain them, and their own guilt still driving
them on, and being all equals in wickedness; these are so natural Causes as I
wonder any one can dispute them: They ly all in the first Cause of taking away
the King's Power, all the rest results out of it.

And they themselves had proceeded so far, as to all Deprivations of the King,
and all manner of Imputations and Proscriptions, as guilty of all the evil of
the War; settling him in the condition of a Traitor, being King, kept him in
custody after they had bought him of the Scots, and not enduring him to terms
till the last, when it was too late.

I grant, his party would not have had the King bin killed; A poor reserve!
when he is made incapable of any other condition. If the People did but know
what it were to subdue their King, and deprive him of his Power, they would
never dispute terms of disposing him: It is the same thing as killing, it stays
but the acting: And this servs to all he says of this kind.

And let me insert this, though I consent wholly to his Narrative; that it is
very ordinary and natural, when a party acts in a joint wickedness and cruelty,
and after grow into difference; the less able party will ever dislike what the
other go through with to act, and pretend to a greater Justice and Moderation,
when it is acted by others, and out of their Power: but more of this in the
following.

Object. It is known, that before they were put out and imprisoned by the Army,
the Commons voted the King's Concessions in the Treaty, to be so far
satisfactory, as that they would have proceeded on them, toward a full
agreement. See Mr. Prin's large Speech in the house to that end: And if they
had not suddenly been secluded and imprisoned, they had agreed with the King.

Answ. This was when they had no other Interest left them but that of the
King's, which they had laid by, and trampled upon perpetually, till now they
must lose all unless they held by that: How endless and insatiate were they in
exercising their own greatness upon the King's weakness; the People perpetually
defrauded of the Accommodation by them thirsted after: Never any thing
satisfactory, though they had all; and playing with this their own fortune, and
most delectable greatness too long, at length (as all new excessive things are
incident to change) the accidents by him mentioned fell in amongst themselves;
and they were voting conclusions with the King, just the instant before they
brake. Some secluded, some made Prisoners; some, to avoid worse, fled out of
the Land.

It is the misfortune and condition of Tyrants to be subject to their own
Power, and Slaves to it. An Army especially, that servs but to Subjects against
their Sovereign, will, though humble, and obedient at first, as all such things
are, grow insolent; as to equals, treat conditions, and have other Interests.
It is like a hand-Wolf, that though he will be played with for a time, yet his
Keepers and Masters are Subject to be torn in pieces by him upon the change of
his humor. Such was this their Army, a hand-Wolf too long played with, till it
grew to know its own strength, and to consider that all Rights were alike
against the King, and amongst the People.

And then for the Nature of the Agreement with the King, It was that for some
time, he should have been without his Power; and all agreements with a King
that vest him not in his Power, are nothing at all in consideration to a King,
for a future restoring, or for security against the present Power; they are
things that cannot be, and any intervening time would have raised new accidents
from so great an impending cause; the greatest in the World, beyond and above
all conditions, and not being, can have no assurance of future being.

I call to mind a Passage in a Book called A Plea for Parliaments, supposed to
be written by Sir Walter Rawley, that it was moved in Parliament in Queen
Maryes time, that if she should die, leaving Issue; King Philip the Father, and
now Matrimonial King, should hold the Kingdom till the Issue came of Age to
govern, and strong bonds should be given for the Surrender. And a certain Lord
(none of the wisest, says the story) who had sat silent during the whole
Debate, at last boulted out this Question; Who should sue those bonds against
the King? They were all presently surprised, and so it fell, not a word more of
it: As much as to say, An absolute Power in possession is above all Condition.

Object. One thing I shall call him back to, that is, saying, That Multitudes
who are now firm and loyal to the present Power, supposing it to be set over
us by God, and therefore would abhor the like practices against them, do yet
detest that Fact that intervened, and made way to it.

Answ. I would desire to be satisfied, how Mr. Baxter can reconcile his
Divinity. This Power set over us by God, therefore not to act against it: The
King's Power either not in his sense set over us by God, or else why did he act
against it? If he say, to reform it; then, why not this? Are all things so
satisfactory to him in this as needs no Reformation? The other Power of the
King's, peradventure in his sense, was not set over us by God. But how this is,
I would desire him to distinguish, and when and where he would make a stop to
man's acting: I should be very glad that the World were satisfied with it, that
Supreme Power should be unquestionable; I would trust God and Man, and humane
casual events, with my share out of it, because I see pretended Reformations
never countervail the mischief of Rebellions.

But in the mean time, I desire him to distinguish betwixt these two Interests,
why he is indulgent to this now; and so much an Actor and Engineer employing
his Divinity, Learning, and Passion, against the old. Let me still hold him to
this his own ground, Set over us by God: Whether he means of God's general
Providence as the great Governor of the World, and so assigning Governors
subordinate, or else that he means it in special to this, out of his fancy, or
favor to it: I would have him distinguish, and I am prepared for him with a
further inquiry. But in the mean time, because I know not my future
opportunities, I shall further trouble him, I suppose he will not otherwise
call or account it Set over us by God, then as all other wicked things come to
pass; as this did, through the blood and death of the King, which intervening
cause he denotes detestable. Now what obligation extraordinary, and which the
former Government did not, this throws upon man, is my Inquiry? Where shall
man's Wisdom act or rest? This done by man, and why may not man undo his own
Work? Is there a Fate upon him in one Action more than in another, if Reason
does nor state a difference? Is his Divinity otherwise intelligible to him than
by his Reason? Does he act freely in some things, and not in all? Are some
things of God, and not all things? If he will say, the being of Kings and
Supreme Governors should oblige an unquestionable Obedience, let him answer
then for destroying the former: Is a less Attribute due to a rightful King than
to his Destroyer? His intended Reformation by a War, intended no less than
destroying his Power to resist. Besides, it will be very hard for him, even in
his own sense, to determine betwixt a true King driven or kept out, and a King
in Fact, and by Usurpation and King-killing, which should draw to it the Right
and Obligation of Conscience: and likewise hard for him to resolve, when the
new is so settled, the other in being though out of possessing, as to make
Obedience entire. Therefore surely it were best God were left out, who in these
our miserable times has been made a Stale and a Color for all the cruelties
men have committed: Certainly Divinity, in understanding the Will of God,
admits of some distinction betwixt things done to God's Glory, and the worst of
Man's Actions, though all alike under the common Providence of God: But a
little further, I desire his Patience to go along with me. A King killed to
day, and the Regicide by his party becomes King in Fact, and in Power to
morrow; then to morrow he obeys him with all Attributes of God's greatness,
Will, Power, Goodness; and if him, another on the next day, then him too, and
so on still. It is known, that after it began in Nero, how many Emperors came
upon the stage of the World in a short space; killing and dispatching the
present, gave being to the latter. Now, where will he define or place his
Providence, or bound Man's acting? Certainly, if at all, in the first place,
for many reasons; as the first loose or progression to Wickedness is the true
cause of all the following; and because there is a natural stay in the first,
which loosed, the like is not found in the following. The truth is, it is a
foolish thing to ty up Man's reason more in one thing than in another; for if
he argues things greater or higher to him, he argues still but to his reason.

In the next he goes higher, and like a Stone falling, the nearer the Center,
the greater its force; so he, as he proceeds farther, grows fiercer about the
King's being judged to death by his People, and he extenuates the Fact by the
formality of it: I should wrong him not to give it him in his own words.

Object. I must needs add, that every wise man sees that the case it self much
differs from the Papists. If the Body of a Commonwealth, or those that have
part in the Legislative Power, and so in the Supremacy, should unwillingly be
engaged in a War with the Prince, and after many years blood and desolations,
judicially take away his life as guilty of all this Blood, and not to be
trusted any more with Government: And all this do, not as private men, but as
the remaining Sovereign Power, and say, they do it according to Laws:
undoubtedly this case does very much differ from the Powder Plot, or Papists
murdering of Kings, and teaching that it is lawful for a private hand to do
it, if he be but an Heretic, or but deposed, yea, or excommunicated by the
Pope.

Answ. Mine thorow-out will give a larger consideration upon the whole; But to
his particulars, as they pass from him.

First he says, have part in the Legislative Power, and so in the Supremacy,
wherein he confounds them both together, and makes it but one and the same. To
have part in the Legislative Power, as to the altering of Laws, or any other
thing wherein it is exercised, implies a right in the People as to those
things, and in the Nature of it a Negative Right: That is, that it could not be
done without their consents; and this Negative Right gives them not a farther
Right.

Object. His next is, and judicially take away his life.

Answ. The King's own words, at that hard time with him, when they sat over
him as his Judges, are most worthy as from himself to be remembered; He told
them how far his case was, their King, from being judged by them, when as all
judicature was derived from him to them. And certainly, this alone of the
King's carries Argument enough in it against all judging or condemning of
King's or Supreams; for no Power can create a Power against it self, and
nothing in nature can go higher than its first Cause: A Power derived out of
the King, cannot be understood to be against the King. He goes on to criminate
the King, whether his sense or supposition I know not.

Object. As guilty of all that Blood.

Answ. The King's unhappiness was, to be made guilty because he was not able to
defend himself: And so shall every Prince be that is overcome by his Subjects,
they must be guilty to be destroyed. Tyrants Wickedness do but prepare a guilt
for the cruelties they mean to act; It was the Kings own saying, That he had
not one foot of Land in his own Kingdom, but what his Army stood upon. It was
not possible to be a more necessitated War than the King's, for all the World
knows, it was destiny upon him; never persons so obdurate as to take no
conditions, never could find any Medium betwixt destroying their Sovereign, and
their own desperateness. And the King's Interest wholly defensive, not only for
himself but for his Kingdoms; and that made him say upon his death, which seals
all truths, that he dyed his Kingdom's and his People's Martyr. It were easy to
go upon demonstrative proofs in this, but it would involve the whole Cause,
which we are to take in its parts.

Object. And not any more to be trusted with Government.

Answ. This is the reason in the Eye of the Law, which sees to the end in the
first act, that all attempts to bring a King under any Power of his People, are
the same as to destroy him; And this was resolved in the Case of the Earl of
Essex, he would seize upon the Court, Camden's Annals, p. 547, 548.
take the Queen into his Power, not otherwise harm her; remove from her evil
Counselors, but honor her Person.

Now this was all adjudged high Treason in every circumstance of it, because
all depriving of a Sovereign Prince of his Power is the same as to destroy him.
Essex himself said before his death, that the Queen and he both could not live;
and others, the most eminent of his party, acknowledged that though it were not
their design to destroy the Queen, yet it would have been the necessity of
their proceeding, if they had prevailed; so as the effects of Rebellion Mr.
Baxte^ makes his Arguments. Before I put an end to these Papers I shall resume
again his words, [No more to be trusted with Government,] to make inquiry into
the Rights of Kings, and their Original; to find their first Cause, and to
judge of their extent and terminations. But at present to his next.

Object. And all this they do (that is, take away the King's life), not as
private men, but the remaining Sovereign Power, and say, they do it according
to Laws.

Answ. Mr. Baxter's Objective words, without any proving, brings every thing to
a question; as this has two very great falsehoods and high presumptions in it:
The one, a Sovereignty in the Parliament; the other, a lawfulness of killing
the King. For the first, which is made the conveyance to the latter to erect so
high a wickedness upon, a Parliamentary Supremacy, to make them an expedient to
kill their King, is no more true, than that there were two Kings in England,
two Suns in the Firmament of Government, two Centers in a Circle, two
Infinites, or any Impossibility that can be imagined. But I shall have occasion
to treat the Argument of the King's sole Sovereignty in diverse passages; only
at present to it, the Parliament is but a borrowed light, all derived out of
the King, the Fountain; in opposition to the King it is but an opacous Body,
the light withdrawn from it. Grotius states the case, Grotius de jure Villi,
54. inventi sunt nostro seculo.
whether Subordinates may act against the Supreme Power; that is, whether any
sort of Magistracy under a King have any quality or consideration in them, as
dividing from the King; and he resolves it in the Negative: He reasons it thus,
that these public Persons are but private in respect of the chief, and all the
faculty of governing in them is so subjected to the chief Power, as whatsoever
they act against the Will of that is defective of the faculty, and is but of
the Nature of a private Act. I shall give it off here, because hereafter I
shall demonstrate the impossibility of two Soveraignties or Supremacies in one
Government, and reduce Parliamentary Rights to their due Qualification.

Now then, take away this, the other falls; this the Theater Mr. Baxter erects
for judging the King, and Scaffold for beheading him. The truth is, the Laws
are all silent about this Question, Whether a Parliament may commit Tteason: so
as if we shall not take them in their general understanding we have no law in
this Case.

It is a thing not to be doubted, that the Law never had it in imagination,
that there was any exception to the committing of Treason; so as no such thing
mentioned in Laws, nor ever entered into the mind of any Commentator, who write
at large, and many times their own conceits; yet it never came into the
conceit of any Person, to except a Parliament for committing Treason. It is
many times in Nature the strongest Law that which is not mentioned; because the
case never imagined to be, and therefore not provided for.

So as if Mr. Baxter will not take all the Laws that are general, without
exception, to include all Persons, then is the King without Law, as against a
Parliament.

All the sense of the Laws respect the King without any consideration of
Persons, no sense or intendment of that, but only the end to which it is
directed; and therefore it is called Crimen laesae Majestatis; which shows
where the end is, in the King's Preservation, but the means never differenced
in respect of any.

It were in vain to enumerate the Laws, and to aggravate them; all dread, and
all saving, being to the life of the Government, the King.

This differencing is out of all Laws, never thought of; it had its Law and
Execution at once, as Treasons are never owned till they are acted.

But let the Reader consider upon the Statute 25 Edw. 3. which is the
Declarative of Treasons, whether there is discernable any differencing in it,
or exceptions of Persons, or Callings, or of qualities, or any imagination of
this Proposition, till now that wickedness strives to defend it self.

I shall take occasion here to speak to former actings of Parliaments upon
Kings, deposing them, and consequently killing them; because the Nature of man
is, to think any thing that has bin done may be done, and so never finds end
of wickedness but to make it infinite. Any extraordinary or transcendent acting
upon Government, though never so unlawful and violent, yet if it become
powerful, it commonly creates something to others to derive from it; as those
Persons, whom Mr. Baxter would vindicate, long before they divided, declared,
That in case they should act to the highest Presidents, they should not fail in
duty or trust; having their eye and aim upon the deposing of Kings, Ed. 2. and
Rich. 2. And the last Actors that completed the Tragedy, conclude power of
Parliaments from former destroying Kings, and setting up others.

I shall produce it only into some considerations by Epitome only, leaving the
large Subject of it to the Histories, how those Princes came to be declined,
and lose their Power. The first, Edw. 2. his condition was, to be Prisoner to
his own Queen, and his Son, a Prince of fourteen years of Age; and the
implacable hatred of the Queen and her party was such, as the King must be
destroyed; no competition being to them both: The whole Power was with them;
they call a Parliament, which acted merely as they prescribed. The King,
deposed by Act of Parliament, submitted, and resigned, in hope of life, which
he could not have. The other as unhappy, Richard II. Prisoner to the Usurper
Henry of Lancaster his Cousin-Germane. The Fate of subdued Kings by Traitors,
is ever to run into the same Center; Traitors leave nothing undone of the last
Act of destroying. Now, the actings being thus, what are the considerations
upon it; First, these Persons, and the Parliament, were the first that ever
acted so in England, and so must derive the Justice and Authority of it out of
themselves, and nothing from whatsoever had been done before.

Next, there was no such thing as King or Parliament in the Nature of it. As
well Jack Cade, or Wat Tyler, if they had completed their Rebellion, might
have convened any party out of the People, calling it a Parliament, and set
himself up King; for one Subject has as much Right to be King as any other.

Next, such a Parliament as it was, it was the Subject of an Army; the Army of
the Usurper, by which he had got Possession, and destroyed the King's Power; so
as in effect, condemning, deposing, was the Act of the Army absolutely; for so
it must be done, by such a party called a Parliament, and for the purpose; and
so are all our Mock-shews, to set up any wickedness, own Authority, but act
servilly, and are mere imposture.

Next, the Act, horrid Treason as was imaginable or possible to be in Nature:
Now the Question comes to be, Whether doing wickedly can create a lawfulness?
If so, all sins and villainies by the perpetrating them, lose their Natures to
be evils, and become lawful; A conceit, nothing that comes into imagination
can be more monstrous! There must be a first lawfulness in every Act, else the
doing it, is a Wickedness; and still that wickedness perpetuated and multiplied
in the after-acting it.

Next, this condemned by the first Parliament that was upon the change of the
Power; for so long as the Power continued it stood for good, as all Wickedness
does. But the Parliament under the rightful King, damns it as traitorous,
detestable, to be driven out of the World, never to rise up again, pulling down
God's Judgments upon the Land, Civil War, and all the Plagues of it: I shall
conclude this, that Wickedness can be no President.

Now, having gone along with him upon his particulars, which he only asserts,
not proves; my next is, to take notice and mind him that he is very near losing
his cause, which I fear he will do anon; for he is arguing to a lawfulness in
their putting the King to death, and it is his business to keep himself out of
it; and likewise the Parliament's Cause, and War, and the Religion, Protestant
and Presbyterian.

Now, being himself a chief Professor and Actor in those-Interests, if he finds
Argument for it, so far it is his Reason; if his Reason, why not his Opinion (I
know not the difference); if his Opinion, why not of the party: Thus he winds
and scrues himself into that Interest he would disclaim, and says more for it
than the Actors themselves; and he concludes with these words, And they say, so
as he says it and yet makes it their saying.

Either Mr. Baxter holds it lawfully done or unlawfully; if lawfully, then he
loses his cause, which is a disclamer of it as unlawful; if unlawfully, then
his Judgment is, that Form of Law used to unlawful Actions, makes them less
evil.

In Answer to it; This is an Opinion so strange, that forms of Justice, put to
wickedness to act it by, should be the good of it, or make it a less evil, that
I never heard it reasoned, but condemned in Nature; very Nature it self has an
abhorrency to it, when we see Laws, and Justice, and Tribunals, and any thing
that is good in its self to be made the means to wickedness.

Now I shall enquire into the causes; First, it is because the Law is the Rule
and measure of all Justice and Righteousness, and therefore the perverting of
that begets a common Injustice, and this far exceeds the Nature of any
particular evil, because it refers and relates to the common condition of men:
All murdering by Law is most wicked and noxious, because the Law it self in its
truth and righteousness is murdered in it; and therefore great actions of
public Injustice, the Laws drawn down to serve to them, are looked upon as
Prodigies; and this Argument is such as needs no amplification or addition to
it, it contains all in it self.

Then the villainy and apostasy of it, when it is done purposely of design and
by Hypocrisy, this comprehends in it the complicate nature of Wickedness when
Hypocrisy is added to it, and when that he calls Legal, Judicial, is made
instrumental of it; the Law debauched, and bawded to serve to the interest of a
wicked action; this is the very height of wickedness, it cannot in nature go
higher. And hence it is, Hypocrisy, and false pretentions, and disguising our
corruptions with shows, and false owning of good, is so hateful, and
abominable, and detested an agravation of all evil, and wickedness.

It was an instance given in Parliament by the Lord Digby, upon the trial of
the Earl of Strafford, to illustrate the nature of acting wickedness by Law,
which they were going upon, that one having gotten with Child his Brothers
Daughter, to mend the matter, and to his further end of enjoying her, marryes
her; and this is condemned by the Casuists, as adding to the simple sin of
Incest, by the Ordinance of Marriage abused to it. This shows the nature of it;
but we shall find it higher presidented in that of Naboth: The design being the
having his Vineyard, the means must be such as would serve to the end; a less
means then to take away his life, would not do it; private murder will not
serve, it must be such a way as he must be condemned, and lose his Inheritance
with his life. The Elders of the City are plotted with in it; the solemnity of
a Fast used; it must be done formally, Judicially; they gave Judgment, as
appears, because they received testimony, heard Witnesses, then kill and
possess. Nor this neither, though extremely wicked, rises up to the height of
the Kings Case; no parallel in the world for it.

If it be objected, That they did not act deceitfully, but believingly, though
wickedly; this is manifest against it, that they resolved the death of the King
before they tried him. Mr. Baxter cannot be so blinded with partiality, as to
believe the King in any case should have come off, or been acquitted, but
precondemned; and thus to make him more the subject of their cruelties and
scorn; and by a kind of Judgment, to be the fatal period of Kingship to the
Nations; so as it was nothing but a direful design, dark as Hell, a mere
conspiracy; And Pagentry in the acting of it, and the Law abused to it, false
in every part of it, to do it in the name of the People, and Parliament, so as
in this, Mr. Baxters reason utterly deserts him, or else he contracts all the
guilt, and odium of it upon himself, to extenuate the evil of the Act, by that
which was the exquisite wickedness of it, the formality and owning Authority in
doing it.

Then to descend from the evil in the nature of it to a politic consideration
of it; this goes to the Calling, the other but to the Person, this brings all
Kings under their people: The difference betwixt this and that of the Pope is,
Things may be as evil as is possible, yet not so extensively evil; this is as
universal as man is: for where men are, must be Government. This judicial way
which he places as the good of it, is such a Monster in the president and
practice of it, as all the World is concerned in it. It strikes a greater blow
then the killing of many Kings; the Calling killed in it; the privilege and
exemption of Supreme Governors killed in it; the very essence of Government
killed in it; the subordination to God, and to be judged by none but God killed
in it; all is beaten down and trampled upon by this act, the whole frame of
nature over-turned; No such thing as Government can be, if the governed may
judge and execute their Governor.

Then the manner of it by this formality, makes it viler upon the precious
person of a Sovereign King than assassination, murdering, or sudden
dispatching; The King to be subjected to so miserable a condition, as to be
made appear a criminal at the Tribunal of his Subjects: And if he had answered
out of any poor, imbasing hope, he had stained that sacred Prerogative of
Kings, Not to be judged: And all the tedious and odious formalities that did
attend this, which horror makes me not express, but take it inwardly, as that
we owe the victims of our sorrow to.

To conclude it, I confess before this horrid production, I thought nothing
could be worse then that of the Pope: but now is the world of wickedness
enlarged, and such a Monster as seems to add to Nature; the odium of it taints
the English Nation, and will do as long as memory is of any thing: for he
cannot deny it English, though so many out of it, so few in it.

Now after all this, I do admire how Mr. Baxter can dispense with the
Scriptures, against using force to Kings, or destroying them. His distinction
of Parliamentary right will not serve, since it is absolutely forbidden.

Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor Curse the Ruler of thy People. Exodus 22.
ver. 28.


That they may have to offer sweet Odours to the God of Heaven, and pray for
the Kings life and his Sons. Ezr. 6.10.


This was customary with the Jews, to pray for the King; which being practical
in Gods Worship, was more then Precept.

Against thee, thee only have I sinned. Psalm. 51.4.


That is, None to judge the Kings sin, but God: He might be evil, but the
offense was only to God. The offense respected the Judge of it, which is God
only.

Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. Eccl. 10. ver. 20.


This not thinking, is a restraint of all evil, since all evil is a first
thinking evil; so as this is an universal prohibition.

My Son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with the seditious,
for their destruction shall rise suddenly. Prove. 24. ver. 21.


This proves the natural dependency of it, The fear of the King on the fear of
God; then it goes to the reason of it, fear the King, not to rebel against him.

I will conclude it with that of David, cautionary to his own Soul; Who can lay
his hand on the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26. ver. 9.
A full definitive sentence in the Case, that no violence can be offered to a
Kings person.

And that this was general to all Kings, see the consent of all Scriptures.

Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of
God, and the Powers that be, are ordained of God; and whosoever resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, receive to
themselves damnation. Romans 13.


Now that all these Powers does properly intend a King, the words following
are, For Princes are not to be feared for good works, but for evil.

And then after, in the singular number, He is the Minister of God, and he
bears not the Sword for naught.

Now this Text, as it makes subjection absolute, so it takes away all parity of
Powers; it intends one Supreme. And Powers in the nature of it, is but one
Power, for all subordinate Powers flow out of it, and refer to it.

1 Timothy 2.
Exhort therefore that first of all Supplications, Prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks, be made for all men, for Kings, and all that are in
Authority, that we may live a peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty; for
that is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

This present Emperor was a Tyrant, Claudius Nero, which stops all objection
from the Kings mis-using his Authority, it looks to the good of Government in
general, and to the evil in general, of resisting to Government.

1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether unto
Kings as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent of him.

Here all Government is included in the King; sent of him, that is out of him,
and acts by him: And submission to Government here is made essential to
Godliness.

1 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, Honor the King.

Making them connaturals, and that the fear of God cannot consist with
dishonouring the King; the word Honor includes all subjection in it.

Having taken forth these Scriptures thus clearly, and considered all the
united force of them for preservation of Kings, and for all Allegiance and
fidelity to them, I reason thus, as to Mr. Baxter, and his Case, that the very
force of Scripture, and Word of God, will not permit any such thing to be, as a
lawfulness of killing or judging a King, or that possibly Law, or Authority
amongst men, should be repugnant to the voice of God, being general and
universal, for obedience to Kings, and not to offer violence to them; To
acknowledge (as he needs must) that the Scripture commands such things of Kings.
But we have a Parliament, a thing made out of the people, that may lawfully
condemn and execute the King; This is a mere contradiction to God himself: no
pretense of man can dissolve the universal Will of God, declared without
exception; for a King he is, and no distinction can frustrate the will and
command of God, for so it should be subject to a lie if it should come under
man.

And then to consider, that truths stated in Moral duties, never lose their
natures, but are ever the same.

And now I am loath yet to part with these Scriptures, till I have made a full
claim to the sense of them, howsoever Mr. Baxter deal with them afterward.

Let every Soul be subject, etc. which is to the King, which I have proved, and
the Text shows it; Is it not exclusive of any power, to be against the King?
Every Soul; the word has a strange emphasis in it; every Soul, that is,
bringing it to a singularity, and nearest distinction of man by his Soul, which
is most himself, and wherein he acts his subjection; and so precisely, and
individually, every, containing all.

Then to fear the Lord and the King; that is both as one, the condition of the
one implying the other. Then forbidding to join with seditious, or such as are
given to Change; which directly points out Rebellion: And then the case of very
Tyrants, commanding supplications to God for them, showing directly the nature
of Supreme Governors to be born by the people, whatsoever their condition be.
And then setting forth all Government of subordinates, to be but the Kings
Government, virtually in him, nothing of themselves perse. And then, Curse not
the King, admit not an evil thought of him, pray for him; still so many steps
to his preservation, keeping all harm or hurt far off him, must needs intend
the greatest, of not destroying him: Then to call them Gods, an exemption from
all humane Tribunalls, above the condition of mankind, subject to God only; as
Supreme Governors cannot in nature be other: and then, generally submission to
them for the Lords sake; that is to say, Gods Service included in it.

Now if out of all this we cannot make a construction, that Kings ought not to
be destroyed by the People, or by any sort or calling of them under any Form,
Guise, or pretense whatsoever; then nothing can be conclusive to man.

If after all this, there be any thing for Mr. Baxter to pretend to, and not
utterly give up his cause, he must make the King of England to be such a thing
as not to be within the intendment of these Scriptures: Not a King, not a
Supreme Governor, not so qualified, or to be so obeyed, or acknowledged, a
thing merely nominal, and conditional, under some other Supremacy, and subject
to a forfeiture of himself; That this was so at his beginning, and admitting;
that time and succession has given him no other right since; that all this
proves it self so to be: That the Parliamentary was the only Primary right,
and only natural, and National, and Kings their Servants, and Trustees, and
accomptable; And that the Government so began, when no King was, and his being
still under a condition; and the condition no less then to be subject to a
lawful destroying Power.

If all this were, which is as far from truth as madness it self; yet I think
that God would take it ill that we should mock him, to set up a King to Govern,
and then to reserve a Power to destroy him, against his Word, and meaning: for
the very power of Governing invests him with all these rights of protection;
vertually all these Attributes fall to him by his actual governing.

It is a principle in nature, that Supremacy attracts all right to it, and all
perfection: to be King, and not perfect, is impossible. And this I will say at
last of the King himself, which I think his very enemies and destroyers cannot
deny, that never any Prince fell by his people, that had fewer faults, and more
virtues.

Now at last my exception to Mr. Baxter is, that he personates the Protestants,
so as to destroy them, and their Religion. There is no other way of keeping the
guilt and imputation of that horrid accursed act from the Religion, but by a
total condemnation of it. We say, and justly, that it was an act that
transcends all that ever was, worse and more infernal, and execrable, then any
thing else the Pope or man can do.

Now Mr. Baxter out of his particular, makes it the Protestant interest, that
it be not so evil as the wickedness under the Religion of Papists, and so puts
it upon the Protestants account, of whatsoever nature it be, and makes it their
interest to extenuate the evil of it, which is a mere involving them, and their
cause into it, and the most unjust in the World; for, Is a Religion to answer
for what wickedness men do in it: I mean, being of it, or professing it? But
thus he loves to hale all Interests after him, to follow his sense. Let him
himself be in love with it, extenuate it, find Jesuitical abstracted,
quintessential notions, to dissolve all Allegiance upon Terms, let him take it
to himself, and not make it more general then his own party.

Having done with this sad subject, we will see him in his next, whither he
will lead us.

Object. It is a grievous Case, that the Senate or Body of a Nation should
think themselves necessitated to defend themselves, and the Church and State,
against their Prince, or any that act by his Commands; it will strongly tempt
them to think that the end is to be preferred before the means; and, it cease
to be a means which is against or destructive to the end.

Answ. The poor unfortunate King, that could never by any possible compliance
and means beg off his own and his Kingdoms ruin of them, was wont to tell
them, when they used the great Argument of necessity for all violent actions,
that they were necessities of their own making. Because their ends were
exorbitant, and such as the Laws would not bear, they must proportion the
means, which drew on the necessities.

Now to his preferring the end before the means; a principle he is fallen upon,
and the most dangerous one of the World; for by this he may decline all Truth
and Justice, to go the next way over to his ends: and yet a very strong one,
that the end is that for which the means is; there is no use or consideration
of the means, but to the end: By this ground he has laid flat all Honesty,
Truth, Goodness, whatsoever; for it may be it does not suit to the end. And
hence it was, that their ends being Reformation (as they call our Deformation
and Destruction) it could not be done by a less means: I do but mind him of
this, his party having made so much use of it. The truth is, if men would ty
themselves to the Justice of the means, they could never attain to unjust ends.

Object. It is essential to governing Power to be for common good.

Answ. No doubt but it is, as appears by their destroying the Government, and
we never had any good since. But without taking this advantage, I will give him
a further Answer, from the nature of Government, and every other thing we call
good; that is, good in the generality, not exact good in every action of it.

Object. It is no Authority which is used against common good.

Answ. Then there is no Authority in the World; for there is no Authority or
Magistracy, but at some time or other is used against it. He multiplies forward
still,

Object. It would tempt them also to think that God never gave Power to any
against himself, or above his Laws, or against the end of Government.

Answ. He should prove here, that God gave them a Right of destroying both the
King and the Government; for that is the Case: For he confesses the War raised
by themselves against delinquent Subjects.

But to answer to this, as he intends it; God does some times give evil
Governors, and does he not likewise give them Power? God himself fore-spake in
Saul, and then concluded the People, in these words; then, that is, when they
were oppressed by their King, 1 Samuel 8.18. Grotius de jure Belli, 81.
shall they cry out; that is to say, seek help of God ( Quia scilicet humana
remedia nulla extarent, Grotius exposition of it) call to God for help; that
is, there was no means of resistance to be used on their part. His next,

Object. A Senate, or the Body of a Nation, will be apt to think themselves fit
to discern when the Public safety is dangerously assaulted, and will hardly be
brought to trust any one to be the final Judge of their necessity; as
thinking, such a public necessity proves it self, and needs no Judge but sense
and reason to discern it.

Answ. Suppose there had been no Parliament, this Argument would have served
for the Body of the People to rise up, and take away the King's Power, as not
fit to judge of the necessity, or to be trusted with the Public safety.

It was the King's Act to call a Parliament, and 'twas his and our ruin that
he put himself upon it.

Having hitherto kept equal pace with him in these his several distinct heads,
give me leave in general to censure of them; that is, that in them he has sown
the seeds of all the Rebellions in the World: Let them be taken as truths,
abstractedly, without their alloy or composition, (as so the very Elements
would destroy us,) no Government can stand. Do we not, as often as we err in
any thing, employ the means against the end? and shall we, as often, fall out
with our selves? These abstracted Considerations cannot consist with the being
of Man, which is not certain in any thing, but subject to error; and as often
as ever a King errs, so often, by his Argument, the means is against the end,
and loses the essence of a governing Power. So as by Mr. Baxter's Learning,
there can never want matter for Rebellion.

In the next, he raises his Parliament as an out-work to affront and batter
Monarchy, in these words,

Object. And if they also think, that the fundamental Constitution of the
Government does make the Senate the highest Judge of the safety or danger of
the Re-publick; and that it is Treason against the Commonwealth, and (as
Politicians say) against the Majestas realis, to rise against them.

Answ. Mr. Baxter has of this in several places, the Parliament's Supremacy,
it is his Goliath: I shall answer generally to it at once.

Now the Arguments may be many, I will make it but a Passage, not a serious
Debate, and give but hints of truths that may be enlarged.

The first is, that I am sure, though I was not of that time, that Kings were
when Parliaments were not; and then, must be granted absolute, the other not in
being: We cannot suppose here in England any time of Government without Kings,
and the Kings themselves thought it best to convene the People, to draw thereby
aids of the Public, by public consent; and likewise, to have all Counsels and
all Grievances in common; to be common in helps and means which is strongest;
and peradventure, to balance the Lo^ds by this popular Power.

Whatsoever the ends were in it, or the use to be made of it, or accidents that
grew out of it, it shows it was a Creature mearly of the King's Will and
creating; and therefore cannot be intended but to act under him, and to his
help, as the end of its Being: So being called by the King in this sense, they
bear in them the Peoples Rights, whatsoever was left in the People to be
disposed of by their own consent: Their Power therefore must hold proportion
with that; that is, only in the quality of the People, as to complain of
Grievances, and petition Redresses, to give their private to the Public, and
to consent to alter Fundamentals as there shall be cause; all which are the
natural Rights of the People, and common consent is required to them.

Now this does not reach at all to Mr. Baxter's sense of sharing with the King
in Supremacy, and Power, and right of governing nothing at all of it. All
Parliament rights have their station below governing, it is by accident when
they meddle with the Government, as about the causes that require their help.
And all great, and outward relations, and inward, may be Objects of this great
Body of the People, as their help is required; but this with that caution, as
the King puts them on, and takes them off: So jealous a thing is Sovereignty it
self.

And it is a nice distinction to make them Judges of the necessity, and not to
judge of the cause of the necessity; and therefore involve themselves sometimes
in it too far, and the retreats have been difficult. No doubt, this must needs
be a strange, great, considerable Power in the consequence of it, that which
all the rest moves by, and is the matter or means of the Government: But this
does not alter the Nature of it.

It is a most noble Constitution, because it begets treatment betwixt Prince
and People; and there is a correspondency betwixt the giving of the one, and
the retribution of the other; but when either make too much use of their Power
it destroys the order, and the inconvenience is so intolerable to the Nation,
as they are brought again to it, and must correspond.

Now nothing preservs so much as when things keep to their Natures. The good of
Parliaments does consist within their own rights, and not to enter into the
King's; for then it breaks the Parliament, or the Parliament breaks the
Government.

To return to the nature of the Objection of coordinate Power of Parliaments;
The Parliament is a Creation that comes out of the King's Will and Power;
nothing of Power to beget it self; and therefore cannot be understood to serve
to another end, against that which was its cause, and which it self had
absolute Being without it.

Never to this day, they have Power to their own Being, but at the King's Will;
a mere Entity first in the King's Will, before it can have any in them; so as
they are merely Creatures, having their Creation from another's Will, and so to
determine them after they are in being, which shows the most absolute depending
on another Power that possibly can be.

Hence rationally, and consequently of this it must be, that the end is of the
Agent and Author, and not to be their own end, that did not, nor could not,
move to their own Being; so as merely it follows, A Parliament is the King's
business because it flows out of his Will: And some Acts have been made by
consent of Kings for certainty of Parliaments, but have not bound Kings; for we
see, they have been discontinued many years together: So certain it is, that
Regal Right cannot be restrained.

Now, the King's good and the People's, are so necessarily conjoined, as it
cannot be supposed they can serve the King, but it must conserve the Kingdom,
and all the People: And hence flows all public considerations and conclusions;
the whole Interest of the Nation resolves it self into it, and all the Powers
submit to it; because all parties are in it by convention or representation,
and the King can make lawful whatsoever they can consent to.

But without the King they are a mere inanimate Body, and can act nothing; they
are as the Womb or Matrix, the King is the generative Masculine part, that
gives life and production, and actuates and forms their conceptions.

And the difference not rightly conceived begets the mistake, confounding their
Power with that of ordinary standing Courts, which act by the King's Power
invested in them, which he cannot withdraw, or deny to; and this of
Parliaments, which is extraordinary and by the King's consent. And then too,
their work is about the generality, not to do with the ordinary proceedings of
Law proper to other Courts, but only the abuse of them.

The Author of the History of Independency affirms, page 35. History of
Independency, 35.
that the judicial Power of the House of Lords is by the King's special
Authority: his Argument upon it is, The King makes them Admiministrators and
interpreters of his Laws, but he never trusts any but himself with the Power of
pardoning, and dispensing with the rigor of the Law, in Criminal cases: And
though the Lord Keeper is Speaker of the Lord's House of course, yet he is no
Member of the Lord's House, virtute Officii. The Judges are not Members but
Assistants only; so that no man in the House of Peers, as he is simply a Peer,
is trusted by the King, either by dispensation of Law or Equity.

When a Peer of Parliament, or any man else is tried before the Lords in
Parliament, criminally, he cannot be tried by his Peers only, because in acts
of Judicature there must be a Judge Superior, who must have his Inferiors
ministerial to him: Therefore in the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, as in all
other Trials upon Life and Death in the Lord's House, the King grants his
Commission to a Lord High Steward to sit as Judge, and the rest of the Lords
are but in the nature of Jurors; so that it is the King's Commission that
authorizeth and distinguishes them.

When a Writ of Error issues out of the Chancery to the House of Peer^, they
derive their Authority merely from that Writ: For the three Reasons aforesaid,
the House of Peers is no Court of Judicature at all without the King's special
Authority granted to them either by his Writ, or his Commission.

As for the House of Commons, they never pretended to any Power of Judicature,
and have not so much Authority as to administer an Oath. Thus far his,

But the Argument is not at all pertinent as to the House of Lords whom they
have expelled, and all Form of Parliament or Callings, but in the People; their
ground is only upon a House of Commons, as the People's Representatives.
Nevertheless, we take the whole, and give truly the Nature of a Parliament; for
the perfectest way of rejecting Falsehood is by delineating the true Form.

It is not imaginable for a King to govern without the assistance and assent of
the Peers, for Government cannot stand alone; for as they are ever a party,
where any King is: the Question is only of the Commons, Prin's plea for Lords,
page 182.
which is an Adjunct; and therefore the Searchers into Antiquity take upon them
to antedate them, and derive them but as an Accident to the Government in
England.

But to take it in the whole, it being a truly poised Government and mixed
Interest, has left so great a share in the People as servs to treat their
King's with, and be at all times able to gain conditions: And God forbid any
Power should deny to the People's good; it can be no end of Government, and
therefore he is not single or alone, but has common consent in the great
Interests of the Nation, changing or making Laws, or making impositions; He
must have common consent to this, and this draws all the rest to it, since
hardly any thing can move but by these two Interests; and this is the balance
of the Government, to make it hang equal betwixt Prince and People.

And the evils and mischief that sometimes redounds is from the abuse of it,
not from the Nature of it, being the best composition of Government in the
World, and the People freer under it than in any Commonwealth Government,
which they call free Government; the Reason is a Secret till looked into
Physically, that is this (best of all to be seen in our late, long, odious,
Parliament), there all the People's Liberties were swallowed up, the People
uncreatured as it were, no defensive, all in the Parliament; when as in the
King and Parliament the People have a direct party, and a defensive, as there
shall be cause, against any deprivation of their Rights.

There are some Signals of Kingly absolute Right, which need but naming, as the
King's Adviseray, to Bills which he will not pass, which was ever effectual, as
to a total condemnation.

So as here was no Power out of the King, all reduced to him in his last Power
of denying, and likewise of pardoning. And this needs not plead any right for
it, but right of Nature, in reason of Government, else without such a Power the
King might be reduced to nothing. And a King never falls or loses his Power,
but he is lost in himself too: He does not retain Kingly Government but on
condition to perish with it.

And therefore all Laws are styled of Grace, and petitioned for; because the
People, till they are passed the Royal assent, have but a Right in Reason to
them, not in Law; only from the Supreme Law of Salus Populi, which is the
comprehensive of all Laws.

The common mistake is, because the King cannot do such and such things without
the Parliament, Ergo, The Parliament governs the King. Now, as to this, Many
may be said to govern me, so as to restrain me, that I cannot go beyond my own
Power, and yet this no active governing Power over another; this is the easiest
thing to conception that can come into imagination. Is there not, where any
Right is, which we call property, a power of denying? And this is all the
absolute Parliamentary power, considered dividedly from the King; and this vast
inconsequence, containing all the means almost to be King, unless the King
would break throw it, which is the hardest task any King can go about; yet
nothing of the Nature of governing power, no agency or efficiency in it by it
self, but only a mere Negative. Because I am engaged in this consideration, I
will resort back to the state of the Question, of a Parliament to be the
highest Judge of the safety, or danger of the Republic: The Answer is direct,
that the King is the sole Judge of the safety or danger of the Re-publick; as
King he is only trusted, and there cannot be two such judging powers; for then
there can be no determination, when they stand in competition.

Therefore all the Powers in the Kingdom act subordinately to the King, and not
against or athwart the King's Power, for that were for a Being to destroy it
self.

The distinction lies in this, that they have nothing to do with the King's
Power, but the People's Rights; which they dispose of by the King's consent,
and not absolutely at all out of themselves.

In this they may oppose the King's desire; that is, they have a Negative
Power, not to be compelled, or the People to be put out of possession without
them.

But where the disagreement is, they are to acquiesce, and so nothing comes of
it, and the King fails of his end; this is the height of their power.

Their Bills, which they are free to make, contain in them Grievances to be
reformed, which implies complaint and consent; whatsoever the King cannot do by
his quality singly as King, he does by consent of the People; and that is the
Character of a Parliament, the People; for it directly represents the
Universality, the People; and has directly and truly no power but what is
nationally and naturally the People's, so as look upon that, you find this, and
no difference at all in it; hence consenting and denying, giving, aiding, being
natural properties of Rights, are left to them, as the People in them: And
this, though great, as to all the means of governing, it does not come near it;
so vast a difference is betwixt being free in mine own, and having Power over
another, as no reason needs to be given of it.

Nevertheless, the King, as the common Interest, is not to be supposed
deficient of the Public means; that were unnatural: therefore as to Government
it self, all means are lawful; nor any thing so concerning to the People, as to
keep the temperament; for when they destroy that, they lose the means to their
own good.

I might leave it here in its causes, but I shall say something by way of
President.

Queen Elizabeth, the greatest Courter of her People, and yet the best
Governor, would lose nothing of her Prerogative; she did every thing with her
Parliament as with Subjects; they knew their own business, and she would keep
them to it; and abundantly the better for their obedience, for every thing is
good or evil as it is governed.

Not a Fast, or Humiliation day, or Preaching, His Plea for the Lords, p. 409.
as learned Mr. Prin has given the recital of it, that they could set up for
themselves, but she would check it, and bring them to Humiliation for it.

So dangerous a wise Prince sees it, popular liberty but to begin to creep out.
They had essays upon her about Marriage: she would not admit the pressure upon
her, nor suffer them to be Judge in it.

Then after, that of her Successor; that went nearer to her, Camden's An a^s,
Elizb.
a pinching thought, and in this the repulse of them was harder, because
apparently did depend upon it the safety, or danger of the Kingdoms after her;
yet in this, she was resolved 'twas too precious to her to part with it to
them, kept it to the last hour of her life; when she could live no longer, then
she declared a Successor, imprisoned their Members that promoted it, laid
absolute peremptory command upon the House against it, Pryn's Plea for the
Lords, p. 410, 411.
at other times imprisoned their Members, and would usually tell them, when
they exceeded, that it was in Her to give them being, and to dissolve their
being, and to assent and dissent to any thing done in Parliament. This from the
best and wisest of Princes; well knowing, that it is not possible for a Prince
to be just to the People, without true obedience from the people.

King James his time, by some Passages then in the Parliaments, will show us
the difference betwixt Regal Right, and Parliamentary Right. Parliament 5
James, Dr. Rawley's result from Sir Francis Bacon, p. 38, 39.
the Earl of Salisburyes words to a Committee of the House; That matter of War
or Peace, was Arcanum Imperii, and must be kept within the vail; nevertheless
that sometimes, Parliaments have been made acquainted with matter of War and
Peace, in a generality; but it was upon one of these two motives, when the King
and Council conceived, that either it was material to have some declaration of
the zeal, and affection of the people; or else when the King needed to demand
moneys, and aids, for the charge of the War. The Earl of Northampton, at the
same time, another of the Council of State, that both by Philosophy, and Civil
Law, Ordinatio belli et pacis, est absoluti Imperii. He further reasoned, That
the composition of the House of Common, was merely Democratical, and intended
to have a private and local Wisdom, as to the places that sent them, and not
fit to examine secrets of State, which depend upon variety of circumstances;
and although there be diverse Gentlemen in the mixture of the House, that are of
good capacity, and insight in matters of State, yet that was the accident of
the person, not the intention of the place; and things are to be taken in the
institution, not in the practice.

The Parliament of the 18th of King James, was a Parliament of contest and
dispute; and held out long by an able King, and a severe People. It was an
effectual Parliament as to the granting of Subsidies, and reforming abuses, yet
in the end thrown off. The evils that it had to work upon, were the evils of
Peace, and making danger of Religion a Monster; and looking at it through the
glass of their own Passions, would dictate extremes to the King about it, and
the Spanish match formidable; and the Kings unkindnesses from Parliaments, had
put him upon petty helps, as livelihoods, Monopolies: about those bred no
breach, but was matter served them to work upon, and wholly put to them, and
the persons offenders in it exposed, and the King himself a chief actor to
suppress it: And to pull down the Chancellor Bacon for Bribery, was their work;
yet at last, it had not a legal end of a Parliament, but dissolved by
Proclamation, and Crimination. The King enforced to this: for this King never
acted to public offense by his Passion, but merely his necessity. Therefore I
shall resort back, and take some remarks and passages of the proceedings along
with me, to find where the stone of it was.

After the matter of the punishments were over, the great and high
considerations, as for diversion of the Match with Spain, and declaring war
against that King for the Palatinate, and new devised pressures upon Papists,
and pressing executions of Laws upon them; so as they involve all the Kings
Interest into their hands, under the notion, that it was the Kingdoms
Interest. The King hearing of this, and it beating through his sides, betakes
himself to high resolution; and to prevent the prejudice of receiving it
formally from them, writes thus to the Speaker.

These are to command You to make known in Our Name unto the House, that none
therein shall presume henceforth, to meddle with any thing concerning Our
Government, or deep matters of State; and namely, not to deal with Our dearest
Son's Match with the Daughter of Spain, and also not to meddle with any man's
particulars, which have their due motion in Our ordinary Courts of Justice. And
whereas we hear they have sent a Messenger to Sir Edwin Sandis, to know the
reasons of his late restraint, You shall in Our Name resolve them, That it was
not for any misdemeanor of his in Parliament. But, to put them out of doubt of
any question of that nature that may arise among them hereafter, You shall
resolve them in Our Name, That we think Our selves very free, and able to
punish any man's misdemeanors in Parliament, as well during their Sitting, as
after.

Their Answer by way of Petition to the King: first Palliating over, and with
the manner and inducements to go upon such things, they have these words; In
the discourse whereof we did not assume to our selves, any power to determine
of any part thereof, nor intrude upon the Sacred bounds of your Royal
Authority; to whom, and to whom only, we acknowledge it does belong to Resolve
of Peace and War, and of the Marriage of the most Noble Prince, your Son; but
as your most loyal and humble Subjects and Servants, representing the whole
Commons of your Kingdom, who have a large interest in the happy, and
prosperous Estate of your Majesty, and your Royal Posterity, and of the
flourishing Estate of Our Church, and Commonwealth; did resolve, out of our
cares, and fears, truly and plainly, to demonstrate these things to your
Majesty, which we were not assured could otherwise come so safely, and clearly
to your knowledge; and that being done, to lay the same down at your Majesty's
feet, without expectation of any other answer of your Majesty touching these
higher points, then what at your good pleasure, and in your own time should be
held fit.

Now if we do but make a breathing space, and a stop here, or being like
getting to some height of ground look about us, certainly it shows, that no
Supremacy is pretended to, but utterly disclaimed; and all resolving,
determining, or the last power in business of Government; and no persons can
come lower, or assert more extremely, and exemplarly against themselves in any
such point of Right. So as we see plainly, Governing Power is all with the
King; and the question comes to be only about propounding, proposing,
discoursing, upon those high points of Regal power in Government, not being
specially required to it; which Kings think, comes too near their skirts, like
David, cutting off a lap of King Readiness Garment, to show only, that he was in
his power; so Kings think the one cannot be done, or assumed, that is entering
into, or assuming out of self Authority, to treat of the very essentialls about
Government, or the great weighty occasions that refer to it, but like the
cutting off of the lap of the Garment, begets a power over the person; and this
was the very stone of difference in this Parliament; so as we see to how near a
point it is reduced, a little space or difference, one would think, betwixt
proposing only, without power of resolving, and not proposing; now there is
nothing more satisfactory then the Kings own answer to them about this; for no
person could speak his business so well as himself, and this very particular of
the passage, it is a School of Learning. Now because I will not altogether
write out of another, nor be tedious, I omit it: It is no matter, let it be
amongst arcana imperii, not to bring all into vulgar light, else the reasons
might be abstracted why Parliaments are not of themselves to assume to treat of
the points proper to the King in Government. I shall leave this, and only
excuse my self in it, being far too high for me, that I only do it in the
defensive to regal Right, which is higher, and to the peoples right, which does
not consist in confusion of Government, but in the certainty of it.

Having done with this high consideration, I shall take notice of his dangerous
inserted words, of Majestas Realis; the self same as condemned in the Spencers,
in Ed. 2. his time, and likewise in the following Parliaments of that Age, for
the most destructive design against the persons, and safety of Kings, that ever
was imagined. A dividing of the Kings person, and his end of Governing; they
would have the Majesty to consist in the end, and so diviseable from the
person; and so the King might be deposed and destroyed, and yet the Majesty
whole. What will not man's brain hatch, when he is disposed to be wicked? This
was new forged, brought out of the Mint again, and begot the Notion, of Treason
against the Commonwealth, and served to make the King a Traitor. I desire his
patience to read Sir Edward Cook, ^o. 7. Rep. ^lv. Case.
7. Report, Calvin's Case; there he will tell him that all Allegiance is tied,
and refers to the person of the King; that the whole consistency of Majesty,
and Kingship, must be in a person in being, not to hang in the Air, as an
accident without his subject; all Relation, all Attributes, all Majesty, are
but rays from that body, dividedly from the King, can be no consideration at
all of Treason, or Majesty; this Serpenti e way of creeping betwixt the Kings
person and his Authority was a device to destroy him.

Object. When the Legislative Power, and highest judicial Power, is by the
constitution of the Government, divided between the Prince and the Senate, and
so the Sovereignty divided, many will be ready to think with Grotius, de jure
belli Lib. 1.13. page 91. That the Prince invading the Senate's Right, may
justly be resisted, and may lose his Right: quod locum, says Grotius, habere
censeo etiam si dictum sit belli potestatem penes Regem fore; id enim de bello
externo intelligendum est, cum alioqui, quisquis imperii summi partem habeat
non potest non jus habere eam partem tuendi; quod ubi fit, potest Rex etiam,
suam imperii partem, belli jure amittere.

Answ. These parties will still stumble at the same stone; that is, because of
the Legislative power, in some sort, or manner, or form of it, in the
Parliament, therefore the Supremacy: which does not follow, for the Supremacy
is the sole Governing Power, and Government is a constant being, the other but
at times, and by occasion; so as no proportion at all is betwixt a constant
governing Power, and an occasional Power; and when they are demanded but about
their own Rights; it being planted in Nature, that where Right is, there is a
power of denying, and a power of giving, yielding, and consenting; and this is
the Parliamentary power properly, and per se, all which arises out of the
Rights, and property of the People merely. Now these persons will not discern
the difference betwixt the power of consenting (which must needs be likewise a
power of denying), and active, efficient power, which is in Government it self,
and is always constant and universal: It has the properties, as the Soul in
the Animal, cannot have parts in it, and dividedness, or to discontinue.

Now they introduce this their objection with a When, when it is so, that is,
the Sovereignty divided; they should prove where it is so: I think not in
nature of two Sovereign Powers in one Government: certainly this is no
Government, but distinct Governments; and how it can refer to one people
governed, requires the inquisition: for when they stand upon terms of
difference, then the Government presently is in the state of War, and none to
reconcile it, being equal divided Powers. Rights may lie so, but Governing
Power cannot lie so; the distance is the same as betwixt two Foreign States,
or Princes, who may reconcile, and accommodate their reciprocal good so long as
they can accord upon it, as well as these several distinct Powers in one body;
and in this, either party upon the difference, betakes himself to his
defensive, and then the Government ceases to be; so as it is not at all
consistent with the nature of Government, but of Governments, in respect the
one of the other.

All Governments are either Monarchial Governments, or mixed Governments; now
in Monarchical Government, first it supposes absoluteness of Supremacy in the
Monarch or Prince, and then it cannot suppose it likewise in any other, for
then the Government should be a Monster of two heads; and besides, so cannot
act, the Powers in counterpoise being equal, and so it is no Power, but a Power
of destroying it self; as equal contraries when they meet, are destructive to
the matter that is the subject of them. Peradventure some instances may be
found of some that have been called Kings, and have been but head Members of
Commonwealths, and such, their safety and being is to act subordinately to the
Powers of the Commonwealth, not above them, for so presently they should
perish, having no power absolute to defend them; so as we see directly, it must
be one or other, either Subordination, or Supremacy entire.

That must needs be a strange Government, where the Sovereignty is divided, and
lying in diverse Powers, when they differ, the people distracted in their
obedience, not knowing where to obey to, but made to follow the lusts,
appetites, and injustice of either party, as it gains power, and not certain to
retain it. Therefore there is a Law amongst our Statute Laws of England, H.
7.11. y. C. 1.
That the subject shall be secured to fight for the King in being. This merely
from this reason of avoiding the mischief the Subject is put to, by a divided
commanding Power; this Law, though a gross one, and against truth many times,
because Usurpers did possess the Throne, yet for this reason preferred, and not
yet destroyed; though the Sword was too hard for it, as for all things else.

It is to be observed, that there is no Government without a mixture, which
makes Rights in the People; God himself does not govern the World otherwise so,
but that he gives the People Laws both for their direction and conviction; for
it is, in some sense, that the Law makes the offense; and besides, otherwise
all must flow from the King as Water continually renewed out of its Fountain,
and the People not know whom to obey, nor subordinates how to act; so as
mixture in the Government makes no Argument, it being of necessity to all
Governments.

And as for taking up Arms, and fighting for their Rights; Right and right of
defending holds not against Government absolutely. His next.

Object. If a Prince engage either hired Strangers, or Fugitives, or homebred
Delinquents, or others, to rise up against the Senate or People, either it is
lawful to defend themselves by Arms, or not; if not, especially if they have a
share in the Sovereignty, then is his Power absolute and unlimited, and neither
Laws, or any thing below, are any security against his Will to the common
safety.

Answ. The Ages that follow shall be very little beholden to Mr. Baxter, to let
them know the true state of a business of the highest and most horrid
importance that ever befell England, far excelling in accursedness the
intestine War betwixt the two Houses of York and Lancaster, because it has
destroyed our Form of Government, and all Title to Govern; which is an
unhappiness upon a People above all evil whatsoever, Usurpation being a
continued source of evil.

I admire he can be so little serious in it; This of his seems no more, then
that the King raises wicked Forces to destroy the Parliament; and a Question
merely, Whether or no they should defend themselves.

There is a great Narrative and Historical part belongs to this, to set it
forth; But it was not my end, but only so far as to answer his, and no farther.

In the first place, the Parliament made alliance with the Scots, disbanded the
English Army, to work their end upon the King. The King was taken in a Toil of
his own making, calling a Parliament, the Scottish Army being in England; and
now both Interests clasped him, that he had no means left him to get out of it,
but to break through it by force, which he despaired of. They draw up a
Remonstrance to the three Nations, to shame the King to the People, and make
him odious; not the accidents of Government but are put upon the King's score;
as if any Government could be without faults, and as if we should have been so
much happier under them, under whom we have found the little finger heavier
than the Loins of Kings, and their whippings Scorpions to the other's Rods; an
Instance taken from Scripture, and often applied, but never truer than in this
of our condition and suffering under them.

The Parliament once in, ruin was inevitable upon the King, never after was
any wisdom or means useful to him; preservation is not always in our own Power,
we have but the offer of it, which neglected or omitted, commonly the means
turns to another Interest, and cannot be regained. The King did now, too late,
strive by all manner of concessions and compliance, yet nothing would divert
destructin that did fix upon him, like the poisoned Shirt prepared by Dejanira
for Hercules, which once on, though he did strive to tear it from him, yet to
no purpose; the venom and poison, and fiery quality of it, did penetrate into
great Hercules, and consume him.

The truth is, the King was dispossessed before he durst appear in opposition;
all his Forces by Sea and Land, City of London, Hull, and Port-Towns, engaged
against him; his own Ordnance and Arms to fight against him: He had nothing but
the Interest of a King, and the pity of those few that did compassionate him,
(the People generally poisoned,) to raise up any party for him, and fighting
was but his mere necessity; for, as he said himself, he was sure to be the
loser, because he had nothing but his own to oppose to in his own Kingdom, and
his own People his Enemies. Yet further, no Concessions would serve, and
Concessions were his fault and misfortune too; it comes to be the case of the
King not to be trusted, and so the dispute grew upon the Militia; a word
introduced, commonly treated, as if an ordinary thing, no less in it self, than
the being of a King, who should have the Power. I may very well give it off
here, because the case came to be, Whether King or no King.

This being somewhat of the active part, I shall speak now to the speculative
part of his Objection; That if a Prince engage either hired Strangers, or
Fugitives, or homebred Delinquents, or others, to rise up against the Senate
or People, either it is lawful to defend themselves by Arms, or not; if not,
especially if they have a share in the Sovereignty, then (says he) is the
King's Power absolute and unlimited, and neither Laws, or any thing below, are
any security against his Will to the common safety.

Now, in Answer to this, first it supposes a Case that never can be, as a King
to raise Forces to destroy his People, or any party of them; it can never be
the case, that is, for a King to War upon his People in condition of
Subjection; therefore it is ever the People's War, resisting the King, in his
governing Power. It may be a case, that the Parliament will not dissolve, but
defend themselves by force, and this is a making War upon the King.

Now this being directly the Nature of a War betwixt King and Subjects, all the
pretenses to a defense are taken off, and the Question comes simply to be,
Whether for other respects about the Government, any party out of the King may
raise War. This must of necessity be resolved in the Negative, because it is
not possible to fancy governing power with a power in the People, or any party
out of the King, to resist his power; for then he should govern no longer than
the governed party were disposed to obey, and so no Government at all; nor is
it possible, in the reason of Government, to put a power upon the governing
Power, and yet that to govern: So as no Argument can be made for resisting,
because it is against Government it self.

But, says Mr. Baxter, Then what assurance of Laws, all at the King's Will.

Now, the precise consideration upon this is, that the very Nature of the
Government, and the King's Interest in it, binds him to the good of it: The Law
says, Nulli magis tueri Rempublicam creditum est quam Regi, no person so
believed to intend the good of the Commonwealth as the King, his sole Interest
makes it so; all others, as Subject^, have private Interests in them, and so
have private respects, which commonly consists not with the public; the King
is the only public Person of the Kingdom, who has no reason or consideration
of his being, but as King; without that, or beyond that, nothing, his whole
being placed in it; the public is his private; and this very reason, in Nature
of Government, making the Government the same with the King, is the full
absolute cause of the certainty and good of it, and is as much as is for any
thing in Nature, or any Being in the World, since nothing can be more assured
than Self-Interest for the good of it. And therefore Kingly Government is the
most certain Government, because there can be no end out of it, all contained
in it; the good of the Government is the King's good, without any difference:
Whereas in all other Forms of Government, the Persons that govern have
particular ends, as private persons, and this is truly the Nature of it, never
any reason can be for the abuse of Government by a King: It may be abuse upon
the King's Government, but never out of any just end of it. So as it is the
foulest mistake that can be, to suppose a King's Interest divided from the
People's, and that he must be held in chains for the People's good and
certainty of Government; when as the People directly lose all their good if the
King want freedom of Will and Power to act. The People's consistency is merely
in the King's power; without that it were nothing, presently the Government
grows seditious and factious, and moving in parts, when the Regal Power cannot
retain it. And hence it is, that those Persons that pretend for Liberty and
Power over Kings, are cause of Murders, and Massacres, of the People.

Nevertheless, if it be objected, that there are evils and abuses under a
King's Government, yet not so considerable (especially here with us in England,
where hardly can be any great grievance, the form of the Government being so
equal) as to make War for them.

Government has many hard things come into it, and extreme difficulties; and
the evils of it are out of the People themselves, stubbornly acting against the
King, and repugning to the means of Government, and of Persons doing wickedly,
and great Ones oppressing and having their ends by wicked means: Nor is it
possible, almost in any Government, to have it so, that the ordinary People can
be able to find Remedy against the Oppressions of great Ones, such as are
wicked and turn even the Government it self into the means of it, and the King
is the party most extremely wronged in it; for all reflects upon the King, and
yet it cannot be helped but in degrees, as things are subject to their
accidents, and so far only the good of Government goes, and never to an
absoluteness. Now, the manner is, that where the universality meets in
Parliament, all is represented, and they complain, and supply the King's wants,
and this is the great means to redress.

And if some hard condition in the Government cannot be got mended at present,
yet extremes do never long endure, but return to the nature of the Government,
they cannot hold out; so as we see, all excesses in Government are causes still
of falling back, and reverting to its right temper, and commonly causes of
pulling away something of the former with it; as ever, all violating of the
grand Charters and Liberties are cause of binding them up, and taking greater
advantage of the King.

A King can never affect to govern ill, but they may affect to have Power; for
Power is not simply good or evil, but in the use of it: and to have treasure;
and the People in Parliament, not complying, Kings are enforced to break out
into extraordinaries, and it cannot be helped; for it is not to be supposed a
failer of the means of Government, all must die and perish before it.

King James in the Parliament, the 18th of his Reign, tells them, that in ten
years he had not made use of them; and had he not bin all peace he could not
have lived so.

When the War began, the contest was about nothing but that they would not
trust the King, and were resolved to bring him below them, being an inexorable
party; and cruelty growing out of Religion is of all other the greatest
Cruelty: But the Laws and Rights were just the same as in all times formerly,
no alteration as to the great Interest of Regal right and the People's Rights,
which shows it is not alterable, that which no time had wrought upon, and all
accidents had in all those ages and times come into it; of so durable matter is
the Government, as no fear ever can be in it, as to necessitate Arms of the
People to vindicate it.

The People themselves are the only destroyers of it.

Nevertheless, though a King may seem all Power, yet naturally and necessarily
all Government involvs it self into the consent of the People, and all Power
comes out of them; so as we are to see where the Interest of it lies, not
merely in the King's Will, who is tied to more necessities than any other; so
foolish it is to think, that though they have the Power of governing, they have
not the natural restraints and necessities of Government upon them.

We are at last to consider the infinite mischsef of a Civil War, and the
strange danger the People run into, the greatest and most devouring Gulf that
is in nature, a body destroying its self and ripping out its own Bowels; for it
is all-acted within the body it self, and the People know not whether they
shall ever return to their Government again, but live under perpetual
Usurpation and Rebellion, which utterly destroys a People, to fall and live
under the King's destroyers; for Usurpation is all wickedness, and all misery,
and all force, and cannot be amended so long as it stands in resistance; so as
if possible, the People's Interest is to get out of it, and come under their
Government: And it is so far a King of England's cause, that has no military
Power in governing, as he will never enforce the People beyond Subjection,
which is their best condition: The very end and design of the Government being
to keep down the great Monster of it, that threatens it; so as on neither side
it can be imaginable, that Rebellion should ever be the People's best good,
remedy, or necessity, which is pretended for it, when it is acted, being so
wicked and unlawful in it self.

Therefore we see it is ever, either of the People pampered with Peace, and
know not what belong to War, or judge not of the good of Government, though
they have it but in some degree good, or else are cheated into it by Treason in
a party designing other ends.

And the Vulgar, the Character of them is all folly, and evil inclination, as
mis-judging and to be unsatisfied, so as never any condition makes their good
under Government, but when it is utterly out of their own Power.

Now the evil and destructive mischief of Rebellion, as all accidents of
destroying and oppressing come into it, must needs prove the unlawfulness; for
wherefore are things unlawful, but as they in their Natures are wicked; and
Rebellion being of all causes in nature the greatest cause of Wickedness, must
needs be the greatest unlawfulness.

We are a little further to consider of the difficulty of Government in its
self, how many things naturally oppose to the good of it, though the common
good of all the Members is placed in it, yet the most in their particular good
or profit, would act against it, or some prejudice to it; as every unlawful
acting is against it: besides, all the dangers that come into it, and
difficulty to the means of it. And some King's Governments, naturally as it
were, though from accident, are obstructed with difficulties and dangers, which
they must still overcome or else they perish; so that the best that ever I
could discern in it is, for a Parliament to help the King, as much as they can
possibly to the good of it: And a King of England his necessity will ever bring
him to meet the People in Parliament.

And still let it be noted, that resistance out of a Parliament makes no
difference at all; for it is rebelling still against the governing Power, and
most destructive when it shall pretend a lawfulness in another power.

I shall come now to the King's own acting, Did he not deny his own Prerogative
about Ship Money, and all other extraordinaries? Regulate the Privy Council,
and take away the Star Chamber, High-Commission-Court, dissolve the great body
of the Bishops out of Parliament, to please the House of Commons? Establish a
Triennial Parliament, pass against his Judgment and Conscience the Act for
condemning and executing the Earl of Strafford, and after grant them perpetual
sitting against his power of dissolving? Did so much to his own preserving,
that he gave away the means of his preservation, and wrought his own ruin by
it.

The like he had done before in Scotland, restrained his Royal power there,
rewarded the very Rebels, and against nature, justified their Acts of Emnity
against himself, and declared his own party guilty.

I have set forth this, to show the nature of Kings in this their condition,
and in relation to the People, and wherein a King's Interest consists; that is,
not to fight for his own which by peace he possesses; and likewise it
disproves them about the War it self, to prove the Injustice of it on their
part, mearly affected to destroy the Government, and to decline the King.

To show what compliers Kings are to peace, we ever see all Kings style their
People, their good People, most when they fear evil from them; treat them by
all possible means of satisfaction and lowly terms; send forth Proclamations
to purge any evil apprehensions of the People; awed even by the very thoughts
of the People; such is the nature of Government to implant fear in Kings, which
is their great Governor.

Henry VIII. the veriest Tyrant in his nature of any man that ever was, yet his
Government as to the Commons was good; he acted cruelties, beyond any other
King, upon particular persons of the great Ones, whom his Jealousy did reach
to: In his Government good in general, and declined all things of breach with
the People, though he seemed absolutely to command them.

It Is true, There are no Princes so stout as those who are most just; as Queen
Elizabeth, with her sure ground of goodness to defend her, kept her Parliament
and People at greatest distance from encroaching upon Royal Authority. King
James had innocence and worth enough in him to vindicate him still; and the
truth is, if the People could but weigh and penetrate into the exigencies and
urgencies of State Interests, how hard a thing it is to do but indifferently
well in the Work of Government, as to the People's satisfaction, they would not
seek to take advantages of Kings, and hold them to extremes; and can never have
any good in the nature of it, for the misfortune of the King ever returns upon
the People,

It was not possible for the People to know their own Happiness under the
Government of former Princes; and it is a Blessing man never is endowed withal,
to know the measure of his good whilst he enjoys it; and this is the cause that
they prize it not, but throw it away, and wilfully bring themselves to misery.

King James, in whose time the People had nothing to do but laugh, and play,
and follow their own Interests; no great Taxes, not the half as of Queen
Elizabeth, as for the time; no fear upon the Nobility, no fear or danger from
the Prince's humor, Religion perfectly Protestant, the King himself the great
owner of Interests in the reason and science of them; yet the People most
ungrateful, no more satisfied than if they had been under a bad Government,
tired out with their very peace: It is his own words to them in the Parliament,
18. of his Reign, We indeed find by experience, that a number of our Subjects,
are so pampered with peace, as they are desirous of Change, though they know
not what.

This happiness continued in the substance, though not in all circumstances,
till the people themselves destroyed it, so as they acted their sin and their
Plague in one.

We come in the next place, to that wherein he betrays himself, to the utter
overthrowing of his Cause, which I foresaw he would do at last.

Object. If the Soldiers must know beforehand, that if they do purchase a
Victory by their blood, when they have all done, they must be Governed by him
whom they have conquered, and lie at his mercy, they would hardly ever have an
Army to defend them; for who would do the uttermost that is possible to
exasperate him, that he knows must rule him when all is done?

Answ. If this be reason with Mr. Baxter now, why not at first? What Faith
could he have in his Covenant, which he destroys by a Principle in his
understanding? We at first looked upon their pretenses as for King and
Parliament, and all their Vows and Protestations, but as so many charms only to
destroy the King, because by other means they could not delude the people; and
now he confesses it, concludes, and consents to the reason of it; that an
exasperated King is never to be trusted again with his power over those that
subdued him; by this he destroys his Covenant, his Cause, and the whole; only
that served then, and this now.

To drive this further, because Mr. Baxter declares himself so in it, as he can
have no retreat out of it: First fight their King, subdue him, be Victorious
upon him, make him Captive; then kill him, according to the Kings own sense and
saying when he was in that condition; That there were but few steps betwixt the
Prisons and the Graves of Princes.

Now Mr. Baxter makes it his very Argument for the death of the King, and so
involves his whole Cause and Party in it, has destroyed all difference and
distinction, and makes the death of the King natural and consequential to the
first of warring upon him. We see here how naturally falsehoods betray
themselves out of their own Arguments.

I shall not pass by the insolency and impropriety of his saying, Conquered the
King; If Mr. Baxter were skilled in the Laws of England, which is out of his
Element, he would know, that there can be no such thing as a Conquest of
Subjects over their King; it is desertion, or Treason, not Conquest.

If he consult but nature, it will tell him, that that which is the proper
strength, existency, and being of any thing, cannot be said to conquer it, no
more then any thing can be said to conquer it self; the being ceases to be, if
the essential* do but divide from it. Cook 3. Inst. p. 12.
Nay the voice and reason of our Laws would never call them Enemies, but
Traitors; Enemies implies a kind of equals. He says.

Object. It was the Judgment of the Parliament upon the division.

Answ. Upon their division, their dividing from the King, their Judgment was
nothing, but as private persons, or wicked enemies; all Subordination depends
so upon its first Cause, as dividing from that, the being ceases to be.

In the next, you shall observe Mr. Baxter overruled Scripture to his own
sense, as he has dealt in Politics.

Object. And that those that did resist the Higher Powers set over them by God,
are guilty of the damnation of resisters.

Answ. This of Higher Powers here in Mr. Baxters meaning, is of those that
raised the War against the King, that they were the Higher Powers not to be
resisted.

Now I have not met with a greater violation of Scripture then this, to make it
a mere contrary to its self, and destructive to the end it serves to, not only
indirectly, but oppositely. This Scripture proceeds from the Spirit of God
directly for preservation of Kings, and Mr. Baxter applies it to the Kings
destroyers, making them the mere object of it, in the act of destroying the
King.

I have driven it thus home, to fix it upon observation, what a strange degree
of falsifying, and abusing Scripture in it, and the horridness of the example,
and consequence of falsifying grounds, and rules by which truths should be
measured, and creating false conceptions which are seeds of all wicked actions.

Now to clear out this more fully and directly, past exception: there is not
one word or syllable in Scripture Doctrinally, of any Power or Authorities,
since God Governed by his Prophets; but still generally, the intendment is of
Kings, and no other Form of Government owned in Scripture, or ever intended;
that being only natural, all Power consisting in unity of Power; and evermore
the Powers are intended as part of the Kings Power; for there is no fraction in
Government, supposing it a Government; so as all Power is ever but the Power of
the chief Power.

So many signalls upon Kings, and Guards for their fence and safety, because if
the head fail, all the parts and dependency of the people must needs dissolve.

And here I shall take up again his words; no more to be trusted with
Government. A Speech of great scorn, and contempt upon Kings, to make them the
people's Servants, and at their dispose, to turn off when they will, and to
destroy; and deriving no higher then out of the Peoples trust, their being
still but a depending being, nothing being higher in nature then its first
Cause; and upon this basis they plant their Engine for pulling down, debasing
Kings, and casting them into their Graves.

It is good therefore to see the relation that Kings have.

For so much as we see immediate of God in it (which is not ordinarily in the
things of the World, but limited to the chosen people, and when he appeared by
his Prophets) then most manifestly the Kings, or at least the first Kings
(which shows the nature of it, and right of it in all) was from God, leaving
out the people at all in it, to have any share in it: All this legible in Saul,
David, Solomon, and in the removes of Kings by Gods special denunciation, and
sending by his Prophets: The people the Executioners in some cases and
circumstances; so as there is no footstep or mark from God of the Peoples title
over Kings, or their making them, or giveing them their power. This in God,
special, and appearing proves in all, shows the nature of it, for that which we
see was done, and of God, and freely done, and at first when no accident had
been, (so as it was a mere promulgation out of nature, and proper to the nature
of it) must needs be held certain to it, and most reasonable to conceive of it.

Corresponding to these are the Texts, Romans 13.1.
There is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God; this
referring to Kings, for the words are after, For Princes are not to be feared
for good works, but for evil, and he is the Minister of God; Power, as Power,
is properly of God, who is the Power.

^ Chr. 1.9. and 11.
Thou have made me a King over a People.

That thou may Judge the People over whom I have made thee King.

^ Sam. 16. ^er. 1.
I have provided me a King; still pointing out his End, and his Author.

The Texts are many more, and clear it beyond all doubt, or objection of man;
that Kings, as Kings, are Gods Creatures, and derive not lower then from God
himself, as immediate to him.

Now because this was of the Jews, a peculiar people to God, we will see what
evidence the Scripture yields in case of Heathen Kings. Nebuchadnezzar an
Heathen, and Idolater, was owned by God as his Servant.

Jer. 25.9.
Nebuchadnezzar, my servant.

Isa. 45.1.
And thus said the Lord to Cyrus his anointed.

Which is the highest emblem of Sovereignty, anointing, attributed to Cyrus as
King; that is, that he had it vertually as King.

Ezr. 1.2.
And Cyrus King of Persia, The Lord God of Heaven has given me the Kingdoms of
the Earth.

And Daniel most full, the Pattent of the King as extensive to all Creatures
and Powers under him.

Dan. 1. ver. 37, 38.
The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength, and Glory,
and in all places where the Children of men dwell, the Beasts of the field, and
the Fowls of the Heaven, has he given into thy hand, and has made thee Ruler
over them all.

An Illustration of Gods dominion over all Creatures, and acting by Kings, his
immediate Vicegerents; to the end of the 5th chapter of Daniel, being nothing
else then Gods clayming his Title over Kings, as derivative from God, and
accountable to him.

Now all this is from the great end in nature, that Kings being to rule the
people, which is Gods proper Office, and Attribute; all Power, and all
Dominion, and all Providence being his, they represent God, and are his Image,
and Effigies in Ruling and Governing: and this makes their dependence to be
merely of God, and not accountable to any Power under God.

The nature of it is showed in that of Saul, as being the first King to the
Jews, and being the institutive of it, comprehends the nature of it.

The person was merely of Gods choice, not left to the people, nor any power
left in them, much less over the King.

In that day shall they cry unto the Lord, says the Text; That is, 1 Samuel 8.18.
no power to be against the Kings Power, but an appeal only to an higher Power;
that is, to God himself, his Author and Founder; they might complain of him
that was set over them, but had not any Authority of their own over him.

And this makes it in its nature to be the greatest trust in the World, because
there is no remedy against it, contrary to Mr. Baxter's sense, abusing the
Term, making Trust, subject.

The reason of this absolute subjection of the People to Government, lies in
the nature of it, that no medium can be found betwixt power of Governing, and
liberty in the people as not Governed; to be subject only to the good of
Government, is no Government at all, or to be subject at all: therefore of mere
force, from its nature, it leaves nothing in the wills of the people; so as no
such mean, or half being of it can be, by any constitution, provision, or
Policy whatsoever, when it comes to Govern, all those things, though part of
the Government, yet come under the governing Power.

Now for the Originals of Ruling Powers ordinarily amongst men, as to the
persons ruling in such a Line, and Succession; we shall find it to be still
from a first Power, before it came to Governing Power; the one introductive of
the other: for Power is its matter and nature; for we see all Government is
Power, and the Power will govern. Therefore equivocally the terms and names are
used; sometimes calling it the Government, and sometimes the Power; so as it is
the same, and signifies the same thing; inseperables in nature, Government and
Power: no remove can be in it; for where the Power is, there the Government
will go along with it.

Hence it is that there is never any discontinuance in governing Power over the
people. In the most confused tumultuous War, and distraction that ever was, yet
there is power still somewhere or other, that contains the peoples liberty, and
subjects them; so as there is not one moment, or minute of time in the World,
where society and community of man is, that there is any vacuum of Power to be
over them; and although powers divest one another, yet the Series of governing
Power is still continued; and in all such removes of the Powers, yet the Power
never falls, but is kept always up, and is in some still, and is as
inseparable from the People, as the matter and the Form, which never are
asunder.

For that which we call Power out of the People, it is not the people, but a
Power acting upon the People; and in such a circumstance of it, if it become
too powerful for the Government, then it becomes the Government it self.

Now having showed thus the nature of it, it destroys all those imaginary
Theaters that they would erect and build popular liberty upon, and popular
right over Kings.

They would fancy governing Power to be of the wills of the people, and the
people the Author; so impossible an assertion, as I only leave it upon what I
have stated, and how contradictory it is to nature in all consideration of it;
so as still the people is but the subject matter of Government, never the
Author of it, nor does Government ever come below the people in the cause of
it, but must derive out of its own cause, which is power to be above the
people, and so in all end and acting of it.

All this is still to explode that Monstrous conceit of the peoples instituting
the Government; or more Monstrous consequence of it, the people as the first
cause of it to dispose of it, and destroy it.

It is observable in Government, that Laws and Liberties come afterward to the
people, after power of the Government it self.

In the Norman Conquest, all lay flatted some time under it, till afterward (as
the Reporters of those times tell us); that the party of the Conqueror, or
their Posterity, did revive the English Liberties: first the Conqueror's
absolute will served them to expel, and dispossess the Natives, and after they
were glad of establishments in Government, to assure their own condition, and
what they had gained.

So as hereby we see Governments, the farther they go on from their beginnings,
the more they take in of composition to their first single Nature; so as still
the Originals of Government are most absolute.

Hence it is manifest that Power is their Fountain and first cause, as such is
their Natures, and the People's Freedom still is under Government, and when
Government is most confused then is their Freedom least; so as still Power is
over them, and are always subject to it, let the Form of it be what it will.

To consider it in common Reason and Understanding, the King took his Being
from the People's Trust, in Mr. Baxter's sense; therefore the People are to
dispose of him: This were for the People not to be governed, for then the Right
were in the People, and the King betrayed to govern under another Authority to
make it accomptable. Therefore this supposes a Monster in nature, and it would
evermore make Government destructive to it self, for then it does not govern;
for where the end and ultimate of Power is, there the Government is.

I shall insert something that is legal in this, pertinent to the Case of the
King of England, how he comes to be King. Sir Edward Coke, that was a man
popular enough, in his third part of his Institutes, page 7. says, That there
is no such thing of the Kingly Being in England as an Inter-Regnum, nor any Act
confers to the making of the King, but instantly by the descent of the Crown to
the right Heir, he is King. This his, and more, there expressed. And indeed, no
worldly Power can dispose, alien, or transfer the right of the Crown. King
Edward the sixth before his death would have settled the Crown upon his nearest
Kinswoman, the Lady Jane Gray, Wife to the Lord Dudly; his Sister Mary being of
the Roman Church: and the Council and Peers swore to this in his presence, and
he dyed. Now, what the effect? Only to make them all Traitors, and no other
right in it.

Parliaments have declared for Titles, but never can make any, nor deprive
Right. It is true, diverse Usurpers have had Parliament Test for their Warrant,
for those have most need of it, but still it was acted under power enforcing,
and so it was nothing but mearly so long as the Power lasted.

Usurpation does not come into possession without power, and it draggs
Parliaments after it, and deprives all reality, but mere Hypocrisy in all that
is acted or pretended to, by Parliament or People.

I have no more now to consider of, than of the Right of Kings, having spoken
of their Original Cause, Power, etc.

Now, this first is generally from the great end of it; that is, Government;
which, as Government, is ever good; good, as Government, though it may be an
evil Government: nor can any failings in the particularities so overruled the
common good of it, but still it has good of Government in it.

But this comes not to the Question of Right in the person which we are to
inquire.

Certainly it cannot be Conquest which is only a great Riot, and multiplying of
Rapines and Man-slaughters; it is all Wickedness which is only distinguished
from common wickedness as it transcends all other actings of wickedness; and
such is the nature of Conquest by excess of wicedness, to make it self above
offending and punishment.

Then it cannot be in submission of the People to it, being first conquered
still before they consent; and if they partly resist and gain conditions, yet
it is in respect of the power, which is cause of all the following of what
nature soever it be. And it is not possible that any one can receive a Right
from his doing wrong.

Some suppose upon the future settlement and equability of the Government
established Title may result, yet still all this is after the power, and cannot
imply in any kind a not Being of it, being first supposed absolute, at least
not their condition to resist it.

Besides, in the Case of a former Right, the Peoples consent cannot evacuate a
right in the former Prince outed, or his posterity.

Now that it appears directly, that none of these things make right, or are of
any force to it, it is cleared by this; that if the outed Prince can recover
and regain Power, these things vanish as unlawful, and as wicked consentings
and compliance; and so long as the old Right can possibly retain its self in
memory, add but power to it, and it is ever unquestionable.

One instance with us in England of sixty years discontinuance; yet when it
recovered power to act, all the Usurpation went for nothing, and the old came
in as Right, not as Conquest.

Where yet shall we find it? Nothing but the Old extinguishing by long
continuance of the latter, and that becoming natural, and consent goes with
Nature; so hard it is to the Titles of Princes and so precious to the People to
retain them, and so dangerous to lose them; And all the Intervals filled, and
taken up with the uncertainty of Government, and all the accidents that attend
want of Title.

Therefore, since only time, and long time, makes unquestionable Right to
Princes, it is of all Rights or Titles the hardest to be attained to, and must
be most absolute, since nothing but User can give in its Authority; therefore
it is most unquestionable, venerable, unchangable, independent of any other
Cause, and so under no other power, and never falls but with the ruin of the
People.

And this is a high perfection of Kingly Government, since no other Form of
Government can have this precious thing, Title in it; that is, Right in the
Person, which is the Cement of Government, and half the means of it; and
consent goes along with it whereby all the People act subordinately, and this
makes it easy and without force, because of this tacit consent of the People
to it; for all operation of the Soul is but consent, consent is the genius of
the Government by which it acts, and all the People, and all common Interest
does center in the Right of it, and find their rest.

And now I have done with the Argument.

I have only something of Observation from the natural effects of Rebellion,
and destroying rightful Government, as we see it in ours: Now, the Work is
done, and all in the Power of the destroyers; What comes of it? Two very
natural and great effects; the one is Wickedness, all manner of wickedness,
impieties, false Religions, Cruelty of manners and actings, multiplicity of
Tyrants; having destroyed the great Tyrant-Government under a King, as they
called it, all persons that get Power, act as Tyrants: Multitude of Tyrants out
of the People themselves, acting wickedly in all parts, Cities, and Towns,
where most Interest of the People lies; strange Principles in profession and
opinion, and despising rancks and degrees of persons, and of Kings, and
Supreams, and bringing all into a contempt and baseness, against order of
nature, and nature of Government, which consists in difference, and degrees,
and subordination. To follow this subject of our present condition, what a
Monster England is become, no such Copy of it in the World? It must be all
written and taken out of it self; the strange infinite forms of Wickedness both
in Faith and manners, base horrible Conceptions, monstrous Notions; all
hatched, and have their production from the putrified matter of standing in
condition of Rebellion, and loosed from the rightful governing Power, and
running loose into parties and into their own sense, having cast off the right
Power, which keeps to Order and Unity, all Order and Unity being the effect of
Government; and the Monstrousness and Infiniteness that enters in the vacancy
or deficiency of it; for Errors in their nature are infinite, whereas all true
Beings have but their natural proportions and definitions.

The other is unsettledness, which is the Curse of Usurpation, and of
destroying rightful Government, that it cannot resolve it self into any thing
of certainty or Being to the People, under the power of it: As we see these
persons, to perpetuate their Wickedness, can make nothing of it.

The King's Right, and the wrong they do, does shine out of darkness it self,
out of that rubbish of confusion and destruction they would bury it under: We
see they can make nothing of all the Power, having the whole, it being the
King's Power and the King's Right; they are confounded with it, do but toss and
tumble this Power over and over, it can no where settle to make a Government,
but monstrous violence grows out of it; and this is all they can create from
it, which does admirably confirm the King's right, and that only in that does
consist the People's Interest; and what a strange spirit and principle is in
it, that though trodden down, and debased, reviled, scandalized, and kept out,
yet it rises against all Power, not in nature left, or possible to make a
settlement, or Justice, or Safety, to the People without it; the People undone
by the usurping it; so dangerous is a King's Right when divested and displaced,
and so precious to preserve in its true place.

My last I will conclude withal, which may reflect upon the whole, is, that I
conceive the best way of calling Parliaments is frequently, and never by
necessity; for when a King has most need, it proves most dangerous; therefore
it is never to be used as the last remedy. Kings ought to have something in
reserve to help them off that again if it grow averse, and incline to danger.
And it was the total ruin of the King, that he was so much a loser before he
came to play this Game: When all was distempered and disordered round about,
the out-Nations up in Arms, and the home-People poisoned, discontented, then he
calls a Parliament, when no thing totally, and mainly, could have destroyed him
but that; for every grievance, and every misery, and every distress of the
King's served them for matter against the King; and so turned the cause of
putting himself upon them for help, to be the means of their depressing him,
and destroying him. It is like that our Savior says, putting a new piece of
Cloth into an old Garment, it makes the rent worse; so all the parts so fear,
and unsound, as nothing to bear the searching, severe remedy of a Parliament,
and apt to grow wicked with their Power.

FINIS.

