Now is the Time.
THE thing that offers it self in this great Conjuncture is, to have a Grand
Committee of Lords and Commons (Forty at least from each House) to be as a
Privy Council, or Council of State, or governing Senate.

It were to be wished, that Twenty of each Forty might be for life; and the
other Twenty Biennial, Ten going off every Year. Or half might be changed
Annually.

Each Senator or Counselor to have for his Salary or Maintenance, a thousand
pound a Year. This would be such an Advancement to the Nobility and Gentry, as
England never saw. And the Charge is a Trifle. There is more spent in some
Monarchies upon Hawks, Hounds, and Whores.

The Prince to preside in this Council or Senate (or such Person as he shall
appoint in his stead) and to have Ten Votes at least. He must also be General
and Admiral; and must have such further Powers, and such a Maintenance or
Revenue, as his infinite Merits require. But withal, such as are consistent
with the Government he designs for us. The Prince's Maintenance should equal,
or exceed, that of all the Senators put together.

All that are of this Council, and all that hope to be (that is, all the
considerable Men of the Nation) will by this means be firm to the Prince. And
so will those others who have the great Privilege of Choosing them, whereby
they may have confidence in their Administration. And this one thing will give
the Prince so strong an Interest, that he needs fear no Pretension that can be
against him. It will be better than a Standing Army: the necessity whereof
nothing can prevent, but such a Standing Council.

The Parliament to be Chosen Triennially, and to meet Annually.

It is believed that such a Constitution as this, would effectually secure us
(according to the Princes good Intentions) from Popery and Tyranny. And the
Prince will be the glorious Author of the Britannique Liberty, as his Great
Grandfather was of the Belgique. The Genoeses to this day adore the Memory of
Andrew Doria, who chose rather to make them a Free State, than to be their
Prince. Barely to change Our Master, would but revive the Feuds of York and
Lancaster, and involve us in the like Calamities.

These things to continue but during the Life of the King, and not to prejudice
a Protestant Successor.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1689.


