A DISCOURSE OF NATURAL and REVEALED RELIGION IN Several Essays: OR, The Light
of Nature, A GUIDE TO DIVINE TRUTH.

LONDON, Printed for John Newton, at the three Pigeons against the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, MDCXCI.

Licensed, May 18th. 1691.

The LIGHT of NATURE a Guide to DIVINE TRUTH.
In the Discoveries it makes of God in respect of Himself and his Creatures.
In respect of Himself, we consider his Existence Chap. 1. and 2. Attributes.
Chap. 3.
God with relation to his Creatures, considered in his Works Worship.
His works of Creation Chap. 4. and Conservation.
His Conservation or Providence over the Universe Chap. 5. and 6. Humane
affairs in General Chap. 7. 8. 9. Special Chapter 10.

Corrollary of Fate and Fortune, Chap. 11. Of God's Worship, or of Religion in
General, Chap. 12. Religious Worships, either of False Gods, Chap. 13. of the
True God. Revealed Natural.

Revealed Religion Jewish. Christian. Mohammedan.
The Jewish Religion in its Authority Chap. 14. and 15. Duration Chap. 16
The State of the Jews since their Fall, Chap. 17. The Christian Religion
examined by The Types and Prophesies of the Old Testament Chap. 18. Solution of
Objections Chap. 19. Heathen Predictions Chap. 20. The Doctrine of Jesus Chap.
21. Solution of Objections Chap. 22. The Life of Jesus Chap. 23. The Miracles
of Jesus Chap. 24. The success of the Christian Doctrine Chap. 25.
Of the Mohammedan Religion Chap. 26. Corrollar. Of the Immortality of the Soul
Chap. 27. Of Natural Religion as a means on. Chap. 28.
The Conclusion.
CHAP. I. Of God's Existence.
Whosoever shall view the World in the several Stages and Revolutions of Time,
may easily observe, that there was never any Nation so overwhelmed with
Barbarism and Ignorance, but did readily believe there was something Superior
to their own Nature; which had Power to hurt and to defend them: and in
conformity to this Belief, they did ascribe more than human Honors to their
Demons; endeavoring also by their Prayers and Oblations, to make them
Propitious, and Ascribing all their Success and Felicity, as well as their
Calamities, to the Decrees and Dispensations of their Gods.

It Is true; the Notions they had of the Nature of these Gods were very gross
and absurd, since they sometimes imagined them to dwell in certain Beasts, in
Brutes, in Plants, or Images made of Stone, Wood, and the like, believing them
almost to be as many in Number as their Worshippers, and subject to the same
Vicissitudes and Distempers of Passions. But how absurd soever they were in
their Rites and Ceremonies, in this they did all agree, that such Numens did
precide over them, and were therefore to be approached with all Veneration and
Humility; to be invoked with all Fervor and Constancy, and to be appeased with
some kind of Expiations; all which being the concurrent Sense of Mankind in all
Ages, can be no other than the Law of Nature, and must be therefore of Eternal
Truth, as being derived from that one first and supreme Cause which gave Nature
its Existence.

I question whether there were ever any who did absolutely disbelieve the
Existence of a Deity, not admitting it in some degree or other. As for those
amongst the Ancients who were Canonized for Atheists, such as Diagoras, Lucian,
and the like; It Is plain, that they only derided those who were esteemed Gods
in their own Times, who indeed had not the least Pretension to Divinity. And as
for those who believed the Eternity of the World or of Matter, such as
Aristotle, Epicurus, and the like; though such a Belief were utterly
inconsistent with the Notions of a True God; nevertherless, they did in some
inferior manner or other believe the Existence of Divine Beings. But whosever
they were of this Tribe, and whatsoever their Belief was; this is certain, that
they could never erect themselves into a Sect, nor make any considerable Body
of Men to be of their Persuasion.

And as for our Modern Atheists or Scepticks, as they are known to be Men whose
Natural Improvements are but ordinary, consisting only in Boldness and some
little Gallantries of Wit; so is it as well known, that they are Men of Sensual
and Flagitious Lives; and that what they teach, is not so much their Judgment
as their Design; not what they think, but what they wish should be: For could
they make the Being of a God, or (what amounts to the same thing) his
Providential Regiment of the World, but disputable, there would be some Color
they think for their Licentious Courses, to which their Lives are Prostituted:
And yet there was never any Man of Parts who has professedly impugn'd the Being
of a God, only by some oblique and side Approaches they have adventured to
Attack him in his Prerogatives, either in denying his Providence, by reason of
some seeming Incongruities in second Causes; or admitting his Providence, they
endeavor in the next Place, to make his concurrence with Human Agents, to lay
a necessity upon the Will for the commission of Evil Actions, and by this
means, they impugn his Goodness; or lastly, by denying the Souls Immortality,
or a state of future Rewards and Punishments, they labor to destroy his
Justice; but of these Points more hereafter. For the present, it is worth our
Consideration, what some have excellently well observed, That Men of this
Denomination, will be ever talking of their Opinion, as if they fainted in it
within themselves, and would be glad to be strengthened by the consent of others.

But to return to the Belief and Practice of the Gentiles; we are carefully to
Consider, what there was in their Idolatrous Worship, which was founded in the
Law of Nature, and what it was which depended upon the Will and Genius of the
Worshipper. That which was founded in the Law of Nature, and in which they did
all agree, was this; That there was some Superior Power which did observe
their Actions; which did govern all the Occurrences of Life, and was Author of
all the Good and Evil which did happen to them.

From this Belief of the Power and Providence of their Gods, they formed to
themselves two Internal Acts of Devotion, viz. Love and Fear; as also two
External Acts, to wit, Invocation and Worship. Now this Worship consisted
chiefly in these Duties: First, Veneration and Honor: Secondly, Oblations,
which were either Expiatory to appease the Anger of their Gods, and make them
Propitious; or else to testify their Thanks and Gratitude for the Blessings
they received; all which flowing Naturally from a belief they had of their
Gods, and that they were the Original of Good and Evil, and consequently of
Rewards and Punishments, is an evident Demonstration, that they did all meet in
those general Notions, wherein the Worship of the True God was most concerned.

CHAP. II. The Belief of the Heathens concerning God.
NOw he that should give a true Account or History of the Heathen Gods, might
himself have hopes to be of the Number of them, by doing a Work more laborious
and difficult, than many of those for which some of the Ancients were Deified:
Their Number (as Varro Reports) amounted to no less than Thirty thousand, and
so Prodigious are the Stories that are reported of them, that even the false
Deities seem to be both Infinite and Incomprehensible, no less than the True
one.

Not therefore to run our selves into a Labyrinth of endless and headless
Fables, we may cursorily observe; that as all the Heathen Gods had their
Original assigned them, so also that they were Mortal too; and that the
Foundation upon which after Ages built their Worship of them, was laid in the
Opinion they had of the Benefits Men received from them whilst they lived on
Earth; Thus Bacchus, Serapis, and Ceres, were held for Deities, as being
reported to have been the first Planters of Corn and Wine; or such, who in
Times of Plenty laid up those Provisions, by which future Dearths were
supplied. All Inventions of Arts and Manufactures were ascribed to Mercury and
Vulcan; of Navigation to Neptune; and of Poetry and Music to Apollo. Upon
which account also it was, that the Egyptians Consecrated so many Beasts,
believing that the Benefit they received from them, did proceed from a certain
kind of Virtue or Divinity, by which they were animated or directed. Amongst
which there was none held in greater Veneration than the Bird Ibis, for shape
much like a Crane; for so it was, that these Birds fed altogether upon the
Serpents which the African Winds, at certain Seasons, brought in vast
quantities from the Deserts of Lybia.

We ought furthermore to Consider, the Authors from whom we have these
Traditions of the Heathen Gods, viz. The Ancient Poets, such as Orpheus, Homer,
Hesiod, Aratus, Theognis, etc. All which were by after Ages called Vates or
Enthusiasts, as pretending to speak by Rapture, and with a Poetic Spirit, by
which they mixed any Extravagant Fictions of their own furious Brains, with
whatsoever former Ages had conveyed to them. So that to beget the greater
Admiration, they thought it proper to invent such Stories as should seem most
Prodigious. Now these Poets being the only Writers, in whose Monuments is
Registered whatsoever relates to the Histories of the Gods; 'twas no wonder,
that so great a medly of Fictions and Incongruities should cast such a Mist on
future Ages, as the Wit and Industry of the most Learned Men could never
dissipate; but by their Comments, Conjectures, and various Readings, they have
rather rendered former Traditions more incredible and perplexed.

Of all the Heathen Gods, Jupiter was esteemed Supreme, as being the Father of
most of them, and the Fountain of that Power and Virtue, for which every one of
them was worshipped. We read also of many Jupiters, but of two more Eminent
than the rest; of which, one was born upon the Mountain of Ida in Creete, as
some, or upon the Mountain Dictamnus, as others affirm. The other Jupiter was
born in Arcadia, and Educated upon the Mountain Olympus; so that the Actions of
the one being frequently attributed to the other, has been the occasion of
great Confusion. However he of Creete seems to have been the so much
Celebrated, and to have appropriated the Atchievments of all the other
Jupiters: He was said to have been the Son of Saturn and Rhea, and to have
delivered his Father from the Oppressions of the Titans; nevertheless, Saturn
upon the Prediction of the Oracle, that he should be deposed by his Sons,
thought to have destroyed them; and of this Resolution Jupiter having notice,
he deposed his Father, which Poets expressed by thrusting him into Hell. After
this, Jupiter and his two Brethren, Neptune and Pluto, made a Tripartite
distribution of the Empire; Jupiter, as being the strongest, chose the Eastern
Parts, which was called Olympus or Heaven; Pluto had the Western, which in the
Fiction of the Poets regarded the setting Sun, or Region of Night, and was
called Inferi, whilst Neptune had the middle or Maritime Parts for his Lot. The
Power of Jupiter's first Government, in suppressing the Petty Tyrants (which
were also called Giants) as also his Justice in the Sanction of wholesome Laws,
was that which made him to be worshipped for a God in after Ages:
Notwithstanding being for some time settled in the Throne, he indulged himself
in all Sensual Pleasures and Passions, and committed infinite Rapes and
Disorders, as appears from the Records of the Poets.

Amongst those who have written of the Heathen Gods, some there are who make
their History to be symbolical, and to represent Nature: By Jupiter
understanding Ether; by Neptune the Element of Water; by Vulcan Fire; and the
Earth by Ops or Cybele; though others whilst they make Saturn or (...) to be
the Son of Coelum or Vesta, seem to pitch upon the better Original of the
Heathen Gods, as also of all other Natural Productions whatsoever.

But waving the Fancies of Poets and Mythologists, this is certain; that as Men
did express their Adoration by some certain Rites and Mysteries of Religion, so
we still find them Invoking Jupiter as the Author of all their Blessings, and
as the Supreme Protector and Governor of all human Affairs. Upon which account
it was, that the Ammonii, a People of Lybia, represented Jupiter with Rams
Horns on his Head; which Fiction of theirs had its Original from the Egyptians
(of which the Ammonii were a Colony) who in their Hiroglyphick Devices made the
Ram to be the Symbol of Fecundity and Strength; which suited well with the
Notions they had of the Strength and Power of Jupiter, and of the Benefits and
Plenty derived from him.

But as Men began to be more improved by Knowledge, and to be more reformed and
polished in their Lives; in the same measure still we may observe them to have
been more and more averse to the Stories and Traditions of their Gods: Upon
which Account it was, that Diagoras and Lucian were branded with the Character
of Atheists; not because they did disbelieve the Existence of a Deity, but
because they derided those who were falsely accounted Gods in the Age wherein
they lived. But Socrates being in high Esteem for Wisdom, and more Eminent for
his Dis-belief of the Heathen Gods, was put to Death for his Opinion; so that
it is no wonder if Plato, and those who followed him, having such an Example of
Athenian Cruelty before their Eyes, became more Timorous and Cautious in
expressing their own Sentiments, for the most part speaking of God under the
Name of Jupiter, to avoid the Punishments of the Bigoted Magistrate. And
although Plato in his Books de Legibus; which were to be communicated to the
Vulgar, spoke after the Style which was then in use; yet writing to Dionysius,
he tells him how he should know when he was serious or no: For when I Epis. 13.
am serious, (says he) I always preface my Writings by the Invocation of one
God; but when otherwise, of many. He frequently calls God, the Father of the
Universe; the Beginning and End; by whom and for whom all things are made; the
Supreme Governor of all things which are or shall be; and the Idea of all
that is Good.

As for the Romans they used more liberty and boldness than the Greeks in these
Discourses; so that Tully, (who was an Academick, or one of Plato's School)
never uses the Name of Jupiter, but tells us, That God himself cannot otherwise
be understood of us, but as a certain Spirit free; Lib. 1. Tusc. Quaest.
segregated from all mortal Composition; such as understands and moves all
things, being it self also endowed with an eternal Activity. In like manner
Seneca, one of the greatest Luminaries amongst the Stoics, never talks of
Jupiter, but uses the word Deus, or God always in the singular Number. God,
says he, has the Exemplary of all things within himself, comprehending in his
Seneca, Epis. 65.
Mind both the Number and Measures of whatsoever things are to be done. And a
little after, showing, that God is the Original and Author of all things, so
the End proposed by him, is nothing but his Goodness; and from thence
concludes, That he has made every thing the best that might be. From which,
and many the like Passages, we are made to understand, that the Notions they
had of God were true and solid, being taken from those Incommunicable
Attributes or Properties, which are essential to the Divine Nature.

CHAP. III. Of the Attributes of God.
NOw the Attributes of God are either absolute, or such without which the
Divine Nature cannot be apprehended to subsist; or Relative and such as regard
his Creatures. Amongst his absolute Attributes or Properties, the first is his
Eternity, or his being without beginning or end: For should he have a
beginning, then could he not be God, but must be inferior to and after that
from whom he had his beginning: but this includes a Contradiction; therefore
the Antecedent also is impossible. And as the Nature of God excludes all
possibility of having a Superior from whom it may derive its being; so also
does it exclude all possibility of ending: For whatsoever should put an end to
its being must have greater power and strength than it self, and consequently
the latter Power must be greater than that of God; but this is also impossible.
In the next place it is essential to the Divine Nature to be infinite in
Perfection: For should his Perfection be finite and bounded, he might yet be
more perfect, by having further degrees of Perfection superadded; for to
whatsoever is finite there may be made Addition. Since therefore there can be
no Addition made to God's Perfections, they must be infinite; nothing but what
is infinite being incapable of further addition or access.

Another Property essential to the Divine Nature is his Immensity, or his being
of a Nature which cannot be circumscribed by any imaginary space, how vast
soever: For should there be any Ambient or Imaginary space surrounding God,
then would he cease to be most perfect: For should he fill all Spaces, he would
be more powerful and perfect than when he is confined to some; as we see the
Imperial Power is greater than the Regal, as extending it self over a wider
Circuit. Now that any thing should be more perfect than God, or that he might
be more perfect than he is, is utterly inconsistent with the very Nature and
Being of God.

And as he is Immense, so must he be Omnipresent, since there can be no
imaginable space whatsoever assignable, which he does not fill; and then if he
be Omnipresent, he must also be Omniscient; there being nothing done or
possible to be done in any point of space whatsoever to which he is not
present: nay, he must have a Knowledge or Prescience of all future Actions
whatsoever: For all future Actions must derive their Being from him first; so
that God having a foreknowledge of whatsoever he himself shall hereafter do,
must have the same foreknowledge also of whatsoever thing shall require his
Concurrence. Now that God has a foreknowledge of whatsoever he himself shall
do is evident, otherwise something might fall out contingently and unexpected
to him; which implies Imperfection and Ignorance, and so not consistent with
the Nature and Essence of God. The last Property essential to the Divine
Nature, is, That he must be One: For should there be more, One could not be of
infinite Perfection, as wanting the Perfection of the other: Nay, it could have
no Divine Perfection, the other having an infinite, and consequently all
Perfection.

The Relative Attributes of God, being such as regard his Creatures, are his
Goodness, his Justice, his Veracity, and the like; all which being agreed to by
all to appertain to the Divine Nature in the highest perfection possible, and
being ever attributed by the Heathens to their Deities how false soever they
were, there is no Place left for Reason to prove what by its own clearness is
as undemonstrable as any first Principle whatsoever. These then are some of the
Attributes of the Divine Nature: To enumerate all is past the Abilities of any
poor mortal and finite Creature; for they are indeed above number, only such as
I have already touched upon are sufficient to evince the Truth of his Existence
to whom they do belong; and of those which may be ranked under this Head, the
first and principal which does occur to our Consideration is that Noble
Attribute of Gods being the Creator of all things.

CHAP. IV. Of Gods Creative Power.
AS for those who held the Eternity of the World, or of matter, we may observe
of Aristotle, that in the Course of his Reasonings, (how much soever he did
comply with the Customs of the times he lived in, and with his own private
Passions,) he was forced to resolve the Operations of Nature into a first
Mover: And in his Book De Mundo, written in his riper Age, and dedicated to
Alexander, he tells us, That the World and Order of the Universe was conserved
by God; and that there was nothing in the World of which he stood in need; that
he was the Father of the Gods, as well as of Men; and the Producer, as well as
the Preserver of all those things of which the World was made; not by way of
commixture with them; but that this Power and Providence of his residing in the
Heavens, extended it self to all things, and moved the Heavens, with the Sun
and Moon, ballancing and sustaining the Earth; and providing, that every thing
should act according to its Nature. In like manner Epicurus his Opinion was as
unstable and fluctuating as his Atoms. For even Lucretius, his best
Commentator, was forced to acknowledge, that the World had a beginning; for had
it been Eternal, we must needs have met with Monuments of greater Antiquity
than the Siege of Troy, or the Theban War.

Now let us see whether what these Men granted, of an Eternal, Infinite, and
Invisible Framer of the Universe be consistent with that Eternity of matter of
which they dreamt 'twas made: Had there been an eternal and prae-existent
matter, then must that matter have been immutable; for though the things made
out of it be subject to continual vicissitudes and corruptions, yet the matter
must be still the same as the Stone and Timber of which the House is made, is
the same still for nature and essence as 'twas before. Now if that out of which
the World was made, was Immutable and Eternal, then must it have those
Perfections of which the Divine Nature chiefly does consist: but if this cannot
be granted, then must it be mutable; and then can it not be Eternal; for what is
Eternal must of necessity endure the same for ever. But to proceed.

This Truth of the Existence of a God, made such deep Impressions on the minds
of Men through all Ages, that even the Poets themselves, so much abandoned as
they were to their own wanton Fictions, were ever and anon forced to throw off
their Masks, and to expose the barefaced Truth. The places cited out of the
Ancient Greeks are known, and many: As the Passages also of the Sibylls in
Lactantius. No less remarkable are the Latins. Ovid's first Book of his
Metamorphoses seems nothing but a Paraphrase upon Genesis: As also Virgil in
that Passage or Fiction of Aeneas his descent into Hell; Lib. 6. Aeneld.
where his Father Anchises amongst other Mysteries tells him,

In the beginning 'twas the Spirit did form
Heaven, Earth, and Seas, Sun, Moon, and Stars of Morn.
The Mind diffusing through the bulky Frame,
Fermented all the Mass; and from thence came
Trees, Flowers, Birds, Beasts, thence also Mankind sprang;
With whatsoever is in the Ocean.
The like he has also in his fourth Book of his Georgicks. What Opinion the
Wisest of the Romans had touching the Heathen Gods, cannot be better learnt
then from Cato, in Lucan; who being Lucan. l. 9.
reduced to great Extremities in the Deserts of Libya, was advised by Labienus
to Consult the Oracle of Hamon, being then near unto it; to which Cato most
Christian like replied,

God's Throne's the Earth, the Sea, the Air and Heaven,
And above all, a Mind to Virtue given.
What needs a further search of Gods above,
What ever we see, where ever we be, there is Jove.
adding further, that 'twas not the Oracle, but Death which could make him
certain, and without more ado he continued on his march, never offering so much
as once to salute Jupiter.

In short; whosoever shall consider, what the wisest of the Heathen spoke
concerning a Deity, though they sometimes used the word (Jupiter) as being a
Name most known to the Vulgar, (yielding herein, (as I have said) to the Style
and Customs of the Times in which they lived.) Nevertheless, the Descriptions
they made, could belong to none but to the only True and Immortal God: For
could that Jupiter be thought by them to be Hominum Sator atque Deorum, who was
born in Creete, and so came into the World, being Peopled before his Birth, as
now it is? Could he be the Father of those who were born before himself? Or
could he give Immortality and Divinity to others, who could not preserve
himself from Death? Could he be the just and upright Governor of the World,
who in his Life time committed so many Murders, Rapes, and Incests, and after
his fictitious Translation, ceased not to have his Ganymede, and to be employed
about nothing more than to get Fuel for his Lust? The grossest Heathen could
never believe this, much less so many Excellent and Learned Men amongst them,
of whom we read so much in profane Story.

Some are of Opinion, that this knowledge which the Heathen had of the True
God, was not from any instinct of the Light of Nature, but from Divine
Revelation; first to the Patriarchs, and from them, by way of Tradition
delivered from Generation to Generation. The Ground for their Opinion is this;
The most Ancient Authors whose Testimonies are cited in this Argument, are
Zoroastres and Hermes Trismegistus: The former is said to have lived about the
beginning of the Chaldean Empire, and is by some supposed to have been the Son
or Nephew of Ham. Whoever he was, Plutarch makes him Tract. de Isid. and Oser.
to have lived many Ages before the Trojan Wars; he is said also to have
Instituted the Order of the Magi; and in Imitation of these, the Persians
afterward had their Sophi. These Magi had the Custody of the Emperors
Archives, Registring the Actions of their Lives, and were accounted as Oracles
in Matters of Religion. As for Mercurius Trismegistus, he was an Egyptian, and
of the greatest Antiquity. In the Works which bear his Name, he seems to speak
as clearly of the Divine Mysteries as Moses himself: Now the Egyptians and the
Chaldeans were ever accounted, by all Profane as well as Sacred Historians, to
have been the most Ancient of all Nations; and we find in Scripture, that 'twas
with these Nations the Patriarchs had greatest Commerce: For Abraham lived for
some time amongst the Chaldees and in Egypt, where the Children of Jacob also
with their Posterity sojourned for some Ages: 'Twas no wonder then, that these
two Nations should have so early a knowledge of Sacred Mysteries, as also of
all other kind of Learning. From Egypt it was that the Greeks took their Light;
Orpheus, the most Ancient Author amongst them, visited Egypt, and searched into
all their Sacred Records. Next after him was Pythagoras, who not only traveled
into Egypt, but into Chaldea also; and 'twas from Pythagoras chiefly that Plato
took his Notions; as the Poets from Orpheus: so that the nearer they were to
the Original, the better always were their Copies.

But whatsoever knowledge the Ancients had by this way of Tradition, certain it
is, that they could not but receive much Light too from the Book of Nature: For
Reason tells us, that whatsoever has a Beginning, must have it either from it
self, or from some other; not from it self, for then must it have had an
Existence before it had an Existence; the thing which produces another, being
ever before that which is produced. But if it has its beginning from something
else, and that from another, and so on; we must either make an Infinite
Progress in Natural Productions, which is utterly impossible; for no Infinite
can actually be made up of Finite Actions; or we must at length resolve all
into one first Cause, which in it self is without beginning, which can be no
other than God.

Let a Man turn himself which way soever he pleases, he shall find a vast
Expanse of Creatures before his Eyes: He sees the Earth producing every Living
thing; and Plants in their Season, and yielding all things useful for the Life
of Man. He sees the Heavens beautified with innumerable Stars of vast Bulk and
Purity; he sees those Glorious Luminaries the Sun and Moon; he sees all these
Celestial Bodies, how they are most regular and perpetual in their Motion, most
unchangeable in their Natures, and of wonderful Influence upon the World. And
although he himself may in some sense be said to be an Abridgment of it, yet is
he not able of himself to produce the least Insect; and whatsoever he does, it
is done only by application of one thing to another, being altogether Ignorant
himself of the manner how they perform their Operations; from whence he cannot
but conclude, that there is something infinitely more Powerful and Noble than
himself, which first gave a Being to so many vast and beautiful Creatures: But
when he shall consider their subservency to one another, and the just Economy
of the Universe, he must acknowledge an Infinite Wisdom also, which does
dispose and govern all things in the World; which Consideration leads us
forwards to Discourse of the Divine Providence.

CHAP. V. Of God's Providential Power in respect of the Universe.
FRom hence, that God is the Creator and first Cause of all things, it follows
naturally, that he is the Preserver of them also, and that he does dispose of
all Things according to his own Wisdom and Pleasure. For God (as it has been
already proved) being Present to all the Actions of his Creatures, so that
nothing can be effected without his concurrence; and having also from all
Eternity, a foresight of whatsoever shall be done, it cannot be but that God
must have some good Ends, in whatsoever he concurs to, such as is best known to
his own Infinite Wisdom, (though such Ends be for the most part far different
from those proposed by his Creatures) where making one and the same Action to
be the Instrument of farther Effects, is that which is called Providence; which
because it is a Point wherein the Power and Wisdom of God does most discover it
self, and wherein we are daily concerned, it will require to be more distinctly
treated of under these Considerations. 1. Of Nature in General, and the
subservency of things to one another. 2. Of human Affairs, in Relation to
Public or Civil Government. 3. Of human Affairs in particular, or the special
Concerns of Private Men.

And first for the greater World; if we look upwards, the Heavens declare God's
Almighty Power. Besides, the Sun, Moon, and the other Planets, all which have a
known Influence upon the whole Course of Nature, we cannot but take notice of
those numberless Stars which adorn the upper Firmament of Heaven, each of which
is far bigger than the Earth: how Immense and Capacious then must that Region
of Aetherbe in which they move and swim; all which, together with the Heavens
themselves, are in perpetual and most regular Motion, making their whole
Circuit in the space of Twenty four-hours, with that prodigious swiftness, that
every Point of the Equator in the Primum Mobile, or highest Firmament, does
move above Vide Clau. in Sphaer. Joan. de Sacro Bosco. and Tacquet l. 5.
Astron. c. 2. Number. 22.
a Hunderd thousand Miles every Minute, as is sufficiently proved by
Astronomical Demonstration.

If we look before us upon the Earth on which we tread, we cannot but observe
how Fruitful it is in all sorts of Animals and Vegetables; what great diversity
of Trees, what delicate Fruits may we observe to issue from the same Soil,
together with an infinite variety of Flowers, most admirable for Color, Figure
and Smell, and affecting all our Senses with Wonder and Delight, whilst our
Reason entertains it self with a curious search after the Causes of each
Production; and what it is that does distinguish every Species, and from whence
they are impressed with such different Virtues and Beauty. The diverse kinds of
Herbs, which we see naturally to grow upon the same Spot of Ground, is a thing
which cannot but ravish the Contemplative, considering that some of them are
good for Food, others of singular use in Medicines; others again most
refreshing in their Odours, which are yet so different, that one has no
similitude with another, and yet all these Herbs are in their smell most
Fragrant, of a lively and unspotted Virtue, and diversified with numberless
minute Strings or Fibers; by which, as by so many little Veins, they suck in
their Juice and Nutriment from the Earth; all which in a little flux of time
seem to die, when by shedding only a few Grains or Seeds revive and
superannuate; and so by a perpetual Succession of new Generations, they repair
their past decays, and by dying they endure throughout all Ages, and become
Immortal. And yet this Earth out of which all these Blessings are produced, by
all the discovery we can make, is nothing but a cold insipid Mass of Matter in
appearance, being grateful to no Sense, and destitute of warmth and all
prolifick Virtue.

If we pass into the Region of Animals, we may observe how some are endu'd with
singular Strength and Beauty; others with great Sagacity; others are most
docile and serviceable to Man for Necessity and Pleasure: We may observe also,
how sollicitous and tender they are for the Preservation and Nourishment of
their young, though they be otherwise most savage in their Natures; and how
every Creature before it can stand or see, does yet know the way to the Teat.

I cannot think it improper (how trivial soever it may seem) to relate what I
have some times, with great Pleasure and Admiration, observed of a young Whelp
not Six Weeks old, which having eaten sufficiently of what Meat was given it,
took the remainder and hid it, by scraping up so much Earth with his Nose and
Feet as covered it; and yet, take a Child of Two or three years old, though it be
endu'd with a Rational Soul, and after it has filled it self, it will cast the
rest away. Whence now is it, that a poor young dumb Bruit should have the
knowledge and foresight of its future wants, and lay up what is superfluous to
supply after hunger? It could not learn this by Imitation or Instruction; no
certainly, we say then it has it by Instinct, or that this Provident
Inclination is impressed on it by God the Author of Nature, who takes more than
ordinary care for the preservation of such poor Creatures, which otherwise
would perish for want of succor. In like manner we may observe, that take a
young Whelp, if it can but see, and put it on a Table, it will creep or craul
about the Edge or Borders of it, and there cry, not venturing to go further.
But take a young Child of Two or three years old, and put it on a Table in like
manner, it will certainly run forwards without fear, till it fall down
headlong, and perhaps break its Neck. Here then we may justly admire, how such
a little poor sucking Animal should understand its weakness and danger; and by
the estimate it makes of the distance of the Ground under it, finds it too
great, and not to be ventured on but with certain Peril. This can be no other
than God's Providential care, who also takes the like Providential care for the
safeguard of Man under all the Circumstances of his Life, as we shall see by
and by.

If we look upon the Fowls of the Air, we cannot but observe, with what
symmetry every little Bird builds its Nest, how cautious in choosing a Place of
safety; and how vigilant and watchful is it to delude the sight of Man, when it
flies toward it? Whence had these little Creatures this wonderful Art of
framing such curious and elaborate Receptacles wherein to lay their Offspring?
They never could acquire it by imitation, or by the direction of their Dams,
being in the Shell only, and in the Bowels of their Mothers when such like
Nests were framed. Nay, even the least Insect of Nature does not fail to create
Amazement; so that the lesser the Animal, the greater is the Wonder and Power
by which 'twas formed. The Providence and Industry of the Ant is admirable, and
so is that of the Be, a Creature certainly above the Commendation of Poets,
when we reflect a little upon their Natures; how indefatigable are they in
their Labor, how careful against future Necessities; how wonderful in their
Order; how admirable in contriving their Frame of little Cells; no way
detrimental to the Herbs and Flowers they feed on, and most useful and
profitable to Man by their Wax and Honey. The least Insect that flies before
our Eyes, how vile soever, has notwithstanding all the Parts of Life,
Respiration and Nutrition; and all the Organs of Sense, and Parts for Motion;
all which are formed with such accurateness and delicacy, as far surpasses the
discoveries of the accutest Oculist.

The wonderful Care and Providence of Almighty God for the preservation of his
Creatures, is yet more visible from hence; That such of them as move slowly,
and so less able to fly from danger, are armed either with pointed Quills or
Pricks, as Porcupines and Hedge-hogs; or else with Shells, as we may observe in
the Tortoise, Snails, and diverse kinds of Fish. The Creatures which are more
timorous are generally the swiftest, as Hares and Dear; or else by herding
together they find some security in their Number. The like also we may observe
of Birds; whereas both Birds and Beasts of Prey are much fewer in number,
living in Dens, and are rarely seen but singly, which otherwise would be very
destructive to their fellow Bruits, and also dangerous to Man.

But not to expatiate over the several Tribes of Creatures, we will for brevity
sake limit our Observation to some general Provisions of Nature, which will
more than instruct us of the great Wisdom and Providence of God, in governing
the Universe, and in supplying the Wants and Necessities of his Creatures. If
we consider the Situation and Temper of the Northern parts of the World, and
such as lie toward the Pole, we may observe how all things are exposed to the
Rigours and Severities which are derived from the Extremities of Frost and
Snow; all which Miseries are abundantly relieved by the comfortable Provision
of vast Woods, which do not only furnish Men with Food, by nourishing all sorts
of Beasts and Birds of Game in great abundance, but do in a singular manner
also provide for them against the Extremities of those Regions, by an
extraordinary plenty of Fuel; and by breeding all such Beasts, whose rich and
warm Furs are not only a defense against the Injuries of the Climate; but by
being transported into the other Parts of the World, do purchase whatsoever is
useful and delightful for the Life of Man.

If we regard the hotter Regions which lie under the scorching Sun, such as
those betwixt the Tropicks, and which contain almost half of the Terraqueous
Globe, we shall find the Parching Beams of Noon to be tempered with the cool
and refreshing Breezes which blow constantly at that Season of the day; and
even directly under the Equinoctial, during the time of the greatest heats,
there fall such vast quantities of Rain, as do not only render that Climate
very temperare, and the Air refreshing, but do render the Soil also in most
Places as fertile and abounding as is any where to be found upon the surface of
the whole Earth. Besides; the equality of Night and Day, and the interposition
of the Earth in its whole Diameter, by reason of the direct rising and setting
of the Sun, as they are the Effects of its near approach, so do they in a
wonderful manner mitigate and balance the intolerable Inconveniences which
otherwise would follow.

Egypt is a Country where it seldom or never Rains, and consequently lying in
that degree of Heat, it could not be inhabited, were it not in a stupendous
manner refreshed and watered by the Nile, which overflowing all the Country at
such time as it lies exposed to the greatest heats, does not only qualify the
Intemperance of that Season, but makes the Country also to be the most fruitful
and delicious, that is to be found in the habitable World: The same is reported
also of Ganges, and other Rivers of India. Nay, even in the Deserts and
scorching Plains of Arabia, how wonderfully has Nature provided for the
exigence of Man by Camels, a Creature whose tender Hoof receives no injury from
the burning Sands, and by being able to bear great Burdens, and to go several
days without drinking, is most serviceable to Travelers, and such as Trade in
those Parts, where any other Beast would inevitably perish through want of
Water.

What is reported of Ferraria, an Island belonging to the Canaries, seems
miraculous; Got. Arthus his Ind. Orient. c. 6.
the Soil of it is as dry and uncultivated as can any where be seen, insomuch
that not a drop of fresh Water can be found any where, unless some few Springs
upon the Sea Coast, from whence the Inhabitants can have no benefit, by reason
of too great a distance, which want is strangely relieved by God, there growing
in the midst of the Isle a certain Tree of no great bulk, and always green, the
like whereof is to be found no where in the Universe. The Tree is continually
envelop'd with a thick Mist or Cloud, such as does neither diminish nor
increase; from the Leaves whereof, which are long in shape like those of a
Wallnut-Tree, there distills perpetually such a quantity of pure Crystal
Water, as equals that of the most plentiful Springs; all which being received
into Cisterns and other Vessels, serves the Occasions of the whole Island, both
for the Inhabitants and their Cattle. No less singular and beneficial is the
Palm Tree, though more commonly known by its rare Benefits and Virtues, as
affording excellent Wine, Fruits, Vinegar, Thread, and Leaves always green, and
such as serve for a durable covering to Houses against all Injuries of the
Weather; so that it is with just reason, that this Tree is made the Symbol of
Virtue, not only for its famed Power of resisting whatsoever does oppose it,
but for its singular Nature and Qualities, being such as can supply all the
Necessities of Life. If Lumbardy abound with rich Wines and Pastures which the
Alps want, yet do these enjoy a cooler and more healthy Air; the poverty and
barrenness of their Soil will never invite their Neighbors to make War upon
them; and in case they should be attacked, their high Snowy Rocks and Mountains
would prove a good security against the Invasion; so that the Peace of the one
may seem more eligible than the Plenty of the other: We may observe, how the
most barren Rocks and Mountains of the World are generally Rich with Marble,
Ore, and many times with Crystal and Jewels of an inestimable value. We may
observe also how the Southern Seas, though they are not so well stored with
Fish as the Northern, yet do they abound with Coral and Pearls, which can in a
manner purchase all other Riches.

In a word, whosoever shall attentively survey the Face of Nature from Pole to
Pole, and from the rising to the setting Sun, may easily discern, that
whatsoever Inconveniences any Place or Country is subject to, the same also
does enjoy some other Blessings equivalent to, or perhaps more beneficial than
what they want; which cannot but proceed from the all Good and Wise Creator and
Governor of the Universe; it being impossible, that so many and various
Effects of Nature as lie before our Eyes, so Regular and Beautiful, so Curious
and Useful, should be the results of blind and undiscerning Chance. Let Stones,
Timber, Iron, with the other Materials of building, be shuffled and tossed
together for Millions of Ages, they will never fall into the Form and Figure of
a House; and yet the Works of Art fall exceeding short of those of Nature; how
then cannot be imagined, that this great Machine of the World, which consists of
infinite variety of things, the least of which surpasses the Productions of the
most Industrious and Ingenious Artists, and where all the Parts hold that
Analogy and Conformity to one another, as makes one universal and perpetual
harmony; I say, how is it possible, that all these things should have their
Original from Chance, and should in such an admirable manner be animated by
Contingencies?

CHAP. VI. Of the subserviency of the Creatures or Parts of the World to one
another.
THis subserviency of things to one another, is a Point which deserves our
further Consideration, as being that which does exceedingly illustrate the
Wonders and Order of a Divine Providence. The Sun as it is in it self the most
Glorious of all visible Creatures, so is it the most Beneficial too, when we
shall consider a little, the wonderful Influence it has upon the Earth in its
Course and Motion: For should it keep constantly to one Circle, a great part of
the Earth would be burnt up, whilst the remoter Regions would be desolate, and
lie covered perpetually with Ice. But by the Wisdom of God it is so ordered,
that all Places in their due Seasons enjoy the benign and comfortable Influence
of this glorious Luminary of the Day; for by its declination sometimes
Northward, and sometimes Southward, in a just and certain Course, it Creates
that distinction of Seasons through all the World, (viz. of Spring, Summer,
Autumn and Winter) by which the Earth is rendered Fruitful, and furnished with
all those Blessings and Comforts which every Season does produce: Which method,
as it furnishes every living Creature with all things necessary and delightful
to its Nature, so is it most recreative to the Spirits both of Man and Beast;
the withdrawing of the Sun being as necessary for their Refreshment, by that
rest and sleep which follows on the Night, as its bright and warm Appearance is
useful to the fruitions of Life, and to the several Labors and Duties of the
Day. How tired are we with the length perhaps of one Summers day? How
unsupportable then would our Condition be, were we obliged to live but for a
Month, perhaps in such a Tenor and Course without Interruption? so that after
the Heats and Parchings of Summer, Nature calls for the cool refreshments of
Winter, and these again prepare our Appetites to taste the Pleasures of the
Spring; so that by this perpetual Circle and Counterchange of Seasons, we are
always in a round or progress, to be relieved by fresh Comforts, and delivered
from the Inconveniences which would follow, by being confined to one certain
and unchangeable state of Nature. The like Observation might be made of the
Moon and of the other Planets, all which are no less serviceable to the Earth
in their several Periods and Revolutions.

But to proceed; if we consider that Tract of space which lies betwixt the
Heavens and the Earth, the Region of Clouds and Rain, of Winds and Thunder, we
may observe likewise how useful these things are, though they seem to be
nothing but the Excrementitious Crudities and Evaporations of Nature. It is to
the Winds we owe that Attemperation and Motion of the Air which is so conducing
to Health; it is to the Winds we owe all the Blessings which are derived from
Navigation. These Winds which seem to scatter where they blow, do Unite Nations
in Alliance and Commerce, and convey to us whatsoever rarity is to be found in
any part of the Earth. The Clouds by their interposition betwixt the Sun and
us, shelter us from the Injuries of its hotter Beams; and by distilling Showers
of Rain upon the Ground, do render it most verdant and fruitful: And even the
Thunder, which in all Ages has been looked on as the effect of an offended
Deity, and to have something in it of Terror and Prodigy, is yet beneficial,
by dispelling those adust and gloomy Vapors which are incident to the Summer
Seasons.

If we cast our Eyes upon the Ocean, at the first aspect it will appear to us
to be a bottomless Gulf, of an unlimitted extent, most hideous in its roaring,
breaking in upon the Earth with great violence, and threatening nothing but
Inundation and Ruin; And yet this great Abyss and Expanse of Waters, besides
the infinite plenty and variety of Fish, with other things, with which it does
abound, will upon a stricter view be found to be the great Medium, by which
Traffic and all Civil Correspondence is supported, and the surest boundaries
and security to Kingdoms; so that whilst it threatens to overwhelm, it does
secure us from the sudden Irruptions of foreign Invasion; and besides, it is
that great and inexhaustible Treasure of Springs and Fountains which supply the
Earth, and adorn it with Beautiful and Navigable Rivers.

Some are of an Opinion, that Fountains have their Original from Rains, which
falling from the higher Grounds, and meeting at last in some common Receptacle,
make those little Erruptions which we call Springs. This Opinion in some
measure may be admitted, since we find that Springs dry up in times of great
Drought, and then swell in times of Rain: But this is not the chief Cause of
Fountains, for then the greatest Springs would rise in the lower Grounds; but
we may observe generally, that they issue from the Sides, and sometimes from
the Tops of Mountains, where there cannot be such stores of collected Water,
and where the Surface of the Earth is dry and barren; and where there is little
or no over-hanging Ground, from whence such Fountains may fall, and be
continued in such a constant Current. They are derived therefore from the Sea,
from whence through the whole Bowels of the Earth there are a vast Number of
subterraneous Channels or minute Passages (resembling the Pores and Veins of
the Body,) into which these Waters are received, and through which they run;
where meeting with those sulphurous Heats which occur every where through the
Entrails of the Earth, they are rarefied and ascend (like the Vapors in a
Limbeck) through all its Concavities and Veins, till meeting with the cold Air,
which generally resides on Mountains and in the Caverns of Rocks, they are
there condensed into Drops, which by distilling from the tops of these
Grotto's, as from the Head of an Alimbeck, trickle down, and meeting in great
Numbers, create these little Currents, which at length forming a Passage
through the sides of the same Mountain, is that which we call Springs: These
Springs meeting together in greater numbers are formed into Rivers, replenished
with all variety of Fish; by which Rivers also the Earth is watered and
defended, and Commodities are conveyed from Place to Place with great ease and
safety; all which Rivers keeping on their Course into the Ocean from whence
they came, make a perpetual Circulation, and become the richest helps to Nature.

If we consider the Earth on which we stand, we shall find the same
Correspondence and Harmony betwixt the several Parts and Regions of it: The
Northern Quarters of the World, as Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Muscovy, though
they be destitute of rich Wines and fat Pastures, abound with tall Trees fit
for building, as also with Masts, Pitch, Tar, (which are the things so
necessary to Navigation) together with Iron, Brass and Copper, which are the
Metals so absolutely useful in Peace and War, and which do in effect Command
the World. Some Countries abound chiefly with Corn, others again with Wine, and
others are proper only for Pasturage; so that the Wants of the one are not only
suppliable by the Plenty of the other, but there is a certain kind of Alliance
made by Nature betwixt Country and Country, from the Necessities they are under
of being supplied by one another. And even these Parts which of all others seem
most destitute of the Blessings of Nature (as enjoying neither the Fertility of
the Land, nor are yet secure from the Violence and Inundation of the Sea, but
seem most exposed to Dangers and Inconveniences from both, by lying upon the
Sand and Wash, and open to the Winds) are by Divine Care and Providence made
the Richest and the most Beautiful Treasures of the World, as appears by
Venice, and the Maritime Parts of the Low Countries, which Places do not only
by their Commerce enrich themselves and others to a Prodigy, but are also of
that Power and Strength, as the greatest Policy and Force are not able to
subdue them.

The grand Objection against God's Providence in the Government of Nature, is
taken from some irregularities which usually occur in the Course of things. The
Hopes and Expectations of a fruitful Spring, are many times frustrated by some
unseasonable Winds or Blasts; or by the sudden inundation of a River: We
observe frequently whole Countries to be overwhelmed by the flowing in of the
Sea; and fair Cities to be buried in Ruins by an Earthquake. What Wrecks and
Miseries do arise at Sea from the Violence of Tempests and Hurricances? What
havoc is there made frequently at Land amongst Trees, and Edifices by the fury
of Winds? Many Places have been ruined by Eruptions of Fire; and whole Kingdoms
have been brought to the utmost Extremity by Pestilence. To this I answer:

First, That those seeming Irregularities are very few and inconsiderable, when
we reflect upon the whole Course and System of Nature, and do no more derogate
from the Care and Wisdom of Almighty God, than the little Flaws and Blemishes
we see usually in the Stones of the noblest Fabrics, do detract from the Art
and Ingenuity of the Architect: so that a building may be Beautiful, and hold
an exact Sympathy in all its parts, though there may be found some Wormholes in
the Timber, or here and there a Stone not so exactly polished.

In the next place; The forementioned Irregularities, whatsoever they seem to
be, are not yet of so great damage, but that the Benefit which attends them is
many times greater. If the Labor and Expectation of the Industrious Husbandman
be subject to Casualties, the Residue will ever carry a greater Price, and stir
up greater diligence; which in the end makes a full return: whereas Years of
greatest Plenty bring down the Fruits and Productions of the Earth to a low
rate, and do both nourish Idleness, and tend to surfeit. If Fruitful Meadows be
for a time wasted by the disorders of a Flood, yet the Injury is recompensed by
the rich Mud and Fatness it leaves upon the Earth; by which it becomes
afterward more Fertile and Luxuriant. The Countries which are most exposed to
the Irruptions of the Sea, are drawn by such Misfortunes to trust to their
Ships; and by that means also become the wealthiest Traders in the World. If
Earthquakes and Tempests subvert Houses sometimes; so by loosning the Roots of
Trees, they exceedingly contribute to the furtherance and Perfection of Nature,
and many times discover new Treasures. If strong Winds be sometimes injurious,
yet are they as profitable to us, not only by dissipating those Smells and
Vapors, which many times infect the Air, but are generally the Forerunners of
great Serenity. The Places which are most subject to Sulphurous Eruptions are
enriched by the Ashes: And even the Pestilence it self, so great a slaughter as
it seems to make of Mankind, is generally succeeded with Healthful Seasons: For
by ripening the Diseases and Corruptions of Nature, and by drawing them into
one common Sore or Issue, it leaves no Tabifick Matter or tainted Humors for
future Diseases to feed upon.

But in the last place; Whatsoever Disasters there be, which proceed from these
and such like Irregularities, they do not argue any Interruption or Defect in
Nature, forasmuch as they are derived from certain and natural Causes, tho they
be detrimental sometimes and hurtful to Men; so that they are rather to be
looked upon as Punishments, than as Vices and Infirmities of Nature; the Equity
of which Proceedings betwixt God and Man will be more fully stated by and by.

CHAP. VII. Of Divine Providence in respect of Human Affairs in General.
THus much briefly of Nature in General, and of the subserviency of things to
one another: Proceed we in the next place to discourse of Gods Providence in
relation to the Operations and Occurrences of Man; and this under a Twofold
Capacity: First, Public, in respect of Greater Bodies, or Civil Communities.
Secondly, Special and Particular, as relating to the Actions and Course of
every individual Person. Moreover, the Notion of Providence is Twofold; the
first is natural, by which God provides all things necessary for the Life and
Sustenance of Man. The second is Moral; which may more properly be called
Previding, being no other than the secret End proposed by God for his
concurrence with Man in all his Actions; which be they never so Irregular,
Unjust, or Vicious from the Evil Ends proposed by Men, are by the Divine Power
and Wisdom, made to be the Instruments of Good beyond the Intention of second
Causes. Profane Story is not so apt to illustrate this Point as Sacred Writ;
for Instance: The End proposed by Jacob's Sons in selling Joseph was Revenge,
God concurs with them in this Action, but upon other Ends, designing to make
this unjust Act of theirs to become an Instrument for their Preservation, as
appears from the wonderful Accidents throughout the whole Course of that
History; which Passage also was a Type of what befell our Lord and Savior, who
was villainously sold, betrayed, and barbarously put to death by the Jews, to
all which God concurs, making this wicked Act of theirs to be the sole Means
for saving those Murderers, and all the World besides, by that Atonement which
was made for their Sins by the Precious Blood of his only Son. This Method is
most Consonant to the Nature of God, it being impossible there should be any
greater Demonstration of his Divine Power and Goodness, than to be able to
convert Poison into a Cordial, and to procure safety out of that which would
naturally be our ruin.

But that we may the better understand the Cause and Reasonableness of God's
Operations with Men, I must leave my ordinary Road a little, and take up with
the obscure Traces and Niceties of Metaphysics; by premising some few
Propositions, which like the Postulata or Axioms in the Mathematics must be
taken for granted for the present, to avoid the long Digressions and
Perplexities which would follow upon a particular Proof of each of them. And,
1. God from all Eternity foresees all future Actions of Men, his Omniscience
being a Noble Attribute and Branch of his Divine Nature. 2. This Foreknowledge
of God (though it imply a certainty of the Action) does not lay a necessity upon
the Agent, no more than my foreknowledge of the Sun's rising to morrow Morning
is a necessary Cause of the Course and Rising of that Glorious Creature. 3.
That God's influence upon the Actions of Men, is either Physical or Moral:
Physical, for as much as he by his Power is the Preserver of every Creature in
its Being and Operations, and this Power extends it self to all the Actions of
Men, whether Natural or Spontaneous. 2. Moral, by proposing Rewards and
Punishments, as Motives to excite or to dissuade from Action, adding sometimes
his Positive and Revealed Commands, together with his assisting Grace, by the
impulse of his Holy Spirit; but this is a Point which more properly concerns
Divinity. 4. That God has given Man a freedom of Will, viz. a Power to choose
or dislike upon the apprehensions he has of Objects: for Man otherwise would be
nothing but a mere Machine, all whose Motions whether Regular or Irregular,
Good or Evil, would be nothing but the contrivance and direction of its Maker,
and would be reputed all for the Acts of Man, because God is pleased to produce
them in his Presence; which is all one as to say, that the Feracity of the
Garden is an Act of the Water-pots, because the Water does run through it, by
which the Gardner does revive his Flowers. 5. That the apprehension which Man
has of Objects, upon which he forms his Acts of choice or dislike, being many
times clouded by Ignorance, or misguided by Irregular Passions, is that which
betrays him to the commission of Evil. 6. The Perpetration of which Evil is no
further forth the Act of God, than that Man in his Existence, and consequently
in his Operations, must depend upon the Conserving Power of his Creator; so
that God can no more be said to be the Cause of Sin, than the Sea, whose Nature
it is extinguish Fire, can be said to be the Cause of the burning and ruin of
some Cities, for as much as it supports and carries up the Ships, from whence
came the Bombs and Fireworks which did the mischief. From whence it follows
also, that the commission of Sin is a Moral Action, terminated in something
forbidden, which may be understood either of the Internal Act of the Will,
proposing a bad Object, or a bad End; or else of the External Action or
Execution, which whether it contain any thing positive in its Nature, is with
great nicety disputed; some distinguishing betwixt the materiality of the
Action, and the formality or obliquity, which is nothing but the regard which
the Action has to an unlawful Object. The former they make to be Positive, the
other a mere Privative, though this latter seemed a little difficult: For
Instance, this or that particular Act of murder, whether intended or executed,
does receive its Individuality and Being from the Object on which it is
terminated; so that this particular Act or Action it self, is nothing else but
the very Termination on such an undue Object, and in which consists, they say,
the very formality and obliquity of Sin. In the last Place, this propensity in
Actions, whether Good or Evil, whatsoever it be, is not of the Nature of a
Creature, since even by divine Power it cannot subsist of it self (it being
impossible there should be such a thing as a Thought, without something which
thinks, and something which is thought upon; or an Action without an Agent and
an Object:) It is therefore of the Nature of a Relation, which can be said only
to have an improper and denominative Reality, for as much as the Terms related
are real Things.

From these Points thus premised, some Rational answer may be given to such
Difficulties as shall occur in our further Consideration of Divine Providence
over Human Actions: Resuming therefore the distribution which I made in the
beginning of this Chapter, we are first to consider God's Providence in
Relation to greater Bodies or Civil Communities, or as it extends it self to
the Establishment and Revolutions of Kingdoms. To prove this, we need no more,
but to reflect upon the Nature and Attributes of God, who, as it has been
already demonstrated, is Omnipotent, and gives Life and Power to every Creature
in all its Motions and Tendencies.

As for Epicurus his Reasonings they are foolish, when he endeavors to show,
that it is beneath the Grandeur of a Deity to concern it self in the
Transactions of Men, and that the Multiplicity and Contrariety of Occurrences
would be an interruption to that Tranquillity which is so essential to that
happy state, where there is nothing but quiet and serenity. These Notions of
Epicurus, so soft and gentle, so smooth and enchanting, would suit well with
the Elysium of the Poets, or the Sultanesses of the Seraglio; but will by no
means consist with the measures of Philosophy, nor yet with the Maxims of
Temporal Princes, from whence they seem to borrow their false and fading
Colors. For amongst the Grandees of the Earth, those were ever accounted the
greatest Heroes who were most active, as Hercules, Alexander, Caesar, and the
rest; whilst such as abandoned themselves to Ease, Idleness and Tranquillity,
were most unhappy in their Government, and in the close of their Lives exposed
to shame and ruin, and their Memories rendered infamous to all future Ages. A
good Prince ought, if it were possible, to know the Necessities of every
Subject of his in particular, and to relieve and protect him; which since he
cannot do, being himself of a Finite Nature, and circumscribed by his own
Personal and Domestic Exigencies, it is his Duty to execute this Power by his
Deputies and Ministers, with their subordinate and inferior Officers, which,
if they prove Diligent, Just, and Men of Understanding, Courage and Experience,
they cannot but render a Prince Glorious and Happy: And upon this Account it
is, that Kings are called God's Vicegerents, and sometimes gods themselves, not
from a supreme and voluptuous Repose, or a resty State and Majesty, but from
their Civil Omnipresence and Ubiquity, by which, like Gods, they can do
infinite things at once, and be beneficial to all, by the assistance and
influence of their under-Agents and Ministers. From hence then, that God is the
Sovereign Monarch of the Universe, and most happy and glorious in his Station,
it follows with Congruity, or rather with Necessity, that he must have a
particular care of the Affairs of his Creatures; nor need he Underofficers to
do this, being by his Nature present to all Places; nor can the multiplicity of
Affairs obstruct or distract a Power which is Omnipotent, and where the
Execution is nothing but Volition.

It Is true, God does sometime upon extraordinary Occasions, and in an
extraordinary manner use the Ministry of Angels; nay even of men in some
Transactions, by giving them a supernatural Virtue to work Miracles, and this
he does to demonstrate his greater Power, in like manner, as it would
demonstrate a greater skill in a Master of Rhetoric, to make a stammering
Idiot deliver an Harangue with good Grace and Articulation, than to pronounce
the same himself, though according to the best Precepts and Gestures of Art.

From the Dictates of Reason pass we on to the Practice of Nations; and here we
shall find through all Ages of the World, how the wisest and greatest
Governments did ever acknowledge their welfare and dependence upon a
Supernatural and Providential Power. The Romans, and before them the Greeks,
those great Masters of Learning and Empire, in all their weightiest
Consultations whether of War or Peace, sought ever to make Heaven Propitious,
or at least to understand its Will and Inclinations, by Consulting of Oracles,
by Victims, and by observing the Rites and Institutions of their Augurs; which
Customs of theirs, though in many things superstitious, and conversant about
false Gods, showed however the universal Belief they had of some Deity or
Deities, which Presided over and Governed all their Undertakings. And in a
further Testimony of their Persuasion and Gratitude, they offered Hecatombs,
erected Temples, hung up Votive Tables representing the Benefits they received
from Heaven, and instituted Anniversary Games and Feasts, with other Monuments,
by which they labored to Celebrate and Perpetuate the Memory of such
Blessings. And upon this account also 'twas, that Providence was also
represented (as in the Money of Antoninus Pius) by the Image of Janus, looking
backwards and forwards, toward past and future Things: But in the Medals of
Hadrian she is figured as a Goddess, holding a Rod in her Right Hand, with a
Globle at her Feet, Symbolizing thereby, that the World is subject to her, and
governed by her Power.

All the Ancients, whether Poets or Philosophers, believed a Providence,
excepting Epicurus: It Is true, Lucian shows himself an Epicure in nothing more
Lucian dial. inter Charon, etc.
than this, witness his Jupiter Tragoedus, where in a disputation held by
Timocles and Dames before the Gods, he concludes with the Epicurean against the
Stoics, in the denial of a Providence; and yet in another Place, in the Person
of Menippus, he does expressly say, that every one shall be judged according to
the Actions of his Life, which cannot be unless the Gods be allowed to have an
Inspection over them. But it is not to be wondered, that some should be
Heterodox in the deductions of Speculation: Hence we have Instances of others
who have denied the Evidence of Sense. For Zeno denied Motion, Democritus
Station, and a Third, That the Snow was white; which singular Extravagancies of
Skepticism may by no means come in Competition with much the Plurality, nor
evacuate the Authority of those, who being infinitely more in number, and upon
the most certain Demonstrations have evinced the contrary.

Upon this Consideration it is that all Public Changes and Alterations of
Government, though attended with general and fatal Calamities, are managed by
Providence, for as much as God proposes Ends of Good; either First, By making
them Punishments for Sin; or Secondly, using them as means to draw Men's
Affections from Temporal Things: Or Lastly, by propounding some other secret
ways for the declaration of his own Glory. But whatsoever Motive there be on
God's Part, certain it is, that their Effects issue from a Combination of
Natural Causes, and do proceed either from the Ignorance of Counselors, from
the Corruption of Officers, from Factions at home, and from Confederacies
abroad; all which, and many such Defects, are the ordinary Symptoms of a
declining State. Nevertheless, there are Eyes too in this Wheel of Fortune,
which like that of a Watch, has its Motion visible to all, whilst the Spring by
which it moves lies unseen.

And yet it cannot be denied, but that Providence by some extraordinary
Accidents, and in a way Supernatural, does sometimes manifest it self; and of
this we have Examples in profane Story. The Greeks in Homer were not ignorant
hereof; who when their Army was destroyed by Pestilence, sent Ulysses with
Hecatombs to Thebes, and desired Chryses to intercede for them with Apollo:
Diodorus Diod. lib. 17. Hist.
Siculus makes it out, that the Prodigious Earthquakes and Inundations in
Peloponnesus, in the Fourth year of the Hundred and first Olympiad, were caused
by the Gods, for the Punishment of Men's Impieties. The change of Temporal
Success and Fortune is many times so sudden, and so much against the Stream and
Current of present Opportunities, that we must confess there is an overruling
Providence, that does blast the Purposes and present Advantages of Men; witness
Imillo General of the Carthagenian Army, Diodorus lib. 14. Bibl. Hist.
who having subdued all Sicily excepting Syracuse, which was upon Terms also of
Surrender; after he had robbed the Temples of Ceres and Proserpina, soon felt
the smart of his Sacrilegious Villainy; for immediately the Plague brake into
his Camp, of which there dyed 50000, He himself being put to a most shameful
flight, returned inglorious into his Country, and execrated by all; who when he
had frequented the Temples in the vilest Apparel, and acknowledged Heavens
Justice in punishing his own Impieties, concluded his wretched Life by a
voluntary Famine. I confess, we do not every where meet with Instances of this
Nature; but yet we may observe in the Course of Providence some unexpected
Issues, by which the meanest Instruments, and upon the greatest disadvantages,
are carried on by they know not what kind of Impetus to the compassing of great
Designs; whilst others upon the greatest assistance of present Means, and the
encouragement of past Success, are dampt in the Execution, and in the very heat
of things find a qualm. Such Accidents, or seeming Irregularities, are by most
ascribed to Fortune, to they know not what confluence of lucky Circumstances,
when yet they seem to be the greatest Proofs of a superlative Energy and
Wisdom, to be able to produce such strange Effects out of so obscure and small
Beginnings; like what we observe in the Mathematics, where the Wisdom of the
first Inventor is seen from hence, that from a few ordinary and common
Principles, and obvious to the meanest Capacities, are raised such mighty
Theorems, as ravish the most Masculine Understandings in the Contemplation of
them: And as in these, so also in the progress of Providential Dispensations,
though they seem abstruse at first, yet after we have dwelt a little on them,
we see the reliance of such Consequences upon their Antecedents in the
Connection, which runs through the whole Choire of Causes. It is not usual with
God in his Providential Regimen, to unhinge Secondary and Natural Causes each
from other: No, he does from all Eternity foresee Events, and must therefore
penetrate the most retired Thoughts, and preside over the most retired and
deepest Consultations; which though they be of Evil Consequence to us, as being
executed by wicked Instruments, yet to him who sits above, they are designed as
Chastisements for past, and Terrors for future Provocations, and are the
Effects therefore not only of his Justice, but of his Mercy also.

For our fuller understanding this Point, there is one difficulty which seems
to obstruct our progress in this Argument, and it is this: If Alterations and
Revolutions of Government be managed by the disposition of divine Providence,
then is it not a Sin to comply with God in such his Purposes? Nay, rather we
are obliged thereto, since it is the Duty of every Man to endeavor the
accomplishment of that by which God designs his own Glory. This Notion has been
the Pillar of Rebellion, the Divine Palladium, or rather the Trojan Horse, from
whence came the Conflagration and Ruin almost of this Kingdom. In the solution
whereof I shall observe Three Degrees of Divine Providence: The First is that,
by which God, as the Creator and Preserver of the Universe, concurs
indifferently to the Actions of his Creatures: The Second is that, by which he
does so dispose of Accidents, and in a Natural way, as to make them useful to
the Purposes of Men, which yet could never have been foreseen by any human
Sagacity: What is more uncertain than the Weather, yet what Success has
followed in point of War, when the Enemy, upon the Inconveniences of Rain, has
found the Progress of his Fortune bounded by the Inundations of a River, or by
the Diseases caused by too immoderate wet in the continuance of a Siege. The
Third and Last Degree of Providence is that, when by some Supernatural and
Miraculous way, a displeasure is declared from Heaven against the Proceedings
of Men; now to apply these Cases to our present Purpose. As for the Last, Men
without controversy are not concerned herein, such Effects being supposed to
proceed in a way Supernatural, and from the immediate Hand of God; or if their
Concurrence were required, they might act their Parts securely no doubt, it
being impossible for God to work a Miracle for the compassing of a sinful
Action: But this cannot concern the Objection, because we see no Kingdoms now
destroyed by Miracles: Nor is the First Case of moment, because God does no
more than what the Exigencies of Finite Creatures, require of him as their
Creator; that is, his ordinary Concurrence with them so far, as they depend
upon him in all their Actions, whether Good or Evil; and therefore the Rebel
has no better a Plea for the Success he meets with than the Murderer, since God
affords his ordinary and general Concurrence indifferently to both. The stress
then of such Pretenses must lie upon the Second Method, viz. When by an
immediate Contribution of Natural Causes, God shows himself more favorable to
one side than the other; but this can be no good Argument, unless I knew that
there were an immediate and special Influence of God therein concerned.
Secondly, admitting this were known, yet unless we knew the Mind of God, and so
propose the same End, we can have no assurance that what we do is Just, since
the same Action, according to the several Ends proposed, becomes qualified with
different Formalities of Good and Evil.

But to show the Absurdity of those who maintain God's Secret Will in
opposition to his Revealed; and according to our Modern Language, own God as
King, i. e. fight against him in one Capacity to preserve him in another: I
shall observe first; That Politic Power in General is immediately from God, as
being founded upon the Law of Nature: For whether Men will or no, they must be
Governed some way; since, to the Conservation of human Race, it is necessary
that men should be secure from the violence of Oppressors; but no man can be
secure, but by flying to some Body who is Superior to him who offers Violence;
and Superior he must be either by strength of Arms or by Authority: Should
private Questions and Quarrels be decided by Strength, the World would quickly
fall to Pieces; it remains therefore, that Recourse must be had to one who is
Supreme in point of Authority and Command. In the next Place, it is
indisputable, that this or that kind of Government in Specie, whether Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or the like, is not De jure Naturae, and from God immediately; but
by the consent of the People intervening: For by the Law of Nature no Man has
Right to rule more than another: but when Men for their own private Quiet and
Security do divest themselves of that Power, by conferring it on a common
Representative: Or when Kingdoms got by Usurpation, in tract of time become
Lawful Governments, the Concurrence of the People being won over by degrees. In
these Cases, so far as they resign their Power, so far have they made
themselves Subjects: and therefore if an Usurper acquire the Power de facto,
this cannot be said to be from God, since the Consent of the People, which is
de Jure Naturae, cannot be resumed and transferred upon any succeeding
Capacity, as long as that is in being on which they conferred their Right at
first.

CHAP. VIII. Of God's Influence on Human Actions.
AND here I must beg my Readers leave to digress a little from the Method I
proposed, viz. Not to meddle with Arguments of Sacred Authority, till such time
as by the Thread of this Discourse I should be brought to speak of revealed
Religion, and particularly the Christian: But so it is, that I cannot make any
further Progress, till such time as some Difficulties be removed, which seem to
obviate our intended Method, under an appearance of being founded (or to speak
more properly confounded) in God's Providential Order. For whosoever shall look
back a little upon the Government of the late Usurper, cannot but meet with
many pretended Luminaries, I should say Incendiaries, of those times, who
endeavored to father the Revolution upon God's singular and gracious
Providence; and so making it to be of Divine Authority. And because such
Revolutions may happen again, it will not be amiss to examine this Doctrine by
the Weights and Measures of the Sanctuary: and that we may do this, it will be
proper to enquire a little (as far as our shallow Reason will permit) into the
manner of God's Operations in the Minds, and with the Actions of Men.

That we may understand the Question therefore aright, I shall premise Two
Things: First, That I shall not in this place discourse of Evangelical Works or
Graces, but of Moral Duties; nor yet of such as are morally good, but of such
rather as are morally bad, and of the Causes from whence they rise. In the next
place, that in regard to Human Actions, the efficient Causes are of Two sorts:
First, Physical, or such by which the substance or matter of the Action (as I
may say with leave from Logic) is produced. There is also another kind of
efficient Cause, and that is Moral; as where one invites another to an Action
by proposing a Reward; or by counselling, or exciting his Will and Affections
to make such a Choice: Also the final Cause, (which is termed by some the
Objective) comes under this denomination; forasmuch as the End or Object in all
Animal and Human Actions, does influence the Action, and excite, move, and by a
kind of secret force impell him to act for the obtaining of such an End or
Object.

Now for the Physical Influence of God on Human Actions, it is no way to be
doubted that he concurs to them; forasmuch as being the Creator of all things,
they cannot act without him: but this kind of influence is general, and regards
all Human Actions, not as good or bad, but purely as the Actions of his
Creatures; like the influence of the Sun which indifferently shines upon the
Earth, and serves to nourish and to mature hurtful as well as wholesome Plants.
The stress then of the Question is conversant about a moral Agency, as whether
God does excite the Will and Affections to sinful Actions by impelling them
thereunto, by proposing undue Objects, or by obstructing them from making any
other choice.

The Great Doctor and Divine of his time, and who drew great numbers after him,
John Calvin, seems to have laid the Foundation of those many Erroneous Opinions
touching Providence, in some bold and Heterodox Assertions of God's being the
Author and first Mover of Man to all sinful Actions; denying him not only a
liberty of doing good, but of declining Evil; so that whatsoever Sin any man
commits, does not proceed from the man's own free Choice, (for then he might
have declined it,) but from a Predetermination in God, who does actually excite
him to the commission of it. This he professedly and strenuously affirms in
teaching, That Men do nothing Calv lib. 1. Institut. c. 18. Sect. 1.
but by the secret Approbation of God: nor act any thing with deliberation, but
what he himself has before decreed, and by his secret Direction has
constituted, as is fully proved by innumberable and clear Testimonies: And a
little before he says, It may seem absurd perhaps, that by the Will and
Command of God a Man should be made blind; for which blindness he afterward
suffers punishment: this they endeavor to evade, by saying, That is done by
the Permission, not by the Will of God; but whilst God declares openly, that he
himself does it, this Evasion is baffled. Likewise speaking of the Assyrians,
whom God made use of for the Chastisement of Judah, he says, They were impelled
by the Will and Appointment of God: I confess (says he) Ibid. Sect. 2.
God, many times acts in the Reprobate, by making use also of Satan's Labor;
but yet so far only as it is permitted to Satan to move in it by the impulse of
God! O strange! we had thought that Satan had been forward enough of himself to
tempt us to Sin, and that he needed not to be pushed on to it by God! But to
proceed; he exempts Satan from being any other than the Tool or Instrument
which God makes use of to effect wicked purposes. It is said, (2 Cor. 4.)
continues Calvin, That Satan, Lib. 2. Inst. cap. 4.
or the God of this World has blinded the Minds of those who believe not: but
how can this be, unless the efficacy of the Error proceed from God? And in this
Sense it is that Calvin expounds that place of St. Paul, (2 These. 2.) That the
Efficacy of Error, Lib. 1. Inst. cap. 18. Sect. 2.
or of being seduced, was infused by God, to the end that they might believe a
Lie, who obeyed not the truth: And in this Sense also it is that he explains
that Passage of the Fourteenth of Ezekiel; And if a Prophet be deceived when he
has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet.

As for Examples, he produces that of Shimei's cursing David; of Absalom's
lying with his Father's Concubines; of the lying Spirit which deceived the
Prophets, and by them Ahab, to the end he might perish at Ramoth-Gilead; of
Satan's misusing Job, with many other Passages of the like Nature; all which he
pretends to have proceeded effectually from God; and that the Devil was only
the Instrument, as was said before, to execute what God had commanded. And to
prevent that Answer which Divines commonly make to such Objections, viz. That
God may be said to harden the Hearts of Men, and to infatuate and darken their
Understandings and Minds, by withdrawing his Spirit and Grace, and to leave Men
to their natural blindness and imperfection: This he rejects as unsound,
standing stiffly to his Doctrine, to wit, That God, by the help of Satan, does
destine Lib. 2. Inst. Cap. 4. Sect. 3.
the Counsels of wicked Men as he pleases; and that he does excite their Wills,
and confirm and strengthen them in their Purposes. And for those who are of
another Opinion, he looks upon them as Blasphemers, who spit their Venom
against Heaven; adding withal, that this is no new thing, since in all Ages
there have been wicked and profane Men, Qui adversus hanc Doctrinae partem ore
rabido Lib. 1. Inst. Cap. 18. Sect. ult.
latrarent; which Language of his is so virulent and unchristian like, that I
know not how to make it English. And to conclude this Chapter, says Calvin, If
it shall seem difficult to any what we now assert, to wit, That there is no
Agreement of God with Man, when Man by the just Impulse of God does that which
is not lawful for him to do, he cries out: Who can forbear trembling at the
Judgments of God, who works in the Hearts of Men whatsoever he will! More
justly may we cry out, Who can forbear trembling to hear such desperate
Doctrine! It Is true, he denies every where that God is the cause of Sin; but
whether that which I have cited out of him, and which was delivered by him, not
occasionally, but ex professo, be not a proof of his making God to be the cause
of Sin, I know not what can ever be proved upon the Earth; and if he
contradicts himself, let those who follow him look to that; he seeming in this
Particular to be an Example of that Judgment which he so often ascribes to God,
of being delivered over in Reprobum sensum, or of having the Eyes of his
Understanding darkened.

And thus much for the Doctrine of Calvin, whom I shall forbear to treat with
that scurrilous Language he so freely bestows on those who differ from him in
Opinion upon this Point. He was certainly a learned Man, and of a strict Life,
and severe; but withal of a most morose and sour Disposition; most vexatious,
furious, and obstinate, (as are all those who follow him) most opiniative of
himself; a Vilifier of such as deserted from him; and as to what concerns the
Point in question, his Doctrine is little less than Blasphemy: For according to
this Doctrine, Man is made a mere stupid, dead, and Passive Principle: and Free
Grace is built upon the greatest Similitude of which a Rational Nature is
capable, (if so be it be capable thereof,) a necessity to Sin.

But God has given us faculties to discriminate betwixt Good and Evil, and
Abilities also to arbitrate upon them: To what purpose otherwise are all those
Menaces, Exhortations, and Prohibitions, so frequently used and insisted on in
Scripture? What means the Spirit of God when we are required to do good, and
eschew evil; to repent us of our sinful ways, and to turn unto the Lord; to put
on the Armor of God, and to withstand the Wiles of the Devil, and to work out
our Salvatition with fear and trembling? For if so be I have not a power to
obey these Injunctions, How is it that God commands me to do that which is
impossible, and yet punishes the nonperformance with Eternal Death? This is
all one, as if a General should bind his Soldiers Hands and Feet, and having
done so, require him to rise up, to apply himself to his Service, and to combat
the Enemy, and then execute the man for not executing his Commands. Besides,
supposing the Will to be thus impotent and depraved, might not the Sinner thus
interrogate his Soul; Why am I thus sollicitous to withstand the Assaults of
the Devil? Why do I thus tire and weary out my self with vain Endeavors? Why
do I embitter the Pleasures and Enjoyments of my Life with Grief and Anxiety,
when it lies not in my own power to remove my Fear? Nay, might not the
Reprobate thus expostulate with God, as Sostratus in Lucian did with Minos;
See thou not with what Injustice thou art chargeable, who have doomed me to
everlasting Misery, being subservient and instrumental only in those Evils
which Fate had predefin'd; and yet thou rewardest others with Happiness, who
are no other than the Dispensers of that Good, to which the guidance of their
unalterable Decrees had pre-ordain'd them? Was there not the same Necessity in
both? why then is there such inequality in the Sentence? These and such like
prodigious Blasphemies are the Natural, or rather the Unnatural Consequences of
this Doctrine.

It Is true; if we look back on man, as in a state of Nature, and as under the
deprivation of that Primitive Perfection with which he was once invested, he
has no Abilities of himself to fulfill the Will of God, nor perform those
Christian Duties which are required of him, unless he be first illuminated by
God's Holy Spirit, quickened with his Grace, and encouraged by the discoveries
and Gracious promises of the Gospel: But this is nothing to the Question, for
we now consider man under his moral Capacity; and of moral Actions it is that
Calvin tells us, That it is of the special Grace of God as often as we think of
doing any thing which may concern our Temporal Good; or as often as our minds
and thoughts have a version to any thing that may hurt us: Upon these moral
Actions then it is that Calvin does chiefly controvert; though the Arguments
and Examples he makes use of, are taken in a manner all of them from the Old
Testament: To all which I answer:

First, in general, That those Expressions which we meet with every where in
Scripture, are not to be understood in strict Propriety of Language; but per
Modum Recipientis, and in the same Sense as God is said every where to repent,
to be jealous, to be angry, to forget, to hear and see, with such like Passions
and Affections as are infinitely short of the Divine Nature; it seeming good to
the Holy Spirit to use such Descriptions to make weak and ignorant men more
capable to understand the Will of God by such sensible and familiar
Representations: And that this is the true Sense of them is evident, from those
infinite Places in the Old Testament, where Men are invited to Repentance and
Amendment of Life, to turn to the Lord, and where heavy Judgments are every
where denounced against those who shall not conform themselves to such
Admonitions; all which would be nothing but a mere delusion of men, if they
were not able to turn themselves one way or other. It Is certain also, that the
Prophets every where use many Rhetorical and Figurative Expressions, Emblems
and Similitudes, as does David also, Job, and almost all the Ancient Writers:
Now to understand all these literally, would be to lead us into endless
Perplexities; we have therefore no other Rule to understand them by, but by
interpreting them in such a Sense, as shall agree best with the Nature and
Attributes of God, with the general Context and Scope of Scripture, and with
the Nature also of Men endu'd with Reasonable Souls.

Now so it is, that the Actions of Men are ascribed also to God, not only from
that general Influence he has upon his Creatures as their Creator, and by which
he gives them Beings, and affords them his general Concurrence in all their
Actions, whether Good or Evil (it being impossible a Creature should subsist a
moment independent upon God) but more especially such Actions are ascribed to
him, by reason of his foreknowledge of all future Events from all Eternity: And
for as much as by his Previdence or Providence, he so orders these wicked
Actions, as to make them beneficial to Men, and declaratory of his own Glory;
either by using them as Punishments, or to humble them under the sense of their
Failings, or to divorce them from their Passionate Desires after worldly
Comforts; all which shows great Power as well as Goodness, proper only to
Almighty God, to produce such excellent Effects out of Evil, and to make an
Antidote out of the Poison of the Serpent.

This may more specially be demonstrated from all the Instances which Calvin
does enlarge upon, in making God to work inwardly in the Minds of Men, and as
it were to inspire them with wicked Purposes. First then, for Shimei's cursing
David, it was a Transgression against the Fifth Commandment of the Moral Law.
David, who dated his Miseries from the time of his Sin against Vriah,
reflecting upon God's Just Judgments on him in a continual series of
Afflictions, commencing from that fatal Transgression, piously ascribes this
particular Injury of Shimei to God's Just Judgment; for had he been ascertained
that God had directed or inspired Shemei to it, it had been very unjust in
David, upon his Deathbed, to mind Solomon of taking Revenge on Shimei, for
what was done many years before by God's special Command. Next for Absalom's
lying with his Father's Concubines; this was occasioned by David's
Transgression of the Seventh Commandment, for which God tells him (2 Samuel 12.)
that he would raise up Evil against him out of his own House, and that his
Neighbor should lie with his Wives in the sight of the Sun; which was verified
in Absalom, who transgressing the Fifth Commandment, as also the Seventh,
executed what God had foretold, by spreading upon the Terrass of the Royal
Palace, and there lying with his Father's Concubines in the sight of all
Jerusalem. This execrable Fact is said to be done by God's Appointment, for as
much as he made use of it for the Punishment of David by a way of Retaliation;
when yet the Author or Counselor of this wicked advice was the Devil, or
Ahitophel, who by this means thought to make the Breach betwixt the Father and
the Son to be incurable.

Another Instance is that of Job's Calamities, but this was not Malum Culpae,
but Malum Poenae, designed by God for the trial of Job's Patience, and for the
Procurement of greater Blessings; and executed by the Devil with design to
drive Job to Desperation; in which Passage we find, that God's Part was only
permissive, in withdrawing that Virtue, by which the Devil was kept in Awe and
Subjection. Another Example is that of the Prophet, who seduced Ahab to go up
and fall at Ramoth-Gilead (1 Kings 22.) This was said also to be from the Lord,
forasmuch as he suffered a Spirit or the Devil, to inspire the Prophets with a
Lie. This fatal End was justly due to Ahab, who himself all his Life time had
been willingly seduced by false Prophets, and was guilty also of shedding the
Blood of Innocent Naboth. Nor does it appear, that what was reported by Micaiah
in this Matter, was any more than Visionary, representing God's Permission,
that Ahab should perish by Seducers, who whilst he lived was the great Patron
or Protector of them: For to understand it literally, that God did hold such a
Consult, and ask Advice of Evil Spirits how to destroy Ahab, is what we cannot
apprehend, but under such Imperfections and Characters of Deformity, as are
utterly inconsistent with the Nature of God.

In like manner ought we to interpret that Place in Ezekiel, of God's saying,
that when a Prophet is deceived, it is he that deceives him; as likewise that
other Passage of 2 Thessal. 2. all which cannot be understood otherwise than of
God's withdrawing his Grace, and so leave Men to the Course of their own
Impetuous Lusts and Passions, and to the Instigation of the Devil. And here I
cannot but call to remembrance how Blasphemously such Expressions were abused
in the Time of the late Usurper: For some of his Chaplains, as they called
themselves, pretending to have a Revelation from Heaven of his Recovery, when
the Cheat was confuted by his subsequent Death, one of them in a Strain of
Humiliation, charged God in the Language of Ezekiel, crying out, Lord thou have
deceived us, nay even thou have ly'd unto us. To such dreadful Blasphemies are
Men misled by such gross and perverse Interpretation of Scripture.

The last Argument of Calvin's which I shall mention, is that of the Prophet
Isaiah cap. 6. Where God bids the Prophet, Make the Heart of the people fat,
deafen their Ears, and blind their Eyes, lest they should see with their Eyes,
hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and be converted and
live. This Passage Calvin much triumphs in, making frequent use of it to prove,
That Spiritual-Infatuation is the work of God. Now if this be understood
literally, it proves that God does use his utmost endeavor to seduce and
destroy those, who otherwise would turn to him by Repentance; a thing which
cannot be thought of but with great Impiety. Besides, it proves the contrary to
that for which Calvin does allege it; for Calvin labors to prove from hence,
that Man has not a power to decline a sinful Act, when yet the Words import the
very contrary: For were it not for such a Spiritual Infatuation and Blindness,
Men happily might see and understand too, and be converted; so that they are
blinded on purpose to prevent their Conversion by seeing: And if they were
blind before, what needs a direction to make them blind: This would be the same
thing, as if we should take one who was born without Eyes, and shut him up in a
dark close Dungeon, for fear he should see and make an escape; or as if we
should load a Cripple with Irons, for fear he should make use of his Legs and
run away; so that the very manner we see of the Prophets expressing himself,
does imply a power in the Sinner of making use of his Eyes and Understanding in
order to his own Conversion. All that can be concluded then from this place is
this, That God may in Justice deprive Men of, or withdraw those Natural Gifts
from wicked Men, who have for a long time withstood the good Motions of God's
Holy Spirit inviting them to Repentance, which the Prophet does express
Symbolically, by deafning and blinding.

That we may not expatiate in infinitum upon this Topic, we will take in one
Instance more out of the New Testament, which Calvin so much relies upon, and
which carries indeed the greatest show of difficulty, being that of Acts the 2.
where St. Peter says, that Christ was delivered up by the determinate Counsel
and foreknowledge of God; for as much as God by his infinite Providence and
Goodness, made it a Means of conveying the greatest happiness to Mankind, in
the Redemption of it, by the Passion of his only Son; when yet we find, that
the True Moral Cause, or Incentive to this wickedness of the Jews, was the
Devil, who entering into Judas, made use of his Covetous Disposition, and for
the lucre of a little Money tempted him to betray his Master.

We see then, that God, though he does not excite and impel the Wills of Men to
sinful Actions, yet is he not an idle Spectator of them, as Calvin dreams would
follow from hence: For we see God acts a Part, and a great Part in them, not
only in his Concurrence to them, as a Creator, but in making use of them; as
also of the Evil Inclinations of men for good Ends, extracting Medicines out of
Poison, which indeed is the greatest Evidence of his Wisdom and Goodness. And
that a Rational Creature should have such a Power from his Creator over its own
Actions, as to follow the Inclinations and Tendency of its own Faculties, is
yet a further Proof of the Power and Wisdom of his Creator; as it is a greater
Proof doubtless of the Will and Abilities of a Workman, to be able to make a
Watch which shall move orderly by Virtue of those Retorts and Springs he gave
it, when he first made it, than if the Hand of the Artificer were always upon
the Needle, to direct and govern it in its motions. It is the Will of God, that
Sinners should repent and be saved; and for this End he sent his Son to take
our Nature upon him: What Evil therefore we fall into is from our selves, and
reflects not at all on God. The Sun (that Glorious Creature, and the great
Instrument by which God governs the Vegetative World, and in a manner the
Sensitive) does contribute to the Life and Growth of all Plants indifferently;
and that some are poisonous and hurtful, proceeds not from the Sun, but from
the Nature of the Herb; and if the Sun by its atractive Beams, does raise
Pestilential Smells and Vapors which infect the Air, and cause Diseases, this
does not argue the least malignity in that bright Planet, nor is the mischief
to be ascribed to it, but to the Lakes, Ditches, and Dung-hills from whence
they rise.

And thus have I endeavored to give such an Explication of God's Concurrence
with men, as is freest from Ambiguity, and which is suitable to the Power,
suitable to the Wisdom, suitable to the Goodness, and suitable to the Justice
of God; whereas the contrary Explication is not only repugnant to all these,
but fills the Mind with infinite Perplexities, and leads its Adherors into
fatal Errors.

CHAP. IX. Of God's Influence on Public and National Alterations.
HAving spoken to the Calvinistical Doctrine, touching God's Concurrence with
Men in sinful Actions, the next thing to be Discoursed of, in order to a
Vindication of Divine Providence from false Imputations, is that great and
popular Point, Of his Influence on Public and National Alterations: This being
no other than a Superstructure upon the former Doctrine. Now the Question is
not about submission to a Government which de facto is over us, but to inquire,
whether all such Alterations, though brought about or begun by Treasons,
Rebellions, Usurpations, Hypocrisy, Perjury, slanderous Aspersions and
Defamations, Pious Frauds, and perhaps Conquest, be of God's appointment, or of
a Divine Ordinance.

The Arguments which are brought to prove them such, are taken partly from
Example, partly from Precepts of Scripture, though ill expounded and worse
applied; of which the first is that of Jeroboam's Revolt or Rebellion against
Rehoboam, which is said to be of the Lord, who also sent a Prophet with express
Commission to Anoint him. To this I have already spoken, at present it is
enough to say, That the Evil of Punishment was denounced and executed by God
against the House of Solomon for their Idolatry, upon his permission of
Jeroboam's Sin of Rebellion; the House also of Jeroboam being punished in like
manner, by the Rebellion of Baasha, for the like Idolatry; as Baasha was
punished for his Idolatry also, by other Rebellions, and so on to the Reign of
Ahab, who was chastis'd by Jehu; who himself, though said to be appointed by
God hereunto was no better than the rest, till at length the Ten Tribes, with
their Kings and Government, were utterly subverted in a final Captivity.
Whatsoever then may be inferred from hence, this is certain, that the Children
of Israel in adhering to Rehoboam, are branded deeply with Rebellion by the
Spirit of God; and it is probable too, that they had never fallen into that
gross Idolatry or Rebellion against God, had they not at first fallen from
their Civil Duty and Allegiance to their King; for we find that the Golden
Calves were set up by Jeroboam to this End, lest the People going up to
Jerusalem, the Place of the true Worship, might have an opportunity to see
their Sin, by serving the True God, which probably must have begot desires in
them to shake off that Yoke which Usurpation had laid upon them.

The whole Order and Method of God's Providential Influence in such like Cases,
may be read more visibly in that Rebellion, or short Revolution under King
David, who for that hardly to be expiated Sin against Vriah, moved God to bring
his Judgments upon him, and amongst the rest this was one, viz. To raise him
Evil from his own House and Loins: For this is ascribed to God, 2 Samuel 12. and
so deeply was King David affected with the sense hereof, that when he heard of
Absalom's Conspiracy, like a man destitute of help, and abandoned by God
(though he were known at other times to have been a Soldier of an undaunted
Valor) he quitted the Royal City in a most dejected manner, attended with a
small Troop, marching in a Penitential Order or Procession, and not like an
offended Sovereign; so that his abject Behavior drew Tears from all the
Spectators, excepting Shimei, who doubtless was the Head of a rascally Mob, to
insult upon injured Majesty, pelting him with Stones and Curses: Nay, this Man
after God's own Heart, was brought to so low an Ebb, that his Prophetic Spirit
deserted him, and left him exposed to Terrors. And yet we find, that all these
Calamities were compassed by Human Means, and such as we meet with usually in
Courts. His Son Absalom we find was well enough qualified to manage a Revolt;
for of the two Rebellious Sons with which good King David was cursed (for so it
was, that he had two of them, Absalom and Adonijah) Absalom was much the more
dangerous, not only as being supported by that Oracle of a Statesman
Achitophel, but being himself also of a most plausible and insinuating
Behavior, and aggravating always the miscarriages of the Court Ministers, in
that there was no Person of Integrity about the King to receive the Grievances
of the People, and to Administer Justice; promising withal, that if he ever
came to the Crown, he would redress such Abuses; holding also a more intimate
Correspondence with such as were disgraced and disgusted with the Court; all
which he received with great familiarity, embracing them in his Arms, and
kissing them. By these Arts of Popularity and Condescension, he is said to have
stolen, or rather ravished the Hearts of David's People. Such then were the
Methods of former Times, as well as of later Ages, and such they will be to the
end of the World. And as these were human Policies, so were they blown up too
by the like human Artifice: For Hushai the Archite, a sure Friend of David's,
claps on a Mask for a time, and gets within King Absalom, by crying, God save
the King, God save the King! And when Absalom in a surly manner rallied him for
abandoning his Sovereign Lord and Master, Hushai with a Gentellesse non
pareille, with an unparalleled softness, and with the utmost Artifice of a
double refined Courtier, cajoled Absalom, in making God's Providence and the
Consent of the People, to be the ground and measure of his Allegiance, saying,
Nay, but whom the Lord and this People, and all the men of Israel choose, his
will I be, and with him will I abide, 2 Samuel 16. And then subjoins; whom should
I serve, should I not serve in the presence of his Son? as I have served in thy
Father's presence, so will I serve in thy presence: For which seasonable and
well managed Piece of Flattery or Court Loyalty, he was admitted into the
Number of Absalom's Privy Counselors, and by that means did discover and
defeat Achitophel's Advice, which drew on the Restoration of his old Lord and
Master.

Nay, though God in these or any other Passages of the Old Testament, had
declared his Will in the most ample manner imaginable concerning such
Revolutions, and that they were brought to pass by him of his deliberate
Appointment and Institution, in the same manner as any other Positive Law
whatsoever, yet is not this any good Argument to prove such Alterations in
other Nations to be de jure divino. For the Jewish Government was a Theocracy
or Government where God did visibly preside, raising up Judges, Deliverers, and
Prophets by his special Inspiration from time to time, even from the Children
of Israel's leaving Egypt to the days of Samuel: Then indeed it was, that the
People desiring to be like the rest of the Nations round about them, Petitioned
for a King; which shows, though it were not according to God's Counsel and
Good-liking, as God himself testified saying, that in asking for a King they
did reject him from being their King; yet so it was, that God hearkened to them,
where by the way we may observe how God acted in this Alteration of the Jewish
Government, conformably to the Wills and previous Inclinations of the People,
naming the Person to them whom he caused to be Anointed; so that 'twas not
here, as 'twas in other Kingdoms, which were Elective or Hereditary; for God
Translated the Kingdom from the House of Saul to the House of David; nor did
Adonijah, David's Elder Son succeed, but Solomon; the like Interruption of
Descent we may observe in others also. And yet for all this, no Man doubts, but
that in Kingdoms now adays the Hereditary Descent of the Crown in a right Line
is very Consonant to the Law of God; and he that should produce the Examples of
the Jewish Successions to the contrary, would be looked upon as a Madman. The
Ordinary Method by which God now adays does govern these Affairs, is by the
Civil Laws and Sanctions of a Kingdom, and the Suffrages of the People, not
excluding the Law of Nature, which gives Precedence to Primogeniture. These
Ordinances we are sure do proceed from the God of Order; whatsoever falls out
otherwise must be looked upon as extraordinary, and out of the common Road.

But some will say; That the most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and he
gives it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4. 17. And truly, by as good Authority
may a Thief take away my Cattle. Put the Case then, that a Thief were Arraigned
for stealing, and Pleading not Guilty, the Court should ask him, how he would
be tried? By the Word of God, says the Thief, (as H. Peter's answered in
something a worse Case:) How, says the Judge, have you the Word of God on your
side? yes, says the Thief, for I have the Cattle jure divino: Prove that, quoth
the Judge: Why thus quoth the Thief, The Lord takes away, and the Lord gives,
therefore it is the Lord who gave me the Cattle, nor did he give any thing but
what was his own; for it is written of him, Psalm 50. Mine are the Cattle upon
a thousand hills. Would such a Plea of my knavish Sophister pass Muster think
you? No verily; for the Jury, doubtless, (if it were not a very Ignoramus one)
would find him Guilty, and the Judge too would with a Jure Divino recommend
them to the Gallow^* The Case is perfectly the same in both these places of
Scripture; and the Thief is to the great Robber, as the Pyrat was to Alexander.
And if such places as these may give Kings a Divine Right to their Crowns, I
cannot see, but that Subjects too, when they rebel against them, and make them
Prisoners, have God also on their side; for it is written of him, That he
binds their Kings in Chains, etc. and we know who they were who blasphemously
applied it to the best of Kings this Nation ever enjoyed: And when all is done,
it is but to cant it out to the old Tune, This is the Lord's doing, and it is
mavelous in our Eyes.

The Arguments taken from the New Testament have something more of difficulty
in them, being Preceptory, as that of the thirteenth to the Romans, where every
Soul is required to be subject to the higher Powers; for there is no Power but
of God: the Powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists
the Power resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation; and a little after, verse 5. we are required to be
subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake: The like we meet, 1
Epist. of Peter, c. 2. of submitting ^^r selves to every Ordinance of Man for
the Lord's sake. To these I answer,

That the Powers or Ordinances which St. Paul speaks of were settled
Governments, and such as had all the Qualifications and Conditions requisite to
Constitute a Legislative Power: For St. Paul wrote his Epistle Anno Christi 59,
and the 2d of Nero's: So that there was now Bacon. ad An. Christi 59.
more than an Hundred Years past since the first Usurpation of Julius Caesar.
There was the Succession of Six Emperors of the Julian and Claudian Family in a
Legal Descent: and although Julius Caesar, was a great Usurper in suppressing
the Senate, in whom the Government had so long continued; yet the Senate
themselves having confirmed this Alteration for so many Ages, and through so
many Successions, by infinite Decrees and Acts testifying their Submission;
here was a real Abdication, or Resignation on their part: And although they
were at first brought to this by Conquest, yet so many subsequent and voluntary
Acts, by which, as it were, step by step, they divested themselves of their
Authority, settled an indubitable right of Government in the Heirs and
Successors of Caesar. Had Cato, Cassius, and the Bruti, with others of the
Republican Party, prevailed after that bold blow they gave in the Senate, they
would have had not only Statues, but also Altars and Temples erected to them.
But Octavian and his Party, getting the better by many illegal Methods, no less
violent and sanguinous than those of his Predecessors; the Form of the
Government, I say, was changed, and submitted to by the Senate themselves, and
those brave Men who endeavored to preserve and retrieve their Countries
Liberty, were stigmatized with the black Character of Conspirators, and
Parricides: So much does Success give Credit and Authority to Tyrannical
Attempts. Now where there is an Authority or Government of such continuance,
and so universally submitted to by the former Lords and Masters, as the Roman
Empire was at the time St. Paul wrote this Epistle, then will it be pertinent
to cite this Passage: but when nothing of this appears, an Argument taken from
a State so settled and submitted to, as the Roman Empire was, is little to the
purpose. The same Answer serves to that place of St. Peter, 1. Ep. cap. 2. As
also that of our Saviors paying Tribute, or giving to Caesar the things that
were Caesar's; for this was spoken about the Sixteenth Year of Tiberius, and
Seventy Years after the death of Julius; so that in all these Cases there was
no visible Right or Title which stood in competition with the Possession of the
Empire.

Hitherto I have spoken to the Testimonies of Scripture; in the Explication
whereof the Rule is most safe and Orthodox, viz. to interpret Scripture by
Scripture, and to understand it in such a Sense as shall not contradict a
greater Evidence and Testimony of Scripture; and not to do as some, who when
they are pressed with the pernicious Consequences of their Interpretation,
presently shelter themselves under God's unsearchable Wisdom, crving out, Who
art thou, O man, who prescribest Rules to thy Maker! with such Nonsensical
Stuff; as though God's Omnipotence could not be declared, but by obtruding on
him horrid Impieties, and the most gross Absurdities. By the same Capacity, or
Absurdity rather, by which they endeavored from Scripture Testimonies to prove
National Revolutions, procured by wicked Means, to be the peculiar and proper
Work of God's Providence; or that such Tyrannical Powers, once introduced, have
God's Authority to warrant, and defend them upon the Score of his Providential
Prerogative: I say, by the same Logic we may prove from Scripture also, that
God has no Providential Care over the World at all: Forasmuch as we read, 2
Cor. chap. 4. That the God of this World, viz. Satan, has blinded the Minds of
Men; so that the Dominion of Satan in his Government of this World is absolute,
and that of a God. Now if the Devil rules in this World as Prince, or God, what
Province to assign to God Almighty's Inspection, is hard to imagine.

It Is apparent therefore from hence, That all such Scriptures are not to be
understood literally, but analogically, and with reference to God's Attributes,
and to the Articles of our Christian Faith: Where, by the way, we may also
observe Calvin's perverse Interpretation of that place of 2 These. chap. 2.
where God is said to send them a strong delusion, that they should believe a
Lie, that they all might be damned who believed not the Truth; when yet from
this place of the second to the Corinthians, chap. 4. the blinding of the Minds
of those who believe not, is ascribed to the Devil; to the Devil by the way of
Counsel and Execution; to God by way of Permission: For we cannot ascribe this
Spiritual Execution to God and Satan too in one and the same Sense without
manifest Impiety.

But to return to the Temporal and greater Transactions of the World, what can
be more absurd, than that all violent acquisitions, all the Usurpations and
Oppressions, all the Blood, Sacrilege, Rapine, and wicked Practices, by which
many Kingdoms and Empires through all Ages have been raised up, propagated and
enlarged; I say, that all such Kingdoms thus supported should be God's
Ordinances; and that they who do not acknowledge this, are in a State of
Damnation? Hence it will follow, that all the Christians who have groaned under
the Turkish Slavery, should they by adhering to Christian Princes, endeavor to
recover their former Fortunes and Liberties, which they were Tyrannically
deprived of; in doing this they would resist the Ordinances of God, and incur
Damnation? Nay 'twill follow also that the power of Supremacy, which the Pope
is said to usurp, is also of God, or God's Ordinance: And truly, if Duration
can give a Title, this of the Pope's has been of longer continuance than any
other Title now in Europe, or perhaps in the whole World. It has been
challenged for above a Thousand Years, and actually submitted to by a great
many Nations. But it may be said perhaps, that the Popes Usurpations are
Spiritual, and that in Spiritual Matters we are to obey God rather than Man.
This Objection does not dissolve, but rather knit the Knot faster: For the Text
says, There is no Power but of God; the Powers that be are ordained of God; so
that all Power, without exception falls under a Notion of God's Ordinance: And
truly if God take such a care for Temporal Administration, much more for
Spiritual; if a Sparrow falls not to the Ground without his Will, he must needs
be more concerned for so great a Body of Men; the Church being that which he
himself with his own Right Hand has planted, in sending his only Son to
purchase it by his Incarnation, and suffering death upon the Cross. The
Spiritual Capacity is his Kingdom more peculiarly; and though the Papal Power
were an Usurpation, that is no matter, it being once possessed by the Bishop of
Rome, and that for so long a time, it becomes a settled Government, and an
Ordinance of God: They therefore who in the first Reformation did resist this
Power, did, according to these Men's Doctrine, resist the Ordinance of God, and
are liable for so doing to Damnation. And thus have they found out a new
Argument to justify the Pope's Authority, such as never any Jesuit, nor the
Pope himself yet dreamed of.

Nay, the Dominion and Power of Antichrist, according to their Doctrine, must
be an Ordinance of God's also: For whether the Pope be Antichrist, or whether
he be yet to come, certain it is, his Power is, or will be great: Nor could he
have this Power, unless it were given him by God; they therefore who shall
resist Antichrist, (according to this new Doctrine) resist the Ordinance of
God; and we know what follows, they shall receive Damnation; from which
Sentence, as well as Doctrine, Good Lord deliver us.

When I first reflected upon the Doctrine of Calvin, touching God's
Providential Influence, and the Consequences of such Doctrine, I was much
amazed, that a Person of his Fame and Learning should run upon such a
Precipice. But when I reflected upon Geneva also, and the Alterations he
occasioned there by his Doctrine, my wonder ceased: Geneva being the Meridian
for which the Ominous Prediction was calculated: hence it is, that wheresoever
Calvin's Doctrine does prevail, it makes deep Impressions, by casting down, and
casting up Principalities and Powers. But whether it be that this Doctrine does
dispose Men to Rebellion, or that they who are disposed to Rebellion, do
embrace this Doctrine for a Convenience, is much the same thing; since in all
places almost, where one has been introduced, or rather intruded, the other has
sat Regent. And truly, let Ambitious Persons make what use they please of such
Doctrines, they will never reap the same Fruit from it in the Conservation as
they did in the Acquisition of their Power; for it is but for a hot and fresh
Pursuer, High-lander like, to leap up behind him, and unhorse the Rider, it is
no matter how, and all is well; that one is tumbled out by another who jumps
clearly into the Saddle; this feat of Activity is Opus Dei, the Lord's doing,
and so let it be in Nomine Domini: though it be dreadful to consider what fatal
Calamities such reiterated Usurpations and Vicissitudes must introduce.

Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, not only for the near Affinity and
Contract which is betwixt it and the Devil, that Arch-Rebel, and for the
mystical Spells and Sacred Names it makes use of; but by reason also of its
specious Appearances; by which, as a Sorceress, it chains and fascinates all
those who look toward it. It fills their Mouths with nothing but Liberty,
Property, Reformation, Removal of corrupt Ministers and Magistrates,
misapplying public Money, and decay of Commerce; whilst it fills their Hearts
with the rich Spoils of the Public, with hopes of new Titles and Honors; with
private Revenge, with Plunder, with Indemnity, with Offices, and mountainous
promises of Success, or of being advanced perhaps to the highest Pinnacle of the
Government. These are the Philters by which Men are at first brought in, and at
last caught: and when they come to die, like those who have been long enchanted
with the Delusions of the Devil, they will find that all those splendid
Entertainments, all the Princely Company and Ornaments, all their Banquets,
Jollity, and Flattering Delights, which did appear to them amidst their
Consults and Meetings of the Night, to vanish in an instant; and all the
glorious Scenes of Darkness will prove in the end fantastical, and mere
Apparitions, when they themselves, left naked and forlorn, shall be called
upon, perhaps, to pay their last Debt, not only to Nature, but to the Law too.

I think, and frankly declare it, That if we look into the State of the World,
we may safely say, that most, or all the Monarchies and Republics in Europe,
and elsewhere, for ought we know, derive their Birth (as I have said before)
from Usurpation and Conquest; what Havoc was made by the Goths, Vandals,
Lombards, Hunns, Normans, etc. is legible in History, and more legible in the
Ruins and Desolations they made, we know what Kings are descended from them
through all Ages: Nor can we of this Nation be ignorant, how the Romans,
Saxons, Danes, and Normans succeeded one another by violent Extrusion: So that
perhaps the poor Britains, or Welsh, are the purest Aborigenists this day in
Christendom. That therefore which made all these crude beginnings, to digest
and ripen into Lawful Governments, was not an imaginary Jus Divinum; but time,
and the following consent of the People, who by mutual Comport, and by mature
and equitable Laws, gave that due mixture of these first jarring Instruments or
Principles, as made the Body, compounded of them, to be fixed and solid. Good
Laws then are those essential and vital parts of Government, which carry the
Image and Superscription of Divine Authoriry. These are grounded upon Truth and
right Reason, which without dispute spring from God: The better therefore a
Government is made up of these Principles, the better is its Constitution, and
whatsoever Occasions may introduce an Alteration, and whatsoever Disasters may
attend it, it is Pious and Christianlike to look up to Heaven, and to
acknowledge the Gods Clemency in the Chastisement. And although God may, and
does sometimes, in an extraordinary manner, and independent on secondary
Causes, to dispose of Circumstances, and give an Issue to them beyond the
Prospect of any Human view; yet unless we knew what and when 'twas, it is
Arrogance in us, to stamp them all promiscuously with the Image and Authority
of God: It Is enough for us to revere him, and humble our selves under all his
Providential Methods.

As for those who endeavor to prove Monarchy to be ex Jure Naturae (and so by
Antecedence ex Jure divino) from that Paternal Authority or Jurisdiction, which
the Heads of Families or Tribes had over their own Members and Dependants in
the first Ages of the World; this I say is no good Argument. I grant that the
Heads or Fathers of every Tribe had a Despotick and Supreme Power over all who
lived within their own Territories: This then was the Order or Economy of
Mankind, for every Family to make a Neighborhood within it self, and not to
dispose themselves into remoter Places, as now adays. They endeavored also to
increase their Families by the Number of Servants, who were also Incorporated
into them. So that these Ascititious or Adopted Members, were looked upon as
Branches grafted into the Common Stock. This is evident from the History of the
Bible, where we read of Kings of every Town or Village almost, which were no
more but Toparches or the Heads of so many Families, which in Ancient Times
were called Nations also. The like we may observe at this very day in the
High-Lands of Scotland, which Country being never yet Conquered, or hardly
overrun, they still retain that Primaeval Economy of uniting their Families
into Bodies, which they call Clans, of which each has its Head, who has in a
manner an absolute Command over all the rest of that Tribe or Clan, as is
obvious to all: This then, I say, was the Order and Government of the Ancient
World in the Ages after the Flood: But being it was not possible that it should
continue in this State; for the Multiplication of so many Toparches or Princes
of Families. Neighboring one upon another, begat infinite Disorders and
Quarrels, which could not be terminated but by force of Arms: Something like
this also we find at this day, to arise frequently amongst the High-land Clans,
where meeting with one another in great Bodies, they fight it out at Sharps,
and live always in a kind of Hostile manner. To remedy such Mischiefs, the
several Families or Tribes of old, were forced to unite themselves into one
Common and greater Body, under certain Laws of Government, whether Monarchical
or of a Commonwealth; or in Case of Conquest, to make the best Terms they could
with the Conqueror. And this is the True and Natural Original of all
Governments throughout the World, and are no more the Work and Institution of
God, than other Civil or Natural Occurrences, derivable from him, as he is the
Creator and Preserver of the World, which generally he Governs by the ordinary
and familiar Methods of Nature.

CHAP. X. Of God's special Providence over the Actions of Private Persons.
FRom God's Providential Government of Human Affairs, in respect of Civil
Bodies, we advance in the next Place to consider, the continuance of the same
Paternal and Providential Power, in relation to the Lives and Actions of every
Private Man: This follows Naturally from the former, for as much as the same
Virtue which moves the Body, must move also every Part and Member of it; as
also, for that God's Omnipotence, Omniscience, and Omnipresence (upon which
Attributes is founded his Providential Power) extend themselves to all the
Actions of Individual Persons, from the dependence they have on him, as their
first Cause and Preserver. But to prosecute this Point with more particular
Arguments, we may first take notice of what occurs to our Observation in God's
special Care of Man, at his first entrance into the World, above other
Creatures. It is known to all, how some have been exposed in their Infancy, and
have been miraculously preserved to be the Parents of mighty Nations, such as
Moses, Cyrus, Romulus; and the like is storied also by the Poets, of their
Jupiter and others of their Gods, thereby intimating the special care of Divine
Providence toward particular Men, not only in saving them from the Dangers
they were exposed to, but by making them the chiefest Instruments in Matters of
greatest Moment and of Universal Benefit.

But to leave these unusual Methods, which seem to carry in them some show of
Miracle, let us look a little nearer home, and we shall find that Man, of all
Creatures that come into the World, is naturally the most unable to shift for
himself; all Beasts, almost as soon as born, find the way to the Teat; Birds
once hatched are quickly in a Condition to feed themselves, but with Mankind
it is otherwise. The Infant that is born stands in need of continual Help and
Succor, and is exposed to continual Cold and Hunger, to Wants and Danger; and
this too, not for some days, but for some years, before it can be able to feed
and nourish it self; and yet we see how God does provide for all these
Exigencies of Nature, when all Natural means seem to fail. For the Children of
those poor Creatures, who seem destitute of all Relief themselves, rarely
miscarry through want of Succor, unless through the wilful Impiety and Cruelty
of such Parents, who to conceal their own shame, or to ease themselves of some
small Expense and Care, embrue their Hands in the Blood of those tender
Infants, or actually withold that Sustenance and Comfort which their
Condition does require: In which Case God is not obliged to work Miracles, and
force the Wills of those bloody and obdurate Wretches, to prevent the Effects
of their wicked Intentions, no more than he is obliged to lay a Physical
restraint on Men to keep them from the commission of Murder, Theft, Incest, or
any other such Crimes, as depend upon their own proper Will and Power.

I shall here forbear to speak of the Natural Gifts and Perfections of Man's
Mind, (that being elsewhere treated of at large.) We have a signal Proof of
God's particular Goodness and Care toward Man, in that Dominion and
Sovereignty he has given him over all other Animals whatsoever. How do all the
Beasts of the Earth and Fowls of the Air, give way and retire at his appearance
or approach; and by such withdrawing, confess a Majesty in his Presence? The
fiercest Creatures, and those of greatest strength, will not make opposition,
unless they be mightily provoked, and reduced to great Extremity. Others again
express a more than ordinary Obsequiousness mixed with Fear, and almost all pay
him Homage and Service. In a word, Providence is that Vigilant and Indulgent
Mother, which with an hundred Arms labors perpetually, and presents to every
Man all the Blessings and Delights of Nature. She enlivens him by the Light and
Beauty of the Stars; she warms him with her Flames; she refreshes him with her
sweet Showers and Breezes of Air; she serves him with her wholesome Waters; she
surrounds him with Rivers, which serve for Defense and Commerce, for Delight
and Benefit: She delights him with Verdant Pastures, with enameled Meadows, and
with the Curious Colors, Figures, and sweet Odours of Herbs and Flowers. She
does Recreate him with the Melody of Birds, and with the soft murmurs of
Crystal Rivolets and Fountains; she does nourish and enrich him with her
fruitful Fields; she shelters him with her Trees yielding Shade, and Materials
for Building; she does feast him with infinite variety of Fruits beautiful to
the Eyes, fragrant to the Smell, and delicious for Taste, as well as wholesome
for Food; she furnishes his Table with all varieties of Meat, according to men's
different Appetites, and the several Seasons of Nature; the Earth with all
sorts of Flesh, the Air with Fowl, and the Rivers with Fish; and in Case of
Sickness, he is succored with Medicinal Plants, Minerals, and Waters of rare
Virtue; so that which way soever a man turns himself, he receives Tribute from
every quarter of the World, and Feasts his Senses with the Wonders and Delights
which do surround him. These indeed are but some of those Entertainments which
are in a manner common to all Men, being such as flow from the Hands of
Providence in the Blessings of Nature; To which if we add the Benefits and
Ornaments of Art, with what comes from Traffic and Commerce, they would exceed
Number. As for other Creatures, into what a narrow compass are their Enjoyments
reduced? All their content is measured by a little Food and Water; and after
the Flux of a few years or days perhaps, they wax feeble and die.

That which seems to discredit this important Truth, is the Observation which
has been made through all Ages, that the greatest Libertines and Oppressors
are for the most part Prosperous, and swim in Pleasures and Delights, whilst
the Virtuous and Innocent are generally despised, and many times reduced to
Misery; or if some become more fortunate, it is presently attributed to the
Deity they Invoke; when yet others, much more in Number, and no less constant
in imploring the Mercies of Heaven, notwithstanding all their Efforts, become a
Prey to Impiety; being either Sacrificed to the Exactions of Usury, or trampled
on by the Voluptuous and Proud, or perhaps Plundered at the Will and Pleasure
of a Tyrant; or exhausted by the methods of a tedious process of Sickness; or
blasted by Defamations and Slanders; or afflicted with an unfortunate Family;
with many such like Miseries and Disasters. Upon which Account, when one told
Diagoras, Thou who do believe that the Gods neglect Men's safety, do thou
not observe the contrary, from the many Pictures or Votive Tables hung upon
their Temples, by those who escaped Shipwreck? Very true, replied Diagoras, for
there are no Pictures of those who perished.

In Answer to this Calumny, and all the Parts and Members of it: First, Good
men may not be successful in what they pray for, because they do not use the
Means. The Husbandman in the Fable, finding his Wagon stuck in the Dirt, lays
down his Whip, and calls on Hercules for help; to whom the God made answer,
Rise, Fool, and use thy Whip, and put thy Shoulders to the Wheels, and then
call on Hercules and he will succor thee. God does not work Miracles to supply
the Sloth of men. Secondly, though men may use their best Endeavors for
attaining what they pray for, they may be unsuccessful nevertheless, by
proposing undue Ends. This man asks for Riches, that he may pass the remainder
of his Life in softness and delight; that man sues for Honor, and the Grace
and Favor of his Prince, that he may show a Grandeur in Commanding others, and
receiving Marks of Homage and Obedience. Thirdly, Though the thing we pray for
may be Honest and the End Good, yet God may refuse to grant it, because it may
not be Beneficial; or if of present Benefit, yet of future and durable
Inconvenience; which made the Heathen cry out, Nam pro jucundis aptissima
quaeque dabunt Dii: The Gods, instead of what seems pleasant, may answer us
another way, by giving us what is fitting and useful. But if the Subject of
men's Prayers be the Preventing of some Evil which threatens us, or perhaps the
Removal of something which afflicts us, yet may we be unsuccessful without any
Reproach to Providence, upon these two Considerations: First, The Evil which we
deprecate, may be designed only for Correction and Amendment; this is no more
strange, than to see the Surgeon, whose help we implore to remove a Pain,
instead of giving present ease, to fall a-cutting and burning, and perhaps
dismembring. Secondly, God may lay Calamities and Afflictions upon men, that
they may produce Nobler Acts of Virtue. The Stock from which the Husbandman
expects the choicest Fruit is pruned most, and must often bleed, by suffering
his Luxuriant Branches to be cut away; whereas Common Trees have been suffered
to grow at random, and to spread wide their Arms, that they may afford more
Fuel for the Fire. This the Heathens understood perfectly, in the Temple which
they built to Honor, which was so placed, that there was no entrance to it but
by that of Virtue, whose Nature consists in Fortitude, and whose Object is
Difficulty and Danger. Aeneas is Figured as a Pattern of Heroic Virtue, whilst
he is exposed to Burnings and Tempests, tossed from Shore to Shore, and always
made to feel the strokes of an incensed Deity; all which served but to render
him more firm and resolute in his Actions, being like the Armor he wore, which
was made impenetrable, by being wrought in the Fire, by being forged and beaten
upon the Anvil, and dipped in the Stygian Lake.

Further yet; Divine Providence may suffer Good men to be a long time under
Disgraces and Afflictions, to render restored Comforts more dear and affecting.
The longer men have lain in Chains and Captivity, the greater is the Jubilee by
which they are restored to Liberty: It Is like a Pardon upon the Point of
Execution, where the Fears of Death yield stronger Fuel and Vigor to Life: How
sweetly does a man who is delivered from the sharp Assaults of the Gout, taste
the Pleasures of Health? how thankful is he for the Benefit, and what esteem
has he for the Means by which he was restored?

In the last Place; Though Divine Providence should never withdraw the
Misfortune under which we groan, yet is this no Argument that we are neglected
by it: on the contrary, it is the best Argument in the World to support us
under it, it being utterly inconsistent with the Nature and Goodness of God, to
suffer Innocence to be oppressed without a due Reward; which, because it is not
found in this Life, it remains, that there is a future State after Death, where
Virtue shall be Crowned: But this I shall wave at present, as being founded
upon the Soul's Immortality; a Point, which by the method of this Argument, may
be discoursed upon hereafter; for at present I shall decline all Topics taken
from the Truth and Doctrines of the Christian Religion, till I shall arrive to
it by the Course and Progress of Reason. Upon this Prospect, which the wiser
Heathens had of a future State after death, they bravely endured the Insults of
Fortune, and triumphed over the Cruelty of those by whom they suffered.
Theramenes being Condemned by the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, took the fatal Cup
into his Hand and drank to Critias, who was the most active man amongst them to
pronounce the Sentence. Brave gallantry in him, to behold Death with an
undaunted Countenance, and drink his Enemies Health in his own Poison! Socrates
not long after, was, by the Command of his Judges, Condemned to the same
Prison, and to drink of the same Poisonous Cup, which being about to take off,
he discoursed after this manner: I have great hopes, my Judges, it will be well
with me that I am condemned to die; for one of these two Things are certain,
either that Death shall extinguish all Sense, or Translate us into another
Place; if all Sense be extinguished, Death certainly is but like a sound sleep,
which is then most pleasing and natural, when it is not interrupted by the
Fantasms of a Dream. Good God! How great Profit is it for me to die! or who can
be more Happy than I? But if it be true (as men say) that Death is nothing but
a Migration into those Regions which men Inhabit after this Life, thou art yet
more happy, since thou shall be delivered from them who would now be accounted
Judges, that thou may go over to those who are Judges indeed; such as Minos,
Rhadamanthus, Aeacus, and Triptolemus, and there Converse with those who have
lived Justly. What would you not give to discourse with Orpheus, Musaeus, and
Homer? Truly I would die often if it were possible, that I might Experiment the
Truth of these things; nor would such of you amongst my Judges, who declared me
Innocent, fear to die: For no Evil can happen to a good man whether living or
Dead; nor can his Concerns be neglected by the Immortal Gods: Nor does this
happen to me by chance, no more than I would have Cause to be offended with
those by whom I am Accused and Condemned, were it not that they thought they
did me hurt. Thus it fares with me, and better it cannot be: But it is time for
me to go hence; I to my Death, you to your Life, but of the two which is best,
is known only to the Immortal Gods.

Having Vindicated Divine Providence from that Part of the Objection which
concerns the Misfortunes of Good men, let us look a little toward the other
Scale, in which the Properiety of Evil men is cast, and see whether it be of
that weight and moment, as to turn the Balance of Justice. I shall not insist
upon the momentary Estate of such men, many of which vanish suddenly like those
gaudy Butter-flies, which are engendered and flutter in the Sunshine: No, let
us bring the Matter under an Impartial Trial, with whatsoever may advantage the
Conditions of such men, and we shall find the Equity of God's Dispensations in
these following Considerations.

First; those seeming Darlings of Fortune, notwithstanding all their Luster and
Parade, are commonly traversed in their Course of Life with some Disasters,
which embitter all their Pleasures and Enjoyments: Here we find a Right
Worshipful Sinner, who Flatters his Superiors, Insults upon his Inferiors,
and Cajolls his Equals, with all seeming Kindness: He lives Jollily and Gay,
treats often, and drinks at all, even from the Church of England to the best in
Christendom: In fine, he passes in the Eyes of most men for a Popular and Happy
man; when all this while there lies an unlucky Mortgage perhaps, which feeds
day and night upon his Estate, and which obliges him to pay secretly some
Homage Fees to Keepers, Catchpoles and Under-Sheriffs; nor does he want
sometimes the Comfortable Prospect of a Jayl. But admit his Fortunes lie
without the reach of such mischievous Engines, yet it is possible he may find
other Discomforts from his Family which may poison his Content. The Wife of his
Bosom may wound him with Jealousy; or if Chaste, she may be Profuse, Imperious
and Importunate; that if there be nothing of all this, yet it is more than
probable, that some one or other of his Children may give him matter of
constant disturbance; the Prop and Flower of his Family, even my young Master
the Squire, and his hopeful Heir, may be an Impudent Debaucht Rogue, perhaps a
Fool: For such, as they are the common Instruments, so are they as commonly the
choice Masterpieces and Workmanship of Knaves.

In the next Place, admit the Prosperity of Evil men to have no bad
Concomitants of another kind, nevertheless it is certain, that even in their own
Nature there is bred something which is destructive to the welfare of the
Subject it belongs to. The most Luxuriant Trees die soonest of the Canker,
which they themselves nourish. The Rich Extortioner passes with most for a very
notable man. He thrives daily in the World, which he seems to Command by the
help of his Money; (for amongst the Vulgar all men's Gentility, Merits, and
Quality, are measur^d by the Acre) and yet who knows not by what Infamous
Practices such a Person works; What Anxiety is there which fills his Thoughts?
How is he ever tormented with his own Fears, and sometimes with the remembrance
of his Guilt? He places his Felicity in a bare acquisition, whilst he himself
commonly wants all those Comforts his Money might procure: His Sleep is
disturbed with Apparitions, and sometimes with real Alarms of those who visit
his Coffers. There is another who places his Felicity in a full Enjoyment of
whatsoever lies within the reach of Fancy: He stuffs his Carcass with most
delicious Wines, and with whatsoever Rarety is to be found amongst the Living,
or to speak more properly, amongst the Dead: He is always hunting out for Fuel
for his Lechery, and so passes away his Time amidst Feasts, Courtships, and the
Divertisements of the Night: Till at length he finds himself arrested by a rude
Fit of the Gout, or of a Dropsy, or perhaps a worse Distemper: The next News
we hear of him is, that he is beleagur'd with the whole Faculty of Doctors,
Apothecaries, and Surgeons, with their Auxiliaries, who very regularly invest
his Body, and formally attack it too, with all the Instruments and Artillery of
Art; Scarifications, Causticks, Salivations, and Circumcisions are hard things
for the poor Patient to understand, but much harder for him to undergo. And
here I leave them to dispute the Point with Nature, being no more concerned
whether Venus or Mercury get the better over him, than I should be for the
Proudest and most Puissant man alive, should I see him strut with a more
Puissant Cancer, or ride in triumph with an Invincible Fistula.

Then for the Ambitious Person, how Happy soever he seems to be, he carries his
Mortification with his State: He swells at the approach of those who depend
upon his Honor, whilst he repays their humble Salutations with a new fashioned
Grin, and answers their Petitions with a Shrug; or when disposed to a Gracious
Compliance, by an Emphatick Nod. With a man of this Kidney, the least slight
will be able to Create a Fever; and yet let such a one be assured, that as he
is never wanting to himself to give the Occasion, so others will not fail to
make good the Counter-point, and some time or other find an Opportunity to
follow the Repartee with the Piquancy of Scorn. Others there are of this Tribe,
who proceed another way, and by the Prudent Methods of a long-studied
Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, crouch like Capuchins at the Feet of those who
may any way advance their Ambitious Ends; but above all, they labor to win the
Fame and Acclamations of the Vulgar, esteeming nothing like to that of being
seen and talked of under the swelling Characters of Popular Greatness: These
are looked upon as rising and happy men; and so they are certainly, if Happiness
does consist in the worst of Slaveries, viz. A forced Compliance to the
Passions of others in flat Contradiction to ones own Will and Inclinations; if
it be happiness to live in constant Jealousies and Fears, and to be obliged
sometimes to act the Perfidious, and to expect always the same from others; if
it be Happiness to carry a Calmness in the Face, and a Tempest in the Breast,
and so be deprived of all the ways of ease for want of vent. And as for common
Fame, what is it but a puff of Breath, which perhaps may swell an empty piece
of Skin into the dimensions of a Bladder, and so be able to bear it up for a
time, and make it swim upon the Surface of the Waters, maugre all the violence
of the Winds and Floods, of the Storms and Waves? and yet for all this big
appearance, give this rising thin floating Excrement but a prick, and aways
flies all the Breath which bore it up, and vanishes in the Mass of common Air;
and then there remains nothing of this windy Greatness, but a poor thin piece
of Matter, which shrinks into a little compass, and is soon lost and cast away.
One peircing Glance of an offended Majesty may stab the Fortunes of the
greatest Favorite, where his Fall perhaps will not be without Ignominy, and
without good Conduct may prove a fatal Precipice.

In the Third place, let us suppose yet further, that Wicked men should enjoy
all the Good things of this Life, without any mixture of Evil, either from the
Nature and Concomitants of such Enjoyments, or from any other Collateral
Misfortune whatsoever, so that their Felicity may flow in upon them with a full
Wind and Tide, and be as easy and unlimited as their Wishes; yet there is one
thing most certain, that they must have an End; which End too will as certainly
give them a Prospect of Two things, viz. Past and Future; if they look
backwards, they will doubtless feel remorse of Conscience; or if not, yet the
Remembrance of their good Fortune, if it were satisfactory, will augment their
present Misery; if empty, their Folly: But then if they look forwards, they
will find themselves surrounded with inextricable Terrors: For though there
were no such thing as a Hell, yet the Apprehension of it, accompanied with the
Images of Guilt, is almost as bad: But if there be such a thing as Hell, where
are they then? But to this we shall speak hereafter, when we shall enquire into
the Soul's Immortality: so that upon all Considerations of Reason whatsoever,
there is no ground to believe any neglect on God's part in the Administration
of Men's Concerns, from the Prosperity of wicked Men.

But in the last place, what will become of the mighty Objection, if it shall
appear after all, that good men (tho not all) are more prosperous and happy in
the outward Comforts and Delights of Life, than the Atheistical and Wicked. We
find indeed glorious Examples of Great, Fortunate, and Virtuous Persons in all
Ages, Places, and Conditions of Life; even such, who confining their
Enjoyments, within the proper Circles of Moderation and Temperance, have really
a better sense of them than those who push them on to Luxury and Surfeit. And
as they taste them better, so have they this advantage also to make them the
Instruments of Good to others; which cannot but procure to themselves great
Honor, and Tranquillity of Mind for the present; as also a solid and eternal
Monument of Glory through all future Ages. Riches, Honors, Employments of
State are good and great Blessings; they first furnish Men with what may
reasonably advance their own Happiness; and then, like Gods, make them capable
to derive a Happiness to others. To these we owe the Erection and Endowments of
Schools, Hospitals, Colleges, Churches, Religious Houses, Public Edifices,
with other Monuments, which serve so much for the improvement of Piety, Good
Manners, and Civil Commerce. It is to good Kings, together with their Counsels
of Wise and Virtuous Statesmen, to whom we owe the Sanction of wholesome Laws,
our Defense from Danger, with whatsoever relates to the Welfare and Security of
a Kingdom; so that even in this Life we may readily observe, that the Scale of
Virtue does outweigh.

Before we leave this Branch of my Discourse, there is one Objection, or
Scruple rather, touching the precedent Doctrine, and it is this: The Events we
meet with in all our Human Concerns, are either Inevitable, or such as cannot
but be; or Evitable, or such as sometimes, had not God in an unusual and
special manner interposed, had never been. If Inevitable, then is it
superfluous and vain to deprecate the Evil which will fall upon us, tho we
invoke Heaven never so much, as 'twould be superfluous and fruitless to
supplicate God for that which will befall us without our Application. But if
such Events are said to be Evitable, then will it follow, that what Evil has
been, might not have been; which yet seems impossible: For whatsoever has been
at some time, was from all Eternity foreseen by God that it should be; and
whatsoever God from all Eternity foresaw should be, could not but be: now, that
what could not but be, might yet have not been, is a palpable Contradiction.

To this, which seems rather a Cavil or Sophism of the Stoic, than a solid
Objection, I answer: That things may be said to be inevitable or Immutable in
Two respects; either by an Inevitability of Nature; or by an inevitability of
the Event; for instance: That Fuel should burn is Inevitable from the Nature of
Fire, whose inseparable Property it is to burn; so that here to hinder the
effect, is the same thing as to work a Miracle; but that the Fire should have
burnt my House and not another Man's, this was necessary or Inevitable only in
the effect, or upon a supposition, that what was burnt could not but be burnt,
or what was done could not be undone: and about these latter Cases it is, that
Providence does for the most part exercise it self: So that we see how the same
thing may be both Evitable and Inevitable at the same time; Evitable in respect
of the Causes or Occasions leading to it; forasmuch as there was no necessity
of the application of such a Cause; which Cause notwithstanding being once
applied, or occasioning such an Effect, this Effect becomes Inevitable,
notwithstanding the Contingency in the Causes or Occasions leading to it. Now
when we offer up our Petitions to God, either to be delivered from Evil, or to
receive Good at his Hands, our Addresses are not superfluous; forasmuch as it
may sometimes, and does frequently happen, that God may avert an impendent
Danger, or bestow upon us an unexpected Good, by such means as lie out of the
ordinary course of Causes, and this too without a Miracle; whereas, had things
run on in their natural Courses, the Event would have been far otherwise. The
reasonableness of our addressing of ourselves to God in all our Exigencies, and
in what way and manner, and upon what Grounds we may hope to find Success, has
been before declared. Desine Fata Deum flecti sperare precando, was the Sally
of a Poetic Fancy, showing a Sentence already executed to be irrevocable: What
Judgment we are to pass upon them before their Execution, or in relation to
God's foreknowledge, or influencing of them, will be more conveniently
discoursed of in the following Chapter: It Is sufficient at present to observe,
that as the end, so also the means fall both alike under God's Providential
Inspection: so that when Men pray to God with a good intent and purpose, they
may conclude safely, that God is no less the Author of their good Inclinations
than of the Blessings they implore; and that if such good Desires be of his
Bounty and Grace, they may reasonably expect his favorable Return to their
Petitions, in some way or other, as shall be most suitable to the Wisdom of the
Giver, and to the Necessities of the Receiver.

God in his Providential Concurrence with Men, deals with us as an Indulgent
Mother does with her tender Infant; which being set upon its Feet attempts to
go; but being ready to fall, the Mother leads him by the Hand, or holds him by
his Shoulder-strings; by which means the weak Infant moves forwards, and the
Mothers Hand follows or goes along with it, and sustains it: But in case it
draw near to the Fire, Water, or any place of danger, the Provident Mother
succors it with greater strength, and turns it another way, and then leaves it
to its own little Wanderings, still bearing it up for fear of falling: nay,
sometimes she slackens her Hand a little, and suffers the Child to trip, or
perhaps to fall gently to the Ground on purpose, that by such little Slips or
Hurts, it may learn to take more diligent heed to its Steps, and by this means
learn also to walk steadily and securely. Now albeit the Child in these first
Essays of Nature, could not be able by its own strength to walk with safety; so
neither is that Virtue or strength with which the Parent assists its weak but
innocent Child, sufficient of it self to perform the Motion; but both being
joined together, is that which sets the Wheels of Nature going. And in such
wise like this it is, that God is pleased by his Paternal and Providential
Care, to govern the Motions of Men, and to divert them sometimes in case of
impendent Danger, or of some extraordinary Occasion, by applying greater Power
and Virtue than what is usual in his ordinary Concurrence with them.

CHAP. XI. Of Fate and Fortune.
BEfore we leave our Obsevations upon Providence, there are Two things
requisite to be spoken to under Two Names, which much amused the Ancients, and
which at this day also have their special Patrons and Abettors, viz. Fate and
Fortune. I shall begin with Fate, which is generally understood to be no other
than an irrevocable Sentence, or Decree of Heaven, by which Human Affairs are
from all Eternity ordained, in such wise, that they cannot possibly be
otherwise: The absurdity of which Doctrine is evident from hence; forasmuch as
it does furnish Men with a false Defense for the Commission of all manner of
Villainies, by charging God to be Author of it, and of man's being necessitated
thereto by his unalterable Decree. And as this Doctrine is full of Impiety in
respect of God, so it contains no less fatal Absurdities in regard to Men: For
according to these Maxims of Fatality, there would be no occasion for Men to
make use of Ships to pass over the Seas, nor of Meat to nourish them; for a man
has no more to do but to walk boldly upon the Waters: For if it be not his
Destiny to be drowned, he needs not fear to venture; but if it be his Destiny,
no Bottom can preserve him: neither needs a Man to eat, for if it be his
Destiny to die by Famine, he will never prevent it by eating; but if it be not
his Destiny to die by Famine, he cannot perish by forbearing. And yet this
Doctrine, so absurd as it is, is believed vulgarly by the Turks; tho we do not
find the effects of it in their Practices, since in all their Exigencies of
War, they have recourse to Human Succors, and are capable of despair. This
Doctrine was at first taught by their Imposture Prophet, to render them more
adventurous and resolute in perilous Attempts.

But it is not sufficient to refute this Opinion, by showing the absurdity of
its Consequence, but it is also requisite to prove its falsehood, by showing the
Erroneous Principles on which it is built. I shall not here enter into a
Theological Discourse of God's Decrees, and Predestination as they are treated
of in Divinity; the Method I proposed does oblige me to speak to these matters,
so far only as they fall under the View and Informations of Reason; and this I
have already done in some measure in the precedent Chapters: all that I shall
add, or rather repeat at present, is, that the Source or Original of Men's
Errors in this particular, is their misunderstanding of these two grand Points,
God's Prescience, and God's Cooperation with Men. First, as to God's
foreknowledge of Human Actions, this does not take away the Liberty in the
Agent; for then God himself would not be a free Agent; since he has from all
Eternity a foreknowledge also of whatsoever hereafter he himself shall do. Now
for our better understanding this Point, we may take notice, that there is a
twofold Liberty; the one Natural, when a thing is done without Let or
Obstacle. Thus a River is said to run freely, when there is no impediment or
stop in its Course; this kind of Liberty implys a Natural Necessity. A Second
kind of Liberty is that which is termed Spontaneous, proper only to Rational
Creatures, and consists in a Power of doing or not doing a thing, and is
opposed to Coaction: which sort of Liberty, tho it imply a certainty of the
effect, yet this certainty is derived from the Power of the Agent, which is
free to act or not to Act; but being once supposed to act, it must of necessity
produce the Effect which follows it. God therefore from all Eternity fore-sees
things so, and in no other manner than they shall hereafter come to pass,
together with the means by which they shall be produced. In things which will
be produced by natural necessity, he foresees them as things which shall of
necessity come to pass by such and such means: Likewise in effects, which shall
proceed from free Agents, he foresees them also, as issuing freely from such
and such Causes.

As to Gods Cooperation and Concurrence with Men in Acts purely natural or
moral, this likewise has been already spoken to, there being no more on God's
part, but that common and general Influence which he affords indifferently to
all his Creatures, by which they are supported in their Being and Actions,
whilst each rational Creature moves after its own peculiar way. Thus we see how
the Planets are all carried from East to West by that General and Diurnal
Motion of the Primum Mobile; whilst at the same time they have a peculiar
Motion to themselves, different from that of the thing which does sustain them,
and sets them too agoing. A Globe or Cylinder, being placed upon a Plate of
polished Steel, and once impressed with the least touch, moves it self from
place to place. Now if such power can be communicated to things purely
senseless and inanimate, how much more easy is it for rational and free
Agents, once inspired with Life and Motion by God, to move themselves by that
Virtue they were inspired with at their first beginnings? Besides this general
and natural Influx of God on the Actions of Rational Creatures, he is also said
to have a moral Influence, by inviting men to good Actions, and by detaining
them from bad ones: yet this being no more than an Objective Influence, or such
as results from the Apprehensions men have of Rewards and Punishments, it
leaves them still at their Liberty to Good or Evil, as we see by daily
Experience. As for spiritual Actions, or those of Grace, they require a special
Influence from God; but these being things which have relation to revealed
Religion, fall not under our present consideration.

There is another kind of Fate which does much amuse the World, being pretended
to be derived from the Stars. That the Planets have a great Influence upon
Nature, by causing that great variety of Seasons, Climats, general Contagions,
excessive Rains and Drought, with other Events of this kind is unquestionable:
and since the Diversities and Constitutions of Countries do naturally incline
men to such and such Tempers; and such Tempers naturally dispose men to such
and such Qualities; it follows, that the Heavens have a remote and general
Influence also upon the Actions of men; yet not so as to control and determine
them in their Liberty, since we find infinite Examples of men every where, who
living under the same Climate, are notwithstanding of very different
Inclinations; and even Brethren, and sometimes Twins (like Castor and Pollux)
are led by different Studies, and pursue contrary Courses of Life; or
whatsoever Inclinations there be in Nature, they are easily overcome by the
force of Example and Education. The Impostures of Astrologers, or such as
calculate Nativities are justly exploded by all men of Sense and Learning.
Condon, the ablest man who ever pretended to this sort of Knowledge, was
shamefully mistaken in his Judgment of Henry II. of France: for having
calculated his Nativity, he foretold that he should live a long and prosperous
Life, when yet he was killed most unfortunately in a Tournament, and in the
Flower of his Age. Men of this Profession are commonly called Fortune Tellers,
yet very improperly; they pretending rather to predict men's Fates; whereas
Fortune is conversant about matters of chance and contingency. The Stoics, so
much in vogue as they were, might pass for better Moralists than Philosophers,
since they taught that all things were governed by Destiny, and yet that man's
Happiness, or the exercise of Virtue was a thing which lay within his own Power
to acquire; Two Points diametrically opposite to one another.

Fortune Combats Providence in the other Extreme with Fate, and amongst the
Ancients was held a Goddess; insomuch that all variable and extraordinary
Events, whether good or evil, were ascribed to her: tho Lucan in a Poetic Rage
allows her neither to be a Goddess, nor that there was any Deity whatsoever,
when he exclaims -- (Sunt nobis nulla profecto
Numina; sed cae^o rapiuntur secula casu.)
being moved thereto upon a Consideration of the unjust Fate which befell
Pompey in his Wars with Caesar. But Juvenal's Conception was much better when
he sang, Nullum Numen abest, si sit Prudentia, sed te
Nos facimus, Fortuna, Deam -- Sat. 10.
intimating, that 'twas our Ignorance which gave the existence to this
imaginary Deity; which certainly is not only sound Philosophy, but sound
Divinity: For if we consider the matter a little, we shall find, that what was
called Fortune, is in reality no other but Providence; Providence in respect of
the first Cause, who from all Eternity foresaw the Event, and formed Ends
accordingly: But Fortune in respect of the second Cause, to whom it happened
besides Expectation. A Father disguisedly drops Money in his Garden, where his
little Son is used to play; this he does to prove him whether he will bring it
to him or keep it, or whether he be inclined to Theft or not: The Boy meeting
with it, looks upon it as Fortune or Chance; at which the Father smiles to
himself, knowing very well for what end he did it. Here we see, that what was
chance to the Child, is a thing of mature deliberation in the Father. A Wise
General, designing to surprise a City, sends men disguised like Peasants, who
contrivedly throw a loaded Cart at the Gate or Entrance of it, as tho twere by
some sinister Accident: Whereupon the Soldiers who lay in ambush win the Town:
What then was a well-contriv'd Stratagem in the General, was looked upon we see
by the improvident Citizens as a thing of Chance. Now if men who are all of the
same natural Capacities, have yet in point of Conduct such Power over others of
the same kind, as to make them the Instruments of their own private Ends,
unknown to those by whom they are wrought, we may with certain reason conclude,
there is a far more transcendent Power in God, who from that immense Prospect
he has of all future Things and Actions, and by himself giving Life and Soul to
every living Creature, may with infinite ease so dispose of all the Events and
Occurrences of man's Life, and to such Ends and Purposes, as the wisest Spirits
can never penetrate: so that what seems to them to be but Accidents and
Contingencies, will be found in the Eye of the Wise Creator and Governor of the
World, to be the unalterable Effects of a prudent and most steady Counsel.

CHAP. XII. That God is to be Worshipped.
FRom what has been hitherto proved through the Course and Connection of the
precedent Chapters, we may advance this farther Proposition; That this God who
is the Creator of the Universe, and presides over all the Thoughts and Works of
men, ought to be invok't and worshipped: which Worship I shall reduce to these
Four General Heads. First, Adoration in respect of his Greatness, or as he is
our Creator. Secondly, Invocation, in respect of his Power, or as he is our
Protector. Thirdly, Thankfulness, in respect of his Goodness, and so he is our
Benefactor: And Lastly, Obedience, in respect of his Wisdom, for so he is our
Counselor.

I shall begin first with Adoration: And here it is not my business to play the
Critic, by showing the several Acceptations of the Word in Classick Authors; I
leave these Curiosities to Grammarians, and shall content my self at present
with such a Notion of it, as is most easy and obvious. By Adoration then, I
understand nothing more but a profound prostration of our selves, expressed by
all External Gests of Body, and accompanied with an inward Horror of Mind, upon
the Apprehension we have of the Greatness and Luster of the Object; as upon the
apprehension also of our own unworthiness: Now that such a kind of Worship (and
much greater, if it were possible for us to express it) is most justly due to
God, is clearer than any thing we can bring to prove it by. Conformable
hereunto it is, that when we come before any Inferior Magistrate, we express a
Respect by outward Signs and a submissive Deportment; and so proportionably,
the greater the Person is to whom we address our selves. But when we are
introduced to the Speech and Notice of our Sovereign, we feel a kind of Terror
upon our Apprehension of his Character; we ought to look upon him (as really he
is) a Vice-God; which Consideration cannot but teach us to approach his Person
as a thing which is Sacred, and Reverable; and this we are ready to express by
an humble prostration of our Bodies, and by an inward Awe of our Minds, and by
a Resignation of our Wills to his just Commands. With how much care and
submission then ought we to approach the King of Kings, who gave us our Beings,
and is the great Judge and Rewarder of all our Deeds? we ought certainly to
throw our selves at his Feet, and to cover our Faces in the Dust, and with a
Religious Silence to attend his Pleasure.

Of all the Heathen Idolaters, the ancient Persians seemed the most excusable
in their Adoration of the Son, a Creature of Eximious Beauty and Greatness, of
wonderful Influence in the Production of all things, and by whose Warmth and
Light we are made sensible of all the Blessings and Delights of Life: And yet
this material Sun is but a Shadow or fady Representation of that inexpressible
Glory which is inseparable from God. Hence it was, that the Ancients did with
all dread and studied exactness celebrate their Religious Rites: They
approached these Mysteries with a Reverential Silence, looking on Taciturnity
as a thing very essential to Holy Functions: whence come these Forms of Speech
so much used by the Priests, Favete ore, Favete linguis, at such time as they
entered upon any Religious Office: And as to their Ceremonies they were
superlatively Scrupulous; insomuch that Sulpitius was degraded from the
Priesthood, because the Tuft of his Cap dropped off whilst he was Offering a
Sacrifice.

The Second Branch of Divine Worship consists in Invocation, and this follows
most Naturally from that Sense we have of our dependence upon God, and of his
Care and Government of the World. For as Tully well argues, If Lib. 1. de
Natura Deor.
the Gods cannot or will not help us; if they take no notice of what we do, or
if in the Course of our Lives we derive no Benefit nor Succor from them, I
know not upon what Ground it is, that we Worship them, and ascribe Honors, and
direct our Prayers to them; as I am doubtful also, that if our Piety toward
the Immortal Gods should once cease and be neglected, but that even Faith,
Honesty, Justice, and Virtue, with whatsoever else relates to Civil Society,
would soon perish and be forgotten -- This Consideration he improves further,
when he tells us, That the Worship of the Gods must be most Chaste, most Holy,
and most full of Piety, and must therefore issue from a Pure, Sincere, and
Uncorrupted Mind: For as much as not only the Philosophers, but even our
Ancestors, ever made a difference betwixt Religion and Superstition. They who
Sacrificed and Prayed whole days together, ut sui liberi sibi superstites
essent, that their Children might survive them, are called Superstitious, which
Appellation afterward became of larger extent; but they who did diligently
ponder on whatsoever related to the Service of the Gods, were called Religious
ex Relegendo, from their frequent and repeated Meditations on that Subject.
Whosoever has but lightly read the Monuments of Antiquity, cannot but observe,
that in all their Worldly Affairs, whether of Peace or War, for choosing their
Magistrates, or for any other Function whatsoever, the first thing they did was
to offer up their Prayers, to observe their Augurs, and to perform some Sacred
Rites. Invocation consists in Three Duties, viz. Supplication, when we pray for
something which we want: Deprecation, when we pray to be delivered from
something we suffer, or are afraid of; and lastly Intercession, when we pray
for others. And yet Supplication amongst the Romans comprehended Deprecation,
and signified also Thanksgiving, as will appear in the next Chapter.

The Third Branch of Divine Worship is Thankfulness to God, as our Bountiful
Benefactor: Gratitude is a Duty so rivetted in Nature, that those who deviate
from it are more degnerate than Beasts, since the most Savage Animals become
tractable and gentle to those by whom they are nourished, and some have
requited the Benefit they have received, after a long course of Time, in a way
very Extraordinary and Miraculous; others have pined away and died for Grief at
the Graves of their Masters; and even Dogs, which are naturally most Fierce and
Ravenous, will still express a Love for those by whom they are relieved and
fed, not only by a familiar Fondness, but by an uncorrupted Fidelity for their
Master's Safety and Concerns. Now if Beasts are thus sensible of their
Obligation, and express, though dumb, their Gratitude to their fellow
Creatures, what infinite measures of Thankfulness are due from Man toward God,
from whom he derives his Life with all his Enjoyments. The Heathens, though
they had no other Light but that of Nature, had a clear sight of their Duty in
this Particular, in the many Games they Instituted to the Memory of their Gods,
for some remarkable Benefits they received. The Greeks, besides their Olympic
Games so much Celebrated, and Instituted by Hercules in Honor of Jupiter, had
also other Games, as the Pythian, Instituted by Diomedes, near Delphi in
Phocis, in Memory of the Python slain by Apollo. No less famous were the
Isthmian Games, Instituted by Theseus in the Isthmus of Achaia near Corinth, in
Honor of Palaemon a Sea God: To which may be added also the Nemaean Games, in
Honor of Achemorus, or rather of Hercules, in Memory of the Lion which he slew
in the Nemaean Woods. In Imitation of the Greeks, the Romans also had their
solemn Games in Honor of their Gods: Those of the Circus were Sacred to
Neptune, their Scenick Shows began about the 394. Year after the building of
Rome, at such time as they were direly afflicted with Pestilence, and were
first brought thither and Practiced by the Etrurians, a most Superstitious sort
of People, whom the Romans ever held in great Veneration in Matters of
Religious Rites. But besides their Games, the Ancients had other Monuments to
testify their Obligation to Divine Bounty. Their First Fruits, their Votive
Tables, the Tenth of their Spoils, their Trophies, together with their Altars
and Temples, were all as so many lasting Marks of Thanks for the Grace and
Mercies they received.

The Last Branch of Divine Worship respects God as our Counselor, being
grounded in our Obedience and Submission to his Will, upon the Account of his
Wisdom and Justice. This as it is the last, so is it the chiefest Duty of a
Virtuous Mind, as being the Center of that Repose which a man feels within
himself, upon the Belief he has of a presiding Providence, which cannot but
Order all his Concerns in the best and wisest way. The Laws and Benefits of
this Noble Duty are excellently well described by the Heathen Philosopher, or
rather the most Christian Seneca in this following Discourse. I will submit to
all Difficulties Lib. de vit. beat^.
and Labors whatsoever, and so Prop up the Frailty of my Body with the Force
and Resolutions of my Mind. I will have the same Contempt for the Riches I
possess as for those I want; and as I shall not look more Dejected when they
are withdrawn, so neither will I be Exalted when they flow in upon me with the
greatest Affluence and Luster. I will not be Transported when I find Fortune
coming toward or going from me; for I will look on other men's Estates as mine
own, and mine as though they did belong to others, leading such a Life as
though I were born for the sake of others, and upon this Score I shall ever be
thankful: Whatsoever I Possess shall not be hoarded up sordidly, nor wasted
profusely, believing ever, that I do possess no more than what I am able to
employ to good Uses. I shall not measure Benefits by their Bulk and Number, but
rather value them by the Worth of the Receiver, never deeming it too much which
is bestowed upon a deserving Person. I will do nothing upon the Score of
Opinion and Popularity, but upon the Account of Conscience: And whatsoever I
shall do by my self alone, I will imagine it to be done in the sight of the
Sun, and upon the greatest Theater, and in the fullest Confluence of Men. I
will restrain the Desires of Nature, by giving Measures to eating and drinking,
and not live only to fill and empty my Belly: I will be cheerful with my
Friends, reconcilable with my Enemies: I will grant before I am entreated, and
meet a Petition half way. In fine; I will look upon the wide World as my
Country, and I shall believe the presiding. Gods, to be ever near me, and to
observe and censure all my Words and Actions; and whenever Nature or any
Accident whatsoever shall put a Period to my Life, I shall part with it
willingly, and with this assurance, that I have ever loved a good Conscience
and honest Endeavors, and that no Man's Liberty was ever lost by my ill
Behavior, much less mine own. He who proposes such Ends as these, and acts
accordingly, needs not doubt but he shall be admitted into the Light and
Fellowship of the Gods. Thus far he. This certainly was great Advice from a
Heathen, and if his Life were answerable, I durst pronounce him happy.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Religious Worship of the Heathens.
NOW since Divine Worship is not only determined to private Duties, and to a
passive Resignation of our Wills to that of the Supreme Governor and Moderator
of all things, but does require also some Public Forms, to prevent those great
Errors to which an unguided Liberty does betray men. Our next Enquiry must be
after this Point also, and this no other than what we call Religion. But before
I advance to further Inference, I think it necessary to make some few Remarks
upon Religion in General, in the Public Worship of a Deity, which amongst the
Romans, according to Valerius Maximus, was resolved into Lib. 1. c. 1.
these Four Points. First, Their stated and solemn Ceremonies, and those were
appointed by the Pontifices. Secondly, The right of doing things depended upon
the Observation of their Augurs. Thirdly, The Predictions of Apollo, and these
were contained in the Books of their Vates and Sybils. And Lastly, Their
Judgment and Removal of Portents or ill Omens, by the Exorcisms of the
Etrurians, or of such as followed the Rites and Discipline of that
Superstitious People. Moreover, according to the Ancient Custom in Matters
Sacred, when any thing was recommended to the Gods, it was called Prayer; when
any thing was requested of them, it was by Vows; when any thing was to be
repaid to them, it was called Giving of Thanks: When any Design was on foot, or
any Public Business to be done, they had Recourse to Augurs, or Consulted the
Entrails; and when any thing was to be Performed by solemn Rites, it was by
Sacrifices. And so great were the Endeavors of the Ancients, not only in
preserving, but also in amplifying their Religion, that there were sent from
Rome, by Order of the Senate, Ten Youths of the Noblest Hopes and Families, who
were recommended to the like Number of Cities in Etruria, there to be Imbued
and Disciplined in their Religious Mysteries.

The Religion of the Ancient Romans Apud Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. Genial. Dier.
as to its History, is something intricate and perplexed. Nevertheless I shall
endeavor to give some small Account of it, as I find it Recorded; and this too
in the clearest and shortest Method that I can; this being very Preparatory to
the main Scope and Design I have in hand. The Sum of what I meet with then upon
this Subject, may be reduced under these Two General Heads, Religious Persons
and Religious Offices. As to Religious Persons, they were of two sorts, Priests
and Augurs: First I shall begin with their Priests.

Numa Pompilius, the first Founder of Religion amongst the Romans, was himself
a Priest or Pontifex. Afterward there was a College of these Pontifices, which
at first consisted only of Four Persons; but in course of Time, as the Empire
grew greater and greater, this College had its enlargments also, so that Sylla
made their Number to be Fifteen; amongst whom there was one who Governed the
rest, who was called Pontifex Maximus: It belonged to this College to Institute
and Interpret Ceremonies both Public and Private, and to determine what Gods
were to be Worshipped, and with what Altars, Temples, and Sacrifices: 'Twas
their Business also to appoint Holy Days, called Feriae, on which men ceased
from their ordinary Employments, that they might with greater Devotion attend
on Sacred Duties. Moreover it did belong to them to see that the Worship of the
Gods was not Corrupted, by introducing Foreign Rites and Ceremonies, and to
take care of what related to Funeral Rites and Sepulture; and to Prescribe
Forms of Atonement for the Ghosts of the Dead, by certain Rites and Sacrifices,
called Inferiae; to consider also of Vows, and to Prescribe Public Forms of
Prayer and Supplications, or solemn Processions. 'Twas the Duty of the Pontifex
Maximus to make Annals of what was done or happened, and to enter the same into
a Register called Album; in which Book also were entered all Public Decrees
and Constitutions, together with the Names sometimes of those who bore Office.
In fine, it was his Province to preside over the College of Pontifices, to whom
also the Rex Sacrorum, the Augurs, the Flamines and Vestal Virgins were
subject, and punishable by his Censor. The Function of the Pontificate was ever
held in so great Veneration, that the chiefest Magistrates were ambitious of
it, such as Licinius Crassus, Julius Caesar, and many others: And in token of
Grandeur, the Pontifex was allowed his Lictor or Sergeant, with his Ax and
Rods: He was allowed also his Litter, and a Curule Chair, or Seat of State,
with other Ornaments proper only to the greatest Officers. Nor was any man
capable of this Sacred Employ, but such as had born some Office of State; and
withal, he was not like other Magistrates, compellable to give Account of the
Administration of his Charge. This Sacred College of Priests were called
Pontifices, from a Wooden Bridge in Rome, called Pons Sublicius, which they
were obliged to maintain, and was held so Sacred, that whenever it was to be
repaired (as it was often) nothing could be done till the Victim was slain, and
the Work made auspicious by a solemn Sacrifice. This Custom still continued
till the Times of Aemylius the Treasurer, who built this Bridge of Stone. The
Scribes and under Officers of this Sacred College were called Pontifices
Minores, and performed also some Sacred and Inferior Functions.

There was one amongst the Priests, who was called Rex Sacrorum, for as much as
he was appointed to exercise these Sacred Functions, which belonged formerly to
their Kings. But the Kingly Government being abolished, they conferred their
Religious Power on this Officer; and least the Name of Rex might create in him
any desire of Empire and Regal Dominion, they made him utterly incapable of any
Military or Civil Office, confining his Authority only to Religious Rites, over
which he did preside. And particularly it did belong to the Rex Sacrorum, to
Sacrifice a Ram to Janus upon the Fifth of the Ides of January. In all their
Sacred Banquets, or Pontificial Feasts, he sat next to the Pontifex Maximus,
and above the Flamines of Jupiter, Mars and Romulus.

The Flamines had their Original from Numa, who Instituted one that was called
Dialis, or the Priest of Jupiter, to whom were added two more Flamines or
Priests, one who presided over the Service or Sacred Functions of Mars, called
Martialis; the other over those of Romulus, called Quirinalis; but in after
Times the Number of the Flamines was augmented also to Fifteen, all which were
denominated from the respective Gods, to whose Service they were appointed.
Every District or Ward also had its Flamines or Priests, who like our Bishops
were called Curiales. Moreover, in every Tribe or Ward there were appointed
other Inferior Ministers, whose Business it was to perform Religious Duties up
and down the Villages, for the Devotion and Benefit of the Common People, much
resembling our Parish Priests. They were called Flamines, quasi Filamines; for
when by the extremity of Heat they could not wear their Caps or Bonnets
peculiar to their Order, they were allowed to bind their Heads, with a small
Filet or Ribband, in form of a Diadem, it being forbidden them to be seen at
any time altogether bare-headed. However on Festivals, and at Solemn times of
Officiating, they were obliged to wear their Bonnets, though the heat were
never so great; which Bonnets had a small Rod of Olives fastened on them, at the
Top whereof stuck a little Tuft or Boss of Cotton. There were also other
Colleges of Priests, of great Antiquity, as the Priests of Mars, called Salii
(a saliendo) from dancing about the Streets on solemn days, and beating their
little Swords against the Sacred Shields, made in imitation of that which was
said to be sent from Heaven in the time of Numa, wherein consisted the Fate and
Safety of Rome. The Luperci or Priests of Pan were said to be Instituted by
Romulus and Remus, upon the Death of their Grandfather Numitor. They were used
to run about the Streets naked, having only a Goats Skin over them, and with
small Thongs of Goats Leather dipped in the Blood of the Sacrifice, they used to
strike the Palms of the Hands of such Women as desired Fecundity. The Romans
also had a Fraternity of Priests called Arvales, appointed by Romulus for the
Benediction of the Corn Fields, with many other Orders also, too long to be now
insisted on.

The Augurs were a Society of Religious Persons, who were looked upon as the
Internuncii or Interpreters of the Gods, and muuh differing in Office from the
Priests. Their Number was small at first, growing greater and greater,
proportionably to the extent of the Empire. Their College was Composed of
Twenty four Members in the time of Sylla's Dictatorship. They were said to be
Instituted by Romulus, who himself was a very expert Augur. It was their Office
to Prognosticate future Events from the flight and chattering of Birds, to
inspect the Entrails of Beasts, and interpret Dreams, as also to make a
Judgment of Prodigies and Monsters, of Tempests, Thunders and Earthquakes: To
explain Oracles and the Prophecies of the Sybills. They were also Judges of the
Election of Magistrates, in so much that the Dictators, Consuls and Praetors,
with other Officers of greatest Power, were oftentimes deposed by the Augurs,
if their Promotion did appear to be Un-canonical and Defective; also they could
dissolve their Assemblies, and suspend Proceedings, if things appeared
inauspicious. Moreover they held their Office for Term of Life, whereas the
Pontifices might be degraded from the Priesthood for diverse Causes. No wonder
then if the greatest Magistrates were ambitious of this Office. Fabius Maximus
is said to have held the Augurship Sixty two years unto his Death; and Julius
Caesar when he usurped all the great Offices upon his subversion of the
Commonwealth, assumed also that of the Augurship, as appears by the Lituus on
his Money. The Augurs were used to make their Observations sitting, and wore a
Veil upon their Heads, and were clothed with a long Robe or Vest of Purple and
Scarlet. He had also a crooked Staff in his Hand, and winding at the end like a
Rams-horn, called a Lituus, with which he marked and quartered out the Heavens
into several Regions: After this a Victim being slain, he recited certain Forms
of Prayers or Verses, and then with Eyes directed toward Heaven, he applied
himself with a profound silence and attention to make his Observations, and for
the better performance of these Rites, the Augurs ever made choice of the open
Campaign, and of the fairest days, least their Observations should be
obstructed by the Winds and Clouds. Neither was it lawful for all the Augurs,
but only for the President of the College, to make a Judgment from the
Phenomenon of Heaven.

Religious Functions amongst the Romans were generally these Three. First,
Sacrifices: Secondly, Lustrations: and Lastly Supplications. The Sacrifices
were of two kinds; First, those by which they inquired into the Will of God by
Observation of the Entrails, and these might be called Exploratory: Next such,
where the Life of the Beast was Consecrated to God, and this kind of Sacrifices
might be called Animal, and might be termed also Expiatory, since by these they
endeavored to appease the Anger of their Gods; though they were sometimes
offered up also to make them Propitious; and sometimes also as Testimonies of
Gratitude. Each God had his peculiar Sacrifice. To Jupiter they offered a whole
Bullock without blemish, or any Spot of Black, and such as had never been
yoked, though the Greeks were wont to Sacrifice a Ram. The Bull was Sacrificed
to Apollo, Mars, and Neptune, as a Goat to Pan; a Lamb to Juno, a Heart to
Diana, and a Dove to Venus. To Ceres they Sacrificed a Sow great with young;
which kind of Sacrifice was called Amburvale; for at such time as the Corn and
Fruits began to be ripe, they led the Sacrifice thrice about the Fields, all
the People following and singing certain Verses suitable to the Occasion; where
one also was appointed to Celebrate the Praises of Ceres by a solemn Hymn and
Dance, and when they had made an Offering of Wine, Milk, and Honey, they killed
the Sacrifice.

This seems to have been the Course and Method of their Sacrifices. Such a
Beast being chosen out as was without Defect and Blemish, yet they cast Fruits
upon the Head of it, as also Meal tempered with Salt and Water. This
Composition was called Mola; from whence it was, that he who Sacrificed was
said to Immolate; Moreover he sprinkled Frankincense betwixt his Horns: This
being done, the Victim was said to be mactata; that is, duly proved and
prepared. Being brought to the Altar, and before the Wine was poured on it, the
Priest sipp'd some of it in a little Dish of Wood or Earth, called Sympulum,
offering the same to those who were round about him, that they might drink
also. This Ceremony was called Libamen, as was that which followed, viz. When
the Priest plucking only the Hairs that grew betwixt the Horns of the Victim,
cast them into the Fire; afterward turning himself toward the East, (for they
ever Sacrificed in the Morning with regard to the Rising Sun) he softly drew
his Knife over the Back of the Sacrifice, from the Head to the hinder Parts.
These Ceremonies being over (which were called Prelibations) the Priest
commanded the Ministers who stood by (who were called Cultrarii, and sometimes
Agones) to Immolate; that is, to kill and flay the Sacrifice, which being done
with many Ceremonies, the Priest strictly examined the Entrails, which he was
not to touch with his Hands, but with some Hallowed Instrument appointed for
that purpose: And if they found all things prosperous, they did cut off some
part or Portion of the Members or Bowels, which were called Primitiae; which
being sprinkled with Flour, were offered to the Sacrificer; who burnt them upon
the Altar; what remained of the Sacrifice was boiled or roasted, and eaten by
those who assisted at it: Tho sometimes all was burnt upon the Altar. Moreover
they had a special Regard to this, viz. Whether the Beast came willingly or
unwillingly to the Altar, looking upon the latter as an Omen of ill Presage,
and that it was not acceptable to the Gods. All their Sacrifices were
accompanied with Prayers and Hymns, in Honor of the Deity to whom they offered
them: which Hymns or Verses had several Names. That in praise of Apollo, was
called a Paean, or Prosodia; of Bacchus, Dithyrambus; of Venus, Eroticus, etc.
All which were accompanied with Music, and sometimes with Dancing.

It Is worth our notice to consider with what preparation the Priests addressed
themselves to these solemn Sacrifices; they purified themselves with Water, and
for some time before abstained from all sorts of Flesh, and the use of Venus.
Tho amongst the Greeks, many times, none were suffered to perform these Sacred
Functions, but such as lived in Celebacy: The Priest when he offered was
attired in a long White Robe, and wore a Veil; and at such time as he was about
to enter upon any Sacred Function, he endeavored to purge himself by a
Confession, and to express his Sorrow and Penitence, not only by Words, but in
the Humility of his Looks, having his Eyes fixed upon the Earth: whereupon the
Officer or Praeco, cried aloud [Hoc age] thereby requiring all the People to be
attentive to what they were about, and to keep silence: And so much briefly for
their Sacrifices.

Their Lustrations, Expiations, or Purifications, were generally of Two sorts:
First, By Ablution or Sprinkling of Water: Or, Secondly, by Fire, which was no
other but Censing: and this was done several ways; either by the Leaves of
Bays, Vervein and Myrtle cast on burning Coals; or chiefly by Sulphur, and a
piece of Pine-wood, in manner of a Torch, which was called Taeda; which by
reason of its Rosin burnt easily, and yielded a kind of Perfume or Smoke, (like
that of Frankincense) as did also the forementioned Leaves; to which Smells
they also attributed a purifying Virtue. Sometimes they used Oil and Pitch
together with Sulphur: And sometimes the Lustration also was made by
Sacrifices: All which kind of Rites and Ceremonies were used on diverse
Occasions, and applied almost to every thing. But the Ceremony especially, with
which Rome was lustrated every Five Years, was a thing of great Pomp: This was
performed in February; (so called from Febrius, who presided over the
Lustration, to whom also they offered a Sacrifice,) at which time the Censor,
in the greatest Assembly of the Magistrates, invoked the Tutelar Gods of Rome,
with solemn Forms, viz. That they would defend the Empire, their Cities,
Temples, and Waters from dangers; that they would be assisting to them in times
of difficulty, and avert Calamities: Vowing also something at the next Luster;
and then made their solemn Procession about the City and Suburbs in this
following Order: First went the Pontifices; after them the Flamines, and
Augurs, with other Inferior Priests: After these marched the Vestals; then the
Septem viri Epulorum, or those who had the charge and ordering of the
Pontifical Feasts, who were followed by the Quindecim viri Saliorum, or the
Masters of the Sacred Rites; together with the Senators and Common People. And
so scrupulous were they in their Ceremonies, that if an Owl or Wolf came at any
time into the Capitol, the City was presently to be Lustrated, or purged by a
Torch and Sulphur, and this was called Victima Amburvalis.

Supplications amongst the Romans were also solemn Processions, and not much
differing from their Quinquennial Lustrations; only the latter was fixed to a
certain Revolution of Years; whereas their Supplications were indicted upon
some sudden and extraordinary Emergency; and they were of two kinds: First,
Imploratory: Secondly, Gratulatory. Their ordinary Supplications lasted only
Nine Days, and were called Novemdialia: But besides these, they made general
Supplications at such time as they engaged in any Foreign War, or when they
were upon the defense of their Country, their Temples and Religion. Many times
they had recourse also to Supplications for the appeasing of the Gods, as upon
the Apparition of Two Suns, or of Comets; as also in case of Earthquakes,
furious Tempests, Showers of Blood, and extraordinary Inundations of Tyber; or
when the Temples and Public Edifices were struck by Lightning; or upon any
other Prodigy of this Nature. The Pontifex Maximus, with the other Sacred
Orders, began the Solemnity, and were followed many times by the Senators, with
their Wives and Children, together with the several Tribes: the young Men,
Virgins, and Matrons also had their place and share in the Ceremony, crowned
with Garlands, and with Laurels in their Hands, they sang certain Verses in a
low and humble Voice, by which they implored the Mercy of the Gods; and so they
visited the Capitol and Temples; but especially those Sacred Chapels, in which
were the Lectisternia, or Pulvinaria; that is, Beds of Repose for the Gods;
which Beds were most richly adorned, and had for their Pillows little Bundles,
or Tossels of Vervien (a Plant of most Sacred use amongst the Romans;) which
Lectisternia also were raised on high, and overlooked the Altars. The chiefest
Beds of Majesty were for Jupiter, Vulcan, and Minerva, because these Three were
chiefly looked upon to have the Power of the Thunderbolt.

The other sort of Supplications were Gratulatory, much like our Jubilees,
where all the Orders, both of Men and Women, whether Sacred or Civil, and
clothed in their richest Ornaments and Habits, made like the Solemn
Processions in visiting the Temples, and offering up their Thanks by singing of
Hymns, Perfuming the Altars, and making of Feasts, with other Marks of Public
Joy; which Supplications lasted for many Days, and were granted upon the
Account of some signal Victory, or for the good Success in their Wars, or any
other public Undertaking. Julius Caesar having fought prosperously in subduing
the Gauls, obtained Supplications, or a Jubilee of Sixteen Days. Brutus, after
he had the better of Marcus Antonius in the War of Medena, obtained a Jubilee
which lasted Fifty Days: One also of the like continuance was indicted by
Cicero in the Senate, at such time as the War was prosperous to Octavius. These
Supplications were always made during the Absence of the General, for whose
sake they were granted, excepting that of Cicero; for whom, tho present, a
Supplication was indicted, in consideration of the great Service he did in
defending the Commonwealth from Catiline's Conspiracy. In short, These
Supplications were usually the Preludes of Triumphs: Forasmuch as they for whom
Supplications were decreed, whilst they were employed abroad in the War,
obtained a Triumph at their Return when the War was finished.

The Religion of the Greeks was much the same with that of the Romans; for they
had the same Deities, and almost the same Rites and Sacrifices. From whence
also we may proceed to take a transient View of the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Jews, which consisted also in several Orders of Priests, Sacrifices,
Lustrations, Jubilees, Feasts, etc. only they differed in the Object of
Worship, adoring the One True and only God, to whom they erected one only
Temple at Jerusalem, where they performed their Solemn Functions: Tho they had
their Synagogues or Sacred Assemblies also every where wherein they taught and
preached, and did some lesser Rites. Their observation of the Sabbath, as also
Circumcision, were the more distinguishing marks by which they differed from
all the World. Tho the latter we find to have been observed also by the
Ishmaelites or Arabians, as descending from Abraham.

The Priesthood was ever held amongst all Nations in great Esteem, which they
expressed chiefly by honoring the Persons of those who attended on it with
glorious Titles, splendid Ornaments, plentiful Maintenance, large Exemptions
and Privileges, and with all External Marks of Observance and Veneration: If we
do not find the same in the Age we live in, this in some measure possibly may
be the fault of the Persons themselves; many of which being of despicable Parts
and Extraction, of uncultivated Behavior, and of Sordid, Covetous, and perhaps
Scandalous Lives, cast a Cloud upon the Function: and had they lived amongst
the Heathens, they would have been thought worthy of no other Priestly
Employment but that of butchering the Beasts; which yet seem to be much more
innocent and gentle. Tho it be very probable also, that as Men decline in their
Morals, and all Sentiments of Piety, so they think to extenuate their
Enormities, by exposing the Priests to the same Contempt under which they have
brought themselves by their degenerate Lives; which in all likelihood will let
in Atheism. For when Men have a true Belief of the Religion they profess, they
cannot but show a suitable Respect for those who are the Instruments of
conveying to them all the Benefits and Blessings of it. However it be, a few
particular Deviations cannot destroy universal Maxims, no more than the Heavens
can be said to be impure and corruptible, from a few falling Meteors, or some
smoaky Comets. The Body of Men through all Age and Regions of the World, have
ever held Religion in high Veneration, as in some short measure has been
already delivered. So that to use the reasonings of Tully, the Persuasion
Tuscul. Quaest. lib. 1.
Men have of Religion, and of the Divine Nature is not founded upon any
Conference and Consent of men, nor derived from any Laws and Sanctions
whatsoever: But the general Concurrence of all Nations in the belief of any
thing, can be nothing else but the Law of Nature. And consequently hence it
was, that many of those Ceremonies in use amongst the Gentiles, were in use
also amongst the Primitive Christians, and may still be retained in the Church,
as being of great signification, and such as serve to express men's inward Sense
and Veneration of the Divine Majesty.

Having thus took a transient View of some Religious Practices amongst the
Ancients, I now return into my old Road; where I shall endeavor to make a more
strict Enquiry of the Truth and Verity of Religion. Which that we may the
better understand, I shall reduce Religion to these Two Generals, Natural, and
Revealed. By Natural Religion I understand such Nations as Contemplative and
virtuous Persons have arrived to by the light of Natural Reason. By Revealed, I
understand only such Religions as are at this time in Vogue, and were pretended
to be authorized by an immediate Voice from Heaven: It Is true, all the Ancient
Founders of Religion pretended also to Revelation: But their Religion being
Conversant about false Deities, and being extinct long ago, I shall now
consider such different Religions as at this Day divide the World, and have the
True God for the Object of their Worship, by whom also they believe it was
revealed; and they are these Three: the Jewish, the Christian, and the
Mohammedan.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Jewish Nation and Religion.
IN the Jewish Religion there are Two things to be considered; its Authority,
and its Duration. First for its Authority: To us who are educated in the belief
that the Old Testament is the Word of God, there is no place left for any Doubt
or Question: So that in this Point, both Jews and Christians agree together.
But then were we to dispute with the Gentiles, such as Porphyrius, Jamblicus,
Celsus, and the rest, who denied the Divine Authority of the Scriptures; we
must have recourse to other Medium's, and such to which these Dissenters would
stand. Leaving therefore the Testimonies which the Scriptures themselves give
of their own Authority, we shall find the validity of their credit demonstrable
from such Circumstances and Natural Influences of Reason, as the most obstinate
Sceptick cannot possibly withstand. The Proofs which I shall bring for the
Authority of the Jewish Religion are three. The first is taken from a
Consideration of the Jewish Nation in General. The Second from the Authority of
the Old Testament. The last from the Certainty of its Predictions.

And first for the Jewish Nation: It Is well known, that as they were the least,
being confined to a narrow Tract of Ground, not exceeding One hundred and
twenty Miles in length, and Forty in breadth; so were they a People of gross
Intellectuals, compared with the Egyptians, Syrians, and Babylonians, who
surrounded them: They were not any way addicted to the Philosophy of the
Greeks; nor to the Ancient Learning of the Chaldeans; nor any way curious in
Mechanical Inventions: They were not dignified or distinguished by Titles, but
lived contentedly, and in a state of Equality, each within the limits of his
own Tribe, improving their Patrimony by all Methods of good Husbandry in
manuring the Earth, and living frugally. From whence it appears plainly, that a
People of this Genius could never invent such a Religion as should have the one
only God, the Great Creator of Heaven and Earth for the Scope and Object of
their Adoration. Neither could they receive Notions of this Nature from any of
their forementioned Neighbors; it being known to all the World, that all the
Nations round about them were gross Idolaters, and held no conformity with the
Jews in their Rites and Manners of Life.

We have a Description of the Perfection and Purity of their Religion in the
best of Heathen Authors: For Tacitus Tac. lib. 5. histor.
tells us, that the Jews worshipped one only Deity, mente sola; detesting those
as profane who represented the Gods under the gross Shapes and Images of Men;
believing the one Supreme God to be Eternal and Immutable. But whatsoever their
Belief was, we find their Practice to be many times very degenerate.

For our better illustration therefore of this Argument, 'twill not be amiss to
take a short view of their Dispositions and Actions, as they are represented to
us in their own Acts and Monuments. The Jewish Nation were a People separated
from the rest of men, by many signal Favors and Prerogatives. They had lain
almost Four hundred Years under the Yoke of Egypt; till at length (God
remembering his Promises) does raise them up a Deliverer, Moses; who by many
Wonders rescued them from under the Hand of the Oppressor. As for Pharaoh and
his Host, he overthrew them in the Red Sea: And 'twas but meet they should be
overwhelmed in the Waters, who were first drowned in Security and Impenitence.
But for Israel to forget God, that God who had done so great things for them,
was as Prodigious as their very Deliverance. They left Egypt, it is true, but
yet they still continued in the Land of Darkness, and were harder than the Rock
which obeyed the Rod, and yielded Waters to quench those Heats which their own
Lusts had first kindled. They resisted the Lord their Deliverer, in their
Murmurings against Moses and Aaron. Nor did they only contend with Moses their
Civil Governor; but they sought the Priesthood also, saying, Ye take too much
upon you, seeing all the Congregation is holy, every one of them. And strange
was their Presumption, when they knew no other way to make an Atonement but by
committing Sacrilege, I mean by offering up of strange Fire, such as made them
both Priests and Sacrifice: And as tho all remembrance of the Judgment, had
been buried with Korah and his Company; they offered a fresh Indignity, saying,
Ye have killed the people of the Lord: Insomuch that God slew 14700 of them in
a Moment. To be short; whosoever takes a Prospect of their Forty Years
Pilgrimage in the Wilderness, shall find it to be checkered with Provocations
and Judgments; and although they melted in the Furnace, yet they returned to their
former Temper when the heat was over, and became more hard and impenetrable by
being wrought in the Fire. Nay, when they were reduced to that state of
Government, under which they were likeliest to subsist, as being at the
greatest distance from Divisibility, I mean a Monarchy; yet then, I say, when
in the most flourishing state, and in the most hopeful way to obtain stability,
we find them at the same time turning Apostates from God, and Rebels to their
Prince.

To proceed then; when of all the Tribes, scarce the tenth part (which in all
things else was consecrated to God) became Followers of the True Religion:
'twas not long before that began to revolt, and to turn away from the Truth:
For it is recorded of the days of Rehoboam, that Judah did Evil in the sight of
the Lord, and that they provoked him to Jealousy, with the sins they had
committed above all that their Forefathers had done: For they also built them
High Places, Groves and Images on every high Hill, and under every green Tree;
there was not a Mountain but had Altars on it, and those Altars almost as many
and various as the Stars of Heaven, to whose Worship they were erected. How
often did God send to them by his Prophets, by his Judgments, and by his
Mercies; but all in vain; neither the one nor the other could perfect their
Recovery; and what was yet worse, instead of turning to their God, we find them
flying to the Assyrians, to that Idolatrous People to be healed and cured of
their Wounds; like the dying Heart, which went to the Covert for shelter, from
whence came the mortal Arrow. Nor did this Contagion overspread the People
only, but many times their Kings, and sometimes their Priests were infected
with the Leprosy; all which Disorders at last found an end in the Ruin of
their Temple, Sanctuary, and City, together with the loss of their Ark, and of
all other Sacred Relics and Monuments, whatsoever; all their Princes, Priests
and men of Note, being loaded with Irons, and carried away like Slaves into
dreadful Bondage and Captivity. Nay, after they were miraculously restored in
the beginning of Cyrus his Reign, we find them exposed to great Difficulties,
and engaged with Potent Enemies in their resettlement; which indeed was rather
a new kind of Combat than a Restoration; for it was Fourscore years and better
before the Temple and Walls of the City were repaired; and not long after
'twas, that they were assaulted by dire Persecutions, under the Greeks, who
lived in Syria, as appears in the Acts and Records of the Machabees: After
which time they fell into diverse Factions and Disorders, even to the Birth of
Jesus, after which shortly followed their final Extirpation.

Now let us put all this together, and then let us make a Judgment of the
whole. The Jews we see were a handful of People, separated from all the World
by Language, Rites, and manner of Life: They were generally of heavy
Capacities, obstinate and most prone to Idolatry, their Kings also and Rulers
being most of them Vicious and Idolaters; in Times of Peace easily drawn away
to follow the Superstition of their Neighbors, and at length broken to pieces
by a miserable Captivity; and even the scattered Fragments of their Nation
battered by a continual series of Calamities, and irrepairable Disorders. And
yet notwithstanding all these disadvantages, we find their Religion to have
been miraculously preserved for the space of Fifteen hundred years: For the Law
of Moses was never abolished, nor any new Rites introduced by the solemn
Decrees of the Sanhedrim; so that there was still the Face of a Church, and Men
raised up in an extraordinary manner to support the same by their exemplary
Lives and seasonable Instructions; all which could not be but by the singular
and special Power of Almighty God, when for so long a Tract of Time all human
Means universally conspired to the utter Ruin and Extirpation of it.

CHAP. XV. Of the Authority of the Old Testament.
THE Divine Authority of the Books of the Old Testament, in which the Jewish
History and Religion is contained, may be demonstrated first from the Matter
and Manner of their writing; next from Records of human Antiquity. And First,
The Old Testament has singular Advantages above any other Works and Writings
whatsoever, in respect of its Antiquity: It begins with the Creation of the
World, with a short account of the Antidiluvian Times, down to the general
Deluge; after which time it shows the Re-settlement of Mankind; as also what
Nations were of greatest Antiquity, and then comes more particularly to the
Ancestors of the Jewish, and describes the plainness of the first Ages in the
Lives and Manners of their Patriarchs: From thence it descends gradually to the
Time of the Jews settling in Egypt in many delectable Passages, with some
account also of the Neighboring Nations. During their abode in Egypt we have
little Account, till such time as Moses appeared, to whom the Law was given.
From Moses downwards we have a more large and accurate History, distinguished
by several Successions of Judges and Kings; and the years they governed reduced
to certain Periods of Time, even to the Babylonish Captivity; we have a
particular History also of their Re-settlement; and after some intermission, we
have an Account of their Actions under the Government of their Highpriests,
during their Wars with the Greeks. Not long after which Time followed the Birth
of the Messiah. In short, the Acts and Monuments of the Old Testament are of
that Antiquity, that even the first Historians amongst the Greeks, as Herodotus
and Thucydides flourished but about the time of Esdras, who was one of the last
amongst the Jewish Writers.

In the next Place, these Sacred Books have a singular Advantage above all
other Writings whatsoever, whether we consider the great variety of Matter
contained in them, or the Style in which they are writ. The Style is for the
most part very plain and obvious to all Capacities (as Books of this kind ought
to be) but withal it speaks with that Gravity and Authority, as becomes Divine
Oracles, not insinuating its Precepts by Rhetorical Arts, but enjoining them by
a kind of Majesty and severe Commands; and yet we have some Descriptions
(especially amongst the Prophets) made with that liveliness of Representation
and grandeur of Expression, as far exceeds the Raptures of our Modern Poets, or
those of former Ages. What Strains of Wit can draw such an Idea of a Glorious
Combatant as that we meet with in Isaiah cap. 63. in the Description he gives
us of our Savior's Bloody, but Victorious Conflict upon the Cross. Who is he
that comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in
his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? (Answ.) I that speak
in righteousness, mighty to save. (Quest.) Wherefore art thou red in thy
apparel, and thy garments like him that treads in the Wine Press? (Answ.) I
have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there was none with me: for
I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood
shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. And I
looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to
uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me, and my fury it upheld
me. And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my
fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth. Can there be formed a
nobler Image of a Conqueror, dapled with Blood, wreeking with Revenge, and
panting and bestriding his prostrate Enemy in the sight of two Armies? How far
short of this is Aeneas's Character in his Combat with Turnus, described by
Virgil? So that Angelus Politianus showed a singular delicacy, or rather a
critical weakness, in neglecting to read these Sacred Compositions, for fear of
debasing his Style; whereas Marsilius, Ficinus, and John Picus Mirandula, Men
of greater Parts and Learning, delighted in nothing more than in the study of
them.

If we consider the variety of Matter treated of in these Sacred Writings,
there is no Collection under Heaven can compare with them; what excellent
Observations and Instructions have we for Morality in the Books of
Ecclesiasticus; which without an Hyperbole, may be said to be the best in that
kind in the whole world, as reaching to all the Circumstances of Life. The
Books of Solomon must tell a Heathen, that he was a Man of vast Knowledge: His
Canticles show him to have been a Man of a most pregnant Fancy: His
Ecclesiastes seems to have been a Discourse by way of Dialogue betwixt Wisdom
and a Sensual Nature: But his Proverbs do declare him to have been both Good
and Wise, and were writ probably before he was Corrupted. The Books of the
Prophets show that they were writ by Men of intrepid Resolutions: They reprove
without Flattery, and touch the Affections to the quick, breathing always an
Ardent Zeal for Virtue, and for the Glory of Almighty God. And as for the Book
of the Psalms they are a kind of Poem, and they must be confessed of all Hands
to flow from an inexhaustible Fountain of Piety and Devotion, and teach us how
we may Address our selves to God under the several Forms of Confession,
Petition, Supplication, Thanksgiving, Vows and Praises: And truly, had David
been inspired with a Human Spirit, he would have employed his Poetic Fancy in
illustrating some Passages of his own Life, viz. His Fights and Victories as a
Warrior, and particularly his Engagement with Goliath, would have afforded
noble Matter for an Heroic Poem; or else as a Courtier he would have Composed
some soft Pastoral or Madrigal, containing his Amors with Bathsheba; or as a
Friend, he would have exercised his Fancy about his more Innocent Love and
Affection for Jonathan. But we find nothing of this Nature; his Subject always
is Divine, one while as a Suppliant or Penitent, another while as an humble
Petitioner; anon with Strains of Gratitude, and in Heavenly Raptures, he
addresses himself to his Creator, and Celebrates the Praises of Almighty God,
by recounting his Wonders and Mercies, his Comforts and many Deliverances; all
which cannot but show, that they were dictated by another Spirit, and kindled
by a purer Fire, than what commonly sparkles in the gay Fancies and Inventions
of Men. As for the Historical Books of the Old Testament, we have touched upon
them already; and we may say of the whole Book or Collection of these Sacred
Writings, that it is like the Manna it speaks of; it is Food to every Palate,
such as does not nauseate, but has a rellishing Taste of every thing, and
creates an Appetite: And it is worth our Observation, that let a Man read these
Holy Writings with all attention imaginable, yet when he comes to read them
again, he shall discover some things of which he was ignorant before, though he
repeat the Section of them to the very end of his Life; which shows that it is a
Spring which is inexhaustible, and that the more we drink of these Waters, the
more we thirst; from whence it is, that the Wisest and most Learned Men have
addicted themselves most to the reading of these Books, the nearer they drew
toward their End, which shows also, that it is their Nature to lead Men
forwards toward a State of further Perfection.

Another thing which shows these Books to be of Divine Inspiration, is the
manner of their writing. Turn over all human Histories whatsoever, and we shall
still find it to have been their grand Scope and Design, to magnify their own
Nation, and to represent their Actions with all advantageous Characters
imaginable, to applaud their own Customs and Manners, and to avouch the Justice
of their Dealings: But it is otherwise in these Sacred Writings; the Penmen of
them are in nothing more copious, than in showing the Blemishes of their own
Nation, their Apostacies, their Idolatrous Dispositions, together with the
notorious and scandalous Lapses and Relapses of their Kings, though held in
never so great esteem for Power and Goodness: And this certainly is an
Invincible Argument, that they did not in their Reports proceed upon Natural
and Human Considerations, but as it was dictated to them by a higher and more
noble Impulse, and contrary to the Genius and Temper of that Nation, who in
reality were as Vain, Self-admiring, and Unconstant as any other People upon
the Face of the Earth. It Is beyond my Power to answer such Difficulties as
occur in the Old Testament, touching the Jewish Genealogies and Chronologies,
together with some Customs and Passages, as seem strange to us of this Age,
since we find the like, and greater, in the Writings of all profane Authors,
though never so well digested; or perhaps God Almighty might on purpose suffer
some Passages to be obscure and seemingly Repugnant to our Understandings, the
better to subjugate our Reason to Faith, which is a more excellent degree of
assent, because it resolves it self into the absolute Authority and Veracity of
the Proponent without hesitance, or any dependence upon our own feeble Notions.

In the last Place, the Divine Authority of these Sacred Writings is legible in
the Acts and Monuments even of Human Antiquity; so that the most polite Writers
amongst the Ancients, did light their Candles from this Sacred and ever burning
Lamp. Virgil and Ovid borrowed out of Genesis, their History of the Worlds
Creation, which they improved, or rather debased by their Poetic Fictions.
Iapetus the Father of Prometheus, and by whom the World was Re-peopled after
the Flood, was no other but Japhet, whom the Poets feigned to be the Son of
Coelum and Terra; that is, to have had his Extraction from God. The Ogygian and
Deucalion Floods were Poetic Fictions derived from Noah's Deluge. Plutarch
Plutarch. lib. quod Bruta ratione utuntur.
makes mention too of a Doves being sent out of an Ark by Deucalion, to
discover the Abatement of the Waters. The Giants climbing up to Heaven, was
taken from the building of Babel: we find also whatsoever occurs in the
Fragments of Profane Writers of greatest Antiquity, to square with the
Accounts we meet with in the Jewish Monuments. The Egyptians and Chaldeans were
ever held amongst profane Authors, to have been the most Ancient of Nations;
and we find the same in Scripture also. The History of the burning of Sodom has
left indelible Marks of its verity in the Bituminous Waters, and noisome smells
of the Lake adjoining, which is so stinking and poisonous, that nothing can
live in it, as appears even at this very day; as also in the Fruits which grow
near that accursed Place, which though most beautiful to the Eye, are easily
crumbled to Dust and Ashes, as Morney du Plessis Morn. cap. 26. de Verit. Rel.
proves out of Galen, Strabo, Solinus, and others: The same thing is affirmed
also by Tacitus. The departure of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, under
the Conduct of Moses, with many other Passages of the Old Testament, are
mentioned by Justin. lib. 36.
Justin, as also by Lib. 5. Hist.
Tacitus, though with some depravation. The simplicity and plain Pastoral Life,
together with the Habits of the Patriarchs are much the same which we meet with
in Homer, (who lived a little after the time of David) in his. Descriptions of
the Age and Men of which he wrote; and even the Feasts of the Gods consisted of
no other Dainties than Bread and Wine. The Temple of Solomon was so famous
throughout the World, that it gave the denomination to the City it self, which
is called Hierosolyma, quasi Hieron Solomonis, or the Temple of Solomon. And
even at this very day, the great Emperor of the Abyssines, or of Ethiopia,
(called Prester John) with all the Natives of that vast Country (though
Christians) still retain Circumcision, not as brought thither by the Eunuch,
who was Baptized by St. Philip, but in Memory of their descent from the Queen
of Sheba, whom Solomon treated not only at his Table, but at his Bed also; so
that amongst other proud Titles of that Emperor, he glories most in stiling
himself the Son of Solomon and of David.

The Memory of the Ten Tribes, who were at several times carried away Captives
by Teylath, Phalastor, and Salmanastor, into the Desert and Nothern Parts of
Media, is preserved to this very day in the Tartars, who ('it is certain) are
descended from the Jews, who were dispersed by the Medes their Conquerors; for
the Colchians, who were the Progenitors of the Tartars, as Herodotus tells us,
Herod. lib. 2.
were Circumcised, though the Name of Tartar was not considerable, nor known till
about the year of our Lord 1200. at such times as Givigi their Captain began to
overrun the World with his Barbarous Multitudes. However so it was that they
still retained Circumcision even long before they ever heard of Mahomet, and
upon that account they embraced his Doctrine with less difficulty, as agreeing
with them in that Custom. All which is further yet Confirmed, for as much as
the Name of Tartar, or Totar (as some report) does in the Syriack Tongue
signify [derelict,] from whence it comes also; that there is at this day such
a great Number of Jews in Russia, Salmatia and Lithuania. To conclude this
Point, whosoever shall survey Matters impartially, cannot but observe that
Orpheus, Musaeus, Pythagoras, Plato, and the rest of the Ancient Worthies,
Copied their Divinity from the Jewish Reports; since we read still, that they
went into Egypt for their improvement in Knowledge, where the Acts of Moses, as
they were of lasting Remembrance, so the Israelites too were their nearest
Neighbors, and who for many Exigencies had a constant Correspondence with that
Nation.

The Third general Argument to prove the Authority of the Old Testament, as
also the Truth of the Jewish Religion, is drawn from the certainty of its
Predictions: For Instance, Jacob upon his Death bed, Genesis 48. in Blessing
Joseph's two Sons, contrary to the order of their Birthright; and as they were
presented to him by Joseph, crossing his Arms, lays his Right Hand upon the
Head of Ephraim the younger Brother, and gives him the Preeminence in his
Blessings: Nor did he do this by chance, but by assisted and steady direction;
for though he was decrepid and his Eyes dim, yet had he a clear foresight of
what was to come to pass Six or Seven hundred years after his death,
Prophesying the future Greatness of Ephraim, which we find verified upon the
Revolt of the Ten Tribes, of which Ephraim was the Head; for Jeroboam their
first King was of the Tribe of Ephraim, as also many of those Kings who
succeeded him, and Samaria the Metropolis, in which the Kings of Israel resided
did belong also to Ephraim. To this we might add some other Predictions of like
certainty, which for as much as they respect the prefixed Duration or Period of
the Jewish Government and Religion, come more properly to be considered of in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. XVI. The Jewish Religion to have its Period upon the coming of the
Messiah.
WE have in some measure seen already of what Authority the Jewish Religion
was, the just extent whereof will yet further appear, if we have regard a
little to the Scope and End to which it was directed, viz. The Birth of the
great Messiah, even Jesus Christ the Savior of the World; and for this purpose
let us a little consider the Nature of those Rites and Institutions, of which
the Jewish Religion did consist. Their Circumcision, Aspersions, and other
Lustrations, could in themselves have no Virtue to expiate Sins, and purify
the Souls of Men; if so, Sanctity might have been purchased at an easy rate.
That vast Number of Offerings and Sacrifices smoking always before the Temple,
could hold no proportion with the State of Men, or with the Nature of God, who
being a pure Spirit, and merciful toward all his Creatures, could not be
delighted with the Blood of so many harmless Animals, no more than the same
Blood could cleanse another Infirmities; and such as were of a Spiritual
Nature, indeed naturally they must seem to increase the Stain, and to make the
Guilt to be of a deeper Tincture.

And for this purpose, let us imagine our selves to have been present at some
of those Solemnities. What Entertainment can our Ears meet with in the doleful
Bellowings of so many Beasts of all kinds, then ready to be murdered? What
Spectacle of Horror must it needs have been for our Eyes to behold such a
Prodigious Number of Levites trussed up to do Execution, wreeking their Hands
in the Bowels of Beasts, with their Knives dropping Blood, and their Frocks
bespattered with Gore, and polluted with Dust, Sweat, and such like Ordure as
must attend such a general Butchery? What Nidour must it be which must affect
our Sense of Smelling from the broyling of so much Flesh on the Coals, and from
the Steams and Fumes arising from an infinite Number of Pots and Spits, of
Caldrons and Frying-Pans? insomuch that all the Stalls, Shops and Chambers of
the Piazza, and the adjoining Buildings of the Temple (which must needs have
been exceeding many) seemed nothing but one monstrous Theater of Blood,
Shambles and Sculleries. To all which Heats arising from such a vast Number of
Fires, let us add those of the scorching Climate, especially in the Summer,
which was the Season appointed for these Solemnities, together with the
Inconveniences and Distempers, which must needs follow such an Immense Throng
of People, and we may easily imagine, that they were almost poisoned in all
their Senses, and that the noysomness of the Offerings was as great as that of
the Sins which occasioned them, and that such a mixture and medly of things, so
Displeasing, Painful and Unnatural, was sufficient to render all, both Actors
and Spectators, but one great and dreadful Sacrifice.

All these Circumstances could not but affect such as were Piously disposed,
with a detestation of their own sinful Natures, for whose sake they were
Instituted; but much greater must their Horror have been when once they
apprehended, that all these Bloody Performances, were only as so many Types of
that one Real and Tremendous Sacrifice, which was to be accomplished in the
dolorous Agony and Death of the Great and Innocent Messiah, God and Man, in his
most opprobrious and painful Sufferings upon the Cross. Doubtless God Almighty
had revealed something of this Nature, to some of the more devout and knowing
Jews, though the Generality looked no further than the visible and external
Rites, which could in no measure purge away Sin, but in Virtue of that
Immaculate and Supernatural Victim, which was to endure for all Ages, and of
which the Lamb of the Passover was a pregnant Symbol, as we shall see
hereafter. No, no, these Sacrifices in themselves could have no purging nor
atoning Virtue, nor could they in their own Natures be acceptable to God: For
thou delightest not in Sacrifice, says David, Psalm. 51. else would I give it
thee; thou delightest not in Burnt Offerings. The Sacrifices of God are a
wounded spirit, a broken and a contrite heart. And upon this account it was,
that Obedience was better than Sacrifice; and that we read so often of the
Sacrifice of Righteousness, Praise and Thanksgiving: Hence it was also, that
the Circumcision of Lips and Heart, that is, a purity of our Works, Thoughts
and Affections, are so often pressed in Scripture. The Blood of Bulls and Goats
could never Hebr. 10
take away Sins, nor could their Sacrifices perfect the comers to them, for as
much as they were only Shadows of good things to come: all which, and many more
Observations of this Nature are pressed at large by St. Paul against the Bigots
of the Jewish Laws; showing also the true and legal Cessation of them upon the
coming of Christ: which thing also was actually accomplished, as appears by the
State and Circumstances of the Jewish Nation to this very day.

From the Jewish Rites and Sacrifices, let us proceed to their Predictions: the
first shall be that of the Patriarch Jacob in the Benediction of his Sons;
where speaking of Judah, he says, The Scepter Genesis 49.
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, until
Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the Nations be, etc. For the
better understanding of which Passage we are to note, that Shiloh was a
Mountain where Vide Morney du Plessis, cap. 29. de Veritat. Relig. Christ.
the Ark of the Tabernacle was kept, and where the Children of Israel for a
long time went up to worship before the Temple was built: and Shiloh in this
Sense may signify the Worship of God; tho the Grammatical signification of the
Word is (who shall be sent) and then the Sense is this, The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, until he come who shall be sent; which even the Jews
themselves understand of the Messiah. In this Prediction it is plain, that Jacob
was guided by the Spirit of God: For by the Course of Nature, Reuben, Simeon,
and Levi were before Judah. This Prediction also was made by Jacob 600. years
before the Regal Power fell into the Tribe of Judah, where it continued till
the Captivity and afterward: For Zorobabel, under whose Government the Jews
were restored, was of the Lineage of David: But after it fell out, that the
Regal Family, and the Priesthood were united by Marriage, for want of Heirs
Male in some one of the ruling Princes, the Government lapsed into the Family
of the High Priest, in right of their Wives: for by a particular Privilege or
Custom, the Royal and the Levitical Tribes married frequently into one another
Families, as appears by Jewish Records: And hence it was that the Vide Baton.
Apparat. p 4.
Maccabees, or Assamonean Family, who held the Priesthood by Paternal descent,
held also the Civil Power by a Maternal Right; both which Powers were still
united in one Person, till the time of Herod, the Son of Antipater, who being
an Alien, or Native of Idumaea, by the Power of the Romans obtained the
Government; and the better to strengthen his Interest in the Jews, he became a
I roselyte, and married Mariamne, the Daughter of Hircanus (then a Prisoner in
Parthia, and the last Prince of the Race of the Maccabees;) whom he afterward
murdered, together with his Wife and the Children he had by her, out of
jealousy, least the Jews should restore some one or other of that Race to the
Kingdom of their Ancestors. He murdered also all the Illustrious Persons of the
Tribe of Judah, he burnt their Genealogies and Archives, and he killed their
seventy Senators, or Judges, which made the Sanhedrim, substituting strangers
in their place, and by these violent Proceedings put a period to the Jewish
Government, even as it was foretold six hundred Years before by Jacob: For in
his Reign it was that Jesus, the Messiah or Christ, was born: And not long
after the death of Herod, the Jewish Nation was governed by Proconsuls, and
soon after also, their City, Temple, and Nation was utterly demolished by
Titus. Now that Jesus was the promised Messiah, shall be proved at large in the
following Chapters: Nor can the Jews show another Messiah, or Savior, from the
time their Government had its period to this very day; much less such a one to
whom the Nations were gathered, as they were to Jesus.

Others there are, who by the Scepter Monsaut. in Apparat.
spoken of by Jacob, do not understand the Davidical Monarchy; for this they
say ended in Zedekiah's Captivity: And as for Zorobabel, tho he was of the Line
of David, yet his Power was not Regal and Hereditary, but rather Consulary and
Ascititions; as being of chiefest note amongst those who returned, and was a
Favorite also of Darius. After Zorobabel, we read of Esdras and Nehemias, that
they exercised the chiefest Authority in the Jewish Government, tho it does not
appear that they were any way related to Zorobabel by Blood or Affinity. As for
the Assamonean Family, who governed as Princes and High Priests, that they were
of the Lineage of David by the Mothers side, is asserted gratis, but not
proved. By the Scepter then, they understand only the Political State of the
Jews, which in some Form of Government or other, was to continue till the
coming of the Messiah, and might be said to be in Judah, forasmuch as the
greatest part of the Jews were of that Tribe and Territory. But which way
soever we interpret the Prophecy, we find it to have been accomplished about
the time of our Savior's Birth; or at such time as Herod invaded the
Government, and extinguished all Jewish Rites whatsoever, as has been before
observed.

The next famous Prediction is that of Daniel, chap. 9. The Words are these:
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City, to finish
the Transgression, and to make an end of Sins, and to make Reconciliation for
Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, and to Seal up the Vision
and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy: Know therefore and understand, that
from the going forth of the Commandment, to restore and build Jerusalem unto
the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven Weeks, and threescore and two Weeks, the
Streets shall be built again, and the Wall, even in troublous times: And after
threescore and two Weeks shall Messiah be cut off; but not for himself: and the
people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary;
and the end thereof shall be with a Flood. There are two Passages in this
famous Vision which require a little explication: The first is the Word Week,
or Hebdomas, which Grammatically signifies a Septenary Number, and is commonly
taken for a Week, or Septenary of days; but sometimes too for a Septenary, or
Week of Years, as is obvious amongst the Hebrews, and particularly Leviticus
25. we have an Account not only of a Septenary, or Sabbath of Weeks, [where on
the Seventh Week; that is, on the Seventh Year, called (Sabbaticus) they were
not to plough nor sow, etc.] but we have an Account of seven Sabbaths, or seven
Weeks of Years; which made in all Forty nine Years, and then begun their
Jubilee, viz. on the Fiftieth Year, wherein Liberty was proclaimed to the
Captive, and every man was to be restored to his Possession, and to return to
his Family: in which Year also they were neither to sow nor reap, etc, In like
manner Genesis 29. we read of Jacob, that he could not obtain Rachel for his Wife,
till such time as he had fulfilled her Week; that is, his seven Years Service
for her, as it is there expressed at large. In like manner this Passage of
Daniel must be understood by weeks of Years, as is agreed upon by all
Expositors; since infinite Absurdities and Falsities would follow, should we
interpret the Prophecy by weeks of Days: For Jerusalem was not built in seven
Weeks, nor in many Years after the return of the Jews: Nor was there any
Messiah who appeared and was put to death, after the space of a Year and some
Months; much less was the Temple profaned in so short a time; nor were there
any such Desolations and Abominations as are there spoken of.

The next Question is, from what time we are to begin our Account. We must
understand therefore that there were several Decrees made by the Persian Kings
in favor of the Jews; of which Two were more signal. The first was that of
Cyrus in the first Year of his Reign, recorded by Ezra, chap. 1. and this
Decree was for the rebuilding the Temple. The other Decree is that which
Nehemiah speaks of in the Twentieth Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, called in
Scripture [Ahasuerus] for the rebuilding the City and Walls of Jerusalem. This
Decree of Artaxerxes was in the Year of the World 3529. to which if we add
seven Weeks of Years, or Forty nine Years to be allowed for the rebuilding of
Jerusalem, and sixty two weeks of Years, we shall find the number of Four
hundred eighty three Years, and then the total Sum of Years will be 4012, which
falls out within four or five Years that Christ the Messiah was crucified; and
in Computations of this Nature it can hardly be imagined that any Chronologist
tho never so accurate, should be able to reduce Transactions to a certain
number of Years by a Mathematical Exactness. However, we find the
accomplishment of this Prediction touching the Messiah's death, to have happened
somewhat above the middle of Tiberius his Reign; at which time 'twas that
Christ was crucified. And as to the Abomination and perpetual Desolation of the
Temple and Jewish Religion, which was shortly after to follow by a Prince of
the People that was to come; all this was accomplished by Titus, Emperor of the
Romans, who in the time of this Prophecy were a People very inconsiderable, and
unknown to the Persians for some Ages after. And as for the Authority and
Credit of this Prophecy, there is no place for Atheism to scruple at: For it
was registered among the Canonical Books, in that Translation of the Septuagint
made by the Order of Ptolomeus Philadelphus, almost Three hundred Years before
its Accomplishment.

The last signal Token of the Dissolution of the Jewish Nation and Religion, is
collected from that Passage in the 33d of Exodus, where we read, that God had
appointed all the Males to appear at Jerusalem thrice in the Year, viz. on the
Feast of Unleavened Bread, at the Feast of Weeks, or First Fruits, and at the
Feast of Tabernacles, or gathering of the Harvest: Each of which Feasts lasted
seven days; during all which time of absence, God promised, that their Lands
and Houses should not be molested and spoiled by their Neighboring Nations:
which in truth was a continual Miracle: For during the space of so many Hundred
Years, we do not find they were ever injured by their Enemies, who doubtless
would never have slipped so many advantages, had they not in a miraculous manner
been withheld by God. But when the time prefixed to their Government was once
expired, then 'twas that God suffered the Romans under Titus to besiege
Jerusalem in the time of the Passover, that there might be a more Universal and
inevitable Destruction; which like a mighty Flood (as it was foretold) swept
them all away; for after that time they were abandoned by God to utter Ruin and
Misery.

CHAP. XVII. Of the State of the Jews since their Fall.
AND here it will not be unprofitable, how unpleasant soever it may be, to fix
our Thoughts a little upon this black and gloomy Scene, by considering the
Severity and Righteousness of God's Judgments upon this forlorn and miserable
Nation, who are now as discernible from all mankind besides, by a perpetual
Stream or Inundation rather of Calamities, as they were once by a continual
Series of Deliverances and Mercies. Scarce had Thirty five Years past from the
murder of the Righteous Jesus, when Titus, by the command of his Father,
invests Jerusalem on the very day of the Passover, which fell out to be the 22d
of April, by all Lunary Computation; tho Josephus makes it to have been on Lib.
6. Bell. Jud. c. 4.
the 16th of April. The City with all its Fortresses was not taken till the 7th
of September following: during which time of the Siege, there dyed by Famine
and other Diseases 715080. besides a vast number which fled daily, or were
turned out of the Gates to ease the besieged: all which were tortured and
crucified in sight of their Walls. The Number of Prisosoners amounted to 97000.
and those who dyed by the Sword, Famine, etc. were in the whole 1100000. A
thing which to us may seem incredible, how so much Provision could be found for
the maintenance of so many Souls; unless it were, that they had laid in greater
Stores than what was usual for the Occasions of the Feast, upon a Prospect of
the Design of Titus, and that they rather confided to their Walls than to the
open Campaign, upon an Erroneous Belief possibly, that God would never suffer
them to be demolished a second time: However it was, the Miseries they endured
must be without Parallel, considering the vast Multitudes which were crowded up
together, and the long continuance of a scorching Season; which (besides the
slaughter made on them by the Enemy,) did direly afflict them by Pestilence and
Famine.

In short; their City and Temple, and all Records of their Nation were reduced
to Ashes: Their Priests and Rulers utterly destroyed, and those few that
remained were loaded with Opprobry and Misery; scattered hither and thither,
and never suffered to return to their Native Country to this very day. And if
at any time in after Ages they grew into a Body, they were presently massacred
as an Execrable Race, and unfit to live upon the Earth. From that time to this,
they have had neither Temple, Sacrifice, nor Priests; and let the Jews lie as
they please, it is certain, that all Proofs of their Descents and Tribes are
lost; all Monuments and Records of their Genealogies perished in the Flames,
they themselves being still tossed about the World, exposed to perpetual Wants
and Fears, and not in the least addicted to Learning, and to preserve the
Memory of their Misfortunes by writing of Histories; or if they were, is it
possible, being so divided and scattered, as they are, and rolling from Place
to Place, that they should give any account of their Lineage or past
Transactions? so that we of this Age might with far greater ease pretend to
tell of what Family and Profession every Man's Ancestors were of Twelve or
thirteen hundred years ago; which if any living dares venture to do I am much
mistaken: much more impossible then must this be, for so many individual
Persons, and in such Circumstances as those the Jews lie under, to give a
History or Account of their Families and Pedigree; who though they be blown and
scattered into all Corners of the Earth, yet have they no footing in it, having
no City of their own, no Magistrates nor Judicature: Nor are they suffered to
purchase a yard of Land any where amongst the Christians. And as for what is
reported of their inhabiting some Mountains of Arabia, or elsewhere, under a
Civil Government of their own, it is without color of Truth, and utterly
inconsistent with the Turkish Maxims. And as they have no Propriety in the
Earth, so have they but a precarious Right even to the Waters; for whatsoever
Traffic they drive at Sea, they are not suffered to have a Ship of their own,
but are forced to venture all in Christian or Turkish Bottoms, and under the
covert of Merchants their professed Enemies, for fear of Reprisals and
Forfeitures. Their Necessities make them industrious and subtle, and have
taught them all the Arts of shifting and cheating, which renders them most
odious: And even those States who admit of them, do it out of Policy, placing
them many times over their Gabels and Customs, as the fittest Instruments of
Exaction, and who know all the sordid and detestable ways of Confiscations, and
of screwing the Strings to the height. Where they are permitted to live
publicly, though their Conversion be pretended, it is nothing less: For if a
Jew become a Christian, his Goods are forfeited, upon pretense of being got by
Usury and unjust Practices; verily a notable Argument to persuade them to
become Christians: It Is such a piece of Policy certainly as cannot consist with
the Maxims of true Christianity, no more than it can consist with Prudence and
Honesty, to suffer them to oppress the People amongst whom they live, by their
many Cheats, and by their intolerable Usuries and Brokeage, whilst they pay
perhaps some share of their Ill-gotten Wealth to the Government in a way of
Composition, for their Permission and Privileges; so that in effect, they are
used only as Spunges to suck the Radical Moisture of the People, which may be
squeezed out of them again at Pleasure; in which Case it is hard to judge
whether are the greater Jews, they or such Christians. And yet for all this,
they are held in the same distrust with Thieves and Murderers, being locked and
chained up every night within their nasty Quarters.

Such severe usage cannot but fill them with dismal Resentments; and hence it
is, that they are the greatest Masters in the Hellish Arts of Poisoning, and
the most refined Instruments of secret Murders and Treachery, and prone to all
manner of Villainy. Notwithstanding that their Religion does require them to
abstain from Blood, it would be both their Meat and Drink too, had they the
Power in their hands. Notwithstanding their Religion does for the most part
consist in Forms of Purifying, in cleanness of Apparel, in frequent Washings,
and abstaining from all Pollutions of Meat and Ordure, yet are they the most
noisome Creatures in the Universe, more unclean and nasty than the Swine they
loath, and distinguishable from all Mankind by their rank and abominable
Smells. Their Habitations, generally speaking, are like so many Styes of
Scavengers; and their very Synagogues (the only Places of that little Worship
and Religion they profess) do stink even to a Proverb. In a word, like the
Progeny of Cain, they are kept alive only to wander about the Earth, with Marks
of Guilt and Terror, and with which they have been branded ever since the
Murder of the Righteous Abel, the great Shepherd, whose Offering was more
acceptable to God; that History being a pregnant Type of the Jews and Christ;
and for this purpose, let us Consider some further Circumstances which attended
that doleful Tragedy.

The Jews, in the Crucifixion of the Blessed Jesus, made Cruelty to be a thing
of Pastime and Recreation. They made a mock King of him, and after they had
exposed him to all derision and scorn, they wallow'd in his Blood, and sported
at his bitter Anguish and Dolours. This indeed was the most mournful Spectacle
the Sun ever beheld; nay, behold it it could not, for 'twas then Eclipsed,
which Eclipse was Miraculous and Supernatural, for as much as the Moon, at the
time of our Savior's Passion, was not in Conjunction, but in Opposition to the
Sun, or at the Full. Now let us see God's Justice in the Counterpart. About Six
years after our Savior's Baron. ad An. Christ^ 4^.
Passion it was, that the Jews of Alexandria were treated ignominiously by the
Inhabitants of that City at the Command of Flaccus their Governor: Their King
Herod Agrippa was mocked and derided in the Person of one Carrabas, an obscure
Fellow, whom they dressed up in Royal Robes, after the Jewish Garb to adorn the
Pageantry, and then treated him with all manner of insult and scorn. At the
same time also it was, that some of the Jews were Whipped and others Crucified.
The Jews began their Passover with the Blood of the Messiah, who was the
Paschal Lamb indeed; and on that very day did they begin to require his Blood
at their Hands, and to usher in the Feast, by making them the Sacrifice. Again,
the Death which was inflicted on the Messiah was Crucifixion; the same did
Titus retaliate on the half famished Jews, who fled out of the City to the
Number of Five hundred, daily, till at length there were not sufficient Crosses
for Bodies, nor space for Crosses. In the last Place, the Jews pretended they
had no other King but Caesar, and that what they did was to prevent the Romans
from taking away their Government; just therefore was it, that those very
Romans whom they thought to flatter by such a detestable Parricide, should
revenge their Treachery by taking away their Government.

Now that the People whom God particularly delighted in, and which were engaged
to him by so many Mercies, and he to them by so many Promises, should fall
under such an universal and perpetual Dereliction, as never happned to any
other People of the Earth to any degree, could not but proceed from such a
detestable and most execrable Crime; so that God does now show as great a
Miracle, in not suffering the Jews to be ruined, and so to be delivered from
their Misery, as he did formerly in delivering them from their Enemies, and in
defending them, though a little and inconsiderable Nation, amongst so many
Potent Governments which surrounded them; all which Calamities are the dreadful
Effects of that almost inexpiable Murder; and of that dire Imprecation of
theirs, Let his Blood be upon us and our Children.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Types and Prophecies of the Messiah were fulfilled in
Jesus.
HAving hitherto proved the Period of the Jewish Religion, not only in its
causes and the certainty of its Predictions, but also in its effects and
consequences, it follows in the next place, that we enquire into the Christian
Religion: Now that this, and this only is the True Religion, and the ordinary
way by which the Will of God is now made known to Men, and by which we may
attain Salvation, is demonstrable from the Authority of its Author, who was
Jesus of Nazareth: The Divine Authority of Jesus, and his being the promised
Messiah or Savior of the World, shall be proved from these Three General
Arguments. The First is taken from the Types and Prophecies concerning the
Messiah, and their accomplishment in the Person of Jesus Christ. The Second
General Argument is taken from the History of his Life, Doctrine and Miracles;
to which may be added the Testimonies and Confessions even of the Adversaries
of our Religion. The Last Argument is taken from the wonderful Effects which
attended the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, being no less than the Conversion of the
World.

I begin with the Prophecies. As to the time of the Messiah's Birth, it was to
commence upon the dissolution of the Jewish Government, as has been already
shown in the precedent Chapter; which Period happened about the Time of Jesus
Christ's appearance, as has been proved already also. Next, for the place of
his Birth, it was to be in Bethlehem Judah, according to the unanimous Consent
of the Jewish Sanhedrim, upon the inquiry made by Herod, and which was
occasioned by the Magi, who came to Worship Jesus. This the Jewish Priests and
Scribes proved from that Prophecy of Micah, chap. 5. where we read, But thou
Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little amongst the thousands of Judah, yet
out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in Israel; whose
goings forth have been from of old, from Everlasting. This Prediction we find
actually accomplished in the Birth of Jesus (Luke the 2.) where we read, that
Jesus was born in Bethlehem, and in the days of Herod, etc. in which Prophecy
we have an Account not only of Christ's Human Nature in the History of his
Birth, but also of his Divine Nature, in his goings forth which have been from
of old, from Everlasting. Amongst the things that were foretold of the
Manifestation of Jesus, there is this; viz. That he was to have his Messenger
or Forerunner, who was to make Proclamation of his coming; which is described
by Isaiah, to be the Voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, Isai. c. 40.
prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the Desert, a Highway for
our God, etc. and the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all Flesh shall
see it. This Description we find to be verified of John the Baptist, by his own
Answer which he gave to the Jews; for when they asked him who he was; he told
them that he was the Voice of one crying in the John 1.
Wilderness, etc. and spoken of by Isaiah; and that there was one amongst them,
who coming after me is preferred before me: And the next day seeing Jesus
coming to him, he cried out, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins
of the world. This is he of whom I said, after me comes a man who is preferred
before me, and I knew him not. In which Passage we have many Noble Descriptions
of the Nature and Offices of the Messiah; as First, his Sacerdotal Function in
his being the true Paschal Lamb to purge the Sins of the World, and of which
the Jewish Passover was but a Type. In the next Place, we have an account of
his Divine Nature; for John looked upon himself to be but as his Shadow, Christ
as the Substance: John was the Voice only of the Forerunner, which sort of
People we know are of a servile and much inferior Nature to those by whom they
are employed; and yet John was by Christ himself accounted the greatest of all
the Prophets; which thing appears from his Miraculous Birth, as also from his
Austere and Exemplary Life; for which Reason he was called Elias by Christ, and
was foretold by Malachi. Malac. c. 3.
Thirdly, from his Excellent Doctrine, Preaching Repentance and Amendment of
Life to all sorts of People, and Preparing them by Baptism: And Lastly, from
his Integrity, Courage and Constancy, in reproving Herod for his Incest, for
which he deserved a Crown of Martyrdom. To all which we may add the Testimony
of the Jews themselves, who all of them held John in the highest Veneration of
Sanctity; in so much that Josephus attributed the Misfortunes Joseph. lib. 18.
c. 7.
and Overthrow of Herod's Army to the Murder of this Saint. Now if this great
Saint was but as a Voice, or a poor transitory thing, which vanishes in a
Moment, in respect of Christ, Christ certainly must be more than a Man. And if
we consider the Circumstances of this interview betwixt Christ and John, we
have further Matter of wonder: For though they were near of Kin, and
Contemporaries, yet had they no knowledge of one another before, which shows
that they lived in great Solitude and Retreat before they entered upon their
Functions: Neither did they take the least notice of their Consanguinity, but
entertained one another with Discourses of a sublimer Nature.

From the Time, Place, and other Circumstances of the Birth of Christ, let us
proceed to consider his Person and Offices; and this we have amply described by
Isaiah: For unto us a Child Isaiah c. 9.
is born, unto us a Son is given; Here is his human Nature, and the Government
shall be upon his Shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: here
is his Divine Nature; Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall
be no End. Upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with Judgment and with Justice from hence forth even for ever.
Here we have his Extraction, and the Perpetuity of his Kingdom, which could not
be Temporal, since the Jews cannot show any such Prince, whose Government had
no End: It remains therefore, that his Kingdom was Spiritual, and such a one it
was that Christ was invested with, as is evident to all the World: This we have
more amply described by the same Prophet, by the Rod out of the Stem of Jesse,
and that the Spirit of the Lord Isai. c. 11.
shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel and of Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and of the fear of the Lord.

Christ's Prophetic Office, as also that of his Mediator-ship was foretold by
Moses. A Prophet shall the Lord thy God Deuteronomy. 18.
raise up unto thee, from the midst of thee, like unto me, unto him shall ye
hearken, according to all that thou did desire of the Lord thy God in Horeb,
etc. viz. When the People seeing and hearing the Thunder and Lightnings,
entreated Moses to speak unto them, and not God, least they should be consumed
by the dreadful Majesty of his appearance. That the Jews were in a constant
expectation of this Prophet spoken of by Moses, appears from the Pharisees
Interrogation of John, whether he were that Prophet? Now that Christ was the
Mediator of a Second Covenant, distinct from that which was made upon Mount
Horeb and Sinah, is taught every where through the Gospel. His Dominion and
Regal Pomp in his Triumphant entering into Jerusalem on an Ass, is punctually
described by Zachary, Rejoice Zach cap. 9.
greatly O Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem: Behold thy King
comes unto thee; He is just and having Salvation, lowly and riding upon an
Ass, and upon a Colt, the Foal of an Ass; and a little after; He shall speak
Peace unto the Heathen, and his Dominion shall be from Sea even to Sea, and
from the River even to the ends of the Earth.

From the Nature of Christ's Government and Offices, we are come in the last
place to consider of his great Sacerdotal Function in his Passion, and the
Circumstances and Merits of his Death: all this we have most accurately and
pathetically described by Isaiah; who seems rather to write a History than a
Prophecy of his Passion. He describes him as a tender Plant growing up out of
the Ground: and indeed we find him every where called the little Shoot, Bud, or
Branch out of the Root of Jesse: Forasmuch as his first appearance was to be
very diminutive and inconsiderable; or according to the Prophets farther
Character of him: He Isa. c. 53.
has no Form nor Comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no Beauty
that we should desire him: He is despised and rejected of men, a man of
sorrows; surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows: Yet we did
esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities: The chastisement of our
Peace was upon him; and with his Stripes are we healed; the Lord has laid upon
him the Iniquity of us all. And a little after we find him brought as a Lamb to
the Slaughter and that opened not his mouth. He was taken from Prison, and from
Judgment, and who shall declare his Generation, etc. For the Transgression of
my people was he smitten; and he made his Grave with the wicked. Then follows
the Satisfaction and Merits of his Passion: When thou shall make his Soul an
Offering for Sin, he shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his Days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his Hand: He shall see of the Travel of
his Soul and shall be satisfied. By his Knowledge shall my Righteous Servant
justify many; for he shall bear their Iniquities. And lastly; the Prophet
concludes this most remarkable Prophecy, with Christ's Glorious Resurrection
and Exaltation. Therefore will I divide him a Portion with the Great; and he
shall divide the Spoil with the Strong; because he has poured out his Soul
unto death; and he was numbered with the Transgressors; and he bore the sin of
many, and made Intercession for the Transgressors. And in the following Chapter
the Prophet invites the Church to celebrate their Deliverance in an Epinicion,
Sing O Barren, etc. Also he describes the amplitude of the Church most
elegantly, saying, Enlarge the place of thy Tent, and let them stretch forth
the Curtains of thine Habitations; spare not, lengthen thy Cords, and
strengthen thy Stakes; for thou shall break forth on the right hand and on the
left; and thy Seed shall inherit the Gentiles, etc. and then tells the reason:
For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name; and thy Redeemer
the holy One of Israel, the God of the whole Earth shall he be called.

To enumerate all the Passages of the Prophets upon this sublime Subject, would
be upon the matter to transcribe their Books. Let us hasten forwards then, and
glance a little upon the Types of Christ, as they are shadowed out to us in the
Acts and Monuments of the Jewish History. Joshua, or Jesus [for they are the
same, and signify a Deliverer or Saviour] was he who subdued the Enemies of
the Children of Israel, and brought them into the Land of Promise and of rest:
A Type of Jesus, who was the Savior both of Jews and Gentiles; who overcame
their Spiritual Enemies, and brought them also into the Land of Rest, even the
Kingdom of Heaven. Those disobedient Jews Numb. 21.
in the Wilderness, who were bit by Serpents, by looking on the brazen Serpent
that was upon the Post, were healed. This History represented the lifting up of
Jesus upon the Cross; where such as behold him by Faith are cured of those
Wounds, by which the old Serpent the Devil seeks to destroy us in our way to
Canaan. The Red Cow without Spot or Blemish, which was to be burnt without the
Camp, whose Blood was to be sprinkled before the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and whose Ashes were to be kept for a Purgation for Sin, was also
a Type of Christ, whose Blood purifyeth for sin, and who also suffered without
the Gate. Numb. 19. Heb. 13.
The Escape Goat which was carried away into the Wilderness with the Sins of the
People upon his Head, was a Figure also of Christ: But above all, the Paschal
Lamb, at the sight of whose Blood the destroying Angel was made to spare the
Israelites, was a complete Type of Christ our Passover, who in the time and
place of the Paschal Lamb was offered for us.

Now since all these Types and Symbols could not have any Power or Virtue in
their own Natures to purge away the guilt of Sins; it is apparent, that they
were only Signs of Spiritual Gifts, and such as were accomplished in Christ, as
the Scripture fully witnesses. Neither let it seem absurd that God should
figure such sublime Mysteries by contemptible and low things: For had he made
use of nobler Types, there might have been some danger, that the Figure or Type
might have been mistaken for the thing figured: as if in the place of a Lamb or
Goat had some Illustrious Person, and of great Sanctity been offered, in
progress of time such a Type or Person would have been looked upon as the very
Mediator himself; whereas God thought it better to represent these Mysteries by
such ordinary and common Creatures, as all Men could not but look upon as
Figures, holding no other Similitude with the thing signified, than as they
were without Spot and Blemish, and capable of dying.

CHAP. XIX. The Objections of the Jews Answered.
It Is now high Time, to see what Ground the Jews have for their Belief, that the
Messiah must be a Temporal Prince of the Tribe of Judah, and such a one as
should gather together all the Scattered Members of that Nation, and unite them
into a Body, and resettle them in Jerusalem, and subdue the World under him, as
did Alexander and Caesar. That which seems most to Countenance this Belief, is
grounded upon that Passage of Isaiah before mentioned, Isaiah cap. 11.
where by the consent both of Jews and Christians, the Rod or Root of Jesse
there Described, is no other then the Messiah who shall stand for an Ensign to
the People, and whom the Gentiles shall deprecate. And it shall come to pass in
that Day, that the Lord shall set his Hand again the second Time, to recover
the Remnant of his People which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt,
and from Pathros, and from Cush, (or Ethiopia,) and from Elam, and from Shinar,
and from Hamath, and from the Islands of the Sea. And he shall set up an Ensign
against the Nations, (as the Vulgar reads it) and gather together the dispersed
of Judah from the four Corners of the Earth, etc. And afterward he tells us,
That Ephraim and Judah shall be reconciled and destroy their Enemies, the
Philistines, and those of the East, the Moabites, Edomites and Ammonites,
together with the Egyptians; and that Nilus shall be smitten in its seven
Streams, etc.

To this I Answer: First, That the Blessings here Mentioned, have no Relation
to such a Temporal Deliverance as the Jews dreamed off, but to that Spiritual
Deliverance they shall meet with in their General Conversion to Christ before
the end of the World. This is plain by the whole Account we have of this Matter
from the Context; for Verses 4th. and 5th. of this Chap. it is said, That he
shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his Mouth, and with the Breath of his
Lips shall he slay the Wicked. That Righteousness shall be the Girdle of his
Loins, and Faithfulness shall be the Girdle or Belt of his Reins. So here we
see. That his Weapons are all Doctrinal and Spiritual; Nor is he descrlb'd by
his Chariots and Horsemen, by his Bows and Spears, but by his Wisdom in
understanding the Will of God; by his Integrity in Judgment, and by his
Condescension to the Meek and Poor. And that he should not be ushered in with
the loud Allarms of War, but with the sweet Fruits of an Universal Peace; so
that all the Beasts of the Field, both the Tame and those of Prey, should live
and feed together: Moreover, he foretells, verse. the 10th. That his Rest or
Sepulcher shall be Glorious; which passage cannot be applied to any, but to
Jesus of Nazareth, in the circumstance of his most Glorious and Miraculous
Resurrection. As for that Passage, that he should Erect his Ensign or Standard
against the Gentiles, 'twas most certainly verified of Jesus, who set up his
Sign, even that victorious one of the Cross, by which he overcame the Roman
Empire, and which will be still Triumphant even to the end of the World.

In the next place, As this Dominion of the promised Messiah was Spiritual, so
the Blessings of it were to extend to the Gentiles, which could not be, were he
to have been such a secular Conqueror as the Jews dreamed off; for the Gentiles
then would have been his Slaves and Captives; whereas by the account of the
Prophets, they were to bear a part in the Jubilee and in the Benefits of his
Government; whence it was that the same Prophet Isaiah burst out into a
Rapture, Crying, Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord
Isaiah cap. 60.
is risen upon thee. (verse. 3.) The Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and Kings
to the Brightness of thy Rising. Moreover, the same Prophet amongst other
Descriptions which he gives of the Messiah, says, that he shall be a Light for
the Gentiles; which Character Isaiah cap. 42.
occurs in many other Passages of the Prophets. Now it is known to all, that the
Use and Benefit of a Light, is not to consume, but to direct Men in the way,
and to secure them from Erring, and falling into Danger. To all which we may
add, the Prediction of Jacob in his Benediction of Judah, where he says of
Shiloh, that he should be the expectation of the Gentiles. Zachary when he
invites the Daughters of Zion and Jerusalem to shout Zach. cap. 9.
for Joy, describes the Triumphant Entrance of their King, or the Messiah by
his humble riding upon an Ass, and by his speaking Peace to the Gentiles, and
the largeness of his Dominions even from Sea to Sea, and to the utmost ends of
the Earth: None of which Descriptions can ever agree to any Temporal Prince of
the Jews, much less to such a Messiah as they dream off, who was to Triumph by
Deeds of War over the Heathen; whereas the Messiah there described, was to win
them to his Government by the sweet Charms of Peace.

In the last place, the Imagination of the Jews, that the Messiah should be a
Temporal Prince, is utterly inconsistent with the grand Scope of the
Scriptures, which teach us every where to forsake the World with all the Pomps
and Vanities thereof, and not to build our Happiness on Temporal Enjoyments.
Besides, the Promise of the Messiah was a thing of Joy: Be joyful O Daughter
of Zion, shout O Jerusalem, clap your Hands, and shout as in a Jubilee, are the
usual Forms which usher in the News of the Messiah. Now were he to have been a
Prince of Grandeur, what matter of Joy could it have been to a poor Jew to
think, that many Ages after he was dead and forgotten, there should some mighty
Grand Signior arise in his Country, who should do Wonders? Just as much comfort
as it would be to me, were I in Wants and Misery, and complaining of my
Condition to some Reverend and Learned Doctor, instead of relieving my
Necessities, he should tell me, Friend, be of good Comfort, and leap for Joy;
for about 2000 Years hence and better, their shall arise a high and mighty King
in England, who shall Conquer all the Nations round about him, and his Subjects
shall live in great Peace and Plenty: Such a thought certainly would be so far
from easing my present Unhappiness, that it would rather increase it; when I
should think seriously of such remote Contents, and such as I should never
taste of; and yet this is the Case of the Unbelieving, or rather of the
All-believing Jews, who after the disappointments and calamities of so many
Ages, are as earnest as ever in the Expectation of their Messiah. But the
Benefits of the Messiah being Spiritual, (as is taught by the Christians,) they
are Communicable to Men through all Ages of the World, and can reach the
remotest Nations; which indeed, was no other then what was foretold by the
Prophets, nor is this belief attended with any difficulties whatsoever.

I confess that many of these Prophetic Passages seem to have allusion to good
King Josias, (who entered upon his Kingdom when he was a Child,) as also to the
Temporal Deliverance of the Jews from under the Babylonish Captivity. But still
it is true, and allowed even by the Jews themselves, that they had a much
farther prospect, even to a greater Deliverance: For neither could Josias, nor
Zorobabel, nor any of the Jewish Worthies be called Deliverers. God knows, they
were poor Supplicants, and depended wholly upon the Indulgence of the Persians.
But the Crcumstance of the Gentiles being to be made partakers of these
Blessings, extends the Benefits of these Prophesies infinitely beyond the
Fortune of the Jewish Nation, who were ever after but a poor scattered and
precarious People.

As to the Authority of these and many such like Prophesies, even Atheism it
self cannot question it; unless we say, That the Jews after the appearance of
Jesus Christ, did stuff the Old Testament with such Prophetic Passages as made
against themselves and their Religion. Besides, all these Passages being found
in the Translation of the Septuagint, and considering also with what exactness
the Jews kept these sacred Copies, even to numbering the very Letters, how
negligent soever they were in observing the Commandments of the Law; it is
utterly impossible such Passages should be foisted in without their knowledge,
as it is impossible that such certain and punctual Predictions should proceed
from any other Mouth, but that of Almighty God; and this I take to be an
Argument, ad hominem, and such as might convince even Porphyry himself, were he
now alive. And so I have done with the Old Testament.

CHAP. XX. The Advent of Jesus proved from Heathen Predictions.
BUt besides the Prophesies recorded in Sacred Writings; we have other
Predictions also out of prosane Monuments, which though of an inferior
Authority, are very apposite to prove the Verity of Christ's Messiah-ship. All
the Histories of the Age wherein Christ was Born, do testify that both Herod,
as also the Jews, were in present Expectation of the Messiah. Hence it was,
that Herod who yielded up himself to the flatteries of his Followers, was
easily persuaded to think that he himself was the promised Messiah; and those
who adhered to this Belief, were in Scripture called Herodians, as is
conjectured: For the Jews finding Herod to be a King of great Power, and who
rebuilt the Temple also after a most magnificent Form; they presently concluded
that this was he who was to restore their State and Empire. And Herod too was
not wanting to himself to improve such favorable overtures; upon which account
it was, that he committed so many Murders even on his own Children also, hoping
in the general Massacre to extinguish the true Messiah wherever he was, as
Josephus tell us; we read Jos. de lib. Jud. l. 7. c. 7.
also in Suetonius, in the Life of Vespasian, as also in Tacitus, how it was
the Belief of many in that Age, that in the Sacred Monuments of the Priest was
registered, that out of Judea should come forth those who were to govern the
World, which was Tacit l. 5. Hister.
erroneously interpreted of Titus and Vespasian.

But above all, Those famous Monuments of the Sybills are a complete evidence
of this Truth. Tully whilst he endeavors Tul. lib. 2. de Divin.
to evacuate the Credit of these Prophesies, reports this Passage out of them:
That he who was indeed to be our King, was to be called also a King in Case we
would obtain Salvation. This Prophecy was contained in the initial Letters of
some Verses; which for this reason also, were called Acrosticks, telling us
withal, that the Prophesies of the Sybills were locked up, and were not to be
inspected, but by order of the Senate; forasmuch as they seem rather to
contribute to the Subversion then to the Conservation of Religion, there being
nothing more odious to the Romans than the thing called [King] which was
legible throughout these Sacred Books. And truly so plain did they speak of
Christ's Government and Kingdom, that even amongst the Sacred Prophets, we
shall not meet with a Description more apposite then what was transcribed by
Vergil out of these Sybelline Oracles; who by his Intimacy with Augustus
obtained a sight of them, applying in his Genethliacon of Saloninus, the Son of
Asinius Pollio, who was a Favorite of the Emperor's, those Passages which in
Truth could belong to none but Jesus; as appears evidently from this
Description.

The happy Days are come, foretold long since, Eciog. 4.

By Cuman, Sybills, Sacred Song from hence;
All fature Ages shall there date commence.
The Virgin too returns the upright reign,
Of Ancient Saturn now returns again.
An Offspring now to us from Heavens sent forth,
Help, chaste Lucina, this celestial Birth;
Which puts a Period to the Iron Race,
And over the World a Golden one does place.
Whose heavenly conduct shall mankind deliver,
From all their Guilt, freed from all fears for ever.
Whose God-like Life, shall yet more glorious prove,
By listing Hero's amongst the blessed above.
These shall behold him too, who never shall cease,
By's Fathers Art, to rule the World in Peace.
Such a lofty Description as this, could by no means square with the
Circumstances of Soloninus, who died nine days after he was Born. Nay, had
Augustus himself had a Son, I question whether these Characters could have been
applied to him, even under a Poetic License of Flattery. In short, they were
transcribed out of the Sybelline Oracles, to which the Ancient Writers of the
Church so often appealed, as to the most uncorrupted Monument of Antiquity:
Forasmuch as these Books were kept by the Romans with the greatest care
imaginable, under the Custody of the College of Sacred Rites, called.
Quindecem viri, and and so impossible to be altered by the Christians. Nor
could these Passages be interpreted of any but of Jesus, who being he that was
to give Peace to the World, was born also under the Reign of Augustus, who
shutting up the Temple of Janus, proclaimed this Memorial and glorious
Passage; that at the time of our Savior's Birth, there was a Universal
Cessation of Arms over all the Earth, as was predicted, and was necessary to
introduce this Prince of our Eternal Peace.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Doctrines of Jesus.
THe second General Argument by which we have proposed to prove the Truth of
Christ's Messiah-ship, is taken from his Doctrine; as also from the History of
his Life and Miracles, as they are represented to us in the Writings of the New
Testament. Now in these Writings there are two things to be considered; first,
their Authors, secondly, their Authority. To prove their Authors, we have no
other way but by humane Authorities; but yet such too as are strengthened by
all the evidence of Reason: For if it were rashness unpardonable to question
the Truth of Caesar's conquering Britain, or of his Defeating Pompey, and of his
being Murdered in the Senate; for as much as the Books which report these
things, are esteemed to be the Genuine works of those who lived in the same
Age, whose names also are prefixed to them, it is certainly much greater madness
to doubt, that the Books of the New Testament were writ by the Apostles, since
we find a more universal and uninterrupted belief hereof in the concurring
Voices of an Infinite number of learned Men from Age to Age, even to the very
times these Sacred Authors flourished; and this is that which we call the
Authority of the Church, or universal Tradition.

The other Point respects the Authority of these Writings. That they have
transmitted to Posterity a true History of Jesus, and were Divinely inspired,
appears from the near Relation they had to Christ in being instructed by him;
so that they could neither deceive or be deceived: For the same Arguments which
prove the Messiah-ship and Divine Gift of Jesus, prove the Testimonies of those
to whom he revealed his Doctrine, to be convincing and infallible. Now here
comes in a Point about which Papists and Protestants raise a mighty Dispute,
viz. How the Authority of the Apostles Writings, called the Word of God, can
depend upon Tradition, which is an Inferior kind of Authority. To understand
this point, we are carefully to distinguish betwixt the Authority of a Witness,
and the Authority of a Judge. The former is only Ministerial, Declaratory, and
conversant about matter of Fact; the other is Magisterial and Legislative, and
may concern matters of Faith; that is, such Divine Truths, as are many times
above our Natural Reason to understand. Now that Divine Truths, as to their
manifestation, should depend upon the Authority or Testimony of the Church, is
not at all absurd; but very consonant to Reason, which in Scripture Phrase, is
called an Evidence or Reason of our Belief or Hope: But then Evidence once
made, we are required to yield an implicit kind of assent to the Doctrines of
Scripture, upon the account of the Divine Authority and veracity of their
Author, as being an infallible Legislator, and upon that score to be believed
in whatsoever he says, though never so difficult to our Wills and
Understandings; and this is called Faith. Let us illustrate this Point a
little; For instance, The King sends his Letters Mandatory by his Messenger, or
some other person of Credit and Reputation; Upon the persuasion we have of the
Credit and Reputation of the Messenger, we receive such Letters as Royal
Mandates, with a suitable Veneration, and then without more ado, we yield, or
ought to yield Obedience to them in the same manner, as if his Royal Majesty
were present in Person to enjoin the Contents. Here it is plain, we make a
difference betwixt the Authority of the Testimony or Messenger, and the
Authority of the Prince; and yet we should not easily submit to these Letters,
were they not attested by such credible means; for should we find such Letters
in the Streets, or Highways, though never so Patent, and Signed and Sealed
with all Formalities Imaginable, we should not take much Notice of them, much
less be obliged to pay our Obedience to them; so that here we see, how the
Motives of Assent are one thing, and the Subject of Assent is another, and of a
higher Nature, though depending on the former.

Having cleared the way to the reason of our Belief, let us now Consider the
Scope and Contents of the New Testament, and we shall find them to be either
Doctrinal, or Historical. The Doctrinals are such as are Conversant about
matters of Belief, or matters of Practice. We shall begin with matters of
Belief, the grand Scope whereof seems to level at this one Fundamental Point;
that Jesus is the Christ, or the promised Messiah: This, as it has been
already proved from the Prophesies of the Old Testament, let us now proceed to
prove also by the actual Offices of a Messiah or Redeemer. A Redeemer is one
who pays a Debt for another, and sets him at Liberty, and properly it has
respect to Slaves or Men Imprisoned, who are unable of themselves to satisfy
their Creditors, or those to whom they are in Bondage. Now Christ as the
Redeemer of Mankind, being a Public Representative, was under a twofold
Obligation; first, of fulfilling the Law or Commands of God himself, and this
is called active Obedience; secondly, of satisfying or suffering for the breach
of it, and this is called Passive Obedience.

Christ's Active Obedience, or his fulfilling the Law, appears several ways, as
touching the Moral Law Christ fulfilled it in his strict Observance of it; but
especially in his more perfect Interpretation of it, by showing its true, full
and genuine Sense, which indeed is the Soul of every Law. The Jews looked only
to the outward performance or shell of the Law, whereas Christ had regard to
the inward bent of the Soul, and to the Affections. The Law said, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God; Christ says, Thou shall love him with all thy heart,
and with all thy strength; The Law says, Thou shall not take the Name of the
Lord thy God in Vain; Christ goes further, saying, Swear not at all; The Law
says, Thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit Adultery; Christ says,
Whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
Judgment, and that whosoever looks on a Woman with a lustful thought,
commits Adultery in his Heart. Christ firbids not only all false
Testimonies, but even all idle Works. Then for the Judicial Law, it was Lex
Talionis; an Eye for an Eye, etc. Christ says, Whosoever shall smite thee on
the right Cheek, turn to him the left also. The Law said, Love thy Neighbor
and hate thine Enemy; Christ says, Love your Enemies, and bless them that curse
you. Also for Alms, Prayer and Fasting, he improves these Duties to an higher
degree of Perfection, than that under the Jewish Ordinances. As for the
Ceremonial Law, it is known that Christ was in all things conformable thereunto;
he was circumcised, and was presented in the Temple, and he observed their
Feasts. etc. But besides all this, he fulfilled these Laws in another Sense, in
as much as they were accomplished in him; for all the Rites and Sacrifices
under the Jewish Law with all their Types, (as has been already showed,) were
Figures only of Christ. Now the Figure or Shadow vanishes when the substance
comes in place; all the Prophets ceased upon the appearance of Christ, as in
the presence of a Prince the Office of an Ambassador ceases: For from the time
of John the Baptist, who was the last Prophet, and by his preaching Repentance,
ushered in the Blessed Jesus, the Jews never had a Prophet more; a clear proof
that he was the Messiah of whom they all writ.

The other Obligation under which Christ lay to the Law, was that of his
Passive Obedience, in suffering the Punishment due to the Transgression of it.
He poured out his Soul unto Death, and bare the sins of many. And so under
these two Capacities Isaiah 53.
he made a full Satisfaction, or a Complete Redemption. Now that one Man, as a
Representative, should bear the sins of many, seems no way strange; for under
the Jewish Law, we read of the Escape Goat, on whose head the Priest transferred
the sins of the People with a kind of an Anathema, which Goat was presently
after driven out of the Camp into the Wilderness, as a Creature utterly
polluted and abandoned. How much more capable then was Jesus of bearing the
sins of many, who indeed was the thing it self Symboliz'd by that Creature;
thus much concerns Christ's humane Nature in which he suffered: But when we
call to mind, that the Punishment due to the transgression of the Law, not
only of the Mosaical, but also of the Commandment given to Adam was Eternal
Death, as the Obedience of the Law was Eternal Life; 'twas necessary that this
Redeemer or public Representative of Mankind, should make an infinite
satisfaction, which since it could not be ex part Poenis, for then must he
have suffered and been damned to all Eternity; it remains that both his Active
and Passive satisfaction was infinite ex part Personoe, and consequently, that
this Redeemer must be God also, so that the Person suffering, was Eternal and
Infinite, though the capacity in which he suffered, was Infinite and Mortal.
This Redeemer therefore was to do whatsoever Men were obliged to do, whether
by the Law of Nature, or that of Moses; as he was to suffer also the
Punishments due to all Transgressions whatsoever.

By him therefore was the Law fully explained, as also the Ceremonial and
Levitical Laws abolished, by exhibiting the substance or thing it self, to
which they had Relation. In him all the Types and Sacrifices had their true
Signification; in him were all Predictions terminated; and when all this was
done, the blessed Jesus made an Offering of himself to God, commending his
Spirit into the hands of his Father, and together with it, the plenary
Redemption of the World, in that full and compartial Ejaculation of his Soul,
crying or proclaiming with his last Breath, it is Finished.

We have taken a short view of the Doctrine of Christ as our Redeemer, and
which we are required to believe. Let us in the next place take a transient
Glance of Christ's Doctrine as our Legislatour, and this concerns matter of
Practice. This Doctrine is amply propounded to us in the 5th. 6th. and 7th.
Chap. of St. Matthew's Gospel, where we have his most correct and true
Explanation of the Decalogue, being such as was according to the true scope of
the Law, and the Intention of the Lawgiver, of which we have spoken already;
we have also his most lively Description, and earnest Recommendations of these
excellent duties of Alms, Fasting and Prayer. We are taught Humility, Meekness
of Spirit, Purity of Affection, Patience under Persecutions. Cheerfulness under
Slanders and Reproach, and Comfort under Afflictions. We are taught to live
Peaceably, and to live Exemptorily; to shun Ostentation, and to unite our
selves to God by inward Acts of Piety, by holy Duties of Charity and Penance,
and by relying upon God's Providence in renouncing the Riches of the World, and
avoiding Hypocrisy, and by a prudent Circumspection, with many other Heavenly
Duties and Instructions; and last of all, by a due Preparation of our selves
for a general Judgment and life Eternal. This is the subject matter of his
Divine Sermon upon the Mount, and indeed the sum and substance of all
Evangelical Duties; we are taught in other places how to address our selves to
God by Prayer, particularly in that most Excellent and Comprehensive form which
is alone sufficient to prove the Divinity of its Author; we have also many
Evangelical Counsels, touching voluntary Chastity, and our abdication of
Riches. He instituted holy Sacraments, as instruments of conveying Grace, and
as Symbols of his Death and Passion; as also of his Eternal Union with his
Church, and as a Bond of Union and Communion amongst Christians. He took Law
for the future Enlargement and Government of his Church, by appointing his
Apostles the Overseers of it, endowing St. Peter with many singular
Prerogatives; and last of all, he promised them the assistance of his holy
Spirit to-direct and comfort them, all which was verified in a wonderful manner.

As touching the Nature and Obligation of Evangelical Works, it is a point
which will require a little to be insisted on; for some there are who allow of
Evangelical Works, but not as Commands, but as Counsels only; and as such
indeed which may adorn our Profession, but yet that they are to be taken up or
left at the discretion of the Professor. And to insinuate this, they tell us;
That Christ came not with a Legislative Power to introduce new Laws, but to
confirm the Moral: And therefore that all those Passages in the 5th. 6th. and
7th. of St. Matthew, with whatsoever else accrues in the Evangelists of this
Nature, have not the Authority of Precepts, but are seasonous' only, and were
proposed by Christ as Invitations to embrace his Faith; and no doubt very
privilegious, being much to this purpose. Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and I will give you rest; that is, I require you to cut off
your right Hands, to pluck out your right Eyes, to bless them that curse you,
etc. and to sweeten all with a gracious promise; I tell you, that whosoever
would save his Life, shall lose it. This we see is the Gospel Style, and had
our Savior used this Rhetoric by way of Invitation, there needed no other
Argument to prove the World's Conversion to have been miraculous. No rational
Man can be so blind as to believe, that Christ used this Language to allure us
to him; that by which he sought, and which proved most effectual, to win Men
over to Christianity, was the proposed Happiness and Eternity of another Life;
and for the procurement hereof, he proved the Exercise of Self-denial, and true
Severities in these and such like Passages, as the best Expedient.

And that these Precepts were not bare Explanations of the Mosaical Law, or
Institutions, but had in themselves the force of binding Laws, is very
demonstrable from Christ's own Works. Mat. 22. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. This is the first
and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it: Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self; which words, though they have Relation to the two Tables
of the Decalogue, yet do they exact much more than what is required in them.
The ten Commandments being almost all Negatives, confessed in these two general
Prohibitions of Worshipping false Gods, and of injuring our Neighbor; whereas
Christ's commands go farther. They are positive and require our utmost
endeavors to advance the welfare of our Neighbor, though he be our Enemy,
whom the Jewish Law allowed to hate. Farther, the Moral Law had respect only
to the Act, Christ's Law extends to our very Thoughts. Nay, we may observe the
like difference in the Judicial Law; there an Eye for an Eye, etc. Evil was to
be compensated with Evil, but here is no Lex Talionis, no returning of like for
like, but on the contrary; a quiet submission to him who offers Violence, and
instead of revenging an old Injury, to be prepared to receive a new one. Add to
this, that Christ requires many penetential Duties, such as Fasting, Prayer,
giving of Alms and the like, all which being much more than what was required
under the Mosaical Ordinances, and running in the Style and Tenor of absolute
Commands, must have the Authority of Laws, and obligations consequently to the
observance of them, which would farther appear should we consider the Efficacy
of such Duties in the work of our Salvation. But it is not my business here to
engage into dispute: I will post on therefore in the course of this Argument,
to consider what is without dispute, viz. the Divine Authority of Christ's
Messiah-ship, as it is represented in his Life and Miracles.

CHAP XXII. Of the Life of Jesus.
HAving given a short Systeme of the Doctrinal part of the Evangelists, we are
in the next place to consider of the Historical, as it relates to the Life and
Miracles of the holy Jesus; or to speak more properly, both these are but one:
For the Life of Jesus is nothing but one great and continued Miracle. He
entered upon the Throne in a manner very different from those Heroes of Old. He
was born in a Stable, and laid in a Manger, and exposed to the cold of the
Season, and to many other Inconveniences which attended that great confluence
of People occasioned by Augustus his Decree. Presently after he was born, under
pretense of being Worshipped, he was hunted after by the most execrable Herod to
be murdered. He was hurried from place to place in the Arms of his tender
Mother, the ever blessed Virgin, who was exposed to perpetual Labors, Fears,
Sorrows, and many wants and difficulties as to all wordly helps. He was forced
to sly into Egypt, the House of Bondage, that he might find relief and safety.
He was the reputed Son of an honest laborious Carpenter; he lived afterward at
Nazareth, a poor inconsiderate Village, then remarkable only for its Obscurity,
and by the Jews held ignoble to a Proverb: Hence it was, that by way of
contempt he was called a Nazarene, and the primitive Christians out of the like
contempt were called Nazarenes, witness that calumnious Invective of Tertullus
against St. Paul. He was also called a Galiloean in a way of Ignominy, by
Julian and Porphyry; his Condition of Life was in some respect worse than that
of the Beasts and Fowls of the Air; for he had no certain place of Habitation,
where to retreat at such time as he began to enter upon his Commission. As to
all worldly appearance, he was poor and destitute, persecuted and defamed;
walking always in the midst of Snares and Treacheries, conversing with
Publicans and Sinners, and attended only with a few despicable Fishermen. This
was the State and Grandeur, this was the Pomp and Equipage of our great and
immortal Hero, and yet still there was a Heavenly Luster breaking forth in the
midst of all these Clouds, through every Passage of his Life, and when most
eclipsed, he was glorified with some Rays of a Divine Majesty.

As to the Virtues of his Soul they were ineffable; he was always doing Good,
suffering Evil; always Teaching^ and by his own Example, proving the verity of
what he Taught; always relieving Men*s necessities, whether Temporal or
Spiritual, and healing their Infirmities: He was cheerful and yet innocent in
his Conversation, and in his Reproofs indulgent, and yet severe. He was pitiful
toward the afflicted, and rigorous with none but with the treacherous
Hypocrites, and the boasting and supercilious Pharisees. He was more pure and
chaste than Angels, most gentle and sweet in his Disposition, lovely and meek
in his Deportment, negligent of Himself, but most vigilant, zealous and active
for the Glory of God, and never discomposed by any extravagance of Anger, Fear,
Sorrow, Joy, or any other Intemperance of Passion whatsoever, though he
sometimes expressed his Tenderness for Jerusalem by most compassionate
Ejaculations, and by a flood of Tears. Wheresoever he went, he made himself to
be known, and public by great acts of Charity and Self-denial: One while we
find him disputing with the subtle Scribes and Pharisees, confounding them
with his Answers, and eluding all their Captious and Treacherous Discourses
with a Wisdom equal to that of a Serpent, but defending his own Integrity with
the innocence of the Dove. As to his manner of expressing himself, it was by
Parables, which way of speaking made a lasting impression on the Minds of Men,
by representing Spiritual things under such sensible Forms as were obvious to
the Capacities of all, and easy to be remembered; but withal they were of
incomparable weight and signification, and truly, such is the Scope,
Pertinence, and Veracity of these sacred Parables, as could proceed from no
other than the Son of God. But above all, his last Speech and Discourse with
his Disciples after his last Supper is most Pathetick and Divine, firmly to be
read by Angels, and capable to inspire the most obdurate Soul with the love of
Martyrdom; and they show sufficiently with what a filial Resignation of himself
to the Will of God, with what melting Tenderness toward his Disciples, and
with what a holy and ardent Charity toward the World, this holy Victim was
prepared to make his Offering.

CHAP. XXIII. Objections Answered.
THe Life and Doctrine of the blessed Jesus so just and holy as they were gave
great offense both to Jews and Gentiles, or as the Apostle Words it; Christ was
to the Jews a stumbling Blook, and to the Greeks foolishness: There were two
things at which both were highly offended, the first was, the Meanness, Poverty
and Humility of his Life, and especially the Innocence of his Death. To the
Life of Christ we refer all those outward Considerations of his Parentage,
Birth, Country, Society, Fortune, with such like Circumstances as attended his
Mortal State. Is not this the Carpenter's Son, is not his Mother called Just.
in deuteronomy contra Trypt.
Mary? Can any good thing come out of Galilee? that he was a Wine-bibber, a
friend of Publicans and Sinners, was the common cry of the Calumniating Jews.
Tryphon though he lent an attentive Ear to the reasonings of Justin Martyr, and
seemed sometimes to bend to his persuasion, could never condescend to this;
That he who was inglorious, despised and crucified, could be the Savior of the
World: This was as far above the reach of his reason to understand, as it
seemed to be beneath the Majesty of God to suffer; for he fell under the
severest curse of the Law by being Crucified. What sentiments the Gentiles had
of Christ, as they are recorded by Origin, are too Blasphemous for Christian
Laws. In short, the result of all these difficulties turned upon this Quire,
viz. how it could stand with Contra Cel^. lib. 1. c. 29.
the Grandeur of God, of one who is infinitely glorious to be made Man, to be
surrounded with the Infirmities of Flesh, and to be exposed to Fears and
Sorrow? Had it not been better for him to have discovered his Divinity by the
bright or known Character of Majesty and Power? This indeed had been more
consonant to his Nature, and more conducible to the end (...) in his
Incarnation, which was the conversion of Men; since Men must sooner yield
Obedience to an Authority which is derived visibly from God, than to the
Commands of one, who as to all appearance, was Poor and Despicable. If he were
the Son of God, why was he Apprehended, Judged, Condemned and Executed? Why did
not he free himself from the stroke of Death, and his Honor from the foul
suspicion of Guilt and Impotence?

To these and such like scandalous Calumnies, it is answered; That Christ's
Exinanition, or his divesting himself of his Glory, by assuming that servile
State, under which he is every where represented to us in the Gospel, was
necessary upon a double account. First, for an Example of Virtue. Secondly for
the greater declaration of his own Glory. First then, such a condition made him
to be an Example of Virtue to others, and to show the abilities and strength of
humane Nature to resist Temptations; for to use the reasonings of Lactantius
upon this Argument; how could all pretenses and Lactant. lib. 4. de vera
sapient. c. 24.
colorable excuses of Men be cut off, unless he who is to teach another, make
the duty practicable by his own Example and Performance; and how can he do the
things which he teaches, unless he be made like unto him who is to follow his
Direction? Had not Christ been subject to Passions, Man might readily have
replied; true indeed, it is my endeavor as well as my desire, not to sin; but
alas, I am compelled to yield to Nature, I am oppressed and burdened with the
infirmities of my Flesh, of my own weak and frail Nature, so that the evil
which I would not do, that do I. Now to cut of all such Evasions, what better
expedient could there be, than for Christ to attest and experimentally to
demonstrate that Flesh and Blood had a Power not to sin, and Abilities to
pursue its own happiness, and this from his own performance, who was himself
molested with the like Infirmities; manners are sooner reformed by Example than
by Precept. Thus was it necessary that our Savior should be made like unto us
in all things, sin excepted.

In the next place, as his knowledge was a Precedent for our Invitation, so was
it extremely conducing to the Declaration of his own Glory; this will appear
more fully by and by, when we come to consider the consequences of Christ's
converse with Men, and the wonderful success his Doctrine has found in the
Conversion of the World. Had Christ appeared like some temporal Prince,
attended with pompous Trains, assisted by Great, Wise, and Learned
Counselors, and strengthened with the alliances of secular Princes, and with
all the advantages of a Civil and Military Power, the whole fabric of
Christianity might justly have been suspected for a thing of humane Invention
and Policy, and liable to be ruined by force or civil Alterations. But when we
shall with Amazement consider, that all those grand Revolutions which followed
in the World's Conversion, proceeded from one so seemingly impotent, and
utterly destitute of all suitable means and instruments for so great an
Enterprice, and this too by suffering an accurss'd death; reason must conclude,
that the Author of such a Miraculous change, could be no other but God; and
that the Religion which he introduced, must be Immutable and Eternal. As for
Christ's Conversation with Publicans and Sinners, 'twas no other than what was
foretold of him, and what he himself openly averred to be expedient, since he
came to save that which was lost, and that they were not the righteous and the
sound, but the sinners and the sick which moved him to Compassion, and which
requires his presence; for where should the Physician be but amongst his
diseased Patients who implore his help.

Another thing for which many Men through all Ages have been offended with the
blessed Jesus, is the seeming severity of his Doctrine; for he that will be
Christ's Disciple, must take up his Cross and deny himself: And for this
purpose let us suppose Dominion, Honor, Riches, Fame, Pleasures, with all
those fady Beauties or Parents of Happiness, which fill our apprehensions, to
be placed before us; let us suppose likewise Christianity to be arrayed in its
most homely dress, as presenting nothing but Want and Difficulties, Hatred and
Disgrace: As requiring us to return Good for Evil, Blessings for Curses, to
feed our Enemies, and to afflict our selves. Of these two Estates, Nature
prompts us to choose the former; Christ requires us to prefer the later, in
which Case the will cannot but be under violent Temptations: For although
Christ requires not our Services for nothing, but has annexed Rewards to our
Duties, and such as infinitely exceed the worth and merit of the performance;
yet since these Rewards are Spiritual, and to be received in another Life, it is
certain they can never sway the Majority of Men, who making sense to be the
measure of their Happiness, cannot but unite their Affections to things visible
and near at hand. Nay, it requires a Man to have a well grounded Faith, and to
be fortified with hardy Resolutions, who being to balance his felt Calamities
against conceived Felicity, shall choose rather to lie under the weight of his
present Miseries, than forfeit his Title to such Contents as are future and
remote.

It Is true, the face of Religion, like that of Diana's Statue anciently at
Chios, seems sad and cloudy to those who are to enter, but to them that are
within, it appears serene and cheerful. The Gospel at the first appearance
seems rigid and undelightfull; it wants that face or varnish which affects the
Sense, yet to them who are acquainted with it, its ways are ways of
pleasantness. To prove this, we need no more but to conjecture, Frist, the
great Rewards which crown our Sufferings, which Rewards though they be future,
are sufficient to support our Hopes, being founded in God's veracity. This is
no more than what we may observe in the ordinary occurrences of Life, where we
find daily what hardship Men endure, what disappointments they wrestle with,
and what expense they lie at to purchase perhaps some small Estate or Office,
or to acquire some little Title of Honor, which things peradventure may never
be obtained, or if they be, Men are but faster hampered in the snare, and by
pains arrive to greater pains; what is this World's Glory, but the breath of
popular Air? and yet so desirous are Men of this breath of others, that in the
pursuit thereof, they have many times lost their own; when yet the Rewards
which Christians are invited to by Gospel Duties are so Solid and Eternal. In
the next place, the Duties of Christianity will yet appear to be more easy and
supportable, if we consider the Assistance promised to Men's endeavors, and the
Mercy and Pardon upon their Repentance for their failings. Besides, affirmative
commands are not always to be observed, nor do they so much require the actual
Performances, as the Thoughts and Disposition of the Mind, viz. to be resolved
to suffer Pains, and Ignominy of the Cross, and to forsake all Temporal
Enjoyments for the sake of Almighty God when occasion shall require.

In the last place, though there were no Rewards annexed to the Observance of
Religious Duties, yet is there no just reason to except against them as rigid
and severe; for as much as even in this Life they carry along with them their
own Reward. The Stoics I confess were Men of some Principles; for they held
that a Man might Tul. l. 5. de finibus Bon. and Mal.
be then most happy, when he was most miserable; not as though Misery were
Happiness formally and in it self, but materially only: Because as an Object it
ministers occasion for a Man to exert those Acts of virtue which constitute him
happy. Whether this Doctrine of theirs were only a Bravery of Speculation, or a
fixed Persuasion and Belief, is not my business to determine: Thus much it
shows, that these Philosophers, who saw only by the divine light of Nature,
and knew little of another life, had such apprehensions of the Excellency of
Man's Nature, as to think all outward Objects, though never so repugnant to it,
to be too weak and insufficient to discompose it; which consideration is of
infinite more force in a Christian upon the Prospect he has of another Life.
But waving this, as I have now stated the matter; let us examine it a little by
the Measures and Circumstances of this present Life. Men naturally are of a
Temper which is haughty and vindicative; Christ requires his Followers to be
humble, and long suffering under all provocations whatsoever. Let us now see
which is easier to follow, he who is swayed by inclinations of Revenge, with
how many restless hours must he be afflicted himself in contriving means for
the Execution of it; with what loss of Time, Content, Reputation, and perhaps
Estate and Death, does he combat his own Enjoyments to disturb those of him he
hates, which whether he compass or fail of, he is equally miserable. Whereas
the good Christian suffers but a short conflict within himself, in resisting
the first resentments of Nature, and then he is at rest; but above all, he
acquires a reputation of virtue amongst all good Men, by whom he is beloved and
honored; and acquires also an entire and noble conquest over his Enemy by the
all-subduing Arms of Love; for there was never Man so devoted to Malice, as
would for ever persecute a virtuous and prostrate Innocence. Nature prompts Men
to Lust, to Pleasures, to Ambition and the like; I need not enlarge upon the
evil consequences of such disorders. It is an Argument very copious and
pleasing, and almost every where spoken to with good success; when on the
contrary the good Christian by resisting these Temptations of Life, is not only
delivered from all their fatal Effects, but by confining his Enjoyments within
these due Limits, or by transferring his Passions upon nobler Objects, he meets
with a full satisfaction of his desires in a solid Fruition of himself, and
tastes the chaste pleasures of Angels in a Reflection upon the Innocence and
spotless Tenor of his Life. Whilst he who lets his unbridled Passion range
through all the Regions of sensual Delights, which fancy can create, does but
shorten his days, and poison even those small Enjoyments of the life he spends
with perpetual Disorders, and with irreparable Detriment.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Miracles of Jesus.
THe Miracles which the blessed Jesus wrought whilst he was upon Earth, make
another considerable part of the History of his Life, and show the divine
Authority of the Author. For so it was, that when John Baptist for the
satisfaction of his doubting Disciples sent them to Jesus to know, whether he
was the Messiah, or him that should come? we find our Savior appealed to his
Works, and by them vouched his Authority. Go that way, (says he) and tell what
ye have seen and heard; how that the Blind see, the Lame Luke 7.
walk, the Lepers are cleansed, the Dead are raised, etc. By such like works as
these he proves the Truth of his Commission; for Miracles being the effects of
God's immediate and extraordinary Power, it is impossible he should put this
broad Seal to the Confirmation of a Lie.

As for those Miranda recorded in profane Stories, as the speaking of Juno's
Statue, and that of a Child of six Months old proclaimed Triumph in Rome, as
also the Augar's catting a Whet-stone with a Razour, so much admired by
Tarquinius, with other such like Prodigies of Fame amongst the Ancients; it is
plain, they were no Miracles, being such as might easily be obtruded by
Collusidn, and lay not without the compass of Natural Agents. Of this kind were
the wonders wrought by the Magicians under Pharaoh, as also those which are
reported of Appolonius by Philestratus, Vide Mart. Derio. Mag. Disq. l. 1. c.
4. quaes. 4.
and of one Zedekiah a Jew in the time of Lewis the Emperor. All which for the
Devil to have effected, either by Local Motion, by the applying of Actives to
Passives, or by making some Alteration upon the Medium, or in the sight of the
Beholder, was not a matter of any great difficulty. I know that Heathen Stories
are famous for the Miracles of Vespasian, but when we call to mind that
intimate familiarity which was betwixt the Emperor and Apollonius Tyanaeus,
who was with him also at Alexandria when he wrought his Cure, it is more than
probable, that what is reported of him in this Nature, was but a piece of
Artifice and Delusion; or, admitting it to have been real, yet was it not
without the compass of Natural Causes. For Tacitus tells us, that Tac. lib. 4.
Histor.
when Vespasian asked his Physicians whether such defects were recoverable by
humane means; they answered, they were, might convenient remedies be applied.
Sp^rtianus relates the like of Hadrean in restoring Spartian. in Hadr.
a blind Man to sight; and yet in the same place he tells us, that Marius
Maximus an Historiographer of good Credit affirmed it to be Fictitious. As for
Mahomet, he saught not to confirm his Doctrine by Miracles, but by the Sword;
but of him by and by.

Those then are truly Miracles which cannot be produced by the Natural Power of
any created Agent, or be obtruded on us by Imposture; and of this kind were
those urged by our Savior to John's Disciples: For who ever heard of any that
raised the Dead, and gave sight to the Blind? And let me speak it with
Reverence, that had our Savior mentioned any other Miracles, as his turning of
Water into Wine, his walking upon the Sea, his feeding of 5000 with a few
Loaves and the like; they could never have won Men over to a belief of that for
which they were brought in Proof, even that Christ was the promised Messiah.
For albeit, such Miracles were true, because impossible to be produced by the
Immediate virtue of any second Cause whatsoever; nevertheless they could not
have been convincing, it being possible for the Devil to counterfeit the like
by a quick Transportation and Exchange of Bodies, or by a speedy supply of new
Matter; in which case it would be very difficult to discern the true Miracles
from those which were false and specious. What is reported of Simon Magus, may
serve for an Instance: He could appear flying in the Air, he could transform
himself into diverse Shapes, and turn Stones into Bread, which no doubt was done
by the Devil in imitation of Christ's Miracles last mentioned, not by any true
conversion, but by a sudden and insensible conveyance of one body into the room
of another.

The Efficacy of Christ's Miracles for the conviction of Atheists, is
sufficiently proved from the credit of the Reporters of them, the holy
Apostles: That the Apostles indeed did transmit the Memory of them to future
Ages, by their writings contained in the New Testament, is proved upon that
more than Moral, certainly we have from Universal Tradition; and that they made
no false Reports in this matter, is proved also beyond all dispute in their
infinite sufferings for the belief of Christ, and from the miraculous success
their Doctrines found in obliging the whole World to follow their belief. The
evidence of which Truth is as clear and convincing as ever any thing since the
first Creation, as will appear more fully in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Effects wrought by Christ, and his Religion.
ANother General Argument to prove the Truth of Jesus's Messiah-ship, as also
the Verity of his Religion, is taken from the Events and Consequences of the
Christian Faith, in the conquest it made over all the World, and this in two
Respects; first over Devils, second-over Men. And first for Devils; Those many
famous or rather infamous Oracles, to which the Heathens for so many Ages had
recourse, and paid so great a Veneration, about the time of Christ's
appearance, began universally to sink and diminish in their Credit, and a
little after become utterly abandoned. That renowned one of Apollo at Delphos,
was mute in the Times of Juvenal, and as for the others of Greece, as of
Amphiaraus, Juvenal Satyr. 6.
Eloea, Tegyra, as also that of Ammon, so much celebrated amongst the Heathens;
Plutarch Plutarch lib. de defect. Oracul.
complains, that they were all Dumb, only that at Sebaclin in Boeotia was
Vocal, the rest to his great astonishment and sorrow, were either silent or
prostrate on the Ground. No less remarkable is that known Passage of the same
Author in the account he gives of Epitherses, who sailing near the Isles called
the Echinades, heard a doleful Voice, as did all the rest who were about him,
crying from the shore: The great Pan was dead. Whereupon followed a most
doleful noise of Harlings and Groans; which thing when told Tiberius, he was
much amazed, consulting the Philosophers there in Rome, who this Pan should be:
Now 'twas under Tiberius that Christ was crucified.

The other great Conquest which the Christian Religion made, was over Men, and
they were of two sorts, Jews and Gentiles: As for the Jews, it is notorious with
what malicious Calumnies, with what secret Conspiracies, with what open
Tumults, with what perfidious Subornations, with what indefatigable Travels,
and with what a constant and universal Concurrence they all endeavored the
suppression and utter destruction of a few followers of Jesus. They stirred up
the People every where, not only in their own Teritories, but in all the
adjacent Countries round about, to lay Hands upon the poor Disciples, and their
Friends. One while they endeavored to expose them to the Sword of the Romans,
as Adherents to some new King; other whiles they charged them with Blasphemy,
and as Prevaricators from their Law, and every where they were branded with
Ignominy, and with the dangerous Characters of Factions and Seditions. This we
find lively painted out by St. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, and more
particularly exemplified in St. Paul, of whose Character and Deportment 'twill
not be unseasonable to take a transient veiw.

This blessed Instrument of the World's Conversion, was at first, we read, a
most violent persecutour of the Christians, and was so much the more dangerous;
forasmuch as he was not animated by private Animosity, or with a wanton humor
of seeking applause by a popular Zeal, but by a serious persuasion and
conviction of Conscience, that what he did, was for the Glory of Almighty God:
And certainly when Men are once of this Persuasion, whether their belief be
Orthodox or Erroneous, they cannot choose but raise great Commotions, and will
combat with insuperable difficulties. And thus it was with this blessed
Apostle, till such time as he was miraculously converted, and with the change
of his Name, which happened a little after, was dignified with a nobler change
of his Nature, and of a ravenous Wolf became a vigilant and painful Sheepherd.
With what popular Clamours and open Violence did the Jews seek him every where
to suppress this Convert? With what hellish Plots and Snares did they labor
every where to suppress him? How often was he whipped and scourged to the utmost
severity of the Law, against which he never offended? His Sufferings are amply
described by himself, in his 2 Epist to the Corinth. c. 11. which Epistle was
wrote about the Year of Christ 58, and consequently contained nothing of the
Persecutions and Afflictions of his following Life for eleven Years after. With
what indefatigable labor did he plant Religion almost in all Regions of the
known World at that time? What Hardships and Miseries did he suffer from
Reproach, and Calumnies, from Hunger and Cold, and from Watchings and weary
Travels. He was every where invested with Perils, assaulted with Temptations,
and besieged with Enemies; all which was nothing to the Anxieties and Troubles
of his Soul for the concerns and welfare of all the Churches; writing
instructive and consolating Epistles every where, conforming himself to the
necessities of others, and as much as in him lay, transferring the burden of
all the Christian World upon his own shoulders, and willing to be made an
Anathema himself for the good and safety of others, which he labored to
promote by Preaching, Praying, Disputing, Writing, and Exemplary living in all
quarters of the World. With what noble courage did he always meet the
Persecuting Jews? with what prudential conduct did he avoid their Treacheries,
and with what solid Reasons did he combat their Errors? With what boldness of
address did he dispute with the Philosophers of Athens, the only Masters of the
World for the Acts of Argument and Judicature? Where ever he went, he made his
Conquests over the Judgments and Wills of others, as well as over his own
Passions. His own dangers and difficulties were the least part of his Trouble;
the welfare of others was that which filled his Mind with an Apostolic
Solicitude. Let any Man judge of a Person in his circumstances, and who held
such a vast correspondence with all parts of the new converted World, which was
then oppugn'd every where; what infinite Letters and Addresses must be made to
him from all places, to all which he was obliged to answer; whether they
concerned Cases of Conscience amongst those, especially of the Circicumsion, or
whether they concerned Church Doctrines and Constitutions, or the behavior of
the Primitive Christians, under so many Temptations and Difficulties as
occurred every where? What continuances of Adversaries, Spiritual and Temporal,
what Solicitations from Friends, what vast designs for the Eternal welfare of
Mankind employed his Thoughts, and filled all the spacious Rooms and secret
Recesses of his Soul? What triumphing over the blandishments and
discouragements of the World, over Crowns and Empires, over Honors, Riches,
Strength, Wisdom and Eloquence with whatsoever else might influence a wordly
Genius; he erects the Standard of the Cross, declaring openly to the Learned
and Illiterate, to the Noble and Obscure; that he came not with the Artifice of
enticing Words, nor the Inventions of humane Knowledge, but with simplicity of
Conceptions and Expressions to Preach Christ crucified. This he demonstrated
with an undoubted Courage, in his Defense or Apology for the Christian Faith at
Caesarea; as also against the Defamations of the high Priests, and the chiefest
of the Jewish Nation, though strengthened with the plausible Insinuations, and
virulent Invectives of their Orator, Tertullus: All which things were
transacted in a most public Audience, before Felix, Festus, and King Agrippa,
and after many difficulties of a dangerous Voyage, he had the honor in the
last place to plead his Cause more than once before the Terror of Mankind, the
most bloody Nero; from whom also, as a just Reward of his cause and courage, he
received a Laurel far more noble than what adorned Caesar's Brow, even that
glorious one of Martyrdom.

His defense doubtless was much the same with what he made before Festus and
Agrippa; however it has pleased Almighty God to suffer such a noble Monument of
Primitive Glory to be lost, as are also many other Illustrious Transactions of
the holy Apostles: Nevertheless, diverse of his Epistles, which by God's good
Providence are delivered to us by the Church, show sufficiently with what a
Spirit he was animated. They are Argumentative and profound in the Doctrinal
part: His precepts carry the Majesty of Oracles, and yet do they flow every
where with the sweet Streams of Tenderness and Compassion; like Lightning
melting the Steel within, even the resisting parts, or the most obdurate heart
without hurting the Body; we find him every where glorying with a Seraphick
Charity, more chaste and lasting than any Vestal Fire, and more sacred than the
Flames of Altars, burning always without being consumed. In short, we find him
carrying always in a mortified Body the Characters of a crucified Christ, but of
a glorified Jesus in the elevation of his Spirit, which he every where
discovers both in the perpetual Activity, and (if I may speak it without a
Solecism) in the perpetual Tranquillity also of his Mind. The same divine
Virtues which adorned the Apostleship of St. Paul, are remarkable also in St.
Peter, and in the rest of Christ's Disciples, whose Conquests we are in the
next place to consider in respect of the Pagan World.

As for the Romans, whose Government at the time of Christ's appearance,
comprehended all the known and civilized World; let us see in what a State and
Posture they then stood. Their Empire was then at the highest Pitch, and in its
greatest Power, Extent and Luster, and greater far than ever any Empire before
or since. Rome, the capital City of this vast Body, upon a Survey made by
Claudius, (called a Lustrum,) containd no less than six Millions, nine hundred
forty four thousand Souls, as Tacitus reports. Humane Tacit. Lib. 11. Hist.
Arts and Learning then flourished most; then lived the acutest Philosophers,
and the greatest Bigots of Heathenism. Their Augurs and Flamines, with such
like Instruments of their superstitious Worship, filled an infinite number of
Colleges, and abounded every where. There was neither Power nor Zeal wanting in
the Emperors and Senate to defend their Rites; neither was their Torments
wanting to be inflicted on those who should oppose them; in a word, never were
the Powers of Earth, or rather of Hell in a better posture for combat. In
opposition to this great and formidable Armado, they appear on the other side a
few despicable Fishermen, and Illiterate Mechanics; mere Idiots in the eye of
the World, and destitute of Friends, Learning, and Policy; without Arms, or
Money in their Scrips, without change of Apparel, and with a staff only in
their Hands, half naked and forlorn: This, at first appearance, looks more
fabulous than a Romance, but that the Case thus stood is clear and indisputable.

Now that such a few humble and ill accounted Champions should enter the Lists
against such Enemies as are now described, was a Prodigy beyond Example; and
yet they did so, and with what success we shall see presently. Twelve poor
Disciples, with a few Converts, did attack this great and adverse party, not by
keeping themselves united into a close body, but by scattering themselves
through all quarters of the Universe. They erected their Standard (the ever
glorious Banner of the Cross) even in Rome it self, the center of Pagan Rites,
and this too in the Reign of the most debauched and bloody Tyrant that ever
sat on the Throne. They preached up Jesus, who was crucified and buried, and
was withdrawn from them as to all sensible appearance: They taught that the
way to Happiness was by Suffering, to be Glorious by enduring Ignominy, to be
Rich by selling all, to obtain Liberty by Bonds and Imprisonments, and to be
Conquerours by being Subdued and Persecuted. They taught also, That Men were as
accountable for their sinful Thoughts as for their Actions; and that every
extravagance of desire was to be resisted: To all which they were to join
Fastings and Watchings, Alms and Prayers; and that Cold, Nakedness, Hunger and
Thirst, Persecutions, and even Death it self were to be endured cherafully; and
all this and much more for the sake of that Jesus who was Crucified, and from
whom also they were to expect their Reward in another Life.

Such Doctrine, delivered from such a sort of Men, one would think to be mighty
plausible to convince the proud Philosophers; as also the haughty and imperious
Romans, who breathed nothing but Conquests and Triumphs: And still the
undertaking seems more impossible if we consider, with what Arms and Weapons
the Romans made their Defense, viz. with Swords and Crests, with Mines and
Prisons, with wild Beasts and Racks, and with all the Artillery of Subtilty and
Cruelty. And yet notwithstanding all these Difficulties on one side, and on the
other, these few Disciples of Jesus entered upon their Warfare; they brake
through all disasters, which opposed them, by withstanding all the disputes of
Philosophers, all the Placarts of the Senate, all the Prisons and Tortures of
the Officers, with infinite other hardships, still attending their Business by
Baptizing, Preaching, and Praying, and at length Sealed the Truth of their
Belief and Doctrine with their Blood; an Eternal proof indeed of its Truth. For
though Men may lie sometimes for Gain, yet we never heard of any, much less so
many and for so many Ages, who would persevere in a lie that they might be
Miserable; and when they might enjoy all the Comforts of life by following
Truth, would voluntarily plunge themselves into a train of perpetual
Calamities, both in this World and that to come, by asserting falsehood.

And indeed, as the natural Weakness and the supernatural Courage and constancy
of the Abettours of Christianity heard its Truth; so also that this Truth was
of a Divine Extraction and Virtue, is farther demonstrable from the Possession
it got in the Minds of the most prejudiced Men over their Judgments, Wills and
Affections, and contrary to all humane Interests and natural Inclinations
whatsoever. Whereas the Doctrine of Plato, after so long a continuance, and
even in the Infancy of Christianity, flourishing in those great Masters of
Reason, Plotirus, Lorgirus and Porphyrus, could never so insinuate into the
Miracles and Manners of Men, as to draw any one Village throughout the World
unto its Principles, and make them live after the Prescripts and Rules of its
Philosophy.

On the other hand, the Progress of Christianity was so Universal and Early,
that even in the days of St. Paul, his Doctrine had converted some of Caesar's
household, Phil. 4. as in the beginning of Trajan's Reign, we read of Flavia
Domisilla, a Person of the imperial Blood, who with her two Eunuchs, N^r^us and
Achelleus, made her Blood more noble yet, by the Effusion of it in Martyrdom;
and but four years after, Pliny going over Proconsul, to the Province of
Bithynia, found such a Multitude of Christians in it, that he was obliged to
consult the Emperor what to do in the matter, not daring to draw the Sword
against all at once; and so fast did Plin v l. 10 Epist. 97. Apologit. cap. 3^.
their number grow, maugre all the Terrors and Efforts of Persecution, as made
Turtullainus in his Apologetick to the Roman Nobles say by a word of Triumph,
We have filled the Cities, the Isles, the Castles, the Councils, the Camps, the
Corporations, your Tribes, your Palaces, your Courts, and your Senate; we have
left you nothing to your selves but the Temples. And thus Christianity went on
still, acquiring strength by its Progression, till at length in defiance of all
the Instruments of Wit and Cruelty, it subdued Principalities and Powers, and
changed the Laws of Empire; it subverted their Religion, and cast their false
Gods and Idolatrous Temples to the Ground; and as a perpetual Monument of their
Victory, it made them throw away their Laurels, abjure their Triumphs, and in
the Crowns they wore, erect the Crowns upon the Globe, the Figure or Symbol of
the World they pre^^nded to command, and which they ever acknowledged to be in
subjection to the Cross.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Mohammedan Religion.
THe Mohammedan Superstition makes the last Branch of revealed (or of a
pretendedly revealed) Religion; this falls in most opportunely to be spoken to,
as being in appearance the greatest Objection that can possibly be made against
the Truth of Christianity, which notwithstanding when impartialy and thoroughly
considered, will afford us one of the greatest Arguments to prove its Divine
Authority; upon which consideration, I have reserved the handlings of this
Point to the last place; for as much as Mahomet is the greatest and most Mortal
Enemy, which hitherto has appeared against it, and therefore the fitest to
follow it in its Triumph.

In the Mohammedan Religion then, there are two things, at first sight, which
occurr to our Consideration, viz. Its Duration, and its Extent; as for its
Duration, it has flourished, or rather insected the World for above a thousand
years; and then for its Extent, although its Original was from an obscure
Imposture, yet in less than Seventy Years, the Disciples of this Sect, under
the name of Saracens, had diffused themselves over Armenia, Persia, Palestine,
Egypt, Lybia, and almost all Africa; and for some Ages past, even to this very
day, they possess the largest and noblest parts of the habitable World in the
Persian and Ottoman Empires, the better part of Judea; as also all Tartary,
with three quarters also of Africa; so that the Crescent seems in a great
Measure to verify that arrogant Prediction of growing greater and greater,
donec totum impleat orbem. Now that such a Pestilent Sect should so long
triumph over, and almost extenuate the Christian Religion, and spread its Roots
and Branches wider also, is a point which at the first sight may seem to
stagger us; but how formidable soever this Scandal may appear to a young
Believer, we shall find no great danger in it, if we consider.

First, the Circumstances of the Age when this Innovation first began. It was
about the Year 630, and in the Reign of Heraclius the Emperor, that Mahomet is
said to have departed this Life, before which time almost the space of 200
Years; the Vandals had overrun almost all Africa, a Country always famous for
Wild Beasts and Monsters; so that almost all that vast Tract or Region being
overcome with Barbarity and Ignorance, the Soil seemed ready prepared for Weeds
to grow in; to which consideration we may add that also of the Eastern Church,
overrun with Nistorianism, and contending with the Western for the Primacy.
All this the Impostour understood very well, as also that Ignorance naturally
leads Men to Innovation: And as the state and circumstances of the 7th. Century
suited well with the Genius and design of such a Prophet, so may we observe
also the like Disposition and Confluence of Causes in the succeeding Ages to
propagate and enlarge the same. For the Hunns, Goths, Vandals, (whose uncouth
Names are of harsh and barbarous sound,) still thronging in upon all quarters
of the Empire, disturbed the repose and course of things; whilst the greater
Prelates contending with one another, and pursuing their ancient Quarrels about
Precedence, and entering into new ones with the secular Power, about Superiority
and Rights of Investiture; all Religion was in a manner degenerated into
Emulation, Faction, and Superstition. By this means, I say, the Mohammedan
Doctrine advanced apace, and the Princes who where of it, under the Titles of
Caliphes and Sultans, became formidable: Whereupon the Christian Princes of the
West, finding the Eastern either immersed in Idleness and Luxury, or unable to
withstand the Inundation of this Sect, entered into a League called the Holy
war, which for some time repelled the Progress of the Mohammedan Invasions, till
domestic Quarrels and jealousies, together with Self-interest, made the
Europeans abandon such a glorious design, and leave all as a Prey to the
Ottoman Usurpers, which ended in the total Ruin of the Eastern Empire.

The next thing to be taken notice of, is the Ottoman Empire it self, which has
for a long time been the most potent, and is at this day doubtless the greatest
in the World; if we consider the extent of its Dominions. It is a vast Branch,
or rather the very Body or Trunck of the Mohammedan Religion; and as being the
most bigoted and zealous in the Propagation of the same, it will not be
improper to make some Reflections upon their Conduct in this particular.

One of the chiefest Policies, or the grand Arcanum of the Ottomans, is to keep
the common People in Ignorance, and to resolve the Exposition of all difficult
Cases, and the final Decision of their Controversies, into the Right Reverend
the Mufti, who in all matters of consequence depends upon the infallible Oracle
the Grand Signiour. To this end and purpose they discountenance and prohibit
all Learning, especially Controversial; for should they attain to the
understanding of Greek and Latin, they would quickly read the behavior and
belief of others in the Translations of former Ages* and by the Helps and
Methods which they find in such Monuments of Antiquity, they would attain also
to the Art of Reasoning, which would draw them insensibly to examine their
Religion, and discover the gross Absurdities and Contradictions of their
Alcoran. For so it is, that their Religion will not endure the stress of a
Disputation, upon which account we find, that there was never one of this
Persuasion of what continuance, and how wide soever it is, or has been, that
did ever offer to defend it by Argument.

Their next Policy is, to probibit the use of Printing; For should this get
place amongst them, new Opinions would quickly be spread abroad, which would
not only expose their Superstition, but make great Convulsions in the very body
of their Government. 'Twas subtly therefore done of one of their Kaimacans,
who when a Printer came to Constantinople with his printing Instruments, and
offered to publish some Books very cheap, caused him presently to be strangled,
and all his Instruments to be burnt; pretending, that 'twas unjust, that one
Man for a little gain should take the Bread out of the Mouths of thousands of
Families who lived by Writing. A plausible pretense indeed, though the true
reason of this severity was that which I am now discoursing of, viz. to prevent
the Innovations which a liberty of Publication would infallibly introduce.

Another Policy of the Mohammedan Religion, consists in their abstaining from
all acquaintance with Foreign Nations. They never Travel themselves, upon any
account, not even upon the account of Traffic, into any Christian Territories;
by which means they are most grossly ignorant of what is taught or done in
Foreign Kingdoms. All the knowledge they have is from Renegades and Fugitives,
which cannot deserve much Credit, and in Religious Matters is totally
insignificant: And as for those who visit their Countries, they are but few,
there being no improvement to be made by an Ingenious and Industrious
Traveller, which may compensate the Risque and Expense; all Foreigners being
generally looked upon by the Turks as Spies, and are therefore under a watchful
Eye and in Danger. To tamper therefore with them in matters of Religion, would
prove Pernicious and Fatal: And as for our Merchants, who resort to them upon
the account of Commerce, their business is Trade and Gain; nor are they
admitted but to a very small acquaintance, and that only with Persons of the
meaner Quality, and such with whom their Traffic lies.

The last Turkish Policy, and which seems also to contribute much to the
Preservation of their Religion, is their constant adherence to their more
ancient Habits, Customs, and Manners of Living; so that whosoever does converse
with them, must in a great Measure conform in these particulars, unless he has
a Mind to be exposed to Contempt, or perhaps Dangers. This one particular, how
trivial soever it may seem, cannot but create in these Musiel-men a wonderful
Opinion of themselves, and a kind of scorn and dislike of whatsoever disagrees
with them; and indeed, Inconstancy in such matters cannot but argue much
Levity, and we may observe our selves what Prejudice may arise from Custom. For
should a Man walk the Streets with a Sugar-Loaf-Hat, with a slasht Doublet, and
ruffling Ribbons about the waste and knees of his Breeches, and with party
colored Stockings, and the like, he would be looked upon as a Fool or Madman;
and yet such a Garb twenty five years since was very agreeable and Court-like,
how ridiculous soever it appears at present. The same Judgment may pass in
another Age upon our present Modes, which seem so decent and useful: So much
does Custom render things agreeable and familiar. In short, that the constancy
of the Mahometans in their false Worship, does not proceed from the Nature of
their Religion, but from the forementioned Causes, is most demonstrable from
those of the Greek Church; who though they are in themselves the most unsettled
in their Opinions, and the most easily won to any Persuasion; yet in Muscovy,
where they live under a Government, which neither Countenances Learning,
Printing, Travel, nor Foreign Modes, we find them as settled and inflexible as
the Turks, and altogether as gross and ignorant.

These are some of the Acts and Methods by which the Turks preserve their own
Religion; and here it will not be improper to take a Transitory view of one
point of Conduct, by which they so much weaken the Christians. They do not make
their attempts on it by open Persecution; this would carry a show of too much
Barbarity, and make the Sufferers pass for Martyrs, which would not only beget
Compassion in the Spectatours, but a Jealousy also in them, that their own
Religion was not of a Divine Extraction, which required such bloody Executions
for its defense; from hence naturally would spring a Curiosity of enquiring
into the Nature, both of one and of the other Religion, which could not but
bring over great numbers of Proselites to the Christian, and which could not
but be attended also with important Alteration. No no, they proceed another
way, viz. by a sort of Toleration, which is nothing but a more lingering and
artificial Cruelty, making Men to taste gradually that bitterness of which a
sudden blow would take away all Sense, and perhaps all Fears. They suffer the
Christians, I say, to enjoy the Liberty of their Religion; but then by their
exactions in Tribute, both of their Children and Estates, by barring them from
all Offices, either of Credit or Profit, by remisness of Justice on their
behalf, and by treating them frequently, with terms of Ignominy and Scorn, and
by exposing them to the right worshipful the Mobb; they so enervate and debase
their Spirits, as makes them very degenerate, enduing their habituated Slavery
without resistance; and with such kind of Methods as these, some of our
Europeans are not unacquainted. An open Persecution is like cutting down a Tree
at the Butt, which makes a great noise in the fall, and leaves a ghastly gap
behind; when yet after some little time, there shall sprout out innumerable
shoots and suckers from the Roots of the mangled Trunk, which will not be
destroyed but with great Labor and Difficulty. Whereas the other Method is
like that of well drawing the Nourishment from the Root, and by removing the
Earth which covers it, by which means it becomes naked, and lies exposed to the
Extremities of Weather, to Cold, and to the burning Sun, and to all
intemperance of the Air, which in short time will make the Tree wither away, or
continue in such a languishing Condition, as shall give but little Umbrage, nor
afford any shelter under its Branches.

Having taking a short veiw of the Mohammedan Methods for the defense of their
own Religion, the next general consideration will be that of its Author, as
also of the Nature and consideration of its Doctrines. Its Author Mahomet, an
Ishmaelite by Extraction, and a Nation of Arabia, was by profession a Carrier,
and being master of Camels did follow Traffic, as 'twas the Practice anciently
of the Ishmaelites or Arabians, and is in use amongst them to this very day, in
great companies of Mules and Camels, called, Caravans. The Imposture being one
of a subtle wit, as are generally Men of this Profession and Country, soon
grew Rich and powerful too: For receiving Pay under the Emperor Heraclius at
such time as the Arabian Army revolted; he was not wanting to make his
Advantage by heading a Company of his perfidious Countrymen, pretending belike
to free his Country from Superstition and Slavery, and to secure their Lives
and Properties: By these means we may easily guess that he was Idolized by the
Arabian Rabble, and soon became considerable. And because pretension of Religion
has been ever looked upon as a fair Cloak for Rebellion, and the fittest
Instrument to puzzle the Populace, the Impostour played the Zealot, and sets up
for an Enthusiast, or some divinely inspired Prophet.

The circumstances of that Age, as we have always noted, did highly favor his
design; for we do not find that Christianity made any entrance into Arabia,
only the Nestorians, who swarmed about Alexandria, had spread themselves into
these parts; as likewise the Jews, upon the account of Traffic. The Impostour
therefore, like a true Trimmer or Latitudinarian, acted the part of a moderate
Reconciler, by forging a Religion, or pacifick Comprehension of all dissenting
Parties. To gain the Jews, he forbad Swines Flesh, retained Circumcision,
abolished Images, extolls Moses and the Prophets, and every where magnifies the
Old Testament. To allure the Orthodox Christians, he magnifies Jesus Christ
also, allowing him to be sent from Heaven, and to be conceived on the Virgin
Mary, whom also he highly honors and esteems, as an immaculate Virgin, both
before and after her deliverance. He taught also, that Jesus Christ came to
instruct the World, and left it a holy Law or Rule in his Gospel, or the New
Testament; and in the last place, to draw over the Nestorians to his Belief, he
taught that Jesus Christ was not true God, nor the Son of God.

And because the Mysteries of the Christian Religion might seem hard of
digestion to new Converts, he expunged the Doctrines of the Trinity, as also of
the Crucifixion and Resurrection of Jesus Christ out of his Alcoran. He took no
notice likewise of the Sacraments, of the Doctrines of Justification by the
Merits and Sufferings of Jesus Christ, nor of Original Sin, and the like. And
to secure the sensual and voluptuous to his party, he expunged the Doctrines of
Christ, touching self Denial, of returning Good for Evil, of loving our
Enemies, of suffering Reproaches and Persecutions with thankfulness, and of
subduing our Passions, and of abstaining from the very thoughts of sin; in lieu
of which severe Doctrines, he allowed his Proselites to have many Wives, and as
many Concubines as they could maintain. He allowed them also, or rather
commanded them to be revenged of their Enemies, and after this life ended,
promised them the fruition of Women, brave Ox-ey'd Women, of pleasant Gardens,
and Fruits, with such like Blandishments as might prove fuel to their Lusts, in
the next life.

Nor did his Artifice rest here; for being jealous that his Novelties could not
easily gain credit upon the score of their own sufficiency, he pretended that
all was revealed to him by the Angel Gabriel; to countenance which Imposture,
his disease (which was the Falling Sickness) was of wonderful advantage; and
we know the time (and God grant we may not know it again) when a black or white
Cap, and a Handkerchief knit about the Neck with a Slip not, accompanied with a
hallowed Cough and a twarying Nose, were the infallible marks of a Son, or
rather of a Father of Grace. But to return to Mahomet (where we left him) in
his fits of Trembling, out of which, as out of a Trance of Ecstasie, being a
little recovered, with a ghastly, pale, and meigre Countenance, and half
distracted, he vented his Blasphemies and Nonsense, in abrupt Sentences, and
with a hideous Voice of denouncing Hell and Damnation, to such as did not fear
God and keep his Commandments, which were sent to them by his Prophet Mahomet;
by which we may judge readily of what Antiquity and Extraction the Quakers are,
who (to give them their due) are much ancienter we see than many of their
fellow Sectaries.

But we must not yet take leave of Mahomet, who of a Captain of Mules became a
Colonel or Brigadier of Light Horse, and at last a great General, by revolting
from his Prince and Master; like another Oliver, he made use of both Swords,
the Temporal, and that of the Spirit; this being the certain Method by which
all Usurpers do advance themselves, viz. to join the Seducer to the Rebel; so
that had his Highness the late Usurper lived in Arabia, in the time of
Heraclius the Emperor, the impartial Reader must agree with me in my Opinion,
that he would have made an excellent true Mahomet, or had Mahomet lived in
England in the Reign of Charles the First, that he would have made as good a
Lord Protector.

As for the Alcoran or the revealed Law of Mahomet, it is divided into Chapters
under certain ridiculous Titles, which have not the least affinity with the
Contents, as the Verses or Sentences of the Contents have not the least
Connection with one another. Every Chapter is prefac'd with the Name of God, all
Gracious and Merciful; but for the Contents of them, they are generally the
same throughout, tending to denounce God's heavy Judgments on Infidels and
Sinners, speaking ofttimes of Heaven, Hell, and a general Judgment. Good Works,
such as Alms, Fastings, and Prayers, are every where commended and commanded;
upon the whole it is nothing but a Hodg podg of Sentences, or the abrupt
transports of a Frantic Spirit, which though in offensive many of them in
themselves, and pretending to promote virtue and a good life, yet being so
often repeated, and without the least connection of matter, it quickly
nauseates, and carries not the least appearance of a Collection or Body of
Laws, being no better stuff than what any old intoxicated bigottist vents
usually in a religious Fury; so that the Alcoran may truly be said to be as
dry, incoherent, devious and dangerous, as the Sands of Arabia in which 'twas
hatched.

But that we may come nearer to our journeys end through this barren Desert,
let us compare the Life and Doctrine of Jesus with that of Mahomet. And here a
sacred horror puts a kind of stop to my Pen, when I offer to compare, I say,
two things so extreme as the holy Jesus with the most impure Impostour. But
since the Beauty of Light may without contradiction be illustrated by the
gloming Nature of Darkness, and the Goodness of God may become more visible by
being opposed to the Deformity of the Devil; let us, I say, compare these two
Prophets together.

First then, for the holy Jesus, he tells his Followers; That he did not bear
record of himself, but that the Works which he did testify of him, to which he
appeals, and of which we have spoken already. As for Mahomet, let us hear what
he says of himself: They will certainly cry out (says he) that Mahomet dreamed
and invented Alcoran cap of the Prophets
what he teaches; that he is a Poet, and that all is but Fiction; we will not
believe him unless he show us some Miracle, as did the Prophets of Old. To this
Objection which Mahomet makes of himself, and against himself we may be sure,
what Answer does he give? Why truly, and very wisely, he lets the Objection
even shift for it self as well as it can, running on at his old impertinent
Career, and crying out; We have destroyed many Towns, because its Inhabitants
were Incredulous; those which we sent before thee were Men which were inspired
by us; demand of them who were before you, and who lived under the written Law,
if you are ignorant of it: They were Men who did Eat, Drink, and were Mortal,
we have accomplished what we promised them, and saved them, together with other
Believers, and have rooted out the unbelievers; we have sent you a Book to
instruct you, do you not understand how many infidel Towns we have destroyed,
and how many new Generations have been established in their places, etc. a very
fair and pestilent Answer to his own Objection, and like the rest of the
Alcoran. There was one Miracle I confess fathered on him; how that once upon a
Time, the Moon was cleft in twain, and fell down upon the Ground, wereupon
Mahomet ran nimbly, and catching up the Pieces before they crumbled into Bits,
solder'd them together again, and sent it up to Heaven whole and sound as a
Bell; a Miracle which no Man saw besides the Author of it, and serves only to
convince his followers, that he was no other than a Lunatic.

In the next place, Jesus Christ was a Person of a most pure and holy Life, as
Mahomet himself confesses, whilst Mahomet owns himself in many places of the
Alcoran to have been a very lewd, voluptuous, and lustful Person. Thirdly, the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ was this: Love your Enemies, entertain not a lustful
Thought, suffer Reproaches thankfully, rejoice under Persecutions and the like;
the Doctrine of Mahomet is, Kill your Enemies, get as many Wives and Concubines
as you can keep, etc. Fourthly, the Instruments which Jesus made use of to
propagate his Doctrine, were a few poor simple Fishermen, timorous and
illiterate, without Friends, Money, or Interest: The Instrument which Mahomet
had recourse to, were Squadrons of Armed and Bloody Arabians. Fifthly, when
Christ appeared, the Romans, who opposed his Doctrine, were in their greatest
Glory for Learning, Number, and Strength; there was then the largest and the
most powerful Emperor the World ever knew, which made head against it; when
Mahomet appeared, the Empire was broken to pieces, and the Country he appeared
in was utterly void of all Learning, Knowledge, Humility and sense of
Christianity, excepting a few Nestorian Heretics. Lastly, Christ promised
Salvation by dying and rising again; Mahomet by sighting, promising also that
he would come again to them a thousand Years after his departure; but he was
not so good as his word; in so much that the Mufti, finding the People much
dissatisfied, and ready to Mutiny about the Nonaccomplishment of this glorious
Prediction, found this Artifice to appease them; saying, That upon a more
diligent perusal of the Sacred Books, he discovered a mistake in the Figure,
and so it was found to be 2000 and not 1000 Years before this most illustrious
Prophecy should be fullfill'd; which Cheat, so silly as it was, was sufficient
to appease the deluded Rabble. From all these Instances it appears abundantly;
that the great Success in the Propagation of the Mohammedan Religion, had its
Birth and Progress from humane Artifice and Invention.

But here the Mohammedan will reply; if Jesus Christ were the Son of God, and
came down from Heaven to Redeem the World from Error and Eternal Misery, how
comes it to pass, that he has suffered such an Impostour as Mahomet to delude
Mankind for above a thousand Years, ravishing his Spouse the Church out of his
Bosom, and making most direful Butcheries on the Sons and Members of it,
insomuch that there is scarce one third left to Christ; so large and permanent
are the acquisitions of Mahomet. From whence 'twill follow; That Christ must
either want Will or Power to defend that Church, for whose sake it is said, that
he came down from Heaven, and was incarnate, and suffered an Ignominious Death
upon the Cross, and that Mahomet, as one of greater Power and Virtue to defend
his Doctrine, was no Impostour, but a true and glorious Prophet A Discourse
like this, how Blasphemous and Offensive soever it may be to the Ears of a
Christian, must yet be suffered were I to dispute with a Mohammedan; and indeed,
it is the only thing of moment which any of that Religion can suggest in favor
of it, to which I answer.

First, that the same Objection might be made against the Jewish Church of Old;
for they were in comparison of the Pagan World, not so much as one to a
thousand; also, they were frequently oppressed by their Neighbors, and at last
their Laws and Nation in a manner extinguished in the Babylonish Captivity. The
Jewish Church indeed was a Type of the Christian, and the Case the same in
both: God's promises were always Conditional, there being required Repentance,
and Duties on Man's part, for failure whereof severe Judgments were ever
denounced, and thus much Mahomet himself allows every where in his Alcoran. Now
that there was such a General decay of Piety and Christian Virtue in these
People, who now groan under the Mohammedan Yoke, at such time as they became its
Vassals, is notoriously evident in all Monuments of Antiquity; nor does Mahomet
promise Blessings and Mercies to his Followers, but upon such Conditions as are
before mentioned, viz. Belief, Repentance, and Good-Works.

In the next place, that there should be great Apostasies from the Faith, and
that there should arise great Seducers, and false Prophets, or Antichrists, who
should deceive many, and introduce New and Damnable Doctrines, was what Christ
foretold, and cautioned those who embraced his Doctrine, to beware of it: so
that the event, is so far from weakening the Truth of the Christian Religion,
that it does fortify the same, by the accomplishment of what Jesus foretold.

In the third place, such a Breach in the Christian Body, is no diminution of
Christ's Power and Goodness; the Church of Christ in this World, is in a state
Militant, exposed to continual Fatigues and Dangers, and sometimes to Defeats,
and to Captivity; this is nothing, but what Christ also foretold in his Gospel,
and what he himself suffered. Now here indeed is the Power and Goodness of God
made manifest, that, maugre all the Barbarity and Artifice of Turkish
Gorvernment, the number of Christians throughout their Dominions, far exceeds
that of those who hold them in Subjection: Nor have the Turks introduced
amongst the Greeks any Doctrines of their own, which may poison the Christian
Faith; so that however their Temporal Estates may suffer by God's wonderful
Providence and Goodness, they are not in any subjection as to their Souls; all
which serves to wean Men from the Love of this World, and to settle their
thoughts upon a future State, which is indeed the grand Scope and Method of the
Gospel: And as this is the Method with the Church in general, so likewise is it
with every true Christian in particular; and although at first sight, it may
seem something harsh, that Christ who came into the World to destroy the Works
of the Devil, and to redeem Men from Sin, should notwithstanding, suffer the
same Devil to tempt us to sin, and to ravish infinite numbers of Souls daily
out of the Arms of the Church; yet even in this particular, he verifies his own
Doctrine, for Eternal Happiness is called a Crown: Now a Crown or Garland,
through all Antiquity, was ever held a Military Reward, such were their Civil,
Moral, and other Crowns, so famous amongst the Ancients; so that the very
Reward does suppose a Victory, and Victory a Fight, and Fight an Enemy
Conformable hereunto the Apostle tells us, that we wrestle not with Flesh and
Blood, that is, with our own sensual Appetites and Passions; but with
Principalities and Powers, and spiritual Wickednesses in high Places; that is,
with Devils who yet retain some kind of Government, and are in Subordination to
one another, resembling the Hierarchy of the blessed Angels, which are
described also by the like Characters of Thrones Dominions, Principalities, and
Powers, and are always at hand to relieve and defend the Elect against Temporal
Dangers, and the Assaults of those black Legions, as is every where most
abundantly revealed in Scripture. Now if Men for a corruptible Crown venture so
much, he certainly does not deserve one which is Eternal and Incorruptible, who
will not suffer hardship, and combat the Enemies who oppose him. Nor has
Christ left the Members of his Church abandoned and destitute, for besides the
assistance of the blessed Angels, the assistance of his Sacraments, together
with his own Example, Precepts, and Promises, he has for our farther
Encouragement, promiss'd us the assistance of his Holy Spirit, to adorn us with
many singular Graces, and to direct his Church into the way of Truth and
Holiness: To all which, whosoever has a true regard, and lives a virtuous Life,
cannot but have a sollid assurance of being eternally happy.

In the last place, the progress which the Mohammedan Superstition has made, is
not so great, as what the Professors of it do pretend; they never met with any
Philosophers to dispute with them, nor Princes to persecute them; so that like
Weeds in a fruitful Soil, being neglected, they soon grow up, and overrun the
good Ground. What Opposition the Christian Religion met with in its Birth and
Infancy, we have already spoken of; as also, that the Christians, after all
their Calamities, far exceed the Mahometans in number throughout all the Grand
Signior's Dominions.

To put an end to this Discourse, I put it thus to the Mohammedan: Mahomet, in
the Alcoran c. of the Table.
Alcoran, brings in God thus speaking to him: [After many Prophets, we have at
last sent Jesus the Son of Mary; he has confirmed the Ancient Scriptures; We
have given him the Gospel full of Light, to conduct the People into the right
way; they who follow the Gospel, ought to judge how it is taught in the Gospel;
they who do not judge conformably to what God has taught them, are disobedient
to his Divine Majesty.] The like he has in many other places of the Alcoran,
extolling also the Apostles of Jesus, as sent and inspired by God; moreover
(Chap. of Wines) he calls the Jews Blasphemers of Alcor. cap. of Wines.
Mary, when they boasted how they had killed the Messiah, even Jesus the Son of
Mary, the Apostle and Prophet of God. [They did not kill him, nor crucified
him; but they crucified another Person who resembled him, God having taken up
Jesus to himself into Heaven.] Moreover in the forecited Chap. of the Table,
says he, Those who say, that the Messiah the Son of Mary is God, are impious.
Now let us see how these Sayings of Mahomet can hang together: It is in the
Gospel that we read, how Christ (the Word) was God, or the Son of the living
God; also that he was Crucified, and Rose again: It is in the Gospel, where we
read, that Christ taught and commanded his Disciples, to Baptize all Nations,
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; as also
instituted the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and left it as his last Legacy
or Pledge of his Love before his Translation: Now if the Gospel, as Mahomet
tells us, be full of Light, and left us by God, to direct us into the way of
Truth, then must the forementioned Doctrines also be true; for should the
Gospel teach us a Falsehood, it could not be said to be full of Light, and to
direct us into the way of Truth. Now if these Doctrines be true, then must that
which is taught by Mahomet to the contrary be false; and consequently, that
Mahomet, in so teaching, is no less contradictory to himself, than to the
Truth, and was therefore no true Prophet, but a lying and wicked Imposture.

But before I take my leave of Mahomet, it will not be amiss, to advertise my
Reader (if he be a Christian) of the danger, both he and all other Christians
are in, of being reduced under the Slavery of this Mortal and common Enemy; so
that how prosperous soever the Christian Arms are, or have been, we are still
in greater danger than ever, of being ruined by the Legions of these Infidels,
not those of their Spahi, or Janissaries, but by those of another Order far more
mischeivous; forasmuch as they fight under our own Colors, and pretend to be of
our Party, such Enemies are ever looked upon as the most dangerous; for they
are rarely discovered till they have given the Mortal Blow. Now these are the
Socinians, a Sect which, though exploded the World above a thousand Years ago,
under the appellation of Arians, are in these our days risen again from the
Grave, and like Spectrums appear every where in the Dark. In denying therefore
the Divinity of Jesus Christ, they do with the Mahometans not only deny the
Trinity, the Doctrine of Justification, or the Merits of Christ's Satisfaction,
but also Baptism in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, together with
the Doctrine of Original Sin. So many fatal Errors do follow one upon the Neck
of another, by denying that one Fundamental Truth which Christ himself is
pleased to call the Basis of his Church, viz. That glorious confession of St.
Peter, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. The Socinians we all know
are a Mungril Brood, half Christians half Turks, and for this Reason it is that
they swarm so much in Poland, Hungary, and Transylvania, and are found at this
day to fight openly for the Crescent against the Cross. This Argument is too
great and weighty to be discoursed upon under the Method I am engaged to, it
would require a Volume; though we cannot but hope, that as the Pens of pious
and learned Men, will not be wanting to pursue and stab their Errors; so the
Sword of the Magistrate, will not fail to find out their Persons.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Immortality of the Soul.
THe Immortality of Man's Soul is a point of high concernment, and comes next
to be considered of; for as much as all our reliance upon God's Providential
Order, as also all the hopes and rewards which depend upon our Faith with
whatsoever else relates to our Christian Practice, are all built upon this
Persuasion, viz. That the Soul of Man which is the Principle or Source of all
his Actions, is of an incorruptible Nature, and survives the Body.

But before we proceed to Proof, it is necessary to clear some doubts which seem
to obstruct us in the Prosecution of this Argument. The first grand difficulty
is from the Old Testament, for if the Immortality of the Soul be so great a
Truth, and so necessary to be believed, how comes it to pass we find no mention
of it in all the Jewish Writers of Old. In all the Books of the Old Testament,
there is no place to be found where there is so much as mention made of the
Kingdom of Heaven, ^^ of a future (...) after Death. Had the Patriarchs and
Prophets believed any such thing, they must needs have mentioned it some time
or other, as being a thing of the greatest concern to them, and the best
support against the Misfortunes of the World and the Terror of Death. And
above all, David must needs have taken notice of it, having such frequent
occasions given him for it from the whole course and variable occurrences of
his life. Nay, even at his Death, his Discourses with Solomon were very copious
about settling the Temporal Affairs of his Kingdom, but not a Word of the place
where he was going to; nor do we find that Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Samuel or any
of the Patriarchs and Prophets to whom God so largely and familiarly revealed
his Will, ever touched upon this important point at the hour of their Death;
only we read, that they slept with their Fathers, and were gathered to their
People, and there was an end. And though we read often times of the Soul, and of
Hell in the Old Testament; yet it is plain, that by Hell is understood nothing
but Death, or the Grave; as by the Soul also is understood no more but the
animal Life, and someti^es the Heart and Affections. A Resurrection of the Body
is indeed mentioned by Job and Daniel, but that is another point; but no proof
can be produced which speaks of the Soul as of an immaterial and spiritual
substance, subsisting after Death.

To this I answer, First, that the Scripture is not so silent touching the
Soul's Immortality, but that there is ground enough, even from Scripture, to
make the matter dubious. For most Divines are of Opinion, that 'twas Samuel's
real Soul which God suffered the Witch to raise the Night before Readiness Death,
which could not be, had it not survived the Body. And even in Ecclesiastes,
(which Book seems even in a manner to determine Man's felicity in Temporal
Enjoyments,) upon the sum of the matter, we are told by Solomon, that the Body
shall return to the Dust, but the Spirit to God that gave it: though much
either way cannot be concluded from the Passages of this Book, which seems to
be no other than a Collection of Observations made by Solomon, under his two
Capacities, Natural and Divine; or a Miscellany of Aphorisms, as they were
dictated by the Natural Man and Wisdom. But whatever it be, this is certain;
that if the Books of Tobit and of Wisdom be of any Credit with us, (as I know
not but they should,) there is enough for our purpose, being told Cap. 2. and
3. of Wisdom, that God created Man to be Immortal, and that the Souls of the
Righteous are in the hands of God, and there should no Torment touch them; and
a little after, he says, that though they be punished in the sight of Men, yet
is their Hope full of Immortality. Tobit also in his Prayer, Cap. 3. desires of
God, that he might be delivered out of his Distress, and go into the
everlasting place.

In the next place, it is notwithstanding probable that God thought fit to
conceal the clear knowledge of this, as also of other Important Mysteries of
Religion, such as the Doctrine of the Trinity, and of the Incarnation, with
some Truths of this Nature, from the Generality of the Jews, to render the
Preaching of the Gospel more glorious, by the new Discoveries it was to bring
along with it, and this is what Saint Paul tells us expressly, 2 Timothy c. 1. viz.
That Jesus Christ had abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality to
Light through the Gospel; though it is pious also to believe, That many of the
Holy Patriarchs and Prophets under the Mosaical Institution, had some secret
dawnings of this Light, even by the Shadows it reflected. Their wanderings in
the Wilderness represented their Instability, Hardships, and Errors of Life,
all which were to end in Caanan, the place of everlasting Rest. Their Jubelees
also, and Sabbaths, were Types also of the same Everlasting Rest, as St. Paul
fully shows, Hebr. the 4th, where he proves also, that the promised Rest, was
not that which Joshua gave them in Caanan.

Farther yet, it is not improbable that God should conceal this Important Truth
from the Jewish Fathers, to the end their Faith might be more Illustrious; for
the less of Evidence, the greater is the Excellence of Faith, as St. Paul
pursues at large through the 11th Chap. to the Hebrews, in the many noble Acts
of Faith, recorded of the Jewish Worthies, and particularly of the Patriarchs
he expounds it, that they saw the Promises a far off, and that they were only
as Strangers and Pilgrims upon the Earth, seeking another Country which was
heavenly. Now if they who had but such a saint glimmering or dawning of a
future State, should live in such a constant dependence upon God's Providence,
with such exactness of Moral Justice, and with such indifference for the Things
of this Life, in respect of God's Commands, was a thing infinitely more Noble,
than if they had had future Rewards within a near prospect; for then
Self-Interest might seem to have been their Motive, whereas now all their
Obedience was resolved into the Will and Pleasure of their Almighty Sovereign;
and therefore it is that Abraham's Faith is so highly recommended to us in this
Chapter: For in his readiness to sacrifice his Son, he actually sacrificed all
the Affections of Nature, and the considerations even of his Reason, in his
cheerful compliance with God's Commands. Many are the noble Acts of Faith
recorded of these famous Men of old, who yet received not the Promises, God
having provided some better things for us, that they without us, should not be
made perfect.

In short, the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality being taught by Jesus Christ,
and the divine Authority of Jesus Christ being evidently deduced from the
Writings of the Old Testament, it follows also, that this Doctrine was therein
contained, as to its Causes, like as an Embryo in the Womb, which though
invisible for a while, was in its due time to be brought forth, and be made
manifest to the World.

Another Objection from Scripture against the Immortality of the Soul, may be
grounded upon that Passage of Genesis the 9th, whereby God speaking of Man
said, Genesis 9th.
Surely the Blood of your Lives will I require, at the Hand of every Beast will
I require it, etc. what our Translation renders Life, is by the Vulgar rendered
Soul, or the Blood of your Souls, and therefore Levit. 17. it is said, that the
Life or Soul of all Flesh, is the Blood thereof; and for that Reason 'twas that
Blood was prohibited, as being the Life or Soul of every living Creature. Now
if the Life or Soul be the Blood, or in the Blood, (as the Phrase is used
promiscuously,) it follows; that proportionably to the effusion of Blood, the
Soul also is effusible, and consequently divisible and Mortal.

To this it is answered, that Scripture Phrases are not to be taken according to
the strict Notions of Philosophy, but according to the Apprehensions and
customary Speech of those they are directed to: For so it is, that whilst we
see Life departing leisurely upon the effusion of Blood, we say commonly, that
the Soul departs with it, forasmuch as the Spirits which are the great
Instruments of the Soul, are recruited by the Blood, which upon this
consideration also may be said to be the Vehicle of Life, but cannot be said to
be Life it self, but in an improper sense; for though upon an Evacuation of the
Blood, the Soul or Life departs, so the Soul or Life may depart also, the
Blood still remaining in the Body without any notable diminution or alteration.

The next Prejudice against the Immortality of the Soul is grounded upon the
Birth, Growth, Progress, and Decays we observe usually of its operations
conformable to the several Stages of Life. Reason we see does begin to disclose
it self in Childhood; and although some Men have a greater share of it than
others, yet upon the main, it seems to borrow its Improvements from the
different Tempers and Dispositions of Men, and the several Methods of
Education; nay some Countries have an Influence upon the Genius's of Men more
than others, and inclines them to more Man-like and regular Thoughts, and
render them quicker Witted and subtle. If the Soul of Man were endowed
naturally with such excellent Gifts, why does it not manifest the same without
so much cultivation and Expense; without so much diligence and study? and as
fast as we acquire the knowledge of some things, we forget others; so that all
the Productions of the Mind, are rather the effects of Art than of Nature. We
see also, when the Body is most Athletick, the Mind also is most vigorous; and
as the Body decays by Age or Sickness, so the Functions of the Soul languish
also, and by all the Experiments we can make, are totally suppressed by Death.
Besides, if the Soul of Man were Immortal, how comes it to pass, that it has
naturally such a horror of Death; whereas it should rather rejoice at its
approach, as the only means of its deliverance from that Obscurity and
Restraint it is subject to in the Body, from which being once released, it is
said to enjoy a perfect and unchangable State of Bliss.

To the latter part of this Objection it is answered; that the Fears which seize
usually on dying Men, is the best Argument in the World to prove the Soul's
Immortality: For dying Men could never have such a fear, had they not
Apprehensions of a future State, as also of its Duration and Immutability; so
that these Considerations being incident to Men of all Conditions, Ages,
Countries, and Persuasions, prove sufficiently, that they are inherent and
natural to the Soul, as Gravity, Levity, and such like Inclinations of Bodies,
do demonstrate there is another Region without them, to which they naturally
tend; were the Soul of Man as well as his Body extinguishable by Death, to dye
would be no more, than to close up all the Labors of a tedious Life, in one
found and eternal Sleep; a thing which all Men naturally would rather covet
than abhor: But when a departing Soul feels an inward Agony, and labors
betwixt Hopes and Fears, it shows it is approaching toward a future state of
Happiness or Woe, the apprehension whereof, cannot choose but fill it with some
amazement and distraction.

As to the other part of this Objection, viz. That the Powers of the Soul, do
rise and fall proportionably to the Improvements and Delays of Nature,
therefore they must perish with it: I answer, this does by no means follow. A
Candle burns brighter or dimmer, as the Glass or Lanthorn which contains it is
more clear or cloudy, and yet the Light would not be extinguished, though the
brittle Case were broken; but on the contrary, it would appear with a fuller
Luster, and diffuse its Beams without confinement. When we see one of those
floating Castles of the Sea proudly sailing; when we observe how easily it is
turned about, and how regular it is in all its Motions, and yet of that force,
as to resist the blustering Winds, and the raging Ocean, we are easily
persuaded, that there is some one within who animates this great and curious
Machine, who though he be no part or Member of the same, yet all the Effects he
works, depend upon the good disposition and frame of the Ship; for if it be
old, leaky, or any way disabled in the Hulk, Rigging, or any of its subservient
Instruments; the Pilot though never so knowing, will appear very defective in
all his Endeavors; nay, though the Pilot knows himself to be of a more durable
and excellent Frame than the Vessel which carries him, yet he fears a Wreck,
and labors what he can to save his Ship from the Apprehensions he has of the
uncertain State to which he shall be exposed, when the Vessel which now covers
him, shall fall to pieces; how apposite this Emblem is, to illustrate our
present Argument, is obvious to all.

As to the Operations of Man's Soul, I confess much must be allowed to the
force and Methods of Education, and to the Temper of the Climate in which Men
live; and yet we may observe, that the grossest Peasants have naturally all
these Gifts, which the wisest Men by all their Arts and Study can arrive to.
The laborious Husbandman, though he cannot dicourse of the Dimensions, Beauty,
and Motion of the Heavens, understands well enough the Criticisms of every
Season, and knows also the Virtue and Temper of the Earth, he cultivates much
better than the inquisitive Philosopher, and accordingly takes his Prospect,
and makes his profitable Returns; he is cautious and subtle in making his
little Bargains, as the greatest Statesman can pretend to be in his Contracts
and Measures of Government; and what is yet more observable, as he has a
greater dependence upon Providence, so naturally he shows a greater submission
to the Will of Heaven, and bears his Losses and Disappointments with greater
patience, than those who have been studied in the Schools of Virtue; so that
much still is to be attributed to the Genius and Fabric of the Soul, the
natural Source of all his Actions.

We may observe also of many Bruits, that they are endued with a natural
Sagacity, great Docility, and with a greater quickness of Sense, than what any
Man can pretend to, and yet one who is born Deaf, and consequently Dumb, though
he be thus defective in that Sense of Hearing, which is so essentially
requisite for the attainment of Understanding, and by which all Instruction
finds a Passage to the Soul; I say such a Man by the help of Art, (as daily
Experience does evince in Mutes,) may be brought to have an accurate and
correct Conception of things, to be most apprehensive of what is said or done,
and by the least Hints and Motions of the Body, to understand the Minds of
those he does converse with, and by an extraordinary quickness in the motion of
his Hands and Eyes, to communicate his own Thoughts; a thing which Bruits
though never so subtle and prone to Imitation, and though most accute and
attentive in all their Senses, and though instructed with the greatest
diligence, can never arrive to in any degree considerable; which shows
sufficiently, that there is a vast difference betwixt the Nature and Capacity
of the Animal, and those of the Rational Soul.

That force of Judgment and Reason; which we observe frequently in Men under
the decays of Nature, whether by Age, or Sickness, is not, I confess, such a
satisfactory Proof of such a perfection of the Soul, as is now discoursed of;
since we find that even habits of Exercise, acquired in our younger Years, as
of Dancing, or Instrumental performances, continue to some considerable degree
in Men, maugre all the Indispositions and Decays of the Body; much more then
may those Habits of the Mind, which were acquired by Discipline and Study,
continue vigorous in a languishing Constitution, though they were admitted to
spring from an Elementory mixture. But for all this, we may frequently observe
in dying Men, some sudden Sallies and Transports of Joy, some extraordinary
Efforts of Mind, which were not the effects of Education; and above all, in
dying Children, whose tender Age never yet arrived to any such Inclinations, we
may oftentimes observe strange Illuminations, and quietness of Spirit, a little
before their departure, which, I say, can never proceed from what they never
yet acquired, but from the innate Propensities and Genius of the Soul.

But whatsoever that dependence be, which the Soul has upon the Body, and
though it should be granted, that it received all its Improvements from it, yet
this is no Argument against the future and independent State of the Soul after
death. An Embryo we see, is formed and nourished by the Womb, and yet when the
just appointed time for its departure happens, it is so far from ceasing to be
what it was before, that it acquires a nobler Degree of Life, by being
separated from its Matrix, and arrives to the perfection of a living Creature
endued with Sense, which before only was of a vegetative Nature; so it is with
the Soul, which though nourished or cherished by the Ministry of these
Corporeal Organs, when once it is delivered from them, assumes yet a higher
degree of Perfection and Life, and is capable to subsist and act of it self, by
Methods far more Noble and Spiritual, than those by which it was employed, when
it was in, Union with the Body.

Having thus given a summary Reply to such Observations, as seemed most
prejudicial to the Soul's Immortality; let us now proceed to prove this
Doctrine by such natural Medicines, as shall yet give farther satisfaction to
the foregoing Doubts, as well as establish the truth of our present Assertion.
Now the general Arguments by which this Truth is demonstrable, are taken, 1.
From the Operations of the Soul. 2. From the natural Inclinations of the Soul.
3. From the Justice of Divine Providence. And lastly, from the Testimonies of
the wisest Heathens.

First as to the Operations of the rational Soul, though the first Rudiments we
have of things, be borrowed from the Impressions made upon our outward Senses,
yet the Reductions and Inferences we make of things (which are the Works
properly of Reason) are of a much sublimer Nature; so that the Organs to Sense,
are but like the Candles to the Soul, which discover indeed the Object in some
respect, whilst the discerning Faculties, is of an extraction far more
spiritual and pure. With what fixed and constant Applications does the Mind of
Man bend it self with all its Instruments upon its Object, and through how many
Labyrinths of Doubts, and seeming Contradictions does it wind it self in the
pursuit of it, whether it be matter of Judgment and Practice, or of Speculation
only and Knowledge? With what order, silence, and readiness does every Faculty
stand prepared, how quick and diligent are they in their Reports, and how
capacious and indefatigable is the Mind in receiving them? Cogitation never
wearies it, though the Animal Powers grow tired often, and require repose. What
an infinite variety of Objects occurr to the Mind at once, what numberless
Idea's and Images of things hover always over it, and how quick are its
transitions from one thing to another, seeming, as it were, in one Point or
Instant of time, to view all Persons, Things, and Places, which ever made an
impression upon the Sense! The Mind passes in a moment from the dark Center of
the Earth, to the utmost surface of the World, and there surveys this vast
Fabric: From thence it flies through that immense or imaginary space, which is
incomprehensible and infinite, and which surrounds the whole Creation. It
fathoms the Nature of Things, so that whatsoever has an Existence falls under
its consideration; it does not only take in present and past Things, but it
extends its Power to future Objects, whether possible, or such as really shall
come to pass; and by a just balancing of what is past, with what may happen, it
frames excellent Rules for the government of Life; it leaves us Precepts also,
how to moderate our Passions by a right use of them; and by these means,
teaches us the Divine Art of Wisdom, and true Felicity.

How many Conceptions are there, which hourly offer themselves to our Thoughts,
when we retreat a little within our selves? Of these some are simple
Apprehensions only of particular things; others by way of Composition, are the
results of diverse Images, amidst which great multiplicity, some there are which
at the first sight seem plausible and attractive, which yet upon farther
examination of Reason, are found to be superficial only and fallacious: Others
again seem abstruse and useless, which upon a strict Enquiry, are found to be
most beneficial and sollid; and accordingly they are committed to the
Storehouses, or several Apartments of Memory, there to be conserved and
reveiw'd at leisure, and to be produced for service toward our farther
acquisition of Knowledge, or for our better conduct in the Occurrences and
Affairs of Life; all which Conceptions and Inferences of Reason are of that
vast extent, and of that spiritual and subtle Nature, as cannot but tell us,
that their Spring is pure and inexhaustible.

Contemplation is another intellectual Act of a Rational Soul, and indeed the
highest and most Seraphick; for by this the Mind is elevated above all sensible
Forms, and many times deserts the habitation of the Body, it seems to break
Prison, and feels an ineffable Agility and Pleasure in being unconfined, whilst
the Body lies senseless, and as it were enchanted with the soft Chains of
Sleep. And when the Mind recovers it self out of the Ecstasie in which all the
inferior Powers are sometimes drowned, what languors are there in the Soul,
what struglings to return to the same state of separation, whilst it nauseats
all earthly Objects whatsoever; which shows that the Soul thirsts after another
State, independent on the Body, and by consequence must survive it.

In the last place, if we reflect a little upon the Will, the other great
Faculty of a humane Soul, we shall find its Operations to be so free and
magisterial, as cannot but tell us, that the Soul, of which it is a Branch, is
independent on all Animal Inclinations whatsoever; for so it is, that we have a
Power of Election and of Rejection of Objects, contrary all the dictates of
Sense and Passion. We see every day how Men choose Imprisonment rather than
Liberty, Poverty and Disgrace rather than Wealth and Honor; and even Death it
self rather than Life, and can bid an eternal Adieu to all sensual Enjoyments
which Nature can induce them to, and all upon future Considerations; so that
the current of voluntary Actions, mounts much higher we see than the Level of
Nature, and must issue therefore from a higher Spring: Therefore Conscience,
which is nothing but that Impartial Judgment, which every Man makes within the
Tribunal of his own Breast, by reflecting on what he has done, or on what he is
about to do; how quick and impartial is it in recalling on Memory such things,
as many times we would willingly forget; how inexorable is it in condemning the
Man himself, and how severe in inflicting condign Punishments, more powerful,
than all the Tortures of the Rack, and of the longest continuance, and as
ghastly as the Horrors of Hell, being such as no Methods of Reason, no Arts of
Education, no Charms of Sense, no Worldly Fruition, no Spirits of Wine, no
Physic, no good Company, nor Music, and finally no Decays of Body can lay a
Sleep; and on the other hand, when a Man has the Testimony of a good Conscience
on his side, though he expects no Rewards from the World; nay, though he expect
Discomforts, as also loss of Friends, Liberty, Estate and good Name, and even
of life it self, how does he rejoice within; with what cheerful Countenance
does he meet the Menaces of Fortune, and in the midst of Tempests finds
serenity. Now whence can this proceed but from the pretensions the Soul has of
a future Judgment it must undergo after Death, which cannot be, were the Soul
Material and Mortal.

With these, and infinite other things, is the Mind continually employed
without Obstacle or Danger, without Rest or Interruption; so that when all the
Senses and Faculties of the Body are actually suspended as in Sleep, yet is the
Soul still vigilant and active, which shows plainly, that it is of a Nature far
more durable and perfect than any Animal Capacity whatsoever; whether Dreams be
an effect of the Animal Faculty or of the Mind rather, is not yet determined,
it is more probable that they are derived from the latter. It Is true, the
Discourses which we seem to make whilst we are a sleep, how rational soever
they appear to Men in this Circumstance, are found very trivial, and many times
ridiculous when our Senses are full a wake; yet this proves not that these
Thoughts of the Night are derived from some other Principle inferior to the
Mind; it being most evident, that the gross Conceits, with which the thoughts
of sleeping Men are filled, are nothing but the Operations of the Soul,
depraved and clouded with such Vapors as fill the Brain in the time of Sleep,
and which do not only suffocate the Senses for a time, but by their spissous
fumes fill all the Bells of this upper Region of the Mind; so that all its
Operations receive a kind of fuliginous Tincture from them. And hence we find
also, that in Men who are perfectly awake, and whose Brains are filled with
adust and scorching Vapors, (as in a Fever, and many other Distempers,) all
the Actions of the Mind seem like Dreams, and all Objects occurr to fancy full
of Terror, Agony and Distraction, by reason of those burning Particles which
fume from distempered Blood.

The second general Argument for the Soul's Immortatily, is drawn from its
Natural Inclinations, which are such as are still aspiring toward higher
degrees of Perfection. The Mind is never satiated with Knowledge, but still
thirsts after new Discoveries; our perception of one thing does naturally lead
us into the enquiry of another; which having once obtained, our Soul takes a
farther prospect still, till at length being arrived to the first origin of
all things, it dwells on it, and enquires also into the Nature and Perfections
of it, as far as its own limits will allow, and deserves to be united with it
for ever. Now this shows sufficiently, that in this life it is only in a
tendency to that Perfection and Rest, which cannot be attained to but in
another. The descending stone, if any thing obstruct its Motion, does by its
resisting weight tell us, that by Nature it would go farther, and the nearer it
comes to its center, it presses still with greater weight, and, if no obstacle
occurr, it is still more impetuous in its Motion, till it falls at last to that
point of Rest from which 'twill not be removed, but with greater difficulty. In
like manner we observe also, how the Flame mounts upwards, and the more pure
and subtle it is, the quicker in its Motion, which still increases, the higher
it rises, till at last it is swallowed up and incorporated in that immense
Region of Ether, to which it was designed by Nature. Thus fares it with the
Soul of Man, which does enlarge its desires far beyound the Enjoyments of Life;
the more it is filled, the greater still is its appetite, which discovers plainly
that it is not yet arrived to its place of Rest; but is only in the way toward
it, which since it can never find whilst it is in union with the Body; it
remains that there must be a future State, where it shall meet with a suitable
content, which cannot be, unless the Soul by Nature were Incorruptible and
Immortal. So that whosoever shall but make a Reflection upon himself, and
consider the Frame and Temper of his own Mind, must needs observe it to be of a
Nature more active and diffusive than Fire, and more quick and penetrating than
Lightning, and as to its comprehensive Power most capacious, and such as Labor
cannot exhaust, nor Age make feeble: On the contrary, the longer it endures, it
still grows more Vigorous, and requires something more than finite to fills its
Dimensions, from all which we may well conclude, that it is of a Spiritual and
Angelick Nature, and such as must survive all the decays and changes of the
Body.

And indeed, were it corruptible and mortal, it must be some of these ways;
First, by the Action of its Contrary, as we see mixed Bodies are corrupted by
some Excess or Irregularity in their first qualities, which interchequing with
one another, cause a dissolution; but this cannot be the case of the Soul,
which is of a Nature most pure and unmixt. Another way by which things are
destroyed, is by Division and Separation of its parts; thus by daily experience
we see, how things Natural and Artificial are always wasted and broke to
pieces; but the Soul being without Extension of parts, cannot be dissolved by
divisibility. A third way by which we observe Bodies to perish, is by a
deficiency of their Aliment; thus a Tree dies for want of Moisture, and a Lamp
is extinguished for want of Oil to feed it; but it is not so with the Soul of
Man, for though it subsist in the Body, as the flame of a Lamp in the Viol, yet
has it not its Illumination from it. It Is true, it receives many Informations
by the outward Organs of the Senses; but these Images being simple and common,
bear no Analogy to the workings of the Mind; besides, we find the Soul
subsisting and acting when all sensitive assistence is withdrawn. That then, on
which the Mind of Man feeds and improves it self, is that infinite variety of
Objects, whether visible or intellectual, which we meet with perpetually, both
in Heaven and Earth, together with those noble Speculations and Conclusions of
Reason, which though compounded of a few naked Notions, and capable of being
multiplied into as great a number as that of Words, which yet are but the
Productions of a few simple and Alphabetick Sounds, variously mixed and set
together. Now since the Multitude and greatness of mental Objects can never be
exhausted by the Soul, it follows, that the Soul of Man can never perish
through want of a suitable Aliment and Supply; indeed all sensible and material
things cannot so properly be said to perish as to be corrupted, by being
changed into something of another Nature; which Transmutation or Corruption of
things is at the most nothing but a resolution of them into their Elements,
from whose implace new bodies do rise; but the Soul of Man is incapable of all
such Alterations. It is not resolvable into any Elements, as being of a Nature
more unmixt and pure than any Element whatsoever; it is not changeable into
another Soul, or capable of being other than what it is, but by Annihilation;
which yet is not consistent with the Nature of God, who having once created a
thing, is never known to have reduced it to its first nothing.

And therefore, as the third General Argument, the Immortality of the Soul is
yet farther demonstrable from the Justice of God's Providence. We have observed
in the precedent Chapters, that as to the Comforts and Blessings of this Life,
wicked Men generally have the upper hand, whilst Innocent and Virtuous Persons
are oft-times exposed to unjust Sentences, Calumnies, Oppression, Torments,
Imprisonments, Confiscation of Goods, and sometimes to Death it self. How many
a poor and honest Christian is there in the World, who suffers by Sickness,
Cold, Hunger and all courses of Poverty, and yet lives always in an humble
Resignation of his Will to that of Almighty God, and is thankful too for the
small Comforts of life he receives from him by the Ministry of his own
laborious Hands; whilst some rich Glutton lies Batning amidst his Wealth, and
swelling with Pride and Fatness of Bread abandons himself to ease, and all
manner of disorders, both of Body and Mind: Whose Religion indeed consists only
in having some young formal Chaplain for State, rather than for Devotion,
thinking his Equipage defective, unless he has some one in the Ecclesiastic
Livery to wait upon him. Now how these and infinite such Indecencies can
consist with the Justice of God's Providential Government, is a difficulty
which can never be answered, were there not a Future State, where unfortunate
Virtue should be crowned, and prosperous wickedness be chastis'd; which yet can
never be, unless the Soul of Man survive the Miseries and Dissolution of the
Body. The Truth of it is, take away the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality, and
we destroy all Morality; For, morally speaking, who would deny his Soul the
Contents and Pleasures of his Appetite, were all Felicity determined in sensual
and present Enjoyments? Who would scruple to enrich himself by Fraud, Robbery,
and Murder, or to gratify his Lusts by Rapes, Adultery, or any other Enormity,
were he sure there were no Punishnent to be met with after Death? The
consequence of which disorders could be no less than the subversions of all
Property and Civil Government.

Upon these and such like Considerations we may in the last place observe, that
the wisest and most learned Men through all Ages and Countries of the World,
believed the Soul's Immortality, such as Hermes; and Pythagoras, who by the few
Fragments Hermes in Paenrand. cap. 1.
that are extant of him in Ancient Writers, was of the same Belief. Socrates at
his Death adher*d to this Belief also, and resisted the Strength and Malignity
of his Poison by this Antidote; that his Soul shortly should enjoy the Society
of the Virtuous and Blessed in the other World. This Doctrine was much improved
by Plato and his Followers, especially Platinus, who was the most learned of
that Sect, and who wrote ex professo, diverse learned Books upon this Argument;
the sum of which is, that the Soul of Man is not derived from the Nature of
the Parents, but immediately from God; that though it subsist in the Body, yet
its Operations are independent on it: Forasmuch as the Soul, the more it
withdraws it self from all sensible Objects, the more distinct and clear is
Ratiocination. From whence we conclude, that when it shall totally be
separated, it shall apprehend things in an instant by Intuition, without the
helps of reasoning; by Ratiocination is nothing but a Combat of the Mind, to
evince something of which it doubts, which doubtings spring from the gross and
cloudy Suggestions and Obstacles of the Body, from which being once delivered,
there will be no place left for Doubt and Hesitation.

As for the Stoics, their Doctrine seemed to lead them to a different
persuasion, since they placed all the Felicity of Man in the Practice of
Virtue, with regard to no other reward: So that our Moral Actions ceasing, (as
certainly they do after Death,) all is at an end. And this Doctrine of theirs,
though it carried with it a great many of noble Sentiments, yet it failing in
the true end of Man's Felicity, it obliged them to maintain a great number of
Paradoxes in its defense; whereas had they understood the Immortality of the
Soul, and future Rewards after Death, that had been sufficient to have
supported them in a virtuous course of life, maugre all the disasters that
might assault them, and which these Philosophers endeavored to oppose, by so
many noble Precepts of their Doctrine. Seneca in some places seems dubious, yet
in his Consolatory Epistle to Mercia, upon the Death of his Son, he is
altogether Divine. Epictetus also, a Stoic, and the Glory of his Sect and Age,
asserts every where the Soul's Immortality.

But above all, Tully, the Flower of Roman Tuscul. Quaes. lib. 1.
Eloquence, and himself a Philosopher of Plato's School, is every where most
Copious and Ravishing, when he comes to speak of the Capacities and Future
State of the Soul. Many (says he) think the Eternity of Souls to be incredible,
because they cannot comprehend the essence and qualities of a separated Soul;
but can they (let me ask them) define what a Soul is even in the Body, of what
form it is, what its dimensions are, and what is the place of its abode? (And a
little after) for my own part, when I seriously reflect upon the Nature of the
Soul, it seems to be much more difficult and obscure to know what the Soul is,
whilst it is in Conjunction with the Body, where it seems to be lodged, as in a
foreign Inn, than to understand the same when it quits the Lodging in which it
sojourns, and takes its Journey homewards to Heaven, the place of its constant
Habitation: For if we cannot understand that which we never saw, we may as well
disown all knowledge of God as of a separated Soul; but Spirits are to be
understood and known only by Spirits: And by and by he concludes, whatsoever
that thing is which perceives, which understands, which wills, which is always
Vigorous and Masculine, must needs be Celestial and Divine, and therefore
Eternal; for we can form no other Notions of God, but as of a Mind abstracted
from all material Concretion; understanding all things, moving all things, and
being it self ended with an Eternal Activity: All which the same Divine Orator
prosecutes most copiously in his Book de Senectute; telling us, that it was not
the Itch of Disputation which drew him to this Persuasion, but having built his
Belief upon the Authorities of Pythagoras and Socrates, he declares farther,
that such is the celerity of the Soul's Thoughts, so great its Memory of past,
and foresight of future things; so many are its Arts, Sciences, and other
Inventions, that it is inpossible that the Nature which comprehends such
excellent things, should be Mortal; and therefore since the Mind is always a
working, and has this principle of Motion from it self, and knows also no
period of its Motion; because it can never divide from it self, and serve the
nature of the Soul, is void of all Mixture and Allay, and contains nothing
heterogenious to it self; he concludes, that it must be indivisible and
incapable of Dissolution, following (as he says) the Doctrine of Plato in this
particular. To Conclude, he says, that if I do err in this Belief of the Soul's
Immortality, I do err wilfully, nor will I ever retract this beloved Error
whilst I live; or if it should be possible, that being dead, I should be void
of all sense, (as some Minute Sophisters do fancy,) I shall not fear to be
reproached by them.

Nor was this Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality the constant Belief of the
wisest Greeks and Romans only, but also of the Persians too, as appears by the
excellent Discourse of dying Cyrus upon this subject, recorded by Xenophon. And
as for the Poets, they universally tell us of a future State after Death,
wherein the Wicked shall be punished, and the Just rewarded; and what their
sense was in this matter we may read in Lucan, in that noble Description he
makes of Pompey's Apotheosis. From all which Considerations we have a most
undeniable proof of its Eternal Verity. It being impossible that a Doctrine
established upon all the Principles of Reason, of such an universal consent,
and believed by the wisest, best, and most learned Men of all Ages, in
opposition to all humane Interests, and sensual Suggestions whatsoever, should
be the effect only of uncertain Conjecture, or of a premeditated Collusion.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Natural Religion as a means to Salvation.
HAving shown in the precedent Chapters of this Discourse, that the wiser
Heathen had not only a knowledge of the true God, as the Creator and Preserver
of the Universe, but a knowledge also of the Immortality of the Soul, and of a
future State where good Men should receive Rewards, and wicked Men due
Punishments from the hands of God most just; it follows of course to be
inquired into, how far this Belief of theirs might make them capable of such
Happiness or of Salvation. And here I shall promise as a foundation, or first
Principle to what shall follow; that the Efficient or Meritorious Cause of
procuring Salvation to Mankind, can be no other but Jesus Christ, who by his
Obedience and Passion, has redeemed good Men, and made them capable of Eternal
Happiness. Next, that all good Motions, virtuous Inclinations, and intellectual
Improvements, are not acquirable by any Natural strength, but by the help and
concurrence of God. So St. Paul. says expressly, Romans 1. where speaking of the
Heathen, he declares; how that which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God has showed it to them.

Our present enquiry then will be of the instrumental Course, or of the means
by which the Merits of Christ's Life and Passion may be applied to Men, in
order to their Salvation. For the more Methodical Prosecution of which Point
'twill be expedient to consider, First, The State of Mankind before the coming
of Christ. Secondly, the State and Circumstances of Mandkind after his coming.
Before the coming of Christ, as has been already shown the Gentiles, though
they had solid Notions of the Nature and Perfections of a Deity, yet there is
little or nothing extant which can countenance any Expectation they had of such
a Deliverer, as we are now discoursing of: And as to the Jews for what appears
from the Old Testament, they knew but little and obscurely of another Life, as
we have also before spoken-unto. They expected a Deliverer or Messiah it is
true; but then they figured him to be a Temporal Conqueror, such as Caesar or
Alexander, who should erect their Nation also into a vast Empire, and bring the
World under their Subjection. A thing indeed which they earnestly hoped for,
having been themselves under heavy Oppressions for many Ages; Nay, so deep was
this Opinion rooted in the Jews, that even the Disciples of Christ, who were
daily taught by and conversed with him, could hardly be weaned from this
Belief, as appears by the Address or Petition on the behalf of Zebedee's
Children, that they might sit one on the right hand, and the other on the left
hand of Christ in his Kingdom; as also from their constant enquiry of Christ,
when he would restore the Kingdom or Empire unto Israel. But this, as having
been already discoursed of, and being a thing which will admit of little
dispute, I shall readily leave and pass on to take a glance of Mankind after
the coming of Christ, and his Ascension into Heaven.

They who have had the Happiness to be born within the Church, where the
Mysteries of the Christian Religion are sucked in with their first Milk, and
grow up into their Nature; such I say, cannot but have a distinct knowledge of
what the Christian Religion teaches, concerning Christ and his Merits, so that
if they do not act suitably to that knowledge, they are verily inexcusable. But
then for those who never had such an Education, nor ever heard of Christ or his
Gospel, and yet retain true Notions of the Nature, Power, and Justice of God,
and live justly and conformably to that knowledge, retaining a disposition to
receive farther Instruction with all propensity to Virtue; I cannot see but
that they may justly be ranked with those great and wise Men amongst the
Ancients, whether Philosophers or others, in whose Lives and Writings we find
so many remains of the true apprehensions they had of a Deity, together with
their great Pregnancy in Virtue. Now of both these sorts of Men, whether before
or after Christ, the question will be the same; for as much as both were under
the same State and Guidance of Natural Illumination and Moral Virtues.

I know it is granted, and with very good reason too, that such as were
contemporaries with the Patriarchs, though they were not of the same Lineage
with Abraham, had such a knowledge of the true God as made them capable of
Salvation. Such a one was Melchisedech, (of whom we read so great things;) such
a one also Job, who lived probably about the time of the first Patriarchs; for
we read that he lived in the time of the Chaldean greatness; also Jethro, the
Father-in-law of Moses, having such an extraordinary and infallible Information
of the Divine Will from the Mouth and Miracles of Moses, and being himself also
a Person of great Conduct and Wisdom, as appears from Scripture, he could not
but transmit the like Instructions to his Posterity, as did Melchisedech and
Job, without all question; the same likewise we may conclude of the descendents
from Abraham by Ishmael, and of his Offspring by Keturah.

Nor was it unusual in those days, whilst Men lived under that unpolished but
golden Age, for God to manifest his Will by singular Revelation to wise Men,
even long after the Covenant made with Abraham, as appears by the History of
Balaam, who though an Alien from the House of Abraham, had a free Communication
with God upon occasions of Moment, and prophesied as clearly of the coming of
the Messiah, as any other' of the Ancient Patriarchs and Prophets. Now for
those whose Doctrine and Actions are not recorded in sacred Writ, as
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Solon, Lycurgus, Numa, and amongst them, I know
not why I may not reckon that strenuous Defender of his Country's Liberty,
Tullius, Ciccro; I say, these and many others of the same class, as they are
known to have had noble Notions of the Deity, and to have been great and
prudent Masters in matters of Morality; so likewise are they famous for their
own exemplary Lives and Government, and are by the most impartial and learned
Writers, held to be in a State of Salvation.

But for such of the wiser and more virtuous Gentiles who lived after Christ,
Writers generally seem a little more severe, though in Truth, the same Reason
concludes favorably for both alike, it being no less difficult for many great
Men of former Ages, though after Christ, to know the History and Doctrine of
Jesus, as it is for any of the present Age to know the Transactions in the
Dominions of Prester John, or of the Emperor of China. Nay, much more
difficult, for of these Countries so remote as they are, we have, by the help
of Navigation and Commerce, some sort of Account; but the Jews as they were to
the Romans but an inconsiderable part of their Government, so the Romans
themselves held no such Communication by Sea as now adays, being surrounded
with Germans, Dacians, Parthians, Indians, and the like, with whom they were in
perpetual Hostility; and what Countries and Kingdoms lay beyond these, were
utterly unknown to them by any kind of Correspondence: So that we may as
rationally conclude, that every Man now adays is an ignorant Idiot, who does
not know perhaps some new and great accident in Japan, or the Regions beyond
the Mountains of the Moon, as that all were damned though otherwise never so
wise and virtuous, who did not know the History of the Gospel, when yet we find
how the Disciples themselves, who conversed with Jesus, were ignorant of the
Nature of his Government, expecting a temporal Messiah, nor were they fully
instructed till after the descent of the Holy Ghost; and even then too, we find
Peter doubting whether it were lawful to converse with the Gentiles as appears
by the case of Cornelius. It remains therefore that the Gentiles of this latter
Age of the World, could have no other ways of knowing the Christian Mysteries,
but by such ordinary methods as other matters of Fact are brought to Light,
which failing, the only Medium of Knowledge and Information, must be by an
extraordinary Revealer.

And this was the true State of the World, in the first Age of the Church, when
the Disciples of Jesus, furnished with supernatural Gifts and Graces, were made
the Apostles and Messengers of these glad Tidings of Salvation; nor did they
do all this in one Age, but succeeding Ages and Nations became Converts to the
Christian Faith, as new Discoveries, and Men of an Apostolic Spirit did
present themselves, as all Histories do testify: This then being the greatest
Point in Controversy, I shall endeavor to pursue it more fully, by such
Arguments as Natural Reason and Scripture can afford us.

First then, that such Men as we now speak of, having not by any Means,
received Information of the Christian Mysteries, should yet be capable of
Salvation, is very insonant to the Nature of an All-mercifull and Righteous
God, viz. Not to punish Men for what was not in their Power to help, or if in
their Power, they would have yielded all dutiful Compliance with it. Now as
this is consonant to God's Goodness, so is it not derogatory to his Justice,
considering, as I promised at first, that such a knowledge of God and Practice
of Moral Virtues, as we find oftentimes amongst the Gentiles; are the Gifts of
God, and not the Effects of Man's proper Will and Power; neither yet are they
derogatory to the Merits of Christ, when we call to mind what was above
promised; that Christ's Obedience and Passion, is the efficient and meritorious
Cause of Man's Salvation; so that Man's knowledge being only instrumental,
whatsoever influence it has, it must be derived also from God, and resolved
finally into the Merits of Christ, according to my first two Axioms or
Postulata's; let us argue then the Point a little closer: The King of England
perhaps sends a considerable Sum of Money, for the Redemption of all English
Slaves throughout the Turkish Dominions; those who hearing the joyful News,
readily embrace it with all imaginable Thankfulness, whilst others hearing
nothing of it sit silent: now would it not seem very hard and unjust, that
these should be excluded from all Benefit by this Act of Grace and Bounty, and
left in perpetual Bondage, because they did not lay hold of that which they
never heard of, which yet doubtless they would have embraced also, with the
same sense of Gratitude with others, had they had the same notice; nay rather,
do we not account an unknown Act of Grace and Bounty done to a Man, and before
it is sought for, to carry Characters of greater Goodness, and to lay a stronger
Obligation also upon the Receiver, when he shall come to have a knowledge of his
most generous Benefactour. So that I doubt not, but Socrates, Aristides,
Epictetus, with other such like Heroes, (whom without Blasphemy or Heresy, we
may suppose capable of Mercy in the day of Judgment,) will exalt with great
Joy, and celebrate the Praises of their gracious Redeemer, when they shall see
him (though in the Clouds, yet) far more glorious than the Sun, and by whose
Merits and Mercies they were brought into that luminous Region of Eternal
Happiness.

And as this is the Voice of Reason, so also is it of the Holy Scriptures. The
first is that of the 11th to the Hebrews, where we read; that, he that comes
to God, must believe he is, and the Rewarder of them who diligently seek him.
Now this belief many of the Heathens had, viz. of his Existence, as also of a
future State, where, after this Life, good Men should be rewarded, and the
Wicked Men punished: we see then, that by these two Acts of Assent, the
Heathens were said to come to God, or to be admitted to his Favor and Grace,
which yet cannot be verified of them, unless they be accounted capable of
Salvation; nay, farther, this kind of coming to God, is called Faith, and such
a Faith, without which it is impossible to please him; when the Apostle tells us
in the Context, That without Faith it is impossible to please God, subjoining it
presently as a Reason: For he that comes to God, must believe that he is, etc.
Another Argument from Scripture, is that Passage of Cornelius the Centurion,
Act the 10th. who though a Heathen, yet by his Alms and Prayers, and the devout
Order he kept in his Family, procured the Grace and Favor of God, to have St.
Peter sent to him for his farther instruction. And of such force and conviction
was this Truth, that even St. Peter himself, though the Apostle of the
Circumcision, could not forbear to make an open profession of it, saying, of a
truth I find, that God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation, he that
fears God, and works Righteousness, (as did Cornelius, and many also of the
illuminated Gentiles,) is accepted of him. Nay St. Peter's Discourse does
imply, that in every Nation there might be some, who feared God, and wrought
Righteousness, and if so, of a certain truth, they are accepted of him. To
these Places we may add, what St. Paul testifies of himself, that though he had
an historical Knowledge of the Life, Doctrines and Sufferings of Jesus, and was
a violent Persecuter of those who believed on him, yet obtained Mercy, because
he did it in Ignorance and Unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. ought we therefore to exclude
all from Mercy who never heard of Jesus, and yet such too, as would have been
as ready as others to embrace him, and to suffer for him, had he been revealed
unto them?

The last Argument which I shall take from Scripture, is that of the 1st to the
Romans: For the invisible Things of him (says St. Paul) from the Creation of
the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the Things that are made, even
his Eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without Excuse. Here we see,
that the Apostle condemns the Gentiles not for Ignorance, or not Believing, but
for their Idolatrous Worship, and not living conformably to that knowledge they
had by the Works of the Creation of God's Eternity and Power, which Knowledge
renders them inexcusable; and yet they would have been excusable, had not their
Knowledge, joined with a suitable Worship of the same true God, been capable to
have procured their Happiness: For it would be unjust to condemn Men, for not
doing of a thing, and yet condemn them too, although they do it; and therefore
a good Life, joined with their Knowledge, must leave them with a reasonable
Excuse, or make them capable of Salvation. It Is true, St. Paul speaks in
general Terms, that the Gentiles were Idolaters, and for that reason
condemnable, as acting contrary to Knowledge; but that all the Gentiles thus
acted contrary to Knowledge, does by no means follow from St. Paul's manner of
expressing himself, it being usual in Scripture, to speak of all in general and
comprehensive Terms, when such as are or may be excepted, are very few in
number: So the Prophet Elijah, in the Term of that general Apostasy under Ahab
exclaimed, saying, that he alone was left of all the true Worshipers of God, 1
Kings 19. But God tells him, that he had left in Israel 7000 Men, who had not
bowed the Knee to Baal; and even in Sodom, the most wicked Town that ever was
upon the Earth, there was found a Righteous Lot.

To put the Question out of all dispute, we have a most pregnant Proof from St.
Paul, in his continuation of this Argument, 2 Romans v. 10. pronouncing, Glory
Honor, and Peace, to every one that works Good, to the Jew first, and also
to the Gentile, for there is no respect of Persons with God; (telling us also,)
that not the Hearers, but that the Doers of the Law are justified before God:
For when the Gentiles, who have not the Law, (that is, a revealed Written Law,)
do by Nature the Things contained in the Law, they having not the Law, are a
Law unto themselves, which show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts,
their Consciences also bearing witness, etc. In this Place, St. Paul treating
professedly of the Law of Nature, by which the Gentiles did act, calls it the
Law (viz. of God) written in their Hearts, and that acting according to the
Dictates of this Law, they do the Things contained in the Law, having the
Testimony also of their Consciences acquitting them for so doing; and therefore
Doers of the Law, are justified in the sight of God. And truly I am the more
confirmed in this Opinion, when I think upon that last great and final
Sentence, which shall pass on Men, at the general Judgment of the World: Many
then shall make great Ostentation of the Faith, saying; Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, Mat. 7. and in thy Name cast out Devils, etc. But
Christ knows them not, but tells them, Mat. 25. that because they did not do
Works of Mercy toward their Brethren, (the suffering Members of Christ) they
should go into utter Darkness, but that those who did show compassion toward
them, should enter into Everlasting Happiness.

Let us now see, what may be objected against this Discourse: And first, Christ
before his Ascension, Mark 16. says. He that believes, and is Baptized, shall
be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned: Now, that those who never
heard of Christ, do not believe, is plain also (from 10th to the Rom.) How
shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard. and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? therefore no Salvation to those who never heard of Christ.

To this Objection (which indeed carries the greatest force of any thing that
can be urged) I answer: First, that Passage of the 16th of St. Mark, He that
believes not is damned, is not to be understood negatively, as though an
Ignorance of Christ, and of his Doctrines, did certainly expose Men to
Damnation; for then the Children of Christian Parents, dying before they come
of Age, to make an Act of Faith, would be damned: The Words then of this Place
do include a positive Act of dis-believing, or rejecting the Doctrines of
Christ after they are proposed: This is evident from the Context in the
precedent Verse, where Christ gives Authority to his Disciples; saying, Go ye
into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature; he that believes
and is Baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. So
that they are damned, who after the Gospel was preached to them, did yet reject
it, all which concerns not those, who never heard of Christ, nor of his Gospel

This then does supersede that also of Romans the 10th. where the Apostle
speaks of a positive and explicit Act of Faith, for v. the 9th he says;
that if thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy
Heart, that God raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved: Now as such a
Faith cannot be attained, but by the preaching of the Gospel, or from
extraordinary Revelation, so neither does it follow from hence, that all who
have not received this joyful Tidings of the Gospel, shall not be saved. He
that is a great Linguist, is generally reckoned to be a learned Man, and yet
from thence it does not follow, that he who is not a great Linguist, is not a
learned Man; upon the whole, the Sense of the Apostle amounts to no more but
this; that they who by the hearing of God's Word, or of Teachers, shall arrive
to a knowledge of Jesus Christ their Savior, and believe his Resurrection, are
in a State of Salvation, quoad Antecedens, in respect of the means; but quoad
Consequens, or the effect, that all such shall actually be saved, is no way
ascertained from the forementioned place. We read every where in Scripture, of
those who make shipwreck of their Faith, and of falling from the Faith: and
when we are exhorted to stand steadfast in the Faith, this does imply a
possibility of lapsing: Nor is it any thing to the purpose to say, that no Man,
who has once embraced the true Faith, can fall from it; for the Faith which the
Apostles exhorts us to stand steadfast in, is doubtless the True Faith. In like
manner at the 13 v. of the same 10th Chap. to the Romans we read, that
whosoever calls upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved; and yet Matthew. 7th
we read, Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the Will, etc. So that all such Places are not to be
understood Mathematically, and precisely such as cannot be otherwise; but
morally, or as to the general, being attended with a good Life, and good Works
of Christian Charity.

But it may be farther objected, John the 3d. Except a Man be born of Water and
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; so that Salvation cannot
be had without Baptism, but they who never heard of Christ, could never be
Baptized into Christ, and must be therefore excluded Salvation. To this I
answer, that Baptism under the Gospel, is the same with Circumcision under the
Law, this being a Type of the other, and both of them a Sign or Seal of a
Covenant of Mercy. But in the time of the Law, we read of many who were not
Circumcised, such as Job, Melchisedech, Lot, and others, of whose Salvation we
can in no ways doubt; the Females also amongst the Jews were incapable of
Circumcision, and yet we doubt not but great Numbers of them were saved; so
likewise since the time of the Gospel, we may charitably believe, that the
Children of Christian Parents who dyed before Baptism, may be capable of
Salvation also. 2. The forementioned place therefore is of the same Latitude
with that of John the 16th. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you; from which place, some of the
Ancients, and the Greeks to this day, hold the Eucharist necessary to Infants;
but notwithstanding that the form of Words be the same in both Places, yet we
do not believe, that Children are obliged to come to the Lord's Supper; and
even Men who dye immediately after Baptism, are undoubtedly saved, though they
were never Partakers of the Holy Communion.

It has been a Maxim, I know amongst the Ancients, that Extra Ecclesiam non est
salus, which throughout all Ages (with due Reverence do I speak it) has been
by many so strained and stretched, or rather straitened and confined, as to
exclude all other Christians also from Salvation, who are not of the same
Communion with themselves; Nay, even amongst us of this Age and Nation, we have
a sort of Grinning, Censorious, Prick-ear'd Hypocrites, who will hardly believe
any to have a true Call, who are not of their own Brotherhood, Sisterhood, I
might say: For their Devotion leans, or rather lies much that way. The former
Maxim then (with all submission to the venerable asserters of it) does not so
much concern those who never were within the Communion of the Church, as them
who having been sometimes within its Bosom, are afterward cut off by
Excommunication, and ejected out of it for Schism, Heresy, or some grievous
crimes, as the practices of all Ages do amply testify, though which of the
contending parties was in the right, or was the true Church, was many times a
matter of endless Dispute. Emulation and private Animosities being oftentimes
the Cause and Fomenter of such severe Censures: And to show that this is the
true sense of the forementioned Maxim, I would only ask of what Communion were
the Magi, or the wise Men in the East, who came to worship Christ? Not of the
Jewish Synagogue certainly, nor of the number of those who were Baptized into
the Christian Faith. And yet no Man doubts but that they who were the first to
worship Christ with their rich Offerings, and came so long a Journey, were made
partakers of the Benefits of his Life and Passion.

The Jewish Church was a Type of the Christian, and much narrower, whether we
consider its Dimensions or the Terms of its Communion; for they were under
stricter Covenants of Salvation and Mercy, under diverse Burdensome Ordinances,
and more especially obliged to Circumcision; and yet by God's special Mercy,
great numbers were saved, who were strangers to the Church. For besides, such
aforementioned as Job, Melchisedech, and others, with their Families, we read
of Nineveh, the greatest City in the World, together with its King, the most
Potent Temporal Prince then reigning upon the Earth, that upon the Preaching of
Jonah, they turned from their evil way to the true God, with such humility and
severity of Repentance as we no where read the like. For even their very Cattle
were obliged to fast, and were clothed with Sackcloth: Now can we think that
all they whom God by such an especial care did call to Repentance, and who
testified such an universal and ready Obedience to his heavenly Will, were
delivered only from Temporal judgments, to be afterward overwhelmed all of
them with Eternal Torments? But it may be said, that this was an Extraordinary
Case, and so say I too. The ordinary and safest way to Salvation, is by a
belief on Jesus Christ, and of his Mysteries, and by the Administration of the
Sacraments, and the observance of Evangelical Duties. But notwithstanding, God
who may and often does dispense with his own Methods, may in some extraordinary
Cases show Mercy to a few, and call them by some special means unto Salvation.

In the last place, it may be alleged perhaps, That the works of the best Men
amongst the Heathens, cannot be acceptable in the sight of God; for as much as
they want Charity. Now Charity is one of the Graces of God's holy Spirit, not
acquirable, but insus'd under the dispensation of the Gospel. It Is true,
Charity is an excellent Grace, and the noblest of all those which we are
capable to receive from the inspiration of God's holy Spirit; for other Graces
tend chiefly to the private benefit of him on whom they are bestowed; but
Charity is a Ray of the divine Beauty and Excellence, and dilates it self in
the good of others, extending it self through the whole World without the least
prospect of advantage to it self. It carries the Soul as on the Wings of a
Cherubim into the divine Presence, where contemplating its own unworthiness in
the infinite Perfection and Goodness of God, it sallies out into Acts of
Admiring and Adoration, and thinks all too little for an Allmerciful and
Omnipotent Creator. Now if the Heathens had Speculations of this kind, (though
imperfect ones, but suitable to the means of knowledge,) I cannot see why they
might not exert them by some efforts, which might hold a kind of Analogy with
those purer Emanations of that true flaming Charity, which is no ways
attainable, but by the free Grace and infusion of the Holy Ghost; for though
the better Heathens did not always do good works (or perhaps but seldom) with a
reference of them to God, as the ultimate end and chiefest good; yet for as
much as they proposed good by what they did, and practiced Virtue for its own
reward, the sole Intention of a good end (without farther reward) was an
implicit devolution of the action it self upon God, as the first Mover and
grand Scope to which it tended. And if to make an action good, it be requisite
that the Agent have God always before his Eyes, some good works even of the
best Christians, will be found defective upon this account; for even the best
of Men may many times do good works, because they are good, not thinking of
God, the Original of all good, and into whom, as into the Ocean, all streams of
Goodness at last return.

The sum of what I have hitherto spoken upon this Argument does amount to
this; That an explicit Belief of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion,
accompanied with an Oral Confession, and the Administration of the Sacraments,
though they be points of greatest Moment, and exceeding helpful, and the only
safe way to Man's Salvation, yet are they not so absolutely and indispensably
necessary, but that it is possible, in some extraordinary cases, Salvation may
be obtained where these are wanting.

Nor is this Doctrine of the possibility of Salvation for the Gentiles, in such
form as has been already stated, without its Abettours, even amongst the most
learned and impartial, such as in August. de civit. dei. l. 18. c. 47.
Ludovicus Vives, and Tract. de salut. Pagan.
Erasmus, as Bishop Apparat p. 36.
Montacute reports. Nay he tells us out of Baletus, that the Divines of Colon
were sometimes of Opinion, that Aristotle was saved; teaching farther, that
Aristotle was the fore runner of Christ in what related to Nature, as John the
Baptist was in what related to Grace. But to pass by this Opinion touching
Aristotle, Andreas Vega, and Dominicus a Soto in the Council of Trent, openly
defended the above mentioned Doctrine of the possibility of the Gentiles being
saved, and Relect. 5. ^^ Indis Sect. 8.
Franciscus a Victoria lays it down as the Doctrine of St. Thomas of Aquin,
that the Indians who never heard of Christ, were not guilty of the sin of
Infidelity. Amongst the reformed Zuinglius in his Exposition of the Christian
Faith, declared to Francis the King of France, (whom Vossius Disputat. de
Sa^ct. 25. These. 11.
calls Maximi Nominis Expositor Fidei,) does by name place Aristides, Socrates,
the Scipioes, and the Cato^s amongst the Blessed. Nor did many of the Primitive
Fathers, such as Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Epiphanius, and
Chrisostom stick to affirm it of many of the Ancient Heathens, who lived before
the Nativity of Christ, as Isaac, Casaubon, Ini^^^ 1. (...).
reports.

But on which side soever the Truth does lie, it is not a point of that moment
as to dissolve the Bond of Charity amongst Christians, especially when Charity,
the very Bond of Perfection, inclines us to take side with Mercy. God's Mercy
is his Triumphant Attribute, the Lord Merciful and Gracious, long suffering and
of great goodness, is the old Style, and that by which God proclaimed his
greatness, (Exodus 3. 4.) and whosoever shall consider the ineffable Mystery of
the Son of God's Incarnation; as also the Redemption of the World by his most
holy Life, dolorous Passion, and glorious Resurrection and Ascension, cannot
but feel some holy Flames of divine Love, whose light may extend it self to the
Gentiles. Nay, though the Opinion which I have been now defending were false,
yet is it not dangerous or damnable: For the Belief even of a Falsehood, to such
as are not convinced that it is so, may be pious and praise worthy. It Is
certainly praise worthy and pious for a Man to believe his Parents or
Benefactours to be happy in Heaven, and yet peradventure they may be in the
number of the Reprobate. Of all Men, Christians certainly are in the happiest
Estate, when we consider the assistance they have from the Gospel, and yet are
they in the unhappiest state too upon the same Consideration, for where much is
given, much will be required.

Great and infinite are the Advantages which the Gospel offers; we are there
taught in what a dangerous Estate we are in by Nature, we are taught also by
whom we are delivered from danger, and how we may have the benefit of such
Deliverance: We have Holy Sacraments to purge our Sins, and to increase our
Grace, we have many glorious Examples of Piety and Virtue to encourage us, and
most heavenly Precepts, by which to govern our Lives; we have the recompense of
Reward in sight, and Promises of Help, both for our Direction and Furtherance
in the way.

The Church, which is abundantly furnished with all these means, may justly be
compared to a well built Ship, in which are all sorts of Provisions requisite
for a long Voyage. Suppose we then, that a Man were to take his Voyage into a
new World (as indeed we are all going thitherward in a spiritual sense) and
that wanting the convenience of a good Vessel, well rigged and furnished, he
should set forth upon his strength, or perhaps embark himself upon some poor,
shattered, leaking Boat or Junc, such as are in use amongst the Indians, it is
ten thousand to one, but such a Man must perish, though it is not utterly
impossible, but that with great care and difficulty, and by God's singular
Providence, he may arrive thither with safety; and for ought we know, the new
World, I mean America, was Peopled some such way, admitting Noah's Flood to
have been universal; since we cannot find from any Records of Antiquity, that
Navigation after the Deluge was in any perfection, but that Men of that and of
some succeeding Ages, considering how they had escaped the dangers of the
Waters, were fearful to commit themselves to the boundless Ocean, not daring
so much, as to put to Sea for a long time after, and that too by little and
little, as Experience encouraged them to make farther Trial. The Emblem holds
good Analogy with the Voyage we are all making into the other World: This Life
is the Sea, where we are exposed to Tempests and Fatigues; we have a bottomless
Gulf under us, and many Rocks, Quicksands, and Hurry-canes ever and anon
threatening to destroy us, and notwithstanding the good Provision with which the
Ship is fraught; if we live not temporately, and with good conduct, we may fall
short of the desired Country, whilst others by God's singular Providence and
Mercy, though destitute of such helps, may find an extraordinary deliverance,
as we find sometimes to have happened to such, as putting to Sea ill provided,
and for a long time given over for lost, have after all their dangers arrived
safely to the Haven.

Put the Case we were upon a Voyage to America (or the New World, as we call
it,) and that others also should be bound for the same Coast, but not perhaps
in the same Bottom, who though they should sail at some distance from us, yet
ought we to have compassion on them, and so much the more, the greater should
their distance be, and the weaker the Ship which carried them; and if we could
not take them into our own Vessel, at least we were bound to succor them, as
far as we were able, and where that could not be done, to recommend them to the
Mercy of Almighty God. But instead of these Offices of Humanity, if we should
deny them Succor, nay perhaps turn Pirates and fall upon them, and make them
Prize, and condemn all the Passengers to Chains and Slavery; would not such
Proceedings seem very inhumane, and might we not fear, that a justly
exasporated God, might bring our own Ship under some fatal Distress, before it
should arrive to the Land 'twas bound for: The Parallel is obvious.

Charity, is an Heroic and Divine Grace, in the Judgment of St. Paul, far
exceeding all other Gifts, how excellent soever; nay, even Faith and Martyrdom,
without it, would be to little purpose. The Gifts of Prophesies and Tongues
shall cease; and Knowledge, like a Dream, shall vanish; for we know but in part,
and that like the reflection of Images from a brittle Glass: But Charity is of
a permanent and Celestial Nature, it hops all things, it boasts not it
self, it seeks not its own but another's good, and of the three Graces,
though it be ranked in the last place, yet is it, by the Apostle, accounted the
first and greatest of them. If we look into the Transactions of the World, we
shall ever find those to have been the bravest, who were most diffusive of
their Goodness, and the wider they extended their Compassion and Bounty, the
greater Honors were they ever thought worthy of. This greatness of Mind, in
doing good to all, not that swelling Ambition of enlarging it self by Dominion
and Empire, was that in all Ages made Men Heroes, and in some sort Partakers of
the Divine Nature; whereas private Ends, with thoughts and Contrivances which
terminate in our own good only, have been ever accounted Characters of a narrow
and straitened Mind.

The CONCLUSION.
THE great Scope of this whole Discourse, through all the precedent Chapters,
has been to combat Atheism and Irreligion, or Profaness, from the Light of
Nature, which not only shows us the Existence of a God, but that the most
perfect and purest Worship, by which a Creature is capable to express his
Adoration, is most justly due unto him. The Existence of a God is discovered to
us from the Theory of Nature, from Principles of Reason, and from the Eminent
Testimonies of the best Men in all Ages. By the same Light we discover also
some of the Attributes of God, indeed so Essential, that they are
incommunicable to any other Being, and serve to prove both the Unity, as well
as the Verity of the Godhead. These I have briefly spoken to, forasmuch as they
are every where copiously and clearly handled by such, as write upon this
Subject.

The considerations of God, in relation to his Creatures, do afford us a larger
field of Matter to travel in, whether we reflect upon his Works, or the Worship
he requires of us. The grand Work of Creation, is as demonstrable as any thing
in Nature, from the impossibility of a fortuitous production of the World, out
of a pre-existent Chaos, and from an Incorruptibility of an Eternity of Matter
with that of the Godhead; so that the very Creation of the World out of
nothing, is another Argument of the Verity and Unity of the Divine Nature.

But God's conserving Power or Providence, being that we daily Experiment, and
by which we have so near and necessary a dependence on him, even in our Beings,
and in all our Actions, is a Point of great Importance also, and capable of a
larger Discourse; whether we consider the Works of Nature in general, or Humane
Affairs, in the regard they have either to public Societies and Kingdoms, or
to the particular Concerns of private Men. That God's Providence is concerned
in all these, and has an influence upon the Revolutions of Kingdoms is
unquestionable: What Measures and Inferences may be drawn from hence, is a
Matter of more dispute, wherein we have endeavored to show, that God's
determination or ordering of these Affairs, is no Argument to prove them to be
always good, so as to justify the Instrument, by which such his Purposes are
brought to pass. We have seen in transitu what influence God's free Knowledge
has on future Actions, and how far Man may be a free Agent, notwithstanding
such Prescience or Decrees of God.

What hitherto has been spoken of, are Points of speculation; that which
follows, and is so necessary also to be known of God concerns Practice, being
no other than our Duty to him, which is his Worship. We have seen how the
Gentiles, and that all Ages and Kingdoms of the World, ever held a Divine
Worship, to be due from them, though almost all of them were Idolaters, and
superstitious in such Worship, placing it on false Gods; and those few amongst
them, who by the Light of Nature, were directed to the Worship of the true God,
were yet very ignorant of the true Worship of God; such a Worship being to be
known only by Divine Revelation. And although all the Heathen Lawgivers and
Founders of Religion pretended to receive their Precepts from some kind of
Deity, and by Revelation, yet forasmuch as all such Deities were notoriously
false, and their Superstition long since vanished out of the World, we ought
not to give them a place amongst the Founders of revealed Worship; and
therefore we have considered such religious Worship, as is at this day in
Vogue, having for its Object the true God, and which make claim also to divine
Revelation: Of which

The first is the Jewish, touching whose Original, there is no dispute amongst
any Professors of Religion at this day extant in the World; for both
Christians, as well as Mahometans, do acknowledge Moses to have received his
Laws from God; and that the Jews were a People set apart by God for his
peculiar Worship, appears abundantly from the preservation of that little
Nation, and of their Rites amidst all the Kingdoms of the Earth which
surrounded them, and held them in subjection; from whom, as they differed
extremely in Matters of Religion, so was it impossible, but their Religion
should have been drowned in that Ocean of Superstition which encompassed them
(considering also their frequent Apostasies, Persecutions, and Inclinations to
Idolatry,) had they not been upheld by a Divine Power, from whom their Religion
was derived.

Notwithstanding this, their Religion was but Temporary, and to determine in
the Messiah, to whom also all the great Promises of the Old Testament, all the
Rites, Ceremonies, and Sacrifices had an immediate regard, as Types and
Figures, in whom also they were all fully verified and accomplished; which
Messiah, was no other but Jesus of Nazareth, the true Savior, not only of the
Jews, but of all other Nations, and who also was and is the Author and
Preserver of the Christian Religion, which God was pleased to reveal by him, as
the only safe and secure way to everlasting Happiness. This has been the chief
Subject of this Book, and the Truth hereof has been demonstrated, not only from
the Types and Prophesies of the Old Testament, but from the Life, Doctrine, and
Miracles of Jesus; to which may be added, the miraculous Effects and Success,
this Doctrine met with in the Conversion of the World.

The Mohammedan Sect, had for its Author Mahomet, who also pretended to divine
Revelation; but for what appears of him, how wide soever he has extended his
Dominion, he was no other than a notorious Impostor, whose Paradise was
Sensuality, and his Religion Empire.

The Discourse of the Soul's Immortality, was a natural Result from the former
Considerations, of which also the better and more learned Heathens had a
belief, no less than of the Existence of God, and of a Providence: From all
which Premises by an unavoidable Sequel of Reason, we were led on to enquire,
what Benefits such Heathens were capable to receive from this kind of
Knowledge, concluding according to the dictates of Charity, that they were not
all excluded from Salvation through the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ, whom
they never had the means to understand; for though they not the true knowledge
of God, (which can be no other but what is revealed,) yet having a knowledge of
the true God from the Light of Nature, that Knowledge, by God's Mercy, with a
Life suitable thereunto, might render them capable of future Bliss.

Thus far the Light of Nature, like that of the Star to the Magi, may conduct
the Gentiles to the Nativity of Christ, and of his Religion, where vanishing at
the rising of the Sun, even that of Righteousness, which does illuminate and
quicken the World with its salutiserous Beams, we must be now contented to lose
our midnight Guide, in that glorious Luminary of the Day, whose benign
Influence, does not only quicken all it shines upon, but gives an orient Luster
to it and discovers to us great and noble Prospects, some more remote and
distant, and others near at hand.

The first thing which occurs to our view from the Light of the Gospel, is the
Church, which presents it self something in the appearance of a fair Forest,
wherein are all sorts of Trees and Plants, some bearing good Fruit, some bad,
with numberless Rocks and stumbling Stones, together with Thorns and Briars;
where we may observe also diverse large Roads, with many By-ways and Paths
crossing and winding with in one another, in manner of a Labyrinth. Beyond this
we have two vast and boundless Prospects, viz. one of a most glorious Region,
lying in a most sweet and serene Air, and crowned with a most beautiful City,
the whole Country being adorned every where with infinite variety of Fountains
and Rivulets, of Fruit Trees, Gardens, Groves, odoriferous Flowers and Plants,
with whatsoever there is in Nature, which may refresh and charm the weary and
curious Traveller. The other Prospect, as of a Region quite different from the
former, being covered continually with a pitchy Smoke, mixed with Gletes of
sulphurous Flames, which do not only threaten to obscure the Sun, but with
their noisome and bituminous Smells, accompanied with loud Groans and Howlings,
fill the Eyes and Ears of the beholder with as great a Terror, as the other
Region-does affect him with Admiration and Delight.

Now so it is, that whosoever would arrive to that glorious Region before
mentioned, must pass through this Forest, where are many wild Beasts and
Serpents, many hollow, dark Grots or Dens; and the many cross Paths turning and
winding one within another, make the Passage very difficult and dangerous; so
that the Traveller will be in Peril of falling into inextricable Perplexities,
without the help of an experienced Guide. And truly whosoever travels this way,
it will not be long before he shall find a Guide, offering himself to be his
Convoy; saying, Sir, if you please to follow me, I will undertake to furnish
you with what is necessary for this Journey, and bring you safe to that
delightful Country which you see before you, though afar off, and whither you
desire to arrive. No, says another Guide, believe him not, for he will but
trapan you, and carry you to that gloomy Region of Darkness and Horror; but if
you please to trust your self with me, I Will engage to conduct you a new, safer,
and shorter way, than any which has hitherto been found out. Matters standing
in this debate, the curious Traveller, cannot but stand amazed too; but how
will he be distracted, when he shall find these Guides, instead of lending him
their charitable help, to fall a quarelling with one another, to that degree,
as to exchange Blows, not only wounding, but dragging one another through the
Thorns and Briars, through Thick and Thin, to that black Stygian Kingdom, where
dismal Horror and Torments reign eternally? Such an Entertainment at a Man's
first entrance on his Journey, is enough to discourage him, and make him draw
back his Foot, and seek some other means to conduct him Heavenward. And yet
this he cannot do without manifest Peril.

What course then must he take? There is none more safe certainly than to have
recourse to the divine Oracle by the Mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah: Thus says
the Jerem. c. ^
Lord, stand ye in the Ways, and see and ask for the old Paths, where is the
good Way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest unto your Souls. The old
Ways then are the safest; and if so, the old Guides too, Even the Successors or
the Apostle and of the Primitive Fathers, and who have been longest (...), and.
who have been longest acquainted with the Ways, will be the fittest to be
relied upon, We ought therefore to have an implicit Belief of the good conduct
of such a one; for although he may step aside sometimes, yet may we with great
security trust him; or if at any time we think otherwise than he does, let us
have a care at least, that we do not contend with him; considering, that it is
he who keeps our Viaticum, and has the dispensation of that Provision, which
must sustain us in the way: And if we chance to leave him or he us, we shall
not only be destitute of convenient Food, but wandering up and down the Forest
through dangerous Places, amongst the Bushes and Thorns, be in danger of
Wolves, and at Night run into the dark and doleful Region before described.
Let us then stick ^^st to our old Guide, yet so, as not to shut our Eyes, and
to be led blindfold: No, let as make use of our own Eyes too, sometimes fixing
them on that beautiful Kingdom we are going to, whose sight the the nearer we
approach to it, will wonderfully refresh us, and make us double our Pace.
Sometimes also let us look downwards toward our feet, for fear of stumbling;
for we shall meet with many rugged passages and stops in our Travel. But above
all, let us remember that the Prince to whom this delightful Country does
belong, will refresh us in our Journey, not only with suitable Provisions, but
with the directions and consolations of his Ambassador, even the holy Spirit.
So that being thus provided for our Voyage, let us set forwards in an humble
reliance upon the all sufficiency and goodness of him who invites us to him.

Let us not be disheartened for the difficulties and dangers of the way, nor
seandaliz'd for the contention amongst the Guides; for it is no more than what
the King himself, to whose Country we are going, has long since foretold us,
viz. that many false Guides or Prophets shall arise with many great Seducers,
who shall pretend also to be Christ: He has told us, that his Church here on
Earth, is like a fruitful Field, in which he, the good Husbandman, did sow
pure Grain, but whilst the Laborers slept, the Enemy sowed his Tares. These
Tares then of Contention and Disputation, are of the Enemy's sowing, and sprang
up presently after the good Corn, and will continue growing in the Field till
the Harvest of the World. Whosoever shall endeavor to destroy them, will in
all likelihood tread down the good Grain also; and since they cannot prevent
the Enemies malice, it is the duty of the Laborers when they sow good Grain to
be watchful, and to nip these spreading weeds at their first appearance; for
they are of a hungry and devouring Nature, robbing all the good Juice and
Nutriment to themselves, and by the many windings of their Wyres, they pluck
the Stalks of good Corn down to the Ground. There is nothing certainly more
pernicious to the Peace and Tranquillity of Religion, than frequent
disputations about it; for though many at first, out of an itch of Ostentation,
may enter upon a Dispute, yet they seldom quit it but with great Animosity, and
by their endless controversies, bring the Mysteries of Religion, and the
Articles of our Faith under Skepticism and Doubt.

Happy were the Patriarchs of the first Age, without dispute, whose Religion
consisted in an Adoration of Almighty God their Creator. They never troubled
their Brains with Metaphysical Quiddities and Distinctions; 'twas their early
business of the morning to make their offerings to the God of Heaven for the
expiation of their sins, and thereby make him propitious. They did celebrate
his Praises in some short pious Hymns, expressing his Greatness and Goodness,
and afterward betaking themselves to the ordinary Duties of their Life, which
were for the most part pastoral; they could not but make infinite improvements
of their time, by observing the Power and Goodness of their Maker, in the
bountiful returns from the Earth, and by observing daily the Beauties of
Nature, with the Vicissitudes of Seasons, and the favorable influence of the
heavens. The Works of God were the subject of their innocent Speculation, whose
wonders also they transmitted to Posterity, by telling, what deliverances their
Forefathers, as also they themselves had found at his hands. Meditations and
Discourses like these, did intersere commonly in all the Employments and
Occurrences of their Lives; and thus by an innocent Labor of Body, and by
Methods of Sobriety, Temperance, and Frugality, unknown to those of this
luxurious and degenerate Age, they did arrive to length of days, retaining to
the last an uninterrupted Health and Vegeteness of Mind; and when Nature had
spun its course, they did wind up their Lives by recommending their Spirits
into the hands of their Creator, and slept with their Fathers, leaving their
Children to follow their good Examples. Thus fared it with the happy Patriarchs.

And truly, under the Gospel, I cannot see, but Men may be as happy, nay more
happy if they please; the Duties which Christ requires of us, carry their own
reward, tending all of them to the perfecting of the Moral Law, and to settle
the Spirit upon a true Basis of repose. The Articles of Faith, as they are
tendered to us in the Gospel, are few; and to an humble and unprejudiced Mind,
carry light and life with them, although disputations and heterodox Questions
may arise in the Church, and embroil many with Faction and perplexed Notions,
what is this to a modest and humble Christian? The practice of whose life
consists, First, in a dutiful Adoration of Almighty God, expecting Salvation
from him through the Merits of his only Son Jesus Christ our Lord, resigning up
himself wholly to his Providence, and being always thankful under every
circumstance of life. Secondly, in performing works of Justice and Charity
toward his Neighbor: and lastly, in living soberly as to himself, and
bringing his extravagant Passions and desires under subjection. Let not such a
one discompose his Rest, by endeavoring to fathom the inexhaustible depths of
Knowledge with intricate and fruitless Enquiries, which indeed are those Thorns
and Thistles from whence Men shall never gather Grapes nor Figs; they who fall
amongst them will be entangled with their prickly Snares. No, let a Man live so
as to have a care of himself, and to hope the best of another; and thus, being
freed from superfluous Anxiety, he will go through with the Duties of Life, and
even of Death, with great alacrity, having attained to a true Settlement and
Tranquillity of Mind.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Newton at the three Pigeons in Fleet Street.
THe History of the most Renowned Don Quixot of Sancha, and his trusty Squire
Sancha Pancha; now made English according to the Humor of our Modern Language,
and adorned with several Coper Cuts, by J. P. The History of the Venetian
Conquests, from the Year, 1684. to the Year, 1688. Translated out of French, by
Sir J. M. A Consolatory Discourse for the support of Widows and Orphans, of
general use to all Christians, who either are, or may be left in such
Circumstances. The Rehearsal, as it is now acted at the Theater Royal, the
fifth Edition, with Amendments and large Additions of the Author. The Disorders
of Basset, a Novel; done out of French. A Memorial for the Learned: Or,
Miscellany of choice Collections from most Eminent Authors, in History,
Philosophy, Physic and Heraldry, by J. D. Gent. The Ghost of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, appearing to Volcart the Porter: Or, a Dialogue touching the
Times. Some Odes of Horace imitated, with Relation to His Majesty, and the
Times, by John Glauvell of Lincoln's Inn, Gent.

