Campania Foelix.

OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE Benefits and Improvements OF Husbandry: CONTAINING
DIRECTIONS for all manner of Tillage, Pasturage, and Plantation; As also for
the making of Cider and Perry.

With some CONSIDERATIONS upon I. Justices of the Peace, and Inferior Officers.
II. On Inns and Alehouses. III. On Servants and Laborers. IV. On the Poor.


To which are Added, Two ESSAYS:

I. Of a Country House. II. Of the Fuel of London.
By Tim. NOVRSE, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1700.



M. Vanderyucht Scul:

Printed for J. Bennet at ye Half Moon in St Paul's Church yard.

An Analytical Account of the Argument.
The Improvements of the Country by Husbandry, Contain I. The Art of Husbandry.
II. The Means to preserve it.
Of the Art of Husbandry, I. In General, Cap. I. II. In Particular of 1.
Tillage, C. II. 2. Herbage. 3. Trees.

Herbage 1. Of Pasture and Meadow, Cap. III. 2. Of Fences, Cap. IV. 3. Of
Foreign kinds of Grass, Cap. V. 4. Of Commonage and Enclosures, Cap. VI.
Of Trees or Plantation, and 1. Of Coppice-Wood, Cap. VII. 2. Of Trees for the
Use of Husbandry, Cap. VIII. 3. Of Fruit Trees in General, Cap. IX. 4. Of
Apple Trees and Cider, Cap. X. 5. Of Pear Trees and Perry, Cap. XI.
The Means to Preserve Husbandry in good order, considered in these Parriculars
Of 1. Inns and Alehouses, Cap. XII. 2. Servants and Laborers, C. XIII. 3. The
Poor, Cap XIV. 4. Justices of the Peace, and Inferior Officers, Cap. 15.
The Conclusion.



With Two ESSAYS relating to this Subject: I. Of a Country House. II. Of the
Fuel of London.



THE CONTENTS Of the following CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. OF Country Affairs in General. CHAP. II. Of Tillage. CHAP. III. Of
Pasturage. CHAP. IV. Of Fences. CHAP. V. Of Grass raised from Foreign Seeds.
CHAP. VI. Of Commonage and Enclosures. CHAP. VII. Of Coppice-Wood. CHAP. VIII.
Of Trees as they are useful in Husbandry. CHAP. IX. Of Fruit Trees. CHAP. X. Of
several kinds of Apple Trees, and of Cider. CHAP. XI. Of Perry. CHAP. XII. Of
Inns and Alehouses. CHAP. XIII. Of Servants and Laborers. CHAP. XIV. Of the
Poor. CHAP. XV. Of Justices of the Peace, with other Inferior Officers. A
Summary of the Argument, or the Conclusion. An Essay of a Country House. An
Essay of the Fuel of London.
Campania Foelix. OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE Benefits and Improvements OF
Husbandary, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Country Affairs in General.
BEFORE I come to speak particularly of Matters relating to a Country Life, it
will not be improper to glance a little upon this Subject as it offers it self
to our General Prospect, which indeed is both pleasant and profitable. And
First for its Pleasure, what can be more suitable to a serious and well
disposed Mind, than to contemplate the Improvements of Nature by the various
Methods and Arts of Culture: The same spot of Ground, which some Time since was
nothing but Heath and Desert, and under the Original Curse of Thorns and
Briars, after a little Labor and Expense, seems restored to its Primitive
Beauty in the State of Paradise. Curious Groves and Walks, fruitful Fields of
Corn and Wine, with Flowery Meadows, and sweet Pastures, well stored with all
sorts of Cattle for Food and Use, together with all the Advantages and Delights
of Water-Currents and Rivolets; as also with infinite Variety of Fruit-bearing
Trees, of beautiful Flowers, of sweet and fragrant Herbs, etc. are the familiar
and easy Productions of Industry and Ingenuity; all which, as they afford
extreme Delight to our Senses, so must it needs be a ravishing Pleasure for the
Contemplative to consider. What an Infinite Variety of Vegetables, so beautiful
and grateful to all our Senses, and so sovereign and useful for Health, may be
produced out of a little portion of Earth well cultivated, and all this from
little Seeds or Grains of small worth in appearance: So that this kind of
Employment may most properly be called a Recreation, not only from the
Refreshment it gives to the Mind, but from the Restoration of Nature, which
may be looked upon as a New Creation of things; when from Nothing, or from
something next to Nothing, we become the Instruments of producing, or of
restoring them in such Perfection.

And although the Practice of Husbandry be a Business of some Toil and Care, of
some Hazard and Expense, yet there is this in it to make all these things
easy, viz. When a Man shall consider the gradual Advancements of growing
Nature, so that every Day represents Things under New Colors and Beauties.
It Is pleasant to see a Field of Corn shooting out of the Earth, which Pleasure
is soon lost in a new and succeeding pleasure of seeing the whole Surface of
the Ground, upon the approach, perhaps of Winter, covered with the Blades of
Green Corn, fresh and verdant as the Virgin Spring. This Pleasure likewise, is
again succeeded with others, arising still from the New Appearances of Nature,
which must needs be a growing Delight, forasmuch as every Day leads us to a
nearer Prospect of Harvest, which is the Crown of all our Labors.

The like Content may be reaped from all the other Employments of the Country,
whether they relate to Planting, or to the Ordering of Pasturage. The Meadow
which to Day is Green, two or three Days hence appears in another Livery, even
that of Flowers, one Week White, anon Yellow, as soon Purple, or perhaps, in
diverse Colors at once, as if Nature had borrowed its Beauties from Art and
Fancy. Fruit-bearing Trees, for some time, are covered with spotless and
sweet smelling Blossoms, such as Perfume the Air, and ravish our Senses with
surprising Delights: These Dropping off, the Fruit it self begins to appear in
its Infancy, which every day grows more Fair till it arrive to Maturity; and
then serves further to gratify our Senses in yielding us Food of Delicacy; but
more eminently, by affording us those excellent Liquors, by which the heart of
Man's made glad, and his Body sustained and nourished.

Indeed, were we to take up always with any one Entertainment of Nature, we
should soon surfeit with it, as we see it happens daily to us in other Cases,
where the constant Fruition of one Thing ceases to affect us: But where there
is such an infinite Variety of Things (such as are the Productions of the
Earth) tendered to us successively, and in their several Seasons, this cannot
but sweeten the Mind with wonderful Content: So that as the Toils and Labors
are still returning, in like manner are the sweet fruits of them also: And even
Toil and Labor it self, has this Pleasure in it, that it quickens Appetite,
and contributes to Health and Strength of Body, where it is not in Excess, and
accompanied with Disorders. And when a Man attentively considers the Annual
Progress of Nature through all its Stages and Alterations, it cannot but mind
him of his own continual Changes, still leading him forwards toward his End,
which is, or ought to be a thing of more consequence to him than all the other
Pleasures which he may justly hope to reap from the several Blessings and
Seasons of the Year.

Hence it was, that the Bravest Men in the First Ages of the World, betook
themselves generally to Husbandry, which (however simple and rude, as it
appeared) was found very advantageous and delightful; insomuch that the Poets
of Ancient and Modern Times, when they would describe the true Felicity of Man,
and give their Fancies the largest Flights of Freedom and Gayety, borrow all
these Descriptions from the Pastoral Life; and even they, who give us
Characters of Great Generals and Princes in Heroic Strains, still represent
'em by Metaphors of this Nature: Hence it was that they were called, Shepherds
of the People, and the Scepter or Ensign of their Office was a Rod, or Staff,
not a Sword. And truly, if we consider the matter with a little Attention, we
may readily observe that Men, and other Animals of the Herd, or such as
associate together, are to be governed much by the same Measures. King David,
who ruled his People certainly by good Maxims, and was the best and happiest of
any of that Nation, received doubtless, much Instruction from his Pastoral
Methods, of which we have many Instances through the whole Tenor of his
Psalms; but to proceed.

The Great Esteem which the Ancients had for Husbandry is further legible from
hence, That they ascribed Divine Honors to those who were the Inventers and
Promoters of it, such as Bacchus, Ceres, Pan, Diana, etc. Invocating them as
the Tutelar Deities over these Affairs: Nor was there a God or Goddess to which
they did not Consecrate some Tree or Plant, thereby obliging them (as they
thought) to attend more particularly to the Preservation of them. But above
all, the Egyptians being the greatest Corn-Masters in the World, to recognize
the Benefits they received from Apis or Serapis, a great Prince, who preserved
them from Famine (which Apis is, by many, conjectured to have been the
Patriarch Joseph) ever worshipped him as their Supreme Deity, under the Symbol
or Representation of an Ox or Calf, in consideration, that 'twas to the Labor
of that Creature we chiefly owe our Sustenance and Life.

And after the Gods; Those Men were ever held in greatest Honor and
Veneration, who procured Peace and Plenty to the World, either by distributing
their Liberality, or by protecting their Subjects from Foreign Enemies, thereby
leaving them at Ease to follow their Country Employments; and such an one was
Augustus, under whose Reign the Temple of Janus was shut, who likewise much
delighted himself in Rural Avocations, and in the Conversation of Mecoenas, the
great Patron of Husbandry and Learned Men. The Figure of the World, encompassed
with Olive-Branches, with the Inscription of Pax Orbis Terrarum, was justly
inscribed by the Senate upon his Coins, for the Peace and Plenty under the
Influence of his Government. The Forms of Plenty, the Bushels and Measures of
Corn in the Ears, with the Inscriptions of Annona or Congiarium, were the
fullest Demonstrations of a Prince's Greatness, and of the Peoples Gratitude:
all which Testimonials, or Pompous Attributes, were still measured, I say, from
the Fruits of the Earth; so that the Romans never thought themselves happier
than under the Reigns of such Emperors, who favored them this way: So that the
Titles which are given to Adrian (under whose Reign the Roman Empire seemed to
be arrived to its fullest Beauty and Growth) were not dawbing Flatteries, but
just acknowledgments of their Obligations to him, when in their Medals they
Figured that Emperor with his Hand raising a pensive Woman from the Ground,
having a Crown on her Head, and a Globe in her Lap, with the Inscription of
Restitutori Orbis Terrarum, thereby signifying, that he raised the World from
the Earth, as I may say, with some Pardon for the Solecism. The like Benefits
were acknowledged by several Provinces in particular, as appears by his Coins;
for so it was, that this prudent Prince made it his business, more than any
before or after him, to visit the several Regions of the Empire, setting them
in good Order, and leaving Marks of his Bounty through all the Stages of his
Progress. The other many Noble Inscriptions which we meet with every where in
Roman Monuments, such as, Ob Cives Servator; Salus Generis Humani; Libertas
Restituta Pacator Orbis, etc. were the Fruitful Issues of Peace and Plenty, as
Plenty was ever the Offspring of the well cultivated Earth.

What Estimation the Jews had for a Country Life is very clear from Sacred
Writings; Most or all of the Patriarchs or Princes of the East, of whom we
read, were Herdsmen and Followers of Husbandry. Job had a large Stock of Cattle
under his Care, and Absalom, David's Son and Darling, made a Feast for his
Sheep-shearers.

As for Profane Story; At such Time as Rome was a Commonwealth, at which Time
likewise it most flourished with brave and virtuous Men; 'Twas no rare thing
for Plowmen to lead forth their Armies; Such an one was Atilius, who was
Tilling his Ground with a Yoke of Oxen, and sowing it himself, when the Senate
sent for him to be their General; those Hands of his holding the Reins of a
Triumphant Carr, which but a little before, held the Plough, to which he gladly
returned again, having prosperously finished what he undertook. No less Famous
was Quintius Cincinnatus, who had the Dictatorship Conferred upon him as he was
Plowing his Four Acres of Land near the Vatican, bare-headed, or covered rather
with Swett and Dust: Four Acres of Glebe, one would think but a small Pittance
for a Roman General or Emperor; so consistent then was Greatness of Virtue
with the narrow Limits of Fortune.

And even at such Time as Rome seemed to be en bon point, at the highest pitch
of Luxury, we read of Terentius Varro, a Senator, who was the most Learned Man
amongst all the Romans, and a Great Commander in the Civil Wars betwixt Caesar
and Pompey, and of some Figure likewise during the Triumvirate, that he valued
himself much from his Breed of Mares, and from his Flock of Sheep, which was
Seven Hundred, as he himself tells us in the Book he has Published de Re
Rustica, wherein he condescends to many Particulars relating to Husbandry and
Good Houswisry, as also to the breeding and ordering of Fowl and Cattle. In the
Second of which Books, being Dedicated to his Friend Niger Turranus, a Roman
Nobleman, he tells us, how this Friend of his was wont to Trudge it a Foot,
from Market to Market, to buy Beasts.

To be short, There cannot be a greater Testimony for the Honor of the Plough,
than the Behavior of Romulus, the First Founder of Rome, and, as I may say, of
that Vast Empire, as laying its Foundation in those solid Maxims by which it
grew to such a prodigious Greatness in after Ages: Amongst which Fundamental
Institutions, this was one (if not the greatest) viz. to Erect a College of
Priests, under the Title of Sacerdotes Arrorum: Their Number was Twelve, of
which he himself was one, condescending to be called the Twelfth Brother of
that Fraternity, being solemnly Installed thereunto by Laurentia Acca, his
Foster-Mother, who platting a Garland of the Ears of Corn, bound it on his Head
with her White Fillet, which was looked upon at that time to be the most Sacred
Badge of Priesthood, and was the First Crown that we read of amongst the
Romans: And in so great Honor was it held in after Ages, that nothing but
Death could put a Period to it, and was ever enjoyed, even in Times of Exile
and Captivity.

No Wonder then, if even Kings themselves delighted to write of Husbandry, such
as Hiero, Philometor, Archelaus and Attalus. Amongst Militant Persons, Xenophon
was eminent this way; but much more famous was Mago, the Carthaginian, and
Brother of Hanibal; which Works of his were held in that Esteem, as to be
Translated into diverse Languages, an Epitome whereof, made Greek, was sent to
Dejotarus, as a Jewel of Inestimable Value; and particularly, it was looked upon
by the Romans, to be so precious, that amongst all the African Monuments of
Learning, this alone was thought worthy of the Romans Care, and to be
preserved, upon the Subversion of Carthage, being Translated likewise into the
Roman Language, by the Care and Directions of M. Cato. Amongst Philosophers,
whose Works are Extant, Aristotle, Pliny and Terentius Varro signalized
themselves upon this Subject, as did also Theocritus, Hesiod and Virgil,
amongst the Ancient Poets, with infinite other Writers of modern Date.

And such an Influence truly had the Art and Practice of Husbandry upon the
Minds of Men, that the most eminent of them in all Ages, whether for Military
or Civil Employments, did ever betake themselves, in some degree or other, to
this Course of Life. Hence it was that every Roman of old had his Villa where
to bestow himself in time of Vacancy from Business, as they have at this Day in
Italy, and elsewhere, belike thinking themselves then most happy, when they
take up with the Entertainments of their Vineyards.

As to the Profits arising from a Country Life, it is superfluous to enlarge on
that which is so obvious to all the World: And first, in respect of the General
or Commonwealth. This is that great Vein by which the Blood is distributed
through all Parts of the Body, or rather the very Blood it self, since it is
disfus'd over the Whole, nor can any Part or Member subsist without it: It is
the Foundation of Traffic and Commerce, forasmuch as all the Manufactures and
Commodities which we export or receive from Foreign Parts, are but the
Productions of the Earth at the first or second hand. Corn, Wine, Oil, Fruits,
Cloth, Linen or Woollen, Silks, etc. are all of them the Offspring of the
Earth, cultivated by Art and Industry.

And as the Husbandman is most necessary to the Public in Times of Peace, so
is he as useful in Times of War, since all the Stores and Magazines, by which
Garrisons and Armies in the Field are sustained, are derived from his Labor
and Providence. The Description therefore which the Poet gave of old Italy,
that it was Potens Armis atque Vbere Gleba, was well concerted; for Italy, as
it was one of the most fruitful, so it was the most martial and victorious
Country under Heaven, giving Laws to all other Nations; so that were it under
the Command of one Prince, it might possibly pretend to be once more the
Mistress of the World, as it was heretofore, when the Boundaries of its Empire
were the Ocean, which it exceeded to in Greatness of Extent: Nor could it be
possible for Flanders, with the other neighboring Countries, to sustain such
vast Armies, and to have been the Seat of War and Desolation for so many Ages
together, with such immense Losses and Calamities, were they not enabled
thereunto by the invincible Industry of its Inhabitants, and by the Fertility
of the Soil.

In the next place, if we regard the particular Interest of private Persons, no
less obvious is it, that nothing can more advance it than Husbandry: The great
Estates and Fortunes which many Men arrive to this way, being a certain Proof
of this Truth. If some miscarry, it is no wonder, whether it be through their
own ill course of Life, Ignorance or Negligence, or perhaps from some sinister
Accidents, from which no State or Condition can be exempted: But in the
General, it is certain, that, considering the vast Numbers of Men who make
Profession of Husbandry, none make a surer Fortune than those who follow it;
there being ten Bankrupt Tradesmen or Merchants for one Husbandman,
Consideration being had, I say, to the Farms, which far exceed the Shops in
Number.

And as to our native Country in particular, it enjoys certainly many
Advantages above any Country whatsoever: For in foreign Kingdoms so it happens,
that one Province abounds only with Corn, another is in Reputation for Wine, a
third is eminent for Herbage, a fourth for Boscage; in which Case Men must be
beholden to remoter Parts for Necessaries, which is a Business of great
Expense, Trouble, and Delay; for Instance, Picardy and Normandy are great
Corn-Countries, but have little Wood, Wine, or Pasturage, all which
Necessaries, being from far, are very chargeable. Holland is famous for Butter
and Cheese, but it must be obliged to foreign Countries for almost all its
other Commodities; whereas with us in England, there is rarely a Farm of Fifty
Pounds per Annum, but has Meadow and Pasture-Ground belonging to it, together
with some Wood or Coppice, as likewise with Arable Land for Corn, with
Sheep-Pasture, as also with Trees for building for the Occasions of Husbandry,
for Fire, and in many Places for Fruit and rich Liquor, being yet farther
blessed with fresh and wholesome Water almost in every Ground, or with some
little Rivolet or Brook running near it; so that a Man enjoys all things almost
within himself, of which he can stand in need, without any Dependence upon
others, or of being in danger of want by any Difficulties in the Conveyance;
though I must confess, that in some respects foreign Countries have an Advantage
over us, not only from the Sun and Temper of the Soil, (which generally
requires less Manurement than with us,) but also from the Woods, which in
hotter Countries are much more easy, being generally dry, smooth, and fit for
Teams or Carriages at all Seasons; or else they have artificial Canals, as in
the Low Countries, which indeed is a thing very considerable to a Farmer who
keeps the Market; so that little Profit may be expected from a Farm, be the
Ground never so good, which lies not near to a good Market Town, or which wants
the Conveniences of good Roads, or of a Navigable River.

The Italian Saying, of Buona Terra, Cativa Gente, has been by some applied to
our Country, with respect, doubtless, to the Peasantry of this Nation; for as
for the ancient Gentry, probably there is not a more frank, a more generous,
and a more open-hearted sort of Men any where to be found, those especially who
have not been infected with the Principles of Calvin, who (to give them some
part of their due) are generally a Brood of formal, censorious, and
supercelious Hypocrites! Some of our true English Gentry may want that
flattering and complemental Gayety, so natural to our Neighbors, following the
true English Genius, which is plain, hospitable, and debonair, without much
Ceremony and Dissimulation; tho withal they are presumptuous many times, and
resentive of Injuries, which really is much more commendable than modish
Hypocrisy accompanied with Cringes and Grimace.

But as for our Common People, many of them must be confessed to be very rough
and savage in their Dispositions, being of levelling Principles, and refractory
to Government, insolent and tumultuous: What Gentleman soever then shall have
the Misfortune to fall into the Neighborhood of such Boors, let him never
think to win them by Civilities; it will be much more easy for him to teach a
Hog to play upon the Bagpipes, than to soften such Brutes by Courtesy; for
they will presently interpret a Man's Gentleness to be the Effect of a timorous
and easy Nature, which will presently make them bold and saucy. The best way
therefore will be to bridle them, and to make them feel the Spur too, when they
begin to play their Tricks, and kick. The Saying of an English Gentleman was
much to the purpose, That Three things ought always to be kept under, our
Mastiff-Dog, a Stone-Horse, and a Clown: And really I think a snarling,
cross-grained Clown to be the most unlucky Beast of the three. Such Men then
are to be looked upon as trashy Weeds or Nettles, growing usually upon
Dunghills, which if touched gently will sting, but being squeezed hard will
never hurt us.

There is this Thing more to be recommended to every Gentleman who affects a
Country Life, viz. Not to embarras himself with too much Business; for the
Affairs of the Country consist much in Labor and Drudgery; so that he who has
a great deal to manage, if he trust to Servants will certainly be cheated or
neglected by them; or if he hurries about it himself, he will be in a perpetual
Toil, though of never so great Strength of Body; and to lose all the Pleasure of
his Life in endless Pains and Vexations, and having many hot Irons in the Fire
to be worked upon at once, some of them will cool and miscarry upon his hands.
'Twas very well observed by the ingenious Bocalin, when all the Kingdoms and
States presented themselves before Lorenzo Medici, to be weighed by his
Balance, and when it came to the turn of the Spanish Monarchy to be put into
the Scale, it still proved lighter and lighter by the Addition of new
Provinces; so that Spain, under Philip the Second, being infinitely augmented
by the Access of Sicily, Naples, Milan, the Low-Countrys, Burgundy, etc. was
less weighty, and considerable than before. The Reason was, because all the
Spanish Treasure was exhausted to maintain such remote and foreign
Dependencies, and served but to feed the Avarice of Viceroys and Governors; so
that the main Body grew consumptive and feeble by having its Nourishment
diverted for the use of such disproportionable and foreign Members, with their
excrementitious Superfluities. The same thing happens then inevitably in a
private Gentleman's Estate, when it is too great for a single Person to manage;
so that there is no way for him, having sufficient to employ himself about, but
to farm out the Overplus to others. A numerous Herd of Servants, (though they are
necessary Helps to one who has a great deal under hand, and serve to fill up
the Measures and Figure of a Family, yet) do in reality impoverish the House
they belong to, being like Wenns, and the like Excrescencies, which, though they
seem to be a Part of the Body, and to add to the Bulk, do in Truth suck the
best Juice to themselves, whilst the genuine Parts languish and decay.

He likewise who affects a Country Life ought to be a Person of subdued
Passions; for where there is a continual Hope, there will be the same, or
possibly a greater degree of Fear likewise; and the various Accidents to which
our Labors and the Fruits of the Earth are hourly exposed, cannot but leave a
Man frequently under the Impression of these Passions. The Seed which the
Husbandman intends to cast into the Earth may be good, and the Soil duly
prepared, and yet the unseasonableness of the Weather, at the time of sowing,
may fill him with Distrust, and frustrate his Hope. The like Frustration also
may happen afterward from extreme Frosts and Winds, from immoderate Rains and
excessive Drouth: And when he is upon the Point of reaping the Fruit of his
Labor, all may be lost by the Intemperance of the Weather. Or suppose we
farther, that he has converted all the Fruits of his Labor into Money, this
likewise is subject to many Dangers; or if he be so fortunate to lay it out for
the Procurement of other Blessings, these may become a Snare to him, and he may
surfeit himself by Plenty, and be cut off in the midst of his Enjoyments. How
many Mischiefs are there to which Fruit-bearing Trees are obnoxious! And when
all thereunto relating shall fall out according to our Desires, how easy is it
for a Man to be ruined by too much delight in drinking of the juicy Blessing,
falling either into a Disease, or into Habits of Intemperance, to the final
Consumption of his Estate, Parts and Credit: So that the true way for a Man to
be happy amidst his Travels and Labors, is not to be over-anxious about such
Comforts, but to be moderate in the Fruition of them; and by this means he will
secure himself from Disappointments, and have his Appetite alwas quick to
relish what is grateful, by being temperate and abstemious. And thus may a Man
rejoice innocently in all his Labors, and be prepared for a more perfect
Fruition of what is solid and unalterable, by his constant dependence upon
Providence, and by making God's Blessings to be the daily subject of his
Thoughts.

If there were a Calendar, or Diary, kept of Weather, viz. what Rains or Winds,
what severities of Heat and Cold; what Plenty or Dearth, what Vicissitudes or
Accidents happen every Year, it would be a most profitable Work doubtless; and
of far more use than all the Prognostications of cautious Astrologers; for it
happens very frequently, that upon the same Concurrence of Causes and
Circumstances, we meet with the same Effects. This Method was observed ever by
the best Artists in Husbandry. And amongst the Ancients, as we may read in
Virgil, they had a constant regard to the Heavens, as to all the Seasons and
Productions of Nature.

And as there ought to be a Diary or Register for Seasons, so likewise for the
Productions which come from Foreign Parts; and to this End and Purpose, 'twould
be a Diversion well worthy the Ingenuity of many Young Gentlemen who travel, to
be curious in observing what Fruits every Soil does yield, as also the Nature
and Complexion of the Soil, the Temper of the Climate, the Rules of their
Husbandry, the Tackle and Instruments they make use of, as also their Methods
of Manurement, with what Returns they make of their Labors. As for Curiosities
of Plants, Fruit Trees, Flowers, and other Rarities of the Gardens, brought
over from Foreign Countries, we have certainly as great a Collection as any
Nation under Heaven, there being none to be found which is so universally
stored with all Provisions of this kind as is England, and possibly some parts
of the Low Countries; which Benefit we have from the great Trade we drive in
all Parts of the World; so that, whatsoever is rare, is brought over, and
naturalized amongst us, being made free of our Soil.

The like Improvements might be made, certainly, in matters relating to
Husbandry and Planting, which would be of equal Pleasure with the
Entertainments of a Garden, and of infinite more Profit, beyond all Dispute;
especially if we make choice of such Experiments and Observations as are
already made by many excellent Persons of this latter Age, in which, this sort
of Natural History seems to have obtained its utmost Perfection; Out of all
which Writings of our Modern Times, a most excellent System or Body of
Husbandry might be compiled, than which nothing could be more reputable to the
Undertaker, nor more beneficial to the whole Kingdom: Not that I think it
Expedient that all Foreign Growths should be encouraged, for this in many
cases, may be detrimental, as I shall show hereafter, especially when the
Introduction of some things, shall discredit and discourage the Growth of
others: only then 'twill be beneficial to the Public, when it is of such
Productions as are imported on us from abroad; for by this means we shall never
be at any straits in time of War, for what we want, and our Disbursements will
be less in the course and methods of Traffic. I shall instance only in Three
Things, of which

The First is, The Planting of Hemp and Flax. It Is known to all, what Profit is
made of the latter in Lombardy and some Parts of France; the Growth of Flax
being esteemed equal to that of the richest Wines in Italy, as being cultivated
in the same rich Soil, such as that in the State of Milan, Parma, Modena, etc.
than which there cannot be a better upon Earth: And when I consider, that the
Flax Trade, and the Thread and Cloth made of it being a sedentary kind of
Employment, clean and fit for Ladies, no doubt many nice Fingers which refuse
to handle greasy Wool, might easily be invited hereunto: And that this was
the most honorable Vocation in which the Noblest Matrons and Virgins of
Ancient Times were employed, is abundantly evident from Ancient Records, the
Invention thereof being of Divine Extraction, and ascribed to Minerva; the like
Esteem it has ever preserved to its self through all after Ages, insomuch that
all Virgins, even of Royal Degree and Birth, were, and are still, styled
Spinsters; because this was the Business they were to profess and practice: No
wonder then if amongst the Familiars of the Nuptial Wagon amongst the Romans,
the Wheel and Distaff was ever the chiefest, and most conspicuous: And truly,
could the Profession of Spinning be separated from the Maiden State of the
greatest Princesses, the Salique Law would meet with an unlucky Rub, or perhaps
a Baffle, when it bars the Distaff from Succession to the Crown, by telling us
that it cannot fall en quenouille.

The Advantage to the Kingdom arising from the Linen Manufactures, would be
very great, especially if young Children were inured hereunto from their
Childhood, for by that means their Fingers being then young and pliable, would
get such an Habit of working, as Age it self could hardly wear away. A Scheme
of this Nature I have met with in a Book published by Captain Yarrington of
Worcestershire, a very knowing Projector, from the Observations he made of the
vast Advantages they found in Holland by these and such like Arts well worthy
our Imitation; such Children being there bred up in Working-Houses or
Colleges, under the Guard of honest, vigilant and experienced Mistresses or
Overseers.

Another thing of which it might be wished there were a Trial made, is that of
the Silk Manufacture, by planting of Mulberries, which doubtless might be made
to prosper in this our Island. This likewise would be a very suitable
Employment or Recreation rather, for the more delicate of the other Sex, who
are so much taken with the Gawderies of Butterflies: From whence also they may
learn this Moral Lecture, That as the greatest Ornaments and Luster of their
Bodies are the Spoils of Worms, so the greatest Food for Worms will be upon the
Spoils of their Bodies.

The Third Thing which I would recommend to be encouraged, is the Planting of
Wallnut-Trees, not for the Benefit of the Fruit to eat, which is
inconsiderable; but for the Profit which might be made of the Oil, which tho of
little Use with us, would be very well worth the Exportation; it being amongst
the poorer sort Beyond Sea, some part of their Food, and most serviceable to
the Great Ones too, in the Use they make of it, to be Fuel for their Lamps,
especially in their Churches, and almost in all Private Houses. There is no
Tree whatsoever growing in our English Soil, whose Timber is so useful for
Curious Furniture; so that every Limb or Branch of a Wallnut-Tree which will
but carry Three Inches Square, is serviceable and of value: Nor do I find that
these Trees are of any Difficulty to be raised as to the choice of Ground, nor
subject to so much hazard as Oaks, and other Trees, upon Extremities of
Weather. All that can discourage the Trial of them is, the long Time we must
wait for the Maturity of them, which exceeds the common limits of an Age; but
since there is no more Care about them when they once begin to grow, than about
other common Trees which grow wild and natural, it seems too great an Argument
of a mean Spirit in a Man, to measure all his Undertakings by the returns of
Profit which he may expect in his own Lifetime, without regard to the future
Advantages which his Heirs and After-Ages may reap from his Industry. Tho in
what I am now speaking of, there is a great Pleasure and Satisfaction in seeing
the gradual Advances of Nature, and considerable Profit to be expected too, by
the Fruits they yield, which will be still greater the longer they grow.

It Is much to be wished likewise, That the State would afford some
Encouragement to Husbandry, more than what we find at present, by exempting it,
or at least by easing it, as to the Public Burdens, especially for some
Years, upon any New Undertaking, which shall be judged profitable to the
Public: For by this Means Men would venture upon Projection. It Is very well
observed by a most Ingenious and Learned Gentleman, in his Remarks upon one of
the greatest, most Ancient, and most polished Governments upon Earth, when he
tells us, [That Agriculture is encouraged by so many special Privileges from
the Crown, and the Common Laws and Customs of the Country, that whatever Wars
happen, the Tillers of the Ground are untouched, as if they were Sacred, like
the Priests in other Places, so as no Country in the World was ever known to be
so well cultivated, as the whole Kingdom of China.] Whereas with us, and other
neighboring Countries, it is the poor Husbandman who must support in a manner,
the whole Expense of a War, and undergo greater Burdens and Drudgery than the
Beasts which Till the Ground.

In fine, What I have written upon this Subject, is not grounded upon the
Reports and Methods of other Authors, but upon my own Observations, toward
which I have had some small Advantage by my long continuance in a Private and
Country Life, which Observations I shall adventure to deliver more particularly
in the following Chapters.

CHAP. II. Of Tillage.
THE Art and Practice then of Husbandry is reducible to these Three General
Heads, viz. Tillage, Pasturage, and Plantation: On each of which I shall be
brief, in regard many write daily upon this Subject, more copiously sometimes
than solidly; their Volumes generally swelling with trivial Observations, and
large Digressions; whereas the Reason of things is more easily comprehended
when contracted into a lesser Room, and freed from tedious Repetitions and
Exemplifications.

I shall begin first with Tillage, which is either in the open and common
Fields, or amidst Enclosures; and although Enclosures, where every Man's Property
is secured by Fences, may seem much more eligible, yet so it is that common
Fields are held generally in greater Esteem and Value, and that for these
Reasons, as, 1st. In common Fields Men are delivered from the continual
Vexation and Expense of making and repairing of Hedges, and consequently from
the Injuries of Cattle breaking in upon one another Ground: For such common
Fields bordering upon Pasturage, or other Enclosures, it lies upon others to
secure the Mounds. Besides, there are Haywards appointed on purpose to make
their Rounds, and to see all things safe. 2dly, Common Fields have a great
Advantage above Enclosures, from Sheep; for when they lie fallow, by being
wide, the Sheep are forced to nip the young Weeds as fast as they peep out of
the Ground, and there leave their Dung; by which means they convert what is
most hurtful to what is most profitable for Corn; whereas in little Enclosures
they will be still brousing upon the Hedges, where likewise they will be
continually nusling to avoid the Sun and Cold, so that they destroy the Fences,
and leave their Dung in Places which make no return, whilst the Fallow is
poisoned with overgrown Weeds and Trash; and here indeed lies the true Profit
of Sheep, for where they are kept in lesser Closes, the Owner will be in
perpetual danger of losing by them, and the Sheep themselves will be in danger
of tearing their Fleeces, and of leaving their Wool amongst the Thorns and
Bushes. 3dly, Common Fields are more open to the Sun, and more free from Birds
likewise, which lying in the Trees and Hedges, will be continually preying upon
the Corn; whereas in little Enclosures, Corn never ripens so kindly, being
under the Shade and Droppings of Trees; the Roots likewise of the Trees
spreading to some distance from the Hedges, do rob the Earth of what should
nourish the Grain, as the Birds likewise will not be wanting to play their part
from the neighboring Hedges, as soon as the Corn begins to ripen in the Ear.

Enclosures nevertheless have this Advantage, (which perhaps is peculiar to
Hereford, Worcester, and some Parts of Glocestershire,) that in the Hedges
Fruit Trees may be planted, the Profit whereof in some Years equals half the
Rent of the Ground: But this, I say, is local, or a Profit only in such
Countries where Fruit Trees are thrifty and flourishing. And as for other
Trees, as Oaks, Elms, Ash, and the like, which grow commonly in Hedges, it is
well if the Lop and Crop of them will serve for Fuel, and the old Trees, and
other Wood arising from thence, defray the Charge of Ditching, and of repairing
the Mounds and Hedges from time to time. This Advantage notwithstanding is
hardly worth taking notice of, it being much more profitable to have such
Hedges as shall never need repair, than to have Trees growing in them which
from time to time may supply the Husbandman with Fuel: For it is certain that
great Trees rob the Quick of its Nourishment, and the Trespass which the
Husbandman receives by the continual decay of such Hedges near such Trees, and
the Expense he must be contiually at in making them good, makes such Fences
very chargeable and expensive, whereas a clean quick-set Hedge will never need
repair.

There is farther Advantage likewise from Enclosures, in that a Man receives no
Trespass or Damage from a Neighbor's turning upon his Grounds; for so it is,
that in Common-Fields the first Plower always receives a considerable Damage,
especially upon his head Lands, which abutt upon another's Lands; for he that
sows last turns his Cattle backward and forward on it, to the great Damage and
Destruction of what was first sown. Besides, the continual Trespass of going
over one another Grounds and Corn, both at Sowing and at Harvest-time, is very
prejudicial to the Crop. Nevertheless, Common Fields are much to be preferred
before Enclosures, for the Reasons beforementioned.

Fallowing of Ground every third or every fourth Year, is excellent good
Husbandry: For they who plow upon the Brush, (as they call it in
Glocestershire,) that is to say, every Year tilling and sowing the Ground,
without Intermission, will certainly be plagued with Weeds enough; for it is the
Fallow, or turning up the Earth to the Sun, which kills the Weeds at the Root,
and makes the Earth more freeable and fine, and gives the Dung or Compost time
to mix and incorporate with the Soil; whereas the other Method, besides the
Damage of Weeds, robs the Ground of all its Virtue by continual Crops, nor can
the Dung have time to digest and mix with the Earth before the Grain be sown.
This piece of Husbandry was much in use amongst the Ancient Romans, as appears
by Virgil, Georg. I.

Illa seges demum Volis respondet Avari
Agricola, bis quae solemn quae frigora sensit.
In the Interpretation of which Place Authors are at some Contest. The
Explication of Salmasius seems most rational, which is this, viz. That Ground
is fittest for a Crop of Bread-Corn which has been four times plowed; of which
the first plowing must be in the Winter, the second in the Spring, the third in
the Summer, and the last in Autumn, or immediately before the Season of sowing;
so that the first and last Plowings, according to his Interpretation, must have
allusion to bis frigora; the other two Plowings are poetically recommended by
the Vernal and Aestival Suns. The Reason of the Summer-Fallow is taught us by
the same Poet a little after.

-- Glebasque jacentes
Palverulenta Coquat Maturis Solibus Aestas.
Because the parching Sun burns the fibrous and stringy Roots of the Herbs or
Weeds, which otherwise would choke the Grain.

Lime and burning of Ground is kinder for Corn than Dung; for Dung, besides
that it requires some Digestion or Maturation, is subject to breed Weeds, by
reason of the Weeds and their Seeds which lie in the Litter. But the Shovelings
of Folds is the worst thing imaginable that can be thrown upon Tillage; for it
consists chiefly of the winnowings of Corn, with all manner of Trash
whatsoever; and though the Chaff or Litter be perfectly rotted and turned to
Earth, yet it shall still flourish with Weeds beyond any other Soil or Compost
whatsoever; but for Pasturage such sort of Management is very kind.

Pigeons-Dung is the hottest of any; one Load and a half of it being thinly
strewn or sown, is sufficient for an Acre. Next, Sheeps-Dung is an excellent
Manurement, and of this about four Load to an Acre; of Horse-Dung, eight Load
upon an Acre is good dressing; and of Beasts or Cow Dung, ten or twelve Load;
and of good mellow Earth, as the Mud, or cleansing of Pools, Ditches, and the
like, after two or three Years sweetening, we ought to bestow twenty Load at
least upon an Acre. We are to note likewise, that the fresher the Dung, the
better it is for Stercoration; so that one Load of Dung, a little ripened or
settled in a heap, is as good as two Load of that which has lain two or three
Years mellowing; forasmuch as two Load of fresh Dung, after it has lain for
some time rotting, will not make one Load. Besides, the saline or sulphurous
parts of the Dung (in which its vegetative Virtue does principally consist) by
lying long in the heap, are wasted by continual heat and rottening, and after
some time will prove no better than rank Mould, or Earth; whereas that which is
new is fat and unctious, and full of heat and spirit.

This which I have said holds true in the Manurement of Ground for Corn; but
for Garden-Ground, that Dung which is oldest and most rotten is the best,
because it may be made fine and sifted, and by this means be fit for all
Seed-Plots, Boxes, Flowers, and the like. But in all these Cases no difinitive
Rule can be given; forasmuch as the Natural Temper or Disposition of the Earth
being in several Places very different, more or less help must be used, and
generally speaking, an Acre of Arable dressed as beforementioned, will yield
three Crops. But of all Manurements I hold Lime to be the best: Four Load to a
moderate Acre is a good dressing; it kills the Weeds, corrects the Coldness of
the Soil, and cherishes the Grain; so that the Ground which is dressed with it
will be the better for Several Years after. It Is likewise wonderful good for
cold weeping Pasture.

In former Ages they manured their Land much with Marle, which is a hot kind of
Earth, and slakes something like Lime: And it is certain that they used vast
Quantities of it, as appears by the great Pits we find in all Places where such
Husbandry was in use, some of which Pits will contain ten or twelve thousand
Loads; but this sort of Husbandry, since the use of Lime has been in credit, is
much neglected.

Burning of Land is excellent good for Corn, for by this means the Weeds are
killed, and the Strings or Fibers of the Weeds or Grass being turned into Ashes
enrich the Ground mightily, by reason of the saline or nitrous Particles with
which the Ashes do abound. Upon which account it is, that such Marshes as lie
near the Seacoast, and are washed with the briny Element, are extraordinary
luxuriant, and feed Cattle beyond any other. Shells and trashy Weeds, of which
we find great quantities on the Seashore, are wonderful Helps to Tillage; so
that a barren piece of Ground, not worth Four Shillings per Acre, will yield
eight or nine Crops successively, as I have been credibly informed; the Reason
is from the great quantities of Salt which such Trash does abound with; and for
this Reason it is, I say, that Rumny Marsh and the Marshes of Holland feed the
best of any Ground in the World. Hence it is that the Low Countries have such a
large Breed of Men, Horses, and other Beasts, as are not elsewhere to be found:
And for the same Reason likewise it is that the Animals which are ingender'd in
the Sea are far more numerous and greater in bulk than those of the Earth; and
the young Fry or Spawn of Fish belonging to the River, such I mean as relish
the Salt Water, as Salmon, Lamprys, and the like, though small and little when
they leave the fresh Streams, will, upon their Return from the Salt Water, in a
very short time acquire an extraordinary Growth. Fish which are so testacious,
as Crabs, Lobsters, Oisters, and the like, are much more nourishing than other
Fish, by reason of that volatile Salt with which they do abound

What we read of old, of sowing Cities with Salt, when they were to be eras'd
and condemned to utter Desolation, seems much to confirm this Opinion; for by
that means the Soil was made fit for Pasturage, and for the Service of Beasts,
which was designed to be unfurnished with Men; though I much doubt whether our
common Salt, if sown upon the Earth, would produce any great effect, having
received possibly some Alteration from the Fire. I am more inclinable therefore
to believe, that by sowing such Places with Salt was no more but to sow or
scatter the Ashes on them, arising from the Ruins, which generally was by
burning; which Ashes, by reason of the copious Salts with which they did
abound, were themselves, by a kind of Figure, called Salts, and such as served
to render the Soil useful only for the Nourishment of Beasts, as I have already
observed. Why such Salts should be so fruitful seems to proceed from their
penetrating Nature, by which they seem to open first, and then to purge the
Bodies which do imbibe them from their cold, crude Humors, healing them
likewise, and afterward rendering them more uniform and compact.

The way of burning Land, is by gathering the Turfs into little Heaps, in the
hollow whereof a little Bush or Faggot of dry Wood being laid; after the Turf
has been well dried and parched by the Sun, they set the Hillock on Fire, and
afterward scatter the parched Turf and Ashes upon the Surface. This Method of
improving the Ground by burning, was much in practice amongst the Ancient
Romans: Their way was to burn the Stubble which remained after Harvest, as it
was left standing on the Ground, and this served to prepare it for another
Crop, as we many Collect from Virgil, Geor 1.

Saepe etiam sterilis incendere proferet Agros
Atque levem stipulem crepitantibus utere flammis.
The Benefit whereof our Poet makes to consist in the Power and Virtue which
the Fire has to purge out the crude Humors of the Earth, when he tells us

-- Omne per ignem
Excoquitur vitium atque exsudat inutilis Humor.
The same Method likewise of burning the Stubble upon the Ground, is much used
at this day in the Campaine of Rome, at which time the Air is very scorching
and unhealthy, the Heat of the Climate being very much increased by such
general Burnings, attended with so much Smoke. In a word, this way of Burning,
is all the help they have in a manner, in the hotter Countries; where the
paucity of Cattle would not afford Soil to dress the Tenth Part of their
Tillage; so that the heat of the Climate, with a little help from their stubble
Trees, does do that which we of the colder Regions are forced to purchase with
four times more Charge and Trouble.

Rags cut or chopped to pieces, are used in many places as a great help to
Tillage; and it is strange to see what a Crop of Corn some barren flinty Ground
shall yield after such a Manurement. In dressing of Ground with Dung, it is good
to let it lie a little in the Heaps, and digest the rawness of it in the Sun:
For turned in fresh, it is not so good, and to let it ly too long, the fat and
oily parts will be too much exhaled.

Many Husbandmen, especially in open common Fields, where they cannot fallow
their Land, unless all agree together, sow Vetches, which serve their Horses
all the Summer, by hitching them on the Land, where they will be sure to eat it
bear, and leave good store of Dung in the place: This Method is looked upon to
be as good almost as a Fallow with dunging, and is performed with no Charge nor
Trouble.

Many likewise, before they sow their Grain, especially Wheat, steep it in
Urine or Brine, that it may imbibe the Salt, and then they flower it with Lime:
This they do, not only to strengthen and cherish the Corn against the cold and
moistness of the Winter Season, but also to prevent Birds, Swine, Worms, and
the like, from feeding on it. Husbandmen likewise observe to buy such Seed as
grew upon a poorer Ground than that on which they intend to sow it: If the Seed
be fair and full, it may do very well, but not otherwise; for it is with Grain
as it is with Plants or Trees, the fuller and more thriving the better.

The Season for sowing every sort of Grain after its kind, must be left to the
discretion of the prudent Husbandman, who must have regard to the temper of his
Land: If it be subject to Weeds, and in good heart and strength, the later the
Ground is sown, the better will be the Crop for the purpose; Barley may be sown
in the beginning of May, for being a quick grower, the very Dews will in a
Weeks time bring it forth of the Earth, and by this means 'twill get a head
over the Weeds, which require a longer time to show themselves, and will not be
so apt to thrive in Hot Weather. But if the Ground be dry and sandy, the sooner
any sort of Corn is sown in it, it is the better, for the heat of the Sun,
joined to that of the Earth, or Soil, will endanger the Crop, and make it turn
yellow and wither; but if in case it prove a cool and wet Summer, it may do
very well; so that maugre all the care and foresight of the honest Husbandman,
he must depend much upon the Dispensations of Heaven, which neither himself nor
the wisest man upon Earth can foresee; and therefore both he and every man
else, (how great and provident soever) after he has cast his business into the
best Method his Reason can propose, must still depend upon Providence, as to
the event, there being so many Accidents which may traverse his Designs, and
such as can never be provided against, nor foreseen.

The same Discretion is to be used in the sowing of Winter-Grain: For light,
Sandy Ground, sown late, will rarely bring forth a Crop, unless well
stercorated; but being early sown, the Season of the Year will cherish the
Seeds without danger of Weeds; whereas the Ground which is more fat and rich,
being naturally subject to breed Weeds and Grass, will quickly push them forth,
and choke the good Grain in the coming forth; but when such rich Ground is late
sown upon, there is no danger; for the Weeds will not stir toward Winter, and
the Grain being lodged in the Earth, will weather out the Cold Season well
enough, and Spring too, when Grass and Weeds are pincht by the Cold Weather.

I doubt not of Winter Grain, as Wheat and Rye sown in February, if the Season
be dry, and the Earth crumbling or mellow, but that it will be as forward as
that which is sown at Michaelmas or All-Hallon-tide, especially if the Ground
be well tempered, and clean from Weeds and Covet-Grass, which Two Plowings will
do; one, viz. as soon as the Crop is off the Ground, the other about Christmas,
if the Season will permit: But the uncertainty of the Weather will discourage
the wary Husbandman; but in case, I say, the Weather should prove favorable,
and a Man were otherways hindered from sowing his Land at the usual Season, and
that the Ground be duly turned and in good heart, I see no Reason for
despairing of a Crop. But Husbandmen, especially Farmers, like their Horses and
Teams, love still to travel in a beaten Road; for should they once miscarry in
a Project, besides the Loss of a Crop, they would think they should be laughed at
by their Neighbors, and be pointed at in the Market: And hence it is that we
rarely meet with any New Discoveries or Improvements of Husbandry from a
laborious Farmer, the Streightness of whose Circumstances will not suffer them
to venture a certain Expense upon an uncertain Return, when the Method is new
and unusual, though he risque the same thing daily, as to the Fruits of his
Labor, which depend, as I have said, upon many Contingences which lie beyond
his Care and Foresight.

Snow does much preserve Corn from the Injuries of Frosts and Winds, but above
all, the Husbandman ought to have regard to keep his Furrows clean, and to make
Furrows also sloping cross his Lands to drein the Gauls and carry off the
Winter-Water, than which nothing can be more injurious. Besides, the killing of
Wants or Moles, which every Husbandman will be sufficiently advertised of from
his own daily Damage, more than ordinary Care ought to be had to his Furrows,
especially at the bottoms of Lands: For though these pernicious Animals do a vast
deal of Spoil by their Hillocks, it is much greater Mischief which they do by
stopping up the Ends of the Furrows; for in such Places it is that the Worms
most resort, and by consequence the Wants, who feed upon them; so that I have
known the same Place choked up three or four times afresh during the
Winter-Season.

Ground newly broke up may be sown with some sorts of Pease or Oats. Pease are
better, and must be harrowed in after the Plowing; but generally the Crop is
not so good as upon tempered Land, forasmuch as it will be subject to Grass and
Weeds. After Pease, the Year following we may sow Barley, for there will be
time enough betwixt Harvest and Barley-sowing to give the Ground its due
plowings. After the second Crop it must be fallow'd and dressed before 'twill
yield another, unless it be sowed with Oats, which will much impoverish the
Ground. It Is the best Method therefore to let old Land, after it has been
broken up, to lie fallow the first Year, and if in good proof, 'twill, with a
little help, yield three Crops successively.

In lesser Enclosures, which are converted to Tillage, I hold it the best
Husbandry in the World, instead of head-Lands on which the Cattle turn, not to
sow them, but to let them lie plain for Grass, as also a large Mere to be left,
of ten or fourteen Yards breadth, under all the Hedges which enclose the
Tillage; for these Borders will never bear good Corn, especially if the Hedges
be quick, and high, and stored with Trees; for the Shade of the Trees and
Hedges, as also the Droppings from the Boughs, will destroy the Crop, as will
also the Birds which lie continually in the Hedges. The Roots likewise of the
Trees and Quick will rob the Corn of its due Nourishment. Let the Borders round
about therefore be kept for Grass, which as it is most delightful to the Eye,
and most commodious for walking, so is it most profitable: For the Washings or
Land-Floods running off the Furrows, will fatten the bordering Mere in an
extraordinary manner, and make it as rich as any Meadow-Ground; as the Shade
likewise of the Trees and Hedges will as well help forward Grass, how injurious
soever they may be to Corn.

After the Crop is in the Barn, being housed dry, the next thing the honest
Labourer or Husbandman is to consider of, is, to turn it into Money.
Peradventure the safest way will be to thrash it out, as soon as the Season
does require, and to send it to the Market; for by long lying in the Barn, Rats
and Mice will quickly draw their Mines, and make large Inroads; nor will the
Thief be wanting, as Occasion shall serve, to give a Cast of his Skill; to
which we may add the Encumbrance of the Barn for the Crop of a following Year.
To keep it thrash'd in the Granary is altogether as bad; for 'twill be subject
to the Assaults of Vermin, and unless often turned 'twill grow musty: Besides,
'twill contract a great deal of Dust and Filth, and the Grains of Corn will
shrink or shrivle, and lose their bright Color: All which will be of much more
Detriment than what may be recompensed from the Advance of the Market, which
commonly does lurch us by sinking lower, but rarely rising to that degree as to
make amends for the Inconveniences we meet with by keeping in our Corn.

But if it be judged expedient to keep Grain, the best way is in the Straw, by
putting it into a Rick, not raised upon Posts or Pillars of Wood, or of much
Stone (as is usual with ordinary Husbandmen) but let the Frame of Wood which is
to bear up the Rick, be laid upon five or nine Pillars, a full Yard from the
Ground. The Pillars must be proportionable to the Burden, being made round and
strong, and finely plastered over, and covered with flat square Stones, four
Foot in breadth each, to prevent Vermin from running up: For if the Pillars be
square, though never so polished, Rats and Mice will run up the Corners; but on a
round one they have not the least Hold for their Claws. The Rick also must be
well thatched, to prevent Damage from foul Weather; and by this means Grain may
be preserved sweet and entire for many Years.

There is this Thing farther which I would recommend to the Consideration of
every Husbandman, (especially if he be a Gentleman,) viz. to avoid as much as
possible the Covering of his Barns and Outhouses with Straw: For besides that
such Thatched Coverings looks mean and beggarly, it is certain that they will
prove far more expensive than Tyling in a little Process of Time. People are
easily drawn to follow the Examples of the Country, to avoid a little greater
Charge for the present, not considering that such Thatched Houses will be a
continual Reparation and Expense: Every violent Gust or Puff of Wind tears them
to pieces, and makes vast Breaches: Unluckey Birds are still pulling them, and
the Rain, Snow; and Weather, will in a very short time rot such Coverings, and
considerable Damage be sustained before Stuff and Thatcher can be brought in
place. Whereas the Tiled Roofs, though a little more chargeable at first, will
last a long while without Repair; and when repaired, it will be done at a
quarter the Charge of Straw Roofs. It Is true, Thatched Houses are a better
Security for Corn against Rain and Snow; but then it is known too, that they
harbor Birds, Rats, Mice, with other Vermin, and above all are most
dangerous, so that many Houses have been burnt to the Ground, and whole
Families undone by Fire catching in the Thatch. But in this and many other
Methods, Country Fellows will never quit the old Road, how Ridiculous and
Inconvenient soever it be, no more than the Irish can be weaned from their old
barbarous Custom of Tailing their Horses to one another, and to draw with them
in their Teams.

CHAP. III. Of Pasturage.
PAsturage is of several sorts: That wherein Sheep thrive best is the Lawnes,
as also the wide and open Downs, such as those in Cotswold and in Wiltshire;
for what is richer or ranker, by reason of the great Dews that lie upon them,
is apt to beget the Rot; also hilly Ground, in which are many Springs and
little Lakes, is very unwholesome: For where Sheep bite closest they thrive
best, unless they be designed for the Butcher, and then they must have a fuller
Diet. There is no small Care to be taken in ordering the Pasture of such as are
designed for Breed or Store: Let them be kept in the Summer as bare as
possible; for if they once come to abate their Flesh, as certainly they will
toward Winter, they will be a long time before they will come about; but being
hard kept in the Summer, and disposed into thriving Pasture toward Winter,
they will keep their Fleeces whole upon their Backs, and be able to weather out
the sharpest of that Season. Of the Usefulness of Fallow-Fields we have spoken
before. Woods and rough Grounds are very hazardous for Sheep, for besides the
Danger they are in of tearing their Fleeces, and sometimes of being hanged in
the Briars, they are subject to a Disease called the Wood-Evil, which is a
Bladder of Water gathering in the Head, which makes them turn round, and so
they will continue in the same place, and in that giddy turning Condition, till
they die. When a Sheep therefore is taken with this Distemper the Butcher must
cure him.

Nevertheless, young Cattle thrive best in rough woody Grounds, by reason of
the Covert and the large Walks such Places yield; and by this means they are
defended from the Fly and the Breeze. The Grass likewise of such Places, though
course and sour, agrees well enough with young Cattle, which would not pay for
their Keeping were they to feed in richer Pasture. Horses, especially where we
would have a good Breed, require likewise a large Walk, and woody, such as
those in Parks, which are dry and hard at the bottom, and withal stony, yet
covered with a sweet Turf, and abounding with fresh Springs, Thickets, and some
Lawnes or Pasturage dispersed in Valleys, and fatned with little Rivolets. And
upon this Score it is, that the Northern Parts afford the best Horses; for the
Ground being poor they can afford them a larger Range, which helps their Wind,
and teaches them to use their Legs, and the stony Ground makes their Heels
tough and hard.

As for the Dayry, as also for the Working-Cattle, and the like, the better the
Pasturage the better the Return. If the Ground be overgrown with Couch or
Foggy Grass, the best way will be to eat it down in Winter, with hungry, hardy
Cattle; and in the Spring, when the young Grass begins to peep out of the
Ground, as certainly it will, and sooner than in other Pasturage, by reason of
the thick dead Couch or Grass which keeps it warm, and defends it from the
Winds and Frosts, then is the time to turn in Cattle, and especially Horses,
which tasting of the young springing Grass, will pluck up the dead and withered
together with it; afterwhich, let it be eaten bare with Sheep, which as they
feed will fatten the Ground with their Dung, and by this means will the Ground
be brought to a fine sweet Turf.

Pasture-Grounds are improved several ways at first; by sowing of Foreign
Seeds, such as Clover, St. Foin, and the like; all which Seeds must be sown
along with the Grain, or a little after, the Ground being prepared or made very
fine: And by this means, when the Grain, which ought to be Barley, is above
Ground, and grown to some strength, the Seed, whether of Clover, or of St.
Foin, for the purpose will be springing up, without Prejudice to the Crop, and
keep back and suppress Weeds, which otherways would endanger the Corn, and
poison the Ground for some time after.

Clover thrives almost in all sorts of Ground, unless very stony or very wet
Land; but it is most proper for a mixed Land, such as partakes of a Sand, and
something a fatter Glebe. The same Manurement or Dressing which serves for
Barley will serve likewise for Clover, which will last good in the Ground for
three Years; by which means that Land which was not worth a Noble an Acre, will
be worth 30 s. an Acre. This sort of Grass may be mowed twice a Year; the first
Crop serves for Hay, the second they cut for Seed about the middle of
September, when the Blossoms are fully withered for it must lie withering on
the Ground for some time, and be housed very dry, which is something difficult,
by reason of the long Dews and the declining Sun at this Season of the Year.
This sort of Grass is very good for Horses, and to feed Pigs, and fatten Sheep.
But for Cattle, as Cows or Oxen, if they be turned in hungry they will be in
danger of over-filling themselves, and by this means to swell and burst; for
this sort of Food is exceeding sweet and luscious. The way then is to turn in
Cattle when they are full, though at the best this sort of Food is not so kind
for them as Grass. When the Clover is worn out of the Ground, as generally it
lasts not above three or four Years at most, the Ground will quickly come to a
grassy Turf; so that I hold it absolutely necessary for every one who lays down
his Ground sor Pasturage, to leave it with Clover. This sort of Improvement is
much practiced in Herefordshire, Worcestershire, and some Parts of
Glocestershire; and after some little Interval of Time, it may be renewed again
upon the same Ground, and so on; the Soil being first duly dressed and prepared
for Corn.

St. Foin, where it likes the Ground, is much more profitable than Clover,
because of longer Continuance: It requires a quite different Soil from Clover,
for it thrives best in a hilly, stony, cold, and barren Ground, but dry, such
as that in the higher Parts of Glocestershire, Oxfordshire, and other Places of
the Kingdom. This sort of Grass may be mowed from Year to Year, for diverse
Years together; and when it dies, after a few Years Intermission, the sowing of
it may be renewed again upon the same Ground, etc. The Fodder is exceeding good
for Horses, and not unkind for Cattle; so that by means hereof, the Ground
which before was not worth Two Shillings an Acre, shall be worth Twenty
Shillings an Acre, and better. The Reason why St. Foin thrives so well in dry,
stony, barren Ground, is this: It is a Plant which shoots its small fibrous
Roots a great depth in the Ground, deeper far than Grain or Common Herbs,
which, by reason of the stony Surface, cannot run low; whereas St. Foin creeps
deep by its Roots betwixt the Joints of the Stones, where the Vegitative
Nutriment cannot be sucked by such Plants as feed upon the Surface, which
generally lies no deeper than the Plow. And because St. Foin requires a dry
Soil, such barren, dry Ground is most sit for it; the stony Surface and the
declining Situation utterly forbidding any Moisture to sink far into it.

Clover likewise shoots down a good depth, but not so deep as St. Foin, and is
in a short time supplanted by other Herbs, forasmuch as it prospers best in a
thriving and loose Soil, and generally we may observe, that such Herbs as are
perennial, shoot deep, roots downwards, as Hops, Docks, Fern, Broom, Nettles,
and the like, whereas they which are annual, ly shallow on the Surface.

Ray or Rye Grain is a spiry benty sort of Grass, and is another kind of
improvement, much of the same continuance with Clover, and thrives best in
Cold, Wet and Gauly Ground; it is not so much in Vogue as Clover, or St. Foin.

Another way of improving Pasturage is by Soil, or dressing of the Ground, such
as Dung which has been rotting some Years; as likewise Shovelings of Folds, and
the Mud of Pools and Ditches after two or three Years mellowing. But I know not
any thing which improves Pasturage more than Mault-Dust; so that every one who
Trades in selling of Malt, may securely promise himself, that the Dust and
Winnowings of his Malt, after it has lain some time, will prove a very
considerable part of his Gain.

The Improvement of Pasturage by watering is next to be considered: For if it
be by a Land-Flood, and conveniently distributed by Furrows, it is of great
advantage; but if the Water ly long upon it, it chills the Ground, and makes it
bring forth Rushes, and such like Trash, or a sort of thin, withern, starved
Grass, but above all, where a Ground is well dressed with rotten Dung or Earth,
and a Land-Flood, or other Water can conveniently be brought over it, without
much washing or stay, it must needs make the Ground very fruitful. The Season
of dressing Pasture is in the Frost: For then the Wheels will not cut into the
Earth, and after the Frost is over the Compost or Earth which is laid on, will
be crumbly and moulder. For certain it is, that the finer the Earth or Compost
which is thrown upon it is, the more Grass it will yield: Upon which account it
is, that Pasture Grounds bordering upon great Roads, are more fruitful in Grass
than others; for the Dust which is raised in them, being carried by the Wind,
and falling upon the tender Herbs, the next Shower carries it easily to the
Roots, so that all parts of the Ground is alike Powdered with this sort of
Dust, which is generally fatter than common Earth by reason of the Dungings of
Cattle, and Trash which is commonly cast into the Highways.

Any Ground which lies upon the Hangings of a Hill and has a Pool or Current
above it, is highly to be valued: For such Ground may be watered at any time,
and the Water will be sure not to stand upon it, which is a thing most
pernicious to Pasture; and if such hanging Ground as I am speaking of be
lightly dressed with Earth before the Water is turned over it, 'twill bring
forth Grass in abundance. I have known some, who having the advantage of a Pool
at the Head of a declining Ground, have thrown into the Water a great deal of
Soil or Dung, and all the time of watering their Ground, have ordered a Horse
or two to be rid or walked up and down the Pool during the running of the
Water; so that four or five Loads of Dung thus cast into it, will help the
Ground better than five times as much clean Dung cast or spread upon the
Ground; for the muddy fat Water will be sure to find the Root of every Herb,
whereas Dung laid upon the Ground, though never so well spread, will lie in
little heaps, and a good part of it will dry or burn away without any Benefit.

Lime thrown upon Pasture, if chill and cold, will bring it to a fine thick Mat
of Grass; but whether the Benefit will answer the Cost and Charge, unless it be
where Lime is very cheap, I leave to the Husbandman's Pocket to consider. To
mix Lime with Earth first, and so let them lie together in a heap, bakeing, is
no good way; for the Lime, when slack'd, will make the Earth as hard almost as
a Rock, so that being to be spread upon the Ground, 'twill lie in great Cakes
or Flakes, and will not be turned to a Powder till the Strength and Virtue of
the Lime is spent. The best way therefore is to lay the Lime in little heaps,
(as we do upon Tillage,) and after it is slack'd, and cast into the Air, the
Wind will scatter the Powder of it finely upon the Ground, which the next
Shower of Rain, or the very Dews of the Night, will convey gradually to the
Roots of the Grass.

The last way of Improving Pasture-Grounds is by freeing them from such things
as do annoy and hurt them, such as Ants, Broom, Fern, Wood-wax, or Dyers-weed,
Docks, Thistles, Nettles, and the like. As for Ants, the time of destroying
them is in the beginning of Winter, by digging up their Hillocks, and sinking
their Holes lower than the Level of the Ground, throwing the Core or Earth,
which is dug out of the Hole, into an empty Cart, and casting it into a Pool of
Water, for by throwing it upon the Ground, they will revive again in the
Spring, and raise new Heaps, after they have endu^'d all the Severities of the
Winter-Season, whether of Rain or Frost; so that, after two or three Years, for
one Hillock you shall have a dozen: For I have found by Experience, that Ants
which have been frozen up in Clods of Earth as hard as the Stone, will crawl
about and work again in the Spring. They then who would practice this Method of
Husbandry, by digging out the Core, must quar^er the Turf of the Hillocks
first, and after the Core is taken out, turn the Turf in outerly, and so cover
the hole, leaving it sunk a little lower than the ordinary Surface of the
Ground, as I said before, that so the Water may sink in and kill them; for
there is no destroying them but by Water. This Method likewise must be
practiced at the beginning of Winter, that there may be time enough for the
Water to soak them; though after all, the surest way to destroy these mischievous
Vermin, is to plow up the Ground and Till it with Corn; for this will do the
Business effectually, and for many Years: And truly all Pasture-Grounds
whatsoever, will call for this Method of Husbandry once in twenty Years, by
which means the Grass will come up the sweeter and better, if the Ground be
laid down in good heart. But if this Method shall not prove successful, the
last and surest Remedy the Husbandman can have recourse to, is to graze the
Ground so turned, as I have before described, with Sheep, for the following
Year; for these Cattle, by nipping the Grass close to the Ground, and by often
walking over it, keep down the Ants; for it is by the Spring-Grass they climb
up, and make their Hillocks in the Summer, where you may see them climb up a
foot high, up to the tops of Grass, carrying up Earth and fastening it to the
sides; therefore all which is finally avoided, I say, by keeping the Grass down
by the Teeth and Feet of such Sheep.

Broom is another Enemy to Pasturage, and to destroy it the most effectual way
is, to let it grow for three or four Years, and when it is in Blossom, (as it
will be in May) to cut it with a Hook pretty close to the Ground; for then it
is that all the Sap and Strength of the Plant is up, and being cut off, I say,
the scorching Heat of the Summer will make the remaining Stub to wither and
die, and consequently the Root, there being nothing to draw it: But they who
practice this sort of Husbandry must be sure to leave no young under-shoots of
Broom; for such, though they seem never so inconsiderable, will quickly draw the
Root and get to a head. They who endeavor to kill Broom by plowing, or
stocking of it up, do throw away their Money and Time, for it will come up ten
times thicker than before. Sowing the Ground with Clover will go a great way in
destroying of Broom, and sometimes it will utterly kill it, by reason it draws
a stronger Juice; but, above all, the sowing of St. Foin, without all dispute,
will utterly kill it, forasmuch as it goes much deeper into the Ground than the
Roots of Broom, and engrosses or draws all the vegetative Virtue of the Earth
unto it self.

The way to destroy Fern is to whip off the young Heads of it with a Switch as
soon as it peeps out of the Ground; for then it is very tender, and will weep or
bleed exceedingly: This being done five or six times in a Year, (for so often
will it get head again,) and continued under this Method for two Years, it will
utterly destroy it. A Boy in an Hour's time may whip off the heads of so much
Fern as will poison an Acre of Ground; so that ten or twelve Hours Labor
bestowed upon a piece of Ground, viz. an Hour at a time, will purge a Field
from this devouring Weed: For by often whipping of it, it bleeds and is
bruised, and the scorching Sun withers it in the same way as I have before
described in Broom.

Dyers-weed, or Wood-wax, where it grows, is a most pernicious Weed; it robs
the Ground exceedingly, and its Bitterness will not suffer any Cattle to eat
it, nor will it be destroyed by mowing. The only way I could ever find, is to
graze the Ground which is pestered with it, by Sheep, and eat it bare; for
Sheep bite close, and love this sort of Herb very well, and it is said moreover
to preserve them from the Rot; and the Hay or Fother made thereof is good for
them in the Winter.

As for Thistles, they are not to be destroyed as Fern, by cutting: Breaking-up
and sowing the Ground with Clover is the best way to kill them, and sometimes
they will die of themselves: The like also may be said of Docks, Nettles, and
suchlike Trash, which proceed commonly from the indigested Rankness of the
Soil. Liming of the Ground, whether Tillage or Pasture, does very much
contribute to the Suppression of these Weeds.

Moss is a great Impoverisher of Ground, and is the pure Effect of old Age, or
of worn out Nature; so that growing in a kind of thick Mat or Scurf upon the
Surface of the Earth, it robs the Herbs of their due Nourishment; or more
probably, I say, the Earth being worn out of heart, is able to put forth
nothing but this dry kind of Trash: And although dressing the Ground with rich
Earth or Dung may encourage the Earth to put forth anew, yet 'twill never
answer the Charge and soon return to Moss again; like an old overworn Man, who,
though he may get a little Strength and Warmth, by means of a plentiful and
nourishing Diet, yet as soon as that is withdrawn, Nature relapses to its former
State of Languor and Imbecility. There is no other way then to destroy Moss,
but by breaking-up such Pasture and tilling it with Corn; for this brings up
the Mould which for a long time lay under the Turf, which being exposed to the
Sun and Dews, quickly acquires a prolifick or vegetative Virtue.

The dividing of Pasture-Grounds into little Closes is not the most profitable;
for besides the Vexation and Expense one will be at perpetually in making and
repairing such Fences, as also the Loss of Ground by Hedges and Ditches,
certain it is that Cattle thrive far better in a large Walk; for the Grass which
grows under the Droppings of Trees is sour and trashy, and in the
Summer-Season, when Cattle are subject to the Breeze, they will not be so apt
to break out where they have the Liberty to range. Likewise it is much more
easy to have Water in a large Field of forty Acres, than to furnish the same
with Water when divided into six or seven little Grounds; sor in so great a
Space as a Field of forty Acres, it is ten to one but we may find some one place
which may serve the Necessities of Cattle: But to find the like Convenience in
diverse Parts or Quarters of the same Ground, is very rare and difficult; so
that I dare boldly affirm, that a piece of Ground of ten Acres will keep a
Stock of Cattle longer than sour Closes of three Acres each, though of the same
Nature and Goodness: For in lesser Grounds Cattle quickly walk over them, and
being sullied and stained with their Feet, they will not care to feed thereon;
whereas in larger Fields they have room to range and feed till the stained
Places be refreshed with Rain or with the Dews.

CHAP. IV. Of Fences.
MOunds and Fences are Matters of great Moment in Husbandry, and they are of
two sorts, being either Dead or Quick. Dead Fences are Banks or Bulwarks of
Earth, Stone Walls, Pales, Ditches, or Current of Water, and the like: For
unless these things be put in good order, all our Industry about our Pasturage
and Tillage will signify but little whilst they lie exposed to Trespassings
and Wast.

As for Banks of Earth they are most used near Cities, where it is impossible
almost to raise a Quick-Hedge, by reason of the great Numbers of Poor who
inhabit the Out-skirts, who upon all Occasions, and especially in cold
Weather, will make Plunder of whatsoever is combustible. The great Multitude
likewise of Citizens and of idle Persons, walking for their Pleasure, as also
of Gentlemen and Country People resorting continually to Cities, upon the score
of Marketing, and other Business, all Enclosures of this kind will unavoidably
be laid wast, especially in the Winter-Season, and 'twill require some Years
for the Repair of a Quickset-Hedge; whereas Banks of Earth are easily mended,
and not easily assaulted by Horsemen, nor liable to be spoiled upon the account
of Fuel: Such kind of Fences are very proper for Corn, there being no Harbor
for Birds, nor Shade; but for Pasturage they are not so convenient, as
affording neither Shelter against the Sun or Weather.

Fences of Pales are used generally about Parks, the ruggedness of the Clefts
being very proper to hinder Deer from breaking out. It is easy also to open or
shut a Breach, by removing or pinning two or three Poles, a thing very
convenient for an Enclosure of Chase.

Stone Walls are too chargeable, unless in such Places where the Ground is
naturally dry and stony, as on Cotswold Hills; for there the Stones lie in all
Places ready to hand, there being no more to be done but to lay them orderly
upon one another: And this kind of Stone-work, laid dry, and without Mortar,
will continue for Ages. As for Canals, or Streams of Running-Water, they are
the best Boundaries of all: For besides the Advantage derivable to the Ground
by watering, they afford infinite Pleasure and Profit by Fish, and serving the
Occasions of Cattle, and sometimes also by Traffic, as in the Low Countries,
and likewise in Lombardy, where those rich Meadows are at the same time watered
by an infinite Number of Trenches or Channels all cut by hand, and replenished
with great Variety of Fish. As for Ditches filled with dead or standing Water,
they are industriously to be avoided, as affording in the Summer-Season most
noisome Smells and Vapors, breeding great quantities of Flies and Insects, as
their Water is most unwholesome and dangerous for Cattle.

Quickset-Hedges consist generally of Holly, Hazle, Hip-briar, Brambles, the
Black and White Thorn, etc. Holly is better raised by Berries than by Sets,
though there be but few who designedly plant them, but in the Walks of Gardens,
and then, I say, they are raised by Berries, and are esteemed for being ever
Green, and for their Red Fruit or Berries. The Holly which is edged or fringed
with a silver kind of Thread is accounted very ornamental in the choicest
Gardens. Holly has this Advantage above all other Quicks, for it will thrive
best among great Trees, as Oaks' and Elms, especially Elms; when other Quicks
will not grow, by reason of the strong Nourishment which such greater Trees
draw, to the Consumption of what is planted near them.

Hazle, though a quick grower where it likes the Ground, ought not designedly to
be planted; for the Leaves and Skirts being extraordinary sweet and tender, all
sorts of Cattle prey most eagerly upon it, to the ruin of a Hedge. Hip and
Haws, as well as Hazle, are best planted by Birds and Vermin: For such
Cr^atures making Nuts and Berries to be their ordinary Food, fly with them, or
carry them from Place to Place, and so dropping them up and down the Hedges, or
else hiding them under Ground, at Spring some will be sure to sprout. Brambles
grow naturally enough we may suppose; though it is true too, that the Seeds of
Black-berries, scattered by Birds, or otherwise, up and down the Hedges, beget
a large Increase; and the Shoots or Strings of them running along the Ground,
quickly take root, (as we see in Straw-berries) and will overrun the Ground,
if not timely subdued.

But the two common Quicksets, by which Husbandmen raise their Hedges, are the
Black and White Thorn, called the Haw-Thorn. As for the Black Thorn, the Quicks
or Sets are not very apt to grow, but where they once take root they are never
to be destroyed, and they make the best Fence of any; for it is hardy and
stubborn, and by being a prickly Shrub, Cattle are not apt to bruise it: One
Inconveniency it has, that it is apt to spread wider than it should do, by
sending forth new Shoots from the Root at some distance from the Hedge, and, if
not carefully looked after, will quickly overrun a Ground. The White or
Haw-Thorn is the most usual Quick which the Husbandman makes use of for the
raising of Hedges; for the Sets are good Greens, and withal thorny and prickly;
but the Leaves or tender Buds being sweet, Cattle, and especially Sheep, will
endanger them very much, if not carefully prevented, either by washing them
with Lime, or by making Dead Fences before them till they be grown out of
Danger.

The Season for planting of Quick, holds good from the beginning of December to
the middle of February, and sometimes later, if the Spring be backward. It Is
infinitely better to plant Quick on the Ditch-side than on the Field-side; for
on the Field-side they will be sure to be nipp'd with Cattle, but on the
Ditch-side the Sets are safe from the drying Sun, as also from Cattle which
graize on the Field-side, especially if some Shrubs, Bushes of Black Thorn, be
pricked in over them with the Stakes which make the Dead Hedges.

Some in planting of Hedges will set Acorns, Ash-keys, Crab-quicks, and the
like: But I look not upon this Method to be so profitable to the Hedge; for
such Trees, when grown up to any bigness, will rob the Hedge Wood of its due
Nourishment, and leave Gaps near the Bodies of such Trees, and will stand in
need of continual Repair; and although the Crop of such overgrown Trees may
serve for Fuel, yet I look upon it to be a much better Hedge which shall never
stand in need of Repair, as I have said before. However it be, every Man may
follow that which he finds most profitable.

Cutting or Plashing of Hedges is another thing which we are to have regard to,
which besides that it must be done in due Season, that is, in the Winter, or
very early in the Spring, great care is to be had furthermore to the manner of
cutting: A felling or downright Blow is too apt to make a Cleft in the Stub,
which will rot and deaden; it is better therefore to cut upwards, if one can
conveniently come at it. Likewise we must be sure to leave good store of bushy
Thorns or Broom on the sides of the Quick-Hedges; for these serve for a Defense
to keep off Cattle from brouzing upon the tender Shoots of a newplash'd Hedge;
and after two Years time, such Shoots will grow strong and be out of the reach
of Cattle, and then we may safely cut away or trim off the Under-growings or
bushy Fuel for our Occasions: Whereas he who cuts the top of a Hedge, and the
under-wood or side Spriggs all at once, endangers the killing of his Fence, the
Cattle having free scope and liberty to nip off the tender Buds in all Places
as fast as they shoot out.

For the same Reason likewise I hold it not good Husbandry to be overcurious
in grubbing up of Thorns or Bushes which grow near a Quick-Hedge; for these
are, as it were, the Outworks which preserve the main Fence safe, which being
once cut away, the principal Fence lies open to the Injuries of Cattle. When a
Hedge is grown very old, and stubby, it is best to cut it up at the Butt,
leaving only here and there a Layer or Pleacher, the Mould being first cast up
carefully to the Bank, to cherish the Roots of such Thorns or Hedgewood from
whence the dead Stuff was cut: For the Safety and Defense whereof a dead Hedge
must be made at two Yards distance, the Brush lying on the Field-side to keep
off Cattle from doing Mischief, whilst the newlaid Hedge is a recovering. This
Art of Husbandry, or double Hedging, is not to be practiced but where there is
plenty of Tynnel, and there the Charge or Expense is no other but the Hire of
Tyning, which is inconsiderable, and after three Years time it may be taken
away ready cut and dried for the Fire. In all dead Gaps of Hedges it is very
expedient to make the Stakes of Sally or Withy, for they will prove quick, and
grow, and afford plentiful Matter for the Repair of Hedges from time to time.

There is a sort of dead Hedging which is commonly practiced with good
Advantage, especially near Lanes, and that is by pricking or sticking Thorns
slant or slope-ways upon the Bank, and covering the bottoms of them with Turf.
This sort of Fence will hold good for a Year or two, and has this Advantage,
that as Cattle will not destroy it by brouzing, so neither will it be in danger
of being diminished by Hedge-breakers, there being nothing which may tempt them
thereunto, as in Stake-Hedges, where the Tynnel is of much greater Substance.
This sort of Hedging is of very little Charge, and where a Breach is made it is
easily repaired; only Care must be took from time to time, as the Bank shall
wash away into the hollow Road and Ditch on the other side, not to repair it by
digging new Earth on the Fields-side to cover the Thorns; for by this means the
Ground will in time be wasted away, leaving a deep Ditch or Trench behind. The
way then must be to cast up the Earth which is mouldred down into the hollow
way, and so repair the Bank or Bulwark; which, though it be a little more
troublesome, will preserve the Ground from being wasted by frequent digging.

CHAP. V. Of Grass raised from Foreign Seeds.
EVery Man that is a Member of a Commonwealth may be considered in a double
Capacity: First, as he stands alone, and in his Private and Domestic Capacity;
Next, as he is a Member of a Body, and in his Relative and Civil Capacity. If
we consider him under the first Circumstance, we must look upon him as a
Creature acting upon Self-Interest, whether it be in getting and augmenting his
Fortune by Industry and Labor; by Traffic, by Cunning, by Study, Employments,
Preferments, etc. or by securing himself from Wrong, or by providing for and
advancing his Family; and, in a word, by gratifying his Desires in all true or
imaginary Enjoyments, and Contents, whether they concern his own Person or
those who are nearly related to and dependent on him.

But then, as he is a Member of a Commonwealth, his Duty extends it self much
farther; for it is with the Body-Politick as with the Body-Natural: If any one
Member shall refuse to be beneficial to its Fellows, it must not expect the
like Relief from them; by which means there will follow such a kind of Jarring
or Discord amongst the Parts of the Body, as will draw on a Distemper and
perhaps a Dissolution, which cannot but be fatal to the disagreeing Members
themselves. It Is true, it concerns every Man to provide for his own private
Affairs in the first place, for if he leaves it for others to do it for him, he
will quickly find himself in a very naked Condition, so prevalent is
Self-Interest, which will first begin and many times end at home. And yet all
this while, a Man, whilst he is thus busy about his private Interest, differs
very little from Brutes: For these know very well what is for their own good,
and will labor always to procure the same; many of which are as sagacious and
provident for their future Benefit, as the most subtle and industrious of
Humane Race. Duties therefore of this kind may be called Animal or Sensitive,
as being common with Men and Beasts as they are living Creatures. But Duties
which concern the Public are of a higher and more distinguishing Nature, as
being of a larger Extent, and carry some Marks of Divinity on them, forasmuch
as they level at the General Good, by promoting Peace and Justice, and serve
consequently to render Kingdoms and future Ages stable and flourishing, and
must be esteemed therefore to be much more noble than the former, as being
founded in Reason and Prudence, and diffusing their Influence over all the
World.

Now to apply these Notions to the Point in question; and first, It is,
questionless, the Inclination of every Man to improve his Estate as much as he
can by the Arts of Husbandry, as we may suppose in our present Case, by sowing
his Ground with Foreign Seeds, such as St. Foin, Clover, etc. But whether it be
for the Interest of the Commonwealth to countenance and permit such
Improvements may be a Question: For if it shall appear that such Plantations
are Injurious to the Public, according to what is already premised, the
Government has Power to restrain Men from pursuing their Domestic and Private,
Advantage, when it shall be to the Detriment of the same Persons, as they stand
engaged in a Public Body or Society.

The Considerations tempting us to believe that such Innovations in Husbandry
ought to be permitted, are these, viz. Besides the Benefit which a vast Number
of Persons reap from Improvements of this nature, certain it is, that great
Numbers of Cattle are raised this way, and consequently more Corn, because more
Dung: Nor can Clover, for the purpose, be continued but for a little time
without Tillage. Now the more Corn and Cattle are raised, the cheaper must all
Provisions be, which is generally looked upon to be a Benefit to the Public.

This Reason, how specious and popular soever it may seem upon the first
Appearance, will, upon a nearer View, be found to be very thin and fallacious:
And first, If we consider the Interest of Private Persons, what Reason is there
that some Private Persons should be suffered to grow rich and get Estates by
the Loss of a far greater Number of Private Persons, no less Industrious and
Honest than their Neighbors? It Is true, where Men riotously or sottishly wast
their Estates, their Neighbors may gather Sticks, and into the Bargain make
themselves warm by the Fire of them: But for the Primitive, Ancient, and Native
ways of Pasturage, so useful and necessary to the Nation, as those of Graizing
and of the Dairy, to be supplanted, with all the Families thereon depending, by
the Invasion of Foreigners, may be as mischievous to the good old Husbandman as
any other Invasion, whether of such as assault us by open force, or of those
more dangerous ones who endeavor to trapan us by fraudulent Cajolery.

The Plantation of Tobacco in England is a Production certainly which would be
beneficial to a world of People both Planters and Smoakers; and yet we find
that it has been destroyed by Public Order, from time to time, as fast as
ever it grew up; and this because it ruined others who before were settled in a
Trade: Why then there should not be the same Reason against Clover, St. Foin,
Rye-Grass, and other Foreign Weeds, we are yet to learn, especially when we
consider the Duties or Payments, whether Parochial or Public, with which
Ancient Estates are burdened. For though it be certainly true, that Meadow and
Feeding Grounds are fallen at least Fifteen per Cent. since the Importation of
these Foreign sorts of Grass, yet are they liable to the same Rates or Payments
with which they were charged before they were impoverished by these Outlandish
Usurpers; whereas Lands, which the last Year, perhaps, were not worth above
Five Shillings an Acre, after they are sown with Clover or St. Foin, are worth,
yearly, Twenty five or Thirty Shillings per Acre, and notwithstanding such
Advance of Profit, are in a manner scot-free, paying only after the Proportion
of their old Rents, upon Pretense, forsooth, that no Man ought to pay for his
Improvements; which thing is false both in Reason and Practice. But that Lands,
on the other hand, which sink in their Value by the Encroachments of others,
should be still stretched upon the Rack, whilst the Productions which undermine
them return triple Profit to the Proprietor, without Augmentation of Duty, are
Maxims very unpolitick, irrational, and unjust. The Ancient Fundamental Course
which has been found profitable and useful for so many Ages, ought not to be
expelled by Foreign Upstarts, which, though upon the Account of their Novelty,
they may get some Admirers and Followers, will be found in the Close to be of
mischievous Consequence to the Public, as will appear farther, if we consider
the second General Argument offered on their Behalf, viz. the Plenty and
Increase of Corn and Cattle.

It Is very true, by means of these foreign Growths more Corn and Cattle are
raised than would be otherwise; but this still is no Befit to the Public, when
the Abundance and Plenty shall lower the Price: For every one knows that it is
more Profit to have one Bushel of Corn which shall bring him Five Shillings
than to sell two Bushels of the same Grain for Six; because, when things are
dear, the Return is made at less than half the Expense; and when Commodities
are cheap, then is Money dear or scarce, because there must be a great deal of
Goods in Exchange for a little Money; as on the contrary, when Commodities are
dear then is Money cheap, because a little Ware will purchase a great deal of
Money: And certain it is, that it is infinitely better for a Commonwealth, when
Money (which is the Blood of the Body-Politick) circulates quickly, and is
distributed through all the Parts, than when it stagnates or lies dead in a few
Men's Hands, whilst Commerce, and all the Business of the Market, shall be at a
Stand by too much Repletion, which must needs occasion a Stoppage of Money:
For, to speak truly, none reap the Benefit of Plenty but the poorer sort of
People, nor do they truly; for so it is, that in the Years of Plenty, Workmen
are hardest to be procured, and those most exacting too, because a few Days
Labor will maintain them a great while. The Plenty does but tempt them to
Laziness and Riot, which in the end leads them into Misery, and becomes
expensive and burdensome to the Public; so that 'twill be still better that
the Market should be quick, (and quick it will be when Provisions are scarce,)
than to have it over-glutted, which cannot but discourage Labor and Industry,
as it will certainly encourage Sloth and Beggary.

What I speak as to Scarcity, is to be understood in a moderate measure; for if
it tend to Dearth, it cannot but be very prejudicial and grievous to all sorts
of People: So that how great a Blessing soever Plenty may be thought, certain
it is that it does dispose Men to Intemperance and Excess, and is then only to
be looked upon as a Blessing, when what is superfluous may be exported abroad,
and bring us home such things as we stand in need of. And as to the Productions
of what we are now discoursing, it is no less certain that they endamage the
Public in many other respects, it being known to every one, that the Flesh of
Sheep or Cattle, fatted by such sorts of Grass, is fady, worse colored and
worse tasted than what is Grass-fed; so likewise is the white Meat, or the
Cheese and Butter made of such Pasturage.

Upon these and suchlike Considerations we may affirm, securely, that as it is
the Interest, so is it in the Power of the Civil Magistrate to banish these
Foreign Productions, because detrimental to the greater part of the Nation; or,
if continued, 'twould be much for its Interest to impose a Duty, as a Crown for
the purpose, yearly, upon every Acre so planted; which would be some Help
toward defraying the Public Charge, and leave the Planters or Husbandmen
sufficient Gainers by the Bargain. It Is the Duty of the Magistrate not to debar
any from their Rights and Liberty, but by all due Provisions to support them in
the same. But when the Interest of Particular Persons shall stand in
Competition with that of a greater Body, (as it is sufficiently demonstrated
that it does in the present Case,) it is certainly in his Power to reduce them
into their former Methods of living, and not suffer them to injure a greater
Body by new Projects tending to their Private Interest. Nor is this to abridge
Men of their Rights, but to confine them to their present State and Condition
of Life, upon Considerations of a more General Good.

Nor does this, which is now delivered, any way prejudice or contradict the
Design of an after-Essay, as to the Business of excluding Sea-coal from the
City of London; because, in that case, the Change is supposed to be of infinite
more Advantage to the City, (and in a manner to the whole Kingdom,) than the
Continuance; and though some Persons may be prejadic'd in their Interests, yet is
their Number very inconsiderable, compared with those who shall be bettered by
the Change: Nor can they be so great Losers by the Bargain as the Grasiers and
the Pasture-Men of this Nation, especially in those Parts where such Foreign
Productions are found to grow.

To conclude this little Dispute: There cannot be a more competent Judge in the
present Question than the English Nation it self, represented in its
Parliaments, particularly in that Provision which they have made formerly
against the Importation of Irish Cattle. It Is very well known, that after the
Desolation made in that Kingdom, Thousands of English Families were encouraged
by the Government then in being, to remove Themselves and Substance, and to
settle there, as it were in form of a Colony, in order to Re-people that almost
ruined and abandoned Island: And because the Country was most proper for the
breeding of Cattle, they began soon to take root, sending over vast Droves into
England, and driving a very considerable Trade amongst their Friends and
Correspondents, the Effect of which being found very prejudicial to this
Nation, and to such especially whose chiefest Revenue depended likewise upon
the breeding of Cattle. The Parliament, I say, finding the Markets every where
to sink, and the Farmers likewise to be unable to pay their Rent, as being
deprived of the Means of raising Money, and consequently that Land-Taxes (the
common Expedient to which the Nation has recourse) would become very uneasy
and heavy upon the Subject: They, in their great Foresight of the ill
Consequences of this Irish Liberty, thought fit to prohibit all farther
Importations; and by this means enabled the English to hold up their Heads
again, and bear their Burdens, proceeding in their former Road of breeding
Cattle, as in Ancient Times. Now if the Parliament dealt thus with Ireland, who
were their Fellow Subjects under the English Crown, nay, English Men, and their
Neighbors; for they were for the most part the English who carried on the
Irish Cattle-Trade, and such English too as had been drawn over into Ireland
upon large Promises of Favor and Assistance; I cannot see but that there is
infinite greater Reason to reduce our Traders in Foreign Grass, so much
prejudicial to the Pasturage of this Kingdom; which Pasturage, I say, so much
impoverished as it is, is still forced to lie under the heavy Weight of Taxes,
whilst the new Planters, or Supplanters rather, who cause this so great a Decay
of Pasturage, are at full Ease, and in the very Letter of the Country Proverb,
lie fattening in Clover.

CHAP. VII. Of Commonage and Enclosures.
ANother Question issuing from the former Discourse, is about the Rights of
Commonage and Enclosures; where, in the first place, we are to understand, that
the Question is not, Whether the Supreme Authority has a Power to uncommon
wast Grounds, when it is attended with Remarkable Benefit, (as in the Case of
the wast Grounds near London, shall be hereafter discoursed of?) for that I
take to be indisputable. The Question then will be, first in General, Whether
the Commoners, or the Proprietors, have the more Ancient Title? Secondly,
Whether it would be more for the Interest of a Nation, that there should be
many wide Heaths and Commons, as now they are? or that all were enclosed and
improved to the utmost Advantage.

I begin with the First, concerning which the Dfficulty will not be great, it
being obvious to every one that in the first Ages of the World we rarely read
of Enclosures. Properties indeed they had of Servants and Catle, and in the
Number of these consisted their Wealth, but for Propriety of Land we meet with
nothing saving those Common Boundaries or Landmarks, (which were Rivers
generally, or Mountains) by which the Possessions of Nations, or greater
Families were discriminated; which Families were not like those of our Age,
consisting of a Master, with his Wife, Children or Domestics; but the Families
of those days were a kind of little Principalities, where one presided in Chief
over the several Branches or Members depending on him, whether they descended
from his Body, or whether they were of a younger House, comprehending in the
account all Servants, with their Offspring; all Captives, and such as were
purchased with Money: So that a Family then might consist of Several Hundreds
of individual Persons, and might be made up of diverse subordinate and inferior
Families, all depending upon one common Head. This, as it is most obvious from
all Profane Story, and more especially from the Sacred Writings; so is it as
plain too from the same Sacred Writings, that the Jewish Patriarchs lived for a
long time, in Tents, wandering from place to place, as they found Conveniences
for feeding of their Cattle.

We find indeed, that the Babylonians, as also the Egyptians, the Two most
ancient and flourishing Monarchs of which we read; That they built them Cities
with stately Walls, and other prodigious Piles which they left as Monuments of
their Greatness to future Ages. It Is certain likewise, That there were many
other inferior Cities, of which we read often in Scripture, such as Sodom and
Gomorroh. The Canaanites also had Cities with Walls looking high toward
Heaven; but all this while, there is no Proof of Enclosures of Pasturage, nor
yet probably of Cornfieldsd; for then there must have been diversities of Farms
or single Houses, as now there are: But of this we read nothing, only that Men
lived still together in some kind of a Body, which is no other but a City.

As for Pasturage 'twas all in Common; but in regard that Corn not being raised
but with Labor and Charge, it is probable that the Prince or Head of the Family
or People undertook the Burden, appointing afterward to every one of his
Servants or Dependants his due Portion. But in after Ages, as Men began to
thirst after Conquest, and many Contentions arising daily about the Divisions
of the Fruits of the Earth, 'twas thought Expedient that every Man's Propriety
should be secured by particular Limits or Enclosures; which happened frequently
upon a Conquest, where the Services of private Persons were rewarded by the
Conquerors assigning out of the Lands of the Vanquished Country, a certain
portion of Ground to every man, as his Service might deserve.

This was the Case of the Jews upon their Entrance into Canaan; and ours
likewise in England, upon the Norman Invasion, as also of the Romans sometimes,
unless those whom they subdued became Tributaries; tho generally, the Romans
dealing bountifully with the conquered Nations, did naturalize or incorporate
them amongst their Citizens, which Clemency of theirs raised that Empire to its
Greatness, few caring to resist such Generous and Potent Enemies, who were so
easy to be entreated, so faithful to their Allies, and so able and resolute to
protect those who submitted to them.

But to return to my Argument, From what has been hinted it is unquestionable,
That the Rights and Title of Commonage are much ancienter than those of
Enclosures; I mean, in the general; and with us here in England, the Rights of
our present Commoners seem to have begun upon the Conquest, when King William
and his Successors, reserving to themselves certain Lands for Forests and
Chaces, and for the Preservation of Game, the Inhabitants bordering upon such
Places, under some Fines of acknowledgment or Vassalage were allowed the
Privilege of keeping Cattle on them, with some other Advantages, the Kings
still retaining to themselves the Royalty or Benefit of such Places for the
Preservation of Deer, and for their own Sport and Recreation. The like
Constitution hereunto we may observe in other Manors or Lordships, derived at
first from the Crown; so that the Commoners Title, in this respect, precedes
that of any Proprietor; Forasmuch as the whole Kingdom then, though beautified
with Cities, and divided into Farms, as at this present day, was to be reputed
but as One Great Common, out of which many private Persons were permitted to
buy; or of the Royal Bounty and Grant, to appropriate some Parts or Parcels of
it, under the Obligation of certain Duties or Acts of Homage, all which
Privileges being confirmed by after Acts of Parliament, do invest the
Commoners with such a Right or Title as nothing but a Parliamentary Power can
reverse.

The next Quaere then is this, Whether it would be more for the Interest of a
Nation that there should be many wide Heaths and Commons as now there are; Or
that all should be enclosed and improved to the utmost Value? Here I must
confess a Field lies open for a large Discourse; all that I shall adventure in
it, shall be to propose such Reasons as may occur on one hand, and on the
other, leaving the Decision of the Controversy to the Reader's Judgment.

First then, it may be urged in favor of Enclosures; That by this means many
Families would live creditably and in good Fashion from the Profits to be made
hereby; and that such Profits would be a very great Encouragement and Spur to
Industry, as the Fruits and Productions reapt from such Enclosures would be of
great Advantage to the Public, by furnishing the Markets with more plentiful
Provisions, whether of Corn or Cattle; which New-Enclosed Farms likewise being
improved; upon a Survey and Estimate made of them, would be a great Ease to the
Nation in time of War, by being made to partake and share of the Common Burden
in the Supplies usually required on such Occasions; whereas in the State and
Condition wherein Commons lie at present, the Public is damnified, such Places
being generally Seminaries of a lazy, Thieving sort of People: For what
Invitation can there be for Industry and Labor, when those who take no Pains
shall share in the Profit? such People likewise being remote from Neighbors of
Reputation and Fortune, may be accounted for Heathens and Savages, living in a
manner without all Knowledge of God; there being little Encouragement for able
Ministers from a lean and hungry Soil, so that living remote from Churches, and
no Officers or Magistrates being near them, they seem to be a Brood of
Terrae-Filii, or law less Rogues, engendring upon one another as from the
beginning, so on to the end of the World, and preserving themselves frequently
from starving, by stealing of Wood, Sheep, and Cattle, and by breaking of
Houses, to the great Annoyance of all honest Husbandmen who have the misfortune
to live near them.

And as the Men, so are the Cattle, which are bred upon such Commons, being a
starved, scabby and rascally Race. Their Sheep are poor, tattered and poisoned
with the Rot. Their Cattle and Colts dwarft and ragged: For little, beggarly
Stone-Colts, running promiscuously amongst the Herd, beget a miserable, shotten
and Bastardly Breed; and generally it is that Horses nabb upon such wild and
desert Places, half famished; by which means the Race of our Horses becomes
tainted and base; whereas the English Horse when he comes of a good Kind, and
being carefully looked to when a Colt, may be esteemed the best, perhaps, in the
World; I mean, for all the uses of a Horse, whether for drudging and fatigue,
or for the Pad: Our better sort of Horses being generally swift and easy
Goers, and fit for the Chase, and for Running, as well as for the Road. Foreign
Countries indeed, yield better Horses for some particular uses, as the Low
Countries or Flanders, for the Draught and Coach; Naples for the Great Saddle;
Barbary and Arabia for Shape and Fleetness: But the true English Horse is
serviceable in more respects than one, where the Breed, I say, is not poisoned
by Commons. Upon which account it is that our Hackneys are so much esteemed
Beyond Sea. Nor are Commons only injurious to the Race of Horses, but also of
Cattle, The increase of such Places being nothing but a sort of starved,
Tod-bellied Runts, neither fit for the Dairy nor the Yoke; so that a Common,
upon the matter, is nothing but a Naked Theater of Poverty, both as to Men and
Beasts, where all things appear horrid and uncultivated, and may be termed, not
improperly, the very abstract of Degenerated Nature.

But notwithstanding all this, much may be said on the behalf of Commons; as
first, that they are more productive of People: For a Common, or Waste of six
hundred Acres will maintain thirty Cottages of Four to a Family, which if
enclosed would not amount to above Eight Farms, each Farm containing about
seven Persons one with another. Now, it is for the Interest of a Nation, that it
should abound rather with Men than Cattle; and that such Men are poor, matters
not, so they be not indigent, or such as stand in need of Relief from the
Parish. For were it not for these poor Laborers, the Rich themselves would
soon become poor; for either they must labor and Till the Ground themselves,
or suffer it to ly waste, and in the end Common. Now such poor Cottages being
inured to all manner of Hardships, prove excellent good Laborers, where they
are kept in order; and as they are exceeding serviceable for the Country
Affairs in Times of Peace, so are they most useful in Time of War, for the same
reason of being bred hardy, and when reformed by Discipline will make good
rough, cross-grained Soldiers enough, fit to kill or be killed. This we see
exemplified in Switzerland, Sweden and Scotland, which as they are the poorest
Countries, so do they yield the bravest Soldiers in the World. Whereas the
Commonwealths which are rich and Traffic are no way considerable upon this
score, their Men generally being foggy and resty. Spain, it is true, is in the
main a poor Country, and yet in no such Reputation for Martial Men, as
heretofore, their Great Ones, which should make Officers, being men too much
abandoned to Pleasures, and if the meaner sort of them make not their Fortunes
this way, it is to be imputed to the Genius of the People, who being naturally
proud and haughty, will rather starve like Dons, than take pains like Men.

But this Consideration possibly, might be of greater Moment under a Government
which thirsts after the Enlargement of Empire, than in a Monarchy, such as the
British is, whose Empire being Insular, it can never be its Interest, unless by
way of Diversion, to make a War upon the Continent, where sudden Invasions
cannot be made, in which principally consists the Success of such Wars; and for
Invasions or Transportations of Armies, they are things of vast Expense,
Embarrass and Noise, and subject to many fatal Disasters from the Winds and
Weather, or the Resistance which may be made by the Enemy, and other
Difficulties in Landing. But let us suppose the Aggressors be so fortunate as
to set footing upon the Continent, they could not expect long to keep
Possession, unless they were certain to have their Allies, the Seas, the Winds,
and a vast Treasure always at Command, and to be able to send Recruits as quick
as we can Letters by the next Return of the Pacquet-Boat. Nevertheless, in a
Defensive or Civil War, such hardy Rogues as are bred usually upon Commons, may
prove excellent good Food for Powder.

It must be confessed, it is true that such Commoners or Cottagers are generally
Savage and Paganish: If honest Ministers were appointed to over-see these
Goats, some small good possibly might be done; but much more might be expected
from a vigilant and severe Justice of the Peace, taking in to his Assistance
some Constables of the like Mettle: For we are not now to expect Miracles in
the Conversion of such Heathens by Preaching; a good strong pair of Stocks, and
a Whipping-post, will work a greater Reformation than Forty Doctrines and Uses.
Nor truly will the Pastors themselves much care to be troubled with such an
unregenerate and barren Flock, which will yield neither Milk nor Clothing.
However the Matter stands, the Fault is not so much in the Men, but something
also in the Government, and more in the Circumstances of these uncultivated
Places, which naturally incline Men to Barbarity and Ignorance.

As for the Sterility of Commons, something might be said against it, were we
sure to have a good Utterance for the Fruits of such new Improvements: But, as
the Case now stands, we want rather Men to be fed, than Meat to feed them; and
where there is Plenty of Provisions, if there be not Wealth proportionable,
'twill quickly cloy, or turn to Surfeit. For Men may be poor, that is, without
a Penny in their Purses, in the midst of full Crops and Herds of Cattle; since
we are not in the Primitive Golden Age of the World, when that Metal was least
in Request, and when all things were procured by Barter or Trucking; but rather
in the Silver one, where whatsoever we stand in need of can no otherways be
obtained but by the Divinity of Money.

The Horses which are bred upon such Commons must be confessed likewise to be
shriveling and grubbish, but withal, being hardy, they are fit for all sorts of
meaner Drudgery, to which better Flesh might not willingly be exposed: So that
if two of these little Garrans go to the making up of one tolerable Horse,
there is no greater Loss than for a Man to have two Six Pences instead of one
Shilling, which, as they are of equal Value, so are the lesser Pieces more
useful for Change and Barter: And he who gains his Livelihood by the Labor of
such cheap Carrions, if one of them come to a Mischance, the Loss is not great;
whereas the Death of one good Horse would be the utter Ruin perhaps of a poor
Man's Family.

And although our Cottagers are found generally to be too lazy, and void of
Morality, yet we may observe, that there is rarely any one of these Huts or
Cabins, but has its little Enclosures lying round about it: As for Example, a
pretty Plot of Ground like a Meadow, from whence he mows a Modicum of Hay, to
keep his Cow, or a few Sheep, against the Injuries of the Winter; as likewise a
little Rib of Tillage for Bread-Corn, or perhaps a slender Orchard, or some
other Plantation of Trees, to shelter him from the Extremities of the Weather;
so that every such Cottage seems to be an Epitome of a more Voluminous Farm,
which is so much the more pleasant to the Eye, not of the Owner, I mean, but of
the Spectators, by how much the Variety of the Landscape is contracted into a
lesser compass. And I have oftentimes stood and paused a while in viewing these
Rural Mansions, considering with my self, within how small a Circle the
familiar Enjoyments and the most innocent Delights of the Earth may be
confined, and how little may suffice to relieve the Necessities of Nature.

As for the Suppressing of Cottages, as it would be unpolitick, so would it be
most unjust, without a due Regard first had for the Maintenance of the
Inhabitants, (which would be no Injury, but a Benefit to such People,) who
having lived Time immemorial in such Places, they have as good a Title to their
Habitations, as if they had continued there from the Beginning of the World. I
know, in Cases of a General Necessity, the Rights of Particular Persons may be
impeached, for the Preventing of a greater Evil, as it is lawful to blow up a
House (without the Owners Leave) to prevent a Conflagration; or in case a Ship
be ready to sink, it is lawful likewise to cast a Private Person's Goods into
the Sea, to lighten the Burden: But this only holds good then when a
particular Man's Concerns is so twisted with that of others, that all must
either sink or swim together. But to invade any Man's Private Interest without
his Leave, or due Compensation had for his Loss, and for the Benefit purely of
others, wherein the Loser himself is not concerned, this is against Reason; so
that we are carefully to distinguish between a Necessity and a Convenience. In
Cases, I say, of Common Necessity, it is better a Part than a Whole should
suffer; but in Cases of Convenience it is not so: For no Man ought to suffer for
the Advantage of Others, when the Person suffering partakes not of that
Advantage.

Where, by the way, we may take leave to glance a little at the Behavior of
some Lords of Manors, whose Bailiffs many times wheedle in the Cottages, (as
depending perhaps upon his Lordship for their Employments,) allowing them
Liberty to build upon the Wast, and to enclose Ground, perhaps; giving them a
Tree or two to carry on the Design, upon Condition they will take a Lease of
such Cottages for Three Lives, paying only some Six Penny chief Rent: Upon the
Expiration of which Term, his hungery Lordship swallows the poor Cottage, with
all its Members and Dependencies, at a bit, which by the Sweat and Labor of
the poor Defunct and his Predecesso^s, was improved to a kind of Competency out
of Nothing, whilst the Remains of the poor Family are exposed to the naked
World, or else forced to pay a good round Fine for the Renewal of that which
was so dearly purchased by their own Pains and Industry. By which sly Methods
the Commonage will be engrossed in Time, and many whole Families be devoured,
to serve the Appetite of an unsatiable Patron: A Thing to which the Parliament
of this Nation ought to have a special Regard, the Members whereof, many of
them, tho Lords of Manors, yet is it to be hoped that they will act like Men
of Trust and Honor, and not suffer Frauds, attended with so much Inhumanity,
how conducible soever they may seem to their private Interests, to go without
Correction. Concerning which, as also many other Points touched upon in this
Discourse, though the Definitive Judgment belong to them, yet every Man endu'd
with Understanding has a Judgment of Discretion to know what is agreeable to
Reason; which Reason will still carry a Sway over the Minds of Men by a kind of
Influence not inferior to that of Authority.

CHAP. VII. Of Coppice-Wood.
THE Third General Thing about which the good Husbandman must be conversant, is
Planting: To which I shall speak under these Particulars. First, of Woods or
Coppices; next, of Trees useful for Husbandry; and lastly, of Fruit Trees.

In planting of a Coppice great Care ought to be had to the Situation of the
Ground: The Ground then ought to be a little rising to the East, for that is
held the best for Timber; and all Under-wood likewise thrives best the more
it is exposed to the Rising-Sun. It is no way profitable to suffer Timber Trees
to grow in Coppice-Woods, unless on the skirts or outsides, where they may
spread their Branches without Injury to the Coppice, and receive the Benefit of
the Sun; but where they grow amidst the Coppice they hurt one another: For if
Timber Trees be lopped, they grow knotty and bare; and if unlopp'd, the
Droppings of the Boughs will spoil the Growth of the Coppice after a Fellet,
and the Underwood likewise will rob the Timber Trees of its Nourishment, and by
this means they will extremely injure one another.

In cutting of a Coppice, if the Shoots be old, it is best to pare em close to
the Ground, for the young Shoots will come up more thick and strong. The Poles,
after they be stripped, if they be left standing a Year, will grow tough and hard
at the Heart, and be never subject to the Worm. The same Benefit may be
procured by cutting them down as soon as they be stripped, and casting them into
the Water, where they may ly for some time, and then taken out for use, as
occasion shall require. It is very ill Husbandry to suffer Cattle to go into
Coppice-Woods: Nevertheless, after they be of Seven or Eight Years growth,
Colts may feed upon the Lawnes or Walks of such Woods, without any great
Damage.

I hold Ash to be very profitable in Coppices; for they will shoot up in
height, and grow very straight, and make excellent Hoops, besides, it is a
quick Grower. I hold it very profitable likewise, where a Coppice is to be
raised by setting of Acorns, to sow Crab-Kernels amongst them; for they will be
raised much safer this way than in a Nursery, and may be removed without any
injury to the Coppice, as occasion shall require: What is pretended, that such
Stocks when they are removed or re-planted in an open place will not thrive, as
being removed out of a warm Bed into the open Air, is a mere Fancy: For I have
known such Stocks as forward as any, and although the Coppice-wood might shelter
them from the cold Winds, yet it is certain, that they suffer much more in the
Root, which is not capable to spread it self far, being choakt up by the crowd
of other Roots about them, which also rob them of their due Nourishment, so
that when they are translated from their hungry Soil, and their devouring
Neighbors and Thickets, they will quickly flourish, and be more hardy than
those which are raised in the Nursery.

Discoursing once with a Gentleman, (Mr. Seal of Cotton Vnderidge in the
County of Gloucester) who was very Curious and Intelligent in these Matters, and
of whatsoever related to Husbandry, he made it out, That an Acre of
Coppice-Wood on a Plain, might contain as much Wood as two Acres on the side of
a Hill, tho that on the Plain, as likewise the Ground on the side of the Hill,
might seem both alike planted, or equally thick in appearance; which Assertion,
tho it looks at first like a Paradox, contains a real Truth, as he made appear
from this Pyramidal or Triangular Figure.



A the Basis, represents the Plain. B B the two sides of the Triangular,
represent the sides of the Hill or Mountain. C C C C Show the Trees shooting
from the Plain, and from the sides: For if we consider the matter a little, and
the Order wherein Trees grow upon a Plain, and upon a hanging Surface, we shall
find them perfectly stretching themselves in such Order as the Figure
represents: So that if the Hill or Mountain be very high and steep, one Acre at
the bottom may contain four times the quantity of Wood, as an Acre on the side
of a Hill, a thing which all who deal in Woods, ought to have regard to.

A Plantation of Coppice-wood is a thing of great Profit; for by this means,
Ground which is not worth five Shillings an Acre, will be worth Twenty, and
better. It Is true, it will be 18 or 20 Years before we come to reap the fruit
of our labor, which may discourage those perhaps, who are advanced in Years,
from entering upon a Project, of which peradventure, they may never see the
effect. But Men are not born only for themselves, but must be mindful also of
Posterity whether descending from themselves, or such as shall rise up in
succeeding Ages. And certain it is, that the Profit which shall accrue this
way, as it is greater, so it is more laudable than what may arise from the
Returns of a long sleeping Mortgage. And there is further advantage in Copoices
or Woods, above other Lands, that they are not subject to sink in their Value
or encumber us, as Tillage and Pasture, which sometimes for want of Tenants,
sometimes by the Fall of Cattle, or Corn, or some Accident or other, become
very hazardous and troublesome, and require continual Expense to maintain them:
Whereas Coppice-Woods being a little looked to, and preserved from Cattle for
some time after they be cut, there is no more trouble with them; and we reap
the Profit of them in a good round Sum, or in Gross; whereas other Lands make
their Returns by little and little, and as it were by Retail, so that Money
melts away insensibly, or in trifling services, perhaps.

Further yet, A Plantation of Coppice-Wood, as it is most profitable to a
private Undertaker, so is it most pleasant and ornamental, if near a
Gentleman's House. If it be seated therefore on the side of a Hill, I hold it
very beautiful and graceful to Plant a Coppice on the declining Ground leading
to it, and so to cut Glades or Avenues which may give a View and Prospect of
the Seat; which Roads or Walks, if well kept, and regularly cut, are far more
graceful than Rows of Trees, where the failing of some here and there, make a
great Gap in the Walk, of which there is no danger in thick Tufts of Wood; and
besides the Pleasure of the Shades, such places are more delightful from the
Birds and Game with which they may be stored. Such Gentlemen therefore who
build for Pleasure, ought to have regard to this particular; as also, to have
Springs or little Currents lying about their Houses, which may serve for Use
and Ornament: Of which more hereafter.

Hitherto I have spoken a little of planting Wood, with regard only to the
private Interests and the Profit of the Planter; but in respect of the Public,
the Advantage certainly is much more considerable which hence arises: For it is
by such Plantations that our Arsenals are, from Age to Age, stored with
Ship-Timber, and consequently the best Safety and Defense of the Nation depends
upon them: So that the Decay of Timber in an Age where there is twice the
Occasion for it as formerly, cannot but portend unavoidable Danger for the
future, if due regard be not had hereunto. And truly, upon the Dreadful Fire of
London, had not Norway, Denmark and Sweden furnished us with plenty of
Materials for its Repair, there would hardly have been any good Timber-Building
left in the Kingdom.

Another thing which seems very much to render good Timber scarce, especially
Oak, was the severe Frost in 83, which made Gaps in infinite Numbers of them,
by which they are become seedy or shattered, and unfit for Plank, and all
better Uses; whilst others received such a cheque or stop as they will not
recover for some Years; nor indeed, be ever so thrifty as before; so that from
that time to this, we find all sorts of Timber growing scarcer and dearer, and
so it is likely still to continue. It Is well we are in good Terms with the
Northern Crowns; but should we once have a Difference with them, we might soon
expect to be brought to the utmost Extremity; especially when the Iron-works
(those great Devourers of Fuel) should multiply upon us, to furnish the
Kingdom with such Iron-Provisions and Stores as are now brought from thence,
and all but little enough to serve our Occasions: So that upon such a general
Slaughter, or rather Massacre of Wood, as would be made in such a Conjuncture,
we could not but become an easy Prey to a Foreign Invasion. It behooves
therefore our Parliaments, more than ever, to put a stop to such Practices as
shall unduly diminish the Growth of such a necessary Commodity, as also to
encourage the planting of it by some Privileges and Exemptions; and
particularly, to encourage the planting of Wood in such Heaths and barren
Grounds as lie commodious to any Navigable River, or near such Ports and
Harbors to which our Shipping does most resort.

But of things relating to this Subject, more at large, when I shall hereafter
discourse of the Fuel of London.

CHAP. VIII. Of Trees as they are Useful in Husbandry.
EVERY Husbandman or Farmer, tho he be not Master of a Park, or of Fair Woods,
ought to have his. Ground well stord with such Trees as may promote his
Husbandry, such as Elms, Oak and Ash; as likewise, to be commodiously furnished
with Aqualicks, or such as grow near the Brooks and Waters, as Sally, Withy and
Orles: For these Trees, tho of less bulk, are very serviceable. And,

First, I begin with Elms: Elms then, as also Poplar, being cut at the Butt, do
Coppice or cast forth New Shoots in great abundance; so that so far as their
Roots spread under Ground, they will sprout out of the Earth like a little
Forest; For there being no Branches to draw the Sap, the Roots cast forth (or
discharge themselves of) what may be spared from the main Tree toward the
raising a new Offspring: These young Plants, if preserved from the injury of
Cattle, will grow considerably, but not to substance, by reason of their great
Multitude: The more therefore of these young Sprouts are wed away, the fairer
will be the remainder: They are better therefore propagated this way than by
Transplantation; tho if transplanted, the best way is to mow Grass or Weeds,
and lay them about the Roots, which will keep the Ground moist, sweating, and
defend the Roots from the Extremities of Heat and Cold; if some Stones be mixed
with the Grass it is not amiss; for they will keep the Grass hollow, and
preserve it from withering and baking together. The like helps may be used to
preserve Fruit Trees, or any other Trees whatsoever.

Elms in Husbandry are useful for Stocks and Valleys for Wheels; For Ox-Bows,
as also for Harrows: This Wood likewise is good in Railes and Gates, if sawn
thin, not being apt to rove like Oak, and being light, will shut and open with
more ease. Boards of Elm are good likewise for Floors and Doors of Rooms, but
not so good as Oak, because subject to swell and shrink upon alteration of
Weather. The Season of cutting them, is from Allhallon-tide to Candlemas; but
if cut in the Summer, let them be cast into the Water for a quarter of a Year,
and that will fetch out the Sap, and preserve them from the Worms.

An old Barr-Oak being cut at the Butt will never Coppice more; but Saplings or
young Timber will shoot from the Butt, but not sprout forth of the Ground,
round about, like Elm and Poplar. Oaks therefore, are best raised of Acorns,
especially in large Fields: For if Acorns be set in a small quantity, they will
be in danger of being destroyed by Moles, or Field-Mice, who are of a strange
quick Scent, and will get them out of the Ground, tho never so well covered,
and carry them to their little Holds or Storehouses.

Oaks, tho they be accounted the longest Livers amongst the Trees of this
Island, perish soonest by Cold and Drought of any, excepting Poplar and Asp, as
was observable in 84, being the Year following that severe Frost. A vast number
of Oaks, especially the old ones, withered away the following Summer, which
proved exceeding dry. And of sound Timber Trees many were split and cleft to
the very heart, so that a Man might put his Finger in the Cleft or Rent, which
closed up again when the Frost was over; and although they seemed to the Eye to
have received no Damage, yet it is certain that they were seely, or weeping or
shattered, and in a manner unserviceable being sawn. For tho the Gaps and
Clefts which were made by the Frost healed up again, leaving sometimes no Seam
nor Scar in outward appearance; nevertheless, when such Trees are cut, the
Wounds will soon appear; so that the Damage done that Winter, as I have said
before, will not be repaired in many Ages; and I look upon good Timber to be a
Commodity which will every day grow more scarce than other. And such truly was
the violence of that Frost, that as I very well remember, it rent a Stone-Wall
from the top to the bottom so wide, that I could lay my Finger in the Cleft,
the Crack running and turning with the joints of the Stones, which Breach at
Spring closed up again, leaving no mark of Rupture behind. The Wall was built
upon a Rocky Foundation in the Water. Of all Trees Elms resist Cold the best,
for I observed not one to perish by that rigid Season.

Oak serves for several Uses in Husbandry, as for Planks and Beds for Waines,
for Spokes in Wheels, for Vessel-Staves, and for all the Occasions of Building;
it is the Wood which is most durable and beautiful. If you cast Beeches or
Quarter-Wood into the Water, being sawn Green, and letting them lie therein a
quarter of a Year, and better, 'twill fetch out the Sap, and make them fit for
Use quickly. Likewise Saplings being cast green into the Water, after they have
lain there for some time, become tough and hard, and will not be subject to
Worms, as appears by Axle-Trees; so that a Gate or Rails made of young Poles
thus seasoned, shall last many Years, and never be subject to the Worm, nor to
love or warp by the Sun. In a word, I hold it best to cast all sorts of sawn or
cleft Oak, as Boards, Window-stuff, Spokes, Pipe-wood, or Stairs, Pin-wood,
Waine-Beds, etc. into the Water, there to season; for being dri^d in the Sun,
they will be apt to warp or cast.

Oaks, Elms, and generally all Trees whatsoever, being cropp'd, or having the
Heads cut off, so that they cannot stretch themselves higher, grow more bulky
and burry; so that it is usual for an Oak, thus dwarf'd, to contain six Yards in
compass: For such Trees rotting and perishing at the Heart, by reason of the
Wet which soaks in perpetually at the Head, Nature enlarges them, and
endeavors to measure out their just Period of Duration by widening their
sides; so that what would have been spent otherwise in the Nourishment of great
Limbs and Branches, is expended wholly upon the Trunk: And so desirous are
Trees of living, (I mean in respect of their Natural Inclinations,) that they
will still preserve themselves in their vegetative Station, till all the Heart
and Timber within be rotted, there remaining perhaps nothing of them almost,
but the very Shell or outward Bark.

Although Oaks be esteemed with us as Trees of great bulk, yet are they far
short of the Cedar, or of the Firr, of which I remember to have seen on the
Wharf, where the Rhosne and the Soan meet, at Lions, Firr-Trees squared full
thirty Yards or Paces in length, being at the Butt near upon three Foot square,
and a Foot and a half near the small End. Nevertheless, Oaks has the
Pre-eminence of these and all other Trees whatsoever, as being more durable
after cutting, and more serviceable in all Respects; and even for Shipping,
Masts only excepted, they are known by daily Experience to withstand the
Batteries of Great Guns much better than any other Wood whatsoever, being not
subject to splintering, like Firr; though perhaps the Firr, as being a lighter
Wood, may be better for sailing; but this must be understood then of Ketches,
or lesser Frigates, such as Corsairs use, and not of great Ships fit for
fighting and more eminent Service.

Ashes are best raised from Keys sown or planted in a Nursery: They are not
liable to the Danger of Field-Mice; and one Ash transplanted from a Nursery,
shall grow more in two Years, than another of the same bigness taken from a
Hedge or Coppice shall in ten; because those in Nurseries are better rooted.
These Keys of Ashes will be in the Ground full two Springs before they will
peep forth, and must be wed a little the first Year, and dug a little too, if
it may be done without Injury, though it be with a How or the point of a Trovel.

Ash in Husbandry serves for Spittle or Spade-Trees, for Drocks and Spindles
for Plows, for Hoops, for Helves, and Staves, for all Tools of Husbandry, as
being tough, smooth, and light. Ash growing in Hedges, ought often to be
cropp'd; for it grows to a head sooner than any Tree, and is the sweetest
Fir-wood of any, being fit to burn as soon as cleft or cut. Besides, tall Ashes
being shaken by the Wind, cast the Rain or Dew which fall upon them, a great
way upon the Ground; nor is there any thing so mischievous to Grass or Corn as
the Dropping of an Ash.

Beech, by reason of the straitness and smoothness of the Wood, is serviceable
in many respects, particularly to Wheel-wrights, Turners and Joiners, and is
useful enough for building, in several respects; but that which gives it the
greater Reputation, is, that it grows in the poorest and most barren Ground, if
it be stony and mountainous; so that the Ground, commonly, where they thrive
best, is on the side of a stony, rocky Hill, which otherwise would not be worth
half a Crown an Acre. Of all Trees almost it is held the most beautiful, for the
Freshness of its Green, for the Straitness of its Trunk; and where they grow,
they kill all tender Shrubs and Brambles, by drawing all the Nourishment of the
Earth to themselves, and yield therefore a most delightful Shade, and most fit
for Walks. Hence it is that almost all Monasteries and Private Houses in France
plant little Walks of them in their Gardens.

In lopping of Trees, it is very ill Husbandry to do like some lazy Workmen,
who, when they are to repair a Hedge, cut one Stake here and another there,
from a Tree, as it lies convenient for their Work; for by this means the Shot
or Stub is killed by the dropping of the over-hanging Boughs, and the Tree
decays, and will in a short time die, as we see in Trees which are half lopped,
which at the best, send sorth but poor starved Shoots. Let the Tree therefore
be cropp'd in the Winter-Season, and all together, and it will shoot with a
very lusty Head, and in a short time yield a large Crop. The Over-hangings
likewise of a Hedge, or of any other Tree, is very fatal to one newly cropp'd,
by casting always stained Water upon it, which in a short time will poison the
tender Shoots, and kill the Trunk.

Some, in cropping or lopping of Trees, leave the Stub long, to preserve the
Timber from Knots; but it is observed, that such Stubs, after two or three
Years, will wither and decay; or, if not, they will hardly grow forth to yield
a second Crop: But in this Point let every Man follow his own Observation. Asp
ought to be lopped with great Care and Discretion; for if the top be cut off,
'twill die infallibly. There must some Branches be left, and that too in a
considerable quantity, to preserve the Trunk; but in case it die, we may be
sure, I say, of a whole Forest round about the withered Trunk, which in due
Season may be transplanted; though such young Trees are something hazardous.

Amongst Aqualicks, or Trees which delight to grow near the Water, Sally is as
profitable as any can be planted, and it is raised of Stakes or Settings. It
thrives almost in all Soils, and is a very quick grower, and is most useful to
make Buckles for Thatch, as also for Edderings or Lays, to bind the heads of
Stakes in Hedges. They may be cropp'd every third Year, and an indifferent Tree
every Lopping will yield half a Dray full of Wood of Tynnel; so that once in
three Years every such Tree shall yield so much Crop as shall be worth half a
Crown in such Places where Wood bears any tolerable Price. We may plant a
hundred such Trees upon an Acre, without any great Injury to the Ground; so
that in Places unfurnished with Wood, a spot of Ground thus planted will
quickly come to Perfection, and serve all the Occasions of a Considerable Farm.
Upon which Account, I have always thought a Plantation of Sally to be far more
profitable than that of any Fruit Trees whatsoever; considering the quicker and
certain Growth of the one, and the long and hazardous Progress of the other,
before it come to Profit.

Withy is much more difficult to raise than Sally, and grows best near the
Water, and in a fat Soil, and especially in Meadows, and on the Banks of a
Brook. It serves for the same Uses as Sally. The young Twiggs also are very
serviceable to Basket-makers, and for binding of Tuggs in Thatch. I have
observed the Settlings of Withy to thrive for a Year or two, and then commonly
they die, that side withering which is toward the South Sun; the Reason
whereof I am yet to learn, unless it be from hence, viz. That the Hole in which
we plant a Setting being made by a sharp, strong Stake, it may so happen that
the Setting not reaching the bottom of the Hole, may wither away for want of
Earth to give it Root and Nourishment, by reason of that hollow Space which
lies betwixt the Butt-end of the Setting and the bottom of the Hole, as the
same Hollowness containing Water all the Winter, helps likewise to starve the
Root, being void of Earth to cherish it.

Orles are great Growers where they like their Soil, which commonly is a boggy
and marshy Ground. They are raised by Seeds they say, by cutting young Poles,
and laying or burying them in the Ground at length, and being well covered with
Earth, they will shoot out in very great Abundance; and if they are stripped or
barked, and let stand a Year after, they will never be subject to the Worm, and
are very useful for Rafting of Barns, as being strait and light. They will make
likewise very handsome light Ladders, and where the Wood is grown to any
Substance, it is very useful for Turners, in making all sorts of little Wooden
Ware; moreover, being a quick Grower, as all Aqualicks are, they are profitable
enough for the Fire; and whosoever will affect the Propagation of these Trees,
besides the way beforementioned, by burying of Poles length-ways, (of which, I
must confess, I never made Experience,) may raise whole Forests of them, by
sowing their Keys or Seeds upon any boggy Ground, lightly covered over or
dressed with Faith, and kept for a time from the Spoil of Cattle.

CHAP. IX. Of Fruit Trees.
HAving already spoken of Coppice-Woods, as also of Trees, as they stand useful
for Husbandry, we are now to consider Planting, as it extends to Fruit Trees,
which is justly esteemed to be one of the most pleasant as likewise the most
Profitable Improvements which a Country Gentleman or a good Husbandman can make
of his Estate. This I shall discourse of under these Particulars, viz. of
Seeds, Nurseries, Grafting, Soil, Cultivation, the several Kinds or Species of
Fruit Trees, with some Cursory Remarks upon Cider. And,

First, For Seeds, I hold Crab-Kernels to be absolutely the best of any for a
Seed-Plot, forasmuch as the Crab-stock seems to have these Advantages above any
other; for, first, it is more hardy against the Intemperance of Weather; in the
next place, it is less capable of Injuries from gaulings, or bruises, and
bitings of Cattle, for the Wounds they receive this way will soon heal;
likewise it is less subject to the Canker, and of longer Continuance than any
Kernel-stock or Wilding whatsoever; and although the Grass should die, the Stock
will weather it out, and after a little time be fit to be re-grafted; whereas
Wildings or Stocks of the Seed of grafted Fruit, will rarely resist and survive
such Disasters.

But the way of ordering such Seeds is a Matter of further Care, for to throw
them upon the Ground, after Cyder-making Time, (as commonly Men do,) unless
they be in a very great quantity, is very uncertain and hazardous: For besides
Poultry, Birds, Pigs, and the like, which at all times will be feeding and
musling on them, there is a far worse Enemy, and that is the Mole or
Field-Mouse, a Species of Vermin betwixt a Want and a House-Mouse. These Moles
or Field-Mice, I say, will feed upon the Kernels all the Winter-Season; and I
have found by Experience, that of a thousand Kernels Hand-set in my Garden, and
well covered with Earth, with the greatest Care imaginable, they have been all
stolen away by these Vermin in a Month's time, and less, so quick-scented and
sagacious are they, digging up the Seeds with as much neatness as if they had
been drawn out of the Earth with a Finger. The like Damage I have found in
Acorns, Filbirds, Walnuts, and the like, tho covered with Lime and Soot; all
which have been dug-up and hoarded by these mischievous Vermin in holes of
Walls, and in the bottom of hollow Trees, to serve them all the Winter.

The best way then to destroy these Vermin is by good Cats, or before we sow
or set our Kernels, to wet some Kernels and flower them with Arsenick: For this
will do their work effectually, as I have found by Experience; but there is a
danger herein, lest Dogs, Cats or Swine, or Poultrey, should meet either with
the Baits or the Vermin. As for those silly Scribblers who write of Husbandry,
and talk of placing Butter-Pots, or Traps Underground to catch 'em in, they
catch nothing but such Fools as rely upon their Whimsies; for I am confident,
they never made any Experiment of this Nature, with Success, seeking only to
entertain their Readers with curious Gimcracks. If a Garden therefore, o^
Seed-Plot be subject to these Vermin (as there are few but are) there is no
other way but to throw many Loads of Muck or Must upon the Ground, and so some
will be sure to escape and sprout; or else to keep the Must thinly spread in a
dry Room till Spring, and then sowing it on the Ground lightly, haw'd up, and
powdered over with fine black Earth through a Sieve, together with some short
Straw, or Mullock, thrown over to preserve them from Birds, together with
Thorns to defend them from Poultry, they will quickly sprout out in that
Season, and prevent the Spoil from Mice, who likewise in warm Weather, and upon
the approach of Spring, will not be so solicitous to make their Magazines. I
say, then the Mulk, or Must, ought to be laid upon a dry Floor, and thinly
spread, and oftentimes turned, being sinely rubbed and crumbl'd; for lying in
great Clods, much more in great Heaps, 'twill heat and rot the Kernels: Or if
the Kernels were hand-pick'd out of the Pulse of the Crabbs after Grinding, and
preserved in a Box till the beginning of Spring, it would be the surest way of
succeeding, tho with a little more trouble. And thus having sowed the Kernels,
and prepared the Ground, you will see them springing up in a very short time,
in a great Plat or Forest, where growing for two or three Years, the next care
must be to form a Nursery by removing them out of the Seed-Plot.

There are some sort of Fruit Trees which send Shoots from the Root, as Pears,
Plums and Cherries; and if an old Tree be cut down at the Butt there will shout
up a great number of young wildings, which may be removed to serve Occasions,
or be budded with choicer Fruits; but these Curiosities concern the Garden
rather than the Orchard, which is the Subject I am now speaking to.

When young Quicks therefore are ready to be removed out of the Seed-Plot, our
next Consideration is of the Ground designed for a Nursery, which ought not to
be over-rank, for 'twill be subject to Cowch Grass, but being well dug and
prepared trim your Quicks, and set them in Lines, each Row, as also cach Quick,
at a Yard distance from each other, casting into the Trench good fine Earth,
with some well-rotted Horse-Dung mixed together, and then cover them with the
Mould thrown out of the next Trench, and so continue setting and trenching till
you have finished your Plantation; but be sure above all to tread the Earth
well down to the Roots, being first carefully spread abroad by hand upon the
prepared Mould. I allow a Yard distance betwixt the Stocks or Quicks that they
may spread their Roots with more Freedom, and be dug up without danger to their
Neighbors; for upon the good Root of a Stock all depends. Some Garden-Stuff
likewise ought to be Planted betwixt the Ranks of the Quick to kill the long
Couch-Grass; as likewise, because the frequent diggings after they have taken
Root, accelerate their Growth by turning in fresh Mould to the Roots, which
will preserve them also from Men.

After four or five Years growth in the Nursery, you may think of removing
them; but whether you ought to graft the Stocks in the Nursery, or remove them
first into the Ground you design for an Orchard, and there Graft them after
three or four Years setting, is a Point I must a little enlarge upon; and so
much the rather, because my Opinion in this Particular, leads me contrary to
the Practice of all the rest of my Countrymen, who for a long time seem to have
quitted the Old Way of grafting in Nurseries, upon some appearance of Reason
doubtless, which yet I am to learn.

It Is the general Practice then of our Planters, to remove the Stocks first out
of the Nursery into the Field or Orchard; and there staking and husting them up
with Thorns, after three or four Years settlement, to graft upon them, upon
pretense belike, that a Crab-stock will not be so apt to miscarry as a grafted
Tree, and that grafted Trees, after they are removed, will stand for some Years
in a languishing condition. But notwithstanding this, the Reasons for grafting
in a Nursery, are much more prevailing; for, in a Nursery they are not only
secured from the Injuries of Cattle, as likewise of Weather, being grafted low
or near the Ground; but they are secured also from the Perchings of Crows, and
such like unlucky Birds, which in open Fields or Orchards will be ever and anon
alighting upon the tender Cyons or Branches, and break them off, and loosen the
Grafts. The pricking in of sharp Sticks in the dawbing; as also the hanging of
Feathers in Strings to move with the Wind, may scare them at first; but when
the Cyons reach higher than the Sticks (as certainly they will do upon the
first shoot) it is on them that these mischievous Birds will be sure to Perch,
to the great damage of the Tree: To which I may add the violence of the Winds
and Weather, as also the danger of Cattle breaking into a new-planted Field or
Orchard; as also, the danger from the Plow it self, which oftentimes destroys
our labor: I say, by these and such like Accidents, which are almost
unavoidable, all our Expectation, after Ten Years Care and Attendance, is ver
much blasted, and perhaps ruined. None of which Inconveniences or Dangers can
happen in a Nursery where a good Fence may be preserved with little labor, and
all the other Inconveniences be avoided.

And as for the thriving state of a Crab-stock above a Grafted one, it is a
thing of little Moment in the present Case: For our Nursery-Stocks once
grafted, and after three or four Years Growth being removed, are much more
hardy than any Stock newly grafted in the open Field or Orchard, and are less
subject to decay from the Wounds they shall receive from Thorns, Plows and
Harrows; whereas young grafted Trees once galled or bruised, if not timely
cured, will be in danger of the Canker, if not of dying. There is nothing more
mischievous to a new-grafted Stock than Thorns, which tho they may serve to
keep off Cattle, wound the tender Shoots, those especially of the first Year
(which indeed are principally to be taken care of) and by this Means the
Branches become cankered, and perhaps, after some little time, the Tree it self
does languish and die.

As touching the Soil of an Orchard, a mixture of Earth, a little inclining to
Sand is the best, and Gravelly Ground the worst. For the Gravel lying generally
toward the Surface of the Earth, the Roots can draw no Nourishment from it,
nor penetrate betwixt such a compacted matter of little Stones: Tho Elms we
find thrive best in such a Soil, because they naturally spread their Roots
wide, and upon the Surface, where they are sure to meet with a fat Earth; the
superfice of the Ground being ever better then the Earth which lies deeper,
whilst the gravelly and impenetrable Ground which lies commonly a Foot or
something deeper then the Turf, forces them to spread their Roots in such a way
or manner as is most suitable to their Nature. Whereas on the other hand, the
tender Fibers or Strings of the Roots of Fruit Trees, especially of Apples,
once touching the cold Gravel, there stop their progress, and for want of
suitable Nourishment from below, the Tree ceases to grow, and in a short Time
after decays.

Likewise an unequal Surface or Country, which consists of little Hills and
Valleys, is much more proper for Fruit, then the level and open Campaigne: For
in a wide and open Field, there is no shelter to keep off the scorching Blasts,
the cold Winds and Storms; whereas an Orchard which lies upon a hanging Ground,
and is environed with other Risings and Bottoms lies warm and covered from
Blasts, and shaded too from the immoderate heats of the Sun, which easily
scorch the tender Blossom. Besides; a declining Surface will not be apt to
retain the Water too long upon the Ground, which will chill and starve the Root
in Winter, but the Water after it has refreshed the Earth gently soaks away.

I would have a Plantation to Face the Morning Sun, if possible: For it is the
Early Sun which revives all Vegetables; whereas the Western or Afternoon Sun is
commonly hotter, from whence also proceed these gleams or hot Winds which are
so fatal to Trees, when they are in the tender Blossom. And from these Blasts
it is; that not only the Blossom, but even the Leaves, and sometimes the very
Fruit, after it is advanced to some Perfection became scorched and singed, and
even the Tree it self many times dies, or at least will not recover it self for
Two or Three Years after. When the Blossoms fall off suddenly or disappear, it
is a certain sign the Tree is blasted; and the Leaves of the Blossoms which
hang on will look Red and Burnt, which being plucked off we shall find a grub at
the Bottom engendered by the Wind, which grub kills the tender Fruit upon the
Stalk: Or if the Fruit hang on for a little Time, the next Puff of Wind blows
them down under the Tree, and such as seem to escape will never be but little
shrivelled starved Apples, such as we call Crickets.

In Normandy it is true; they plant their Fruit Trees in Walks, and in the wide
and open Fields, so that we may ride every where through plains of Corn a Mile
or Two, every way planted in Cross-walks, and in double Ranks bordering upon
the Corn on each side, with a fine Carpet of Grass like an Alley of Twenty
Yards breadth betwixt the Ranks, such walks running many Times in a straight
Line for a Mile or more together; which is wonderful delightful. The Reason why
they are not in such danger of Blasts as we are here in England, is from the
clearness of the Air, the Country being generally Sandy, and the Winds more
cooling as coming from the Continent, or the Britannick Sea which lies North of
them; whereas with us, the Island we live in is more subject to inequality of
Weather, and our Western Winds which reign almost half the Year by Intervals,
are always hot as coming from the main Ocean, in those Parts of England I mean
which are in Reputation for Cider: For the River Severne running South-West,
and widening it self in a very great Measure the nearer it draws to the Sea;
the Winds come up the River as it were conveyed by a Channel, being restrained
or pent betwixt the Forest, and Cotswold-Hills: For which Reason it is, that
Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford-Shires, the Three most celebrated Counties
of England for Fruit, lie in a manner exposed to the full stroke of these
South-West Winds; which indeed are more furious and boisterous than any other
Winds with us, as (blowing from the Main Ocean) as it were by a Tunnell without
any Eminence or Tract of Land to break its Violence; which being hotter
likewise by reason of the Southern Coast from whence they come, than those of
any other Quarter, and at such Time as the Air is thick and foggy (as generally
it is in our Northern Islands) the heat meeting with such an impure Air, begets
an Adust gloomy kind of Vapor like to Smoke, which the Peasants call a Red
Wind, and this is that which blasts and destroys the tender Fruit and Blossoms.

In a Plantation or Orchard likewise, great reguard is to be had to the
distance of the Trees: In a large Plantation for the purpose, I would not have
them to be set nearer then twenty Paces to one another, nor wider then thirty,
that so there may be space for the Trees to spread, and for the Corn to grow.
Likewise I would have the Ground laid down plain, and not in Furrows or Ridges,
because of setting the Ranks straight, and at an equal distance, which those
who plant upon the Tops of plowed Lands cannot do, being obliged to follow the
turnings and windings of the Ridge. And after the Stocks are well rooted (as in
Two or Three Years Time they will be) then plowing up the Ground for Tillage is
the best Method imaginable to bring on an Orchard: For Trees will thrive more
in Two Years on plowed Ground than in five Years on Pasture.

Moreover in planting these Rules are to be observed. 1st, To put a good
quantity of old black Mould to the Root of the Stock and to work it in well
with the hand betwixt the Joints and Strings of the Root, whose Branches must
be cut slanting underneath, so that the Bark may cover them; otherwise they
will rot. 2dly, The Earth must be trod down very close: For if it lie hollow,
the Root in Summer will be dried up, and in Winter 'twill retain Water, which,
when frozen, will kill the Root. 3dly, Let all Stocks be planted leaning
toward the South-West, the Winds of which Quarter are longer and more violent
than any other Winds whatsoever, and will make a Stock set upright to grow
irregular and crooked; whereas by this Method the Force of the Wind will bring
what is leaning against it more and more toward an upright, and enable the
Tree to stand firm against the Fury of these Western Shocks. 4thly, In staking
them great Care must be taken, that the Stakes do not gall or bruise the Trees:
As for Briering or Thorning them, it is superfluous, except in such Places
where Cattle go; and for such Orchards they will come to little, for do what we
can the Cattle will some time or other brouze them, and in Ground not plowed,
the Stocks will come on very poorly. They therefore who love good Orchards,
must keep their Ground in Tillage always, and by this means turn in fresh Mould
to the Roots; so that here is no need of Thorns, where Cattle are not supposed
to go.

It Is not good, for the first or second Year, after a Stock is grafted, to
prune off the Suckers; for the tender Grafts not being strong enough of
themselves to draw up the Sap, the Tree of necessity must wither and die. This
I have found by often Experience; so that many times the Grafter is condemned,
when the Fault lies in the superfluous Curiosity of the Husbandman: But where
the Cyons or Grafts are grown big enough to draw up the Sap in such a
Proportion as may keep the Trunk of the Stock green and flourishing, then off
with the Suckers. Likewise it is a very excellent way to nip the Shoots of the
first Year; for besides that, Crows will be apt to perch upon such tender
Shoots and break them, it is certain that such high weak Shoots are very liable
to be shaken by the Wind, and in the Winter-Season to be pinched by the Cold
and Frost, which will much endanger the Grafts, especially if the Winds in
March be any thing severe; for such Branches will either wither, or be
cankered, as I have observed from the cold Winds and Frosts in March 93, 94,
and especially 96, which was the most unkind Season for Fruit Trees which has
happened in any Age. The Midsummer-Shoot, for the same Reason, is much to be
preferred before that of the Spring; for they come forth short and bushy, and
by the next Year will be strong enough to resist any ordinary Shocks of Wind
and Weather, and are out of all danger from the perching of Crows.

Good daubing likewise is of great Moment to a Tree; for if the Cleft be not
well secured from wet, the Tree will be in danger, so that as often as the Clay
or Mortar is washed or worn off, it should be renewed again, till the Bark
covers it. Likewise, if a Tree be grafted with two Cyons, it is best to pare off
one of them close to the Head of the Stock as soon as the Grafts come to any
bigness; for they will be apt to grow one within another, and so be cankered.
The Reason therefore of putting two Grafts into the Incision, is for the better
Security, in case one should fail, as also to draw up the Sap in greater
Plenty; though I hold it absolutely safer to graft in the Nursery with a single
Graft upon a young slender Stock, for such rarely miscarry, and the Cleft is
soon skinn'd over; the Sap likewise is more easily drawn up, and the Branches
will shoot far enough asunder, without danger of twisting one within another.

The Maladies to which Fruit Trees are subject, are, first, Moss; and this
proceeds either from Old Age, and then it is incurable, or from the bending of
the Bark; the Remedy whereof is lancing, or else digging about the Roots in
Winter: But if Moss proceed from the Wetness of the Soil, I hold it likewise to
be incurable. Scraping or burning of the Moss with Straw, may serve for a time,
but 'twill return again as long as the Cause remains. The Canker is another
Disease incident to Trees; if it be in the Branches, I look upon it as
incurable; for the cankered Branch being cut off, the after-Shoots will
likewise be cankered, till you pare away all the Branches: Esteem therefore
such a Tree to be fit for nothing but the Fire. This Disease many times
proceeds from the Wounds which the tender Shoots of a new-grafted Tree receive
from Thorns growing or stuck near about it; but it is not so always, for some
Trees will be cankered, do we what we can. Many tell us that the Canker
proceeds from the Rankness of the Ground, or from the Nature of the Fruit, so
that Grafts cut from a cankered Tree will prove cankered likewise. This I
cannot speak to by Experience; only, that where a Canker is in the Body of a
Stock (as it happens frequently) by reason of some bruises or rasure from the
Plow, Harrows, Traces, and the like, the best way is with a sharp-pointed Knife
to cut round about it to the quick, and it will stop from going farther, and
yield a new Rind or tender Bark; otherwise, if the Sap be stirring, the Bark
will peel, and loosen much farther than the Bruise, and wither away, to the
great Danger of the Stock: Therefore, after the Incision round about the
Bruise, let the naked Place be covered with Earth and Cow Dung mixed and bound
about with a twist of Hay daubed with Cow Dung likewise, and after a Year or
two the Breach will be cured, and sometimes be entirely skinn'd over with a new
Rind. I have observed the Canker likewise to proceed from the Extremity of
Weather, or bitter Winds, about the latter end of March, at such time as the
Trees, by the precedent Season, which has been very mild, were in the fairest
way to make us hope for a Blessing; so that the Sap being then stirring
upwards, and thus arrested by the unusual Severities of the Spring, the Trees
themselves have been much mortified, and especially such young ones as have not
been grafted above three or four Years. All which I have found by woeful
Experience in the Year 1694, when of above a hundred young Trees grafted in my
Nursery and Orchards, I give above one half of them for irrecoverably lost;
which Damage of being Canker-eaten they received the two precedent Springs,
which were the most rigorous for cold Winds that ever were known. We may
observe in Trees that are cankered in the Branch, that though you cut it off to
the quick, there will be a little Eye or Speck in the remaining Branch, like
the Speck in the Corn upon the Ear, which runs deeper and deeper, till it comes
to the Body, and then hold such a Tree to be good for nothing but the Fire; but
in case it has not entered too far, possibly the Tree or Stock may be saved, by
regrafting it with a Winter Quinnin, a Bodenam-Crab, or the Apple we call a
Boon-apple, as likewise the Golden-pippin, for these I observe never to canker:
I have thus regrafted diverse, but I have not yet had time to see the Effects,
having made the Experiment but this Year 97. The Apple we call a Woodcock is no
way apt to canker, as I have found by Experience, and for this Reason ought to
be highly esteemed, as well as for its excellent Liquor, being likewise a great
and constant Bearer, and not subject to be blasted. These sorts of Fruits are
very apt to canker, viz. the Bromstraw-Crab, the White, Red, and Red-sided
Muss, the Sweet-Pipin; so that where any of these Trees are infected with this
Disease, let them be new Grafted, if not too far gone, in which Case let them
be dug up.

The Winds in Winter are generally looked upon to be very helpful to Trees, in
order to make them fruitful by loosning the Earth about their Roots.

If Trees be unthrifty, as in Orchards unplow'd it often happens, their Roots
must be uncovered about Christmas, till the latter end of February, or the
beginning of March, putting in some old rotten Dung well tempered with the
Earth, and close-trod down, or Ashes mixed with Earth, and the like. Ants are
very pernicious to Trees, and are destroyed by digging and putting Soot to the
Roots.

Lime is found to be a very great Enemy to Orchards, there not being half the
Fruit as formerly, since this way of helping Ground for Corn has been
practiced; so that even the Trees themselves dwindle and decay; nay I may
confidently affirm, notwithstanding the Humor of planting in this present Age
that there is not half the Cider made as was about Thirty Years ago; the
foresaid liming of Land, and the many severe Springs we have had of late Years,
being the True and Natural Causes of such decaies.

I would advise all Lovers of Fruit Trees to have a little Plantation near
there House, and this to be close set with Trees not above Ten Yards asunder;
so that in an Acre of Ground thus planted, there will grow a hundred Trees: The
Reason of such a Plantation is this, that when the lower Plantations or
Orchards are blasted, this may supply that loss: For Trees growing close
together are apt to save one another, and to shelter themselves from the Frost,
Cold Winds, and Blasts. Besides, the Neighborhood of the Dwelling House, Barns
and other Outhouses will afford Security likewise. It Is true; such little
Orchards cannot be plowed where the Trees stand so Thick; in this Case
therefore the Ground must be dug, which Method though it be more Expensive will
turn to the greater Advantage of the Trees, and return a plentiful Crop of
Beans, or other Garden-Stuff. And upon this Account it is, that Trees growing
in Gardens or near a House in such Order as I have described, prosper very well
when others are smitten. It Is good likewise to have Trees growing in Hedges for
the same Reason: For such Hedges will shelter them from the Blustering Winds
and from the nipping Frosts. And although such Hedge-Rowes do not yield so
large a Crop, and are troublesome to be gleaned, yet it is good to have some,
tho in a lesser quantity, when the larger Plantations shall miscarry.

I must Confess, that Trees planted in Hedge Rows are not very prosperous,
unless on a light Sandy and declining Bank, where the Water may run off quickly
out of the Ditches; or rather, where there are no Ditches at all: For where
there are Ditches, and on a level, the Water is apt to lie long in the Winter
Time and stain the Root: For Remedy whereof some cut up their Hedges at the
Butt, and plain the Ditches, planting a New Hedge at some distance: By this
Method the Trees will recover themselves incredibly; but whether the profit
arising thereby be worth the Charge and Trouble of raising a New-Hedge, I leave
to the good Husbandmans Consideration, Though I think such Hedge Rows where
there are Ditches on the other side, which hold Water most the Winter, are
little to be reguarded.

I like also very well to suffer some Kernel Fruit or Wildings to grow in the
Orchard, for such Trees will never Canker, they resist the Violence of nipping
Winds, Frosts and Blasts, so that we may be sure of having a fair Account of
them, which is a Thing of some Benefit, for though the Fruit be harsh, yet
'twill serve for the Ordinary Occasions of a Family, and it is better to have
harsh Cider than none at all.

CHAP. X. Of the several Kinds of Apple Trees, and of Cider.
COme we now to consider the several Species or Kinds of Fruit Trees, with
which a good Orchard ought to be Planted, where I shall first begin with
Apples, of which the chiefest sorts are these; the Red-streak, the Sweet Pipin,
the Bromstraw-Crab, the Winter-Quinnin, the Pear-Main, the Boddinam Crab, the
John-Apple or Oaken-Pin, the Moile, the Wood-Cock, with the White, Red, and
Red-sided Muss, the Bon-Apple, the Brasling.

I begin with the Red-Streak, which I place in the Front, or first Rank, not
that I do esteem it does deserve that Place, but out of Complaisance with the
Humors and Opinions of Men. This kind of Apple thrives no where so well as in
Hereford-Shire, where the Trees grow to a very great bigness; whereas in
Gloucester-Shire at the distance of some few Miles, though they thrive well at
first, yet they never arrive to any bulk, but run out into small slender
Branches and dwindle away, the Natural Cause whereof I am to learn, since there
is no visible difference in the Soil and manner of Ordering them; hence it is,
that Men are forced many Times to behead such Trees, and regraft them with some
other Fruit. A knotty Nut-grain Stock is commonly the fittest to be grafted
with a Red-Streak.

As for the Liquour which it yields, it is highly esteemed for its noble
Color, and Smell; it is likewise Fat and Oily in the Taste, but withal very
Windy, Luscious and Fulsome, and will sooner Cloy the Stomach then any other
Cider whatsoever, leaving a waterish raw Humor upon it; so that with Meals
it is no way helpful, and they who drink it, if I may judge of them by my own
Palate, will find their Stomachs palled sooner by it, than warmed and
enlivened: Nevertheless the Price it carries makes it worthy to be esteemed by
the Drinker, but more by the Seller; and when it is Virtues are duly examined, I
doubt not but it will loose Credit with both. There are two sorts of
Red-Streak, the large Red Red-Streak (as they call it) and the lesser, which is
streaked with Veins of Green and Red: The former is the fairer to the Eye, the
latter is the better for Cider. The common Price of Red-Streak Cider is Three
Pounds at the Mill, sometimes it has doubled that Price, but of late Years it
sinks in its Credit.

The next kind of Apple for Cider is the Sweet Winter Pippin, which must be
well hoarded, as must also the Red-Streak, before we grind it. They will not
Sweat in the hoard under a Fortnight, and to grind any Fruit sooner, though the
Liquor may be more in quantity, 'twill be less in goodness, and in the
mellowness of the Taste. This sort of Apple of it self makes no very good
Cider, as being ill-colour'd, pale, and greenish, thick also and sweetish, and
with a little Age turning dreggish or ropy. The way then is to grind with them
an equal quantity of Broms-brough Crabs, after they have been well hoarded and
sweat, together.

The Bromsbrough-Crab is an Apple peculiar to those Parts of Gloucester-shire,
which lie betwixt the Severn and Wye. It is a large greenish Apple, hard, and
ill tasted, and therefore it may be planted in the Fields securely, there being
nothing in the Fruit which may invite the Eater. Likewise it is a good Bearer,
but it is a little too apt to drop, and does not ripen all together; as it
happens also with many other Fruits, of which I shall speak anon. They must be
under-shook therefore, and so be gathered as they ripen. They are a
Winter-Fruit, and of the same Duration with the Sweet-Pippin, and of it self
makes a strong, rough, masculine Cider, of a most noble Amber Color, a little
inclining to Red; it is not very pleasant, but withal very full of Spirit, and
warms the Stomach, and in quality much resembles those Wines which the Italians
call Asciutto, being rough and drying, being such as will keep good in the
Vessel for two Years, and in Bottles for diverse. The true way then of using
this excellent Fruit, is to let it hoard till about the middle of November, and
then to grind it with the Sweet-Pipin, where the roughness of the one will be
allayed and qualified with the sweetness of the other, and these two Fruits in
conjunction make absolutely the best and richest Liquor our Country does
afford, whether we consider the Color, which is equal to that of Red-streak,
o^ the Goodness of the Liquor it self; which, though not so sweet and luscious as
Red-streak, is really of a true Vinous Nature and Flavor, or of an excellent
Smell, and heady, and warm upon the Stomach, in which latter Virtue or Property
it far surpasses the Red-streak: And when Goodfellows (as we call them) drink
for Drinking's sake, or upon a Debauch, it works it self off the best of any
Liquor. But whether this be to its Commendation, or no, I know not; yet if Men
will be intemperate, the Fault is not in the Liquor but in the Person; the
former being no more blameable than a Razor, the goodness of whose Edge may be
used by some not to shave, but to cut their own Throats. One Fault there is, to
which Trees grafted with Bromsbrow are subject, which is the Canker, which if
they do escape, (as sometimes they may, from some peculiar Goodness and Quality
of the Ground,) I hold my Planter to have made as good a Choice of Fruit as
it is possible.

The Winter-Quinin, as also a Pearemain, make a rich, pleasant Cider, very
hearty and mellow; and when racked off, and Bottled, is very delicious and
grateful. But these sorts of Trees are no very great Bearers, nor do they grow
to any considerable bulk, and therefore may be more serviceable at the Table in
Dishes than in Glasses.

The Bodnam-Crab is a little, small Apple, something vein'd and colored like a
Redstreak, or a Lady-Apple. It is a good Bearer, but very subject to drop or
ripen by little and little. You must plant them therefore near the House, in
some enclosed Spot of Ground, which is well secured from Cattle, Pigs, and
Poultry; which last they cannot well be defended from, unless we totally banish
them from our Habitation, which I am confident every Gentleman, or Gentlewoman
rather, who have any Esteem for their Fruit, and a good Garden, will readily
approve of; for I account them the most unprofitable and mischievous Creatures
that can vex a House, and fit only for Farmers, and poor People, who make
little difference betwixt themselves and their Beasts. But to return to our
Bodnams, which being a Fruit which is ever dropping, may lie and m^llow on the
Ground; or else we may gather them as they fall, and put them in a heap by
themselves in the Apple-Loft; or we may under-shake them, as I spoke before of
Bromsbroughs. They may be ground about the same time with other Winter-Fruit,
viz. from the beginning to the middle of November. It is no very juicy Apple,
but it makes amends for that in the Redness of it, I holding good Bodnam Cider
among other Liquors of the first Rate. This Apple has its Denomination from an
Ancient Family in Herefordshire, where I suppose it was first in Reputation.
One Prerogative this Fruit has, viz. that it is not subject to Canker; so that
if there be an Occasion of regrasting a Tree overgrown with this Disease,
there cannot be a better Remedy than the Bodnam.

The Woodcock is a fair large Apple, and produces an excellent Cider,
comparable with the best. The Fruit is not unacceptable at the Table, and the
Stocks grafted with this Fruit are not liable to so many Diseases and Accidents
as other Trees, and it is likewise a good Bearer.

The John-apple, or Oaken-pin, of all Fruits is the worst for Taste, being most
harsh and hard: They will hang on the Tree till Christmas, and keep till Apples
come again, and yet worth little to eat, being dry and mealy; notwithstanding
it may serve well enough for the Pastry, in regard they may be had when all
other Apples are gone. However, being ground in the Mill, it makes an admirable
sort of Cider: The Time of Grinding it, is after Christmas, if the Frosts be
not over-violent; for they hang upon the Tree the longest of any Fruit, and I
take it for a General Rule, that the Fruit which is longest a ripening makes
the best Cider. It Is true, this sort of Apple yields but little Juice, yet
withal it is a very great Bearer, and constant, and fears neither Thief nor
Weather: For which Reason it ought to have a Place allowed it in a Gentleman's
Orchard, even amongst his choicest Fruits, how little soever this kind of Apple
is valued by the Vulgar.

The Apple called a Bon-apple is not commonly known, and yet I esteem it, when
I consider all its Properties, to be absolutely the best and most profitable of
any that grows: For, first, it is a constant and fruitful Bearer, the Apple
large and firm, like a Sweet Pipin, but o^ a longer shape; secondly, it is never
subject to the Canker, nor to be blasted, and the Fruit as well tasted and
lasting as the Pipin, and fairer to the Eye. In the last place, it affords an
excellent Cider, hearty, mellow, and lasting as any. They seldom or never sail
of Bearing, and therefore they ought to be preferred before all others, as they
will be, doubtless, by all who shall have Experience of them.

The Bradling is another sort of Apple, near of kin to the Bon-apple, for its
Hardiness, and its Resistance of the Canker, that Fatal Malady to which almost
all other Trees are obnoxious The Cider which this Apple yields is likewise
good and hearty.

The Moyle is a s^rt of Summer-Fruit; they are raised of Suckers, or little
Setlings, like Codlings; it makes an incomparable pleasant Liquor, but a little
weakish, and fit only to be drunk by Ladies in the Summer, and will not keep so
long as the more masculine Cyders, to which it bears the same Resemblance as
the Verdea does to the stronger Wines of Florence.

Having spoken of Winter-Cyder-Fruits, we come in the next place to discourse
of such as we call Summer-Fruits, amongst which there are several sorts of
Muss, which deserve to be taken notice of; as, first, the White Muss or
Summer-apple, commonly so called, it is pleasant to eat, and has a grateful
Tartness with it; it is also a great Bearer, and a quick Grower, and makes an
early Cider pert and sharpish, and fit for the Table. 'Twill hardly keep
pleasant a Year about, and is very good for the common Occasions of a Family.
The Red Muss is a pleasant, fair Apple to the Eye, and is fit likewise for the
Table, and makes a sort of Cider much the same for Strength and Taste with the
White or Summer-apple. The great Objection against this Fruit, is, that it
drops very much, and is subject to be very Worm eaten, which will be apt to
make the Cider bitterish.

The Red-sided Muss is an Apple likewise of the same bigness with the two
former, and has a Tincture of Red upon one side. It is longer a ripening than
the two former kinds, and will require to be well hoarded, so that this Species
of Fruit may be reckoned for such as is betwixt a Summer and a Winter-Apple.
The Cider it makes is much more masculine than that of the White and Red Muss,
and comes nearest to the Bromsbrow for strength. It has also a deeper Color
than either of the other, and being racked off, and bottled, it may serve well
at the Treat, and is very good in Winter, and the older it is, the better is its
Complexion, which the fair Sex amongst us would be glad to find in themselves.

There is likewise an Apple called the Winter-Muss, which hangs as long on the
Tree as Pippins, Brombrows, or any other hoarding Fruit. It makes likewise good
hearty Cider, and it is good to have Variety.

As for Hemmings, Tankard-apples, Lady-apples, and the like, they serve also
for the same Variety, and though their Liquor be not in any great Reputation, yet
their Fruitfulness makes amends: For I look upon the Lady-apple, which in
Color most resembles a Red-streak, to be the greatest Bearer that is, though
indeed it makes the thinnest Cider: However such Liquors serve very well the
Occasions of a Family when the other Fruits are a ripening.

It would be a Curiosity worthy of a Gentleman's Trial, to sow Kernels of all
sorts of Fruits whatsoever, whether of Apples or Pears, not promiscuously, but
every kind by its self, and observe what sort of Fruit every sort of Kernels
would produce: By this means, doubtless, many new and curious sorts might, with
great Delight and Profit, be propagated, and the Experiment might be enlarged
farther by grafting one Wilding upon another, by which Mixture more new Species
would still appear. The Red-streak, called likewise the Scadamore-Crab, the
Bromsbrow-Crab, and the Bodnam-Crabs, were all of them, doubtless, at first but
Wildings or Kernel-Fruit, improved after by grafting; which three sorts of
Crabs make really the richest Cider that can be found amongst us, and of the
noblest Tincture.

I would moreover advise every Gentleman who has a Love for Cider, to store his
Plantation with all sorts of Fruits, and planted in all sorts of Grounds, and
all sorts of Ways, viz. in Open Fields or Orchards, in Hedge Rows, and near his
Houses: Some Fruits likewise blossoming at one time, and some at another, it is
very likely whilst some Trees miscarry and receive Damage by the Winds and
Frosts, others which are not yet in Blossom, or which have blossomed some time
ago, or which are under some sort of Covert or Shelter, may escape from Danger.

I shall not enter into a Discourse upon the Art of making Cider: It Is the duly
Practice of every Family. Some Things however there are which ought daily to be
looked to by such who hope to be Masters of good Cider; of which the first is
the hoarding of Apples, and here I hold it much better to lay them in a Chamber
on heaps, than to leave them sweating in Gardens or on Grass-plots; for lyi^g
on the Ground, and in the open Air, they not only receive and such in the Rains
and Dews which fall upon them, but draw a dead Sa^our from the Earth, whilst
the Spirit which works in the Sweating is imbibed therein; which cannot but
much impoverish and flatten the Liquor: All which Mischiefs are avoided when
Apples are hoarded within Doors and on a Chamber-Floor. Besides, Fruit ripens
sooner within than without Doors, because in the hea^ing or serment, the
Spirits are neither imbibed by the Spongy Earth, nor so apt to fly away in the
Open Air, which must needs help forward the Digestion by mellowing of the
Apples, the Heat being less subject to wast and Dissipation.

Another thing to which we ought to have regard, is the drawing-off or racking
of Cider from the Lees, after it has done working, and is w^ll settled. This way
of r^cking sortens the Cider much, and contributes to its Vegeteness and
Conservation; for by lying long upon the Grounds or Lees, it attracts an
Acidity, which in a short time will make it eager and fretting. The true Season
of racking Summer-Cyders, that is, such as are made of Apples early ripe, is
about Christmas, when it has been a little clarified by the Frosts. But for
stronger Cyders, which carry a great Body, or Spirit rather, and come from the
Mill as thick and sweet as Honey, they are not to be touched till the Winter be
passed, and then, if not pretty clear, they must be racked a second or perhaps
a third time; so that I have had Pippin and Bromsbrow Cider, which has not been
fine or fit for botling under a Twelvemonth, the Fruit being extraordinary
ripe and well hoarded when 'twas made. But the common Season for botling of
Cider is about two Months after the Racking, which falls out about May; for
then the Cider nits or frisks in the Vessel, which is the critical Season of
botling, and if it be not taken then, all the botling in the World will not
make it brisk and lively: Though still I say, that the thicker the Cider when it
comes from the Press, the more Rackings it must undergo till it becomes fine,
sparkling, and without Dreggs.

They who have a Curiosity for Cider, must have regard likewise to many other
Circumstances; as first for the Mill; that of Stone is found by experience, to
be much better than the Steel-Engine, so much talked of alate, which is ever and
anon apt to be out of Order, so that many have quitted the use of them,
returning to their Stone Mills again. Next, for pressing of Cider, there are
several ways of doing it: The way of pressing by one Screw is better than by
two. The Muss, or broken Pulp, being thrown into Cribbs, Boxes, Knewcloaths,
Baskets, or wrapped up in Twists of clean Rye Straw, in which particulars, every
man may follow his own Experience and Fancy. I shall not trouble my Reader
about Ordering the Vessels, this being part of the Concerns belonging to the
good Housewise; and yet if there be any fault in this particular, (as many
times there is) the Liquor, and perhaps the Vessel, is irrecoverably lost. The
best way then as soon as the Liquor is drawn of, is to stop up the Vessel
close, and never to turn out the Lees or Sedement till it comes to be used
again: For in case any Air or Moisture get into it, 'twill soon poison and
corrupt the Grounds, which will give such a nasty, oily Smell to the Vessel, as
can rarely be got out by burning, or any Method whatsoever. Some indeed there
are, which after the Cider is drawn of, wash the Vessel very well with cold
Water, and when it is clean from all its Lees, they dry it well in the Sun or
Wind, and so let it stand till they have occasion again to use it. This way of
washing with cold Water is esteemed much better than with scalding Water,
because the hot Water is more apt to penetrate the Wood, by which means the
smell of the Cider is soaked out of the Pores of the Vessel, which are filled
with a waterish Vapor, which when cold will be apt to make the Vessel moldy;
whereas cold water washing off only the slimy filth which sticks to the sides,
leaves the Wood of the Vessel well seasoned with a strong smell of the good
Liquor, which will very much help the Cider which hereafter shall be put into
it. Some regard likewise must be had to the Bottles, that they be very clean
washed and dried, otherwise after some little time, there will be a kind of
Cream upon the Neck of the Cider, which will very much deprave it, and fill it
full of Dreggs, and make it distastful. The newer the Cider is the more space
must be left betwixt the Cork and the Liquor in the Bottle: For upon Change of
Weather, it will be apt to work, and being windy, if too close filled 'twill
endanger the breaking of the Bottle. Likewise, such Corks ought to be well tied
down, for they will rise o^ draw with the windiness of the Cider, and sometimes
fly out in the Air. Cider therefore ought to be old, and well digested of its
windy Quality, before ever it be bottled, and yet if kept too long, or pricked,
'twill never recover it self, and after some time, it shall gather a flying Lee
or Dreg, which is a certain sign it is lost. I shall not speak of the artificial
Helps of Cider, esteeming the Liquor which stands in need of them, to be worth
very little, and yet so it is, that many of our Cyder-Merchants make their
greatest Profit by these Adulterating, and artificial Practices. By these Marks
it is easy to know adulterated Cider: It frisks a little at first, but then it
flattens presently, and tastes a little deadish and sweet; it is likewise thick
and muddy, and raw upon the Stomach, and after it has stood a little in the
Glass, it is utterly insipid: Whereas that which is true and genuine, retains
it is sparkling Quality for a long Time, and through the whole Body of the
Liquor; it is as clear as Amber, warms the Stomach, and invites the Drinker to
a further Trial; it is clear to the last Drop, and has an excellent Perfume or
Smell, and with its Spirits or Vapors it very much refreshes the Brain by
Reason of its Native fragancy.

CHAP. XI. Of Perry.
THere is another sort of Liquor made of Pears, called by the French Poiree,
and by us Perry: This sort of Cider was in greater Reputation in former Ages
then Apple-Cyder, and tho for many Years past, it gave place to it, being in a
manner supplanted by it, yet now again it begins to recover it is Ancient Credit
and Esteem; not only because it begins to be scarce and rare, there being no
new Plantations of Pears, whilst the old Trees daily fall into decay; but it is
in vogue likewise for the Nature of the Liquor, which is found to have a strong
Spirit in it, for which Reason it has been much bought up of late by our
Distillers, who extract a sort of Brandy out of this Liquor, as they do
likewise from Apple-Cyder.

The Reason why it lost its Credit formerly was; 1st. Because it was not
lasting, for in the hot Weather 'twas apt to be ropy and dreggish. 2dly, 'Twas
more windy than the Juice of Apples, and thought unfit for Gentlemen to Drink,
as being apt to engender the Stone: And Lastly, If drunk new it is looked upon
to be very unwholesome, as being very Cold and Laxative. But notwithstanding
this, Perry is found to be very profitable to the Husbandman, and to have some
Advantages above Apple-Cyder, and that in these Respects; for, 1st, Pears when
grafted come on faster, and are not so apt to miscarry as Apple Trees, the
Grafts seldom die, much less the Stock. 2dly, They last much longer than
Apple Trees, and grow to a far greater Bulk of Timber. 3dly, They will grow and
thrive best in a cold watery or clay Soil, where Apple Trees will not live.
4thly, They are not so apt to be blasted as Apples, nor subject to Cankers; and
when Old, the Timber of them if cut in season is very useful and beautiful for
Drawers, Tables, Cabinets, and such like Curiosities. Pears likewise are
constant and great Bearers, and yield a most plentiful Juice, and being mixed
and ground with Crabs, will afford a very wholesome and palatable Liquor and
lasting enough; which tho it be rough and harsh agrees well with laboring Men,
and gets them a good Stomach and will not wash thorough them so soon as
Mault-Drink. Upon which Considerations, I hold Pear Trees to be the most
profitable Fruit for a Farmers Use: For where they grow they rarely be at
charge for other Liquors, and where Men live Temperate, by the means of this
sort of Drink they are very healthy, and arrive to a great Age, as appears
evidently by the Inhabitants of some parts of Worcestershire, where Perry
still continues in great Plenty and Esteem.

The best sort of Pears for Perry, are the Squash-Pears; they are very fair and
large, and yield a most plentiful Juice, very delicious and hearty, and will
keep the longest of any Liquor made of Pears: It is a good Bearer. The
Horse-Pear likewise is a good Fruit for Liquor, but not so much in Credit as
the Squash-Pear. There are two sorts of them, the Red and the White.
Perry-Pears have this Advantage, that though they drop and lie under the Trees,
they are not in danger of being devoured by Swine, being of a very rough and
harsh Taste, much less are they in danger of being stolen by Boys and other
pilfering People, whilst they hang upon the Trees. Summer-Pears, such as
Gernets, Orange-Pears, Windsor-Pears, and the like, being ground with some old
Cider, and a little Vinegar, and the like, will afford a very pleasant, pert
Liquor, to be spent early, as in August, before other can be had.

Now, although Fruit Trees be one of the greatest Blessings we can receive from
the Earth, next to Bread, for I esteem a good Plantation to be as profitable as
a Vineyard beyond Sea, nay more profitable, as being managed with little or no
Labor: Nevertheless, it has been observed, that in such Places as most abound
with Fruit, the Owners of such Plantations are not always the most thriving
Men; for so it is, that Cider being sold many times at a low Rate, Men choose
rather to turn what is superfluous into their own fleshly Vessels, than play
the Merchants with a Drugg of so small Pro^^t. This Custom of Bibbing, or
drinking wastfully, (which in the Country is called good Neighborhood, and
keeping a Good House,) makes Men of Necessity neglect their Business, both
destroying their Health and Understanding, and wasting their Fortunes. But

At present there is, or at least of late there has been, an Excellent Project
a foot, which, doubtless, will much increase the Planting of Fruit, and make
very considerably for the Advantage of the Undertakers; I mean the new
Invention of drawing-off the Spirits of Cider by distilling. This kind of
Brandy (though of a weaker nature) is very useful to the Nation, when we cannot
be supplied from Abroad, and is very Profitable to the Husbandman, he being
certain to convert what is superfluous, and would otherwise be spent wastfully,
into good Money. So that the Project is equally Beneficial to the Nation,
(especially in Time of War,) as also to such Persons as have any Cider to
spare; and will prevent likewise that Intemperance, or unnecessary and sottish
Drinkings, to which Goodfellows otherwise are too apt to addict themselves,
upon Pretense that they may consume the Manufacture. Nor ought we to be moved
at the Complaints and Murmurings of the Rabble or poorer sort, who by this
means are forced many times to buy their Drink, which at other times they would
have as plenty as Ditch-water, since it is found, by certain Experience, that
where there is most Plenty there is most Beggary; Men ever refusing to take
Pains, or at least they will be most exacting and high in their Wages, where
they may have their Provisions for nothing, or at any inconsiderable rate: So
that we may easily observe, that in such Parts of this Kingdom as are not so
plentiful, and do not so much abound with this Liquor, we shall meet with
fewest Beggars and fewest Alehouses, which, without Offense, we may justly look
upon to be Pest-houses of the Nation, not for the Relief they yield to the
Diseased, but for the Poison and Infection which they diffuse. But more of this
presently.

And thus have I made some Cursory Remarks upon this Branch of Husbandry which
concerns the Planting of Fruit Trees, or the Orchard, glancing only upon that
part of which concerns Husbandry or the Farm: As for the other Branch of it
which concerns the Garden, or rather the Dish, I mean such curious Fruits as
serve for the Desert, they lie out of my Road. Nor were I ever so much minded
to discourse upon this Subject, nor am I capable to say any thing to purpose;
all that can be said or wished for in this nature, being already copiously, and
most ingeniously delivered to us by the Excellent Pens of some English
Gentlemen, such as Mr. Evelyn, who ex professo has written most amply hereupon,
and Sir William Temple, who by the Taste he has given us, makes his Reader long
for a fuller Entertainment, which we have some Reason likewise to hope for,
since he is pleased to tell us in the Discourse which he has published of
Gardens, As the Country Life, and this part of it more particularly, were the
Inclinations of my Youth, so they are the Pleasure of my Age.

To conclude this Subject: Since the Productions of the Earth, and the Labor
of the poor Countryman is the very Basis of the Commonwealth, and that Magazine
to which those who are over us have recourse in time of Exigence, as we
experiment sufficiently in these our Days of Taxations; there are other things
in the next place which ought to be considered and discoursed upon, as being
such with which the Countryman is most nearly concerned, and to which if due
Regard be not had, all the Affairs of the Country, or of Husbandry, and even of
the whole Kingdom, will be found quickly at a Stand, or rather in a declining
State, and they are these Four: 1st. Public Inns and Alehouses; 2dly,
Servants and Laborers; 3dly, The Poor; and lastly, Officers or Country
Magistrates.

CHAP. XII. Of Inns and Alehouses.
I Shall begin with Inns and Alehouses: These, at first, were allowed for the
Relief of Travelers, for the Accommodation of such as resort to Markets, and
for the Convenience of Country People meeting with one another, to discourse of
their Private Bargains and Business. But however 'twas in Days of Yore, certain
it is at present that there are few of these Houses, especially the lesser
Tipling-Houses, which answer these Ends; and rarely shall we meet with any
which is not prostituted rather to Drunkenness and Debauchery: For to such
Places as these it is, that the lewd and improvident Labourer frequently
resorts, upon Pretense of comforting his weary Body with a Cup of good Liquor,
there spending the Profits of a Week's Labor with a nasty Queen, whilst his
Wife and Children are ready to perish with Famine. To prevent which Calamity,
they betake themselves to begging and stealing, and at length (especially in
their declining Days) they fall an Escheat to the Parish, or perhaps to the
Gallows; having spent wastfully in such wicked Places what should have
maintained them in Old Age, and in the Time of Sickness.

To such Places as these it is to which the sturdy, wandering Vagabonds, and
pilfering Merchants, of both Sexes, resort, uttering their stolen Wares, and
discovering the State and Circumstances of Houses they begged at, for the
farther Instruction of Highwaymen and Brurglayers. In these Places it is where
the innocent Traveller is betrayed by the wicked Intimations of Hosts and
Servants, especially in lone-Inns upon the Road, and by such means falls a Prey
to Robbers who have their greatest Shelter and Security in such Country Inns:
And therefore it highly concerns the Magistrates or Justices of a County, to
have a watchful Eye over all such Places, and rarely to License any Inn or
Alehouse, but in or near a Market Town or Village, where the Frequency of
Inhabitants may give Security to Travelers, beyond the Bond and Faith of a
perfidious Host, or their mercenary Sureties.

Farther yet: It Is in these sweet Places of Refreshment and Good-fellowship,
where young Men of Fortune sometimes, and Men of Years likewise, and under a
declining State, sweetly solace themselves together till they are profoundly
drunk; and whilst the Reckoning multiplies, like the Lights in the Drunkards
Eyes, the officious Attendants watch their Minutes for plundering of Pockets:
But if the Gentleman has no ready Cash, but might be drunk upon Tick, he shall
not want for burning Account when he comes to even his Scores; and then there
must be a Hair of the Tails, which will at length be strong enough to draw on
the Dog, and make him fasten again. And thus it fares with Sots, till by
neglecting their Business, and wasting their Estates, they fall under the
Snares of a griping Mortgage: And we may observe, in many of these Places,
especially in the more celebrated Tipling-Houses, that as there are a sort of
sly Knaves ready to make a Prey of Good-natured Culleys, so there is likewise
some one or more little Engines of the Law, who, as Retainers to the House, are
always at hand to hamper any Gentleman in a Statutable Instrument as soon as he
shall fall within the Noose of a Drunken Wager or Bargain.

In these Places it is where a Congress of Sots, or (in the softer Phrase) of
Good-fellows, being drained together, that such Persons having little Business
of their own to spend their Time on, fall to debating the Concerns of others;
so that many times a heavy Doom is passed upon the Lives and Actions of honest
Men at the dreadful Bar of an All-definitive Alehouse, whilst mine Host or
Hostess holds (if not the Balance, at least the) Measure of Justice, I mean the
Glass, which besure shall never be wanting in its due Place and Order, and in a
plenary Distribution: And after they have canvas'd the Matter a little,
interluding the Farce with many impertinent and obscene Healths, they very
lovingly fall together by the Ears, though more there are who fall together to
the Ground by the more forcible Blows of the All-knock-down Ale: Here it is
where all Respect and Friendship is reduced to the Test of a never-failing
Bottle; and as for those who have not the Honor to be remembered in these
Offerings, they must for ever lie in Silence, as a Company of morose and
irreputable Reprobates.

Farther: In these Places it is where the Divans, or (as I may say) the
States-Provincial of a County, are held with great Solemnity. In these petty
Conventions it is where all Matters, relating to their Office, are with great
Judgment and Silence agitated and determined amidst the smoking of Pipes, the
cluttering of Pots, and all the noise and ordure of a narrow Room infested with
Drinking and a Throng; and well it is, before the Assembly be broken up, if
some one or other of them do not become a Subject of Humane Frailty, even then
whilst he is upon his Duty of correcting such Disorders. 'Twould be much more
suitable to the Gravity of a Court of Justice, were it kept in some Townhouse
or Market-House, since few Market Towns are unprovided with such Public Rooms.
It would add much to the Grace of the Business, if the Magistrate should sit
aloft, and conspicuous upon the Bench (as it is becoming in a Place of
Judicature,) and not be obliged (as may be seen sometimes) to hold a Glass in
one hand, whilst he signs a Warrant with the other; though much more Eminent was
he, who to show the stediness of his Hand, writ and signed a Warrant upon the
heaving Belly of a boggy Hostess.

In fine: In these Places it is where Consultations are held frequently about
Matters relating to the Public, as the Elections of Representatives to sit in
Parliament, and the like. Here it is, that Affairs of this Nature are debated
and concerted; here the Respective Parties rendezvous and strengthen their
Interest by profuse Entertainments, and Extravagance of Drinking; so that it is
not Merit, but Ale frequently which recommends the Person: That Ale, I say,
which at other Times deprives Men of their Speech, here makes Voices, where
it is not the emptiest but the fullest Vessels which make the greatest sound;
and although Money be the chiefest Instrument in the Matter, yet are they not
always the richest Men who succeed herein; insomuch that it happens sometimes,
that a Gentleman, to secure himself from a Process, or in hopes to better his
Condition, per Vias and Modos, does, in striving to be Burghess of a little
Borough, expend more than all the Elections are worth, and is ruined,
possibly, by it, seeking afterward, to be sheltered from Arrests, under the
Shadow of being a Retainer to some Member of Parliament, having f^il'd in his
Grand Design of being one himself.

Nor are there wanting Examples of such too, who, though they do succeed, are so
Fortune-shaken by the vast Expense they were at to procure it, that they might
be rather looked upon as coming into that Place for Sanctuary, than into a
Senate House, there fencing against the Laws and the Proceedings of Justice,
for Payment of their Debts, whilst they pretend to be Patrons of the Laws, and
to prescribe Justice to others. The many Exorbitances and Scandals then
attending some Elections, can proceed from no other Source but the great
Liberty of a sort of indigent, ignorant, and mercenary Wretches, to give their
Voices; so that let a Man but cram their Mouths with three or four popular
Words, as Liberty, Property, Popery, etc. and their Bellies with Beef and Ale,
these yelping Hell Hounds shall yawn and bawl, from the New to the Full of the
Moon, and damn themselves into the Bargain; many times swearing themselves to
be Freeholders, when they are mere Cottagers, and receive Alms from the
Parish; so that this sort of Men, how light and empty soever they are of
themselves, are weighty enough many times to turn the Scale of an Election. No
Wonder then if Parliamentary Proceedings have not been attended with such
frequent Blessings as might reasonably have been hoped for, when such
unqualified Creatures, animated by such Artifices of Debauchery, have so great
a Stroke in designing many times the Persons to sit in such Assemblies.

To remedy which Disorders, there cannot be a better Expedient than for the
Parliament it self to reform it self, and particularly by depriving such lewd
Miscreants of their incroaching Liberty, in giving their Voices; reducing the
Forty Shillings per Annum to the true Standard and Value it was at when such
Qualifications were admitted of, Forty Shillings then being as much as Forty
Pounds now adays; it being ever held the best way to interpret a Law, not by
the Letter, but by the Reason and Intention of the Legislatour: For it cannot
be imagined that a poor Fellow, of Forty or Fifty Shillings Income, or
thereabouts, who must be supposed to make up his Livelihood by Labor and
Drudgery, should have any mighty Understanding of the Interest of King and
Country, or be above the Snares of Corruption, which seizes easily upon the
Ignorant and Indigent.

Were the Rabble then of such beggarly Mercenaries repressed, the Elected
Persons themselves would receive great Benefit in being exempted from such
unsupportable Charge as usually accompanies a popular Election; the Country
likewise electing, would not be forced to neglect their Domestic Business, by
a long Attendance: For Men's Qualifications would be better weighed and
examined, and the Elections themselves being without so much Noise and Tumult,
without Delay, and without so many daring Perjuries, Debaucheries and Scandals,
we might have all the Reason in the World to hope for a Blessing upon such
National Assemblies; for from a free and legal Parliament orderly and soberly
Elected of such Persons as are in Credit, for Prudence, Temperance, Courage and
Justice, and with all Men of Estates, Honor and Integrity, we might expect
such mature and steady Deliberation, as would be the greatest Repose and
Security of this Kingdom.

And yet so much frequented, or rather celebrated, as are many of the Inferior
Inns and Alehouses, there are few who betake themselves, to this scandalous
Course of Life, but such as are Bankrupts, or of little Fame and Honesty. The
Laws of our Kingdom it is true, have made very good Provisions against the
Abuses and Disorders of such Places; but when they who are entrusted with the
Execution of them shall be remiss and partial, we shall stand in need I fear of
a further Execution.

The superfluous number of such petty Inns and Alehouses seems to proceed from
these two Causes; The first is from the application which is made frequently on
the behalf of some broken, half-starv'd Merchant, or idle Fellow, who rather
than beg, or steal and be hanged, or at the best become chargeable to the
Parish, hopes to get a Subsistence by the little Cheatings and degenerate
Shifts of Ale-selling. The other Course is much of the same Figure, it being
commonly no other than the sordid Interest of some mean-spirited, Justices, who
to maintain a superfluous or indigent member of his Family, or Acquaintance, is
tempted easily to license Alehouses for the sake of Fees, and he himself
perhaps, forced to patch up his Broken-Fortunes by humbly making of Malt,
which will certainly be vended in such little retaling Houses, and at such
Rates belike, as his Worship shall be pleased to trust it at; and then, to give
Reputation to the House, as likewise to the Ale, the good Gentleman must wink
at Faults, and go himself now and then in Person, and brush it away briskly
with half a Dozen good Fellows of the Neighborhood; where to countenance this
high Calling, they shall talk pleasantly, as, how that the consumption of the
Manufacture is for the advantage of His Majesty's Revenues; for the Circulation
of Money, and for quickening the Market, and such like merry Nonsense; at
which perhaps, a sly Excise-Man sitting by shall wink a Nod, and by putting in
a word or two, help forwards with the Argument: And thus they pass away the
time Jollily, licking the Froth of a rank, overgrown, and fulsome Hostess, till
his Worship is Magistratically Drunk, which cannot but afford great Joy and
Triumph to the valiant Conqueror, as well as matter of Pity and Derision to the
sober Spectator.

Upon these Considerations or Inconsiderations rather it is, that the number of
superfluous Tippling-Houses is connived at. But I would gladly know of such wet
Politicians, when the Chimney-Tax was on foot, if any one of them would have
suffered himself to be gulled, and have built more Chimneys than would have
served his Occasions, for the noble or royal End rather of increasing His
Majesty's Revenues? Nay rather, Would not every prudent Man have retrenched his
superfluous number of Chimneys, that he might have had something else to have
kept him warm, besides his smoaky Tunnels, and much more smoaky Imaginations of
fantastic Allegiance? Much greater Madness would it have been then to have
built more Alehouses, only to increase such Duties; and yet such Sots are
easily Piped on to destroy their Estates, and the best Houses they have, I mean
their Bodies, to advance the Custom of so rich a Manufacture. His Majesty
doubtless, must needs have a great Obligation to such Loyal Sots, when to speak
seriously, in a Case so empty and ridiculous, the Interest of a King or Kingdom
does not consist in a large Exchequer, but in the Good Management of the
Public Money, and in the Wealth, Industry and Affections of his Subjects, such
as are able and willing to support the Necessities of a Government, which can
never certainly be found in those who are abandoned to an idle and sottish
Life. And as for those who plead the advantages which some men may make by
buying the Estates of wastful Spendthrifts, they do but in other Terms tell us,
that it is expedient for the Commonwealth that some should be trained up to be
Fools, that there may be a way for Knaves to make their Fortunes; and we may as
well say; that 'twould be good Policy to Countenance and Encourage Knaves too,
that Lawyers might have Business to be employed about, and to get Money.

Foreigners doubtless, those I mean, of such Countries to which our English
Youth resort upon the score of Breeding and Improvement, when they see how much
these Kinds of Houses are by all sorts of People celebrated and frequented, and
how our Gentlemen usually at their familiar Rencounters, entertain one another
with an Heroic Narrative of what happened at such or such a drunken Engagement,
as Men would do were they to report the furiest Events of some desperate and
bloody Battle relating with all the Punctualities of Circumstance, how many
withdrew; who they were who bravely stood to it, and who fell finally in the
fight and Combat; I say, when Gentlemen of other Nations shall hear a distinct
Relation of such Generous and Martial Deeds, they cannot but smile, and
entertain an odd Opinion and Contempt of our English Morals. Cabanels or
Taverns being esteemed in other Countries, as places of Infamy fit only for
Porters and such trivial Chapmen, but never as suitable and fit Houses for
Civil Gentlemen to Rendevouz in. And indeed, if there be any Cause assignable,
why the Process and Martial Genius of our Nation is so degenerated from what it
was in former Ages, it can be no other then that against which I am now
declaring. We cannot boast of any great Generals, at least they have not the
Honor to be employed as such: And, for our common Soldiers, tho they be
naturally strong and surly, yet are they not the best for Service, it being
impossible for Men who are in a manner habituated to Intemperance and Disorders
of Life, to be ever able to endure hardship, Thirst and Hunger, Heat and Cold,
and to be subject to Discipline and Command, and yet in these Two Points, viz.
Sufferance and Obedience it is, that the Perfection of a good common Soldier
does consist. And as for our Courage, so much as we boast our own Valor, and
decry our Enemies over a Glass of Wine or a Pot of Ale, it is not so when we
come to Action: Our Wildfire or sputtring Crack being quickly spent with
little Execution, and our Men wash away upon the Fatigues and hardships of a
Campaigne.

From the same Cause likewise it is; that the Turkish Valor is so much debased
from what it was heretofore. Their Prophet or Lawgiver Mahomet amongst other
Politic Institutions, utterly forbad his Followers the use of Wine; which
Command of his they rigorously observed for diverse Ages, during which Time they
were very prosperous and successful to a Prodigy. But falling from their
Primitive Discipline, and suffering themselves to be corrupted by the Examples
of their Neighbors, as to this Point of Abstinence, they at this Day do like
the Greeks, that live amongst them, drinking in Private to the height of a
Debauch: By which means their Spirits being often troubled and enraged, they
become incapable of Discipline and Fatigue, and their Strength of Body and
Health being likewise wasted, they soon abandon the hardships of War; and this
I take to be one of the greatest Reasons, why they have been so unsuccessful in
this latter Age.

And really, if we look further backward upon former Ages, we shall find that
none of the Ancient Roman Hero's or Generals, except M. Antonius, were
stigmatized with Intemperance in Drinking, and with Debauchery: And amongst our
later Worthies or Generals, I cannot readily call to mind any one of these Sons
of Bacchus, who were any way eminent for Conduct; but that the bravest
Generals, such as the Duke of Alva, Alexander, Farness, Count T^lly, with
others were very remarkable for Abstinence and Severity of Discipline. The
Office indeed of a great Soldier is a Thing of Vigilance; like a Lion he must
be most watchful when he seems to devour; he must wait upon every Critical
Minute, and be perpetually upon his Guard. The seasons of Rest to others, and
the silence of the Night are fittest for Deliberation, and for Execution many
Times: He must conceal his Thoughts by a studied reservedness, or by Suffering
his Tongue to run Counter to his Intentions, and by a thousand seign'd
strategems amuse his Enemy, and delude the Vigilance of Spies, till a
favorable overture shall occur, which possibly may not be above once or twice
in a Campaigne, and such too as may not be but of a Momentary Duration. He must
Support the Courage of his Soldiers, and teach them to endure Watchfulness,
Hunger, and all manner of hardships by his own Example, with infinite other
Acts and Habits of Sincerity, Temperance and Prudence: None of which can ever
consist with one who Frolicks in a Debauch, and has his Brains intoxicated with
Drink, which renders him Talkative, Huffish, and incapable of Considering, and
his Body also incapable of Action and Hardships; and where such Intemperance
becomes habitual, it renders the Person subject to it Crazy, and fitter for an
Hospital than a Camp.

Alehouses and Taverns are not the only Places, in which Men practice this
Exercise of Debauchery. In an Alehouse it is true; they Act as in a Theater
open to the Eyes of all; and the Circumstances of such Places being generally
stinking and nasty, are alone sufficient to render the frequenting of them most
abominable and infamous: Whereas they who fuddle in their own Private Houses,
seeming to Act behind the Curtain, are altogether as unexcusable as the former;
the very Quintescence or Poison rather of the Sin consisting in the abuse or
superfluous waste of those Blessings, which might serve for the Relief of such
as are ready to perish with Cold and Hunger. As for Drunkenness, or that
Giddiness of Brain which attends Excess with all the Concomitant Ordures, they
are indeed but some part of the Punishment due thereunto, it seeming good to
the All-wise God to annex Pain to Intemperance in all Cases almost whatsoever.
When I have seen a Man of Fortune, as they call him, rouling in his Coach, and
making a Visit to his several Posts and Preferments, and meeting the Caresses
and Complements of his Acquaintance, in all Places where he comes; when I have
considered in what Ease and Luxury he lives, rising perhaps about Nine or Ten a
Clock, and it may be is at the pains to take a little breathing-Walk to whet
his Appetite for a Feast; when I see him stuff his Carcass with fat Venison,
and Claret, till the very Seams of it are ready to burst, and after Dinner
dozing and smoking his Pipe with great Grace and Gravity: When I have seen all
this, I say, I have been upon the point of envying such a Man's Happiness;
when, lo! upon a sudden, Oh! I feel a Pain in my Foot, an intolerable and
unexpected Pain! Good Man! all must needs be mightily concerned for him, and
the Town and Country must ring of this great and sudden Disaster. The House is
alarmed, the Doctor, or Apothecary, with other Dependants and Retainers to the
Family, are sent for in post-hast; and after a critical Examination of the
Matter by the whole Consult, without stirring from the Place, they give in
their Verdict, that it is the Gout: And now perhaps my Grandee begins a little
to reflect upon his former Life, and would gladly change States of Body with
him who lives on moldy Bread and Cheese all the Week, and whose Drink perhaps
is from the next Brook, or but one degree beyond Water.

The like Observations might be made upon other Extravagancies, such as
Whoring, with all that Train of fatal Disasters which follow all Excess of our
Passions, whether of Desire, Envy, Revenge, Anger, etc. all which are
inseparably accompanied with such a Degree of Pain or Punishment, as far
exceeds the imaginary Pleasures of any Intemperance, and is infinitely more
lasting; so that Quo quis peccat Eodem punitur, is a Motto which ought to be
engraven upon every Man's Heart, being universally true in all manner of
Disorders whatsoever.

I have been told Abroad by some German Gentlemen, that it was a usual thing
amongst them, in the Warmth of their Debauches, (which in those Countries are
excessive) to drink their Healths out of the Barrel of a cocked and loaded
Pistol, with Finger on the Triquer, whilst they discharge the Wine into their
Throats; so that upon the least Miscarriage of an unst^ady Hand, the Bullet
would not fail to do its Duty. This Point of Bravery being over, they all give
a Volly on fire together, and then charge afresh, and so on. If this kind of
Gallantry were in vogue amongst us, I believe we should have fewer Drunkards
than now there are, and by going out of this World by a Draught of Flame, they
would be better prepared to drink of it for ever in the next.

But whilst some Countries indulge themselves in this Infernal or Stygian
Recreation, we have Examples of Sobriety in others; so that the French, so
extravagant as they are in some things, in this Particular, may justly reproach
us for not following their Mode, as they do for following them in others; there
being very few Gentlemen amongst them to be found who drink betwixt Meals, and
even at their Meat they drink their Wine above half mixed with Water, more or
less, according to every Man's private Palate, and sometimes Water discolored
only with a little Rosie-Tincture of Wine: And yet we do not find but that
these Men have almost as much Mettle and Bravery in them as any Brandy-Hero
whatsoever. Each Country has its National Vices as well as Virtues, whilst he
who would acquire the Character of a Gallant Man, ought so to follow their
Examples, as to propose what is good and commendable in them for his Imitation
and Practice, declining their ill Customs as Things which bring Disesteem and
Misery in the end.

Amongst the Abuses of Inns or Alehouses, it is too well known what all Men
suffer from their cheating Measures: Their Quart-Pots or Flagons, their Juggs,
their Muggs, their Jacks, their Carmikins, their Beakers, their Tum^lers, their
Glass-Bottles, their Tankards, and above all, their Silver-Tankards, though all
of them be pretty little Curiosities, yet are they most gross Cheats, not
containing above a true Pint and a half; so that in Four Shillings expended
this way, One is pure Cousenage. Much better were it, if their Measures (after
the Custom of other well polic'd Countries) were marked and sealed, and reduced
to a Standard all England over, as our Weights are over all the World: Whereas
in a paltry Alehouse a small, slender-wasted Flagon, with a broad empty
bottom, and with sides, back, and belly crushed almost together, and capp'd
half way with Froth, goes down very glibly with my bonny Customer at two or
three Gulps; and when Good-fellows are upon the Quill of Drinking, the Strength
and Capacity of the Man is much esteemed by the Number of Flagons; whereas the
silly Sot, perhaps, never drank half that quantity, for which he sets so high a
Value upon himself, and pays so dearly.

The like Cheats we meet with daily from the trashy Ingredients of
sophisticated Liquors, which many times does advance them double or treble in
the Price, when really they are much beneath the Plain Drinks for Health and
Goodness; nor are we to forget the hard Names with which many Liquors are
baptized; which puts me in mind of what I have sometime heard of a Two-Pot
Knave, who being out of Reputation for Drink, or (to speak in the Language of a
Tapster) being at the lowest Stoop, and on the very Dreggs and Lees of his
Profession, was advised to make Daucus-Ale, which he christened Blan-Carote.
This dainty new Name, by the help of some pleasant Waggs of his Acquaintance,
was cried up for a curious Outlandish, Low Country Drink; and this was
sufficient to give it Credit, bringing such Custom to my honest Draw-Causor,
that in a short time after, he became very rich, and was at the least a
Squire's Fellow, and, for ought I know, something better. But such Cheats as
these are rather to be winked at than punished; for I know no Law which can
oblige a Magistrate to put Brains into the Heads of Fools; and to put them all
into Bedlam who fall under this Character, would be very troublesome: Let them
rest merry therefore, for their own and for others Diversion, till they fall
irrecoverably into the Hands of the Catch-pole.

In sum, It Is the Business of a Resolute and Sober Magistrate to Reform
Notorious Disorders, by Punishing the Offenders, and by Suppressing such Houses
as are useless; permitting only in greater Towns some Public Inns to serve the
Occasions of Travelers, and of the Market; and upon the Occasions likewise of
Fairs, to allow Private Houses a Liberty to sell Drink: For by this means, Inns
will become well accommodated, and not as now, being (by reason of their great
Numbers) ready to eat, or rather to drink, one another. In greater Towns and
Cities, a greater Number or Proportion is to be allowed. If Gentlemen likewise,
and especially Justices of the Peace, would withdraw themselves from these
scandalous Places, unless obliged thereunto by Urgent or Public Occasions,
Sobriety would by degrees get ground, and others also be invited to follow
their Good Examples: And as for Inns up and down the Country Roads, 'twere well
if they gave good creditable Security and Caution to the Bench, for their
honest Demeanor, better than what is usually taken in these Cases; and if a
more watchful Eye were kept over them, from time to time; so that by these and
other Prudent Methods, the Business of the Country would thrive and prosper,
whilst they who are appointed to follow it are reduced to the Rules of
Temperance and Frugality.

CHAP. XIII. Of Servants and Laborers.
BEfore I come to speak of Servants, as they are Members of our English
Commonwealth, and of the Obligations or Duties under which they lie at present,
it will not be improper to Discourse of them as they were in f^rmer Ages and
Kingdoms of the World; or as they are a Part or Portion of a Commonwealth in
General, and how they were treated in Ancient Times. Servants then, I say, in
Ancient Times, were of Five kinds.

The First were such as were Servi by Nature and Birth, as all those who were
begotten on Bondwomen, Handmaids, or Harlots, or came of Parents of base and
servile Condition: Of this kind we read of some in the Families of the
Patriarchs of old, as also under the Mosaical Law, Levit. 25. where the
Children of the Bondmen and Bondwomen, which were not of the Stock of Israel
(for they were not allowed to have Bond-Servants of their own Tribes) were
looked upon as their proper Inheritance, and to be accounted as Bondmen and
Bondwomen for ever. Amongst the Romans likewise, such as were born of Bondwomen
were called Vernae, in opposition to such as were by Birth called Ingenui, or
Freeborn; which Custom still had a more peculiar Regard to the Woman, if show
were of base and servile Condition: For, by the Civil Law, if a Woman were a
Serva, and the Father free, the Issue were accounted Servile, or Slaves; as on
the contrary, if a Man of servile Condition and Quality did beget a Child on
the Body of a Freewoman, the Issue was looked upon as Freeborn: Hence came
that Maxim of Partus Sequitur Ventrem, for we are more sure of the Mother than
of the Father; and herein the Civil Law is directly contrary to our Norman or
Ancient Customs: And it is not improbable, that William the Conqueror being
himself a Bastard, and of base Blood by the Mother's side, thought good to
measure the Pre-eminence of Birth from the Father's side.

A Second sort of Servants and Slaves amongst the Ancients, were such as were
Servi Jure Gentium, as being taken Prisoners in War; it being ever adjudg'd
Just, by the Laws of Nations, that such Prisoners should become Servants or
Slaves to those who spared their Lives; and hence it was that by the Romans
they were called Servi quasi servati, forasmuch as they were saved, I say, when
by the Law of War they might have been killed. Of this kind the Jews had none,
for they were still required to kill their Enemies, without Quarter; a thing
indeed which to us seems very harsh, and repugnant to the Dictates of Nature,
and Laws of Humanity, which teach us to do to others what we would that they
should do to us: No less contrary was their Behavior in this Particular to the
Practice of all Nations besides. We read indeed of the Gibeonites, that by
Stratagem they circumvented the Israelites, and that they ever lived amongst
them as Slaves or Bondmen.

A Third sort of Servants, who, by the Civil Law likewise were accounted Servi
or Slaves, were such, who, though born free, yet sold or hired themselves to
others for a certain Term, either of Years or Life. This was practiced amongst
the Jews, where we read of some that were hired only for a Year, and some for a
longer Term, and these amongst the Jews were distinguished from Bondmen: For of
their own Tribes, by the God, none could be a Bondsman, though ^^ght sell, bind,
or hire themselves to be Servants for a Term of Time; and this was frequently
practiced by poor Debtors with their Creditors, which poor Debtors God
commanded to be treated not as Bond-servants, but as hired Servants or
Sojourners, with Gentleness and not with Rigor, Levit. 25. and that in (...)
Year of Jubilee, when Liberty was proclaimed to the Captive, they were to be
set free; though Bodin tells us, from Deuteronomy. 15. that such Servants or Debtors,
were, by the Law of God, to be released upon the Return of the Seventh Year,
which was accounted Holy, and called a Sabbath of Years; at which time also all
hired Servants were to be at Liberty. Upon which Law is our Custom grounded of
binding Apprentices for Seven Years.

And here by the way a Question may be started, whether such an Apprentice, by
being sold, or made a Bondsman, for Seven Years, though descended of Gentile
Parentage, does not forfeit the Privileges of his Blood? For though he be not a
Slave, such as were those amongst the Romans, yet being bound or sold into a
State of Servitude, he thereby renounces actually that Liberty or Freedom which
is essential to a Gentleman: So that in France, Germany, Italy, and in the
Northern Parts, and elsewhere, where the Civil Law is in force, the
Low Countries only excepted, it is rarely seen that Gentlemen, though never so low
in Fortune, will bind their Children Apprentices, nor make any Affinity with
Merchants, though never so rich, unless they first purchase Honors and quit
their Traffic. Whereas, with us in England, we see the contrary every Day,
forasmuch as we are not under the Directions of the Civil Law which entails
such Privileges upon Blood. Nay, and what is yet more remarkable, the Nobility
do not only condescend to make an Affinity and Relation (...) the Shops; but
the Shopkeepers themselves, even Retailers, and sometimes mere Merchants, are
enrolled amongst the Nobility, or Orders of Knighthood; a thing which at the
first blush looks a little Heterodox, viz. to see the Blew-Apron entitled to
the Sword.

But to return to the Jews: It was a Custom or Law with them likewise, that in
case a Servant should prefer his Master's Service before Liberty, he was to be
brought before the Judges, and to have his Ear bored through with an Awl by his
Master at the Door-Post of his House, and so he became his Servant for ever:
Nevertheless, in case he lived to the Year of Jubilee he was to be set at
Liberty, as most Interpreters agree, unless he should choose rather to serve a
second time.

A Fourth sort of Servants or Slaves were those as were called Servi Poenae, or
such as were condemned to the Mines and Galleys, of which kind we have many in
these our Days: And of this kind likewise are those with us who are adjudg'd to
Public Workhouses, or Bridewells.

The Fifth and last kind of Servants or Slaves, were those who were sold by
Robbers or Pirates, and might, bona fide, be possessed by those who purchased
them, unless they knew them to be free; though by the Civil Law a Pyrate or
Robber cannot divest a Freeman of his Liberty, however he may confine him in
his Person, and force him as his Slave. To this Head likewise we may reduce all
those who were of old sold by the Tartars, and sent into Egypt, as the
Mamalukes, as those likewise who at this Day are sold Yearly by the same
Tartars to the Turks in great Droves; as those Blacks also of Guinea, in which
our Merchants drive so Considerable a Trade.

The Power which Masters formerly had over their Servants or Slaves was very
great: Amongst the Jews, it is true, this Power of Masters was restrained and
limited by the Mosaical Law; for they had no Bond-Servants or Slaves, as I said
before: Only poor Debtors might pawn their Service, and these were to be
t^^ated with all Mercy and Gentleness: And as to their hired Servants, in case
a Master, by his over-Severity, should smite one of them with a Rod, that he
died, the Master surely was to be punished, but not to be put to Death for it,
as I conceive; and in case of a Maim, he was to let his Servant go free; but in
case a Servant continued ill for a Day or two, by means of his Master's
Correction, the Master was not to be punished, for such a Servant was his Money.

But amongst the Romans 'twas far otherwise: For there the Master or Patron had
a full Power over the Life of his Servant, without the Cognizance of the
Magistrate; insomuch that Asenius Pollio having invited Augustus upon a time to
Supper, condemned his Servant to be cast into a Pool or Lake, to be Food for
the Lampreys, which he kept there in store, because he chanced to break a
Crystal Glass; nor would Pollio, by the Intercession of Augustus, be prevailed
upon to spare his Servant's Life. If at any time it happened that the Patron or
Master of the Family was found murdered in his House, all the Servants living
under his Roof, though never so innocent, were instantly to be put to Death: Of
which Cruelty we have a very Remarkable Example in Paedonius, Prefect of Rome;
for, as Tacitus (Lib. 14.) reports, Great Intercession was made by the common
People of Rome (who for the most part consisted of Libertines, or such as being
sometimes Servants themselves had been made free,) on the Behalf of the
guil^^ess Servants, but all to little purpose: For, after the Debate of the
Senate, it was resolved, That the Custom of their Ancestors should be kept
inviolable; whereupon, without more ado, than with a more majorum, all the
Servants in his Family, being in number Four Hundred, were put to Death: Nay,
so little did the Romans value the Lives of their Slaves or Servants, that many
times they commanded them to encounter with wild Beasts, or with one another,
in the open Theater, purely for Divertisement and Pastime, under the Show of
Bravery and Courage. It Is true, the Petronian Law forbad innocent Servants to
be cast to wild Beasts. Nero likewise, and after him Hadrian, as Spartian tells
us, appointed Judges to hear the Complaints of Servants, who at the Will and
Pleasure of their Patrons were condemned to die: But all these Provisions were
superceded by the more Ancient Custom, which placed a Power of Life and Death
in the Will and Pleasure of their Masters.

This Arbitrary, and Unlimited Power in the Patrons or Masters made their
Servants or Slaves take Sanctuary at the Temples and Images of their Gods: But
neither the Statues of Caesar, nor the Temple of Diana, which King Servius
appointed as an Asylum for Servants; nor the Statue of Romulus, appointed by
the Senate for this End and Purpose, could afford any Protection, no more than
the Sepulcher of Theseus at Athens, or the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. Though
Tiberius (as my Author Bodin observes) with great Policy caused his own Statue
to be erected as an Asylum for fugitive Servants, withal menacing Death to any
who should take such Servants from thence; and this the subtle Tyrant did, not
for the Good and Safety of such Servants, but with Design that they might more
easily be tempted to conspire against their Masters; and thus he kept the
Masters under Awe and slavish Obedience by the Protection he gave their
Servants. Upon the like Score it was that Sylla, having proscris'd or banished
Sixty Thousand Citizens, the better to consummate his hellish Villainy and
Cruelty, animated the Servants to cut the Throats of their Masters, with the
Promise of Liberty; amongst whom, one bringing the Head of his Master to Sylla,
he kept his Promise; for he manumis'd him, or made him free, but withal
commanded him to be thrown down headlong from the Tarpeian Rock or Precipice,
the usual Punishment for condemned Persons, as a Reward justly due to such a
Traitor.

No wonder then if Jealousies arose betwixt Masters and Servants, which broke
forth afterward into dreadful Tumults, and were accompanied with infinite
Treacheries and Murders; for at one and the same time, in all the Cities
belonging to Italy, Messana in Sicily excepted, the Servants conspired against
their Masters: And afterward, in the time of Crassus, above 60000 Servants
took up Arms at once, under the Command of one Spartacus, a bold Slave and a
Gladiator, and put three Armies of the Romans to flight: For so it was, that
the Number of Servants or Slaves was ten times greater than that of those who
were born free; insomuch that M. Crassus himself numbered no less than 500
belonging to him, besides such as attended always on his Domestic Concerns.
And that there might be some Distinction made betwixt Servants and those who
were born free, it was debated in the Roman Senate, That all Servants should
wear one certain Badge or Habit; but this design was laid aside by the more
prudent Suggestion of one of the Senators, saying, that by this means the
Servants would be able to know their own Numbers and Strength, and so be
tempted to cut their Patrons Throats. Hence it became Capital for any Servants
to carry Arms, as it is at this day in Paris for Lacqueys, since the Tumult
raised there of above Twenty Thousand armed Lacqueys, which put that City under
a great Consternation, upon the Execution of a Criminal who wore a Livery.

But amongst the Romans, in case of any Urgent Necessity, they first made their
Servants free, and then armed them: Thus did S^ip^o Africanus after the Battle
of Cannae, manumising three hundred Slaves fit for Service. Nor were their
Slaves suffered to row in their Galleys before they had been manumised, as
Helvius reports of Augustus, in his Naval Battle at Actiam. On the contrary,
Justin tells us, (lib. 41.) That the Parthians were not suffered by their Laws
to manumise their Servants or Slaves, whereupon they were constrained to treat
them with the same Affection and Courtesy as they did their own Children,
breeding them up to Horsemanship, and to the Quiver, and by this means they
became very Numerous, and serviceable in their Wars. For in the Parthian Army,
which put M. Antonius to Flight, there were but Five Hundred Freemen, the rest,
who were fifty thousand Horsemen, were all Slaves. Now because the Romans never
trusted their Slaves with their Arms, the better to prevent Disorders, they
employed them in some Manual Occupation or Trade, which by the Institution of
Numa Pompilius, it was not lawful for Free Citizens to profess. And yet for all
this, we find that in their Civil Wars, their Slaves would still quit their
Masters, and side with one Party or the other, in hopes to better their
Fortunes; so that Augustus after the War finished with Sextus Pompeius took no
less than Thirty Thousand of them Prisoners, all which, for adhering to Pompey,
were delivered over to their respective Masters, to be put to Death by them for
their Desertion, and such whose Masters or Patrons were already deceased, he
forthwith commanded to be hanged.

And such truly was the Number of these Servants or Slaves in the Christian
Empire, that when Mahomet revolted in Arabia, he sent his Ambassador Homarus to
proclaim liberty to all Servants or Slaves who should follow his Standard:
Whereupon such a vast Number of them thronged from all Quarters, that he soon
subdued the fairest Provinces of the Eastern Empire. This Success of the
Asiatick Slaves soon invited the Europeans to rebel against their Patrons: For
about the Year 781, the Servants in Spain took up Arms for their Liberty, as
likewise in France about the time of Charles the Great, and St. Lewis, as
appears by their Laws against the Conjuration of Servants: And such verily was
their Power about this Time, that Lothair, the Son of Lewis, being twice beaten
by his Brethren, pro^laim'd Liberty to all the Slaves and Servants who should
come to his Assistance, by which means he recruited his Armies. After which
Time the Slave, and Servants every where grew so insolent and insupportable,
that the Christian Princes thought it the safest way to give them their Liberty
by degrees, and ^o free themselves from those dangerous Eruptions with which
they were daily menaced from their Power, which could not well be restrained
and limited; retaining only a successory Right to the Goods and Fortunes of
such Libertines or Freed Men, in case they died without Issue, which in the
Style of that and of after Ages, were called Mort-mains.

In sum, as soon as the Christian Religion began to triumph over Paganism,
there was a Door opened for a greater Liberty, which was made much wider by
Mahomet's Indulgence, which forbad any of his own Religion to be Slaves.
Hereupon the Christians likewise thought it just to indulge the like Liberty to
those of their own Profession, which yet had not its due effect for some
considerable time after. For about the Year 1200, there were some remains still
of Servitude, as appears from the several Decretals of Alexander the Third,
Urban the Third, and Innocent the Third, wherein (peaking of the Marriages of
Servants, they were not called Connubia or Matrimonia (the Canonical words for
Marriages betwixt Free Persons) but Contubernia, which word the Lawyers always
used to distinguish the Marriage of Servants from that of those who lived in a
state of Liberty. However, in the time of Bartolus, who livd about the Year
1300, there were no Slaves or Servants of the Ancient Stamp to be any where
found; and Lewis Hutin, about the Year 1313, manumis'd all Servants throughout
his Kingdom, for a certain Sum of Money, which, as the Learned Bodin
interprets, must be understood of such Libertines as were called Mortmains in
former Ages, who by me Prince's Indulgence were released from that Bond of
Servitude by which they were restrained from marrying, or alienating their
Goods out of their Patrons Territories.

The Right and Title which Patrons of old had to their Slaves or Servants, was
as great and unquestionable as that which they had to their Lands and Houses,
or any other Possession whatsoever; insomuch that neither the Magistrate, at
the Request of the People, nor yet the Authority of the Emperor, could alienate
or extinguish that Authority which a Master had over his Servant, or make him
Free without his Consent: Nay, the Emperor had not Power to bestow a Ring of
Gold, which was a sort of Military Reward, and conferrd usually as a Badge of
Gratuity upon those who deserved well of the Prince; I say, the Emperor had not
Power to bestow such a Gift upon a Libertine, without the Consent of the
Patron; insomuch as Commodus commanded all the Gold Rings to be taken from off
the Hands of those who had been rewarded with them without their Patrons Leave.
So that by the Imperial Laws, no Prejudice could happen to the Patron by such
Rewards, although a Prince should restore a Servant to his Birthright, or that
State in which he was born, which Prerogative was solely in the Prince.

The way of making Slaves free was by a Box on the Ear, which the Master gave
the Servant as a Farewel-stroke to his Servitude. This was called Manumising;
and then the Master bestowing on him a Tufted Cap to cover his shaved Crown, he
was reputed a Libertus, or Freed-man; so that ad Pileam vocare was used as a
Phrase amongst the Romans, to signify a Man's Advancement into a State of
Liberty: For Slaves always were shaved, and went bare-headed, as it is at this
Day used by the Turks. And for this Reason likewise 'twas, that Priests
heretofore, and at this Day in the Roman Church, wear their Heads shaved, to
show, that they are wholly dedicated as Servants or Slaves to the Service of
God. The Pileus or Cap then was a Badge of Liberty; and for this Reason 'twas
that Brutus caused his Medals to be stamped on the Reverse with a Cap betwixt
two Ponyards, thereby signifying the Liberty which was procured to the People
of Rome by the Blow which Julius Caesar received from his Dagger.

By an Ancient Law of Justinian, all Libertines were for ever restored, or
transplanted rather, into the State of those whom the Legists call Ingenui,
without any farther receipt. But this Law is antequated; for by the Civil Law
now in use, it is the Prince only for the Time being who can range a Libertine,
coetaneous with himself, amongst those we call Ingenui, or Freeborn; no Prince
being capable to extend his Grace to such as shall be made Libertines in future
Ages: And as the Prince has a Power now adays to exalt a Libretine into the
Order of the Ingenui's, without the Leave of his Patron; so the Patron too has
still his Title to such Goods and Possessions of his Libertine as were acquired
before his Translation to his Freedom; and this by the Civil Law the Prince
cannot alienate or extinguish, as appears from the Judgment of the Court of
Paris, by the Testimony of the most Learned Bodin. Nevertheless, an Ingenuus
thus made by the Grace and Favor of his Prince, may leave his Children
whatsoever he gets after his Instalment; and in case he has no Issue, he has a
Right to Legacy his Goods to whom he pleases.

The Ancient Jews, though they were allowed to take Bondmen from among such as
we^e Strangers or Sojourners with them, yet such Bondmen or Strangers being
once circumci^'d, were under the same Privileges with those who were Freeborn,
Exodus 12. But amongst the Turks it is otherwise at this present Day: For though in
the Beginning of their Empire (like Romulus) they incorporated all sorts of
Slaves and Servants, who followed their Arms, their Empire nevertheless being
new-settled or built, they proceed by other Policies, notwithstanding the Laws
of Mahomet, their Prophet and Founder, to the contrary; for albeit the
Mahometans do circumcise and instruct the Children of Christians in their own
Superstition, yet they think good still to treat them and their Children like
Slaves. Howbeit, the Janissaries, and those of the Seraglio, though
Tribute-Children, (forasmuch as Men may hope to reap better Fruit from Youths
of pregnant Parts, and of a better Education) are treated in another manner
than those of ordinary Promises, and are not therefore to be accounted Slaves
properly, being appointed to the peculiar Service of the Prince, and are many
times by their Merit advanced to the greatest Places of Trust and Power. In
Imi^ation of the Turkish Policies, or Perfidiousness rather, the Portuguese
heretofore compelled such Slaves as they bought or brought from Africa, to
abjure Mahometism, and to be baptized; nevertheless they still treated them and
their Offspring as Slaves, selling them openly in the Market like Cattle; a
thing certainly very repugnant to the Laws of Christianity, as well as to the
Commands of God by Moses.

The like Barbarity was practiced by the Spaniards in America, which Cbarles
the Fifth, Anno 1540. endeavored to restrain: Whereupon Gonzala Pizarus, the
then Governor in these Parts, rebelled; but being afterward taken Prisoner,
was executed, and all Slaves mada free, being obliged only to labor for their
Masters in the nature of hired Servants. However, long it was not before the
Spaniards, following the Example of the Portuguese, fell to the Trade of
selling Slaves like Cattle; insomuch as at this present Day, throughout all the
Grand-Signior's Dominions, throughout the Kingdoms and Provinces of the East,
throughout all Africa and America, and throughout most Countries of Christian
Princes bordering on the Turks, Slaves are sold openly in the Market like
Beasts; so that the World now seems as much or more replenished wi^h Slaves
than in the Times of Ancient Paganism. Nay, amongst the Turks, the poor
Christian Captives are stigmatized in their Bodies with hot Irons, as we do
burn our Horses, thereby impressing an indelible Character upon their Bodies,
that all the World may know to whom they do belong: A most infamous sort of
Usage! and never practiced by the Romans upon their Slaves, unless such as were
most desperate and obdurate Villains.

And yet, let Men steer by what Policies they please, it is certainly true,
that it can never be the Interest of a Government to be over-stock'd with
Slaves: For never was Rome in greater Danger than when Spartanus headed Sixty
thousand of them in the very Body of Italy; at which Time the Empire was
infested with Fourscore thousand Pirates, who with Nine hundred Ships ravaged
all the Cities of the Mediterranean, at their Will and Pleasure, the
Suppression of which Pirates was one of the Glorious Achievements of Pompey,
and procured him the Title or Surname of Great.

Nor are our Plantations in the West Indies free from the like Dangers, as
appears from the frequent Insurrections and villainous Attempts. Much better
were it, certainly, after the Project of Charles the Fifth, abovementioned, to
instruct such Wretches in the Principles of Christianity, and then baptize
them, treating them in the nature of Servants for Term of Life, or upon other
Terms, without the infamous Usage of Selling them: For these inhumane
Restraints are the things which fill them with Resentments blacker than their
Bodies. For notwithstanding the Fabulous Reports of some, none doubts in Reason
but that they are, notwithstanding their Complexions, of the same Species with
Whites, and have Souls to be saved as well as others. The Merchant, perhaps,
cares not if the Devil ensnares their Souls, so he may have the use of their
Bodies. However, it would be worth a serious Consideration of the Governors of
our Church, if they would extend their Care a little this way, their Neglect or
ill Success in converting Pagans, and spreading the Gospel amongst Infidels,
being one of the greatest Arguments which the Papists bring against our Church,
as their Care, Diligence, and Success in this Particular is one of the best
Arguments they can offer in the Behalf of theirs.

And thus having given a Summary Relation or History of the State of Slaves or
Servants, and of what Account they were in former Ages, and in Foreign Kingdoms
and Empires of the World I now must think of returning home again into our
English Soil, which certainly is too mild and favorable to such Mercenaries,
as others heretofore were too severe. What I shall write concerning them, is
no^ out of Pr^judice or Passion, but from a disinterested Spirit, and upon
manifest Experience; for I dare boldly affirm, that there is not a more
insolent and proud, a more untractable, persidious, and a more churlish sort of
People breathing, than the Generality of our Servants; and that the great
Dis^ouragement to Husbandry, and the great Expen^e we lie under, together with
the many Vexations and Disappo^ntments we daily meet with, are derived ch^efly
from their great Disorders, which, if not mutually remedied, will insensibly,
or ^ather most sensibly, reduce the Kingdom into a more languishing State: But
this must be the Work of the Subordinate Magistr^tes.

Come we then, I say, to consider Servants as they are a Part or Portion of our
English C^mmonwealth, at present; wh^re it must be acknowledged, in the first
place, that they are the Instruments, or rather the Hands, by which the good
Husbandman does subsist and live: So that he who has the good Fortune to meet
with such as are Faithful, has found, doubtless, one of the greatest Blessings
of which this Life is capable; as on the contrary, he that shall rely on such
as are Lazy, Wastful, and False, needs no other Curse to make him miserable;
and let the Master be never so Honest, Laborious, and Prudent, he shall never
prosper in the World whilst they are in his Service.

Men of more plentiful Fortunes and Credit have an Advantage over Servants and
Laborers, especially if such Masters be Men in Office; because it is oftentimes
in their Power to humble them, or to do them good: For such is the Temper of a
base and servile Nature generally, as renders it insensible of Obligation, or
Courtesy, Men of this Character caring little for any, but upon the aforesaid
Considerations. Hence it is that Great Men do in a manner command the Services
and Labors of others, and a Right Worshipful shall never want Hands when his
Occasions shall call for them. As for a Gentleman of the Fourth or Fifth Rate,
or those of about a Hundred per Annum, they are, probably, in the worst Post of
any to reap Advantage from such Instruments: So that I dare be bold to say,
that a Yeoman-like Man, of about Forty or Fifty Pounds per Annum, shall keep a
better House, and lie warmer than the former: For a Yeoman goes himself and
works with his Servants; so that there is not only the Labor of one Hireling
saved, but the Good Man being always in Company with his Workmen, he is sure to
have a Pennyworth, and to see his Business go forward; and it is very well known
too, that Servants will of themselves work much more heartily when the Master
partakes with them in the Labor, than when they are left to themselves.
Moreover, such a good Husbandman buying or selling all things himself, and
looking to all his Cattle and Tack of Husbandry with his own Eyes, or being
constantly employed in his own Affairs, can never receive Prejudice from the
Ignorance, Negligence, and Falsehood of Servants, which I am confident amounts
to one Third of the Income; so that he must needs suffer, and that very
considerably, in his Interest, were he to trust all his Concerns with others.
Whereas a Gentleman, unless he be such a one as has been bred up to the Plow,
cannot labor with his own Hands, nor may he go to Market to sell his own Corn,
forsooth; and if he ventures to buy or sell Cattle himself, it is five to one
but he is over-reached; and if he lies within Doors, or follows his Recreations
without, it is the same Odds, that his Servants neglect his Business, or attend
their own, viz. to filtch and cheat him.

Servants or Laborers are of two sorts, Domestic, and such as live by the
Year, or such as we commonly call Day-Labourers, whether Carpenters, Masons,
etc. or other poor Men which we employ about our Husbandry. I begin with
Domestics, who certainly are as much debased in their Duty, as they are
advanced in themselves beyond what they were at in former Times. Forty Years
ago, Three Pounds Ten Shillings was the Wages of a good Bailiff, or Capital
Hind; as likewise Forty or Fifty Shillings of a young Fellow: But now their
Wages is risen One third, at least. The Reason hereof can be no other than the
wastful manner of Living amongst many of our Gentry, who abandoning themselves
to Drinking, Feasting, fine Apparel, Furniture, and superfluous Retinue; as
likewise to the Vanity of excessive giving to Servants at one another Houses,
there is such an Emulation amongst them, who shall spend his Estate most nobly,
as they call it, that even the very Servants themselves will ape their Masters
in riotous Living and Excess, and are as modish in their Habits; so that in
former Ages they would have been mistaken (God bless 'em!) for Gentlemen of the
First Order. To maintain which Vanity, they must advance their Wages, which,
instead of making them more Thankful and Diligent, does but render them
commonly more Disobedient and Proud. To remedy which Disorders, nothing can be
more helpful than good Sumptuary Laws, confining every Man to live in a modest
Decorum, according to his Condition and Quality, and, above all, reducing
Servants to their primitive Frugal Habit: For a Clown, certainly, and a
draggle-tail'd Kitchen-Wench, when tricked up like my Master and Lady, cannot
choose but have a mighty Opinion of their own Merit and Improvements. The Cat,
when she was dressed out of the Wardrobe of Venus, sat at Table with the State
and Demureness of a Virgin-Bride; but as soon as a Mouse crossed the Room, Puss
forgets her Majesty, and running eagerly upon the Prey, showed her self to be a
pure ravenous Animal, and fit only to live on Vermin. A paltry Chambermaid,
which came but just now all perfumed from emptying and cleansing the Vessels of
the Chamber, shall appear at Table in her Flowered Manteau, and her tottering
Commode, forsooth; but notwithstanding all, upon every trivial Accident and
Turn, will not fail to show her self to be a mere errant Cat, destined by
Nature to feed on meaner Fare.

Amongst the many Knaveries of Servants there is one trickish piece which they
usually put in practice, viz. When a Servant's Year draws toward an end,
without giving Notice of his Intentions to his Master, he hunts about for a
fresh Service, and when he had found a Place where he can advance his Wages, he
hires himself by taking Earnest; and t^en dis^oursing with his Old Master, if
he cannot make be^ter Terms with him than those with his new one, he quits him,
and serves the new one; but in case he can get more from the old one, he leaves
the latter in the lurch, sending him only his Earnest again, and continues with
his former Master: So that whosoever hires such a Rogue, may be in danger of
being deceived, and may be put to his shifts, whilst my juggling Merchant lies
at his Liberty of choosing which he will of the two, and consequently of
leaving one of them unprovided. I know not whether the second Master may bring
his Action against the first, for retaining him whom he had hired: But
certainly there is all the Reason in the World, that such a false Rascal should
be preferred to serve a third Master, I mean him of Bridewel, there to labor
and earn his Bread amongst other Statutable Rogues.

It Is very true, the Laws of our Kingdom have made a good Provision against
such Cheats, forbidding all Persons to hire any Servant without a Discharge
from his former Master, or at least a Certificate from the Parish he has lived
in, of his Honesty and good Behavior; so that he who hires a Person without
such a Cer^ificate, is obnoxious to an Action. But so it is, that this good
Statute seems to be antiquated by non-usage, and the contrary Course seems to
have gained the Force of a Law by a continual and uninter^upted Practice, since
we rarely meet with any who insist upon these an^ient Forms. Hence it is that
Men are much in the dark as to the Qualification of the^r Servants, taking them
upon trust, o^ perh^ps like Vagabonds at the Doors: For should a Man stand upon
the Niceties of the Statute, he might sooner starve than be furnished with a
Servant. It highly concerns therefore the Gentlemen of a County, to whom these
Matters are referred as Judges, to see this good Law executed; which, if duly
observed, would quickly bring Servants to that Sense of Duty as would make all
Affairs of a Country Life both profitable and pleasant.

To this End and Purpose it would be expedient, that no Servant, I mean such as
are to be employed in Husbandry, should be suffered to hire himself in any
other County than that he was born in: For by this means the Actions of his
Life would easily be inspected, and the Servant himself be prevented from
wandering like a Vagabond, escaping the Punishment due to the Rogueries he might
commit in one County, by shifting into another.

Secondly, It would be very expedient likewise, that of Servants, against whom
there is sufficient Proof made of their ill Behavior, there should be a Record
or Memorandum of such Offenses entered into a Register, and to be kept by the
Churchwardens of every Parish: For by this means they would be still bridled
from playing the Rogue. And, in the last place, 'twould be expedient that it
might have the Power of the Bench at their Sessions, or rather of the Judges in
their respective Circuits, to limit and determine the Wages of Hinds for the
Purposes, not to exceed Four Pounds per Annum, and of others proportionably,
making all Transgressions of such an Order, whether Masters or Servants, to be
obnoxious to a Penalty. These Three Points duly executed, would quickly make
the Servants honest and industrious, and fit consequently to be trusted: By
these means likewise the Masters would become wealthy, and able to provide for
their Families, and supply the Public Exigence upon occasion; and in like
manner the Servants themselves, when married, would betake themselves to their
honest Labor, and thereby provide for their Wives and Children, and for
themselves too in Time of Sickness and Old Age, and not leave themselves a
Burden upon the Parish, nor liable to be prosecuted for ill Courses, as being
bred up Strangers to them in their youthful Days: For he who has been a
wastful, pilfering, or idle Servant, will never make an honest Labourer in his
declining Years, but go on from Roguery to Roguery; as on the other hand, one
who has been acquainted with Frugality, and has been found true when a Servant,
will have something to help them forwards in the World, by taking of a Farm,
and by his former Actions gain Trust with his Landlord, and Credit in his
Dealings.

And because Rewards sometimes are found to have as great, or a greater Force
upon some Natures than Punishments, it might not be improper if some Privileges
or honorary Marks were conferred upon such Servants as should continue Seven
Years in a Service, the same being to be entered into the Parish-Register, for
the Reputation and future Advantage of such Servants; such Memorandums,
Gratuities, and Privileges, being a good Fund of Credit upon which Servants
might begin the World; it being no way to be doubted, but that one who has
lived some Years in a Service, will use his utmost Endeavors, by a faithful
and diligent Behavior, to preserve to the End of such a Term of Years as would
be so advantageous to him.

Laborers, whether Artfiicers, or such as drudge in Husbandry at Day-wages,
are another sort of Servants, as being hired at a certain Price to labor for
us. The Tricks and Shifts of Workmen are too many to be particularly spoken to:
Therefore they who deal with such, ought to be cautious and prudent. It Is the
common Use of Workmen to undertake more than they ever intend or are able to
perform; and this they do that they may have many Strings to their Bow, to
serve them upon all Occasions, which infallibly puts them upon a Necessity of
breaking their Words for several times, perhaps, one after another, and of
leaving what they undertake unfinished, frequently to the great Damage of those
who are concerned with them. In which case a Man must hold his Tongue within
his Teeth; for to prosecute their Neglect, would be such an Alarm to others of
the same Profession, that a Man might very well rest assured with himself,
never to get any of this kind to come hear him; for usually they all combine
and hang together.

There is one Notorious and Common Cheat practiced by all Laborers, or
Workmen, such as Carpenters or Masons, I mean in the Countries, who usually
hire some vagabond or indigent Boys or Fellows, which they call Journeymen or
Laborers: These, the most ignorant of their Trade must have Wages, as tho they
had served an Apprenticeship; so that it is common, and I have found, and do
daily find by Experience, That a Mason shall take up half a Starved Rogues and
Boys to serve them, subducting clandestinely Two Pence a day out of their Wages
pretending for the purpose, that they pay a Boy Six Pence per diem, and receive
the same of their Masters, when by underhand Contract they pay such Boys but a
Groat, and so of Men-Labourers: So that a Mason or Carpenter shall by this way
of Cheating, get his Half Crown a Day, if he has many Underlings: And when such
Boys or Laborers are tired with their Slavery, they pick up other lazy and
Indigent Vagabonds, who being shortened in their Maintenance, pilfer and watch
all opportunities of stealing wherever they are entertained. 'Twould be very
prudently done therefore, if the Gentlemen of the Bench would have a more
especial Eye to this Abuse, and 'twere to be wished that they were empowered to
settle Apprentices upon such Artifices as are most necessary for the Country, a
Plowrights, Carpenters, Masons, etc. that so there might be some trained up
still to serve the Country in these necessary Occasions, whereas Masons,
Plowrights, and the like, rarely take Apprentices, that so they may keep the
Husbandman in continual dependence on them, and engross all to themselves, so
that a Man may hunt some Miles many times, and wait many Weeks for such sort of
Engineers, and Court and Sneek, for fear of displeasing them: And when any such
knavish Workman chance to die, there is a mortal Breach or Gap made in all
Country Business; so that a Man's Husbandry may cool upon his hands before he
shall have the good Fortune to be relieved.

There are four sorts of Laborers, who when hired by the Day-labour for 12 or
14 d. per diem, as the Work is, or as the Rates run commonly in the Country in
which they live; and yet the same men when they undertake Work by Task, shall
gain twice as much in a day; which shows plainly, that when they wrought by the
day, they did not exert half their Strength and Labor; a notorious piece of
knavery and deceit. I do not much approve therefore of hiring Men by Task,
unless the Work be such as depends upon many subordinate and inferior Workmen
of diverse. kinds; as in Building, Projecting and the like, where the
Head-Undertaker must be supposed to have a greater Insight into all things
thereon depending than an ordinary private Person can pretend to, and therefore
if a Man be diligent in computing his Charge, and wary in making his Bargain,
he may ease himself probably of a great Trouble and Expense, which he will not
fail to meet with in chaffering every day at the Workmen of several
Occupations; which must needs be a Business of Hazard and Vexation.

But my Business at present concerns such rather as we commonly call
Day-Labourers; as Hedgers, Ditchers, Thrashers, Wood-cutters, with suchlike
servile Laborers as are more nearly concerned with the honest Farmer or
Husbandman. And here I think my Observation does not fail me, viz. that in
times of greatest Plenty, Laborers are in greatest scarcity; for so it is,
that lazy Fellows (and such common Laborers are for the most part, they
especially of the baser sort) can in times of Plenty maintain themselves for a
Week, perhaps, with Three Days Labor: For generally such sort of Cattle will
work only from Hand to Mouth, knowing, that in case of Old Age, Sickness, or
Increase of Children, the Parish must maintain them; and if they have at any
time Six Pence in Bank, the next Alehouse lays an Embargo on it; or if we be
in an absolute necessity of their Labor, we must purchase it at extraordinary
Rates. Now this is evidently the Ruin of the Husbandman, viz. To give most to
hire Laborers, when the Productions of the Earth yield him the least Profit;
and what is yet worse, the Number of Poor increases. For few will labor when
the Earth yields them Food for nothing, which Observation may be yet farther
improved from hence; that the most fertile and plentiful Countries are ever
stocked with Vagabonds and Beggars, whilst the hungry and barren parts have no
Entertainment for such unprofitable Vermin, and con^equently the Inhabitants
grow rich (or at least are not poor.)

To remedy which Evil there can be no better way than for the Justices of the
Peace, once every Year, to regulate the Rates and Wages of such Laborers,
according as the Profits and Productions of the Earth shall ebb or flow, as
also severely to punish such nuissant Fellows as shall neglect their daily
labor: For the Rule of the Civil Law is most certainly true, That it is for
the Welfare and Interest of the Commonwealth, that every man should make a good
use of his time, and of his own propriety.

There are another sort of wandering Laborers, or Merchants-Errant, as
Journey-men Tailors, Journey-men Shoemakers, and the like, which wandering from
Country to Country, are entertained in Towns and Country-Villages, where these
Gentlemen stay usually no longer than till they can make an acquaintance with
the Neighboring Grounds, Shops or Stables, and then away march these
Professors of the Gentle-Craft, and renew their Trade in some other Country,
and so on to the end of their Lives, unless they fall peradventure, into the
hands of the Press-Master, or of the Hangman.

There is yet a further sort of Mungrel-Labourers, or Merchants-Errant, as
Common Pedlars, Fiddlers, Cobblers, Juglers, Fruit-Carriers, Tinkers, Rag-men,
Rat-catchers, Rope-Dancers, and the like, which wandering up and down the World,
pretend to live by their Labor and their Wits, being a sort of Pilfring
Rogues, fit only to receive their Wages at the Stocks or Whipping-Post. As for
our Scotch Merchants, or Traveling Pedlars, they are not unwelcome to the
Places they frequent: for tho they be Scots, that is, such as will never loose
any thing which may be got; yet to such who know how to deal with them, they
afford good Penny-worths enough, and are inoffensive in their way of Living; so
that they are rather to be countenanced than discouraged; and if they
under-sell the Shops, it is the Drapers fault: For certainly, Men will rather
buy what they want when brought home to their Doors, than go abroad to purchase
the same at a dearer rate: Perhaps the Shops cannot afford it so cheap, being
obliged to maintain a Family, and to pay Rent, with other Duties: But this is
nothing to the Buyer, who will still lay out his Money where he meets with best
Cheap; which is no other than what the Shopkeepers themselves do daily
practice.

Whether it be better for a Housekeeper to have his Work managed by
Day-Labourers, or by Domestics, is a Point likewise of some Consideration in
the Economy of a Family. Domestics probably may be a greater Charge, because
we are obliged to pay and provide for them, even then when they do us no
Service, as in case of Sickness, or of unseasonable Weather, or of wanting a
full Employment: In all which cases, Day-Labourers ly more easy upon us, as
being paid no longer than they work; but for all this, it is better to have Work
wanting for our Servants, than Servants for our Work; and besides, as
Day-Labourers are ever and anon failing us in times of greatest Occasion, so
have they greater opportunities of cheating their Masters, by having Houses of
their own where to bestow whatsoever they can cleverly make away with, and it is
with such Retainers to Houses, likewise, whether Day-Labourers, Chair-Women,
Nurses and the like, that the Domestic Servants themselves ever hold a more
than ordinary Correspondence in the Art and Methods of Filtching.

CHAP. XIV. Of the POOR.
THE Poor, if they be not a considerable, yet are they a Numerous Party in a
Commonwealth, and in this sense therefore, worthy of our consideration. But
before I treat of them with regard to our English Meridian, I shall take a
little larger Compass, and make some Remarks upon them as they stood at the
beginning, or in the First Ages of the World.

In the First Ages then, as I have hinted in the precedent Chapter, it was a
usual thing for the poorer sort of People (who abounded with Children, as
living generally a temperate and frugal life) to pawn themselves and Children
to Usurers upon the Loan of Money, or other Necessaries for their Support and
Livelihood. The Oppressions of these Usurers many times drew such poor People
to commit Disorders, which made Plato of old to observe, That there were Two
Extremes equally destructive to a Commonwealth, viz. Riches and Poverty: For
where Men are very Rich and Great, especially under a Commonwealth, they are
apt to fall presently into Factions: This was the Case of Rome under the
Triumvirates of Caesar, Pompey and Crastus; and soon after, of Augustus, M.
Antonius, and Lepidus: And of later times we find the like in Florence, when it
was a Commonwealth, till at length all submitted to the Power of the Medici,
who by the help of Leo the 10th, who was of that Family, got the Sovereignty
over all the rest. And on the other hand, where a Republic is over-stockt with
Poor, such Poor being numerous are always ready to be seditious, and have
sometimes made the Government to shake, when they have reflected a while upon
the unequal Distributions of Fortune, and upon the wretched Estate they live
in, compared with that of other Men.

Upon this Consideration 'twas, that the most celebrated Lawgivers of Greece
asserted an equal Distribution of Goods, or at least of Lands, to be the best
Expedient for the Conservation of a Commonwealth in Peace and Tranquillity, and
amongst the Modern, Sir Thomas More likewise was of this Opinion in his Vtopia,
being the Model he formed of a Commonwealth. And yet notwithstanding such
Projects of Wise Men, we do not find that they ever brought them to any great
Maturity: For when the Thebans and Phocians planted a Colony, and sent their
Ambassadors to Plato, entreating him to prescribe them some good Laws for the
Establishment of their New Commonwealth, he miscarried in his Design: For they
of the Colony, refused to submit to such a levelling or equal Partition of
Goods as was contrived by his direction. Lycurgus is said to have effected this
in the alotment he made of Lands, tho with some peril of his Life. Solon
likewise was of the same Judgment, but could never bring his Project about: For
when Agis King of the Lacedaemonians was attempting to make an equal
Distribution of Lands, he was seized by the Ephori, and put to Death in Prison.

And here I cannot but admire a little at the Mistakes of so many wise Men: For
upon such a levelling of Possessions these fatal inconveniences must of
necessity follow, as 1st, That no man will think of being industrious, when the
fruits of his Labor must go to maintain the idle and profuse; nor can a
Commonwealth subsist without Justice; nor is there any place for Justice, where
all Bargains are disannulled and banished; nor any Faith and Credit to be given
to the most solemn Obligations, whether of Promises or Contracts. 2dly, such a
levelling of Lands will make a horrid confusion and distraction in matters of
Inheritance: For it is reported of Lycurgus, the great Oracle of his Age, and
Patron of levelling, that in his own lifetime he saw above Twenty Heirs to one
Estate, and likewise as many Estates or Inheritances to fall to one from the
want of Heirs in the other Branches of the Family: So that do whatever he
could, an inequality of Fortune was the unavoidable consequence of a Civil
Constitution.

However, it must be granted too, that in the first Planting of a Colony, such
Agrarian Laws may be allowed of, by which all Men may have an equal share in
the Dividend; yet so as still to allow a Prerogative to Primogeniture, and the
liberty of after-Contracts, without which a City or Commonwealth cannot
subsist, and which will inevitably reduce Men under an equality of Fortune: Tho
'twould be still much better, and more just, upon the settling of a Colony, to
proceed not by an Arithmetical Proportion, that is, by an equal division of
Lands amongst the Coloni; but by a Geometrical Proportion, which with regard to
Persons Merits and Circumstances, allows some to have a greater share than
others, and this is called Distributive Justice: For to deprive the poorer sort
from having a share in the Dividend, is the way to throw down a New-form'd
Government before it is upon the Hinges; as it happened anciently at Thurium,
where when the Great Ones had monopoliz'd to themselves all the Lands belonging
to that Territory, leaving the poor Debtors under the Burden and Exaction of
their Creditors; such oppressed Debtors conspired and expelled their Lordships
from their Lands and City: Whereas the prudent Romans having such Tumultuous
Innovations always before their Eyes, were forced oftentimes to show great
Indulgence toward the Common People, easing the Debtors from the Rigor and
Exaction of their Creditors, by a defalcation sometimes of a fourth, and
sometimes of a Third Part of their Original or Principal Debts.

In the Reign of Trajan, (at which time the Roman Empire was at its fullest
Growth) a poor Man was defined by the Laws, to be such an one whose Total
Substance was under the value of Fifty Aurei, or Nobles: From whence we gather,
that there was a kind of distinction with them betwixt Pauperes and Mendecos:
Those of the former Denomination, or the Poor, were of a large Comprehension,
as containing within their number, such as were low and decayed in Fortune, as
well as those who sought their Livelihood by begging in the Highways, and
creeping from Door to Door: The latter sort were purely Beggars, and were to be
looked upon therefore as in the lowest Rank of Humane Fortune: With Analogy to
this it is, that the state of a Freeman with us is accounted to be one whose
Patrimony amounts to Forty Shillings of yearly Rent, and for those who have
less, they are to be registered amongst the Poor, and to be exempted from
Tribute and Duty, as being in reality Poor, tho not all alike.

Another Question likewise there is, which I shall briefly touch upon, as
having some affinity with the Subject upon which I am now discoursing, and it
is this, viz. Whether one who is born nobly (or in the Ancient Style, of an
ingenious and Genteel Family) does forfeit the Privileges of his Birth and
Ancestors, and become ignoble by being poor? They who hold the Affirmative,
build upon this Foundation, to wit, That in Ancient Times the Emperors and (in
imitation of them) other Princes were wont to reward the Services of their
Vassals or Subjects, by bestowing Lands upon them, and upon their Heirs and
Successors for ever, as a peculiar Mark of their good Esteem and Grace. These
Lands so distributed were called Feuda, or Fee-Farms, as being under some small
Obligation of Chief-Rent or Duty to the Prince of whose Bounty they were held,
and who in all Ages and Countries was ever esteemed to be the Fountain of
Honor: Now if such Privileges of Blood be annexed to the Feudal Possession, as
Testimonials of the Princes Favor, the Fee once lost or sold, the Vassal has
nothing to show in evidence for his Honor which he derived by his Ancestors
from the Bounty of the Prince or Emperor. And upon this account it is, that
the Titles of Counts and Barons are annexed so frequently in Germany and
elsewhere, to certain Castles and Manors: So that whosoever does purchase such
a Castle, does ipso facto become a Count or Baron. Something like to those
Feudal Rewards we read amongst the Turks, who farm out or let to their
Officers and Soldiers of Horse the Lands of Countries conquered, distributing
such Lands into Portions, much resembling our Farms, all which are held of the
Grand Seignior at Pleasure, or for Life; which Timariots are obliged hereby to
attend upon that Emperor in his Wars.

Notwithstanding this, It Is much more evident, That the Feudal Possessions or
Lands heretofore bestowed by the Christian Emperors upon their Soldiers and
Attendants, were not conferred upon them as Marks of Dignity and Honor, but by
way of Stipend, thereby binding them to follow such Princes in their
Expeditions, as it is at this day practiced by the Turks, I say, in reference
to their Timariot Horse: From whence it follows, That as Men were not enobled
by such Fee-Farms, so neither were they degraded from the Range in which they
were born by the want of them: It being utterly repugnant to Reason, and
contrary to the Opinion of all wise and learned Men, That a Person should be
more or less honorable and praiseworthy, from the number of his Acres or
Baggs, which are the scatterings of blind and un-discerning Fortune, and which
fall indifferently upon the Good and Bad, and many times are not in the power
of the best Men to acquire or preserve; Nay rather, such Blessings are
frequently contemned by them: But in case a Gentleman be reduced to Poverty by
his own Prodigal Courses, or by his infamous and idle life, there is no reason
he should have a place amongst those of his own Birth and Quality; since hereby
his Blood and Honor may as well be stained, as by his making profession of any
servile Handicraft: For all Mechanic Arts have been ever accounted to be
servile and base, forasmuch as the Professors of them, like Horses and Beasts
of Drudgery, acquire their Livelihood by the Sweat and Labor of their Bodies.

No less base or ignoble are they accounted in the Civil Law, who follow any
nasty or sordid Trade, as Butchers, Tanners, Chandlers, Hatters, Curriers,
Cordwainers, Cobblers, etc. And above all, They have been ever looked upon as
vile to the utmost degree, who gain their Livelihood by irreputable and
scandalous Professions; such as Hangmen, Pimps, Travelers with Raree-Shews,
Tumblers, Players, Rope-Dancers, Common Fiddlers, Vintners, Alehouse-keepers,
and the like; so that if a Gentleman once makes a practice of these Arts, tho
he acquire never so great Riches by them, he is utterly degraded from his Post
of Honor.

And yet in this degenerate Age, if a Man can but get Wealth, tho in never so
vile a way, he is without more ado, esteemed a Gentleman, especially amongst
the poorer sort. A petty Shopkeeper, or Retailer shall cringe, sneak, flatter
humbly, protest, swear and forswear, perhaps, to get a halfpenny, and when by
the studied and repeated Methods of a vile Condescension, with other Shifts and
Artifices peculiar to Tradesmen, he shall get an Estate, he is reckoned amongst
the Topping-Men, and may arrive possibly to the Dignity of Knighthood. So
likewise may we observe every where a great number of those whom they call
shrewd or Notable Men, that is, such as have a good long Reach in bargaining,
trucking, and in managing other Men's Estates and Business, who at length come
to be celebrated Usurers and Purchasers of Fair Estates themselves: These, I
say, are accounted Capital Gentlemen, and ought doubtless, to be advanced to
Civil Offices: So that if a Man can by a Trick of Legerdemain, Juggle an Estate
out of the hands of an easy Gentleman, he deserves to be taken notice of under
Characters of great Respect, it being usual with the Fox (as it is reported) by
his stinking Tricks to poison out the Badger from his Hold, which with much
labor he had made, and then Earth himself in the others Habitation. I have
heard of a Practitioner in the Law, who tho he were not very eminent in the
knowledge of it, became exceeding rich by puzzling and entangling the Titles of
his Clients, and then buying their Estates: And such truly is the Method of
subtle, Time-serving Knaves; whilst many an honest, poor Gentleman lies under
fatal Necessities, either from the Extravagances, Number and Education of, or
Provisions for his Children, or by the Encumbrances upon his Estate, or by the
heavy expense of a tedious, vexatious and disastrous Suit at Law, or perhaps he
suffers purely for a good Conscience in his constant adherence to the Rights of
his lawful but unfortunate Prince, as we have seen too many Examples of this
Nature within our own Memory.

Let us come now to the Poor, who by the Laws of our Land are declared Poor,
and for whom they have made so good Provision, especially in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and particularly that Act for the Relief of the Poor by a Parish
Rate or Assessment, was a very charitable Design, preventing the indigent and
needy from wandering about the World, exposed to Misery and Famine; the many
other provisionary Acts likewise, as of binding poor Children Apprentices, of
setting up Workhouses, or Houses of Correction, of punishing Vagabonds, and
the like, were supplementally made to promote the General Design of relieving
the Necessities of Human Nature: But so it is, that notwithstanding all these
provisions, the Necessities of the Poor are as great as ever, and the Parishes
themselves, to which such Poor belong, are at a more than ordinary Charge for
want of a true Care and prudent Management of a Work of this Importance. When
any poor Persons, or pretending to be Poor, shall think of seeking Relief from
a Parish, away they Post him to the next Justice of the Peace, who easily moved
with their Importunities and Complaints, or the intercession possibly of
Friends, too easily and frequently grants his Order to the Overseers of the
Parish, for the Relief of such a pretended poor Person, without enquiring into
Circumstances. 'Twere much more equitable, if the Justice, at such time as the
Overseers bring their Books to them to be Signed, would take their measures
from the Parishioners or Officers themselves, who certainly must be best
acquainted with the Necessities and Course of Life of such as pretend to be in
Want, and by this Means, many idle Bodies who have wasted their Fortunes, and
are still fit for labor, would be made to work, toward the support of
themselves and Families.

I hold it likewise very expedient, that in Corporations and Market Towns, No
Mercers, Victualers, Bakers, cum aliis ejusdem furfuris, be suffered to execute
this Charge: It being too well known, that such Chapmen make their own Markets
and Advantage thereby, in obliging the Poor to take their Dues for the purpose
in Bread or Ale, at their pinching Measures; whereas, did they distribute their
Alms in Money, such poor Men or Women could manage, and lay it out with more
Frugality and Profit for such things as they should most stand in need of; so
that 6 d. or 8 d. will procure a Peck of Malt sometimes, and be a Provision
many days, which when taken out in Ale will be consumed easily at a sitting. So
likewise may we observe of Mercers and such petty Merchants, that they will put
of their worst Commodities, whether Linen, Woollen, or other little
Necessaries, and herewith furnish the Poor out of the Parish Stock, and at such
Rates as they think fit: In which case the Poor People receive double Damage,
not only in being forced many times to be sur-charg'd with that, which perhaps
they have no great need of; but being ignorant likewise of the Quality and
Value of such stale, half-rotten Ware, they dare not make their Terms with Men
who have the Power of their Purse, but must submit themselves to the Conscience
and Honesty of a Shop-keeper's Word, which, upon my word too, will many times
ply and enlarge it self, not to the Necessity of the Buyer, but to the Interest
of the Seller. The Persons who are the greatest Objects of Charity, are young
Orphans, or the super-numerary Children of Poor People or Laborers as likewise
exposed Children, sick and maimd People, and such as are broken with Age, or
such as are reduced to Want by the Accidents of Fortune, and perhaps, are
ashamed to expose their Misery, as having lived sometimes possibly, in some
Credit and Fashion.

There are another sort of Poor likewise, which ought truly to be provided for:
I mean our lusty, sturdy, vagrant Beggars of both Sexes: These rambling from
House to House are constant Retainers to all lousie Inns and Alehouses, and
are the best Informers that Highway-men and Burglares can rely upon, and many
times pick a Pocket, break a House, steal a Horse, and cut a Throat with as
much dexterity as the best Professors of these Arts. They color their
Rogueries under the Disguise of Tinkers, Crale-Carriers, Ragmen, Inkle or
Starch-Sellers, Net-weavers, Travelers, etc. For whom our Laws, it is true,
have made some small Provision, but for want of a just distribution, such
pilfring Vagabonds are found to swarm every where. It would be much better, if
an old Law of Valentinian the Emperor were revived; by which, Every such
Vagabond as was able to work, became Prize to the next Freeman which met him,
and was enrolled amongst his Servants or Slaves to Till his Ground during life,
to the end he might not cheat others by his Impostures and pretended Beggary.
Such a Law as this would be of more advantage to this Nation than any possibly
now extant, there being no place left for Remisness, Affection or Partiality;
for if one should suffer such an Errant-Merchant to go free, another would not
fail to apprehend him, and where a Man's own Private Interest is a Law, it can
never happen that such a Law should want its due Execution.

Under this Head likewise we may reduce those whom we commonly call Egyptians,
or Fortune Tellers. They are called Egyptians, I suppose from their dark, tawny
Complexion, or from their pretended knowledge of the Heavens, and their
Destinies. In Foreign Parts they are called Zingars, which Name sounds as tho
it were of a Tartar Extraction. These People, like the Tartars, always
professing a wandering Life: Tho by the Vulgar they are called Gypsies, a Gypso,
from that sooty Wash or Paint with which they stain their Hands and Faces.
These impudent Vagabonds have for a long time rambled over all parts of
Christendom, and as for those of this Tribe in England, they are generally
Broom-makers, Sweep-Chimneys and the like, and chiefly such as inhabit the
Borough of Southwark, who in the Summertime, for want of Employment, wander
about the Country, having their King over them, who commonly is some
Broken-Merchant, or well-experienced Pick-Pocket: But this kind of Vermin or
Insects does not swarm so much now-a-dahs, as in former Ages.

To return therefore to such as are truly Poor, It Is certainly a very good
work, and very acceptable to Almighty God, to relieve their Necessities; but
it is without Dispute, a better Work to prevent Men from falling into Poverty;
For Poverty in it self is a kind of Curse, and is attended with Misery: He who
repairs a broken House deserves doubtless a good Reward, but he deserves better
from the hands of the Lord thereof, who frames such a Building as shall never
fall into decay. The Dutch in this particular are well worthy our Imitation,
for by building Public Workhouses, whether of Correction, or for the
Education and Employment of Children, they make the corrupt and excrementitious
parts of the Body Politic, as I may call them, to contribute to their own
support, as well as to that of the Government. Little Children which are either
poor or exposed are committed to Public Workhouses, as to Cloisters or
Colleges, and their tender Fingers are taught to work before they can well use
their Tongues, and being thus inured from their Infancy their Hands are much
more ready and nimble, whilst Labor and Industry grows up and augments with
their Nature: Even the Blind, the Lame, and the like, have Works to be employed
about: For a blind Man may use his Arms in turning of Wheels or Grinding; and
he that is lame in h^s Legs may follow such Work as consists with si^ting, as
sewing, knitting, weaving, and the like; as he likewise who is maimed in his
Arms may be able to get his Living by the use of his Feet: And let not such
impotent People lie bawling in the Open Streets, as they do continually in the
Capital City of this Kingdom; many of which Beggars get more Money, and fare
better than others by their honest Labor and Industry.

As for lesser Criminals, as Pick-Pockets, Petty-Larceny, Pimps, Common-Whores,
Sheep-Stealers, Coney-Catchers, Hedge-breakers, and other the like Offenders,
whose Crimes deserve not Death, 'twere very good they were condemned to
Bridewel for a Year or two, or more, as the Nature and Circumstances of their
Crimes do require: For by this means they would be made profitable to the
Commonwealth, whereas Whipping or Frizzing them a little in the Fist, is a
Punishment of no great Pain, and of a short continuance; and such cauteriz'd or
Case-hardned Rogues as soon as out of Jayl are but the more confirmed in their
former Practices. Some few indeed are secured to Transportation: It Is pity but
there were more of them made to travel the same Road; tho the best wa^, I say,
would be to keep them to work in Houses of Correction, since we have not
Galleys, as in other Countries, wherein to bestow such useless Lumber.

And here I cannot but think our Laws a little too merciful likewise, in
punishing Robbers on the Highway and Murderers: For what by the Intercession
which is made commonly for the pardoning such Offenders, (which indeed is no
defect of the Law) and what by the Contempt which a more obdurate Felon has of
hanging, so it is; that such kind of Villains are always numerous. Breaking
upon the Wheel has been found in other Countries to be the best Expedient to
diminish the number of Malefactors. It Is true, this sort of Punishment carries
the face of Cruelty in respect of him who suffers, where a Man's Bones are
broken to pieces, and his Nerves and Sinews beaten to a Pulp, which must needs
be very dolorous; and to continue so for twenty four hours or more perhaps,
must needs be very grievous to him who suffers, and fearful to the Spectators.
But after all, it must be granted too, that this sort of Punishment is a kind
of Mercy to others of Mankind, when by seeing such tortured Wretches they are
reclaimed from their wicked Courses by these Examples of Horror; whereas
otherwise they would be in the like danger of coming to a Fatal ^^nd. Hence it
is, that since Breaking on the Wheel has been practiced in France, there has
not been the Tenth Part of the Robberies committed, as before; whereas under
the gentler Dispensation of Hanging, few are moved by the Complaints of the
Malefactor, who ends his life in a compendious way, and probably in less pain
than many who die a Natural Death. The End of Punishment is not Expiation; it
may be satisfactory to the Law, there may be Confession likewise, and possibly
Restitution; but it is the Mercy only of God through the Merits of Christ Jesus,
which must assist the Guilty: The end therefore of Punishment is for prevention
of the like Offenses and Amendment, which in Capital Cases can never have place
in the Offender; it must be therefore in terrorem, in regard of others, ne and
ipsi veniant in eundem locum tormentorum; that by their wicked actions they may
not come into the same place of Torment; which End, if it cannot be obtained by
one Method of Punishment, Religion and Justice do advise the Magistrate (who is
to have regard to the generality of Men) to have recourse to one which is more
severe, that others may be brought off from the like Precipice and Destruction,
as we see they are most effectually by such rigorous Examples of Justice, or
(to speak more truly) rather of Mercy.

The Charities of Rome make a Noise in the World, and if they be not performed
with sound of Trumpet, certain it is, that they are Pompous and full of
Ostentation. Many of their Methods are most worthy our Imitation, tho in
general it must be said too, that at first sight nothing less appears than
Charity; such is the number of Nasty Beggars, of maimed and sick People, and of
Idle Vagabonds. Where they lodge a Nights God only knows, and perhaps the Pope,
but certain it is, that the Streets and Piazza's are full of them all the day;
whether it be that the Report of the Roman Charities does draw Beggars from
every Quarter, or that men trusting to such Relief do neglect an honest and
laborious course of Life; or that the Genius of the Italians inclining them to
Laziness, whilst the Gabels and Taxes they live under do reduce them to an
humble State of Life; or that the Charities themselves be distributed in such a
frugal and stinted manner, as shall only serve to keep Men Needy, and in a
condition of craving Alms; whether, I say, upon any, or perhaps upon all these
Considerations, it so happens, this is certain, that there are vast numbers of
such half-starv'd Wretches ready every where to perish. The like also may be
observed all along the Country betwixt Rome and Naples, which naturally is one
of the most fertile Spots in the whole World, and yet the poorest and most
beggarly in its Inhabitants. And as for Rome, I believe his Holiness would be
Author of as great a Charity as any that City can pretend to, if he would
convert some Religious Houses into Houses of Correction, and there employ some
of the many idle Merchants that place is infested with, in making some
profitable Manufacture, which, as 'twould be of great advantage to the
Apostolic Comera, or Treasury, and bring that City into some form of Trade, so
would it be found most acceptable to God, to whom nothing is more odious than
Idleness, the Nurse of all Vices, and nothing can be more acceptable to him,
than to see men taught to live in an honest, laborious course of life, and so
to be delivered from that Train of Vices and Calamities of Poverty which attend
always Men of base Condition and Fortune, once abandoned to Ease; and
consequently nothing could be more beneficial to Men than to be translated from
such Miseries into a State of Credit and Plenty.

But leaving these Foreign Objects, and to come to the Poor of our Country
Parishes, upon whose Account I now write, 'twere best worthy the Consideration
of the Justices and Parish-Officers, to ease the Husbandman in Years of great
Plenty; for then it is that half the Money will buy the Poor as much Bread as
they spent in other Years; and then likewise it is that the Husbandman, perhaps,
cannot make half so much of his Grain as in Years of greater Scarcity, being
forced to give greatest Wages in Times of greatest Plenty, as has been
observed before. Hence likewise it is, that as in Years of Plenty, so in
Countries also of Plenty, there are most Beggars; for few will trouble
themselves to eat their Bread in the Sweat of their Brows, which they may feed
on with Ease and for Nothing. In these Years and Places therefore of Plenty
it is that more than ordinary Care should be taken to set the Wanderer to work,
and to lay up in store for the Impotent and Needy, and to restrain and punish
all Merchants-errant, who under show of carrying Crales or Packs at their Backs
lie pilfering and sharking every where, to the great Annoyance of all honest
Housekeepers.

Let this Point then be the Center of all that can be said of the Poor, or of
Works of Charity, viz. Public Colleges or Workhouses; and here let the
scattered Currents of Charities meet, were there but Public Spirits either to
contribute to, or with a little Pains and Honesty to oversee such a Pious
Design, Villainy would soon be impracticable, the Number of the Poor diminished,
and such as remain would be well provided for. The Parish Taxations likewise
would be eased, the Manufactures of the Nation would be advanced, and Foreign
Importations would be lessened. The Profits arising from the Labor of sturdy
Vagabonds, of lazy, faithless Servants, and of lesser Criminals, would maintain
the Orphans, and educate them in Methods of Industry; and if the Felons and
other Rogues, with which the Goals are replenished, were obliged to Labor,
during their Confinement, it would be a great Ease to the County, and to such
Felons themselves too, by preserving them from being instructed in farther
Rogueries, and from being idle, and talking only with their Fellow Prisoners of
former Pranks: So that once in a Goal, and a Rogue ever after.

Out of this Bank or Stock of the Workhouse might Money be lent gratis, or
without Usury, to poor Tradesmen or Husbandmen, to set them up with, or to
relieve the Losses and Misfortuens of others, provided they should give good
Security for the Capital; or if detained longer than half a Year, to pay
Interest for the same. Out of this Fund likewise might some Provisions be made
for binding of Apprentices, for marrying poor Girls, and for the Repair of
Hedges, Highways; and the like. If there were Colleges and Hospitals likewise
for the Reception and Breeding up of exposed Infants, as is practiced in Rome
and elsewhere, there to be trained up to Labor and to Virtue, it would prevent
many a Murder of such shiftless Innocents; nor should we see such a Number of
little Brats carried at the Backs of Beggar-Women from Door to Door, which,
when a little grown up, run begging about the World, till coming to Years of
Ripeness, or rather of Rottenness, they engender the like beggarly Spawn or
Fry, and so on to the end of the World. Such a Provision for Bastards, as I am
now speaking of, would not be an Encouragement for People to increase their
Number, since their Parents should be obliged to labor in such Public Houses
till the Children were able to get their own Livings. This would be a greater
Punishment than that of binding one Parent only in a Pecuniary Caution to
Indemnifie the Parish, which thing as yet is rarely executed; whereas Four or
Five Years Labor in Public Houses would be a great Ease and Security to the
Parish; and the Disgrace, and Laborious Employments of such Places would deter
Men and Women more from their wicked Courses than any Amercement whatsoever.
And as for our Parish-Children, as we call them, such as Orphans, Bastards, and
the like, they are commonly entrusted by the Overseers of the Poor to some idle
Housewife, who does just keep them alive, and teach them perhaps a little to
read, and to run a leasing and loitering in the Streets, and there learn
Roguery, till the Eigth or Ninth Year of their Age; whereas, were they
committed to such Public Colleges or Houses, before spoken of, and being under
the Care of honest, experienced, and industrious Overseers, they would soon be
taught to earn their Bread, and be out of all Danger of being corrupted by
Idleness and Ill Example.

I know a Gentleman who once designed to bequeath his Estate to a Corporation
in trust, and to be employed for the Erection of a Public Workhouse, and
afterward for laying in a Fund or Stock for employing Whores and Rogues, the
Profits whereof (some Consideration being had to the Governors and Overseers
of such a Work) to be employed for the Uses abovementioned, the Scheme whereof
I shall not trouble my Reader. But so it was, that he was soon after inclined
to revoke his Charitable Design, when he considered the Business, or rather the
sacrilegious Disposition of some Bodies or Societies: There being too many
deplorable Examples before our Eyes of those who within their own Doors are
most sordid and Niggard-like, but do not scruple to spend such Charitable
Stocks, or the Bread of poor Orphans, I may say truly the Blood of Jesus
Christ, in making riotous Feasts and Entertainments, and in impertinent and
scandalous drinking of Healths, or perhaps in private Purloinings. And that
this is not a passionate Invective, but a serious, though deplolorable Truth,
would be but too legible, were there an impartial Inspection made into some
Chamber-Accounts: For the Redress whereof we do not find any due Care taken.
Charities therefore of this kind, ought, upon mature Consideration, to be
entrusted with such; for though there be some honest Men to Day who rule the
Roast, to Morrow there may be those of another Kidney: So that upon all Public
Occasions and Expense, Charitable Uses generally must bear the Burden.

The Mounts or Banks of Piety, such as they have in Rome, and elsewhere, are
excellent Provisions: For out of these and suchlike Funds, young exposed
Children are bred up and provided for; Fortunes are given to dispose of them in
the World, Moneys lent without Interest, and many other Public Works carried
on: But, as I said before, a competent Number of Bridewells, or Working-houses,
would be of as great or greater Use, which yet they want. They send them indeed
to the Galleys, but that is not a Method so advantageous.

And as for our selves here in England, the best Trustees for such Public and
Charitable Designs would be the Justices of Peace in a County, provided there
were Choice of such as are of Integrity and of a Public Spirit: For these
generally being Gentlemen of some Fortune, would not so easily be tempted by
sordid Ends; nor could they conveniently do it were they so disposed, their
Concerns being independent on one another, and all things being exposed to the
View of the World in an Open Court: Were they therefore enabled by Act of
Parliament to purchase Ground and build Workhouses in Corporations and
Market Towns, a Reservation being made in City-Charters for such a Liberty; and
if there were Visitors or Judges appointed by the Government, every Three
Years, to inspect the Miscarriages of such Justices, and to strengthen such
Pious Designs with all due Provisions, as from time to time should become
expedient, I doubt not but it would be the best Work that ever was undertaken,
whether we consider the Glory of God, the Good and Wealth of the Nation in
general, the Prevention of infinite Disorders, and the Relief of Thousands, who
otherwise would perish, Soul and Body. And that upon a due Execution of such
wholesome Provisions, it is no way to be doubted but such vast Numbers of
well-inclin'd Persons would daily be invited to bestow bountifully in their
Lifetime, and at their Deaths bequeath ample Legacies, to promote Works of so
great Benefit and Piety.

But before I shall proceed farther in this Argument, I shall, with my Reader's
Leave, make some Remarks which I have ever looked upon to have a considerable
Influence in Increasing the Number of our Poor, which, if not prudently
remedied, will make way for farther Distempers, and the Danger still is
greater; forasmuch as the Things I am now to speak of are not really Vices in
themselves, but on the contrary are esteemed generally as very considerable,
and such by which Men seem to purchase a kind of Esteem and Honor amongst the
Generality of Men: Of which

The First is our Extravagance and Luxury in Apparel. All Ages and Nations of
the World have ever had Regard to this Particular, esteeming a fantastic and
variable Dress to be the greatest Index of Levity in the Mind, and a very
superfluous Expense. The Jews of old constantly kept to one kind of Habit, as
did also the Greeks and Romans. The like also we may observe at this Day, and
from Time Immemorial amongst all the vast Empires of the East, the Turkish
Dominions, as also throughout all Africa, and the greatest Kingdoms of the
North; in all which Places every Nation has kept constantly to its own Habit,
being such as was most convenient for their Bodies, and most suitable to the
Air and Climate in which they lived: And even in Europe, besides the Polanders
and Muscovites who stick fast to their Ancient Fashions, the Spaniards, who are
a very great People, are very regular in this Particular; so that their
Sobriety herein must be looked upon as a great Help to keep up the Gravity and
Grandeur of a Nation which otherwise would fall into a lower degree of Poverty
than that under which they now lie, should they indulge themselves in the
Vanity of new Modes; such Expenses being utterly inconsistent with Men
abandoned generally to Ease and Wantonness.

Nay, that Nation from whom we borrow all our foppish and fantastic Garbs,
observe some sort of a Decorum in this Matter: For all their Students in the
Law, their Advocates and Notaries, wear short Cloaks, with wide Breeches, and
short-skirted Doublets, of black Cloth, with little Bands. Their Physicians
likewise, and generally the Burghesses of better note, wear the like modest
Habit. But with us in England, all from Prince Prettyman to Tom Thimble are
Messires Alamode: So that in this Sense we may be truly said to overcome the
French. It is a common Saying amongst our Fopling Gallants, That it is very
ridiculous for a Man or Woman to be known by their Clothes; and so say I too,
being of the Opinion, That a Person is better known by Changeable and
Party-colored Clothes than by a plain, modest Dress; this being the Habit of
sober Persons, which few are capable to understand, but the other is that which
all gaze at, being the Livery of Changelings and Fools. The various Fancies and
Fashions which Men and Women so highly value, is a thing certainly most vain
and ridiculous; so that were a Nobleman to furnish his Gallery with Pictures, I
think he could not hit upon a Fancy more to his Diversion than to have some
quarter of it furnished with Paintings representing all the Fashions of both
Sexes which have been worn by us within these Forty Years, that is to say; from
the Downfall of Ruffs to the Up-rising of Commodes; all which are so various and
unlike, that were a grave, sober Turk to view them, he would conclude that they
were the Modes of all Nations of the Earth, both past and present; and so great
a Value as we our selves had once for them, we must now laugh at them as very
Antic, and more Comical than all the Scarmouchio's and Harlequi's in the
World, and by consequence we must condemn our selves as guilty of extreme
Levity and Folly.

The true Use of Raiment is to cover our Nakedness, and to defend our Bodies
from the Injuries of the Season: Now certain it is, that he who has but one or
two Suits of Apparel, whole and clean, well fitted to his Body, is as well or
better provided than he who has six or seven in his Wardrobe, where the
frequent Change many times proves injurious to Health, and before he has half
worn out one Suit, the rest must be laid aside and given to a Train of lubbarly
Waiting-Men, upon the Assurance Mr. Tailor gives us, upon his honest Word, that
it is out of Fashion; and then my Gallant must flutter abroad again,
Top-and-top-Gallant, in his new Mode, with a dainty hard Name: By which means
many Gentlemen, especially the younger Sons, or those of smaller Fortunes, who
still are ambitious to appear abroad equipped like Gentlemen, forsooth, are
reduced to the utmost Extremity; till, in sine, Master-Taylor, from taking
Measure of my Spark's Body, comes at last perhaps to take the Measure of his
Estate, or it may be provides him with a Tenement for Term of Life, which he
cannot easily run out of.

Then for the Richness or Gaudery of Apparel, this ought to be taken notice of
as much as the Vanity of supernumerous Habits. It Is pleasant to observe what
Difference there is many times in the Air and Deportment of the same Person
dressed in common Apparel, and at other Times when new-rigg'd out. The Peacock,
when he has his Train about him, how proudly do^s he strut, and display his
Glories in the Sun! but when he is stripped of his glittering Plumes, how
meanly does he run, like a common Fowl, and seek to hide himself in the Hedges!
It Is no new thing for People to pay Respect to the Man who wears the Gold Ring
and Rich Apparel; and t^uly if they do it not, the Man will put them in mind of
it himself: For he who Yesterday went trudging along the Streets like a
Corn-cutter, to Day holds his Crest on high, and walks slow and slately, and
with the Magistri^l Mien of a Spaniard. He scarce vouchsafes a Look toward an
humble Inferior, as he thinks, and if saluted, he returns the Civility by an
Offer only to touch the Brim of his shining Castor, or perhaps with a Nod. Now,
if we consider the Matter rightly, the true Ground upon which such a Grandee
expects more Regards than formerly, is not from any selfconsciousness of his
own Merit, but purely upon the score of his Apparel; so that the honor (if
any) is really due to the Sheep which bore the finest Wool out of which his
Cloth was made, or to the Insect or Worm which gave the Silk to make his glossy
Ribbons; so that it is not the Man, but the Beast, all the while, which is the
Object of our Admiration.

The greatest and wisest Princes of the Earth, how vain and pompous soever they
have been in setting out their Grandeur, ever affected a Modesty in Apparel,
especially in their usual and ordinary Entertainments, leaving their Gold
Laces, and glittering Colors to their Pages and Footmen.

In fine, The words of the Son of Sirach are most worthy our Remembrance, when
he tells us (cap. 19. Eccles.) A man's Attire, excessive Laughter and Gate show
what he is.

Another thing which I shall take notice of as very destructive to our English
Gentry, reducing many of them to Beggary and Misery, is their ill Education,
which in truth, reflects more upon the Parents than upon the Children: For
whilst the Heir sweeps away the Estate, the younger Brothers (upon the death of
their Parents) being never settled in a Calling, nor inured to Labor, become
wretchedly shiftless. It Is true, some there are who are apprentic'd out, and
some few others there are who follow Divinity, or rather the Preferments of the
Church, especially since the Tubpreachers have been removed: But still there
remains a vast Number of them who have no other Calling but that of haunting
Taverns, Play Houses, Gaming-houses, etc. or of following and bawling after a
Pack of Dogs, or of sharking from House to House, which, after the modish Word,
they call visiting of Friends.

The French Gentry, it is true, do not much affect to place their Children to
Trades, or to make any Alliance with the Shop; but then they have other ways to
dispose of their superfluous Suckers: For besides their Preferments of the
Clergy, which far surpasses ours, and which are in a manner engrossed by the
Nobility or Gentry, they have an infinite number of Monasteries likewise,
wherein they bestow or barrel up the Overplus of their Families; which
Monasteries are safe and reputable Places also for their less useful Members to
retreat in, having been disgraced by Fortune, or such as otherways are
burdensome, and disposed to live a contemplative and retired Life. But besides
these they have other Places too wherein to bestow their Members, I mean their
Garrisons and Armies; and truly, were it not for such Issues of War, a Country
so luxuriant as France is, would soon fall into fatal Distempers by the
Redundency of its own peccant Humor: So that the present Greatness of that
Kingdom is not to be ascribed to the Temper and Dispositions of the People,
(who generally are as light, extravagant, and unconstant as any Nation
whatsoever,) but to the Maxims of their two great Cardinal Ministers, and above
all to the vast Prospect and Genius of the present Monarch. And yet after all
their Politic Methods of bestowing their Leisure-Gentlemen, there are vast
Numbers of them swarming in all Towns; some of which live an easy, supine
Life; others by Tennis, Gaming, Rooking, and Cullying, which some call living
by their Wits; and twere very well if they were made also to live by their
Hands, by serving an Apprenticeship in the Galleys, as many of them do
effectually. However, I do not take the great Appearance these Men make in
their Towns and Cities to be an Argument of their more exceeding Number: For
should our English Gentry, like the French, quit the Country for the softer
Life of the Town, I doubt not but that they would make as great a Show to the
full.

It Is true, we of this Nation are at present falling into the like Methods with
France: For as long as the War lasts, we are not likely to want Utterance for
our Dreggs, nor truly of running into our former Excesses by our wastful
Profusion of Money; so that we are or may be out of all danger of dying by a
Plethory. And yet let the Sword take off as many as it pleases, there are a
great many more who go the back way off the Stage by the Goal, the Pox, and the
Gallows. The pilfering, stinging Wasps, the buzzing Flies, and the gaudy
Butterflies, are all of them a dronish and lazy kind of Insects which are
ingender'd of Corruption, by the Warmth of the Sun, and fly from Place to
Place, corrupting and tainting all they feed upon, but withal they are but
short-lived; and if there are any of the Brood I am now speaking of, who
survive or escape a more compendious Destiny, they live but a preminary kind of
Life amongst their Friends and Acquaintance, and at the best end their Days in
an Hospital.

The Dutch (following the Biass of all Commonwealths) have little Esteem of
Nobility. In this however they are most worthy our Imitation, in that they make
little difference betwixt Noble and Ignoble, as to their Course of Life,
thinking all obliged to make Profession of some Calling, by which they may be
serviceable to the Public and to themselves too. For some Members to lie
always idle, whilst others labor p^rpetually for the Preservation of them and
of the Body too, is a thing very monstrous in Nature, and will soon fill the
Parts which want Motion with Indispositions and Tumors, and draw on a
Dissolution of the Whole: Whereas the Industrious Man, by augmenting his
private Patrimony in some by sort or other of a Calling, has the means of
Living in his own Hands, and knows how to begin a new in the World when Fortune
shall reduce him to any Extremity.

And although a Gentleman does not make some Mechanic Art to be his Profession,
there is no Absurdity for him to make it his Recreation, as well to divert his
Spirits sometimes, and keep him out of Idleness, as also to get his Livelihood
by it in case he fall into Misfortune and Poverty: A thing generally practiced
by the Ottoman Princes, upon Pretense that they ought to live upon their own
Bread which they get by such means. Nor is it one of the least Policies of the
Jesuits to encourage their Missionaries hereunto, or at least to initiate such
amongst them who are of a working Genius, making them to understand and
practice some Handicrafts, the better possibly to disguise their Negotiations
or Missions in Places where they are not allowed of; as also to insinuate the
better into all sorts of Company, and to be able to live of themselves
whenever they are put to their shifts: And by such means chiefly it is that
such Missionaries have made so great a Progress in the Eastern Parts of the
World, and elsewhere.

As every Family consists of several Members under the Government of one Head,
as Parent or Master; so every Family, wi^h all its dependent Members, is but
one larger Member of a greater Body, the Commonwealth. When therefore a Parent
shall neglect to do his Duty in training up his Children in a regular Course of
Life and Employment, the Commonwealth, which is the grand Parent of all
Inferior and Subordinate Parents, and of all their Offspring, may and ought to
take care of such Members of Families as are in danger of ruining themselves,
and of being troublesome to he Public; and this they ought to do, by placing
them in some Calling or other, as shall seem best to the Magistrate. And it is
pity but such Laws were enacted amongst us, enabling him to execute a Charge of
such Importance, and grounded upon so much Reason. And in case Persons of loose
Lives, whether Gentle or Ungentle, should be found Refractory and Pernicious,
'twere not the worst Method to cultivate them, as we do those Trees which are
Canker-eaten, from too much luxuriancy of the Soil, by pruning and lopping of
their Superfluities, and then transplant them into a leaner Earth, and so make
them capable of bearing Fruit. And truly our Western Plantations would very
well agree with many unfruitful Plants, with which this Kingdom is
over-stock'd, we having but too many of both Sexes, who by too much fatness of
the Ground are overrun with the Canker, but being removed into another Climate
would increase and fructify.

The Countries which are poor, but not the Poor of a Country, produce the best
Soldiers, as appears by the Switz, and Highlanders of Scotland, and generally
in all the Northern People: For Poor, Vagabond Rogues are lazy, dull of
Apprehension, Intractable, and incapable of Discipline, and withal, destitute
of Courage and Spirit, which is the Life and Soul of a Soldier; when, on the
other hand, such as are born under a hungry Climate, in a sharp and cold Air,
like our Breed of Horses, are best for Service: They have sufficient to keep
them from Want, and therefore are not broken in their Strength; and yet are not
weakened by Surfeit, and therefore fit for Labor, and in a Capacity of
bettering their Condition by the Fortune of Arms: So that in an Invasive War
this sort of Men are very useful; for there it is the Prey only which draws them
to Action, whilst they that be Rich are not only debauched with Ease, but care
not much to hazard what they have upon uncertain Events. And yet in a Defensive
War the Rich are best: For those of scanty Fortunes have nothing to lose, and
therefore they will not much concern themselves which way Matters go; whereas
the Rich, having all at Stake, will push hard to defend their Interest, which
if they cannot do by their own Persons, they are capable nevertheless of
procuring others to fight for them, by means of their Money, as is at this Day
evident in the Dutch, who are not very good at Conquest, or the Enlargement of
their Boundaries, but are very resolute and obstinate in Defense of their own;
so that in the Main or Sum of the Matter, Commonwealths are better at keeping,
and Monarchies at enlarging their Territories; and certainly that Prince or
Commonwealth is in the best Post and Circumstance for War which has Subjects of
both these Capacities; I mean some which are inured to Hardship, and others
which are Wealthy; and by this means a Prince has Money wherewith to furnish
himself with Arms and Military Provisions, and Men to manage them upon all
Emergencies.

And it is as certain too, that that People or Nation is in the best Condition
of any which live under such a Prince or Government, as does not thirst after
Conquest and widening of Empire, but contrives rather to preserve Subjects in
Peace and Plenty: For it is the Peoples Purse which must bleed to carry on the
Designs of an Ambitious Prince, in which if he miscarry, they who did
contribute to the War, are utterly undone; and if he be successful, the People
are never reimburs'd their Money, but are still miserable, by falling under one
whose Appetite of Dominion is enlarged by Conquest, and by this means also has
greater Strength to wrest future Supplies to carry on his windy Pretenses,
having a drawn Sword in his Hand, and being surrounded with Armies inured to
Blood; so that they who first supported him in his popular Quarrels, and hugged
themselves by claiming a Share in the good Fortunes which their own Money
procured, will be found in the end to be in a vanquished and very miserable
Condition, when they thought most of being happy. Whether the Bird be killed by
a sudden and unavoidable Shot, or fall leisurely and smoothly into the Snares
or Net of the Fowler, by listening to the sweet Modulation of his soft and
fallacious Prize, is much the same to the poor Creature which becomes a Prey.
Nay, rather of the two, it is better for Men to fall under the Hands of a
Conqueror, who may challenge a just Title to their Service, than to step
insensibly into Slavery by their own Sloth and Over-Credulity.

When the Inhabitants of Himera, a City of Sicily, consulted the Poet
Stesichorus about choosing Phalaris for their General, he tells them this
Fable: The Horse and the Stag feeding in a Meadow, they could not well agree
together; whereupon the former, being distrustful of his own Strength, to wage
War with a Creature of so much Activity and Majesty, flies to the Husbandman
for succor, who told him he would undertake to deliver him from his Fears were
he but armed and mounted. The Horse, overjoyed at the Undertaking, suffers the
armed Man to bridle and saddle him, and to get upon him; insomuch that by the
help of the Man upon his Back, he made the Stag quit the Coast, and began to
triumph as Victor. But, on the other hand, the Husbandman finding the Horse he
had mounted to be a serviceable Beast, would not suffer him to return and
wanton again in the rich Meadows; but inuring him to the Bridle and Saddle,
continually rid him as often as he pleased, laying also heavy Burdens upon the
Back of the poor Creature, from time to time, and at all times; insomuch that
the Carrion, now spurred and galled, and almost jaded to Death by his
Deliverer, wished a thousand times he had lived Neighbour-like with the Stag of
which formerly he was so fondly fearful. This Story of Stesichorus made the
Citizens reject the Help which the Tyrant Phalaris offered.

Men being uneasy under the present Government, and of seeking Relief by
changing Masters, has caused great Revolutions in Kingdoms, and involved
Subjects in perpetual Wars and Miseries, as is obvious from infinite Examples.
I shall for the present content my self with one, and a very Remarkable one, in
this our Kingdom. Richard II. was a Prince who suffered himself to be too much
biassed by evil Councils, and thereby gave great Distaste to most of his
Subjects; amongst whom Henry of Bullingbrook, a subtle Prince, and near Allied
to the Crown, was more eminently offended; insomuch that crossing the Seas with
a small Force, being beforehand assured of the Affection and Assistance of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Common People, who all flocked to him upon his Landing,
as did also the Army which was levied to oppose him, he easily surpised the
abandoned King, pretending at first, and swearing solemnly upon the Sacrament,
that he came not over to seek the Crown, but to set the King and his People to
rights, and to preserve his Own. The poor, easy, or rather uneasy King,
finding himself forsaken by all, was forced to credit his Cousin's
Protestations, till resigning up himself into his Hands he became his Prisoner,
and to lengthen out his unfortunate Life a little, was contented to call a
Parliament, and there resigning the Crown, was afterward murdered. No sooner
was Henry IV. saluted King, but the People began to repent of what they had
done, finding all Henry's Pretenses of Reforming Abuses and Redressing of
Grievances to be mere Sham: So that great Plots and Conspiracies were laid to
dismount their Rider; after which ensued a most Bloody and Lasting Civil War,
which never ended till the House of York, to whom the Crown of Right belonged,
was seated in the Throne. The Calamities ensuing upon Richard's being deposed,
are elegantly expressed by Mr. Daniel (who was a Poet of more than ordinary
Depth of Thought) when he brings in that unfortunate King by a Prosopopoeia,
upbraiding England in this manner.

(1.)
Then shall thou find the Name of Liberty
The Watchword of Rebellion ever used,
The idle Echo of Uncertainty,
Which evermore the Simple has abused,
But new-turn'd Servitude or Misery,
The same, or rather worse, before refused:
The Asper, having once clim'd to the Top,
Cuts off the Means by which himself got up;
(2.)
And with a harder Hand, and streighter Rein,
Does curb that Looseness he did find before;
Doubting the Occasion like might seem again,
His own Example makes him fear the more.
Then, O Injurious Land! what have thou gained
To aggravate thine own Afflictions Store,
Since thou must needs obey Kings Government,
And no Rule ever yet could all content.
The Sum of the whole Matter then is this, That it is much safer for a Nation
to bear some Burdens under the present Powers than out of Hopes of greater
Liberty, or of bettering their Fortunes, to fall a Prey to new Masters, who,
like fresh Leeches, will be sure to draw hard, and suck out the remaining Blood
and Wealth of those they fasten on; which in the end must leave a Kingdom in a
very poor and consumptive State, From which sort of Poverty good Lord deliver
us. And so I have done with the Poor, of what Kind and Denomination soever: Let
us now come, in the last place, to consider such Inferior Officers or
Magistrates upon whose Management the Affairs of the Country do much depend.

CHAP. XV. Of Justices of the Peace with other Inferior Officers.
THE Office of a Justice of the Peace as it is Ancient, so is it very
Reputable. They who bare this Office being appointed by the King to be Censores
Morum, in some respect, and by reason of their great Number and Quality, as
likewise of there Employments, they be allowed to have a very considerable
Influence upon the Affairs of a Kingdom. Disorders of whatsoever kind, as
Riots, Frays, Profanation of the Lord's Day, Swearing, Drunkenness, Frauds in
Dealing, Purloinings, Hedge-breakings, Destruction of Game, unlawful Meeting of
Conventicles, all unlawful Gaming, Vagabonds, Petty Factions; as also greater
Offenses against the Crown, as Treason, Murderers, Thefts, Burglaries, with
infinite other Enormities, fall under their Cognizance; but more especially are
they bound by Duty to have a strict regard to the Three foregoing Particulars,
viz. Alehouses, Masters, Servants, and the Poor: So that in matters of smaller
Moment, they have the final Decision, and of all Criminal Causes whatsoever,
which shall happen within these respective Limits, they have the first
Examination, and by them such Offenses are remitted to a further Trial.

Now Country Gentlemen are looked upon to be the fittest Instruments for
Executing this Trust, and that upon these two Accounts: First, In regard of
their Estates: For being (or at least as they ought to be) Gentlemen of
Fortune, they are not apt to be Corrupted as other Officers whose Fortunes and
Livelihood depends upon the Profit of their Office. In the next place, living
in the Neighborhood, they are more Competent Judges of Persons and Offenses,
and more easy to be Recours'd to for Remedies of all Disorders, then others
who are strangers, and at greater distance. But notwithstanding the good and
laudable Intention of the Government there are to be found daily too too many
of undue-Qualifications entrusted with the Execution of this important Charge;
some there are indeed very Beneficial to the Country, and an Ornament to their
Office, but whilst others are defective, the Reformation of Manners makes but
small advance: But however stands the Case, it is certain, that none ought to be
deputed to this Trust, but such as are duly Qualified as to these Particulars:
1st, A Competency of Knowledge; 2dly, Integrity of Life; 3dly, Courage and
Resolution, and 4thly, Prudence, or a Command over his own Passions.

The first Qualification necessary in a Magistrate, is Competency of
Understanding or Knowledge of the Laws, Statutes and Customs of the Nation in
which he lives. I do not think it Necessary he should be as Learned as
Tiberian, Cujac or Sir Edward Coke; that he should be able to penetrate all the
difficult Cases which may arise betwixt Man and Man, whether in these Public
or private Relations, with all the Niceties which a Scrupulous and subtle Brain
can start or invent; so on the other hand, it might reasonably be expected that
he should be one of something a better Culture than to be able only to Spell
his Name in a scrawling Character; long Coats may become some sorts of
Creatures well enough, but to see them in long Robes or the Habiliments of
Magistracy, though it may move the serious Spectators sometimes to merriment and
laughter, yet it cannot choose but touch him with a secret dislike.

The next Qualification requisite in a Magistate, is Integrity of Life and
Manners: And this indeed is something more Commendable than the former: For
Knaves there are, and too many of them who have a sufficient Stock of
Understanding or rather of Learning; but to be a good Man, as it clears his
Reputation from all Imputation and Craft, so it delivers him from the
opprobrious Character of a Fool. A Fool it is true, may sometimes commit an
honest Act, as a good Man may a Fault, by Inadvertancy and Mistake; but he who
is truly Honest and Conscientious proposes well in all his designs without
Hypocrisy and private reserve, and seldom trips or makes a blunder, the
Example of a Magistrate is certainly of much more force then his Orders: For by
the one he Excites and Invites, by the other he drives and Compells, which
implies something of Reluctance on his part who is Commanded: And since Men
naturally are more prone to Vice, they cannot but post onwards with a full
Career, when they are assisted with the Wings of Authority: For who can be ever
brought to have a Detestation of Drunkenness, and of mispending his Time, when
he has the Authentic Examples of Justices of the Peace before his Eyes, not
only inviting them to Drinking, and making such Excess to be very Genteel and
Orthodox, but Patronizing perhaps, the very Houses themselves, as the Soul and
Center of their Mirth and Refreshment, and the best Support, possibly, of their
Interest.

And here I cannot but make a Cursory Remark upon what occurred at the Time I
was making these Reflections in the Neighborhood where I live. It is of a
Justice of the Peace of some Figure and Popularity, whom it pleased God, in the
Time of his Sickness, to touch with a deep Sense of his former Wickedness, and
of the Mischief he had done to others by his vicious Example; insomuch that h^
sent his Circular Letters to be read publicly on Sundays in the Neighboring
Churches; in which Confessionary Letters he most Conscientiously owns his
former Riotous Course of Living, in Swearing, Drinking, Lasciviousness, etc. as
likewise the Glory he took in drawing others to Intemperance, and seeing them
wallow in their own Bestiality. All which he heartily bewails, and seriously
exhorts his Friends and Acquaintance to take Example by him, humbly craving
their Prayers to Almighty God on his behalf; desiring furthermore, that in case
it should please God to restore him to Life, and he should relapse into his
former wicked Courses, that such his Public Recantation or Consession should
be urged against him, to his perpetual Reproach and Infamy. Which Pious
Disposition of his, as it ought in Christian Charity to be looked upon as
proceeding from God's extraordinary Mercy to him, in filling him with true
Sorrow and Repentance, so there is great Hopes likewise that (notwithstanding
the horrid Corruptions of the Age) the Example of such a contrite Penitent may
have a good Influence upon many of those whom this Gentleman's former
Conversation had corrupted and poisoned. Nor should I have been so particular
in mentioning these Passages, had not the Gentleman himself desired to make his
Confession and Sorrow as Public as possible, for the Good and Benefit of
others, as well as for the Ease of his own Soul, which God ^^ may hope in
Charity had Mercy of.

There is another sort of Corruption to which Men in Office are often subject,
viz. Partiality in the Administration of Justice; which proceeds sometimes from
an irregular Affection, but more frequently from Bribery and Covetousness. This
is an Epidemical Distemper which has reigned in all Ages, Places, and Persons
almost, and will continue to the End of the World; so that a Magistrate, many
times, like the Balance, (the Symbol of his Office,) inclines to that side
where most is received: So that a small quantity of Metal, if of the heaviest
kind especially, will quickly turn the Scales. Demosthenes was a Man of great
Boldness, of excellent Parts, and for a great while an uncorrupted Patriot of
his Country's Liberties and Properties, no doubt; for by the Force purely of
his Speeches he kept the Athenian Senate steady to their Interest, against all
the Intrigues and Insinuations of a subtle and aspiring Prince, who, under
show of defending the Weaker against the Stronger, actually enslaved most of
the Grecian Republics. But no soft, cankery Speeches of Philip could move
Demosthenes; for he was as good or better at that Trade than the King. But
Alexander his Successor took another Method: For sending Harpalus his
Ambassador to Athens, with a vast Treasure, and Presents of inestimable Value,
many of the Senate were debauched by these means, the chiefest of which was
Demosthenes their Orator, upon the Wheels of whose Tongue their Government
seemed ^^ turn: For as the Ambassador was putting his Retinue and Baggage
ashore, Demosthenes cast his Eye upon a certain Vessel, curious for the
Workmanship as well as the Matter of which 'twas made; which the Orator could
not forbear to admire and commend; which Harpalus observing, and judging by his
Eye the Pulse and Bent of his Heart, sends it him secretly at Night full of
Gold, the Luster whereof could not be withstood by our Orator But his Treason
being discovered, he was brought before the Areopogites, and condemned to pay
Fifty Talents, and to be sent to Prison, from whence he escaped by Flight. The
same Orator at another time was bribed by the Meleteans, and being called upon
to harangue publicly against them, he entered the Senate with his Neck wrapped
about with a great many Cloths of Flannel, pretending that he had a Quinsie or
Soreness in his Throat; whereupon some made this S^rcasm, that it was not the
Angina, or Quinsie, but the Argentingina, (a Word ever after used for Bribery,)
which took away his Speech. From whence we may observe, that in the best of
Times and of Governments there were some, who, pretending to be the Defenders
of their Country's Liberties, turned Pensioners to those who would have
undermined them.

Amongst the Roman Worthies, whose Works or Monuments are at this Day extant,
there is none more eminent than Seneca; famous for his Excellent Books of
Morality, a Professed Stoic, or one who placed Happiness in the Exercise of
Virtue, and in the Subjection of our Passions; and famous likewise for his
Death which he received by the Command of Nero, whose Tutor sometimes he had
been: And yet we find this Man of Morals to have been accused for Bribery, or
perve^ting the Public Money, (for he was Quaestor or Treasurer,) and that he
was banished by Claudius for the same. And truly, if we consider the vast
Treasure which he scraped together, and which was seized upon and confiscated
after his Death, (which, if some Reports be true, amounted not to much less
than to a Million of our Money,) I know not how we shall preserve a due Honor
for the Memory of this Great Man, unless we say, That Seneca the Philosopher
was a very good Man, but that Seneca the Courtier was a suspected Person.

To pass by Themistocles, and others of the Ancients, who were tainted with
this Contagion; we have an Example of one in our own Kingdom, who had the
Misfortune to fall under the The Lord Chancellor Bacon.
like Suspicion; one who was great for his Place and Figure in the Government,
but much more great for his Learning, and was removed from his Employment upon
the like Charge of Corruption: So that this great Personage seems to tell us
(in an Epistle-Dedicatory to Bishop Andrews) that his Case had in some measure
a very near Resemblance to that of Seneca. But when we consider the manner of
Life in this Excellent Writer, being wholly immersed in Philosophical Studies,
and Publishing of Books, leaving the Management of Business, for the most part,
to his Underofficers and other Domestics, upon whose Informations he might
depend, it may reasonably be imagined, by any Ingenious and Impartial
Considerer, that many things might be carried on under his Authority which he
was not privy to. However, so it happens, oftentimes, that the Master suffers
in his Reputation for the Faults of his Servant; and yet the Master himself is
not without Fault, but is guilty of great Imprudence and Breach of Trust, in
leaving that to others which he ought in Duty to execute by himself; so that
Bookish Men seldom make good Men of Business; the former sitting down in their
Studies are taken up with the Pleasures of Reading and of a Contemplative Life,
whilst the latter are in a perpetual Hurry and Noise, and (if Public
Ministers) importuned with infinite Petitions, and entangled with Intrigues.
Nor can there be any thing so irksome to a Man in his Closet, and amidst the
innocent Refreshments of Meditation and Reading, as to have his Door still
thrash'd at by multitudes of Complainants; a thing which might easily tempt a
Man to remit the troublesome part of his Charge to Deputies, that he himself
might pursue the more natural and pleasing part, without Disturbance and
Distraction, and be knocked on the Head, possibly, like Archimedes, in the
midst of his Theorems and sandy Demonstrations.

And truly amongst those who are destined to the lesser Wheels of Business,
it is not rare to find one here and there of mean Fortune, but of a meaner
Spirit, who covets to be in an Office, which he manages with that Prudence, as
never to want small Timber for housekeeping; some likewise there are of this
Tribe, who if a Complaint be brought against an Inferior-Fellow by one of a
better Degree, it is five to one but he shows Indulgence toward the meaner
Person. This at first blush looks like Clemency and Moderation, when in reality
it is his sorded Interest which tempts him to this Method: For by this means he
has a Creature always at his Devotion to help him possibly in Harvest, or upon
some other Occasion: Or if an Artificer, he must be always at his Beck, and
work at lower Rates: Besides, a kindness shown to an Inferior-Fellow, makes a
great Noise, and is in all Men's Mouths, so that a firm Interest is by this
means Coveted in all others of the same level, which is a Thing very
Advantageous to make a Man Popular, especially in matters which are carried not
by Weight but by Numbers; whilst one of higher Order, when he has an award,
owes no Thanks, and Consequently no Service where he is obliged only to the
Merits of his Cause, or perhaps standing near upon the same height of Ground
with his Worship, he cares not much to Creep and sneake at his Elbow. It Is not
rare to observe likewise, how the tenderhearted Female, the good Gentlewoman
of the House, has a mighty Influence upon these Matters, inclining such a Judge
of differences to Compassionate the distressed: For what tender Bowels will not
yearn with pity at the lamentable Cries of a whole Panel of Innocent and
Complaining Children, especially when their Testimony shall be strengthened and
supported with the weighty Evidence of a very Creditable, Upright, and
Uncorrupted Sugar Loaf.

Another Qualification requisite in a Magistrate, is Courage; and this, first,
in respect of the Persons he is to judge betwixt: For as he ought not to favor
a Poor Man in his Suit, in like manner ought he not to be afraid to Censure the
Rich where there is just Cause of Complaint brought against him; so that whilst
Justice is blind, as to the Quality of the Person, it ought to be Eagle-ey'd as
to the Nature of the Cause. In the next place, Every good Magistrate ought to
show his Courage in Relation to the Times he lives in, that is, not to be
mealy-mouthed in doing what is Just and Honest, for fear of being evil looked
upon by the higher Powers. But they certainly are most inexcusable, who, out of
a timorous Nature, or out of a sordid and sneaking Compliance rather with the
Fortunes of the Times, in Hopes merely to preserve themselves in their little
Station, shall refuse to Redress the Injuries of One whom malicious Neighbors,
and a Rabble of ^^oting Ruffians, out of Hopes of Plunder, shall think fit to
dub a Disaffected Person. Should a Man, I say, come before such a one with a
Complaint against a licentious Pack of Rogues, Mr. Justice would presently
shrug up his Shoulders, cock his Eyebrows, and with a reserved, solemn, and
forlorn Countenance, becoming the Gravity of a Funeral, desire the Complainant
to forbear importuning him, till the Times were a little settled and quiet;
telling him, that then he could be his Humble Servant most effectually, but
that in the mean time he must have Patience. This is all one as if I were
overtaken on the Road with violent, tempestuous Weather, and coming to my
Friend's House to be sheltered from the Storm, he should shut his Door upon me,
saying, Sir, I am very sorry to see you in this Condition, but you must pardon
me; for should I open the Door, the foul Weather would beat into my House, and
I might take wet and be ill by such means; but if it please you to have a
little Patience till the Storm is over, I will answer your Request, and you
shall come into my House and welcome. And still would not the Case be worse,
were it a Public Inn I should fly unto for Relief, that is to say, a Place set
apart and appointed by the Government for the Succor of the wayfaring and
distressed Traveller? Indeed Officers of Justice are appointed and set apart
for the Relief of such as are distressed, and what they do by way of Relief is
not Charity, but Duty and Justice; and failing hereof, they ought to be
suppressed as well as those barbarous Innkeepers who shall refuse to
accommodate an honest Traveller because he is wounded, rifled, and perhaps
tumbled in the dirt by Rogues and Robbers, upon Pretense, forsooth, lest his
own House should be incommoded, and receive Damage by the like Insults from a
Crew of desperate Villains. The Truth of it is, the way to make the Times
peaceable and quiet, is, to punish Tumultuous and Riotous Disorders, and not to
suffer them to run on without Control, till the Authors of them shall of
themselves think good to be civil.

But what says my Trimmer? Why this: All things are brought about by the Will
and Providence of God, and therefore ought we to comply with such
Dispensations. Besides, there were very great Mismanagements under former
Governments. We ought not therefore to strive and tire our selves against the
Tide, lest we be choked or carried Head and Heels under Water; but let us do
like our Neighbors, swim with the Current, and open our Arms wide upon the
Waters, and the Flood will never hurt us, but carry us safe and smoothly to our
Journey's end. The Case is clear. Let us even turn Tenants then to our new
Landlord. Thus he cants in Public, whilst he mumbles at another rate within
himself, after this manner: I value neither this nor that Form of Government
farther than it suits with my Private Interest; I will stick fast to this
Maxim, To be True and Faithful to the present Government; so that upon another
Revolution, whatsover (and whenever) it be, when that is trump'd up, it
becomes the present Government, and I will comply with it, and cry it up; I
will not be overscrupulous to be honest, when it may endanger my Opinion with
the People, by making me suspected to disaffected; I will say as they say, and
look cold upon my former Friends and Acquaintance, who are out of doors, or ill
thought of, whether deservedly or undeservedly, matters not much, since it is
Popular Opinion which is the Measure of all things: This is the Test I will
ever adhere to, and come on it what can come, there will be a Gracious Act of
Pardon, and as soon as Success shall Canonize the Cause, I will Preachit up for
a wonderful Turn of Providence, and run in with the First, and cry, God save
the King, God save the Cummonwealth, God save what is Uppermost, and God save me
to: We read (2 Samuel 16.) of Shimei a Benjamite, or one of the same Tribe and
Family with outcast and accursed Saul, that when good King David withdrew
himself from the Plots and Sword of his Treacherous Son, this wretched
Miscreant ran along by his side, cursing this unfortunate Prince, palting him
likewise with Stones, and casting Dust or Dirt at him, the usual Artillery of
the Mob; withal insulting over his distressed and forlorn Sovereign, with some
strains of Divinity, crying as he ran along, that it was the Lord's doing to
retaliate the evil which he did to the House of Saul, and that he himself had
drawn Vengeance upon his own Head, by his own Mis-management and Tyranny: All
which he yet farther Proclaimed, or Preached up, before all the People, saying,
That the Lord has delivered the Kingdom into the hand of Absalon thy Son. But
when it seemed good to the Justice of Almighty God to baffle the Prophaners or
Buffooners of his Providence, by the Restoration of the Good King; behold!
Shimei throngs in with the first to congratulate his Happy Return; nor does he
appear like a Mean Rascal, but was attended with a brave Retinue of his own
Tribe, having no less than a Thousand Benjamites with him (cap. 19.) crowding
in the Head of the King's Friends, even the Men of Judah; for no sooner had the
King crossed the Water, but Shimei greets him at his landing: The Dog which
formerly ran barking and snapping at him on the way, now came crowding and
fawning at the Feet of injured Majesty, and licking the Sore which his own
Teeth had made; so that his Tongue was now soupled and anointed with soft
melting and flattering Speeches, which before was poisoned with virulent
Imprecations. And the better to procure and insure his Pardon, he lays fast
hold of an Act of Oblivion, saying, or whining rather, Let not my Lord impute
iniquity to me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely,
the day that my Lord the King went out of Jerusalem, etc. and the better still
to recommend his Address, he suggests to the King the early Submission,
dissembling his Relation to the House of Saul, by telling of a Lie, and saying,
Behold, I am come this first this day of all the house of Joseph, to go down,
and meet my Lord the King; claiming as we see, an Affinity with that Patriarch
who was the most innocent, and the most persecuted of all the Sons of Israel,
whereas in Truth, this impudent Rebel and Imposture was a Benjamite, a Partisan
of Readiness, and a most inveterate Enemy of the King's: Much such an one as the
Loyalists of the Cromwellian Order; and how well they played their Game, and
out-ran the King's Friends upon his Return, is sufficiently known to all; such
Sycophants, or rather Politic and Perfidious Villains there have been in all
former Ages, and such too there will be unto the end of the World.

Whether there be any Man of this Character now bearing Office I know not: But
since it is certain that there have been such, and most probable too that there
may be such in after Ages, if what is here written shall ever happen into the
hands of such an one, let him be pleased to know, that notwithstanding the
Office which he may bears, which peradventure may procure him some little
respect, like what of Old was given to the Ass which carried the Image of Isis,
he is still to be looked upon as a thing of little Value. A Farthing, we know,
whether of Brass, or of dull pliable Lead, by reason of the Royal Stamp, or
Superscription it carries, may be of some small use amongst trivial Merchants,
and may serve a little for a Change, but still it is bue a Farthing; and when
the Image and Characters are worn off (as soon they will be) or when the little
Coin is cried down (as it happens frequently) this despicable bit of base Metal
is good for nothing but to be thrown away, and trod under foot, or to be
prostituted to the Sport of Children.

The last Qualification requisite in a good Magistrate is Prudence and
Moderation of his Passions; so that if this be wanting, let a Man otherwise be
never so well qualified, he is utterly unfit to be a Moderator of Differences.
'Twas wisely therefore said by the Heathen Poet, that Prudence comprehended all
the other Deities whatsoever, notwithstanding Fortune be that Goddess which in
the Opinion of Men is most or solely adored. Certain it is, that Prudence is a
Complex of many excellent Virtues; it is circumspect and diligent, and
Janus-like, looks forwards and backwards: It examines things with great
Attention and application of Thought, and determines consequently upon mature
Consideration: It implies Patience and a subjection of Passions, and by the
steady Bent of a vigorous Mind, accompanied with the greatest sedateness of
Temper it reduces all its Decisions to the Test and Measures of Reason: Nor
does it perform its Duty with a sly Squint-eyed regard to its own private
Interest, sailing by every Point of the Compass (which in the Opinion of the
Worthies of the Age, is called mighty Prudence) but without collateral Respect
and Bias, it is guided by Truth and Honesty, as the sole Magnet which
attracts, or rather the Polar Star by which it steers its Course through the
greatest Depths in times of Darkness; all which require, I say, great Vigilance
and Activity, and yet withal, great smoothness of Temper, of which no Man
certainly can be capable who suffers himself to be hurried every way by his own
violent and distracting Passions. Whilst the Body is in agitation, it is
impossible for the Arm to hold the Balance steady; and whilst the Eyes sparkle
with Indignation and Rage, and the Man is transported with vehemence of Choler,
it is impossible to discern the difference in Weight; so that in cases like
these (which happen but too frequently) the Magistrate, whilst he pretends to
judge another, is the Executioner upon himself: The Vexation and Torment which
he suffers in his own Spirit being a far greater Punishment than what he might
inflict upon an Offender, besides the secret Contempt to which he is exposed in
the Eyes of all who see him, which with the Train of Absurdities thereon
depending, must needs be a great aggravation to his Trouble, there being
nothing so sharp and pungent to a Man in Office as Scorn, especially from those
whom we pretend to chasti^e: For what can be more Comical than to see such a
Judge of Grievances, who should be most composed in his Deportment, to beat the
Ground with his Feet, and the ^able with his Fist; to corvet, fling and wheel
l^ke a Madman; to swear and huff, to foam, snuff and snort, half choakt for
want of Breath, squeaking, and Roaring. It Is in a word, to see a Man, or Beast
rather, baited with himself, as some Bait Dogs by tying Crackers to their
Tails, which cannot but be a pleasant Divertisement to the unconcerned
Spectator.

It Is true, there are many stubborn, cross-grained Rogues which a Magistrate
oftentimes has to deal with; To reform these by soft Admonitions and persuasive
Methods is all one as to polish and civiliz^ a Wolf by reading of Moral
Lectures. No, such Brutes are to be tamed by other Methods, tho the Magistrate
ought still to keep himself within the Center circumscribed by Reason, which
should he go out of, he is in certain danger of being torn in pieces by Devils,
I mean those real Furies which are ever too near us in all our Walks. He who
shall grasp a pie^e of burning Iron, and endeavor to fashion it for Use, may
himself peradventure, suffer the Punishment due to the Malefactor, in being
burnt in his hand; if therefore he would work upon the rude Lump, and make it
fit for Service, he must hold it fast, and hammer it with Instruments of the
same Mettle, Beadles, Catchpoles, Gaolers, Hangmen, with such like Engines of
Humanity, are the fittest Tools in the World for a Magistrate to work with in
the Reformation of an obdurate Rogue; all which, I say, may be so used and
managed by him as not to endanger his own Fingers, or discompose his Thoughts.

Thus briefly have I glanced upon some of the Qualifications which are
requisite to the Constitution of a good Magistrate: To find a Man in whom all
these meet in full Perfection is a thing rare, if not impossible; however, in
some inferior degree they are indispensably requisite, and for want of these
it is, I say, that the Nation falls into so many Disorders, whereas were
Magistrates severe and conscientious in the execution of their Charge, and
Exemplary in themselves, Sobriety would be in Credit, disorderly Rogues would
be reduced; Frugality and Industry would lift Men above the Necessities of Life
into a Region of Plenty: Parishes would have their Public Charges lessened,
the Poor would be employed, and by consequence, Husbandry would be improved,
Trade advanced, and the Commonwealth grow great and flourishing; all which are
such Temporal Blessings as cannot but make a Nation happy under the Blessing of
Almighty God, which we cannot reasonably hope for, till Drunkenness and
Profaneness be severely punished, and his Worship duly celebrated and honored;
for when Men cease in the Performance of Religious Duties, they will soon
degenerate from being Men.

Thus it was of old, during the Sta^e and Economy of the Jews; and thus it was
likewise through all the Circles of the Christian Church in all its Periods and
Revolutions, as was most deplorably and eminently conspicuous in the Eastern
Churches, upon the Inundation of the Goths and Vandals, and afterward of the
Saracens, and lastly of the Turks, who finally subverted that Empire, all which
was ushered in by the corrupt Lives of the Christians, as appears by the
History of those Times. The like Calamities happened likewise in the West, so
that rarely any Kingdom has been subverted and ruined, which had not first
deserted God's Worship, and poisoned themselves by Debauchery, for they go
together; it being utterly impossible for a Man to be truly Religious and yet
debauched in his Morals as it is almost impossible for a Man to be truly Moral
and Virtuous, and yet to be Irreligious. There is no Man so fit for great
Undertakings, as he that is a good Christian. The Fears of Death cannot
disorder him so much as others, upon the Hopes and Prospect he has of Future
Rewards: Difficulties cannot dismay him who is above the Temptations of Ease
and Pleasure. His Reputation and Honor being unspotted, he is received in all
Places with respect, and wherever he goes, he carries along with him his Bills
of Credit, which must needs facilitate his Enterprises, and refresh his
Spirits: His Dealings are without Fraud, and unsuspected, and therefore he is
in a fair Post to advance his Fortunes: He has a vital Heat within himself,
which gives Nature a quick and easy Circulation, and arms him with Man-like
Resolutions in all Cases of Hazard and Distress, filling him with far more
noble Spirits than what flow from a Bottle of Wine or Ale, which end commonly
in a total Consumption of Health, Reputation, Fortune, and of all Intellectual
Guests whatsoever.

Nor are the Philters of good Company, with which Men are so willingly
intoxicated, of any greater Virtue: For there can be no solid Friendship in a
Debauch: It does not so properly cement as bedawb men's Inclinations to one
another, by a kind of Ordure or slimy Matter, which cracks or drops off upon
the least shog and puff of Wind, or upon any Change of Weather, tho it may
possibly keep them sticking together for a little time; and when this dirty
Copulative is disbanded, some Relics of it will still remain, by which they
may be known to one another, as well as to all the World besides.

What is here written may be distastful possibly to some, but that is a Scandal
taken, not given. A Horse may winch and kick a little, whilst the Hand gently
rubs his galled Back; but still the fault is not in the Hand which designs a
Cure, but in the corruption of the Beast; however it be, as some dissike,
others may approve of the Method: And the good word of one virtuous person is
of more weight and value than that of a whole Jury of par-boil'd, rattle-headed
Clod-pates (tho upon their Oaths) or of any spurious and degenerate Mercenary
whatsoever. And God be thanked, notwithstanding the corruptions of the Age,
there are many men in Office of public, generous and untainted Principles and
of laudable Lives and Customs; But whilst some are defective, their ill Conduct
proves fatal to others: For Men (who are naturally inclined to Vice) will
easily copy after such Examples as suit with their own Dispositions, whilst the
good, out of an innate Modesty, or out of fear belike, of offending their
equals, or for being censured possibly, for morose, formal and puritanically
affected, suffer the bad to run on in their full Career, without confronting
them, or showing any visible dislike of their loose behavior. Let a Salad be
compounded of never so many wholesome Herbs, one poisonous Weed, as Hemlock and
the like, tho it be hardly discernable by the Eye, from what is good and
healthful, shall embitter the whole Dish, and make it baneful. In the mean
time, it is the duty of every Man to erect a Count within his own Breast, and
there examine his Life and Actions before his own Conscience, which Almighty
God has put in Commission of the Peace over him to direct in his Actions, and
to curb his Passions and extravagant desires.

The Conclusion.
NOW to make a Summary of this Argument I shall humbly offer two
Considerations, to which, if due Regard be had, they will very much contribute
to the True Interest and Advancement of our Country-Affairs, and to the Peace
and Felicity of this Kingdom.

The First relates to that great Community or Body-Representative in the Lower
House of Parliament; the Members of which Senate are, as I may say, our
Deputies, as being elected out of the Number of Commoners, Freeholders, and
Citizens, though we find them many times to be dignified with Titles and Offices,
and to be Considerable by their Estates.

The long Continuance of the same Parliament has been by Experience found to be
of ill Consequence to the Country; for such Parliaments ripen, or rather are
corrupted into Parties and lasting Factions; and the Popular and Leading Men of
them being won over by Pensions and Offices, to slacken their Adherence to the
Country's Interest, look upon themselves as petty Lords or Princes in the
respective Places for which they pretend to serve.

Another Corruption altogether as mischievous, is the Expensive and Scandalous
Procuring of Voices by Drinking-Entertainments, and other Illegal Methods: Of
both these I had made Enlargements, when this Subject first entered into my
Thoughts. But since it has pleased the House of Commons to make some Steps
toward their own Reformation, I shall not farther touch upon it, hoping that
they will make themselves truly Honorable and Revereable, by making a further
Progress in the Reformation of some other Matters, which, in the Opinions of
honest and impartial Lovers of their Country, seem very much to obstruct its
true Interest and Tranquillity.

Prerogative and Privilege are the two Hinges upon which the Frame of
Government does turn, which when duly fixed, all things open and shut with
ease; but when one of these Hinges is placed too high, or is too strong for the
other, the Frame moves with Difficulty and is in danger of falling. Upon which
Account it is, that aspiring and busy Persons are most pernicious to the
Public Welfare. It has been heretofore, and probably may be their Method for
the future, to cry up the Liberty and Privilege of the Subject, and to declaim
against Arbitrary Power, and by Popular Insinuations to draw on the Weak and
Credulous to their Parties: But when once these Zealous Patriots can get a
Retaining Fee from the Crown, then out Nettle in Dock; none more vehement
Promoters of Prerogative (even to the utmost Stretch) than these Proselytes:
Whilst such as cannot be gratified to the Extent of their Desires (which
generally are insatiable) erect their Standards of Defiance, and become most
furious Incendiaries, and make their first Batteries upon Sovereignty, by
pretending to reform Church Government, and of adhering, forsooth, to the
Peoples Safety both as to their Religion and Property. Nor are these Disorders
incident to Popular Assemblies, but many ^im^s to the Courts of Princes; and so
far as they r^gard the Subject before us, seem capable of a Remedy, would the
Honorable the House of Commons pass a Bill, That no Person bearing Office in
the Court, or receiving Pension from it, should be capable of sitting in the
Lower House* And if any Person, after his Election, should ^ccept of any
Office, Employment, and Gratuity, in Dependence on the Crown, t^^t he should be
looked upon as Resigning his Parliamentary-Trust, and another chosen in his
place. For by this means the King's Bounty in Rewarding his Subjects would not
be restrained, nor would the King be forced to stoop to Factious Humors by
stopping their Mouths with Preferments, and by this means rende^ them more
imperious and craving, by which others might be encouraged to t^ead the a^^e
crooked Paths also, to his great Expense and V^xa^ion: Nor would the Subjects
Jealousies be kindled against the Government, to which they will be prone, when
they shall find these they did conside in to be biased by Dependence and
Interest, and to act contrary to that Freedom and Impartiality which ought to
be in every true Representative of his Country.

The like also may be said of Military-Officers, such I mean as are actually in
the Services of War; for War is their Trade by which they gain and make their
Fortunes: No doubt therefore but such Persous will be very profuse in giving
Money, of which they themselves will be sure to have so Considerable a Share.

Rara fides Pietasque viris qui Castra sequntur
Venelasque Manus, ibi fas ubi Maxima Merces,
Aeremerent paruo, etc.
The Third sort of Persons which seem less suitable to the good Constitution of
a House of Commons, are Lawyers, such I mean as make the Practice of the Law to
be their Profession: For that a Member of Parli^ment, who is to make Laws,
should be a good Lawyer himself, no Man doubts. But for those who make it their
Calling, besides that they are under the same Temptations of w^^ping, as others
who are held en Gage; so it is known too, that they are generally gifted at
making of Speeches, their coustant Practice at the Bar rendering them bold and
voluble; whilst others, perhaps of as much Judgment and Integri^y, for want of
use, are either abashed to deliver themselves in Public, or not so fluent and
copious at Expression. Besides, the tedious and perplexed Style in which Bills
are usually penned, by the many Exceptions, Proviso's, Repetitions,
Amplifications, and Compasses of Words and Sentences, after the Tenure of a
Conveyance, under show of making the Sense more full and obvious, do but make
it obscure and mystical, and liable to diverse Stretches and Interpretations;
and doubtless more Disputes and Controversies do arise, and greater picking
Work there is for Lawyers, by reason of such Perplexities, than from the
Original Consideration upon which they were framed as Remedies. The Sense and
Reason of things lies in a little compass, and, like the Rays of the Sun,
yields most Light the nearer it is drawn to a Point or Center.

It has been the Opinion of a great many judicious Men, That if one half of our
Parliamentary Acts were repealed, and if there were a Digest or an Abridgment
made of the Remainder, pruning off the Suckers, and leaving what is necessary
and substantial, and which might be so couched as might be obvious to most
Capacities, 'twould be the best Work such an Honorable and August Assembly
could ever undertake: For doubtless it is expedient for every Subject to
understand the Laws by which he is to govern his Life and Actions, and not fall
unadvisedly into a Snare, or have recourse to others who may make a Prey upon
his Ignorance; or rack himself beyond the Port of his Capacity and Private
Fortune, to purchase vast Volumes of Statutes, or Acts of Parliament, which may
be sufficient to break the Back of a Porter and the Brains of a sober Reader.

Nor should I have presumed to have said thus much, were I not warranted by the
Authority of one of the most Judicious, the most Learned, and the most
Competent Persons this Nation ever had, viz. my Lord Chancellor Bacon, in his
Offer made to King James upon this Subject, who, after he had commended our
Laws for the Mat^er, tells His Majesty, That they ask much Amendment for the
Form, which to reduce and perfect, I hold to be one of the greatest Dowries
that can be conferred upon this Kingdom. The same Author in the same Book ^ells
us also, That from the Times of Augu^tus, downwards, there was such a Race of
Wit and Authority between the Commentaries and Decisions of the Lawyers, as
both Laws and Lawyers were out of breath. Whereupon Justinian, though a Prince of
no great Capacity himself, by the Advice and Diligence of Tribonean, an
excellent Lawyer, taking in other Learned Men in that Faculty, made a Body of
Laws, such as might be weilded, being compiled out of the Ancient Ruins of
Books as Materials, making Novel Constitutions also of his own.

The first Emperor we read of, who did make an Attempt of this Nature, was
Theodosius II. who caused a Code to be compiled by many Judicious and Learned
Persons; but so it was, that his Constitutions did extend no farther than the
Times of Christianity, beginning with Constantine the Great: Whereas
Justinian's Body of Laws was of a larger Compass, being compiled more
especially out of the Collections or Codes of Gregorius, Hermogenes, and
Theodosius, and so taking in all the Ancient Roman Laws.

The first who in this Island did attempt the Reducing the Laws into a Body,
was King Edgar, by which he made himself more famous than by failing round this
Island with a Fleet, or his Quatuor Maria Vindico. Nor was there any thing for
which Alphonso, the Ninth of that Name, King of Castile, was Surnamed the Wise,
as from his compiling a Digest of the Laws of Spain.

It would be very convenient if such a Drught of a Digest to be made of our
Statute-Laws, were printed and perused by all Men; for, no doubt, there are
great Numbers of understanding and unbiased Men, who do not sit in the Lower
House; and though they cannot make a definitive, may make a discussive Judgment
as well as any Member of Parliament; and by making their Objections, the whole
Project would be winnowed and sifted thoroughly, and left to the Decree of a
Parliamentary Senate, to give it the Authentic and Indelible Stamp of a
Universal and Standing Law, purged from all Doubts which might arise from
unforeseen Errors; which would be a thing of wonderful Satisfaction to
Subjects, who ought to be governed by such Constitutions as are fully, freely,
and deliberately examined, and so Beneficial to all; which would prevent so
many Repeals of Statutes as we meet with every where, to the great lessening of
the Wisdom of those by whom they were enacted; and so diminishing of that
Veneration and Honor due to the Laws themselves, upon their being so defective
and subject to Alteration. Upon this Consideration the foresaid Verulam tells
us, from that Report of Aeschynes, That in Athens there was a Council of Six,
who, as standing Commissioners, did watch to discover what Laws waxed unproper
for the Times, and what new ones did in any Branch cross the former; and so ex
officio did propound their Repeal in order to make these Constitutions more
refined and lasting. A Work of this nature would be well worthy the Care and
Encouragement of a Prince, and would represent him to after-Ages more glorious
and radient than all the Luster of his Arms and smoaky Achievements can ever
pretend to do.

It would be likewise very Satisfactory to the Country, if the Gentry and
Citizens, before they went to an Election, would propound to the Candidates the
Grievances of the Nation, and of the Countries and Cities in which they lived;
for by this means the Electors would be better informed who they were about to
choose, as also the Elected, what was expedient and agreeable to the Kingdoms
Exigence, and for the Relief of their Neighbors.

It were to be wished also that such Members of Parliament as were appointed to
inspect and state the Public Accounts, should make what they have done this
way Public, either by printing or by causing it to be entered amongst the
Parliament-Rolls and Records; there being no hing more rational, than that
they, who freely open their Purses for the Good and Welfare of the Kingdom,
should, for their better Encouragement in future Supplies, understand a little
the Methods of Past Disbursements.

The way of Voting by Balls, (as anciently among the Romans by Stones, where
casting in of a White Stone into the Chest, imported Grace, as the Black Stones
the contrary,) I say, this way of Baloting is an Excellent Invention well
worthy the Greatness of the Venetian Republic, in which it is practiced. When
the Senators or Council meet in the Doge's Palace, there is a close, deep,
double Box of two Colors, with a common Hole or Orifice at top, into which a
Man putting his Hand may reach the Mouth of either Partition without being
discerned, into which side he puts a little Ball about the bigness of a Button.
Two of these little Balls, which are made of Cotton, and so soft that no Man
can hear into which side of the double Box they fall, are given to every
Senator when he comes up to give his Vote, (of which Balls one is White and the
other Red; the one signifying the Affirmative, the other the Negative Vote,)
and when they have thus one by one put in their Balls, the Boxes are unlocked
and opened before them all. By this means Men give their Votes secretly,
without being known which side they took, and without Danger of being called to
an Account afterward, or of being awed and drawn in by the Examples of others;
as it happens to the contrary with us, where a few leading Persons influences
the rest, and so draw all into Cabals and Parties. Were this way of Baloting
practiced in England, the Topping-Men (as they call them) would signify
little, as likewise the winding Methods of procuring Partisans; for, after all,
every Man might Vote according to his Conscience, and without ever being known
or marked for it afterward.

The other Grand Consideration which I have to offer on the Behalf of the
Country, in order to make it Happy, relates to our Inferior Tribunals or Courts
of Justice, those I mean more especially which regard the Judicature of
Counties, as the Assizes of the Circuits: And,

First, It might be wished that the Judges who preside in Cases Criminal, might
be Local, and not Itinerant; that is, such as residing constantly in the
Capital Town of a County, might have power to hear and pass Sentence upon
Offenders, holding such Sessions (as in London) once a Month at least.

The Disadvantages of Keeping Malefactors in Goal half a Year are very great.
And,

First, In Respect of the Goalor, who, having a Swarm of Rogues for so long a
time under his Custody, runs great Hazards in case of an Escape; which often
happens where so many desperate Wretches are to be provided for and guarded.

Secondly, In Respect of the Prisoners themselves, who, if Innocent, endure too
rigorous a Punishment by so lo long a Confinement and Hardship; if Guilty, they
do but encourage one another in their Rogueries; and when so many Villains of
all Sizes and Complexions hold a Convention, they contract an Intimacy; and, by
recounting the Feats of their past Lives, and by instructing one another, they
become Ten times more the Children of the Devil than before: So that once a
Goal-Bird, and ever a Rogue. And even such as have the Misfortune to be
Cloistered up with such Infernal Company, though less Guilty, or perhaps
Innocent, cannot but receive, by long Custom and Conversation, an odd Smell and
Tincture from them.

Thirdly, In respect of the Expenses the County is at for maintaining such
Felons.

Fourthly, In respect of the Opportunities such long Confinements give them,
either to corrupt Officers by the Mediation of Money or Friends, or by forging
Stories, and by suborning Witnesses, by which they may make their Escape.

And, Lastly, the Streightness of Time, by which such Itinerant Judges are
confined to a Day, makes such Causes to be cursorily run over; whereas a Thing
of that Mom^nt, as Life and Death, wherein the Safety of the Country, the
Honor of the Government, and the Fortune of the Prisoner, are so deeply
concerned, ought to be examined with Leisure and Caution: All which Mischiefs
are fully releiv'd by fixing Judges Criminal in every Capital City; and the
frequent Execution or Examples of Punishment, though single, would be a greater
Terror to the Spectators than that of an Execution once or twice in a Year.

Another thing for which the Country seems to call for Relief, is the
Miscarriages of Jurors, who being for the most part of the Yeomanry, Mercenary
and Ignorant, and having no Good-liking of the Gentry, who are their Betters,
are very Incompetent Judges of Differences wherein a Gentleman is concerned.
Such Trials therefore, if they were pen Pares, would be more consonant to the
Rules of Equity; that is to say, where the Controversy is between Gentlemen,
the Jury might be only of Gentlemen. When one of the Parties is a Gentleman,
the other of the Yeomanary, the Jury might be half of one, half of the other
Order; and where both Parties are of the Yeomanary, 'twould be congruous that
the Jury should be of the same Alloy.

In the Third place, that the Prosecutor of a Felon, in case of Conviction,
should be exempted from Charges by paying of Fees, and I know not what: For
what Encouragement is there for a Man, whose House is Broke-open and Robbed
perhaps of 30 or 40 Shillings worth of Goods, to throw 5 or 10 Pounds after it,
to have him Tried, and perhaps Acquitted? Upon which Score it is, that most
Persons choose raher to Compound in Private with such Felons, than be at
farther Costs to Prosecute such Offenders; which is but to give a farther
Encouragement for the Practice of Villainy, to the Disgrace of Justice.
Moreover, if all the Forfeitures, Penalties, Fines, and Amerciaments arising
from this Topic, and other suchlike Misdemeanors, were employed for the
benefit of the Place in which the Offense was committed, for the Maintenance of
Prisoners, and for other Public Uses, 'twould be an Excellent Provision for
the Inhabitants of such Places, and make them watchful to observe Miscarriages,
and to inform against them; which would be the surest Means to make Men study
to avoid them by their Good Behavior.

Likewise Robbing of Houses in the Daytime ought to be made Capital and
Punishable with Death; which thing is most Just and Equitable, as being many
times more heinous than Burglary: For a Man who breaks a Dwelling House in the
Nightime, and steals Provision and Goods, though of small value, is sentenced
to be hanged; when yet a Company of Ruffians, who shall rush violently into my
House, binding Me and my Servants, and breaking-open Doors and Trunks, and
carrying away a very Considerable Booty, may expect a more favorable Issue:
And yet this latter Crime is much more audacious, more unavoidable, and many
times more fatal. It is not every petty Pilfering or Filtching which ought to
come under this Denomination, but these more violent Attempts, where ^he
Persons are seized, and under Terrors; which ^ look upon to be much worse than
Robbery on the Highway: For her^ a (...) an Assault, especially if he has any
(...) about him and consequently may provide for his own Safety by Arms or
Company. But no Man breathing can keep a Guard always upon the Door of his
House, which is always open for the Occasions of the Family.

Deliberate and wilful Perjury is certainly the greatest Sin that can be
committed against God and Man.

And first against God: For if the perjured Person believes there is no God, he
is guilty of Atheism; but if he believes there is a God, and yet makes use of
the Deity to attest a Lie, and to abett a Falsehood, by which the Life and
Fortune of an Innocent Person may be destroyed, he does, as much as in him
lies, fasten the Murder or Ruin of such an Innocent Person upon God, than
which nothing can be more devilish and impious.

The Heinousness of Perjury, in respect of M^n, may be considered,

1st. In respect of the Innocent Person injured; by which he may lose his Good
Name, or his Interest and Fortune may be wounded, or perhaps he may be deprived
of Life: So that in this Respect it may be termed Robbery, or Murder, or Both.

2dly, In respect of the Perjured Person: It is for a Man formally and solemnly
to abjure God, and damn his own Soul; for he desires God so far to save him by
the Contents of his Holy Gospel, as the Thing he swears to is true; which in
his own Heart he knowing to be false, he obliges and conjures God to damn him
by the Contents of his Word.

3dly, In respect of Humane Society: For it cuts off all means to end
Controversies; for an Oath is said to be the End of Strife, and many times,
where false, it involves whole Kingdoms in Ruins, of which there are so many
Examples before our Eyes. So that if the Punishment due to an Offense ought to
be commensurated to the Damage a Man sustains by it, Temporal Death is too
little for it; and in respect of the Dishonor done to Almighty God, Eternal
Damnation is justly due unto it. Now to prove a Person perjured, where the
Substance of the Mat^er sworn is true, the Mistake of s^m^ Punctil^o's or
Circumstances of little Moment is not sufficient, nor yet the Oaths of Persons
swearing to the contrary; for they who swear Con may swear falsely as well as
those who swear Pro, as is found frequently before Courts of Judicature. But to
convict a Man of Perjury there ought be a full Evidence of the Fact from the
clearest Circumstances attested by the Oaths of Reputable Witnesses, or by the
Consession of the Person perjured, or by Proof of Subornation, with many
suchlike Irresistible Evidences: And as an Atonement for such an heinous
Crime, for an infamous Person to stand an Hour or two in the Pillory, is not so
properly to expose the Person guilty, as God and all Mankind to Public Scorn.

There is one great Miscarriage which we meet with often in Cases Capital, viz.
When Two, for Instance, are concerned in the killing of a Man, of which one is
Principal, the other Accessory; and when the Matter of Fact lies close and
heavy against the Principal, as that he gave the first Blow, to fetch this
Gentleman off it shall be ordered, that the Accessory shall be first brought to
Trial, against whom the Evidence not re^ching so fully, he shall be Acquitted
by his Jury, and, without stirring from the Bar, come in as an Evidence on the
Behalf of the Principal, in whose Company he was when the Fact was committed:
So that the Matter being referred to the Consciences of a well-concerted Jury,
the Principal shall be acquitted also, by their bringing it in Manslaughter
only; and so, by the help of a little Money, be discharged without Punishment.
In which Case, the Word barely of the Accessory and Interessed Person (for he
cannot be admitted to Swear) shall outweigh the Oath of him who swears for the
King, as they call it, though uninterested, or without any appearing Temptation
for him to swear falsely; the Justice of which Proceedings I am yet to learn,
though not the Reason or Inducement.

Many other Things there are, which, if duly ^ectified, would very much advance
the Welfare of this Nation. As there is but one Weight or Pound, so would it be
very expedient there was but one Measure all England over, whether of Liquids
or Solids, as one Bushel or Quart, which should be the Standards, to which all
greater or lesser Measures should be reduced. One Measure we have; as that of
the Foot and Yard, etc. by which all Planes or Things, consisting of length and
breadth may be exactly measured. Those of the Bushel and Quart, with all other
Measu^es of that kind, might as easily be adjusted: For by this means infinite
Numbers of Cheats from R^s^ally A^e-sellers, Vintners, and such like Re^a^ler^,
would be avoided; as ^ikewise the shuffling Tricks of petty Chapmen, or Badgers
of Corn, who Trade from Town to Town, buying in one Place where the Measure is
great, and selling the same Grain in other Places where they have less Measure
to the Bushel; which Jobbing way is a great Obstruction of the Markets, and to
the Defrauding of the Poor, such Badgers licking their Fingers well, by getting
the Grain into their Hands, and as it were monopolizing of it.

The Reformation of our Ecclesiastical Account, according to the Canon of the
New Style, would be a Thing very Expedient, not only in order to make a
Uniformity in Celebrating of Christian Feasts at the same time throughout the
World, but as squaring also more exactly with Chronology; the Old Style being
subject to many gross Absurdities, too large here to be insisted on: But a
Business of this Nature belongs to the Ecclesiastical Capacity to examine.

'Twould be very Beneficial also to the Pubick, if Justices of the Peace were
obliged to proceed ex officio against Scandalous and Idle Livers and Suspected
Persons, though no Information be brought against them; it being most obvious to
every Man's Observation, that many Notorious Crimes are hourly committed
against the Commands of the First Table, or of God, which go unpunished; whilst
those which more immediately concern Man, or the Second Table, are more
narrowly inspected: Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Atheistical Talk, Drunkenness,
Frauds, Imbezzlements of Estate, with infinite Profanations of the Divine Law,
are Things which should a Man inform of he would be hissed at.

These, and many other the like Considerations, which flow incessantly upon
Thinking Men, may, peradvanture, some time or other enter into the Thoughts of
some Public Spirits, whom Authority may influence, who, doubtless, from their
own Observations and penetrating Reason, may meet with Things of greater
Importance than what can be suggested by a Person altogether insufficient, and
living in Privacy and Obscurity, whose Endeavors, though every way
discountenanced, yet in one thing he will never be restrained, viz. In pursuing
his own Inclination and Duty, in praying to Almighty God for the Safety,
Honor, and Settlement of this Kingdom.

AN ESSAY Of a Country House.
BY a Country House I do not understand a Farm, nor the ordinary Mansion House
of a Country Gentleman; nor yet a Villa, or little House of Pleasure and
Retreat, where Gentlemen and Citizens betake themselves in the Summer for their
private Diversion, there to pass an Evening or two, or perhaps a Week, in the
Conversation of a Friend or two, in some neat little House amidst a Vineyard or
Garden, sequestered from the Noise of a City, and the Embarras and Destraction
of Business, or perhaps the anxious and servile Attendance of a Court. By a
Country House then, I understand a greater Fabric, fit to lodge a Nobleman
endu'd with ample Fortunes and a virtuous Mind, where he may sweeten the
Travels of a Vexations Life, and pass away his Days amidst the solid and serene
Enjoyments of the Country.

The Place or Seat of a House being a thing wherein Fancy must have a share,
and the Fancies of Men being very various and unconstant, 'twill be difficult
to Cast an Essay of this Nature into such a Mould as shall please the
Curiosities of all Men. Some have taken delight to raise Stately Houses or
Castles on the top of some Rock or Eminence, as it were hanging over, or at
least over-looking some noble River, as the Castles of Nottingham, Warwick,
Windsor, and the like. True it is, that such Seats have a most beautiful
Prospect, an excellent Air, and the under-running River is a thing of great
Ornament and Use; but then it is as true too, that they are too much exposed to
the Heats of Summer, and to the Blasts of Winter: they want Outlet, and rarely
enjoy such a tempered Earth, or Soil, as is requisite for a Garden; nor can
they well be beautified by Fountains, which Circumstances conduce very much,
and are in a manner essential to a Noble House.

Others again please their Fancies by building in a Valley, upon the Bank of
(or near) a River; for by this means they are sheltred from the violence of
Cold Winds and Tempestuous Storms, and enjoy the pleasant views of verdant
Meadows; so that a beautiful House seated upon the Bank of a clear-runing
River, washing the Walls of the Terras in the Gardens, and stored with Swans,
is very delightful, as it is also to be refreshed in the Summer Evenings, by
taking a Turn or two upon the Crystal Streams in some little Bark or
Pleasure-Boat. But withal, such Seats are incommoded many times by Floods, nor
is the Air so wholesome, especially in the Winter, being too much subject to
Foggs and watery Vapors; nor do they afford that pleasure to the Eye as a House
built on the side of a Hill, over-looking the neighboring Plains, and whose
Prospect is terminated by other Hills at a greater distance: For a Seat which
has nothing but the wide Plain for its object, affords but little pleasure to
the Eye (it being here as upon the Sea) where the level of the Surface
determines the sight to a small distance: Upon which account I cannot see why
Versailles should be looked upon to be so fine a Seat, there lying nothing but
dead Plains beyond it, in which the sight, I say, is soon lost, receiving in
but little Variety, in the same manner as it happens to those, who being on
Shipboard, cannot see a League about them, unless some Ship or Landmark
standing above the level of the Eye, lengthen out the Prospect.

The Old Romans generally took much delight to build their Pleasure-Houses near
the Sea, as appears by the Ruins at this day seen near Baiae and Gaeta. This
probably they did for the benefit of the Breezes, which at some certain times
of the day, blow always from the Seas with universal Refreshment; tho it is
probable too, that the great Road for all their Military Expeditions, as well
as to their Naval Magazines, lying toward Naples and Sicily, which was the
Granary also of Rome, the Nobility and Gentry were more inclined to choose such
Places for their Retirement and Recreation, as lay nearest to the Road of
Business; so that they were always in a readiness to change from one line to
another, upon any sudden occasion, and with little trouble. The great Cascades
or Falls of Water from a Precipice, which we observe frequently in Italy,
occasioned principally by the dissolution of the Snow on the high Mountains in
the Summer Seasons, afforded noble advantages for Summer-Seats. Hence it was
that Tusculum and Tyber were then esteemed as places of great Delight, as they
are also at this very day under the Names of Friscati and Tinoli.

But since we have not these natural Advantages, we must be contented with such
as our Climate and Country do afford. First then, we must have regard to the
Air, that it be open, not Perd nor subject to Fogs and Mists. In the next
place, let the Soil be dry, sandy or Gravelly, and sur le Parchant, on the side
of a Ground gently rising, not amongst Enclosures, but in a champaign, open
Country; and if a Navigable River ran within Two or Three Miles of the place,
'twould be very commodious in many respects, and if nearer at hand, it would
much contribute to the Beauty and Prospect of the Seat; but above all, I hold
it absolutely necessary, that it should be served with some little Rivolet, or
copious source of clear and wholesome Water, descending from the higher Grounds,
behind the place on which the House is designed to be erected; the uses whereof
I shall speak to hereafter. As for good Neighbors, (a Circumstance much
conducing to sweeten the Tediousness of too much Solitude) I suppose my
Nobleman to be in such a Range of Fortune, as either by his Power, or by his
generous Deportment rather, to be able to draw them to his Seat, or if these be
wanting, yet to be Master of so much Fortune, as to be able to compass within
his own Family and Teritory, whatsoever a Mind endued with Moderation, can
reasonably desire. And as for the Site and Circumstances of such a Seat as I am
going now to describe, there are many Noblemen and Gentlemen in this Kingdom,
who have all the Natural Advantages imaginable for a Prince-like Habitation.

In pursuance therefore of such a Draught, I shall reduce my Project under Two
General Designs or Heads. The First shall be that of the Main Building or
Habitation it self; the Second shall be that of the Farm or Village thereon
depending, and by which the great Mansion House may be supplied with
Necessaries, as likewise with Laborers upon all Occasions. First then, for the
Mansion House it self, let it be seated in the midst of a large Park, the
Ground gently rising, and facing the South, or at least the Morning Sun. I
would have the Park to be at the least a Mile and an half over every way, which
I thus divide, viz. half a Mile for the Approach or Avenue to the House, half a
Mile for the Houses, Gardens, and Lawnes invironing the principal Mansion; and
half a Mile behind the House for Outlet.

All the Ground betwixt the Entrance of this Enclosure or Park, and the second
Region allotted for the Dwelling House, I would have planted with Trees, and
above all with Beech, if the Soil will admit; or if the Place be already
planted, and in the form of a Wood, I would have a large Walk or Road, of
Thirty Paces breadth, leading directly from the Entrance of the Park to the
Dwelling House, which I would have to stand in full front or view; which Walk
or Road I would have regularly pitched for a considerable breadth, to prevent
the Dirt which a constant Intercourse of Horses and Carriages might make. On
each side of which Ground-walk I would have private Foot-walks within the Wood,
well gravelled, or clean kept, in breadth of about Sixteen Foot each, which,
like a dark Arbour-walk, should butt directly upon the corners of the front in
the Dwelling House; so that the Trees meeting at the top, would make it
wonderful cool and delightful in the Summer, the long Shade-alleys or Glades
being terminated in the building. But in case it may be thought that such Walks
or Glades through Woods might hinder the View and Prospect of the House, the
Avenue or Approach may be cast into a Figure something resembling a Theater; in
which case we may allow what wideness we please, provided still that the
principal Mansion, with all its Courts, Gardens, Out-buildings, and Offices,
stand full in front to the Entrance, the shady Groves regularly contracting
themselves the nearer Approach we make unto it. By this means the Palace will
be seen at a vast distance, without Reserve or Mask upon its Face, resembling
the same stately Canopy at the head of the inbearing Woods. But whatsoever
Fancy may be pitched upon, this must carefully be taken heed to, that the tops
of the Trees do not rise higher than the Rooms upon the first Floor, to the
hinderance of Air and Prospect; and it may easily be allowed that they will
not, considering that the House is to be built upon a Rising Ground, and at
some distance from the tending Woods.

As for the Mansion-Seat, or Dwelling House, let it be erected in the midst of
that internal or middle-Region, before-allotted, in the Figure of a Square or
Saxon (...), the straight line or Basis joining the two sides, which we call
the Front, to be a double Building, and to be One hundred ninety four Feet in
Breadth, and Sixty Foot in Depth o^ Traverse, therein comprehending the Walls,
Partitions, and Chimneys, for all which there must be an Allowance
proportionable to such a Design. I would have the first Floor on the Front-side
to be at least Four Foot above Ground; and the first Floor on the two wings or
sides to be about Three Foot, or something lesser, above the Ground, assigning
the under-Region for Kitchens, Pantries, Larders, Cellars, Pastry-Rooms,
Storehouses, Distillatories, Landring-Rooms, etc. as also for Lodging-Rooms
for some of the Inferior Domestics. As for Brew-Houses, Bake-Houses, and the
like, I shall provide for them in another place.

I would have the House divided into two grand Apartments, perfectly the same
in all Respects, as to form and number of Rooms, excepting only a convenient
Room for a Chapel, to be taken out of one side; of which anon. Let the whole
Fabric then consist of, 1st. Vaulted Rooms, at least Nine Foot high, and of
this Four Foot above Ground: 2dly, The Ground or Lower-Floor: 3dly, The
Chamber-Floor, or Rooms of State: and, 4thly, The upper-Floor. As to the
height, the first Course of Rooms in the front, in which we land, ought to be
Fifteen Foot hight, he next likewise Fifteen Foot, and the upper-Story, or
Roof-Floor, to be Twelve Foot high; so that the Front, from the Bottom to the
Roof, with Allowance for the Thickness of the Floors, will be near upon Fifty
Foot high. I would have likewise Fourteen Windows in the Front, Seven on a
side, each Window to be Six Foot wide in the clear, and Nine Foot high; and so
they will be Six Foot distant from one another. In the middle of the Front I
allow Twelve Foot for the Breadth of the Thorough-Passage; and I would have the
whole Orchard fair of the Front, I mean in the Roof, to be cast into this form,
viz. Three Pavilions, one in the middle, and one at each end, resembling Three
Cupola's, not round, but rather in a Canopyform. For Decoration, I would have
betwixt all the Windows, Columns on their Basis, reaching from the Ground to
the Roof, and sustaining a suitable Cornish; the Pillars to be in Number
Fourteen, answering the Intervals of the Windows; and on the Cornish over every
Pillar I would have a Statue of proportionable bigness, a la Romanesque, as a
Gladdiator, a Hercules killing the Hydra, with suchlike Figures as represent
Action or Motion.

But in regard that Pillars in their full Dimensions, or proportionable to the
height given, will be vastly big and expensive, and consequently darken all
the Windows in the Front, (for such Pillars in their full Dimensions are rarely
to be seen, but under the Roof of Portico's in vast Fabrics, sustaining great
Weights, and standing at some distance from the Lights,) I would have the
Pillars in this Design, being such as are for Decoration rather than for Use,
to stand swelling a little out of the Building, in relievo, more full or
shallow, as the Architect shall think fit: Or in case they be made entire, they
may be of different Orders, rising betwixt revery Stage or Story in the Front,
and then they will be of such a size as will not much hinder the Light or
Prospect. However, I hold the former Design or Decoration, by Pillar-work, as
in a Basso Relievo, swelling out of the Walls betwixt the Windows of the Front,
to be more beautiful than the several Orders of lesser Columns standing out
entire, because we have the Beauty of Greatness without any Inconvenience and
with less Expense.

Over the Portal or Entrance, which must be ascended by double-winding Stairs,
of eight or ten Degrees, I would have a stately Balcony looking full in the
Grand Avenue, over which an Architrane supported by Pillarwork, and garnished
above with Imagery in Relievo; the Roof on the Front-side to be leaded, as also
the Arches, to weather the Windows, etc. and let the Coins or Corners of the
Front, as likewise the Stone-Work betwixt the two Grand Apartments, or about
the Portal, be of great square Stones, cut and set a la Rustique; and on the
top of all, directly over the Entrance, and in the midst of the Statues, but
something higher, a Statua Equestris, or some Trophy; as likewise a Victoria
alata, at each corner of the Front, would look very great and noble: And
because the Front is supposed to be a double Building, the Roof toward the top
ought to be flatned and leaded, and incircled with Balisters, with some Figures
for Ornament here and there, conveniently standing on them. Such flat Roofs
likewise are very Commodious for Air and Prospect in the Summer-Evenings, as
likewise in the Winter-Seasons, when the Days are calm and serene.

Now as to the Distribution of the inward parts of this Front, supposing, as I
said, that it be a double Building, at the least Sixty Foot in the Traverse, of
which Twelve Feet for the but Walls and middle Partitions, whereon to raise
Chimneys, and support the Roof, let the^e be, in the first place, two
double-Gates for the Entrance, one of Grate or Inn-work, for the benefit of the
Air and Breezes in the Summer; the other an inward Gate or Door of Wood to keep
out the Winter-Winds: Opposite whereunto, at the end of the Passage which does
traverse the House, let there be two other Doors likewise of the same Figure,
Matter, and Dimensions with the former, giving an open View through the House,
Inner-Court, Gardens, etc. and this not only to please the Eye, but to refresh
and cool the House in hot Seasons; for such Thorough-Passages suck in the Air
in a full Stream, of which more hereafter. Likewise, touching the Front, as
also ^he other two sides of the Fabric, consisting of two Grand Apar^ments, I
shall make a Description of one part only; the other being understood to be
perfectly the same, excepting only one or two Rooms, which is not very material.

On the Front or Entrance-side therefore, as soon as we land, let there be on
the one hand a Hall, or Common Reception Room, in ^^^adth twenty four Foot, in
length thirty six Feet, besides the breadth of that space which was allowd for
the Cross-Passage betwixt the two Grate-Doors; by which means the Hall, with
the Addition of the Passage, will be forty eight Feet in length, that is to
say, double to the breadth; which may seem perhaps something disproportionable,
but this may be disguised by a Screen, or otherways. Within the Hall let there
be a Parlour or Room of Conference, square twenty four feet; and within this
let there be an inward Parlour, or Room of Reflection, of the same Dimensions,
which will be very light, as being the Corner-Room, and so it must have Windows
on two sides; of all which three Rooms I would have the Doors placed directly
one against the other, and to be rather on the Window-side than in the middle
of the Room. It being likewise supposed to be a double-Building, on the side of
the inward Parlour I would have a Withdrawing-Room; and on the side of the
middle Parlour, or Room of Conference, I would have a Winter-Parlour, or Room
of Reflection, which will fall out to be of less Dimensions than the rest, and
therefore warmer and more private; and for this there will be space enough and
to spare toward our Privyl Stairs, which we shall come to by and by: And
lastly, on the Hall-side there will be another convenient Room for
Entertainment, or for any other use whatsoever.

Now for the Grand Stairs, I would have them double, and placed near the
farther Door, opposite to the Entrance; and for each of these there is allowed
twenty four Feet one way; and sixteen another; so that the Grand Floor or
Entrance being to be added to it, the Area of each Ascent will be twenty four
Foot square, and the Steps or Degrees will be near upon eight Feet in length. I
would have the Rails of the Stairs to be Iron-work cast into Figures, or
Devices, and Ciphers, as also to be laid in Oil to prevent Rust, and to be gilt
in convenient Places; as also on the Walls of the Stairs, and of the Hall, let
there be large History-Paintings, as of Huntings, Battles, Carousels, and the
like, and here and there some Statues on their Pedestals, or Busts in Niches.

The upper-Floor of the Front is for Rooms of State, as Antichambers, Chambers,
Withdrawing-Rooms, etc. The Passage or Entrance on which we land at the top of
the Stairs of the first Floor, will be of the same Dimensions with the Passage
or Entrance underneath, viz. sixty feet in length, and twelve in breadth, at
each end whereof let there be a stately Balcony-Window, one opening toward the
outward Courts and Avenue of the House, from whence you may behold the Park and
Country below you; the other gr^^^ Window will open to the inward Court, from
whence we have a View likewise of the Gardens, Fountains, and of the Country
which lies about the House: At each of these Windows in the Balconys, let there
be placed fair Orange Trees in their Cases, which, when the Windows are set
open, will, with the Air that is drawn in, send their Perfumes into the Gallery
or Walk, as also to the bordering Chambers, with wonderful Pleasure and
Refreshment. The Walls of this Cross-Walk or Gallery, I would have adorned with
all sorts of Landscape, as Boscage, Paysarge, Ruins, Promontories, Buildings,
Towns, Rivers, Sea-Battles, Sports or Wakes of Peasants, etc. also some curious
Cabinets and some Statues would much adorn it.

On the other side of the Grand Apartment below, and opposite to the Common
Hall I would have a Private Chapel, twenty four Feet in breadth, and in length
thirty six Feet, and about thirty Foot in height, being the height which was
assigned for the Lower and Middle-Stories, with an over-hanging Gallery issuing
out of the Walls or Passage of the middle-Story, beforementioned: As for the
Ornaments of the Chapel, that is a Thing which must be left to the Genius of the
Lord of it.

And as for the upper Region of the Front, on the side which regards the Park
or Entrance, there should be a fair long Gallery; at one end whereof I would
have a Library, with a Repository for the Deeds and Writings of my Lord's
Estates and Manors. The inward-side of this upper-Floor should be for
Lodging-Rooms, and the side-Walls of the Gallery to be adorned with the
Pictures of the Family, as also of Brave and Learned Men; to which we may add
Statues, and Rarities, whether of Art or Nature, with Cabinets and Monuments of
Antiquity, with Maps and Platforms of Fortification, with all sorts of Engines
and Machines in lesser Forms; as also with the rarest Prints, with
inlay'd-Cabinets and Tables, whether of Stone or Wood, by Materials of the
Natural Color; and some Originals or good Copies of the best Masters: For as
for Painting in Frieze, the Temper of our Air will not admit of it.

The Chimneys in the Front or double-Building require to be rai'sd in the
middle of the House, and not on the side-Walls; as for the side-Building or
Wings of the House, it not being a double-Building of such Bulk, the Chimneys
may be placed in another figure: All which Chimneys should have their Tunnels,
not in the common form, but in the shape of Flower-Pots, Vines, Censers,
Candlesticks, or some such Fancy; yet so as all to be of one kind, as the
Architect shall think fit; all which would be much more Graceful and Ornamental
than the common shape, and altogether as Convenient, Cheap, and Useful: And so
I have done with the first Double-side or Front of the House.

Next, for the Sides or Wings, they must be of a lower and narrower Structure,
as being the main Rooms of Use, and to attend upon the greater Pile. To each
Side I allow One hundred and fifty Foot in length, out of which we may take
sufficient Space for Chimneys* Stairs, and Passages. The breadth of the
lower-Rooms, besides the Thickness of the Walls, to be eighteen Foot; and
therefore they must have Thorough-Lights: And on the within and Court-side I
would have a Cloister or Walk of about ten Foot broad and fourteen Foot high,
the Pillars or Archwork whereof to meet at the top, and to have little Niches
for Busto's, or for some Imagery in Relievo. Over this Cloister I would have
the upper-Stories extended; so that they will be of twenty eight or thirty Feet
in breadth, which I thus distribute, viz. Eightee^ Feet for the Chambers, which
must be square, their heigt eleven Feet, and Windows proportionable; and on the
side of each Chamber there will be sufficient on the Court-side, or on the
Hanging-over the Cloister, to make two little inward Rooms or Closets, of about
ten Foot square each, which may serve for Lodging-Rooms for Servants, attending
on Gentlemen or Ladies, as also for Closets, Wardrobes, or Places of
Convenience; so that there will be six larger Chambers, and twelve lesser
Chambers or Closets upon a Floor, and the like Number in the upper-Story, if
the Architect think fit. I would not have the Vaults on the sides to be above
three Foot above Ground, for that is sufficient to give Light to the
Subterraneous Rooms or Offices, which Rooms may be sunk to what depth we
please. The Rooms on the First Floor above Ground may be designed for Ordinary
Entertaining-Rooms for Strangers, a Room for the Gentlemen-Servants to eat in,
etc.

I would have two Stair-Cases and Thorough-Entries on each side, one at each
corner, where the side-Buildings or Wings are joined to the Main Body or Grand
Front; the other in the middle of the Sides, with Steps gently rising to the
First Floor or Passage, where Stairs likewise are assigned. I would likewise
have the Cloister continued throughout that side which makes the Main Body; but
withal, there must be a greater Allowance proportionable to the Building, viz.
Nineteen or twenty Foot in height, and in breadth about thirteen, with a fair
Ascent in the middle, leading to the Grand Passage of the House, and answerable
to the Entrance on the Front. Over this Cloister Walk there is to be no
Building, but a flat, leaded Walk, like a Terras, where may be placed Statues,
with Boxes of Orange Trees, Lemons, Jessamins, Flower-Pots, and Greens, with
some Bird-Cages, to be conveyed or removed, as Occasion shall require; as
likewise two Fountains or Jetteans, with their Basins, the Water to be
delivered by Pipes into the Base-Court, to furnish other Fountains or Basins;
all which would not only delight the Eye but the Smell too, at such Time as the
Balcony-Windows of the middle-Gallery; before spoken of, shall be opened.

The other Wing, which makes up the third Side of the House, I would have to be
the same in Form and Dimensions with that I have now described; saving, that at
the farther ends of these Sides or Wings of the House, I would have an Armoury
in one, and an Jirfirmacy in the other. And as for the Garrets or Roof-Rooms of
the whole House, they are to be for the Use of the Domestics, or Apartments
for Women; as also for the Pages and Gentlemen, which are Retainers to the
Family, with convenient Places also for the Occasions of the Landery.

As for the Inward-Court of this Building, I would have it neatly Paved or
Pitched, and not to be of Earth, with Gravelled Walks and Grass-Plats; for
these in the Wintertime will loosen after a Frost, and stick to the Feet;
besides, the Washings of Rain will fill the lower Draughts with Filth: Nor is
there any Danger of too much Heat to be reflected from the Stones, as my Lord
Verulan does object; for the sides of the House will guard the Courts
sufficiently from such Annoyance: But this, as many other things, must be left
to the Fancy of the Builder. However, I should like two Fountains, or Jetteauz,
with their Basins, in the midst of the Court, on each side one; and the further
end of the Court, or fourth Side, answering the double-Building, to be all of
Grate-work, with Freestone-Pillars, and Statues on the tops, giving a View or
Prospect into the Grand Garden, the Doors or Gates being of Azure and Gilded,
opening in the middle, and giving Entrance thereinto.

Besides these Buildings, of which I have already spoken, on the back-sides of
the two Wings should be Stairs leading down into the Offices and Cellers, as
also at twenty Paces distance a long range of low Buildings, in form of a
Penthouse, not exceeding the height of an ordinary Wall of fourteen Foot. The
Use of these is for Storehouses for Coal and Wood, for feeding of Poultry, for
washing of Linen; as also for Lodging-Rooms for the Inferior Domestics, as
Gardeners, Cooks, Scullions, Common Footmen, and the like. I allow twenty Paces
breadth to the Walk before the low Buildings, for the Convenience of Carts and
Drays to come and go on the Backside, to bring all necessary Provisions, of
what kind soever. Likewise I would have the Current of Water running from the
Roof, not to be discharged by Pipes on the Court-sides but to be let round by a
kind of Gutter upon the Leads to the Back-sides, there to be received into
great Gisterns of Lead, for the Occasions of the Landry, and from thence to be
conveyed into the Common Draught or Vaulted-Shore, or to serve the Occasions of
the Kitchen-Gardens.

And thus much may suffice for the Draught of the Main Building, with one
further Remark only, that in case the Building be of Stone, the inside Walls
must be lined with Brick to prevent the Injuries which may happen to the Rooms
and Furniture, from the dampness and sweating of the Stones. The next thing to
be considered of is the Gardens, viz. that of the Kitchen, and that of Pleasure.

I shall begin with the Pleasure-Garden, into which, as I said before, we are
to make our Entrance through the side of Grate-Work, which makes up the
Quadrangle of the inner Court: The Par-terries or Plan of the Ground to be
allowed for the Garden, ought at least to be Six-Score Paces or Yards in
breadth, and Nine Score in length; which I divide into three equal Parteries or
Gardens, allowing to each Garden one hundred and twenty Paces, and sixty for
depth, the Garden equally extending it self on both sides the House. As to the
Pattern of the First Garden, let it be subdivided into Two Plats or Plans by a
grand Alley in the middle, of thirty Foot in breadth; the side or round about
Alleys to be fifteen in breadth, the borders on the sides of the Alleys six
foot breadth, as also three foot along the Walls or Sides of the Garden where
Fruit Trees may be planted. Within which Borders on the sides, let there be
other lesser Gravelled Alleys of about six foot breadth with paths through the
middle of the Borders, of a just breadth, to pass from Alley to Alley. When
this is done there will remain a Quadrangular Plat in the middle, which may
serve for a Grass-Plat, and in the midst thereof let there be a fair Fountain
with a Basin of thirty foot Diameter, well paved and flank*d with Freestone,
and in the Center of this let there be some Statue delivering the Water into
the Fountain, such as Neptune riding upon a Tritan, out of whose Shell let the
Water spout, or a Sea Monster thrusting up his Head, and spouting out the Water
into the Air, or a Diana with her Nymphs bathing themselves, and the Water
trickling down the Linen wherewith she drys her self; Or some other naked
Female Figure, with water letting out at her Nipples, with a thousand such
Inventions. The like Curiosities of Walks, Fountains, Statues, etc. to be in
the other Partern or Partition of this First Garden.

The Borders which may be made, more or fewer, wider or narrower, according to
the Genius of the Gardner, I would have replenished with Flowers, for every
Month or Season of the Year: For to see a Flower-Garden without its
decorations, is all one as to sit down to a Table furnished with Cloth, Plates
and Napkin, and nothing served in. To enumerate the particular Flowers would be
too tedious, the Curious may find Varieties to entertain themselves in Mr.
Wooldrige's Collection, and especially Mr. Evelyn's Calendar, a Gentleman who
has obliged all lovers of planting, by his Excellent Books upon that Subject.

All throughout the Borders at an equal distance, let there be little Bushes of
Ever-Greens, as Dwarst, Cypresses, Philyreas, Rosemary, Lavender, Bays, Lawns,
Limes, Savine and Rue; for these also are Green in Winter and Sticky. Also some
kinds of Holly would be Ornamental, as likewise little Firr-Trees, but these
must be removed every three Years, because they cannot be dressed without
spoiling their Figure; let there be planted likewise up and down some little
Tufts or Matts of Peaks for these look prettily in the Winter, as also some
Mizerean Trees and the like.

Along the Grand Alley, as also from the ends of the long Upper-Walks, we may
have three Ascents to Mount by, into the Second Garden, each Ascent to consist
of sixteen or seventeen Steps, which second Garden I would have to stand nine
foot above the first, which may easily be brought about, the whole Design both
of the House and Garden being on a Rising Ground, as I said at the beginning;
so that the Second Garden will be as a Terras to the first; and in the sides of
the Bank which parts the two Gardens, and looking full to the Sun, we have a
place for our Green-Houses. These Green-Houses must be at the least nine foot
high; for otherwise they will not be capable of holding Cases or Boxes of
Orange Trees of any considerable bigness. These Green-Houses likewise ought to
be sunk three or four foot under Ground, for by this means the Plants will be
better defended from the Frost. Also the Vaults should be made of Brick to keep
out the dampness of the Earth, and I like Matted Doors or Pent-houses to be
hoist up and down at pleasure, much better than Glass-Doors, tho they are not
so beautiful: For they will defend the Cases very well from Cold; or perhaps it
may not be inconvenient to have the Glass-Doors lined with a thick Matting
within, or to be covered therewith on the our-side, as shall be most
convenient. The Furniture of the Green-Houses ought to be this, viz. Orange and
Lemon-Trees, Myrtles, of which the small leaved Myrtle is more difficult to be
preserved: Tuberosus's, which will hold their Flowers in Winter, Jessamins of
all sorts, as the Spanish, or Jessamine of Catalonia, the double-blossom'd
Jessamine, with a Flower like to a Double Cherry, the Persian Jessamine, and
the like; as likewise Mavyn, Syriacum, which tho a little Shrub, or a sort of
Mastick Thyme, is much to be valued for its rich, Balsamic Smell: the
Olive Tree, the Pomegranate-Tree, the Oleander or Rose-Lawrel, etc. Likewise in
the same Bank let there be Variety of Seats, and in the midst a Grotto made of
Shell-work, with some little Imagery, delivering the Water through little
Pipes, with some wetting-Places, as also a Bathing-Place or Basin in the midst;
likewise some artificial Birds murmuring or chirping, a Serpent hissing, with
some contiguous Furies, would very much contribute to the pleasure of such
Grotto's. All which Waterworks, whether of Grotto's or Fountains are to be
framed with proportionable Pipes for the clearer Conveyance of the Water to
some of the lower Fountains, and from them to the Offices of the House. On the
Tops of the Degrees or Stairs by which we ascend to the Second Garden, let
there be erected little Pyramids with gilded Balls, or little Angels on the
tops of them.

The Second Garden being of the same Dimensions with the first, I would have
distributed into the same Order of Walks, Alleys, Borders, Grass-Plots and
Fountains; only for Variety let the Grass-Plots and Alleys about them be of an
Oval Figure: Also let the Borders be planted with Flowers of different kinds
from those of the lower Garden, yet serving the several Months or Seasons,
which may easily be done, if we except the Winter-Quarter, which admits but of
little Variety: And as the first were adorned with Ever-Greens, so let the
Borders of this be adorned with dwarft Fruit Trees, as Cherries, Apples, some
choice Pears, etc. cut and shaped into little round hollow Bushes: likewise to
have little Lath-Walkes for Climbers or Honey-suckles, Indian Ciestes, and the
like. On the sides of this Garden I would have Two Terras-Walks, over-looking
the Country on either side, each Walk being sixty Paces long. From this Second
Garden let there be three Ascents (as from the former) landing into the third
and last Garden: Also about the VValls of the Terras of this second or
Middle-Garden, let there be planted some sorts of Fruit Trees, and here and
there some Common Jessamines, the White and the Yellow. Trial likewise may be
made of the Spanish Jessamine, and of the broad-leav'd Myrrh, as we see in the
Tuilleries at Paris, but I fear they will not resist the Injuries of our
Climate, tho they be fenced with Mattings.

The Third or last Region of our Pleasure-Garden I would have wholly to be
designed for Boscage: Only Three long Alleys running to the farther end by way
of continuance of those which traverse to the lower Gardens. Let there be
likewise up and down little private Alleys or Walks of Beech, for this is a
delicate Green: Here likewise let there be Tufts of Cypress-Trees, planted in
the Form of a Theater, with a Fountain at the bottom, and Statues round about;
likewise Fir-Trees in some negligent Order, as also Laurels, Philyrea's, Bays,
Tumarist, the Silac Tree, Althea Fruits, Pyracanthe, Yew, Juniper, Holly, Cork
Tree, and in a word, with all sorts of Winter Greens which may be made to grow,
together with wild Vines, Bean-Trefoile, Spanish Ash, Horse-Chesnut,
Sweet-Brier, Honey-Suckles, Roses, Almond-Trees, Mulberries, etc. Also up and
down let there be little Banks or Hillocks, planted with wild Thyme, Violets,
Primroses, Cowslips Daffadille, Lillies of the Valley, Blew-Bottles, Daisies,
with all kinds of Flowers which grow wild in the Fields and Woods; as also
amongst the Shades Strawberries, and up and down the Green-Walks let there be
good store of Camom^le, Water-Mint, Organy, and the like; for these being trod
upon, yield a pleasant Smell; and let the Walls be planted with Hedera,
Canadensis, and Philyrea's, etc. So that this Third Garden, Grove or
Wilderness, should be made to represent a perpetual Spring; To which end and
purpose let there be large Aviaries in convenient places, which should have
Ever-Green Trees growing in them, especially such as bear Berries, together
with little Receptacles for Fresh Water. Likewise for Variety's sake, let there
be here and there a Fruit-Tree, as Plumbs and Cherries, Haw-Thorn, with such
like as will not run to Timber; for these Trees also have their Beauties in
their several Seasons. In a word, let this Third Region or Wilderness be
Natural-Artificial; that is, let all things be disposed with that cunning, as
to deceive us into a belief of a real Wilderness or Thicket, and yet to be
furnished with all the Varieties of Nature: And at the upper end of this
Wilderness, let there be a Grate-Gate, answering the Entrance to the Garden;
beyond which, and without the Territory of our Garden, let there be planted
VValks of Trees to adorn the Landscape; Likewise a Bowling-Green and Poddock
would be suitable to this higher Ground; and thus at length the Prospect may
terminate on Mountains, VVoods, or such Views as the Situation will admit of.

Our Kitchen-Gardens are the next thing to be spoken to, and these must be
double, answerable to the Two Grand Apartments of the House, and are to have
their place immediately behind that Range of low Building or Offices which run
along the two wings of the Main Structure. The breadth of these Gardens I would
have to be equal to the length of these Sides, as also of the Court-Walls,
which make the Entrance to the House, and so down to the Stables, of all which
by and by; so that the breadth of each Kitchen-Garden will be at least One
hundred and twenty Paces; and for depth, more or less, as it shall seem good,
there being Outlet enough and to spare out of the Space or Ground we at first
allowed, which was half a Mile every way for the Buildings and their
Appurtenances.

I would have the Kitchen-Garden likewise to be divided into several
Apartments, not as the Pleasure-Garden, by Ascents and different Ornaments, but
by ranging or distributing the Herbs, which may serve the Occasions of the
Kitchen, according to their several Uses: Odoriferous Herbs, with such as are
fit for the Pot, or the Distillatory, should be in one quarter, as Thyme of all
sorts, Winter-savoury, Marjorum of all sorts. Sorrels, Bourgloss, or
Langue-de*Beuf, Borrage, Orach, Bloodwort, Cumfry, Spinach, Leeks, Onions,
Garlic, Parsley, Violets, Hyssop, Staechas, Muscovy, Sweed-Moudlin,
Southern-wood, Fennel, Baum, Angelico, Lavender, Organy, or Pennyroyal, Beets
of all sorts, etc. Another Quarter of the Garden should be for Roots; as
Carrot, Scorronera, Radishes, Rom^luccio, Horseradish, Parsnips, Skirrets, etc.
For as for Turnips, Potato's, Jerusalem-Artichokes, and the like, they are a
wild sort of Fare, and may do well enough in Common Ground: And as for Beans,
Pease, Worts, Cabbages, and the like, they will require more room than what we
can allow them in this Place.

The Third Quarter of the Kitchen-Garden I would have assigned for
Sallad-Herbs; as Lettices of all sorts, Chervil, Burnet, Chivet, Endive,
Spinach, Alisanders, Sweet-Basil, Rampions, Rocket, Cellery, Sage, Corn-Salad,
Pursland, Cucumbers, Garden-Cress, Indian-Cress, etc. not forgetting such
things as serve for Seasoning of Dishes, and our Ragousts, as Garlic,
Roccombol, Eschalot, etc.

The last Quarter of our Garden, let it be for Asparagus, Cole-Flowers,
Brocoli, Dutch-Savoys, Muskmelons, Artichoaks, Kidney-Beans, etc. and up and
down the Beds let there be planted such common Flowers as may serve for
Garniture or Show; as Columbines, Star-wort, Flos-Solis, Holy-oaks, common
Carnations, Pinks, Lilies, Gilliflowers, etc. As likewise let there be
Provision made in every Quarter for Physick-Herbs: And likewise in the
Kitchen-Garden, or near it, let there be a large Recepticle of Water; in or
near which let there be a quantity of rotten Horse-Dung, or Pigeons-Dung, to
soak, which, after it has been heated by the Sun for some time, may serve the
Occasions of the Garden. Likewise, let there be Stores or Magazines to all the
Gardens, or a Compost of rotten Dung, whether of Horse or Sheep, with Lime
discreetly used, some Ashes, the Earth of rottin Wood, the Dust or Powder of
old Wythies, and the like; which, after it has been well tempered together, and
thoroughly digested, (which will not be under a Year or two,) it will be still
at hand to serve the Seed-Plots, and other Occasions of the Garden: And this
sort of Compost will not be very apt to breed Weeds, especially if the Pots or
Seed-Plots be powdered with the Earth in the hollow of an old Tree finely
sifted.

Likewise in some convenient Place without the Kitchen-Garden, there ought to
be some Provision made for Cherry-Trees, Plum-Trees, Filbrids, Walnuts,
Quinces, Mulberries, with the like; as also for Goose-berries, Ras-berries,
Currants, Straw-berries, etc. The Walls of all the Kitchen-Garden to be planted
with Vines, and all sorts of Wall-Fruit. There must be likewise a Plantation or
Nursery. All which, with many other things of this Nature, are to be left to
the Care and Consideration of the Gardeners, who ought to have their Lodges
near the Walls, and over-looking the several Gardens, with Postern or
Privy-Doors into them, and good Mastiff-Bitches to guard them.

As for Vineyards, I account them a superfluous Curiositv; for they will never
come to much, unless it be in a Soil, or Rising-Ground, near some great River,
where the Beams of the Sun reflecting from the smooth Surface of the Water
against the neighboring Banks, may contribute something possibly, especially
in a hot Season, to the Maturation of the Grapes. Besides, that in the Model I
here propose, there is Wall-room sufficient to make a considerable quantity of
Wine. There is one thing farther to be regarded in the Pleasure-Garden, which
is, to have Seats within the Walls on every side, in the nature of Vaults or
Summer-Houses, finely paved, with Arch-work, and some little rise by Steps; by
which means such as walk may ease themselves, and enjoy either the Sun or the
Shade, and be secured from the Annoyance of Winds and Rains, at all Seasons of
the Day and of the Year. And thus much may suffice for a rude Draught of the
Gardens.

We are now in the last place to consider of other Buildings, as Stables,
Coach-Houses, as also of the Courts or Approaches to this Country House. The
Courts then leading to the Front ought to be two at least; the Figure or Form
of them, whether square or oval, may be left to Fancy. The First or
Outward-Court of Approach ought to be eighty Paces in the sides at least, with
proportionable Gates of Grate-work, Walks, etc. The Walls to be planted with
Philirea's, and at the Entrance two stately Pyramids of forty Foot high at
least, with Angels or gilded Balls on the top, and within the Gate a convenient
Lodge for the Porter, in the midst of the Grass-Plots Statues. The second Court
would require to be of the same wideness, but not of the same depth, but rather
something less than the former, and to be ascended by Steps or Degrees; at the
Entrance, the Arms and Achievements of the Family, with their Supporters, or
some Figures of Gigantick Form. In the midst of the Parterrees on either hand,
Fountains, if there be sufficient Store of Water, with Cypress-Trees round the
Borders. Through this Court we are to ascend by Degrees or Stairs into the
Dwelling House; but the Form and Figure of such Stairs is to be left to the
Architect. On the sides of the Inner-Court a Terras would be very proper, and
the Walls on the Top or Crest may be adorned with Flower-Pots, little Pyramids,
Anticks, and the like.

Next, for the Stables they are to be two, answerable to the two Apartments of
the House, and they are to be placed at about twenty Paces distance from the
ends of the first Court Walls, that there may be sufficient room for Teams to
go to the back-sides of the Apartments, to serve the Occasions of the House, as
I have beforementioned; which Entrance should be of Palisade-work. Each Stable
ought to contain Sixty Hor^es at least, besides Coach-Houses; over which to be
Lodgings for the Grooms, Coach-men, and such Footmen, and other Servants as
are appointed to attend them. Each Stable therefore will require to have a
hundred Paces, if single; for as for double Stables, they are not graceful, nor
can there be sufficient room within for Provender, Harness, and other
Furniture. I would likewise have some Water discharging it self into the
Cisterns, at the Entrances into the Stables, as also within the Stables, for
many Uses, in order to keep them neat: For the Stables to be built in a long,
strait line, is not so graceful; let each Stable then consist of two Circles,
in form of a Greek Gamma ^, thus: For in this Position or Figure they will look
like two Piles or grand Wings of Outbuilding, enclosing the Approach to the
House with great State: So that the two Stables extending themselves in Front
on either side the Dwelling House, the whole Front of Building, viz. Stables,
Dwelling House, with their interjacent Passages, will be about Two hundred and
twenty Paces wide; which interjacent Passages betwixt the Stables and the First
or Outward-Court Walls, require, I say, to be Palisade-work; as likewise a long
Pale or Rail-work of the same Figure and Shape, running across from the end of
one Stable to the end of the other, with double Gates in the middle, opposite
to the Entrances of the Court, would be very convenient and graceful.

It will be convenient likewise for the House, as also for Strangers, if there
be a pretty neat Inn built at a little distance from the end of one Stable, and
this for the Accommodation of such as have recourse to my Lord; and at the like
distance from the end of the other Stable, a fair Dog-Kennel, with its
Appurtenances and Lodings for the Keeper and Huntsmen: Below each Stable let
there be a fair Fish Pond, for watering the Horses when they are breathed about
the Lawns; which Ponds should be graced with Swans and other Fowl, and being
abundantly supplied with the Waters running continually from the Fountains of
the Gardens and higher Grounds, will be extraordinary fat from the Common
Draughts and Swill of the House. I could wish, I confess, much more
Fountain-Ornaments than what I speak of in this Design; but when I consider the
Nature of our Climate, we cannot be so liberal this way as would otherwise be
required for the Beauty of a Noble Seat: For the Frosts are long, and our Soil
generally moist and weeping in the Winter; so that the Pipes will be oftentimes
in disorder, and to be opening the Ground perhaps under the very Foundations of
the Building, would be a thing of great Expense, Trouble, and Hazard; though it
must be said too, that we having Lead in good store, such Expenses will be less
chargeable. Many Fountains likewise in a Garden, especially in our cold Region,
will chill the Ground, and be a Hindrance to the Growth of choicer Plants, if
the Water be not very carefully conveyed under Ground by Pipes accurately
soldred, and of a just Diame^er: Though so few as are here designed, may, without
dispute, be used and preserved without any considerable Damage or Hazard,
especially when we consider the declining Posture of the Ground in all the
Gardens and Courts; by which means the Current will be very Natural, and one
Fountain feed or supply another.

From the Dwelling House let us, in the next place, take a Walk along the Grand
Avenue to the Gate or Entrance of the Park, of which I spoke at the beginning;
where must be a Grange or Farm, with other Buildings, for the Use and Service
of our Country Mansion: For it cannot be imagined that the Port and Expenses of
a Nobleman's Family can be supplied by the Clouds, though they drop never so much
Fatness. And the many Artificers and Laborers depending upon such a Structure,
must of necessity require some suitable Provision to be made for them also.
This Design or Building therefore which I mention in the last place, ought to
be perfected in the First; forasmuch as before we build a House we ought to
have a Place of Accommodation for the Workmen and Laborers who are to build
it: And before any such Project be thought upon, the Undertaker ought to be
provided with a Country which does abound with good store of Timber, as also
with Stone, Lime, Ground fit to make Brick, and above all, as I said at the
beginning, to be near a Navigable River; for without these Circumstances, so
great a Design will fall to the Ground before it be brought above Ground.

At the Entrance of the Park therefore I would have a little Town or Village,
consisting of about thirty or forty Houses, built or ranged in one straight
Street, leading to the Park-Gate; the Building to be low, uniform, and suitable
for such as may inhabit them, as Carpenters, Masons, Plaisterers, a Glasier
and Plummer, Smiths, as Lock-smith, Gun-smith, and for Tools and Implements of
Husbandry, a Wheelwright, Sadler, Tailor, Shoemaker, Mercer or Chandler, a
Butcher; in a word, for all sorts of Artificers and Laborers, which any
Nobleman's House can stand in need of. Some perhaps may think it to be more
expedient to have such Artificers enrolled in the Number of the Domestics, or
those who unite in Liveries. I grant indeed there ought to be an Employment for
every Fellow who attends upon a Nobleman, besides that of eating and drinking,
and waiting upon his Lord now and then at the tail of a Coach: For there is no
greater Bane to a Nobleman than to have a Troop of unprofitable, idle Lobcocks,
or Rogues always at his Heels; for such being never inured to Labor, or
Business, when once they are purged out of the Family, betake themselves to
Gaming, Alehouse keeping, sharking, or padding upon the Road, or perhaps have
the Honor to be knocked on the Head in Soldiers Coats. Such Servants as these
were the Dogs who devoured Actaeon: Let them be employed therefore in the
Gardens, in the Kitchens, Stables, and about the Game: For as for Artificers,
if they be not in a settled Estate, such as that of Marriage, or of
Housekeepers, they will upon every turn be taking a rambling Frisk, and leave
their Lord in the lurch. The best way therefore is to settle them in a Village,
as I have described, where they may have a comfortable Subsistence with their
Wives and Children, and be always at hand to serve their Patron's Occasions,
and to confer with one another upon the common Concerns of the Family they
depend on, living in a provident, industrious and reputable manner; and to this
End I would not by any means have an Inn or Alehouse in any such our Village;
for this will soon tempt them to Idleness and Wast: And if they were once in
two Years to be rigged out in a Livery, 'twould add Splendor to their Lord,
and be an Engagement on them to stick to his Service.

In the midst of the Street I am now speaking of, I would have two other
Buildings on either side, running out in form of a Cross, viz. a Grauge or Farm
on the one side, and on the other an Hospital, with a neat Church or Chapel,
that so my Lord might remember, as he receives Blessings on the one hand, it is
his Duty to repay something to God Almighty on the other.

The Grange or Farm-House should have three sides of building, and the fourth
side open toward the street. I would have the Farm to Consist of Six Teems and
Consequently twelve Men Servants besides a Head Bailiff or Steward to Oversee
them, and to keep an Account of all the Productions of the Farm, and how
delivered out. In this Grange there must be all Conveniences for Maultery,
Dairy, Brewing and Baking: For from hence all my Nobleman's Provisions must
come as the Occasions of the house shall require, for to encumber a Palace
herewith would be an Intolerable Annoyance. Besides Herds and Plowmen there
must be a sufficient Number of Servants likewise for the Dairy, for Brewing,
for Baking and for other occasions of the Grange, at the least eight Females,
over which 'twere convenient there should be an Ancient Matron of Honesty and
Experience appointed, and to Govern these Affairs. The whole Number of such
Servants then cannot be less then Twenty five: All the Men Servants to lie two
and two in one common Room, near whom the Head-Bayliff, or Steward rather,
ought to have a sitting Lodging with a Room to keep his Accounts. The upper
Rooms of the Grange to be for Granaries, Maulting Rooms and other Storehouses
with thorough Lights: Behind the Farm-House must lie the Stable and Outhouses
ranged in a Convenient Order, together with a large Dove-House, and Ponds for
tame Fowl, and for the occasions of Cattle.

As for Orchards or Plantations of Fruit Trees, having spoken already to this
point, I shall only hint, that if the Soil were proper for it, I would have the
Fruit Trees planted in long Walks, as it is in Normandy; for this looks much
more suitable to the Grandeur of a Noble Seat, though I fear such Trees in our
Country would not be very prosperous as being too much exposed to the weather:
However, if Fruit Trees be not planted, 'twould be very Convenient and
Ornamental to have such Walks in length and Crossways, of Lime-Trees, Elms,
Oaks, and the like: For to see the Campain without Garniture would look a
little too bald, and to have it choakt up with little Enclosures would look too
Yeoman-like, and would be a disturbance to Recreations of the Field, as Hawking
and Hunting, and be stoppage also to the wholesome Air, and to the Prospect of
the remoter Countries.

There must likewise be store of Fish Ponds: For there will be sufficient Water
for these, running daily from the Gardens and Offices of the Palace and the
Ground about it. The Fish Ponds must be designed one below another, some for
stews, some for feeding, and some for spawning. The Spawning-Pools must be but
little, and every Three years New ones to be made in another place: For in a
little piece of Ground freshly broke up, Fish will multiply prodigiously for
the First year, the next year less, and in the third year the Spawning-Pool
will be good for little, the strength and Nutritive Virtue of the fresh Earth
being spent.

Amongst our Pools, I would have one if possible for Pikes; for it is an
excellent Fish, though destructive of the other Fry, nor apt to thrive in a Pond
unless fed with a good Current. Carps, Tench, Perch, Roch and Gudgeons should
be the main Stock of our Pools; and one Caution ought to be given viz. Never to
break the Ice in case of a severe Frost, which Thing indeed is Contrary to the
Common Practice: For I found by Experience, that in the year 1683 (one of the
severest for Frost we have ever known in England) that all my Fish died in
those Ponds where I brake the Ice, only in a little Pool or Pit which I took no
care of, believing it to be frozen to the Bottom, there the Fish all escaped
and grew Extraordinary: The Reason for their Growth was the same with that for
there Preservation: For as I conceive, there are many nitrous particles or
kinds of spirits issuing continually through the Body of the Earth, from which
nitrous Exhalations or Atoms all Things derive a seminal virtue, and have there
accretion; so that the Rigorous Season sealing up all the Exterior Passages
and Pores of the Earth, and covering the Water too with a thick coat of Ice,
impenetrable by the Air, and through which such Exhalations cannot pass, the
Fish by this means receive much more Nourishment than at other Times, the
Bottoms and Sides of the Pool which lie under the Ice being free to admit of
such perspir^tion which cannot fly out into the open Air as at other times, by
reason of the congealed Surface of the Water; and this is the true Reason of
Juvenal's Observation of some sorts of Fish that they were longo frigore
pingues; and upon the same Account it is likewise that Fish are found in the
Northern Seas in much greater Numbers and of a larger Bulk than in the
Southern. And truly I can averr it upon my own Experience, that after the
severe Winter beforementioned, when the Ice was thawed, I took out of my Pools
Carps big with Spawn some 14 some 16 Inches long, which the Summer before were
not above 4 or 5 Inches in length; so that they grew 10 or 11 Inches, or
better, in Eight Months space, which could proceed from nothing but the
Extremity of the Cold. The Reason why Fish turn up their Bellies and die upon
the breaking of a Pool, is this: When a hole is made in the Ice, the compressed
Water flows out thereat in a full Stream or Gush: This Motion of the Water upon
the Inlet of fresh Air draws the Fish to the breach from out of there Banks or
Holds where they lay warm, tho much incommoded for want of Air, which the
closeness of the surface would not allow them: Coming therefore to the broken
places for Respiration, the excessive coldness of the Air presently be numming
them, and deprives them of sense and afterward of life: This they who pretend
to stealing of Fish understand too well, and the less the hole is, so a man can
but turn and wind his hand in it, the greater will be the crowd of Fish about
it, and consequently they will fall more easily within the Clutches of such
Fish-Mongers. There Is no Expedient therefore better than not to break the Ice
at all in case of an extraordinary Frost. As for other Observations relating to
a Farm, they have been briefly glanced upon in the foregoing Chapters.

From the Grange or Farm-House, let us cross over the way toward the Church or
Hospital: let the Hospital then consist of two sides, one for Maimed or Aged
Men, whether Widowers or such as were never Married: The other side for Women
under the same circumstances, whether Virgins or Widows; for married Couples
will never accord with the Orders of a Public Hospital. Let there be Chambers
for Twelve Men and for as many Women their Cells to be on the Ground-Floor, let
each Cell consist of Two little Rooms with convenient Outlet and a little
Garden. On each side of the Hospital let there be a little Refectory where they
shall Eat in a Collegiate way, with a Common Kitchen and Cellar to each side
likewise: All to be managed by the care of some pious decayed Gentlewoman or
Matron with her Servants, which Matron or Governess also is to have convenient
Lodgings and Maintenance for her Care and Labor.

At the upper Side and in the Front of this Hospital, but at some convenient
distance from it, let there be a little Church or Chapel, competently endowed
for the maintenance of a grave and pious Divine, who may have his Lodgings at
the end of the old Men's Apartment and toward the Church. It Is his business to
read Prayers twice a day in the Church, to observe the Fasts and Feasts as they
are appointed in the Liturgy; as also to Instruct the Members of the Hospital,
together with the Youth of the Village or Neighborhood, in a virtuous way, and
to preach likewise on Sundays. I would not have such a Person to be encumbered
with Tithes, but to be provided for by a Salary, or by the Annexing of some
part of the Parochial Dues for his Support, by the Favor and Authority of the
Bishop, or in case it should be an Impropriation (as generally it happens in
all the Capital Mannours of great Noblemen) it would be in the Power, I may say
it would be the Duty, of such a Patron to make all suitable Provision, annexing
the Parsonage to such a Church.

As for making such a Village to be a Market Town or to have the benefit of
Fairs, I do not much approve of it: Such a Design indeed would draw more
concourse of People, but withal 'twould make the place more noisie and dirty,
and divert the Inhabitants from attending the Service of their Soul, however it
might tend to their own private Profits and Advantage: For so it is, that I
would have all the Families of this little Village to be maintained by their
Labor in the Employment and Services of him to whom they do belong, who
likewise, as such Artificers or Laborers do decay in Age and Fortune, may
dispose of them into his Hospital, there to end there days in Piety and Peace.

Thus have I made a rough Draught or Design of a Country House according to the
Idea in my own Mind: It is not my business to warrant this Model by all the
Rules of Architecture and o^ Art. It Is sufficient to my purpose that I have
given a General Scheme, which, with a little Amendments or Alteration, will
stand together in some tolerable Figure, and answer our Expectation as to the
Innocent Pleasures and Delights which the Country can afford.

It Is True, all Countries do not afford us the Natural Advantages for such a
Seat as I have now discrib'd; nor indeed are there many Persons to be found who
have such a largness of Mind and Fortune as to undertake and finish a Design of
such expense. However, some their are, who as there Fortunes lie without the
streighter limits of Anxiety and Care, so are they privileged from the
Vexations of a Busy Life, and have therefore Means and Leisure in some measure
or other to employ their Time, and to spend their days amidst the Enjoyments of
Retreat.

What is said in this kind is not to be understood in Justification of those
who abandon themselves to a supine and sleepy course of life, retiring to their
Country-Houses as to a Seraglio, where they pass their Time in all manner of
Sensuality, or Beastiality rather, as did Sardanapalas of old, and Tiberius in
the Isle of Copias, sheltring their enormous Lusts from the Observation of the
World under the Masque of a sequestered life. No, no; such Brutes have always
met with their Rewards, feeding and fatning within their Stys in order only to
their Slaughter: The True design then of such Places of Pleasure and Retreat is
to sweeten the Fatigues both of the Body and of the Mind, and to recover us to
our former Bent of Duty, which is but in some measure to restore Man to his
lost Station: For God doubtless would never have placed him in a Paradise, had
not a Garden of Pleasure been Consistent with Innocence; which being once
forfeited, to drudge and labor amongst the Thorns and Briers were to be his
Punishment, and even the very Employment of his life. Solomon, after he had
built stately Palaces adorned with Orchards, Vineyards, Pools, Gardens, and
with other Ornaments of Pomp and Grandeur tells us, Eccles. 2. That all this
was done by him even then when he was under the conduct of Wisdom; which shows
plainly, that the greatest Souls, and such as are divinely inspired, may seek
content from Temporal Blessings, though with Solomon too they must Remember, that
all such Delights are Vanity, as are all other contrivances and enjoyments
whatsoever compared with what is truly durable and solid.

Some Men who are born to great Fortunes may not have those Qualifications
which may recommend them to Public Employments, or Offices of State: They may
want an Insinuating Address, Heat of Spirit, Boldness, or perhaps a ready and
refined Capacity to understand Intrigues, and to turn and wind through all the
Labyrinths of a Court: Or if they ^e duly qualified, they may have perhaps more
Prudence then to hazard the Fortunes they were born to upon the slippery
Chances of a State-Interest, or upon the Unconstant Favors of a Prince who may
himself ^e the Sport possibly of Fortune; or peradventure, tho they be never so
happy in the Air of a Court, they may still be obnoxious to popular Disgusts,
which generally prove fatal. They indeed who have little to lose may venture,
and possibly make there Fortunes: But one born to a flourishing Estate, can
rarely improve his Fortune this way, but after all his Travels and Services is
in a very fair Post of wasting it. How many are there of these seeming-happy
Darlings, both Princes and Subjects, who sink every day under the weight of
their Golden Chains? or if they arrive through a continual Series of Honors
and Success to old Age, yet then how grateful must it be to humane Nature,
overworn with Business to find a place of Repose! So that the ablest Statesmen,
even in the highest Tide of Prosperity, are glad to recollect there Spirits a
little by withdrawing themselves ever and anon from the Noise, Ceremonies, and
Intrigues of a splended but fallacious Attendance, where they themselves waste
there Days, and I may say Nights too in contriving to undermine Others, who at
the same Time are no less vigilant to return the like Kindness into their own
Bosoms: Whereas a Nobleman or a Gentleman in his Country House has all within
his Territory at his Command, and in subjection either to his Courtesy or
Power. He wants no Pleasure which Man can reasonably propose. His Enjoyments
are without Competition or Jealousy, and such as advance the Health of his
Body as well as the Content of his Mind: He lies out of sight of those more
Expensive Temptations to which a City-Conversation is Obnoxious, and in lieu
thereof lets the Overflowings of his Estate spread it self in a laudable
Hospitality, by which he creates to himself a firm Interest in the Affections
of his Country, which will be always at hand to second him upon occasion.
Besides; it looks great in a Man, and carries something of a divine Character
stamped upon it, to be able to frame a Building after the Idea he has within
himself; that is, to be able to give a durable Existence to something which was
not before, and to adorn it with all the Graces of Symmetry and Beauty.

And if he be a Man of a Contemplative Genius, the Seat of his House cannot but
suggest manlike Thoughts. The same Eminence of Ground which displays the
Beauties of the Earth by day entertains him with a much larger and more
beautiful Prospect of the Heavens by night, which may direct his desires
toward a more glorious and more lasting Mansion. The Variety of Flowers
beautiful and fragrant, with which his Gardens are adorned, opening themselves
and dying one after another, must admonish him of the fading state of Earthly
Pleasures, of the frailty of life, and of the suceeding Generations to which he
must give place. The constant Current of a Fountain or Rivolet must mind him of
the Flux of Time which never returns, nor causes to run on, till it ends in
Immensity. But if he find Fastidiousness amidst Fruition, ^^ it happens usually
in the greatest Pleasures (those excepted of the Mind) he may then recollect
himself and think, That since such Pleasures are unsatisfactory and transitory,
the Mind is yet capable of farther-Enjoyments more durable and sincere, which
since it cannot meet with amidst earthly Divirtisements, it must look for a
plentiful Entertainment in another Region.

Upon this Consideration, doubtless, 'twas that many brave Men, especially of
the middle Age (so much Condemned as it was for Blindness and Superstition) did
voluntarily exchange the Pomp and Grandeur of Life for the surest and chaste
Delights of Retirement; and even at this day we may observe how the most rigid
Orders of the Monastic State or Institution do sweeten all their Severities
with the calm and Innocent Refreshments of a Garden. So that the little
Partitions of a Carthusian's Cell may yield as much Pleasure and Content to a
virtuous Mind as the Stupendous Fabrics, of the Lowre and the Escurial: For
to speak truly, when we converse daily with Noble Structures, our Admiration
becomes less by Acquaintance; so that it is not their Greatness but their Order
which does ravish the Thought; which Beauty of Order may be found in a little
Model, as well as in the Voluminous Contrivances of Art. The little Wren has
its pretty curious Nest proportionable to its Body and Nature, and though humbly
built, yet is it framed with as much accurateness, perhaps with more then that
of the Eagle in the high Rocks, and on the Top of Mountains bordering on the
Clouds.

A little, well designed House, neatly kept, and feated in a good Air and a dry
Soil, as likewise on the side of a Hill, with a shady Wood or Grove about it,
and a pretty Spring or running Stream before it, may afford infinite delight to
one who may carry a Generous and high born Soul under the Circumstances of a
narrow Fortune. The Neighboring Wood, as it yields him Fuel against the
Severities of Winter, defends him from many a cold Storm and Blast; so does it
relieve him by its Shades against the scorching Sun in Summer, and is to him as
a continual Aviary. The sweet Stream running by his door serves not only the
occasions of life, but murmuring amongst the Pebbles makes a grateful warbling
noise altogether as pleasing, though not so thundering, as that of the Girandola.
The Industry and Working of his little Bees, their elaborate Cells, with their
constant Intercourse, may be as much Diversion to him, as it may be to the
greatest Prince living to have the constant Visit of Friends with their
numerous Trains about the Gates of his Palace. A Person of such an humble but
advantageous Post is at no expense nor-labour to suck in the wholesome Air; it
comes into his doors freely, and of its own accord. The neighboring Banks and
Thickets yield him sweet smelling Flowers and Turfs suitable to the several
seasons of the year, and for the service of Nature: His little Flocks of Sheep,
with other such like Animals, requite his Care with constant supplies of Food
and Raiment: All which and many other Delights, attend him constantly without
charge and travel, without disturbance and fear, without sneeking Attendance,
Flattery and Envy, being placed in that middle Region of Happiness which lies
above Oppression and Necessity, and below the Menaces and Storms to which
higher Fortunes are exposed. And if an open Prospect can yield Content, he is
abundantly rewarded with the various Scenes of the under spacious Valley, where
he beholds numberless Objects, with the remoter Seats and Habitations of
others, checkered with light and shadows, answerable to the course of the
Clouds and breakings-out of the Sun: All which succeeding one another in a
constant Flux, cannot but show him the Mutability of Fortune, or the
Interchanges of Prosperity and Adversity to which the World under us is
subject; and by this means he may reap instruction for future Occurrences,
whilst he enjoys the Blessings of his present Condition, and in his little
Circle be as perfectly charmed as he who is surrounded with the unmeasurable
Blessings of Nature and Fortune, and with all the Contrivances of Art.

AN ESSAY Upon the Fuel of London.
HAving entertained my Reader long enough at a Country House, I shall now
invite him to take a Walk in the City: For so it is, that eve^ Things most
innocent and pleasant, by lying within our daily Conversation, beget in us a
kind of Aversion or Fastidiousness; so that to quicken our Appetite, we must
make our Sawces salt and picquent, for without such helps the best Things would
become too luscious and fulsome; like as we see in Music, which would quickly
nauseate, were it not for some Discords here and there artificially intermixed,
to awaken the Hearers Attention, who would soon be cloyed and sleepy with the
continual Harmonings of Concords. But be it what it will be, one of these two
Things is certain; for the Noise and Entertainment of the City must either be
grateful or displeasing; if grateful, 'twill ^e satisfactory to abide a while
with it; if displeasing our return to the Country will give us more Content
then before.

The City then in which I purpose to wander a little, is the Metropolis of this
Kingdom, which in many respects may challenge a Parity with, if not the
Precedence of any City in Europe. I shall not make a large Discourse of it, by
recounting its Antiquity and Privileges, it is Wealth, Greatness and
Government: I shall only take a Transient View of such Things as first occurr
to the Eye of a Stranger, who must readily confess, that it is adorned with
many noble Advantages above any other City whatsoever. It is built upon a
rising Ground or Bank which lifts it up above all the Injuries and Annoyances
of Floods and Vapors, and being on the North-side the River, the Sun draws all
the Foggs the other way: It is formed to the Figure of the River like a
Semicircle or Crescent, javelling highest in the midst, where it is also
beautified with one of the proudest Temples of Europe, whilst the City gently
declining toward the extremes, it appears one of the goodliest Theaters in the
Universe. On the North-side it enjoys a most serene and wholesome Air, lying
open to a most fragrant and fruitful Valley of Pastures and Meadows always dry
and fit for Walking, and replenished with infinite Numbers of Cattle of all
sorts; beyond which at Three or Four Miles distance, lie the higher Grounds or
Hills covered with Villa's or Houses of Pleasure; so that whosoever walks here
must reap Health, as well as Delight.

The Situation of this City all along declining or shelving toward the Thames
is of infinite Advantage, not only in respect of Prospect, but likewise for
keeping the City clean and neat; so that all the Filth and Ordure of the
Streets and Kennels have a quick discharge into the River, the River also
affording a quick and easy Conveyance of all Things from one Place to another
with little Charge and Difficu^^y, which otherwise would not be brought about
but with great Expense and Trouble.

The River it self in some respects is one of the noblest in Europe; at London
it lies about threescore Miles from the Sea, and consequently out of Danger of
sudden Surprises from unwholesome Foggs and Air, or of having a brackish and
briny Water so much destructive to Health; and yet it brings up whole Fleets of
greatest Burden, whether they be those of War or Traffic, and is covered
always with such Ships laden with inestimable Riches from all Quarters of the
World. And as the Tide does plentifully furnish us with all Foreign Blessings,
and with such as are to be found in the Country which lies below the City, so
the natural Stream or Carrent of the River does float down all the Commodities
and Provisions of what kind soever, that are of English growth. So that all
manner of Blessings, whether of Art or Nature, whether from Home or from Abroad
are still flowing in upon this City both from above and below it with full
Stream and Tide: Whilst the River it self is covered always with infinite
Numbers of little Boats, and upon the Banks of it for many Miles upwards and
downwards, there are a vast Number of stately Buildings and little Towns, being
in a manner nothing but a Continuation of Palaces, or Houses of Pleasure; so
that each Village would in any other Place pass for a beautiful City. All the
Royal Palaces or Buildings are seated on the Banks of this River, amongst which
the Royal Castle at Windsor, is one of the most superb Fabrics which can any
where be seen, whether in regard of the Beauty and Greatness of the Building,
or its noble and lofty Situation.

Besides all this, the Roads leading to this City are gravelly, straight, large
and level, and firm, and smooth at the Bottom, and yet the Fields and Meadows
thereon bordering are most Fat and Luxuriant, a Thing we shall very rarely meet
with: For the richest Countries are generally the most Dirty; and indeed the
Country about London, were it other then what it is, 'twere impossible such a
constant intercourse of Horses and Carriages should long continue. Upon all
which Considerations, we may safely affirm, that London can stand no where but
where it does, and that Constantinople perhaps excepted, there is no place to
be found which does afford such Conveniences for a great and noble City as
London does.

And truly, if we look within the City, it has many singular Beauties. It does
not abound indeed with such stately Palaces, as other Places boast of: But for
the Burghoisie, or the Merchant-like part of it, it is equal to the best. The
principal Streets, especially those built since the Conflagration, are most
Magnificent, the Shops fair and richly furnished, and the Broad ^^^'d Ways on
each side guarded with Piliers or Barriers to keep off Coaches and Carriages
from, incommoding the Foot-Passengers, are wonderful Convenient, and the
walking upon the Broad Pavement is extraordinary easy and pleasant. The
continual Range of over-hanging Balconeys, is not only graceful and ornamental,
but useful also to shelter those who walk under them, from the Inconveniences
of the Sun and of the Moon, as they are Commodious for the Inhabitants when
they would take a View of the Streets, and of whatsoever occurs that way.

There is no City in the World can show so many Noble Piazza's, so large, so
beautiful, and so regularly Built; it does abound with curious Walks, as that
of St. James's Park, those of the Inns of Court, and others, besides the many
Gardens and Entertainments of the River. It Is beautified with many noble
Structures; the stupendous Fabric of St. Paul's, the Royal Exchange, the
Pillar near the Bridge, as also the Bridge it self, together with
Westminster-Abbey, and the Hall adjoining, and many other Monuments are of that
Greatness and Solidity, as will not easily be out-fac'd by Time. The
Townhouse, as also the several Halls or Colleges of the several Companies of
Merchants and Artificers, are most stately Buildings; and truly no City in the
World can show such Cabarets or Taverns as can London: These would pass for
Palaces in other Countries, to such a Degree of Pomp and Splendure is Riot and
Drinking arrived; but whether this be to its Commendation or no, I dare not
determine.

And now having said all this in Commendation of London, I shall add but one
Word more, which in short is this: That of all the Cities perhaps in Europe,
there is not a more nasty and a more unpleasant Place. I shall not enlarge upon
the Exorbitancies of the City, nor declaim against the dear Rascally sorts of
Liquor whether Foreign or Homespun, together with the Excessive Rates of most
Provisions in the midst of so much Plenty, by which means Cooks, Vintners,
Victuallers, Ale-house-keepers, Coffee-Merchants, with such like Irreputable
Traders acquire vast Estates quickly, and are treated by those who frequent
there Houses with Terms of Condescension and Courtesy, upon hopes purely of
being favored with something which may not Poison 'em. I say, these and such
like Disorders would take up too much Time to reflect upon, only I must, with
my Readers Patience crave leave to enlarge a little upon one, which if
redressed would extremely Contribute to the Benefit and Beauty of this City;
and if continued, will still leave it exposed to many fatal Inconveniences, I
mean the burning of Sea-Coal.

This indeed is that one great Nuisance which sullies all the Beauties of this
City, being such as may be seen, felt, smelt, and tasted at some Miles
distance, so obvious is it to all our Senses: This is that which makes all the
Entrances into this City to be so noisome. The great Heaps, or Mountains
rather, of Cole-Dust, upon the least puff of Wind (like the Sands in Arabia)
invade and cover all Places; and lying (as they for the most part do) in or
near the Highways, upon the fall of Rain they render the Roads insufferably
black and dirty; so that a Man, if he would Ride a Mile or Two to take the Air,
must be harnass'd Cap-a-Pied, and wade sometimes to his Horses Belly almost in
this rich Balsamic Compound, and be as dirty as a Carrier, and although he
came but from Hackney or High-Gate, he shall be dappled and bespattered as if
he had rod Post from York. And as this is generally the Case in the
Wintertime, so in the Summer it is altogether as Incommodious, the Neighboring
Roads being filled with Clouds of Coal-Dust, and when Men think to take the
sweet Air, they Suck into their Lungs this Sulphurous stinking Powder, strong
enough to provoke Sneezing in one fallen into an Apoplexy. From whence comes
all those Rheums, Coughs, and Consumptions, which so universally afflict the
Inhabitants of this Place, especially such as have not been accustomed to so
gross an Air.

And such truly is the Corroding Quality of this Smoke, that the hardest Things
in Nature, or made by Art, cannot resist it, witness the Bars and Casements of
Windows, the Balconeys, with all sorts of Iron-work, which though never so well
Oil'd and Polished, will in a few Years become Eaten and Mouldring with Rust,
and must after a short Time be renewed to become fresh Fuel for this
all-devouring Smoke. The Stones themselves run the same Fate, witness St.
Peter's in Westminster, the Buildings in the Strand, as Sommerset-House, the
Savoy, the New-Exchange, Northumberland-House, with the more Ancient Buildings
of White Hall, all which are eaten away, peeled and fley'd as I may say to the
very Bones by this hellish and subterraneous Flume. The vast Number of
Coal-dust Carts trotting up and down the Town, perpetually scatter very
liberally of their precious Cargo in the Streets, which all that walk along may
partake of freely and welcome, the Streets receiving the overplus; by which
means they become most intolerable Dirty upon the least shower of Rain, and as
much plagued with Dust in dry Weather: From whence it is, that the Complexions
of Men and Women too, if they do not wash and daub, are soon tarnish'd and
become Sooty.

'Twere endless to reckon up all the Mischiefs which Houses suffer hereby in
their Furniture, their Plate, their Brass and Pewter, their Glass, with
whatsoever is solid and refined, all which are Corroded by it. A Bed of
Fourscore or one Hundred Pounds Price, after a dozen Years or so, must be laid
aside as sullied by the Smoke, which in the Country might have been preserved
fresh, and in its Primitive Luster for many Ages. All sorts of Hangings,
especially Tapestry, are in a few Years totally defiled by it, losing their
Beauty, and stinking richly into the Bargain, as may be seen or smelt, rather
in all the Hangings almost of Ordinary Houses: Hence it is, that of latter
Years they choose rather to make use of Wainscot to line their Walls with,
though this too is quickly found to loose its Beauty. All Gildings, Pictures,
Utensils; in a Word, all manner of Furniture whatsoever, though never so great
Care be used, do suffer extremely by this Tartanous Smoke, as do also all
Private Persons, those especially of better Fashion, in their Apparel; so that
Hats, Linen, Perriwigs, Wearing-Cloaths, Silks, with all Things of this Nature
presently turn Russet, and loose their Gloss and Beauty.

Nay so piercing is this smoke, that it works it self betwixt the joints of
Bricks, and eats out the Mortar; so that what was Fresh and Beautiful Twenty or
Thirty years ago, now looks Black, Old and Decayed, as appears in the Buildings
about Hatt^n-Gardens, and up and down Holborn, Bloomsbury, and elsewhere. Upon
this Account it is, that once in an Age or Two there must be Rebuilding, or
continual Repairing in a manner the whole City, which must needs mortify the
Inhabitants, with a continual Embarris of Carts, laden with Brick and Rubbish,
and render the City (as we see it does upon the matter) fit for nothing but
Scavengers. And what is more to be lamented then all the rest, the glorious
Fabric of St. Paul's now in building, so Stately and Beautiful as it is, will
after an Age or Two, look old and discolored before it is finished, and may
suffer perhaps as much damage by the Smoke, as the former Temple did by the
Fire. For it is impossible but channell'd Pillars with so much Carving, as is
about the Cornish and Porches of this Church, should be furred and sooty by the
Smoke sticking to it, and in a short time be defaced. Upon which account
perhaps it might have been more convenient, that the Outside of this sumptuous
Pile had been of a plainer mould.

By reason likewise of this Smoke it is, that the Air of the City, especially
in the Winter time, is rendered very unwholesome: For in case there be no Wind,
and especially in Frosty Weather, the City is covered with a thick Brovillard
or Cloud, which the force of the Winter-Sun is not able to scatter; so that the
Inhabitants thereby suffer under a dead be numming Cold, being in a manner
totally deprived of the warmth and comforts of the Day: To remedy which
disaster they are forced to make more Fires than ordinary, so that the more
Fire the more Smoke; and the more Smoke the more need of Fire; when yet to them
who are but a Mile out of Town, the Air is sharp, clear and healthy, and the
Sun most comfortable and revi^ing.

These and many other such mischievous Effects are the unavoidable Consequences
of this sort of Fuel. The Remedy whereof can be no other than the burning of
Wood and Charcoal, in the place of that Coal which is dug out of the Earth: but
whether this be practicable or no, is a matter which will require a further
Examination under these three General Points. The First is what Quantity of
Wood may probably be sufficient, to serve the occasions of so vast a City?
Next, whether such a sufficient Quantity may be found for this occasion? And
Lastly, Whether the Profit and Benefit arising from this Exchange of Fuel, be
greater than the Damage we may suffer by a want of Sea-Coal?

To understand what Quantity of Fuel may be sufficient for this great City, we
must enquire into its Bigness, the Number of its Inhabitants, and the
Circumstances of the Climate. As to the Bigness of London, it is without dispute
Greater by one Third, than it was before the Conflagration: For upon that
General Deluge (as I may say) of Fire, so many hands were employed in the
Repair of it, and such a confluence was there likewise of Workmen, from all
quarters of the Kingdom, and from abroad, that Men soon acquired a deep insight
and great experience, in the Art of Contriving and Building, and every
Carpenter almost and Bricklayer became an Undertaker. And when the Ruins were
Repaired, that they might keep themselves Employed they made use of all
Inventions whatsoever, to engage men into farther Labyrinths of Building,
making show every where of new Commodious Contrivances, as also of Cheaper
Methods. So that a House nowadays may be Built at half the Expense it would
have Cost Thirty years ago. And such an Emulation was there and is there still
amongst Men, as to the Elegancy and Convenience of Building, that what was
formerly looked upon to be very Beautiful, is now rejected as Contemptible and
Antic, and fit only to be pulled down, to make way for something more Gentile
and Modish. And yet for all this, I am very confident that the City as to the
Number of the Inhabitants, is not bigger than it was heretofore: For we may
easily perceive many quarters of it to be very thin, by having its Inhabitants
drained away to replenish the new Buildings, which yet are but very
indifferently replenished.

The Number of its Inhabitants as near as may be guessed at, may amount
probably to Four or Five Hundred Thousand, comprehending therein Men, Women and
Children, of which one fourth may be supposed to belong to the Country, being
Comers and Goers, and drawn thither upon the account of Business or Pleasure;
which Number is still greater or less as the Seasons of the Year, or of
Business, are more or less inviting. The most rational way of guessing at its
Inhabitants is from the Bills of Mortality, which one week with another may
amount to Four Hundred, or yearly to Twenty three Thousand and upwards, which
in the space of Twenty years (the Common measure of an Age) may amount, I say,
in the Sum Total, to the Number of Four or Five Hundred Thousand.

The Number of Houses as they stand at present in the City and Precincts of
London, Westminster and Southwark, may be computed to a mount to Forty
Thousand: For as for the greater Buildings or Houses, such as the Palace Royal,
the Inns of Court, of Chancery, and some Noblemen's Houses, they must not here
be reckoned as single Foundations or Houses, since some of them may contain the
Building of Twenty, Forty, or perhaps one Hundred private Houses, of the middle
Order, such as those which belong to Tradesmen or Shopkeepers. Let the Common
standard therefore or measure of a House be such an one as contains Nine
Chimnies, for where there is One that has more, there are Five which have
less: so that the excess viz. of the greater Houses on the one hand weighed
against the defect on the other, viz. the great Number of small Buildings in
private Allies and the Out-Skirts of the City, most of which have not above
five or Six Chimnies to a House, I say, upon such an Allowance (as is here
made) we may reasonably pitch upon Nine Chimnies to be the common proportion of
every House one with another; and than the Sum Total of the Chimnies may be
about Three Hundred and Sixty Thousand.

If we allow yearly therefore to every Chimney, one good Load of Wood or
Charcoal, or something more, we shall find that London will require about Four
Hundred Thousand Loads of Wood yearly to supply its occasions: And from this
too we may make a considerable defalkment, when we shall consider what a great
Number there are of Brewers, Dyers, Hatters, with such like Smoaky Occupations,
all which require a stronger and more constant heat, such as that of
Sea-Coal-Fires: Which Professions also being noysom in themselves and dangerous
to their Neighbors, upon the account of the many Casualties of Fire to which
they are more obnoxious, it would be very safe and convenient if they were
obliged to Settle on the farther side the Water, which would very much
contribute to the Health and Security of the City: So that upon an allowance of
our Furnace-Gentlemen, to use Sea-Coal, as also for the Sons of Vulcan, our
little Forge-men and Smiths which require to be dispersed up and down the Town
to some necessary occasions, we may reasonably believe that about three Hundred
and Fifty Thousand good Loads of Wood of a Tun to each Load, will be sufficient
to answer the occasions of this City.

It Is true, a Nobleman's House, and where there is much of the Kitchen, will
require Thirty or Forty Loads of Wood, but then we must Consider, that for one
Nobleman's House there are Eight or Ten smaller Houses of about Four or Five
Chimnies, which will be supplied with Four or Five Loads commodiously; so that
reguard being had still to the proportion of the House, the Quantity of Wood
before mentioned will be sufficient; and so much the rather, because that in
the Summer time most of the Nobility and Gentry retire into the Country.

Our next Enquiry then will be, where to find such a Quantity of Wood as is
here pitched upon? To this end and purpose we are to consider in the First
place, what quantity of Wood grows usually upon an Acre of Ground. An Acre then
of Coppice-Wood of about Twelve or Thirteen years growth, if moderately well
stored, will yield about Threescore Cords or Loads of Wood, each Cord or Load
being Eight Foot in length, Five Foot Six Inches in height, and Three Foot in
thickness or length of the Billet closely laid together; so that one Acre of
good Wood-Land will yield yearly about Five Loads of Wood more or less, and
then we shall find, that about Sixty Thousand Acres of Land well planted with
Wood, will afford us the quantity we are now seeking. These parts of Sussex and
Kent, which lie betwixt Tunbridge Wells and Rye, which is about Thirty miles in
length, and of a breadth proportionable, are almost all Woods, Great part of
Buckinghamshire, of Oxfordshire and Barkshire abound with vast Numbers of
Woods: The like may be said also of other places bordering upon the Roads of
London, from all which places to London we have a most easy conveyance by
Water, as well upwards by the Tide, as downwards by the Stream: For so it is,
that the parts nearest bordering on the Thames and Medway are most productive
of Wood; or if there be occasion for a Land-carriage, so hard, so capacious and
level are the Roads as are no where to be found in any other part of England.

What quantity of Wood this may amount to is hard to compute; but without all
dispute it far exceeds the Quantity required to serve the occasions of London,
especially if the Iron-works, those great devourers of Wood, were made to keep
their due distance. But in regard that London is not the only mouth which is to
be fed with this fiery food, there being some Consideration to be had to the
Necessities and Occasions of the Neighboring places, we must be allowed more
Ground than what is at this day planted with Wood, and this we shall not be
long a seeking for, if we consider of the great number of Heaths, waste Grounds
and Commons, which lie every way within Twenty or Thirty Miles of London. It
may reasonably be computed to be Fifteen or Twenty Thousand Acres, all which at
present is not worth Five Shillings an Acre, being stocked only with rascally
Sheep and Geese.

Let us suppose then an Act of Parliament to be raised in favor of this, or
some such like Design, (For without the All-mightiness of a Parliament no Great
and Public Work can ever come to any Maturity:) this Project then must be
built upon these Grounds, and First, In order to an Enclosure let all the
Rights and Privileges of the Commoners, be brought in at such a Rate or
Purchase, as the Supreme Authority of the Nation shall think fit: For to
deprive any one of his Right and Privilege without due Compensation made is
very unjust, as doubtless it is most just so to do when it shall redound to the
greater Benefit of the Public, without any detriment to the particular Persons
concerned. Secondly, such enclosed Wastes or Commons to be carefully preserved
by more than ordinary Provisions, to prevent tumultuary Invasions of mobling
Levellers, as likewise the clandestine Havocks to which such Enclosures
(especially near so Populous a City) are very Obnoxious. To this end and
purpose 'twould be convenient, that every Gentleman or Nobleman herein
concerned, over and above the subservient Laborers to be employed in Planting,
Fencing, Defending, Dipping, Cutting, Cording, Coating and Carrying such Wood
as from time to time should be upon the premises; I say it would be very
Expedient, that to every Thousand Acres so planted, there should be a Capital
Bailiff or Ranger, whose business it should be continually to visit the Woods
under his care, and to give an Account of what may occur to his notice.
Thirdly, that there be a standing Court or Body of Men, deputed every three
years by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City; by the Stewards of
Westminster and Southwark, and some others also by Parliament, to enquire into
Frauds and Disorders; and to determine the Prizes of Wood throughout the City
with its Penalties and dependencies; and in a word to Inspect and Regulate the
whole affair.

And as to that particular Branch of Enclosing Commons, 'twould certainly be a
thing of the greatest Advantage that ever could be thought of, and that in
respect of, First the Commoners themselves, for besides the ready Sums of
Money which so many Families would be enriched with, proportionably to their
Stock and Interest (which certainly would turn to a greater profit than what is
reaped from a waste and uncultivated Common) there will be a constant provision
likewise for a great Number of Poor Families who are now ready to steal or
starve, having only their bare naked Pasture to feed upon, where they are
exposed all the Winter long to pinching Winds and Hunger. Every Hundred Acres
so Planted as is here designed, will very well Employ and Maintain Four
Families for ever, when such Woods shall be capable of Cutting; and in the
raising of them, there will be continual Employment in Planting, and in making
and repairing of Hedges, etc. so that the poorer sort of People will be double
gainers by the Bargain.

Next for the Purchasers, it is as certain too, that their profit will be very
Considerable: For the Ground which before was not worth a Noble an Acre, being
Planted as it is here Projected, will yield near upon Thirty Shillings an Acre
for ever. And in the last place, the Public will reap Benefit by such
Improvements not only in respect of that more copious supply which will be
transmitted daily to the City, but in respect also of that Provision which may
be made for Timber, especially in the Skirts or Outsides of such Plantations:
For the Government ought to have a prospect to future Ages; and to have Timber
growing so near to our Naval Magazines would be a Thing of Inestimable
Advantage; the want and decay whereof is that, which we shall every day be more
sensible of than other. Lastly, it is for the Interest of the Commonwealth,
that Lands should be improved in Order to make the Public Burden more easy:
For Ground of Thirty Shillings an Acre can bear Taxes more easily than that of
seven or eight Shillings an Acre: And this reason will ever hold good, when the
Damage which some may receive, is inconsiderable in respect of the Advantage
reaped by others, and especially by the Public.

What may be objected against this Project of Enclosures is, first, That by
this means there will be a greater shelter for Thieves, and Robbers with which
such Places are but too much infested. To this the Answer is easy, as to
Robbers on the Highway, or the Bilbo-Blades, breaking upon the Wheel will be
an undoubted Remedy, of which I have already spoken. Pardon likewise, and a
Reward to such Robbers who shall discover their Fellows, will be a good
prevention of their Confederacy, and create a Jealousy amongst them, or fear
of one another. This was practiced with very good Success by Sextus Quintus,
who cleared all the Ecclesiastic State of Banditi or Proscripts, by promising
indemnity to every Bandit who should bring the Head of his fellow: whereupon
they fell to cutting of one another's Throats, each laboring to prevent his
Companion from making the first Experiment upon himself; and so not daring to
trust one another, the Gang was soon broken, for singly they were not
dangerous. As for petty Rogues, there is no great fear of them in the present
Case. Mutton-Mongers would have little Employments, the Commons being
unprovided with that Commodity, and for other pilfering Chapmen there will be
then no more cause of fear than now, rather less; there being a full Employment
for the poorer sort, and the Overseers of the Woods will be very useful also to
observe the Disorders of those under their Care.

Another Objection may be made from the noisomness of so many smoking
Cole-Pits, which we may suppose to be continually employed for the charboning
of Wood: But for the same reason there must be no Lime nor Brick made: For
these things too are of an offensive Savor. Besides, Charboning of Cole is a
thing which will not happen above once in Twelve or Thirteen Years, so that the
inconvenience may easily be born with, and is incomparably less than the
continual stink of the Sea-Coal Fires, which are so great an Annoyance to the
Court, to the Nobility and Gentry, and in a word, to the most Considerable part
of the Kingdom, whether we consider their Number or Quality.

Those who follow the Chase might possibly receive some prejudice as to freedom
of Riding by such Enclosures: But on the other hand they would reap a greater
Advantage from the preservation of the Game: For such Woods would ever be well
furnished, and the Countries neighboring upon London, is generally so open,
and the Fields so large, that there is liberty enough for the Chase, without
any incoveniency to the Rider, or to the Husbandman; but these are trivial
Considerations, not worth our insisting on.

Let us then hasten forwards and consider, whether the Profit and Advantage
arising to the Nation in general, and to London in particular, by burning of
Wood, be greater than the Damage they may sustain by the dis-usage of
Sea-Coal: If we consider the Question with an eye to the Public, it will be
told us by the Coal-Merchants, that in the Fleets where such Provisions are
brought, there are a great number of Boys and Seamen bred, who are so useful to
us either for War or Traffic; also, that one Chaldron of Coal will yield as
much Heat as four Loads of Wood; and that were it not for Coal the poorer sort
of London would perish. Likewise, that the use of Coal is the preservation of
Wood, and consequently of Timber, for where great Woods are cut, many thrifty
Trees, which in time would prove excellent Timber, are condemned to the Fire.

As touching the breeding of Seamen by the Coal-Voyages, it is certain that some
advantage does accrue to the Nation by that means; and certain it is too, that
would we apply our selves to the Fishing-Trade, we might be furnished with many
more Seamen than those who ply betwixt Newcastle and London; as it is certain
also, that the Fishing would bring us in more Profit than any other Undertaking
whatsoever. But so it is, that we are contented to let our Neighbors Fish upon
us (for the Net cannot well be avoided whilst the Waters are troubled) and then
make them rich at our own Expense, by buying our own Fish of them, at such
Rates as they shall be pleased to utter them: Which Point would deserve a
little to be insisted on, were it not that the Manifold and Signal Blessings we
have otherwise received of them, would lay us open to palpable Ingratitude,
should we once offer to contest it with such generous, faithful and constant
Friends, whose Benefits verily ought never to be forgotten. And yet, I fear,
though we should apply our selves to Fishing, we should not be very successful
at it, unless we could imitate them in their Industry, Parsimony, and their
great Care and Diligence in Curing and Ordering such Fish: For these are the
Three Principal Points which they have regard to who follow this Trade; which
such will never be good at, who love to live in full Pasture and at Ease.

But what will become of this Salt Water Objection, if we suppose (as really we
may without much peradventure) that were Wood the Statutable and Staple Fuel of
London, many Ships would be employed in bringing Char-Coal by Sea from other
parts of England, as Hampshire, etc. where such Provision might well be spared.
But to come to our Colliers; Be it as it will be, were London alone allowed or
obliged to make use of Wood-Fuel, there would be a vast utterance of Sea-Coal
along the Thames, and in all the Villages adjacent to London. And whereas
Commodities which come by Sea are subject to Disappointments, so in time of
War, should the Coal-Fleet be taken or obstructed, what then would become of
London? But Wood being a Native of the Neighborhood, could never fall a Prey
to Pirates, or be subject to Naval Attempts; and look what Provisions may be
made one Year, will continue the same in all others succeeding, if the same
quantity of Ground be yearly cut: For Wood is not like other Products of the
Earth, as Grass, Corn, etc. which by immoderate Rains, or excessive Heats, or
by many other Accidents, may become scarce and dear; but look what Profit a
Coppice yields at one Fillet, 'twill yield the like at another, if of the same
Growth, and duly preserved; so that our Computation being once adjusted, we
shall rarely be to seek for new Supplies, nor be unprovided.

But admitting that the New Castle Colliers might suffer something by the
disusage of their Coal in London, if it shall appear that the whole City, and
in effect the whole Kingdom of which that City is an Abridgement, shall suffer
infinitely more by the Use of it. I cannot see, what Reason there can be to
persuade so great a number of Men to a Continuance of that which is so
injurious to their own Concerns and Interest, only to be thought officious and
beneficial to some few others, who shall thereby get Estates: Just as
reasonable, as if I should endeavor to persuade the Citizens of London to pull
up their Broad Paving with which their Streets are flanked and which are so
commodious to all Persons, because 'twould be for the Interest of Shooemakers
and Tailors, that Men should wear out their Clothes and Shoes by trudging up
and down in the Dirt, or otherwise to ride in Coaches; which though very
Expensive to him, who goes up and down the Streets upon his Occasions, would
nevertheless be very commodious and profitable to Coach-makers, and to the
Hackney-Merchants.

That the burning of Sea-Coal may happen to be the Preservation of Wood, is in
some Sense very True, but it is as true too; that the burning of Wood would be a
greater Increase of Wood, and consequently of Timber, because it would
encourage Men to convert their barren Grounds into Wood-Plantations, whereas
where Wood-Fuel is neglected or supplanted by that of Coals, Men are easily
tempted to quit the Preservation of their Woods, and convert their Ground to
Tillage in hopes to find more Advantage; so that if Wood were made the Fuel of
London, I doubt not but that many would be thereby invited to convert their
Arable into Woods as a Thing of much more Profit: For being once Planted, they
are preserved with little Labor and Charge, and yield a certain constant
Revenue without hazard: For Crops of Wood with a little Care, as I said before,
will never fail, and being arrived to some Growth, a Year or Two's forbearance
will excedingly advance the Increase. And as it is true likewise, that one
Chaldron of Coal will yield more heat than Three or Four Loads of Wood, so it
is as true too, that the Damage sustained in a House in London, of any Figure
o^ Trade, by the smutty smoke of the Coal, is triple to the extraordinary
Charge such a House would ly under, were it obliged only to make use of Wood
and Char-coal.

In respect of the Poor, Sea-Coal must be confessed to be a very commodious
Fuel, because cheap; so possibly might Turf and Cow Dung be; but were it not
for that Thick Cloud of Sea-Coal-Smoke which covers the City in the
Wintertime, and deprives it of the Benefit of the Sun, I doubt not but there
would be less occasion for Fire than now there is; that the Poor in London
might subsist as well as they do in other Cities of England, by the Benefit
only of Wood, were the Price thereof fixed to a just and equitable Rule.

Paris doubtless, is more Populous than London, and has as many Poor, the
Winters likewise are sharp enough, tho not so long as with us: Neither have
they their Wood in any Quantities growing near it, nor such a River as the
Thames to float it; and yet such is their Economy in this particular, that
there is no want, nor do their Poor starve in Winter. With us however, and in
case of a Season more severe than ordinary, 'twould be a Charity becoming the
Wealth and Greatness of such a City as London, to give Four or Five Thousand
Chaldren of Sea-Coal to be distributed amongst the Poorer Families, which at
the Proportion of half a Chaldron to a Family, would supply the Indigence of
Twenty or Thirty Thousand Poor People, without any considerable annoyance to
the City.

Something may be objected against the Use of Wood, as being more cumbersome
than Sea-Coal, which lies close in the bottom of a Cellar, and is in no danger
of Fire, whereas Wood must have a great deal of Room to ly within Doors, and
without Doors too 'twill be no less an Encumbrance and Hazardous, tho a great
Number of Houses there are which have no Convenience without, or any spare
Backside at all, and especially in the City. But this is easily answered; for
first, It is supposed that the greatest part of our Wood-Fuel is to be
Char-coal, which will ly in as little room almost as Sea-Coal, in Holes and
Vaults, and over and above has this advantage, that it is sooner lighted to
serve our Occasions, and more easily, and with less waste, put out, and
reserved for further use, so that we may kindle more or less of it, as we see
good, and without waste, whereas Sea-Coal-Fires are a long time a kindling, and
many times we are forced to make twice as much Fire as is needful, because this
kind of Fuel cannot be made to burn in a little quantity. Wood, as Faggots,
Billet, and the like, is too cumbersome for some Houses, within or without
Doors: It is to be supposed then, that in the out-skirts of the City such
Provisions are to be stored up, or to be always ready upon the Wharfs, or in
Boats, and especially on Lambeth-side; from all which Places the Woodmongers
may supply the Occasions of private Families without great Hurry and
Encumbrance, as we we see it done in Paris and elsewhere. And although Char-coal
of it self be no very wholesome Fuel, especially in close Rooms, yet being mixed
with Wood which may make a Flame, it is very inoffensive and sweet, making a
very cheerful Fire, and yielding a very strong and lasting heat.

There remains one Objection more against Wood, which truly is the most
material thing which may be said against it, and it is this, London, we know, is
a City very subject to the Misfortune of Fire, by reason of the great Quantity
of Firr used in Floors, Partitions, Wainscot, etc. which sort of Wood, by
reason of its Rosiny Nature, is most apt to take fire, and the Hearths and
Chimneys in the new Buildings are made so little, and the Wainscot coming so
near, there is much to be feared that way; whereas Coal-fires, lying in a Box
or Grate, are not apt to fall upon the Floors, or if they do, the Cinders die
presently.

I must confess, as many Chimneys are now made, there ought to be more than
ordinary care to prevent Mischief: However, there is hardly any Chimney so
little, but will contain a moderate quantity of Char-coal with some short
Billets, all which may be so contrived in Frames or Grates, as may easily
prevent Mischief by falling on the Floor flaming; and our Sea-Coal casting a
stronger Heat than other Fuel, may be every way as dangerous to thin Wainscot,
or Boards, near the Chimneys, as Wood-fire: For so apt is Fire to catch, that
by any intense heat it will kindle at a distance, without any substantial
application of burning Matter. But whatsoever inconvenience there may be upon
this score, it is no way comparable to the Advantages which will arise on the
other hand, as is most evident to the impartial Reader from the foregoing
Discourses,

For whilst Sea-Coalis burnt in so great a quantity, it is at present,
Shopkeepers must expect to have their Wares tarnish'd and sullied, which must
needs debase the Price, let them do the best they can. The Citizens and
Gentlemen must have their rich Furniture smutted and casted, and their closer
Rooms stinking and smoky. Their Wearing-Apparel likewise must be subject to the
same Fate, and every thing must lose its Luster. The Skins and Complexions,
especially of the fairer Sex, will stand in constant need of artificial helps,
which in time brings Nature under inconceivable Decays and Deformity. The
Buildings, whether public or private, must run the like Destiny, whilst their
Streets are continually dirty and stinking, and the Town it self perpetually
plagued with Coal-Dust and Rubbish. The Inhabitants must be contented
frequently to want the Sun for many Days together, and especially in a Season
when its Beams would be most welcome, as also to have their Bodies filled with
Coughs and Rheums, till they fall under Consumptions. All the innocent Contents
which the Mind can take from fair Prospects, whether of Buildings, or of the
Country, are lost in these Clouds: All the Beauties and Verdure of Gardens, are
blackened by this sooty Air; all the Roads and Walks near the City being
continually subject to black, stinking Dirt or Dust, and from this stinking and
smoaky Air it is probably, that young Infants are hardly to be bred up in
London: For their newborn Bodies, like tender Plants, or Blossoms, are soon
blasted by the Sulphurous Exhalation.

In a word, it is impossible for any Man to live sweet and clean, to appear
polite and well-adjusted amidst so many inevitable inconveniences, without a
vast Expense, which whilst some of more ample Fortunes may bear with; Others
(and they too many) of straiter Circumstances, no less ambitious to make a
Figure in the World, according to their Birth and Quality, fall into Ruin by
living beyond themselves, that they may live in the Company of those of their
own Degree and Rank. And it may be worth a transient Thought possibly, that as
Wood-fire does totally extinguish (as I may say) all the foregoing Mischiefs,
so the very Ashes of it will be a very considerable Profit, and useful upon
several accounts, whilst Coal-Cinders serve only to choke up all the Avenues of
the City; so that a Foreigner coming to London, would think it to be regularly
fortified and flanked with Bulwarks or Ramparts of Ashes; or else fancy
perhaps, these Mountains of Rubbish to be the Remains of the last dreadful
Conslagration.

Some little Scruple may be made against the Use of Wood-fires, from that
Provisionary Act for the Rebuilding of Paul's, laying a Tax or Tribute on
Sea-Coal for the Carrying on and Finishing that Great Design. But this is as
soon solved as thought on: For this Project of Wood-fires, supposing it were to
be put in execution, could not signify any thing, under Four or five and
twenty Years; for so long it will be before a new-planted Wood will be sit to
Fell; before which time, it may be hoped, that Admirable Fabric may arrive to
its Consummation, or supposing it should continue longer in building, I can see
no Reason why the same Burden or Tax may not be laid upon Wood for some short
time.

When I first gave my Fancy the Liberty of ranging upon this Subject, I could
not imagine with my self that it would have any other Effect than to amuse the
Reader, by giving him some Diversion from what before he might be cloyed with,
as possibly by this time he is with that which I am now writing of: For it
cannot be thought that an Essay of this nature, coming from so mean a hand,
should meet with a very favorable Reception, especially where the Business is
of that intricate nature, as will open a Breach to diverse Contests, and give
Offense to some whose Interest lies another way; though peradventure it may
appear agreeable to others. However, I dare be bold to say, that were the
Matter seriously weighed by those of Judgment and Power, as they would easily
be inclined to think favorably of this Expedent, upon Considerations suggested
from their own Private and Prevailing Reasons; so their Authority, and the
Figure which they bear in the Government, would enable them to put this Project
upon the Trial, by surmounting all the Difficulties which might make head
against it: For a Business of this nature, after the Course of Four or five and
twenty Years, (as I have already said) would come to the Birth; as in truth all
Great and Profitable Designs whatsoever are the Issues of Time, and Things of
greatest Maturity and Duration are longest in their Concession.

But suppose we, after all, that it should be found by Experience, that
Sea-Coal in the present Case should be more Advantageous than Wood-Fuel, and
that Wood-Fuel thereupon should be rejected, the Gentlemen notwithstanding who
had undertaken to plant the Wast-Grounds and Heaths in the Neighborhood of
London, would still be great Gainers, their Ground being rendered of Thrice or
Four times more Value than it was at before; which would be a good Return for
their Money. Likewise the Kingdom in General would have the Advantage, in
having such Nurseries for Timber, and so commodious for use. So that no Damage
could accrue by the Attempt, but there would be great Certainty of Advantage,
in many respects, though it should fail in the Main Design, which in all Projects
whatsoever is a very rational and sufficient Ground for Trial.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul 's
Churchyard.
Folio.
FAther Malebranch's Treatise concerning the Search after Truth: The whole Work
complete; to which is added, his Treatise of Nature and Grace, being a
Consequence of the Author's Principles contained in the Search: together with
F. Malebranch's Defense against Mr. de la Ville, and several other Adversaries.
All Englished by T. Tailor, M. A. of Magdalen College Oxon. The Second
Edition; to which is Added a Treatise of Light and Colors, Communicated by the
Author, to a Person of Quality in England: And not before Published in any
Language.

Athenae Oxoniensis; or, An exact History of all the Writers and Bishops who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford, from 1480, to the end of
the Year 1690; giving an account of the Birth, Fortune, Perferment, and Death
of all those Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives, with the
Fate and Character of their Writings The Work so complete, that no Writer of
note of this Nation, for two hundred Years, is omitted: In two Volumes.

A complete History of the Canon and Writers of the Books of the Old and New
Testament, by way of Dissertation, with useful Remarks on that Subject: in two
Volumes, by L. E. Dupin, Doctor of the Sorbon, and Regius Professor of
Philosophy in Paris. Done to English from the French.

A new Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam; by Monsieur de la Laubiere,
Envoy Extraordinary from the French King to the King of Siam, in 1687, and
1688; wherein a full and exact account is given of their Natural History; as
also of their Music, Arithmetic, and other Mathematick Learning; illustrated
with Sculptures. Done out of French by Dr. P. Fellow of the Royal Society.

Dr. Pocok's Commentaries on Hosea, Micah, Malachy and Joel: printed at the
Theater Oxon.

The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley, the 9th Edition. To which is added, the
Cutter of Coleman-street, with some Poems never before printed.

Quarto.
A Critical History of the Texts and Versions of the New Testament, in two
parts, by Father Simon, of the Oratory.

A Discourse sent to the late K. James, to persuade him to embrace the
Protestant Religion; by Sam. Parker, late Bishop of Oxon. To which are prefixed
two Letters, the first from Sir Lionel Jenkins on the same Subject; the second
from the Bishop, sent with the Discourse: All printed from the original
manuscripts.

A Sermon before the King and Queen, about Reformation of Manners, by Edward,
late Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Bishop of Chester's Charge to his Clergy, at his primary Visitation.

Of the Reverence due to God in his public Worship: A Sermon before the King
and Queen at White Hall, March 25. 1694, being the fifth Sunday in Lent; by
Nicholas Lord Bishop of Chester.

Two Sermons, one on a Thanksgiving before the House of Commons in November
1691; the other before the Queen, in November, 1692. by Dr. Jane, Dean of
Gloucester.

Three Sermons before the Queen, by Dr. Resbury.

Four Sermons, one on a Thansgiving at Worcester; the second before the Queen;
the third upon the Occasion of a public Charity. The fourth before the King,
on the 5th. of Nov. 99. By the Right Reverend William Lord Bishop of Oxon.

Two Sermons by Mr. Adams, one before the Lords Justices upon the taking of
Namur; the other before the House of Commons, Nov. 5.

A short defense of the Orders of the Church of England; by Mr. Milbourn.

Certain Considerations for the better establishment of the Church of England;
with a Preface by James Harrington Esquire.

Five Sermons on several Occasions, by Mr. Francis Atterbury.

A letter to a Lord, in answer to a late Pamphle^ An Enquiry into the Causes of
the present fears and dangers of the Government; in a Discourse between a Lord
Lieutenant and one of his Deputies.

A Sermon at the Funeral of John Melfort Esquire by Mr. Easton.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Sir Willoughby Chamberlain; by Dr. King, School.

Two Sermons; the first of Anger, before the Queen; the other before the Lord
Mayor; by Mr, Blackburn, Chaplain to the Bishop of Exeter.

Two Visitation Sermons at Guildford in Surrey, in 1697; the first on
Enthusiasm; the other of the Necessity of Reformation and an holy Life; by W.
Whitfield M. A. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Octavo and Twelves.
Thirty Six Sermons upon several Occasions, in three Volumes: by Robert South,
D. D. the second Edition.

Sermons and Discourses upon several occasions, by Dr. Stradling, Dean of
Chichester; together with an Account of the Author; by James Harrington Esquire

Sermons and Discourses upon several occasions, by Dr. Meggot, Dean of
Winchester.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Roman Emperor: Translated out
of Greek into English by Dr. Causabon, with Notes. To this Edition is added,
The Life of the Emperor; with an account of Stoic Philosophy; as also Remarks
on the Meditations. All newly written by Monsieur and Madam Dacier.

Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God; patchetically discoursed of in
a Lettet to a Friend, by the Honorable R. Boil. The eighth Edition with some
Additions.

Academy of Sciences; being a short and easy Introduction to the knowledge of
the Liberal Arts and Scinces, with the Name of such Authors of note as have
written on every particular Science. By Dr. Abercromley.

A Letter to a Divine of the Church of England, concerning the composing and
delivery of Sermons.

The Inspiration of the New Testament asserted and explained; in answer to the
Six Letters of Inspiration from Holland, etc. By Mr. Le Moth.

Cardinal Bona's Guide to Eternity; Englished by Sir. R. L'estrange.

Remarks on some late Writings of the English Socinians, in four Letters* done
at the Request of a Socinian Gentleman, by Mr. Luzancy, Minister of Dovercourt
and Harwich.

The Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces; to which is added, the Life of his
present Majesty King William the Third, from his Birth to his Landing in
England: By Mr. Tho. Bro^n; together with all the Princes Heads taken from
Original Draughts, by Mr. Robert White.

Monsieur Bossu's Treatise of the Epick Poem, con^aining many curious
Reflections, very useful and necessary for the right understanding and judging
of the Excellencies of Horace and Virgil. Done into English from the French,
together with some Reflections on Prince Arthur. To which are added, An Essay
upon Satyr, by Monsieur Dacier; and a Treatise upon Pastoral Poetry, by
Monsieur Fontanelle.

A Comparison between Pindar and Horace, written in French by Mr. Blondel,
Master to the Dauphin; Englished by Sir Edw. Sherburn.

Monsieur Rapin's Reflections upon Aristotle's Poetry; containing the
necessary, rational and universal Rules for Epick, Drammatick, and the other
sorts of Poetry; with Reflections on the Works of the Ancient and Modern Poets,
and their Faults noted. Translated by Mr. Rhymer, by whom is added, some
Reflections on the Poets of the English Nation.

A Voyage to the World of Des Carts; translated from the French by T. Tailor,
M. A. of Magd. Coll. Oxon.

Memoirs of the Court of France, written by the ingenious French Lady:
Englished by Mr. Thomas Brown.

A Discourse of Religious Assemblies; wherein the Nature and Necessity of
Divine Worship is explained and asserted, against Negligence and Profaneness:
For the use of the Members of the Church of England: By George Burghop, Rector
of little Goddesden in Hertfordshire.

A Conference with a Theist, in four parts, by W. Nicholls, D. D. Rector of
Sels^y in Sussex.

The Certainty and Necessity of Religion in general; or, the first Grounds and
Principles of Human Duty established. In Eight Sermons preached at St. Martins
in the Fields, at the Lecture for the Year 1697, founded by the Honorable R.
Boil Esquire. By F. Gastrel, B. D. Preacher to the Honorable Society of
Lincoln's Inn.

The Certainty of the Christian Revelation, and the Necessity of Believing it,
Established, in opposition to all the Cavels and Insinuations of such as
pretend to allow Natural Religion. and reject the Gospel by F. Gastrel, B. D.
Preacher to the Honorable Society ^f Lincons-Inn.

Aeschinis in Ctesiphontem, and Demosthenis de Corona Oration. Gr. Lat.
Interpretat. Lat. and Vocum Difficilimum explicationem adjecerunt. Per P.
Foulkes, J. Friend. Aedis Christi Alumni.

Aesopicarum Fabularum Dilectus, Gr. Lat.

The Rights, Powers and Privileges of an English Convocation Stated and
Vindicated, in Answer to a late Book of Dr. Wake's, Entitled, The Authority of
Christian Princes over their Ecclesiastical Synods, Asserted, etc. and to
several other Pieces.

Jacobi Patriachae de Shiloh Vaticinium a depravatione Johannis Clerici, in
Pentateuchum Commentatoris, Assertum Opera and Studio Sebastiani Edzardi
Accedit Ejusdem Dissertatio de nomine Elohim, Auctori Judicii de R. Simonii
Historia V. Test. Critica opposita.


