Imprimatur,

Geo. Thorp Reverendissim P. D. Gulielmo Archiep Cant. A Sacris Domesticis
April 16. 1679.
ESSAYS Divine AND MORAL.

By Bridgis Nanfan, Esquire.

LONDON,

Printed for William Leach at the Crown in Cornhil, near the Stocks-Market.
1680.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, William, Lord Bishop of S. David's.
My LORD,
THe World has such a Veneration for your Lordship, that but to affix your
Name here, gives an ennoblement to what of its self is altogether immeriting. I
do not a little glory in the honor of your Friendship, and that in the perusal
of these Papers you have been pleased to give them a valuation. I do now with
more than ordinary assurance let them see light, since influenced by your
favor, and warranted by so true an understanding.

My Lord, Divinity is not my Province, and in a dissol^te age may seem less
fashionable: but the most unconcerned person, when he comes to make a retreat
into himself, will leave to turn devotion into Ridicule, and find piety his
best security. Heights of this nature are not within my Talent; what I have
most, reached at has been the gracefulness of expression, otherwise unfit to
approach your Lordship. I know no reason but that composures of this kind
should put on all the luster we can dress them with, to beget Inamoratos, since
their intrinsic beauty has in this pore-blind world so little attraction.

My Lord, it is usual in Dedications to celebrate the persons we address to; but
your Lorship has so often drawn your self to the life, that a rude Pencil
would seem but to disfigure the fair Lineaments your inimitable hand has
fashioned. To enumerate your Lordships perfections were too bold an
undertaking, and (where they are so eminently known) were to set up a Taper to
the Meridian Sun. Besides (but by paying your Lordship a fitting observance) I
should offend your humility, of which you are a great example. Though the Copy
seldom reaches the original, yet that all persons would endeavor such
perfection, is heartily wished by him, that desires to continue the honor of
stiling himself,

My Lord, Your Lorships most Obedient Humble Servant, Bridgis Nanfan*

These following Essays are,

1. De Sanctitate Matutina. Ecless. 12.1. 2. De Humana Fragilitate. Job 14.1.
3. De Passione Christi in Corpore proprio. Lament. 1.12. 4. De Passione Christi
in corpore mystico seu de cruce piorum. 2. Cor. 4.17.
ESSAYS Divine and Moral, etc.
ESSAY I. De Sanctitate Matutina.
ECCLES. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth.


AN Elegant Subject receives no illustration from the faint colors laid on by
a rude hand. The Pencil of the greatest Statist fits best to beautify the
noblest actions. What nobler action, than to chalk out the intricate Labyrinth
to an eternity of bliss? A skilful Pilot he must needs be that steers through
this Hellespont.

2. The sure Lanthorn of the glorious Gospel must be eminently placed, while we
pass this straight, when so many with winged Sails make to the heavenly Ophir,
yet for want of the true Card of God's illuminating spirit to direct them, or
fainting by the way, when they cross the line of persecution, few make a rich
return of their labor.

-- Pauci quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, at que ardens evexit ad aethera virtus.
None then so fit to keep steady the erring World, as old Solomon, who had not
only God (the Infallible Word) to dictate to him, while he dropped this Precept,
but the Firm of Heaven set to a Transcript of a full Series of Experience, from
the rising to the setting of his Age. He could in the liveliest colors
delineate unto us the exorbitances of our Juvenile fervours, who had the Malady
thereof as a Quotidian Ague.

3. This Magus could also best state the unwieldiness of frosted Age to ring an
hourly Devotion, when the Wheels and Master-springs are rusty and out of order,
and its imbecility to raze those strong Fortifications Satan (that subtle
Engineer) cunningly builds to annoy us; when he, who had wisdom to an
astonishing excellency, could not repulse the temptations spun with the fingers
of the softer Sex, but must, in scorn of the ever living God, go worship
Ashtoreth, the Goddess of the Sydonians.

Remember now thy Creator.

That Is the burden of his Song: all the rest of the strings are wound up to
tune with this. Good God so dispose our hearts and hands to beat the time, that
our souls, with so sweet an harmony, so Angelical a Diapason, may be ravished
into an heavenly ecstasy.

Before the glimmering spark of our devotion be absolutely extinguished, he
puts in this seasonable Memento, as a bellows to blow it into a new flame.

4. This is the Antidote that cleanses and purifieth our blood, poisoned with
the invenomd arrow of our sins. Those Seraphick thoughts are the pearled dews,
Ambrosial showrs, that water, and refresh us, when we are almost dried up, and
withered: Those Arabian winds (rich in their Perfumes) that fan and cool our
spirits scorched with the raging heat of lust and concupiscence. When the
ghastly visage, haggish Ghost of sin affrights us, one drop distilled from this
Alembick, and carefully thrown on the faces of our consciences, presently
inspirits those parts, which before only wanted the decent ceremony of a
Winding Sheet. When we are sung asleep with Satan's Lullabys, when, in the
midnight of a besotted Lethargy, he carries his dark Lanthorn to fire this
train, here is the Curfue that rings the Alarm, that with full buckets of
repentant tears we may timely extinguish the spreading flames, before they lay
hold on the rotten buildings of our souls.

5. They who went to the Cave of Trophonius, to consult the Oracle, drank of
two Rivers; Lethe at the entering in, Mnemosyne at the going forth; that, by the
operation of the one, they might purge their thoughts of such delectations, as
they had given too free a Welcome to; by the other, enshrine in their breasts
what that adored Diety deigned them the knowledge of. So when we make our
Applications to Heaven, consult that sacred Oracle, we must not only memorize
him, as the great Architect of the Universe, as God from all Eternity, but we
must clear our remembrance of all Dregs and Lees, the issue of our foul
Impieties, of such poisonous Cates as discolor the easy tinctured complexion
of our souls, with this cooling Julip put out the fire of our Concupiscence,
with this Opiate deaden and stupifie our enraged affections.

Good and evil, like fire and water, have repugnant qualities, will not body
together, but like an Exhalation, break.

6. How then can we contemplate our Creator as a pure Essence, but we must
abominate our own beastiality? How can we remember him as a just Judge, without
trembling at the Bar of his Justice, and putting in the merits of our Savior,
as our surest Plea? Or take in Ideas of an all-seeing eye, without ransacking
the inmost Cells, and Meanders of our hearts, for the casting out those Devils,
those Impieties that have lain so long leiger? They must be thus exorcis'd
before we can fashion an entertainment, garnish the best lodgings in our souls,
give a respectful audience to those tutelary Angels, to that Legatus a latere,
Christ Jesus himself.

In the Reign of Tiberius it was judged an heinous crime in Paulus the Praetor,
for taking a Chamber Pot in his hand, when he wore a Ring that had the
Engravement of Caesar.

7. It must needs then be an offense of a deeper, die (after we have once
lodged God in our hearts) instead of Myrrh and Cassia (incense of a pure life)
to make him nauseate those dwellings with the ordure and filth of corrupt
affections.

This is a Catholicon, a Medicine for all diseases. When we are entangled with
macerating cares, the thoughts of a true and powerful friend clears the mind of
its disturbances, builds a confidence in us equal to a victory: so though
misfortunes, like violent Surges, roll in upon us; yet if the Heavens be
serene, that we have but a gleam of our Maker, such beams, such coruscations
issuing from his grace, dispel all Mists and Fogs that incurtain our souls,
brighten every affliction, make every wound and scar received in his warfare,
marks of honor and beauty.

8. The Ancient Hebrews would memorize on their Gates and Porches, the favors
the Lord had been pleased, at any time, to confer upon them. Such gentle dews
of acknowledgment, exhaled from us by God, are showred down in whole Cataracts
of Love and Bounty. If such gratitude in Heaven, that a cup of cold water given
in the name of Christ, ushers in a sure Reward; shall we, who have not activity
to inspirit the meanest action without the Master-spring of God's Omnipotent
Power, satiate our selves with the affluence his goodness affords us, and not
give a retribution of thanks? Shall he, that formed all, find only a repugnancy
in him, whose reason (as an Heavenly Intelligence) should sit on the Sphere of
his active abilities, to give them perfect motion.

Remember now thy Creator.

9. This the Persian Decree that cannot be reverst, the first word of command
given unto the Young Soldiers, fighting under the Banner of the Church
Militant. This ranks our thoughts and affections, that they run not into
disorder. These few words make^ us, more than Archimedes, to take the
transcendent height of Heaven; and though but a ladder of few rounds, yet when
we ascend the uppermost step, our heads are reared above the Clouds, where we
look upon the great Magnifico's of the World, as so many Anticks below us,
dancing Galliards to no better Music than what pleasure and vanity, as so many
deceitful Sirens, sing us.

10. Is it not time therefore to sound a retreat to such, that run a full
career in pursuit of their own vanities, with this excellent piece of Scripture?

Remember now thy Creator.

Let such learn to put by insinuating pleasures with that brave resolved
answer, Hippolitus gave to the enchantments of an alluring Siren,

Procul impudicos corpore a casto amove Tactus -- Shall we throw the
remembrance of him behind us, who made himself the Pattern to mould us into so
enamouring a shape; whose hands (as Saint Basil has it) were to man as a Womb,
enobled that shape with a soul (though clogged with the rags of flesh,)
journies from East to West, rides about the Circumference, descends to the
Center, ascends to the top of the Universe, posts from Earth to Heaven in a
moment.

11. And when (like foolish Schoolboys) we had robbed God's Orchard of that
Fruit impaled with his own mandate, and so heaped coals of fire upon our own
heads; though by this we had sunk our selves to the lowest abyss of misery, yet
would he not (like friends that take their farewell with our felicity) leave us
forlorn; but rather than we should eternally perish, and so cancel the benefit
of our Creation, tore a limb of the Diety, made a divorce between God and God,
betwixt himself and his beloved Son, that he might be a Sacrifice for so grand
an offending. When he had thus repaired the old defacements caused by Adam, new
minted, coined us full of Glories, steering us from a troubled Sea into safe
harbor, this Watchman that slumbereth not, still kept Sentinel knowing, the
storm being once allayed, we would put our weather-beaten Vessels to Sea again.

12. This not all (though sufficient to engage our remembrance) but every
Creature (the riches of Nature) made by the hands of the Almighty, kneaded of
the same Elements, and only beholden to man for their names, are so
subservient, as to pay themselves to him, as constant Tribute. I need not take
care to put more weight into God's balance, when the least mite of his favor
will at any time turn the Scale of our best: deservings, but join wonder with
the Psalmist, What is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man
that thou so regardest him?

But let us not, Fata fugiendo in fata ruere; while we hale off the Sands, fall
foul on the Rocks; to prevent a forgetfulness of our Maker take such boldness
with this Superspiritualis spiritus (styled so by Damascen) as one friend will
with another. The Effigies of him, whose endeeredness to us has merited some
extraordinary value, is commonly drawn in the liveliest colors, set in the
most obvious and eminent place, that we may enjoy a living show for a dead
substance.

13. But this great and terrible Jehovah, glorious in his incomprehensible
Attributes, whose sacred name I adore afar off, not daring to approach but with
a prostrate countenance, much more with a rude Pencil venture at his
Dimensions, who is great without quantity, and good without quality; can he be
circumscribed with lines, whose Center is every where, and Circumference no
where? Who spans the Poles with his fingers, and holds the whole World in his
fist? Shall fading colors set forth the glory of his countenance, who is
clothed with light as with a garment? With what eyes shall we behold this
Father of light, when the face of his servant Moses carried too radiant a
luster for the Israelites to behold without a darkning Veil?

14. Nay, by what measures shall we estimate the Creator, when the Creature it
self, the Sun (a Creature without so much as Vegetation) appears too
resplendent for the eye of man to fix on without dropping a tear, as a
repentance for his boldness? But then let hot sullenness have that predominancy
over us, because we cannot see beyond our Horizon, have a full draught of his
ineffable Majesty, refuse to know so much as we can. Without unravelling the
ruffled skein of the Trinity, we may comprehend that, which may be the material
cause of our salvation. To remember him as our Creator, and (in the acceptance
of his Son's merits) our Redeemer, as one that by day goes before us in a
pillar of a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire, is a Sphere large enough
for man's narrow soul to Intelligence.

To make this a Complete Chain, we must add another link to it; In the days of
our Youth.

Remember thy Creator, in the days of thy Youth.

15. That easily rated to us we commonly strike into a bargain, not omitting
the Golden Opportunity of purchasing. Can more triumphant glory, with such
exceeding cheapness, be set before us than this Clum Empyraeum, this Heaven of
Heavens, purchased only with the Remembering our Creator, in the days of our
Youth?

Certainly it was a Noble show to have seen Rome (Queen of the World) when her
victorious Captains made their entry in their Triumphal Garments, crowned with
the Spoils of Kingdoms, attended by Princes, and Potentates, Ensigns, and
Trophies of their glorious Conquests.

16. Alas, it was but a Poppet-shew, at best but fantastic Pageantry, to those
super-excellent things of the New Jerusalem, which cannot be decypher'd but in
part, when our bodies are glorified; because we cannot see to the end of
eternity, shall never be able to characterize the plenitude of its glories, and
rich beatitudes; because we shall never have experience of their termination,
have that duration, that a thousand years are but as one day, of such an
everlastingness, as that of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Merciful Lord give
us that holy longing of Saint Augustine; To see that head which was crowned,
and those hands which were pierced, to purchase for us such inestimable
glories, that have an incomprehensibility above all admigration.

It is observed that Saint Paul, after that he had been rapt up into the third
Heaven, and there seen the wonders thereof, and heard things unutterable, put a
very low valuation upon any thing that was terrene ever after.

C. 1. Since our encouragement is so great, our Trophies for victory over sin
and Satan shall be so full of Pulchritude, so glorious, let us not post off our
repentance to a dying hour, that must of necessity be an early Sacrifice, but
strike while the Iron is hot, in the fervor of our Age. Though he paid some
that came at the last hour, equally with those who endured the whole heat of
the day, and showed them eminent mercy, when the cracked glass of old age has
been dropping the last sand; yet know we not whether the fatal Sisters will
draw out the thread of our life to a greater length, or that God (whose lenity
may be abused) will accept our dull spectacle services, when the evil days are
upon us, we refusing him the choicest oblations of our youth.

This portion of Scripture (pardon the compareson) is the Brazen Head that
tells us, Time is. If we have not the Wedding Garment on when the Bridegroom
calls, we shall not have admittance into the Bridal-Chamber.

2. Such as repudiate Christ in the luster of Youth, in their Meridian of
Glory, shall receive a retaliation, when that Vermilion proves adulterate.

Christ's Spouse the Church is fair, and has no spot in her, not bleer eyed,
not palsie-headed, but comely, as the Tents of Kedar, and as the Curtains of
Solomon. So that, if we will match with Christ, we must bid the Banns while our
Roses are fragrant; when we are young, and pulpy, that the Seal of God's Grace
may stamp the more lively. Signature on us.

When God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his Son Isaac, (a straight command for
the Father to bath his hands in his Son's gore; nay, Isaac his only Son, Isaac
whom he loved) yet Abraham's ready performance shall be the echo to God's
call, and will as attentively receive his orders for the slaughtering his Son,
as his Wives Sarah's for the impregnating her Handmaid Hagar, as it is manifest
in his early rising to offer up this piece of himself, as sweet incense unto
the Lord.

3. Out of this old Cistern we may draw forth living waters, and we Children
learn of this Father of many Nations; betimes, in the dawning of our age, rise
from our downy beds of sin, to glorify our Maker, and those endeared pleasures
(as so many Dalilahs,) that enervate and disable us from combating with Satan
(that great Leviathan) we must depose, unthrone, before they subject us to a
vassilage.

The pestilence soonest deflowers the fairest complexion, and an inconsiderable
disease in our Nonage makes the Lillies look pale and wan, blasts the Roses in
our cheeks, and every where gives a sallow tincture to what before appeared
pure and sanguine. Now this of the mind holds the same parallel with that of
the body. The first stage of our life is the most dangerous for giving and
receiving temptations: Every vice, like a Curtesan, trickt up in the loveliest
attire, makes its address, and rather than this tinsel stuff shall want vent,
that subtle Impostor, the Devil, brings in all the Presidents and Pleadings of
Nature.

4. Speaks to us in our own Dialect, robed with the fairest blandishments and
graces of speech; leaves out no artifice or flourish to make his Oratory
persuasive; tells us, to meditate on Heaven is but a fit of Melancholy, the
dumpish thoughts of Mortality carry a harsh and jarring sound to our sprightly
spirits, such wrinkled severity, such gray headed Meditations, knit no
Rosaries, make no fit Chaplets to crown our budding Age; our Understanding is
not yet settled, our Judgment but in the blossom; so great a work ought to have
a serious and well weighed deliberation, which in youth must needs be disturbed
with Objects of a brighter luster; persuades us only then 'twill be seasonable
to hang the Chambers with black, set up a grim Skeleton, dress the Closets and
Windows with bundles of Cypress, when the marrow of our bones is drunk up, when
we have lopt off the excrescencies of an exuberant fortune, when weariness and
diseases call froward and sullen Age to its retirement.

5. At what time soever a sinner does repent: Here we have God's Word for it,
that any time serves his turn. Why then should we rifle youth of his solace,
make meager the plumpness and fairness of our body with fasting and penance,
when we may beguile the nights tedioussness with revelling, and fare
delicioussly every day? Why should we put on Sackcloth and Camels hair, when
we may wear Tiara's on our heads, fine linen and a Tyrian Robe upon our
bodies? roll our selves in dust and ashes, in penitential tears, and heart
breaking sorrows; when we may (...) down in beds of Ivory, bath our Bodies in
Egyptian Liquors, and besmear our braided Locks with Nard? Why should we not
drown the sound of a bold Boanerges (who denounces nothing but black and dismal
portents) with amorous Songs, and heart ravishing Ditties, chaunted by Quires
of beautiful Sirens?

6. As Soon as he has thrown water (drawn out of the Stygian Lake) on those
glowing Embers, beaten down those vapors that were only dancing in this lower
Region, and for want of an heavenly influence could not ascend higher, to be at
a greater certainty, shows us all the glories of the World, carries us
(according to our Saviors usage) from the Pinnacle of the Temple, to an
exceeding high Mountain, from an affection, a lust of a lesser growth, to one
of a greater maturity; knowing that his intoxicating cup ( Philtre like)
assures him our amors, that these adulterate delectations set out in the
richest embroidery, have a fascination irresistible: And where our pleasures
are there will our hearts be also.

Here are the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, enough to make a riot, to beat
down, to level those Mounds and Bulwarks, that are slightly set up, and worse
guarded for the souls preservation. Musaeus calls the light of Hero a deceitful
one, because it extinguished when Leander, amidst the boistrous waves, had most
need of its direction. So may it be said of the vanity of this World, that it is
an Ignis fatuus, a deceitful light, it leads us to Charnel-houses and
Cmetaries, to death and destruction.

7. Therefore Solomon, that we may not be turned into hearts by the
Enchantments of that Satanical Circe, drink of those tilted Lees, entertain
their dalliances and fawning Courtships, presents us a more lovely and lasting
Object, Our Creator, at whose right hand are pleasures for ever more.

The grave and stanch Councillors of Rehoboam (that his Reign might not be
built upon a slippery precipice) gave him this sound advice: Speak kindly unto
the people this day, and they will be thy servants for ever. So Solomon with
the whole Hierarchy of Saints and Martyrs, bequeathed us this excellent
Principle (grounded upon experimental knowledge:) Speak heartily and fervently,
unto God this day in prayer, in this Praeludium of our Age, and he will go in
and out before us all the days of our lives.

To make such early provision is a removing the evil day far from us.

8. When the mighty Caesar fell, in the morning as he entered the Senate, a
Book was conveyed into his hands, wherein was laid before him the whole Scheme
of the Conspiracy: but he disposing of it for an Evening exercise, lost the
opportunity of putting by those fatal thrusts made at him. Architas Tyrant of
Thebes, refusing to read a little Schedule (where, as in a Magic glass, he
might have viewed the Pourtraictures of his Enemies, and have seen the face of
their Confederacy) perished that Evening amidst the Delicacies of a Banquet.
Thus as soon as we appear upon this World's Theater, God stretches forth his
Scepter to call us to him, puts into our hands the Book of life, where, in
legible Characters are delineated to us the Stratagems and Machinations of the
Devil, also how to break those Snares, destroy those Gins and Toiles set for us.

17. But if we will play with Feathers and Rattles, when our Salvation lies a
bleeding; or, Archimedes like, draw circles in the dust; we may expect to be
doomed to Caesar's fate, if not in the bud, yet when we are full blown, before
our tremulous leaves shall fall with Winter Frosts.

Qui primo obstitit, repulitque malum, tutus, ac victor fuit: Shall Seneca, a
Heathen, give such demonstration of a brave mind, and we, who have the glorious
Gospel perpendicularly shining on us, walk in the shades of death, and live as
if we had not one beam or ray to invigorate us? The Naturalists observe,
Frigiditas non intrat in opus naturae. Whether it be a received Maxim in
Philosophy, I Am sure it holds in Theology. If we render God the Service of our
Youth with cold and benumbed hearts, it makes us rather retrogrades than
advancers of our salvation. When we are composed of such dull Materials, such
phlegmatic Constitutions, that the bright rays of the Apostles, the flaming
Torches, those Saints and Martyrs, that with Elias are carried up to Heaven in
Chariots of fire, or those celestial flames of divine truth brought down by
our heavenly Prometheus, will not light our dull matches, quicken this earthy
Compositum.

10. Lord! what warmth, what animation can they receive by thrusting them into
the cold and dying embers, with the ashes of security raked over them. Remember
therefore thy Creator while thy vivid parts are active, while we can give our
bodies a lively Sacrifice, before the Sun of our youth be set, or day darkened,
and the North Star shine only in our Horizon, before the Winter of Age
approaches, such years, such days, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure
in them.

The Kingdom of Heaven must be taken by violence: How unfit then is decrepit
Age to Camisado the Devil? Who, like that Roman Cocles, posts himself on that
bridge we are necessitated to pass over, makes good that narrow straight that
leads unto Heaven; and those infirmities, that soul vessel (our body) is then
fraighted withal, so distract and discourage the mind, that it knows not where
to make its advantage.

The Prophet Jeremy tells us; It Is good to bear our yoke in our youth. As Soon
as Sampson's strength forsook him the Philistines prevailed, and made a mockery
of him. If Jacob had wrastled with the Angel, when his strength (as a
fortification) time had dismantled, he could not have held eontest with God
till the Morning.

11. The Ancient Romans would enrol none into their victorious Legions, but
such as had strength in some degree equivalent to the Magnanimity of their
minds. The Grand Seignior (whose vast Territories his irresistible hand has
made Tributary) yearly assesses his Christian Provinces at so many young
striplings (when confirmed in the Mahumetan Faith, principled in the Customs
and Manners of the Country) to recruit the valiant band of Janissaries. Holy
Writ shows us the same care in Nebuchadnezzar, who culled out the towardliest
Youths of the Israelites, that, by an early sowing in them the Seeds of
Idolatry, they might be choice Instruments for the propagating their Pagan
Worship. And the Poets tell us, that their great God Jupiter would be served by
none, but such as the young Hebe, and the beautiful Ganimede.

12. If the Glories of our blooming Age shall thus adorn the Throne of Princes
(whom God with the breath of his Nostrils can make but as stubble before the
wind) Shall not then this Tetragrammaton, our great God for whom we want
Epithets, nay, the Tongues of Angels, to give him nomination) command our
attendance when clad in the fair Livery of a becoming Youth? Shall not we work
with him whilst it is day? For when the night comes no man can work, no vigor
is then left to dissipate those Clouds, no Sun to exhale those Mills and Fogs
that lie on the surface of our souls. Dum hodie appellatur: It Is to day that
you must hear his voice. And you shall hear it in a sweet Tone, sung by God
himself in the Quire of Heaven, with a Consort of Myriads of Angels: Arise my
Love, my fair one, and come thy way. If we were not a stiff necked People, a
perverse Generation; We would echo back that of Isreal's melodious Chanter; O
God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee.

13. Plato in the height of his Agony, amidst the pangs of death, thanked the
Gods, That he was born a man, and not a beast, a Greek, and not a Barbarian.
But that insensate man, that stops his ears against such heavenly Charmers,
shuts out the Almighty, draws a Curtain betwixt God and his poor soul, least
the thoughts of Heaven damp his pleasures, the reverence due to so great a
Majesty strike him into an awful obedience, when the untunable summons of death
alarm him, Plato's joy shall be his sorrow, wish that his ashes might never be
kneaded into the same lump, but go to a Land of forgetfulness. Improvident
soul! the clear sky of thy felicity shall be soon overcast; thy short day will
have a long night: For thy Heaven here thou must have an Hell hereafter.

Cleombrotus was so far transported with reading a Treatise of the Immortality
of the Soul, that he presently slew himself.

14. And it is recorded by Caesar in his Gallick War, that the bare opinion of
the Druides (who taught that the Soul was out of the reach of Death, and that
it outlived the Bodies dissolution) made their Followers magnanimous in
warlike Achievements, and pulled that frightful vizard from off the face of
death, which otherwise would have stopped the carier of their prowess and
gallantry. But that that made them valiant, makes thee cowardly, and (if made
thy case) but faintly expressed, when the Philosopher calls it Terribilium
terribilissimum, the terrible of terribles; when the Doors shall be shut, the
Windows darkened, and the Curtains drawn about thee, the Mourners attending thy
departure, and nothing but Emblems of sorrow and sadness, and thy evil Angel
(like Brutus spectre) facing thee in this thy dismal solitude, and thou cry out
to him, Habe me excusatum; and he will answer thee in the Negative, Thou must
be stripped of all thy Glories, of all thou accountest dear to thee; thou must to
the shades below, and after that to Judgment.

15. Then will the body (after that it feels the throws and pangs of Death) fly
out upon the soul for her inbred contagion and sentiments of impurity; and the
soul accuse the body for giving fuel to all intemperance, for its officiousness
in acting the dictates of a corrupt mind, and only agree in that they are alike
miserable.

How grievous will it be, when thou shall consider thou have bartered away thy
God for a trifle, sold eternity for a moments pleasure, for that which Pindarus
calls, The dream of a shadow? And now every one of these Phantasma's attend
the Exit, and sad Catastrophe of thy soul, carry a faggot to her funeral pile.
Now can thou discern (to thy immense sorrow) that Ixion like thou have
embraced a Cloud for Juno; That those Virgin faces have been Harpies, ravenous
Birds, and that they had their Dragon Tayls under their deceitful wings;
Jaellike they have brought thee butter in a Lordly dish, but born a hammer in
their deadly hands.

16. It Is the Prophet Esay's call to the regenerate man lodged in the Chambers
of the Earth; Awake and sing, ye that lie in the dust, because the dawning of
your rejoicing is at hand, that you shall wear Crowns on your heads, and carry
Palms in your hands: But to the unregenerate man will the call be; Awake and
howl, ye that lie in the dust, because the daybreak of your for sorrowing
draws nigh. Then will ye cry out to the Mountains and Rocks to fall upon
you, and hide you from the wrath of the Lamb.

Let therefore these expressions, which have put on mournful Robes, these
Scutchions and Ensigns for lost souls, broach our eyes, and sosten our
petrified hearts; sting and quicken our remembrance for the works of a devout
life, That we put not the consideration of our eternal welfare, like Joram's
Messengers, behind us. No trusting to an after game, when we have but one cast,
one throw, whether we have Heaven or Hell: It Is odds against us we draw a
blank, when we have but time to pull one chance out of this great Lottery, but
few hours to redeem thousands of their Predecessors.

D. 1. It might have been Ornamental to a Christian, what dropped from Seneca;
Ante senectutem curavi ut been vivcrem, ut in senectute been morerer. It Is no
good trusting to that we can make to our selves no certain assurance of. It was
therefore Saint Augustine's care not to venture his salvation (a thing so
precious) on an Evening Repentance. We can promise to our selves no boon
voyage, putting to Sea when our Vessel is leaky, and weather beaten, fitter to
be careen'd, than ventured forth upon the tempestuous Main.

2. What can we say for our selves, or who shall plead our cause, when the
soul, and all her fortunes, are properly Gods by title of Creation, and we
change the property of them, and make them instruments for sin and Satan; when
we prostrate our beauties to our lust, and make courtship and caresses to vile
affections, to rottenness and putrefaction, whose deformity lies hid under a
lilly'd skin spread over it, and serve God when our zeal is as cold as our
bodies; when we cannot bend the knees to reverence our Maker, lest we stumble
to the Earth, the Tomb which must presently enshrine those few dusts of ours?
Though we are then free from some sins (but thanks to our age for such
abstinence: Temperantia in senectute non est temperantia, sed impotentia
temporantiae.) It Is not that our affections are surfetted, that we nauseate
those Cates we have so deliciously fed on; Or Saint Hierom's Surgite a.
mortuis, and venite ad Judicium, knocks at the doors of our hearts, and tells
us; For all this we must come to Judgment; but that our bodies are not able to
go an even pace with our desires, that they are too much enfeebled to follow
the pursuit of their former vanities: Why wait we not for the twilight to hunt
the quarry of our goatish affections, but that our stock of fuel is burnt up,
by too freely blowing the coals of our lust, or that Rheums and Dropsies have
drowned those scintils and sparks that were left?

3. Why Epicurize we not so much, but that there is a deficiency of heat for
its digestion? Why rise we not so early to inebriate our selves? It Is because
we have so many issues and botches (the plague sores of a debauched life) that
makes our bodies Plena rimarum; Sieves like, they cannot hold full draughts. As
the Prophet Elisha said to his servant Gehazi: Is this a time to be taking
rewards? So, Is this a time to begin our Heavenly Pilgrimage, when all is dark
about us? To begin to live, when a diseased body, a distracted mind, and
unsettled estate call for reparation? When (like the devout women) we might have
presented to God, in the morning of our Age, gums, and sweet spices of prayers
and supplications?

Adolescens, tibi dico, surge. Now is the time that salvation is offered to us;
when every faculty is in its most admirable perfection, the senses most subtle,
their spirits more agile.

4. The eye can best discern without a Perspective, the Effigies of God in his
own person, and all other his mighty works for the service of man; The ear
quickest hear the sweet sounding music of his word; The hands have a greater
dexterity to perfume God's Altars with the Odours of Almsdeeds and charitable
actions; The feet strongest and best able to support us to the hallowed Temple:
Thus employing our vigorous and active abilities, is a seeking the Lord while
he is near to us. The nature of Quicksilver is to tremble, and be restless,
till it find something with which it may commix. So these Mercurial parts, if
not set on work in God's service, will be sure (though to their own cost) take
employment elsewhere. Youth knows no Medium; its lively Embers will be either
blown into a flame of Devotion or Concupiscence. Let us therefore tread that
path figured out to us, take that Clue in hand to lead us through the intricate
Labyrinths of a perplexed life: And, for our better direction, there are
erected in holy Scripture Pyramids and Columns, such store of lights, as so
many Pharo's, that we may sail on with a prosperous gale to our haven of
felicity.

5. If the glorious Mansions of the Heaven, with all its splendid Equipage, be
worth the purchasing; Let us Remember our Creator. If at any time we Remember
our Creator; let it be, Juvenili aetate, In our rosie-morn, In the days of our
Youth. If we will bate our selves so much of our present enjoyments, as to pay
him Primitias, the service of our Youth; Let it not then be a lame, or
disjoynted one, lest we be put by, as those maimed persons in the Old Law, from
serving at the Sanctuary; but such vivid, such Heroic services, as will not
shame the giver, nor cause God to withdraw his hands from deigning them a
favorable acceptance.

6. This will forward our Journey to the New Jerusalem; a City that has all
peace, all joy: Where there is no leading into Captivity, nor crying in her
streets. A City of pure Gold, and the Walls of Jasper. A City that has no need
of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God does light
it: Where we shall not forget him; for we shall sing Allelujahs to him: Where
we shall not forget him; for we shall have such glorified bodies, as to see him
face to face without a flaming bush to interpose, without meaner Objects than
Saints, Angels, Cherubims, and Seraphims.

ESSAY II. 7. De Humana fragilitate.
JOB 14.1. Man that is born of a Woman is of few Days and full of Trouble.


QUod natum est poterit mori: Every birth will have a burial. And a greater
Rhetorician than Seneca tells us; There is a time to be born, and a time to
dye. The hand of fate signs no Indulgences, reprieves not any, seeing all are
doomed and destined to the shades of death. Nulla prece mobilis Ordo: No
entreaties can reverse the Decretals of Heaven. The world it self, with its
resplendent Luminaries, Sun, Moon and Stars, plead no exemption.

8. Those weaker fires must be burnt with a more powerful one from Heaven, and
every thing reduced to its primitive condition, to a figured nothing. God only
that was without beginning, knows no end. All things else will have their
calcination, will to rubbidge. That Microcosm, man also (though but an Epitome
of the World, yet of greater dignity than the whole Universe) for Adam's
disparadising himself must have this Dilapidation.

Though the hands of the Almighty have kneaded us (Thy hands have made me and
fashioned me round about) and baked these bodies, when inorganical, in the Oven
of the Womb, to a purity of ripeness, to an animation; yet our first sinning
has cracked these Vessels, that we moulder to dust again.

9. Though thou have formed us so like unto thy glorious self, as made David
out of an ecstasy of admiration, cry out, I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
yet since we have blotted out the Inscription of Heaven, which was so
gloriously figured on us, defaced that noble Impress thou was pleased to stamp
upon common clay, it is no injustice if we return to dirt again, for this Lord
Paramount to change our free tenure into Lease hold, nay into Villenage. Since
we refused to live in the Sunshine of his favor, it is of our own meriting
that we are doomed to a Land of darkness. Though these earthly Tabernacles have
the enoblement of being Ancient Demain, Crown Lands; yet have they no
privilege of immunity, shall not be freed from the common Gabels nature
imposes upon them, but have their devastation too. Though our bodies (by divine
Institution) are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; yet if we make them receptacles
for sin, we cannot expect loss than a dissolution of them. For, The wages of
sin is death. Every man (as Tertullian has it) being Homicida sui, a murderer
of himself. Man forges the weapon, and sin is the sword that does execution on
us.

10. Dari bonum quod potuit auferri potest. The same power that cast these
divided Elements into one entire Building, can with the breath of his nostrils
destruct them again; and since we prove not Vessels of Honor, will speedily
take the matrials asunder, and lay them in the dust: And yet may we not with
Holy Job) say unto him, What do thou? For it is the Lord's doing, and
therefore mavelous in our eyes.

Seeing then we have pulled this house upon our own heads, which if sin had not
undermined (though but houses of Clay) had outbraved times dilapidation. Let us
therefore be content (our own consciences having already proved our Indictment)
to hear that irreversible sentence passed on us, which has long since sent
many to the place of execution; though reprieved for a few days, yet will thou
bring us also to death, and to the house appointed for all living. We must all
back to the place whence we came, the Earth, there lie fettered in the prison
of the Grave, to be torn and mangled by her little Furies, fierce executioner,
till our bones are picked clean, till they have their incineration too.

11. In the sacred rolls of Heaven we find the same judgment denounced against
the heritage of the Lord, Thou Worm Jacob. No higher title does the Lord bestow
on the greatest of the Sons of men: For they shall all lie down alike in the
grave, and the worms shall cover them. Stoop here, and see the polished
Tombstone that is laid over us; the worm shall cover us: And read what Epitaph
Job has writ on it: Man that is born of a Woman is of few days, and full of
trouble.

It had been enough to have said, We are born of women, without reading to us
the destiny of a short continuance; for by that we might have spelled our
fleeting condition, and as in a mirror, viewed the forms and Idaea's of our
present sufferings. It Is necessary to derive our pedigree, blazon the cankred
stuff we are made of, that we might not too much glory in a mistaken happiness.

12. Corruption thou art our Father, the worm is both our mother and sister.
Like the Apples of Sodom, we may then appear glorious to the eye, but let the
finger of God touch us, and we crumble to dust and ashes. That structure reared
up of rotten and putrified timber, will have a fall, shall be forsaken of his
supporters: Vessels kneaded of friable and mouldring matter, will into
fractures, cannot long body together. Of such an uncornbin'd Composition is man
that is born of a woman, and therefore but of few days.

A short Requiem did that Noble Heathen sing to the soul of his endeared son
(upon the news of his disanimation) Sciebam me genuisse mortalem: I knew I did
not beget an immortal being, that which could not die.

13. This reproves that too feminine nature of some, who melt down themselves
with immoderate sorrowing, as if they would preserve their departed friend in
the pickle of their briny tears. Cadant lacbrymae sed non fluant. Some small
drops (as a rightful Tribute to the dead) may be sprinkled on the grave; if not
for our dear brother, yet for our disconsolate souls, that have lost the start
of this blissful Santon in his heavenly expedition.

That the body must perish, must have a change, nothing more certain. Are not
our ears continually alarmed with the dismal sound of the Passing Bell? And
whilst our eyes are busily looking on the Hearse, and pomp that attends it, we
perchance stumble at a grave; and they, that even now carried their dead friend
to his bed of earth, may, before the Sun has run his next days course, justle
with him for a grave.

14. Worms must necessarily devour us, to make room for others. For one
Generation passes, and another comes, and that small portion of turf measured
out to us by the Charnel-man, we hold but for a season, till we have forfeited
our Lease by letting our building run to ruin, a dissolution of our selves.

Then we, and the Grave, carry but one Complexion; the Sons and their Mother
Earth alike featured, the guildings and flourishes of Nature being quite erazed
out of us: so that ill-favored Thirsites appears as lovely as Adonis;
Cleanthes a poor tankerd-carrier, as wealthy as Craesus: for the Mouths of
both are filled with Dust. Pompey, that would admit no equal, has here no
inferior: for Dust has no preeminence, shows no Acts of Royalty, displayes no
Ensigns of greatness. Our Beautys (if we have any such light thing to glory in)
will become as Dirt, and our very deformities heightn'd to a greater deformity,
the vilest of putrefaction. What Statist, by the help of his inspections, can
resolve this to be Dust Imperial; distinguish that which sat on a Throne, from
that which wearyed out it self in a Spittal?

15. What Anatomist, or Critic in Physiognomy, dare (by making inquisition on
a Skeleton) trust to the Symmetry of those disguised parts, averr, here lie the
ruins of Beauty, there the rubbidge of uncomeliness? What Classis, what Synod,
what General Council can, by winnowing or sifting the Dust of the Grave, say,
this is believing Dust, that Atheistical? Such sudden revolutions will the
coldness, and chillness, and darkness of the Bed of Earth work in us, when once
laid up in it, that we are not only lost to our selves, but to those that
sudceed us. Can the Eye of Augustus Caesar light us to his neglected Urn,
which, before Death had eclipsed, shot such scorching Beams of Majesty, that,
like the Sun 'twas said to dim the sight of his admiring Subjects? Or that
silver-tongu'd Tully tell us where we may rake up his disparkl'd ashes?

16. No Inquisition will the Son of Sirach have in the Grave. If thy charitable
Friends be disposed to pay thee an anniversary mourning, it might prove
difficult finding out thy Sepulcher: envious Time has blotted thy Epitaph,
cracked thy Tombstone, perchance divested thee of that upper Garment, and
pieced it to some remote building. Allow it appear in legible Characters, we
cannot say this Dust belongs to thee; some latter Friend may be there since
interred; the Charnel-mans Shovel may by digging too near, pare thy Sides,
throw the into the neighboring Grave: or the Earths little Cannibals, in their
Caresses and Frolickings, drag thee out of the Chancel into the Churchyard, or
highway, or feed on thee in thine own Grave, and spew thee forth in another.
Hard finding thy Grave then, but harder finding thee in thy Grave, and hardest
finding any piece of thee entire; if Sainted, not so much as to make a Relicque
of. So many mutations, transmigrations, will these Rags of Flesh receive in a
few Centuries of Days, as soon as in Lus^res, or Olympiads.

E. 1. This then should teach them who do Turgescere fastu, swell with a
Tympany of Pride, and self conceit, that they despise not their poor Brother.
Did not one fashion us both in the Womb? Shall we then account him inglorious,
whose Roof is not seiled with Cedar, nor painted with Vermilion? Why, he that
has swallowed down Riches shall vomit them up again; and those stately
Palaces, erected as so many lasting Pyramids to perpetuate our Names and
Memories, are but Castles built in the Air: For when Death has sealed our
Mittimus, we shall, no more to our House, neither shall our place know us any
more. So that we might take up that of Esau (though more justly) Lo I dye, and
what good will my birthright do me? Such embellished Mansions, when the Edifice
of our Flesh shall ere long be dismantl'd? Such Hydropick desires of Gold, when
we our selves shall become Dross, or (according to the Prophets embasement)
reprobate Silver? How far can Preferments stead us, when Death shall cut the
Spurrs of Knighthood off our heels, degrade us of all our Honors, level us
with the Earth, nay sink us lower then the Dust we tread on?

2. Philip Monarch of Macedon falling in the Sand, and seeing there a perfect
draught of his Body, cried out, upbraiding his insatiable Ambition; O ye Gods,
we think the whole Universe too little for us, and behold how small, and minute
a part serves.

In the Days of David a-short Arithmetic would have cast up the Years of Man,
and how many Ages have since spent themselves to bring about this declining
one, this last quarter? No Methusalems in these Days: for as the World that
encircles us, wears, waxing old as does a Garment: So this Microcosm, this
little World Man must wear. We cannot fetch out the Steps of our Grand-sires,
their Shields, and Lances, are too weighty for us to manage. One of their
Monuments, where they allowed themselves but Elbow-room to lie, if destructive
time has not levelled its stateliness, and luxury, with the Earth (for the
Mausolea themselves shall be entombed too in the common Grave) would serve now
to hide a whole Family of ours.

3. To our Pygmy growths our Years then must be proportionable: Our abode here
shorter than a peregrination. Tho we pass by those Iliads of Dangers, that
obviate us, and burn out to the bottom of the Wiek, dye in our socketts; yet
deduct so many Years for our declination since those more durable ones, and;
almost one half of that abbreviated time for Sleep (the Handmaid of death,)
how inconsiderable, when, cast up, will the Summa totalis be that we have to
live? How short our continuance? If they were but Sojourners when the World was
in the Meridian of his Age, in its greatest Stature, what a hasty transition do
we make in its setting, in its decrepitness. As if we came to give the World a
visit, and, in scorn to its miserable shortness, bid a farewell to it.

If Life was but a shadow when God darted on them the rays of his glorious
Countenance, and held Dialogues with the Sons of Men, how far distant are we
(that refuse to come into his presence) from the substance?

4. If our Life in those large striding times was but a Span long, how short
are we now of that Span? And if God does not alarm us to Judgment, that a few
Ages more succeed ours, their being will be so fleeting, so voluble a duration,
so short, so inconsiderable, that they will not know how to entile it. Even now
we attribute too much by calling it a continuance, having already, in the way
to that general dissolution, suffered so much change, but that the precedent
Words check the loudness of the phrase: It Is but short, but a few Days. Man that
is born of a Woman is but of few Days.

He that lives longest has but his Term, his being here is but as a Thought
presently shouldered out by another. The Flower we know (though more gorgeous
in attire than Solomon in all his Glory) in the morning is by the Suns vigor
raised out of the Bed of Earth, displays her Colors, and in the evening
sickens, and dies. Yet Man is no other; sometimes less considerable, rising
with the Sun, and stays not his setting.

5. How great a part of mankind from their Mothers lying in, date their laying
out? deliverd by the Hands of the Midwife, from the Mantles and bloody
coverings of the Womb, to be sealed up in a Winding Sheet, post from one Grave
to the other? How many (with the Babes of Bethlehem) see the World, without
continuing so long, as to understand what they see, or, if they know it in the
best of content, conclude it not to be worth the knowing, if but for its short
continuance? How many before they arrive to that perfection Nature designs us
(the beauty, and strength of Youth) are often so debilit^^ed, that for want of
Strength expire?

How few make their perambulations till they feel the decrepitness of old Age
kicking up their Heels; or if the Thread of their Life be drawn out to a more
unusual length, yet is it but a lassitude, a Province of Labor and Sorrow;
every Minute expecting when Death strikes at the crazy Doors of their Bodies,
the Damps that they carry about them, making their Taper all that time burn
Blew, ready to extinguish.

6. That Death shall unbody our Souls, take down these tapestry Hangings of
Flesh, strip us to the bones, what is more, incinerate, Calcine those very
bones, distracts not reason; since there is a necessity for all men once to
dye: Mors necessitatem habet aequam, et invictam. But that we should untimely
dye, and, which is more admirable Non admittere mortem, sed attrahere; Make our
hands (the Bodies careful Conservators) our own Executioners, is a wonder too
transcendent. When a healthful composure intends us for a longer time,
precipitate our ruin, dig our own graves; as if we conceited a greater misery
in living then Job, or to lay violent hands on our selves were (after the Roman
garb) to deck our heads with Garlands and Trophies for the conquest over our
present sufferings.

7. The two main Columns that support man's life, are heat and moisture: If
there be an excess or deficiency in either, this stately Colossus becomes
irreparably ruinous. But if we were such perfect Naturalists, as to acquaint
our selves with the right constitutions of our bodies, and had an observant
will to act according to the dictates of our knowledge, by measuring out such a
temperament, that the heat be not cooled by an exuberancy of moisture, or too
thrifty allowance for it to feed on, our lamp might burn with a greater Nitor,
a more lasting Clarity. But such things, are we born of women, either to know
so little, or, which is worse, make not practical what we do know; that either
with excessive ating cloy we that heat, make it unfit for digestion, or throw
too much drink upon those glowing embers, or else frying up our marrow,
emptying our veins to fill the exorbitant desires of our lusts, we are hurried
to our last sleep many decad's of days sooner then if we measured out every
thing aequa lance, with the hand of Mediocrity. No marvil our day is so soon
clouded, our tale so soon told, our Pilgrimage so soon terminated: for not only
Nature intends us a quick dispatch; but we must needs steal a Thief into our
farthing candle, mend the swift paced sand that measures our time, by shaking
the glass of our life into quicker motion: Like that exquisite Limner who cut a
visible line through that small one coppied out to him by his competitor.

8. We have but one passage that leads us into the world, and that a strait
one: For we come like Rebeccha's twins, struggling, and striving for our
admittance; but death has bands of Executioners in a readiness to give us our
passport. Though there is but one postern that leads us out of the land of the
living, Death, yet many are the ways trod out to it.

Mill modis lethi miseros mors una fatigat. Some foot it by those lesser paths
of Agues, and Colds; Others ride the beaten and trodden ways of Surfets, and
Fevers; Others the common rodes, and high ways of Pestilence, and the Sword.
At this Center, Death, all lines meet, all rodes give up their passingers: and
when we have discharged our Bill of fare, paid Nature her arrears (for we have
been dying even from our infancy) vestigia nulla retrorsum; We make no return.
The eye of him that has seen me shall see me no more.

9. Though we have our Magna Charta confirmed to us by the king of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, of a Sovereignty over the Creatures, as is acknowledged by the
Psalmist, Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet; Yet there is
no creature so contemptible, but may have a time to triumph with the spoils of
his Lord.

Praesentemque viris intentant omnia mortem; Every thing menaces destruction,
has an Envenomed arrow ready to let fly at us. The Fates could string their
Bow with one single hair, when they sent a death to Fabius a Roman. A fly was
winged with Destiny, when it choakt Adrian. Aristides, after he had escaped the
furies of men and savager beasts, had the thread of his life snagl'd in two by
the bite of a Weesel. A Gnat, or Emmet, can as well lay us in the dust as an
Elephant.

10. An Ear-wig (when ransacking the Cells and private chambers of our brain)
stings us as deadly as a Scorpion. A small fish-bone destroys us (as it did
once Tarquinius Priscus) sooner than a shark, or Sword-fish. A pin may give
Lethale vulnus, a fatal wound (if sharpn'd with the anger of Heaven) as readily
as could Ajax spear: And this confim'd in the mournful story of Lucia sister
to the Emperor Aurelius, who innocently sporting with her infant, received a
small prick in the breast with her Needle, and through that small loop-hole
presently death discharged it self upon her. God out of a little Orifice can
give our vitals passage, and our souls can as easily sally through Chinks, and
Crannies of our bodies, as if it had doors, and gates to let it forth. Add then
these casualties (from which no one purchases a Patent of exemption) to the
natural infirmities of our body's (which are wounds, and bruises and putrified
Sores) and our foolish propensity of imping those feathers, that of themselves
are winged strong enough to carry us to our long home, and we must necessarily
conclude our emanation from the prison of the womb, to Golgotha, the place of
execution, to be inconsiderable, so inconsiderable, as to have no continuance.

11. Is our time here but of short continuance? Then is it high time to trim
our lamps. Rogus et urna meditanda. Set before our dreaming fancies our Pile
and Pitcher, and every man say to his improvident soul, what the Prophet did to
King Hezekiah; Put thy house in Order for thou shall surely dye. Quamdiu? Cras
quare non modo finis turpitudinis meae Says St. August. How long will ye
resist the holy motions of repentance, and cry out to morrow we will purify
our souls with snow-water, when before the day comes, they may be drowned,
swallowed up in their own pollutions. Let nothing therefore hinder thee to pay
thy vows in due time, and not at the vespers of death, when thy Malady and
busy care to leave a calm and quiet estate to thy hasty successors, distract
thee in thy accounts to God.

12. The womb was our tiring room to put on the habiliments of the flesh. The
world is our tiring room to deck, and apparel our selves with the rich robes of
righteousness. And we know not how soon the loud Music of the last Trump will
sound us forth, to show to the all discerning eye of Heaven, whether we have
acted to the life Comoedies of pleasure, and sensuality, or Tragoedies of
sorrow, and compunction for sin; whether we have chanted wanton lays, and
amorous ditties; or Canticles, Hymns, and spiritual songs.

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum; Let us with the Poet conceit every
day to be our last, and with that Heathen Seneca, Efficere mortem, sibi
familiarem; Make death our daily companion; so to prepare, Ut Moriantur ante
nos vitia; That our sins give up the Ghost before us: For in our last scene
they will shift their robes, and (to our great Consternation) all appear dressed
in their true deformities.

13. When this Pursuivant (Death) has thus attacht the unregenerate man, what
has pride profited him? Or what good has his riches, with his vaunting,
brought him? Then if he had the whole world at command he would take up the
Devils phrase, All this will I give thee to reprieve me but a few days, that I
might file off my rust, burnish my self for Heaven, clear my freckl'd soul of
those Morphewes, and stains, that present her uncomly in the sight of her maker.

Desine fata deum flecti sperare precando, But alas entreaties avail not any
thing; ho deprecating fate: it is not our importunate whining can alter the
decrees of Heaven. Think not, because, when God decreed Hezekiah a present
death, upon his humble petition he reverst that heavy sentence, and commanded
the Sun for a sign to go so many degrees back in the Dial of Ahaz, therefore
that he will do so for us. Let us not be deceived by expecting an Injunction
from the Chancery of Heaven. The Egyptians found it experimentally true, that
the Goddess of Destiny spared none, no not the first born in Pharohs Court,
therefore they built her no Temple, offered no Sacrifices to her.

14. Non Torquate genus, non te facundia, non te Restituit pietas --

It matters not whether we are of the Julian, or Claudian family, no
embellishing of perfections, no ornaments of Nature, no sanctity of life can
privilege us from the grave: for every man has his appointed time, and that a
short one, and as if that were not enough, a miserable one too. The Prophets
have foretold it, the Apostles revealed it, every day, every hours experience
confirms to us, Man that is born of a woman is but of few days, and full of
trouble.

15. What? To be of few days, and that full of trouble. We should rather have
thought, that the brevity of man's life had been remunerated with all solace and
delight; the few steps we tread had been on the fragrant Carpets, of roses, and
violets, than, instead thereof, to find a repletion of sorrow, such sorrow as
will keep pace with our being; though an unbidden guest, attend us, till we are
entombed in our mother Earth.

15. Job thought it too hard measure (though he let it not go unrepented of,
sitting in sackcloth and ashes) when out of the bitterness of his soul he
expostulated with the Almighty; Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me
alone, that I may take a little comfort. This was but a fallacious argument. If
he had changed his note it had been more tunable. Are not my sins many? Why
then is the rod of affliction laid so gently on me? Why should the avenger of
all things cease from punishing me, when I stop not my Career in offending? How
can I with confidence beg any boon at his hands, when I vouchsafe him not a
retribution of thanks? Our afflictions are no compensations for sins past, but
sometimes given us as a makebate between us, and our indeered amors, to
divorce us from the gayeties, and Utopian felicities of this deceivable world,
which (like the Panther) pleases at distance with a perfumed breath, but in
their embraces murder us.

16. The careful nurse imbitters her nipples with Wormwood, that the Infant
may nauseate the teat, and feed on stronger nourishment: God deals with his
children, Antidotes the poison, by sowring the pleasures of this world, making
our honors and lushious delights palled and insipid; rubbs off the varnish,
and shows their deformity, that we may no longer be Inamorato 's of them.

Why then should we wrack, and torture, our inventions to acquire that which
beggars us? Build steps, and stairs, to mount us on the Terrace of a greater
misery? (It Is St. Basils) Duriorem carcerem praeparamus: by enjoying the opulent
things of this life, we fortify our prison, lay another coat of dirt upon our
Souls, which hinders the beams of our Creator from irradiating them. There is
nothing that in our esteem merits the name of good, but has an allay, a
checquering of sorrow.

F 1 We know the purest glasses will have their dews, their tears hanging on
them; the brightest felicity its dropping cloud, an opacous body of discomfort;
and pleasures themselves will destroy us before enjoyment, if plentifully
poured out. Our souls are so shallow, that they will be soon surcharged, if
they come toward us velut agmine facto, in too violent a source. Pliny reports
that Chilon the Philosopher in embracing his Son (having a Crown of Laurel
bestowed on him at the Olympic games) with a surfett of joy presently expired.
So did Marcus Iuventius, when the Senate designed an ample honor for him. What
pleasure can we expect, what trust repose in any thing that is under the Sun?

Quos faelices Cynthia vidit,
Vidit miseros abitura dies.
Miserable Job reads here miserable man's fortune, and in the glass of his own
infelicity (the Devil laying the Scene for his tortures) could clearly see to
set us this Elegiack dirge, full of misery. We have not one appellation in
scripture (when dissected, untwisted by the Rabbis) that we find any thing to
glory in.

2. In Adam we are called Red earth, which holds complexion with those spurious
bratts hatched by us (our sins,) they are as red as Scarlet: and if the
swarthiness of our discolored souls gives leave to blush at them, then do we
keep to our dye too. Sometimes we are called Ish, but a sound, and that
properly enough; for we come Crying into the world, ringing loudest peals of
complaints, when our voice is inarticulate, unexpressive: And we may be
compared to a sound, a voice; for that is soon sent forth, and as soon lost. You
see then, we l ave not our names for naught. God will not enoble with a
splendid title that which deserves so much embasing.

3. Indeed our piesent tribulations are as a thousand witnesses to assert this
truth,

Quocunque; aspiciam? Quocunque lumina vertan; We cannot look upon any thing,
but what appears with a a clouded face. Let us take our rise from our entrance
on this stage of life to the shutting up our last Catastrophe, and we shall
appear Actors in one continued Tragoedy. No sooner bolt we out of the womb (for
we come headlong into the world, which shows our giddiness and innate love to
it) but we find an entertainment so cold, that we are fain to warm us with our
own tears, and our ability so faint, so useless to administer relief to our
crying necessities, that our little Organs are presently sounded to implore a
necessary aid, our legs too weak to underprop the small burden of our bodies,
our hands not strong enough to reach us sustenance; and she that landed us in
this vale of misery could not keep us from going as soon out of it, if the arms
of a stranger did not reprieve us from the grave. All that time we are led and
directed by Tutors, and Governors, reckon our selves under the rod of
persecution, differing nothing from a servant, though Lord of all.

4 And no sooner arrive we to complete man, but emulation boyls within us to
such a tumor, that we envy, and hate, those we see move in an higher Orb; and
think our condition but Heremitical, because the seat of our Sovereignty is not
built high enough, to give us prospect over our Neighbors. Under this Torrid
Zone of our age, in these distempering dog-dayes, our desires are so
exorbitant, affections so disproportionable to the dictates of reason, that
while wandering through innumerable Labyrinths of care and trouble, trusting to
the Clue of our own fanatic spinning, we lose our selves, and seldom attain to
that our betraying fancy reached at. What though we crown our endeavors with a
sought for success, the felicity of our enjoyment, in a just balance, will
weigh too light, if set against the harrassing of the body, and wracking of the
spirits in procuring it? So that this florid part of our life, if compared to
the other extremes of age, appears to you at first with as great a difference,
as the Sun in its pride to a day of clouds. Yet upon a due calculation we have
as many Halcyonian days under either Polar Star, as under the Eccliptick of
our youth.

5. Having now cut the line, sailed through this dangerous passage, I shall
lead you into a more temperate Climate; but there we make no long progression,
enjoy only some few lucid Intervalls: For before we can purify our blood,
poisoned with the sin's of our youth, bring back our straying fancies,
recompose the distempers of our bodies, settle the Vertigo or giddiness in our
brain, the Winter Quarter of age approaches, disparkling such cold influences,
that the warmth of our breath has not vigor enough to thaw the Isicles that
hang on those few hairs, our many sins could spare us. Tum quicquid aetatis
retro est, mors tenet; Death makes one in this last Scene, journeys with us in
these latter days of our Pilgrimage. So that the same may be rehearsed to us
(though in another sense) which St. Paul preached to the wanton widows, That
we are dead while we live. Our tattered flesh, suppl'd with Salves and
Unguents, swadl'd and held together with plasters and trusses, like ruinous
buildings with Clasps and Cramperns of iron.

6 What is it then but labor, and sorrow, and, as the wiseman renders it,
Days wherein we have no pleasure? Though he terms them days, yet are they
overshadowed, in which we enjoy but a twy-light, the sable Curtain more than
half drawn about us; our Candle all that while blazing in the socket, giving
more of ill savor, than light; So that we are not only a burden to our selves,
but an offense to others.

Rarum est faelix, idemque; senex. If we did but curiously scan the distempers
incident to each period of our life, and what a Symphonie there is in the whole
to complete our sorrow, so that though we shift the Scene from our Infant Morn
to the Solstice of our age, that to our declination, it is rather a malo ad
Pejus, not to better our condition, but present it more disconsolate.

7. Good reason have we then, being men of like infirmities, at this grand
Inquest of man's mortality, to give in with Job the same verdict, though he as
our foreman (for his experience) speaks for us: Man that is born of a woman is
of few days and full of trouble.

Since a fullness of trouble co-habits with us in these earthly Tabernacles,
it is our happiness that our lease is of no longer continuance. Seeing here we
float upon a Mare Mortuum of misery, it may comfort us that we are not far from
the shore. If Heaven had granted a longer Term, it had been but to be longer
miserable. For holy Job observes; While the flesh of man is upon him, he shall
be sorrowful, and while his soul is in him, it shall mourn.

8. Now if we have conformed our selves to Gods holy rule, whereby to ground a
confidence, that Christ is gone before to prepare a Mansion in Heaven for us,
that consideration will alleviate the harshness, and asperity of our
sufferings, sweeten the embittered cup that Nature has put into the hand of
every mortal, dull the edge of our tribulations (the certain concomitants of
this life,) sugar all our tears, stiflle all our groans, make us with the
Salmander live in the flames of our persecutions, call to our astonished
enemies for our funeral Pile, that we may embrace it with gladness; 'twill
suggest that ere long we shall change these vile bodies (now subjected to the
outrages of Fortune) for glorified ones, that we have not many days to pass
through this wilderness (inhabited with Serpents and Scorpions) where Legious
of sorrows and vexations march after us, like the terrible Host of the
Egyptians, before we arrive at our promised Canaan.

9. Though sickness fastens on us, almost to the throwing down of these
mudd-walls, this tottering fabric of flesh; yet will it appear but as sweet
slumber, because of our assurance, that when we are dissolved we shall be with
Christ. Though our fortunes are unjustly seized on to gorge the exorbitant
lusts of higher Powers, and we left as trimly suited as Adam in his green
Apron, yet shall we pot repine at our chastisement, since the king of Kings, by
an Act of resumption, takes back no more then what he formerly lent us the use
of, and in the height of our penury sing a Te Deum, knowing that God has
stored for us a treasure in Heaven, so lasting as moth, and rust, cannot
Corrupt, so sure as Thieves cannot break through and steal. Though we are
bereaved of our children (those little Images of our selves) yet will we look
up to Heaven, from whence flew the arrow of his vengeance, and appease our
sorrow with David's Salve; We shall go to them, they shall not return to us.
Though all the misfortunes of the world, like an inundation, break in upon our
weak defense, yet this Red Sea shall not swallow us up, and as Paul and the
rest of the passingers (when shipwrakt at Melita's shore) boated all safe to
land on planks and broken pieces of the ship; So we, when wrackt, and torn, on
the rocky hearts of our remorsless enemies, lay hold some on one comfort, some
on another to land us safe in our wished Port.

10. Though we are beaten for professing the name of Christ, yet let us, with
Peter and John, rejoice, that we are counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his
name. Now said Ignatius (the Martyr) begin I to be Christ's disciple, when in
his journey to Rome he received scorns, and contumelies, from a band of
Soldiers commanded for his Convoy. We are then in highest favor in the Court
of Heaven, our soul brightest, when it has the light of his arrows, and the
shinning of his glittering spear.

Curtius records of the great Alexander; Semper bello, quam post victoriam
Clarior; That he appeared more Illustrious in the inquietudes of an hazardous
war, than in those serene vacations that he triumphed for his glorious
victories. Disturbances, and anxieties, in our life many times put an edge on
the bravery of our spirits, when too much prosperity becalms them. An
overcasting cloud makes the Sun of our felicity arise more radiant. The fairest
picture must be shadowed with the blackest groundwork. A Diamond emitts a more
vigorous luster when set within a black enamelling: So, afflictions are the
souls foyl's, to set off, and make her appear more amiable in the sight of her
Creator.

11. We better see our faces in Jett than in Alabaster; cleerer discern what
stains the soul has contracted in the glass of adversity, than prosperity.
Crystal is too lucid, too transparent, gives no reflections. So honors, and
earthly pleasures, shed their beams, dart their rays too powerfully,
destroying our Souls Optics, that we cannot perfectly discern our selves, nor
God lowering on us, till they are in their declination, till they make a longer
shadow.

Seeing then the sorrows of this life are the truest glasses to dress our
selves in, though they are burning glasses yet let us look steadfastly on them,
and there shall we behold Tyara's, and scepters, prepared for us. Our
lamentings (by their excellent Alchymy) converted into songs, our Captivities
into triumphs, our ignominies into Crowns and Diadems. And not like that
wretched Apostate who forsook the frozen lake, and that glorious company of
Martyrs, not long after to dye the death of an Infidel.

12. Though we walk upon the backs of Porcupines, the way set with thorns and
prickles, yet is it but for a few days; for ere long we shall be at rest in
the grave. And at that great Audit, when Christ shall deign to meet us half way
in the Chariot of the Clouds, we shall be raised again in the twinkling of an
eye.

Though our Tombs are defaced, our Urns kicked about, and our neglected ashes
promiscuously mingled with the common dust, yet God (that great preserver of
men) will rally every shattered limb, and pair those feet that were before
Antipodes, set every splinter, carefully gather every scattered Atom, put
sinews and flesh upon every dry bone, give to every seed his own body, to
every body his own soul, but more refined, made more glorious: For in the
resurrection our terrestrial bodies shall be sublimated to a Celestial
perfection, be like unto the Angels in Heaven, and, if that be not change
enough, have an assimilation with God himself. Though nature, and her
Elementary bodies, be at variance, yet there shall be the nearest conjunction
between God, and us: For we shall be marr^^^ unto the Ancient of days, And I
will marry thee unto me for ever. Says the Prophet Hosea.

13. Then Time shall be no more; for we shall be to all eternity. Faith shall
be no more; for we shall have an Epiphany, a day of glorious manifestation of
all his promises. Hope shall be no more, for there shall be a perpetual
Jubilee, a constant fruition of such superlative beatitudes, that the tongues
of Men and Angelsin deciphering them seem but as sounding brass, or as a
tinkling Cymbal. But love in its altitude, in a quintessential perfection, free
from the violences and transportations, the weakness and imperfections, the
heats and colds of our love to the Creature, which varies with its object. This
not sullyed with any mixture of malice or envy, when it beholds a Saint sit in
an higher Throne encircled with a bigger Crown.

14. If so many Kings and Princes threw aside their Coronetts, and Diadems,
that they might have more leisure to contemplate the excellencies of Heaven,
when their understanding was but weak, their love but an Embrio; If so many
Martyrs hugged and kissed their stakes, laid them down in their flames, as in
their Marital beds, to conserve this love, to secure themselves for
immortality; How bright and glorious will the flame be, when it shall have the
fervor of a Seraphim, the purity of an Angel? When we shall see the Object of
our love (God) with whom there is no change, or variableness, and still desire
to see him. To meditate on him here, is to see him hereafter.

ESSAY
ESSAY III. G. De Passione Christi in Corpore proprio.
LAMENT, 1.12. Have ye no regard, all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce Anger.


Here Is black tinctured in the deepest die, words of such transcendent
Prevalency, that would make stubborn Rocks relent, and exact a fluency, of
Tears from the sealed up Fontanels of our Eyes. Can any Heart, (though
petrified to a wonder) not break that brittle Mansion it is enclosed in, when it
shall hear one sing his own sad Elegy, ring his funeral Peals with such
mournful Bells?

2. Had that Tyrant Nero, who sung the Ruins of Troy (when environed with the
Flames of his Imperial City) bin a spectator of this Tragedy of Tragedies,
heard these doleful Notes (clad in so sad a Livery) so attracting Sorrow and
Compassion, Pity would at an instant have Triumphed over cruelty, and made him
turn convert to the highest Commiseration. For who could stifle a tributary
Groan, when he heard this dying Swan sluctuating on the bitter Waters of
Affliction, without being ever after deaf? Who could with a supercilious look
(without suffering an absolute Eclipse) behold such innovated Punishments, too
grievous to answer the foulest Treason, undergone by him who had not the
meanest trespass to account for? Or yet in this Iron-hearted Age of ours look
on this sad Lamentation (though superannuated) and not set his sorrow to a
louder Key, then the doleful mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo.

-- Quis talia fando
Temperet a Lachrimis? --
3. But if these attendants here (these words that wait upon this mournful
piece of Scripture) move us not, or the deplorableness of our condition beget
no emotion, yet hear his own complaint, sounded by that golden Trumpet
Jeremiah, we know not what an unexpected reformation it may work in us: For he
that out of Stones could raise up Children unto Abraham, and squeeze the
hardest Rocks into flowing Rivers, can with the Breath of his Nostrills mould
our Hearts into the softest temper, and raise a right and unfeigned
Lamentation; for never Words were spoken more emphatically, or with a truer
accent of Sorrow. Have ye no regard all ye that pass by? etc.

4 As petty Punishments become petty Offenders, so an abyss of sinning calls
for an abyss of Suffering. It Is no meritorious act in an Homicide to bow down
his Head to the stroke of Justice, for he shall but sacrifice it to the Blood
of another: There the Law makes it compulsory, fashions the Punishment to the
Offense. But for the Son of God, the second Person in the glorious Trinity,
(one so free from Spot or Blemish, that durst say to his critical Enemies,
which of you can rebuke me of Sin) to bow the Heavens, and come down from his
Imperial Throne, where he sat surrounded with Saints and Angels; to approach
this vile World, which was before his Footstool; to put on the rags of human
Flesh, which before was clothed with light as with a Garment; and from a King
of Kings to be enrolled a subject, and pay Tribute to Caesar; that rid on the
Wings of Cherubins, here in his greatest Triumph to bestride a silly Ass; that
thought it no robbery to be equal with the Father, to make himself of no
Reputation, and to take upon him the form of a Servant; that had so many
glorious Mansions in Heaven, so wholly to dethrone himself of all Pomp and
State, as not to have a hole to hide his Head in, to be hunted like a Partridge
in the Wilderness, betrayed by one Servant; abjurd by another, forsaken by the
rest, and generally scorned and scofft at by the Multitude, spat at, scourged,
and delivered to a Death, the most ignominious Death, the most torturing Death,
the most prolonging Death. All which summed up could not be endured by any, but
one that participated of the Deity, or ransom less than the Sins of the whole
World.

5. Now our Messiah could not have writ our Names in the Book of Life, if he
had not descended to the susception of our Infirmities. So that he was made Man
to suffer, God that he might be able to suffer. Not that the Godhead was
Co-partner with the Humanity, or any way attenuated his sufferings; for that
was invulnerable, impassible. But the All sufficiency of the Deity sustained,
and strengthened, the insufficiency, and weakness, of the humanity. Else could
he not have trod the Wine Press of his Fathers Wrath, drunk so deep of the Cup
of his indignation. That which would have torn, and shattered, the best built
edifice of Flesh, Christ is enabled to undergo, that he might not give up the
Ghost, till he has gone through what a wrackt invention of exquisite Tyrants
could inflict.

6. But before we go up to Mount- Calvary (the Scene of his Tragedy) let us
walk to the Mount of Olives, that from that Ascendant we may take the better
prospect of his doleful Passion: There shall we find him laboring under such
an Agony, as should make him so exceedingly sweat, sweat Blood, drops of Blood,
and that trickling down.

Ibat purpureus niveo de pectore sanguis. 7. No wonder there was such Distemper
in his Body, such an Ebullition of that most precious liquor, when God had sent
fire into all his bones. If our astonishment has not already overset our
reason, benighted our senses, look on him in the Judgment-Hall (though but with
Peter afar off) yet may we be near enough to see him run the Gantlope, his
virgin body enduring so many stripes (as some affirm) wearied a whole band of
soldiers.

Viscera mortiferis tandem contusa flagellis. The Scribes and Elders had reason
of state to hasten his death: But that Mercenary soldiers (whose short winged
souls seldom soar so high as Court-Politicks, and whose Commission we sind not
so extensive) should, contrary to the nobleness of their Profession, act the
ignominious parts of abominated Hangmen (especially when the meekness of his
phrase would, like softning oil, rather Mollify their stony hearts, than
confirm their obduratness) illustrates Gods heightened fury to sin, and so
consequently to Christ, then the greatest sinner in the world. He should not
sip in the cup of his fathers wrath, being now to drink a Health to the whole
world, but quaff off the very lees of his indignation.

8 He shall not have the liberty of Job, with a pot-sheard to wipe off the
excressency of Blood; for those holy hands, that had been so often extended, to
give comfort to his afflicted people, lifted up to his father to reach down
mercies from Heaven for his persecuting enemies, so Charitably disposed to deal
Alms to so many Thousands, are now fast bound, and they (who should have
guarded him as Prince of Jury, not Prisoner in Jerusalem) are already voting
his destruction in their hasty leading him away to [Pontius Pilate the Governor.

O hard hearted Jews, not only cruel to your Savior, but pittiless to your
selves in refusing to be washed in the laver of regeneration; spill so much
Nepenthe, and not cool the tip of your Tongue with one drop, make of it no
cherishing Cordials to strengthen your enfeebled souls; wound this Balsom tree,
lance this Wing Palm, and hang no bottles to gather the distilling liquor, but
let it fall (like a box of rich Spicknard) on a parched hearth, not to be
gathered up!

9. The morning being now come (too bright to look upon such black deeds) they
set the great Judge of Heaven and Earth to receive his Condemnation from men.
Little hopes to receive the benefit of Clergy, when the High Priests, and whole
Sanhedrim, are his Prosecutors. Pilate might have said the pains of denouncing
sentence against him, who in his present sufferings represented the truest
figure of death.

-- O quantum mutatus ab illo Hectore -- 10. But it is decreed this Holocaust
must be off'red up to atone the incensed Majesty of Heaven. Caiaphas the
High Priest prophesies the same. Women's assaults many times batter down men's
strongest resolutions. Strange then if Pilates wifes Petition carry not a
prevailing. Sed oportet Christum pati. The sentence of Heaven is irrevocable;
no appealing to a higher Tribunal: Her Petition then for this time shall be
rejected; and though she suffer many things in a dream by reason of him,
Nevertheless (like the neglected Prophesies of the Trojan Cassandra) it shall
pass but for a dream, to clear a small scruple of Conscience. He will not enter
the Lists alone with the Jewish Nation, and so run into a Praemunire against
Caesar.

And now no sooner had Pilate made clean the outside of the Platter (the inside
still streaked and purpled with the Blood of Christ) washed his hands in token
of Innocence, but they presently cry out for his Crucifying; as if nothing
could rebate the edge of their craving Appetites, unless they carous'd full
Draughts of his Blood.

O miseri quae tanta insania cives? 11. They must needs go whom the Devil
drives: some (whose Feet are swiftest to shed Blood) are already run to the
place of execution, and there proclaimed him coming. Others thrust him out of
the Old, and accompany him as far as Golgotha to the New Jerusalem; and,
instead of sable Vestments (a decent attire for a departed Friend) or the
Romans sacred Velles and Infules (mentioned by Livy) signs of submission, and
humble demanding of Mercy, put on Crimson Robes dyed in the Blood of Christ;
instead of solemn Dirges, ring loud Peals of Acclamation. And they that not
long before ushered him with Triumph into the Holy City, singing Hosanna to the
Son of David, presently change Note, crying, Crucifige eum, crucifige eum.
Though he lie weltring in his own Blood, yet is he forced to try the strength
of his bruised Limbs, and he that (to the admiration of Beholders) reanimated
the dead, and enabled them to take up their Beds and walk, must take up his
Cross, and walk his last Peregrination. For Holy Writ informs us, that
Malefactors among the Jews carried the Cross, whereon they were to be
crucified, to the place of Execution. Christ for the first Stage carried his
own, which afterward with a cruel requital bore him.

12. Would not so nefarious a death expiate so small a crime, so slenderly
proved, have fed their meager Appetites even to Satiety, but there must be
added to it a Ceremonious Mockery ( Bellerophon like) bear the Warrant signed
for his own Destruction, embrace that Altar on which he presently shall be
offered up a Victim.

Isaac carried his own Funeral Pile to the Mountain where he was to be
sacrificed, but had a timely Reprieve by an Exchange from Heaven. It fared not
so with Christ. He was so far from escaping that sharp potion the Hand of God
had imbittered, that, before he came to receive his grand Tortures, his whole
Body was one main Wound, without the least Parenthesis of Soundness. Never such
Indications of Love.

Cernitur in toto corpore sculptus amor. 13. Every where Engravements and
Sculptures the indelible Characters of his superabounding Mercies.

In horribili stat cruce nostra salus. And now is this our immolation laid on
the Altar of the Cross: and that Man should not surfeit to damnation by eating
the fruit of Eden, Christ climbed that accursed Tree, which bears nothing but
bitter and deadly Fruit; so inexpressive, as Cicero undertook not (lest he
should spill colors) to decipher the Tortures of the Cross: else would not his
exuberant Style have quitted a Subject so abounding with so few words. Quid
dicam in crucem tollere? A bloody Tragedy must needs ensue where the Devil
digests the Plot, and the Highpriests, Scribes and Elders are the chief Actors
in it; the avenging God letting loose, and unmuzzling the whole powers of Hell.

14. Certainly those Fiends could not so soon forget the many Affronts put on
their Delegates by our Savior, as being thrown out of their possession of Men,
and glad to be humble Petitioners to have admittance into a Herd of Swine (too
good a dwelling for such unruly Guests.) Where we may observe, that though they
at present could not disgorge their full swollen malice, yet, to show how ill
they resented this disgraceful expulsion, threw a whole Herd of Swine into the
bottom of the Sea, to provoke the greedy Gadarens to defire our Savior (as the
Author of that Loss) to depart out of their Coasts. No marvel the Prince of
Darkness endeavored to cloud this bright Star of the East, proclaimed open War
against the Prince of Peace. But that his Companions in the flesh, what is more,
the terrors of his Father should set them in array against him! 'Twill not
then, misbecome this man of sorrows, in the height, of his dolorous passion, to
break forth into this bitter Complaint, to upbraid those unrelenting Passengers
with this (though too mild) exprobation. Have ye no regard all ye that pass by?
Behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto
me, etc.

15. Our Savior's naked Body hanging now on the Cross, modesty for a while
bids me draw the Curtain; and if you look back you will see greater things than
these: for we have as yet but walked the round, and at a distance taken a
slight survey of the out-lines of this great Piece of sorrow; but if we make a
nearer approach, we shall find the inmost and more sensitive parts sending
forth deeper Groans, louder Outcryes.

There was Poena animi, as well as Poena corporis: And a wounded spirit who can
bear? Else would he not have cried out, and that with so loud a voice, before
his remorsless Enemies (whose proud rejoycings were the eccho's of his Sighs
and Groans) My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The repetition of [God]
showed the vehemence of his Passion, as if he felt himself wounded with God's
wrath, and abandoned of his own Father for our sins: our impieties carved
greater wounds in his disconsolate soul than those of his Body; his Feet and
Hands were but once nailed to the Cross, but his Soulpiercing Wounds forced a
tontinued Distillation: for every levity he paid a Groan, and the least
sentiment of sin cost him a sob, a tear.

16. If Christ paid so costly a rate for our Peccadillo's, our Venial Sins, it
must be keener than a two edged Sword, more loathsome than the baneful juice of
Aconite, to see the Borish Gergasites prefer the saving of their Swine before
the imparadising their souls; the Buyers and Sellers in the Temple pollute so
sacred a place rather than lose a convenient Exchange for their Merchandise.
Could any sorrow be like unto his sorrow to find Unbelief, a Disease so
Epidemical, and in his own Country, where so near a Relation should have at
least paid him equal respect with remoter parts, there to have his Pedigree
scornfully ripped up, Is not this the Carpenter's Son? As if God (who measures
not as man does in deceitful Balances) were a respecter of persons, or he that
fabricked this admired Machine without matter, could not Royalize with a
Commission the abjects of the people to act his high Commands, or (to use the
Apostles Phrase) make known the riches of his Glory on the Vessels of his Mercy.

H. 1. Could any sorrow be like unto his sorrow, to hear Peter (that great
Cornerstone) who had so solemnly promised to wear his Master's Cognizance
(even to death) to discard him when his greatest extremity challenged his best
and stoutest observance, not once, but thrice, heightened with direful Oaths,
and horrid Execrations, and that to a silly Maid, in the presence of his Lord
and Master, and obstinately persist in it, till the Warning-piece went off the
third time, and shot remorse into him? Could any sorrow be like unto his
sorrow, to see the Holy City Jerusalem (the Metropolis of Jewry) with its
Glorious Temple, now the beauty of Nations, ere long to suffer such a
Dilapidation, as not to have one Stone stand upon another, making good what was
sung at the Funerals of another Sceptred City;

Ruit Ilium and ingens gloria Teucrorum. 2. When Hector, Captain of Troy, Was
despoiled of his life, the Trojans and their City became a Prey to the
Neighboring Nations: so soon as those Regic^des destroyed their Native Prince,
the Roman General both conquered and crucified them. In verticem ipsius
recurrit pernicies. Our just God making the hands of Heathens instrumental to
vindicate the cause of Heaven. Could any sorrow be like unto his sorrow, to see
himself every where bespattered with bitter Sarcasms, who should have been
Deliciae generis humani (the Honor of the Emperor Titus) and a Murderer
reprieved; one that destroyed the living, before their Christ who had raised
the dead?

3. Could any sorrow be like unto his sorrow, to see the seduced Populacy (who
should have been so bold in the cause of their salvation, as to have vyed tears
with the drops of his most precious Blood, tuned their Sighs and Groans, to the
loud tenor of his Outcries, and rivings of his Soul) carelessly pass by shaking
their Heads? To see those Rabbis, the Scribes and Doctors, so far from
applying a Sovereign Cure to their tainted Souls, that unless he would show
them another Miracle by an immediate descending from the Cross, they would not
believe? As if all those mighty Works he had already shown, and same had
brought home from remoter parts, were clean forgot. Could any sorrow be like
unto his sorrow, to see his Kinsfolks and Familiars stand afar off, and made so
unfit to pay a full Tribute of Commiseration, as that they could not with
safety own a clouded Countenance?

4. If he eat with Zachens he is accounted a Friend to Publicans and Sinners:
there they unawares speak truth, for he seeks their Conversion; I came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. If on the Sabbath he cures the
diseased, and gives them a Reprieve to complete their Calcule for that great
and general Audit, it is a breach of the Law of Moses. If he speaks mystically
to them (by wresting it to their own sense,) form it into matter of Accusation.
When the Tyrians and Sydonians heard the Harangue of Herod the King, they
raised their Notes to the highest: Acclamations, styling it The voice of God,
and not of man: But if Christ embroider his Speech with Tropes and Figures,
though never man spoke as he spoke, his Friends say, He is mad, his Enemies cry
out, He has a Devil. O quae mentis acerbae moestitudo? But why should we wade
farther in this, since we are no more able to fathom the depth of his
sufferings, either of Soul or Body, than S. Austin's Child could lave out the
immense Ocean with a little Spoon.

5. Some will say much may be undergone in good company; but for Christ (who
before he assumed this Body of Flesh, was. a companion to the great and mighty
Jehovah, and well might be so, when there was an equality of Greatness, waited
on by Myriads of Saints and Angels) now to be placed between two Thieves, two
notorious Delinquents, could not but mount his thoughts to the summit of
sorrow. That Virtue is seated betwixt two Evils is a Maxim undeniable, since
it is so notably verified by our Savior's hanging on the Cross between two
Malefactors (likely companions are these then for extenuating miseries, when
their natures admit of such perfect contrarieties, as good and evil in their
several Abstracts) who there, instead of an ingenious Confession, revile their
Fellow-Sufferer Christ Jesus with this tart Satyr, If thou be the Son of God
save thy self and us.

6. A strange Object had they found out for their scorn and derision, who was
wholly composed of Meekness and Gentleness; but a stranger time had they made
use of to vent it in, when death had them on his Shoulders: but the one of them
(to the wonderful demonstration of the readiness, and prevalency of his
Mercies) presently turned Convert, reproving his Companion; Fear thou not
God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And in the nick of time (while
the Iron of Contrition was hot) hammered ont a well formed Petition; Lord,
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. Words fitly spoken, hanging like
Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.

7. They needed not have made so curious a scrutiny for new fashioned
punishments to afflict him,

-- Qui poenis occurrit atrocibus ultro. For when Vinegar mingled with Mirth
and Gall, was proffered him to drink (a favor bestowed on such at their
Crucifixion, to open the Veins, and so accelerate death) Christ would not
drink, lest he should mar the whole Tragedy, by failing in the last Scene.
Good God! if these be the Favors Man deals to Man, let me receive my Favors
from thine own hands. From the first putting on the Swaddling Clouts of Flesh,
he had yielded most acceptable Sacrifices of perfect Obedience to his Father:
and therefore the horror of the last three Hours Suffering should not make him
sound a cowardly Retreat, and so frustrate the Decrees, and preordain'd
Resolves of the Almighty. Perdidit vitam, ne perderet obedientiam. He would
give up his life, rather than make forfeiture of his obedience.

8. Unless we go beyond nature for a search, the fire of the hottest Revenge
will expire, when it has the Blood of its Adversary sprinkled on it. But their
malice rebated not with his death, but had a continuation to his Body after his
high flying Soul had journied as far as Heaven; else would they not have
desaced that incomparable piece of Building (glorious in it self, but more
glorious in being the Sphere for this Son of God to move in) by thrusting a
Spear into his Virgin Side, for Blood and Water to stream forth, too too
precious to be spilt on the Ground of that most accursed Country.

9. Timanthes a Grecian Painter, when he was to resemble the doleful Sacrifice
of Iphigenia, drew a sad Ajax, a mournful Ulisses, but the Face of Agamemnon,
the Father, he veiled with a sable Curtain, as not knowing how to decipher so
great a sorrow. So we may content our selves to have delineated the Bewailings
of his Disciples, that received the glorious Impress of his Doctrine, the
inward sighs and bitter Lamentations of his Friends and Kinsfolks. But instead
of showing you his wounded soul, stabbed with our sins, his tortured Body, such
Throws so unexpressive, such pangs so unsufferable, something should be
interposed betwixt your sight and it, lest out of a zeal to draw that to the
life, we take from the State, and Majesty of so true a sorrow.

10. As the Forerunner to the sad Catastrophe of an Heroic Potentate, a
blazing Comet prodigiously shakes his flaming Beard, as if it threatened to fire
the lower Region to light him at his Funeral: But at so great and terrible a
Massacre of him, who could bind such Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with
Links of Iron, could the Sun, that shone but at his courtesy do less than
withdraw his Beams, lest it hold the Candle, whilst such horrid Assassination
was perpetrated on the Son of God? Or the Earth, his Footstool, to fall into a
Trepidation, while it bore such unnatural Inhabitants, that (Viper like) would
tear out the Bowels of him, who brought Bowels of Mercy and Compassion to their
languishing and Bed-ridden Souls? Since Christ should be no more preached in
the Temple, but polluted with Buyers and Sellers, rent it self in twain from
the top to the bottom, the Stones clave asunder, and in their inarticulate
Oratory bespake their accursed ruin, and our insensibility. The Allarm so
great that the dead who had long slept, awaked, as if they arose to present him
their Tombs. Every thing full of prodigy and wonder. The great Luminary of
Heaven suffers an Eclipse, though the Moon, not then in conjunction, but full,
to the admiration of Dionysius; Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut mindi machina
dissolvetur. All things in that disorder, as if nature were distracted, and
every thing ran back to its first Confusion.

11. Thus we see, Sun, Earth, Temple, Stones, which are the insensible servants
of Man, by their several unaccustomed Mutations, seem to have a quicker
resentment of his sufferings than man, who alone is concerned without any
Corrival.

By this time devout Joseph has begged the Body of Jesus, and (though a rich
man) ventured to show his affecion to him living, in a decent interment of him
dead. While his charitable hands are throwing on fragrant Spices, and rich
scented Odours, let us a little look back on that great Attribute of God (his
Justice) that which here occasioned our attendance on this sad and solemn
Obsequy.

12. Those Pieces must needs be well limn'd, that have the hand and care of the
best Artist to figure them, Adam is here drawn to the life, for he is styled
the Image of his Maker; his Soul of no Elementary Substance, but the Breath of
God. And this Epitome of the Creation, prelated so high above exacts he but an
observance to one single command; the Command high and peremptory, upon the
pains of Death; the temptation languid, and saint, commended by a Serpent.

13. That he, that is thought to exceed his Successors in wisdom, and had the
precipitation of the Angels, the wrackings of those glorious Vessels, as in a
mirror figured to his understanding, should (by so soon affronting his Maker)
split that Ark that carried the whole fortune of Mankind, and afterward give
the lie to his Omnisciency, and essential Ubiquity, by shrowding himself in the
close Walks of the Garden (as it God wanted a Clue to the Maeanders of his own
planting; or one Tree could repair what the other lost, shelter him from the
imminent Storms of Heaven; or that there were an Opacity in those Glorious
Optics, who could see through the dark and disordered Chaos to model and rank
things into a beautiful Order) and in his Epostulation aggravate this sin by a
seeming extenuation; The woman whom thou gave to be with we, she gave me of
the tree, and I did eat: (As if God had laid the Scene for his Transgression)
If I had been alone, steered my own course, I had not thus offended,
Strengthens this Bill of Indictment drawn up against him, and calls for justice
to avenge it. O Lord, how shall we fulfill the whole Law, when Adam in his
brightest integrity, but newly dropped from the hand of his Maker, could not
observe this poor Particle of it? The Spark that flies the Fire that fed it
shall be put out. If we refuse the allowed Delicacies of Paradise, nauseate the
Cates of his own planting, we shall earn our Bread with the Sweat of our Brows.
Since we dislike to equal the days of Heaven, we shall die like Men, die
eternal deaths, if not expiated by the Crucifixion of the Holy Jesus.

14. As our Impieties are transcendent, so will his justice be elevated to the
same height. Our Sacrifices must be adequate to the multiplicity of our
Transgressions. Could man, by exposing his own life to the fatal stroke of
death, satisfy for his own offenses, his debt were quickly paid, and Heaven
with all its Glories purchased at an easy rate. But the only wise God well
knew that the whole world of flesh, though it had as many worlds as this has
Men, and all to endure the exquisitest deaths the most ingenious Tormenters
could inflict, would not take off the interest of our Engagements, no, not,
expiate the crimes of one days offending. Let us not therefore think we are
hardly dealt withal, because God would not remit any thing of a due debt, but
forbear giving up our Verdict, till we sweeten our censures with the ensuing
Mercies, which is that that next presents it self.

15. As the Mercies of God are above all his Works; so is this Mercy of his, in
sacrificing his only Son, Paramount above all his other Mercies. For since
Hecatombs of Beasts could not appease the wrath of God, but that we must enjoy
the blackness of Hell for our demerit, he freely bestowed on us his beloved
Son, to live miserably among those which gave him such untoward welcome, to
pass through such an agony as should make him sweat Blood, Tears of Blood; to
die a cursed death, such a death, such a sorrow, that none but himself could
endure, no Tongue but an Angels can relate.

16. Friendship is never so truly beautified, at no time so gorgeously set
forth, as when, like a ready Handmaid, it waits, upon the greatest indigency.
God was, and is, that true Friend to us. He saw how near we sat to the Margent
of Hell, how the Devil stood in Ambuscado with dilated Arms, ready upon our
first tripping to lay hold on us, our own imbecility to resist: the Attack;
then sent he one that would not be foiled, should rescue us out of the Regions
of Darkness, though with the unavoidable loss of his own most precious Blood.
Ungrateful Man, though he has defaced the Image of his Maker, disrobed himself
of all his Glories, yet would not God that he should die eternally, as is most
eminently seen in this his one mercy.

As it was a mercy in God in being this way satisfied for oui Oftences, so was
it as great a mercy in Christ to lay down his life: for he did it
spontaneously, and without compulsion; his Passion being wholly in compassion
to those,

Qui mortem insonti possent imponere Christo. I. 1. No man takes my life from
me, but I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again:
That he that was God, and is God, should die, is man's wonder: but that he, who
could draw forth more than twelve Legions of Angels in warlike Equipage to his
Rescue (when one single Angle proved sufficient to slay one hundred and eighty
five thousand armed Men in one night) would die most readily, lay down his
life, rears that wonder a degree higher. But that this Son of God (whose Soul
was so Crystalline, whose whole life more innocent than the Seraphical thoughts
of expiring Saints) would prodigally pour forth his most precious Blood to bath
and cleanse our Leprosy, is an exaltation of that.

2. It shall be upon record, as an high piece of merit, if one man lay down the
Treasures of his own life to cancel the exacted debt of of his Friend.

-- Subeuntem fata mariti
Alcesten. --
Alcestes reprieved her Husband Admetus with the loss of her own life.
Maecenas, a noble Theban, embraced death to restore life to his Captive
Country. Calphurnia, the Daughter of Marius, was by him sacrificed in the
Cimbrick War. History is replete with blazoning Grecian and Roman Worthies,
who have disvalued their own lives, when in competition with the safety and
honor of their Country. This had a limitation to their Friends, to their
distressed Country, yet it entitled them to be seated in the hallowed Pantheon,
enrolled among the Gods, to have Tombs and Statues, built to perpetuate their
memory to futurity. But Christ's love was universal, it had the essential
property of good, it was sui diffusivum, it extended to the whole Universe, to
those that despitefully used him. In the Abyss of his Passion, in the throws of
his most compungent sufferings, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. There
could be no ends in Christ, no accumulating of Glories, in whom dwelt the
Fullness of the Godhead bodily.

3. The insuperable and transcendent love of Christ is every where legible and
conspicuous. Let us fashion returns of Gratitude in the greater Odium to our
Deviations, that cost him so many pains, so many sorrows; making that pious
resolution of S. Bernard our own, Nolo vivere sine vulnere, cum te video
vulneratum: As long as we hear thy Wounds, as so many Mouths, crying out upon
the cruelty of our Aberrations, we will not live without a throbbing Soul, a
wounded Spirit. He had days of Humiliation for our Festivals, sorrowing for our
rejoicing; drank Vinegar mingled with Gall for our Carousing; for our Purple
and fine Linen he wore a Robe of Mockery, and that spat on, and defiled; was
scourged for our wantonizing; macerated his own Body, to pull down the
excressency of ours, overgrown with a repletion of Luxury; crowned with Thorns
to obtain for us a Crown of Righteousness, that he might throw to us the
Donatives of Everlasting Life. And after all this (as if his Endearedness to us
had been hitherto unexpressive) ascended the Cross, that by that Ladder we may
scale Heaven, and for our prize have the Fellowship of Saints and Angels for
ever.

4. Thus we have seen God's Justice, and Mercy run parallel. His justice must
keep us to that severe awe, and perfect Obedience, that presumption get no
footing in our hearts; not so much as an Outwork, whereby it may at any time
surprise the main Fort. His mercy must teach us not to despair of his
seasonable relieving us; though our Sins are the black Curtain drawn between
the light of his glorious; Countenance and us, so that we are almost dried up,
and withered, yet, at, the least appearance of our Humiliation, he will shed
some Gleams, dart a Ray of Favor upon our drooping Souls.

5. An abused patience amongst most men transforms it self into a fiery
indignation. What greater motives for God to destroy the interest we have in
his favor, than our disdain and ingratitude. The Israelites after they had
once received from the hand of God Livery and Seizin of the Land of Canaan, and
by that had a confirmation of the validity of his Promises, they so soon forgot
the exuberant mercies of the Lord, that he presently seized on their large
Charter of Liberty, and gave them into the hands of Tyrants, Christ when he had
once peiced the rich Robes of the Deity to the rags of flesh, soon found us
sick even to death, our wounds gangreen'd, and nothing could restore them but
his own Blood. Medicabile Nardum, rich Spikenard, precious Ointment; he
searched into our sores, wiped off those venomous pollutions we had attracted
from the Loins of our first Parents, made us sound men, left us his Antidotes,
Instructions to continue sound Christians. But we must not like an
over-confident Prodigal, who has his first Debts struck off from his Friends
hopeful amendment, continue his unthriftiness, presuming to find their favor
as prolifical as at first. Debet amor laesus irasci. Love once abused changes
its smiles into frowns.

6. God will not be mocked; he has a Rod of Iron in his Hand, which he will
not always brandish over us, but when we provoke his wrath he will strike home.
Tarditatem irae gravitate supplicii compensabit (says Lactantius.) Though God
does not present execution, yet when he is pleased to scourge us, he will
recompense the slowness with the weight and grievousness of our Chastisements.

Then when God is angry who can stand before his wrath, or abide the fierceness
of his displeasure? his wrath is poured out like fire, and the Rocks are broken
by him.

7. Because the Almighty has hitherto given us a Lifeguard of Angels, that
therefore he will continue the same protection to us (however we demean our
selves) is an argument built wholly upon fallacy. The distance is many times
great betwixt his Will and Power. 'Twere easy for God to make the Black Guard
of Satan splendid Courtiers in Heaven, transplant all the fiery Legions of Hell
into Parardise, hallow and sanctify all their Profanations, transforming them
into glorious Angels of Light, and instead of howling and shrieking, make them
perfect Choristers to sing Anthems in the Celestial Quire. But that God will
have his justice go an even pace with his mercy; they to be tormentors for
sinning, we to be tormented by them for offending.

8. But let it not be with us as in unsound Bodies, the expelling of one
Disease the making room for another, which may be as obnoxious as the first;
instead of a too confident relying upon the mercies of God, and our own
worthiness, to fall upon its contrary evil, a despairing of the sufficiency of
his promises. From the last, a Rock equally as dangerous as the first, should
be our care to waft our weather-beaten Vessels, when we have almost steered
into safe Harbor. We cannot figure any thing of the inward and distant Lights
of the upper Region, without the assistance of a Telescope. But God, with a
Glance swifter than Lightning, darts through all the Figleaves of our
pretensions sooner than thought; threads the Maze and Labyrinths of all our
Hearts: Then must he needs give a veritatem dixisti to Moses, Our Imaginations
are evil, and that continually. As Soon as we shake off the Fetters of the Womb
we are froward, repining at our Maker's dealing with us, who might have molded
us into Monsters. As soon as we draw breath we draw in sin, and that with
Greediness. But let not this anatomizing our contagious Souls startle us, or
fill us with conceit, that therefore we shall utterly peperish; for if we were
destined to damnation, then were our Creation no happiness, but a curse.

9. If we timely take up, God will let light into that gloomy darkness that
invelops us, disperse those full swollen Clouds of his Wrath, that they break not
on us. He is not an inexorable Judge: his stock of mercy is as replete as ours
of sins. The Thief on the Cross deferred his repentance till the last moment
(when we are sure he had not time to make long Prayers) yet did outrun many
who all their life rode post to Heaven, and gave in his Been discessit the same
day the Son of God entered into his Glory. If after all the abominations of
Sodom and Gomorrah, Abrabam could have found out but ten righteous persons in
those Regal Cities, God would have stopped the Viols of his Wrath from being,
poured out upon them. A strange discouraging Lottery, where so many thousand
Blanks may be drawn, before the Hand of God can light upon one prize. Here
might we enumerate the mercies of God, and for want of numbers leave them
numberless. Sure this would have more puzzled Archimedes's Arithmetic, than
the Sands of the Sea he proudly vaunted he could give a number to.

10. 'Twas a mercy in God to midwife us from the dark Prison of the Womb, which
otherwise would have been to us a putrid Grave. 'Twas a greater mercy in
preserving us till we arrive at a ripeness of Knowledge, that we may consider
our admirable making, with the wonderful Architecture of the Universe. But a
greater mercy than that is the possessing our Souls with the saving knowledge
of his Word, which is a Lantern to our Feet, and serves as a Pale, and Fence,
to keep in the depraved mind of man from breaking out into all Enormities.
Where, for our greater Regulement, we may see as clear, as if painted by a
Sunbeam, the Sufferings of the Primitive Saints, and God supporting them to
hold out the Conflict to the end* without Apostasy; and likewise his Justice
severely executed on those, that presumptuously spurn at his Ordinances, and
despise his rich mercies.

11. But his mercy of mercies, and greatest of all mercies, is, that of sending
his only Son, who was equal to the Father, and the Holy Ghost in Majesty and
Honor, to have sorrow, such a sorrow as should make him so dolorously complain
to all those that passed by. To die, to die such a death as should make him so
passionately cry out to his Father, as if he had suffered the height of God's
Anger (his Dereliction) and all to exorcise us of sin, and Satan; ransom us out
of a Land darker than darkness it self, that we may be elated into the highest
Heaven, where we shall be as far above the Sphere the Sun moves in, as we are
now below it.

12. And that great and terrible Jehovah, whom we durst not name without a
venerable prostration, whose clarity we cannot here behold, but through a Glass
darkly, by reflected Beams, there see face to face, know him as we are known,
accompanying Saints, Angels, Cherubims, and Seraphims, in singing Praises to
that great God; where Sorrow shall know no Beginning, Bliss no Ending.

ESSAY IV. I. 13. De Passione Christi in Corpore mystico, seu de cruce piorum.
2 CORINTHIANS. 4.17. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.


It Is a Canon drawn up in the College of Heaven, that through the Ordeal Fires
of Adversity the Saints enter the Regions of Blessedness. It Is fancied by the
Poet, that Aeneas passed through strange and uncouth places, had much of horror
and trepidation before he reached the Elysian Plains. We must sail through this
Fretum, pass these Straits before we lanch out into the Ocean of endless
Beatitudes.

14. We must scale these rugged Alps before we make our Intrado into the
Campania of future Glory. There is no Galaxias, no Appian way to Heaven; it is
not Lapidibus complanata. And this every where proved to us by the Footings and
Tracings of many imparadised Saints; some to the Theaters to be baited with
wild Beasts, as Ignatius; some to the Fire, as Polycarp; some to the scalding
Baths, as Phocas Bishop of Pontus; others to the Scaffold, as Saint Paul; every
place tinctured with the Blood of Martyrs, the Prison in Jerusalem, the Cradles
in Bethlehem. But their Race is run, they have finished their Tragedy with a
glorious Exit, with the Plaudite God and Angels.

Some say the Lilies have no other Seed than their own Tears. We are sure the
Church has no better Seed than the Blood of her Martyrs. It is a goodness we
are not to thank our Enemies for. That which is intended for an utter
extirpation, proves our best preservative.

15. Our Bodies keep the sounder for their Phlebotomy. The more they trample on
us, the higher we rise: Antaeus like, we gather strength by our fall. This
emboldened Tertullian to tell the Bloodshot-eyed persons of his time, that
their persecutions did but open the Sally-port to God's distressed people.
Plutarch reports how that Promotheus stroke his Enemy with an intent to destroy
the object of his hatred, but instead of cutting the Thread of his Life, spun
it out to a greater length; prob'd a hidden wound, lanced a concealed
Imposthume, which otherwise had proved fatal. Here is the true Sword Salve
which both wounds and heals. O lovely Sore, when the Heavenly Aesculapius puts
on the Plaster: O happy wound, that works so glorious a restoration. He that
beholds the Wrackings and Tortures of the Saints and Servants of God, without
faith to look upon the Crown their Savior is weaving to adorn their Temples
with, or to conceive the Caresses and Exultancies their Souls make in the midst
of their Agonies, will behold them with much inquietude and astonishment.

16. It Is the contemplation of the Joys of Heaven that buoys our Souls, that
they sink not in this black Sea. Through that Medium thy not only look into
Heaven, but Paradisum mente deambulant. See but the Bead-roll of S. Paul's
Sufferings; read but the Bill of Fare he draws you of a perturbed life, you
would think he might make the greatest Holy Day. Magnum aliquid spectat. Sure
there was some immense thing he looked after, that kept him from Swoons and
Faintings, that alleviated the sorrow and anguish of his soul: and here he
gives us of the refection, assures us our affliction is but light, and, which
makes it inconsiderable, it is but for a moment.

Philosophy tells us, that the worlds chief materials are Food and Raiment, the
rest is Nugatorium quiddam, whole absence may be dispensed withal; and
therefore, if the chosen of God want the Redundancies of an exuberant Fortune,
we cannot say their life is levened with sorrow and discomfort.

K. 1. If we anatomize man in his Umbrage, his mendicant Condition, we shall
not find him so pared to the quick, but that he may rival with him whom fortune
has aspected. Zeno Citiensis lost all his Goods in a storm. This which would
have made foul weather, raised a Hirrecan in another Breast, he not only
receives in a calm and serene temper, but counts it a Blessing from the Gods
that they had given him liberty to study Philosophy. It Is not the thing it self
that has any intrinsecal worth to ennoble our condition, but our manner of
receiving it, the value we set on it. Paul the Hermites Coat was as gorgeous in
his Eye, as if vested with a Persian Robe. And John Baptist's Locusts and wild
Honey tasted as sweetly, as if he had feasted at the Table of Apicius or
Lucullus. Diogenes Earthen Platter, and the Roman Senators Dishes of Clay, were
as useful as if molded of China Earth, or imbossed with Gold. The purling Water
tasted as deliciously out of those courser Goblets, as dissolved Pearls drank
out of Cups of Agate and Crystal by the riotous Anthony and Cleopatra. And if
we respect fame, Epaminondas and Fabricius are transmitted to posterity with as
many Asterisques of Honor as that wealthy Crassus; their contented poverty
studding and enamelling their best Perfections.

2. Let our condition be never so abject, so necessitous, we have no reason to
obnubilate the Sun of his Favor with the least interposition of distrust: for
Heavens great Almoner many times gives us a measure brim full, pours out the
over-flowings of his Love, and that when all humane help is at a loss, and
impossibility of self-preservation. Where could the Israelites have found out
materials for the cutting out new Garments in their forty years sojourning in
the Wilderness, if God had not miraculously minded their preservation? Sure no
Workmanship so lasting as that which this great Architect fashions with his own
hands: the Ground was too rude and churlish to give Viands to so many Guests,
yet the Fleshpots of Egypt could not equal the Dainties they are in that
barren Soil.

3. Sure the Banquet must be rich and bountiful, when this generous Dispensator
furnishes the Table with Cates, fetched out of the Storehouse of Heaven. And
Elijah in his indigency had his Mess brought him, one while by an Angel,
another while by a Raven.

We have not yet seen any Gorgon Faces to affright us, and though we are led
into darker Rooms, yet the Damps will not be so great as to make our Tapers
burn blew. To be sentenced to the Athenian Ostracism, denied to breath the Air
that suckled us, torn from the society of Friends and Acquaintance, snatched
from the dear Embraces of an indulgent Wife, to hear the Cries and
Heart-breakings of a tender Offspring, or, like disconsolate Niobe, see them
slain in our own sight. We might think this to be calculated for the Meridian
of Sorrow; yet it is a Grief that may be very well supported with the
Contemplation of what is yet left us. And if this be not Cordial Operative
enough, consider that in Heaven we shall not be erratick, but Stars fixed in
the Firmament of Glory; not irradiated with a borrowed luster, but perpetually
enlightened with the presence of God himself.

4. Plato never reckoned himself destitute of Company as long as he had the
conversation and freedom of his own thoughts, never banished his Country when
he had the fame Elements for sustentation, the fame Luminaries to give him
light and warmth. They may erase our Palaces, disparkle our riches, strip us of
all the world calls beautiful, because we are here but Tenants at will; but
that which we hold by a second life is a Building not made with hands, eternal
in the Heavens. They may dilacerate our Bodies with unaccustomed Torments,
undress them of natures chiefest imbellishments, yet they cannot disrobe our
Consciences of their white Vestments, extinguish those bright flames which
(like Elias's Chariot) coaches us up to Heaven.

5. If they banish me (says Brutus) they cannot forbid to carry with me my
Virtues. They are Crown-Jewels that must not be fingered, no ravenous hand may
embezzle. Though Detraction blurs our Honor with her sour Breath, makes putrid
the sweet Ointment of a good name; though our Statuas are thrown out of the
Capitol, and hung up by the Heels in the Forum; though our names are blotted
out of their Records and Annals of fame, registered only with scorn and
imbasement, God permits it, that from this obscurity, out of this lowness of
Fortune, he may do himself the more honor, show the excellency of his power by
mounting us on a higher Throne, drawing the Rays of our Glory to a brighter
Luster. Historians every where show us many brave men, as well Heathens as
Christians (who had no other fault but too much merited of their Country) that
have been paid with scorn and ingratitude, nay, with Proscription; and
afterward, with the consent and applause of those very Persecuters, have
thrown off the Mantles and Coverings of Darkness and Obscurity, and like the
Sun after an interposition, appeared all Glorious.

6. God seldom remunerates his Servants here with a temporary felicity. Some
indeed have been crowned with Rose-Buds, have let no Flower of the Spring pass
by them. Though Mordecai, a Captive, was invested with the Royal Robes, and
rode upon the King's Horse, yet others have gone on foot, and not a seeming
Gourd to refresh them, but so as he comforts and keeps vivid the Vitals with
his Spirits and Extracts, distilled through that glorious Limbeck, Paul the
Apostle: We may be troubled on every side, but not distressed, perplexed, but
not in despair, persecuted, but not forsaken. God has Balsom for every Wound,
a Plaster for every Sore, and though he dress it not while it is green and
fresh, yet he will make his applications before it fester.

What though God suffer an Executioner to lay violent hands upon thee, he
cannot go a step beyond death; he does but antidate the work of a Disease, the
difference only is, a nefarious hand presently storms the body, and a malady
takes it in by a longer Siege: few drop like a wasted Taper in the Socket, but
some violent wind puts it out, some sharp Disease is the extinguisher, and the
Conflicts and Colluctations that such have with death adequate the throws of a
more hasty Transition. So that it matters not whether we die Sicca, or humida
morte; whether we are burnt with a quick fire at the stake, or a lingering one
of a Fever; whether we are thrown into the Tiber, or drowned at home with a
Dropsy; whether starved in a Prison, or shrivelled in our Chamber with a
Consumption.

7. Since God has a Statute upon our Bodies, It being appointed for all men
once to die: and that we cannot be removed from our Troubles of Life but by
death, then the shortest way must needs be the best. It Is a poor thrift to put
a Save-all into our Farthing Candle, to be angry because the thread of nature is
broken before she has time to wind off the whole bottom. Though the eye of
Moses was not dim, nor his natural force abated, yet when God bade him, Go up
and die, he readily quitted his own command, went up to the top of Pisgah, and
died. The Primitive Christians set so great an estimate upon the days of their
death, that they called them Natales. Then they only began their Epoch of
living: the world was but before in labor with them, and death was the Midwife
to give them a Nativity.

8. Certainly could we but hear the Transports of a refined Soul singing an
Obiit to the world, preparing her Heavenly Viaticum, it would have a strange
charm, awake our Poppy Souls, and infuse into them raptures of joy and
exultation unexpressive; or if fabricated according to the Model of that
Philosopher, who would have a Window in the Breast of every man, we might see a
strange Festivity within him, not a Cloud in that Hemisphere. What more lovely
than the wounds of Sebastian (though drawn with a rugged Pencil)? Those
feathered Arrowswinged him for an Heavenly Flight. Does not a Martyr amidst his
Flames show like the Sun encircled with Rays of Glory? And S. Stephen, when
brought before the Council, appeared not with pallor and dejection (like a
Malefactor that looks half executed before the doom be past) but so Seraphical,
that the Judges saw his face, as though it had been the face of an Angel. When
a Saint has been mounting a Scaffold, have we not been big with conceit by
those few Stairs he was ascending a Throne; that it was his Jacobs Ladder that
railed him up to Heaven?

9. He must needs make a boon Voyage, that in so little a time is set on the
shore of eternity, with so few steps is carried from earth to Heaven.

Let not then any thing startle us, though vizarded with loathsomness and
deformity, nor be terrified, though we change life for death (with that brave
Theban Epaminondas) so the Victory may be glorious. It is God's care (and who
would not almost love his Disease for such a Physician (many times to use
Corrosives to the Body, that the Soul may have her Lenitives; punish the worser
part, that the better may be preserved. To a mortal man there can be no
immortality of evil, man himself has but a short period; his life compared to
things of the least duration. And yet they that acted the most tragical parts
(no doubt) had some Interludes and Recesses. It was not long that Joseph lay in
prison, nor Job on the Dunghill, nor Jeremy in the Dungeon. Others have put on
Mourning for a longer term, but they also had a time to shift their Sables.
Dabit Deus bis quoque sinem.

10. It is against the Rules of a Tragedy to have every Scene filled with Blood
shed and Slaughter. A strange distempered Season if the Heavens should
continually be hung with black; as strange if we always sat in darkness, that
the Sun did not sometimes peep through our cloud of Adversity. Though it
enlighten not the whole Body, yet it may guild the Fringes and Borders of it;
gives us, though not a glorious light, yet sufficient to keep our dying spark
alive. But against all partiality, it must appear strangely short, if compared
to the never terminating pains of the Fiends below, where the Worm never dies,
nor the Fire ever goes out. It is observed by Boethius, That a punctum of time,
and ten thousand years hold better proportion than so many years, and that
endless thing Eternity. Aeternum, aeternum, quanta, haec duratio, quanta! How
much horror and amazement should the consideration of it bring to them that
barter for a present felicity, a few transient Glimmerings, so much horror and
confusion; where they shall spend morientem vitam, be always dying, and yet
never die; not one drop of Water shall be cast into the Furnace to slack their
Flames, not one spark of Fire shall warm these refrigerating Waters: and to
heighten the wonder, contraries shall dwell together without any destructive
clashing. Lamentable is the cry of the Prophet Esaias, Who among us shall dwell
with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings?

11. Is it not then better to be cast down with sorrow for sin, than to be sunk
so low, that we never rise again; to be clouded for a while, than over-cast for
ever? Melior est modica amaritudo in faucibus, quam aeternum tormentum in
visceribus: It is better to chew a little Gaul in our mouths; than to have
Gripings in our Bowels, and Excoriations in our Souls, and that for ever: to
drink a Jill of Wormwood, than to be perpetually intoxicated with the Cup of
his fiery Indignation: to endure the heaviness of a night, for the joy that
comes in the morning; a day that shall never be benighted, a day that shall
not have so much as a Cloud to veil or curtain the Saints happiness.

12. It was answered by that famed Emperor Vespasian (when Apollonius desired
admission for Dion and Euphrates, men eminently qualified) My Gates stand
always open to Philosophers, but my very Breast is open to Apollonius. So the
Gates of that Palace Royal of Heaven, that sure City of Refuge, are never shut
against such as are beaten on the Anvil of Affliction for righteousness sake.
But God receives these to a greater endearedness, stretches their natures wider
to receive a fuller measure of Glory, erects their Throne with more refined
Gold, sets richer Jewels in their Crown, that ennoble their suffering with
Patience and Glory in their Tribulation. Patience, it fans the holy fires of
Love, throws perfumes into the flame, snuffs our Lamp, and makes it burn with a
brighter clarity; like the Chemists Elixir, it turns all into incorruptible
Gold, the Touchstone by which God tries his people whether they be Gold or a
baser Metal.

13. The warlike Inhabitants of Germany plunged their Male Children in the
Rhene, to discover by their boldness in struggling with the waters, their
Courage or Cowardice. Our Heavenly Father casts us on the Waters of Marah,
wrinkles the face of them with that tempestuous wind, Euroclydon, that troubled
Paul, to see whether we would lighten our Ship of that Baggage Stuff she is
freight with, whether we have courage to go on, or patience to endure, though
we see neither Sun, nor Stars, for many days.

He that goes to Golgotha, and sees Martyrs and Malefactors sent to the
immortality of another world, may easily make the difference, who suffers for
demerit, and who for a good conscience. The one sings in his flames, the other
howls; the one reproaches the Executioner, the other thanks him, and with that
Proto-Martyr Stephen prays for him; the one, like a spent Meteor, stinks in his
Socket, the other (like Aromatic Torches) perfumes the Air with odoriferous
Evaporations, or a setting Sun that leaves an impression of Glory on the
Neighboring Clouds.

14. But to have heard the complaint of Hadrian sung in a sort tone, in a
sadder Elegy; or to have seen the impatience of Herod, when wracked with an
incurable Disease, but more distorted Conscience; or Julian the Apostate, full
of horror, and remediless despair; or Nero, when he crept into a Thicket of
Reeds, for fear of dying more majorum. This sure (like Belshazzar's
Handwriting) would have made loose the Joints of his Loins, and his Knees to
smite one against another. But the Saints of God they smile upon death, and
torture, and good reason have they. Mors non est obitus sed abitus: Death is
their Jail-delivery, gives them a Writ of Ease from all their Labors and
Endurances; it is their Intrat to their Glories, and endless Beatitudes. S.
Jerome saw but a little timidity in his Soul, some show of her unwillingness to
leave her old Habitations, and presently he gives her the check; Egredere, quid
times anima mea, egredere, etc.

15. We may with less reluctance traverse this Alpian way, because much plained
with the footings of those that have gone before. If Myriads of Saints marched
in the van, and dared their Enemies to an Execution, shall it startle us to
bring up the rear? No Victory without fighting, no Crown without Victory. We
may be Spectators at the Olympic Games, carry a Crown to adorn another
Triumph, but never wreath our own Brows, unless we get the Garland with
striving. And who will not enter the Lists, when he is sure to carry away the
prize? For God, with his Militia of Angels, attends the Combat, and enhaunceth
the price of their Virtue, according to the vigorousness of the temptation they
grapple with. If such had not their exemption from the effects of an angry God,
whom the Lord has styled, A man after his own hearty, the signet of his right
hand, the friend of God, his Husbandry, his Building (expressions of a strange
endearedness) can we, that are but Shrubs and Brambles, think to have merited
more of lenity than those Oaks of Bashan, those Cedars of Lebanon; those Colums
of Piety and Godliness, that our services are of an higher strain than the
Apostles and primitive Saints, and therefore he should lay his strokes the
gentler on us.

16. Believe it, we have dipped our Sins in a far deeper Die, made them as red
as Scarlet, rivalled the greatest Offender, and therefore our suffering can
never make an expiatory Oblation. If God did perpetually flash his Lightnings,
dart his Thunderbolts, and knot his Rods (like the Whips of the Furies) with
Serpents and Scorpions, yet the disproportion must be strangely great betwixt a
finite suffering, and an infinite Majesty offended. It Is of singular advantage
and encouragement to us in this War-fare, that Christ underwent the fame
pressures, but ripened to a greater maturition: for he can tell (to a scruple)
how much Freight we can take in, how many fathom of Water our Vessel draws; so
that he will be sure to unlade us, if the Burden be too weighty, throw into
them some sweet Liquors, if the Waters taste too brackish.

L. 1.It was a comfort to dying Lausus, that he received his death from the
great Aeneas. It matters not how many stripes we receive, how deep the wound,
how disconsolate the Soul, since it is a Savior that afflicts, who carries
healing under his Wings: so much Blood and Sweat, so many Sighs and Sobs shall
not become fruitless; but he will see tho Work of our Redemption perfected. We
are wounded, but that good Samaritan will have compassion, bind up our Sores,
and pour Oil and Spikenard on them, that can settle and compose a distempered
and sadded Soul, and sparkle our Countenance, as if we were putting on the
Royal Habiliments in the morning of our Resurrection: Dum dat verbera ostendit
ubera. God never bruises us, but he has a Plaster ready spread, pearled
Cordials to fetch back a departing life. It Is said the Stork lets out the
corrupt Blood of her young ones, and then acts the Chyrurgeon's part, closing
up the Wound with her Tongue. Thy Rod, and thy Staff, they comfort me; both
like loving Correlates attend each other.

2. It is a very great advance to a Cure, when our fancy builds a belief, that
the means and applications used by our Physician will be prevalent to a
repelling the Disease; then we yield our Bodies wholly to his disposal, and
never dispute whether he will phlebotomize, or use strong Purgations; whether
he scarrifies the wound, or makes an incision. God, who is omniscient, knows
best how to deal with his Patient. Emollient Medicines will not remove a
Chronical Disease. It Is well if we can save the Body by cutting off one
gangreen'd Joint, by letting out a little discolored Blood, preserve the rest
sanguine and sound.

Sure those Laws of the Romans (like Draco's) should have been writ in bloody
Characters, where they invested the Parents with the power of life and death of
their Wives and Children. Fulvius had not the denomination of cruel in doing
execution upon his Son for confederating with Catiline. And Titus Manlius was
thought rather favorable, than a severe Justicer, when he went no higher than
to make his Son Syllanus a perpetual exile.

3. This rigorous piece of Justic, and unbiassed affection, built Trophies to
their name, but no way improved the condition of the Patient; for it was
Physic of a strange nature, a sublimate never ripened in Loves Limbeck. Our
Heavenly Father that fashioned us may impose what Laws his divine wisdom
thinks best; but if he wounds his Servants, it is to heal them; if he takes
away a temporary life, it is to hasten them to an eternal one.

Magni beneficii est indicium; When God seems to disfavour us, then are we in
highest favor; and we make the nearest approaches to him, when in the eyes of
the world we seem to be at the greatest distance. Holy David acknowledged a
Cure done upon him by an Heavenly Chastisement; It was good for me that I was
afflicted. The Prison was the best School for Manasses; for in that, solitude
he could have no Divertisement, but leisure wholly to contemplate his great
Deliverer and figure to himself Ideas of a more Glorious Kingdom. Vexatio dabit
intellectumi Punishment is Sins Looking-glass; there it beholds its ugliness
and deformity, the Stains and Morphews which make the Soul look squalid.

4. When Absalom was under a Cloud, and putting his Designment of a Rebellion
into the Forge, to amass a greater strength, he sent an invitation to Joab to
embark in the same design; but Joab (whether in detestation of such
unnaturalness, or unwilling to hoise Sail, till he saw to which point of the
Compass the Wind would settle) rejected the Summons, Absalom sends again and
again, and still Joab refuses; but when he gave command to burn his
Cornfieldsd, and ravage all that Neighborhood to him, he made no dispute, but
came apace. So in our prosperity we draw a partition betwixt God and us, will
not cloud our thoughts with the contemplation of Judgment and another World,
let his invitations be never so luscious, presented by Prophets, Saints, and
Angels: but when he lays waste our Possessions, dismantles our Dwellings,
throws us upon the Dunghill, then we look with averseness on out sins (the evil
Spirits that raised this Tempest^) then do our visive Beams pierce through
Heaven it self, and in this foul Weather seek to cast Anchorage in the Arms of
our Savior.

5. The Philosopher observes, that if we will see the Stars, and highest part
of the Sphere, at Midday, we must descend to some Cavern, or low place in the
Earth, where we are freest from the light, and coruscations of the Horizon we
live in. So we must be removed from the glaring luster of the World before we
can truly discern Heaven, and the radiancy of its Glory. The Figure and Global
part of the Sun is clearer discerned in a Dish of Water, than in his Fiery
Chariot. The Astronomers best posture is to lie prostrate on the Ground. When
we are thrown on our Back, humbled and brought low, then we best behold God's
Immensity, and our own impotency. The Earth that has endured the Summers Heat,
and Winters cold, cut with the Plow, and crumbled with the Harrow, is best
cultivated to receive her Seed, and make a grateful return to her Benefactor.
Some Fruits are best fermented with nipping Cold, and biting Frosts. Our stony
Hearts are soonest ripened and mellowed by affliction.

After we have been thrust into the Forge of Persecution, we are then
malleable, easiest to be hammered out. God sets his stamp, coins us for Glory,
when melted in the Crusible of Adversity. Prosperity (like the Sun) does too
much harden us. Thunder scatters and disparkles ill boding exhalations, cleers
the Air of all pestilent and malevolent humors: God thunders by affliction,
breaks the racks of sin, and scatters those foul Meteors that are engendring in
the regions of our Souls. Spikenard, precious Ointment, and sweet Waters
savours more that the hand scatters and throws about, than when sealed up in
their Enclosures of Crystal. Spices, for pounding and bruising, send forth
exhalations more redolent. How Sunburnt, what Aethiops appear we, when blacked
with sin? But as soon as God has burnished (and like the Diamond) cut and
pointed us, we appear (like the King's Daughter) all glorious. Affliction is
the Mercury Water that clears our sallow complexion: the best Beauty Spot we
can put on.

7. Elkanah said to the Mother of Samuel, Am not I better to thee than ten
sons? So it may be said, is not affliction better than a thousand pleasures?
Here every vanity does way-lay us, as Jael did Sisera, Turn thou in my Lord,
till it smite us through the Temples. If we saw but this foul Body dissected,
it would appear like a Mandrake Apple, comely to the eye, but poisonous in
taste; or like the glorious Tombs of our Ancestors, that, enshrine nothing but
dirt and putrefaction. It Is not all Comical we act; the Scene will presently
change; like Jonas's Gourd, it springs up to day, and canopies us from the
Sun's intrusions, but anon an envious worm withers it. Pleasure was never so
absolutely enjoyed, but that it had some Gall, some Worm wood thrown into the
Cup. The smoothest face cannot laugh without contracting Wrinkles, and the
extremity of it bedews our Cheeks with Tears. Like a Rainbow, it has half Sun,
and half Cloud. Like a Meteor it gives a glaring light, but portends mischief;
fits us for Plagues and Pestilencies. If they were really good and profitable,
they would improve those that enjoy them; but the contrary effect is most
apparent.

8. When Nebuchadnezzar stalked on the Roof of his stately Palace, and there
beheld the Majesty of Babylon, did he not then begin to wax proud, and vaunt
the Workmanship of his own Hands: Is not this great Babel which I have built?
But when God had humbled him with Chastisement, plumed his Eagle Wings, then
could he pierce through those Clouds and Vizards that inveloped his
understanding, see more of his Maker from that lowness of Fortune, than when he
towered on the Pinnacle of all his Glories. When David had his Beams displayed
in a Royal Horizon, sitting on the House top, soon pryed into the Retirements
of Uriah's Garden, and there fed his eyes with the unlawful love of Bathsheba:
but when Nathan the Prophet had trumpeted God's Judgments, and with a black
Pencil drawn a Scheme of his succeeding miseries, it soon fetched him down from
that height, and made him retire into himself, and appeal to the Chancery of
Heaven for Mercy.

9. We have no reason then to be sadded, or cast down, if we see another wear
richer Robes, bespangled with brighter Glory; because the Merchandise he
trafficks for, has such a supervaluation, so strange an impost set upon it. He
that sufficiently batteled in the pleasures of a luxuriant life, bids us, Envy
not at the glory of a sinner, for thou know not what shall be his end. O
consider, what real and substantial sorrow they exchange for counterfeit
pleasures; for fleeting vanity, an endless misery. If Dives in his life time
had seen those pits of confusion, heard the shrietches and yellings of the
damned, put his Finger in that scorching flame, been stretched upon the wrack
but for one moment, he would have made his life more tragical, torn off his
Purple and Fine Linen, and put on a Pilgrim's Habit; would have fasted himself
to a Skeleton, set Lazarus at his own Table, and sat himself at the Gate.

10. It Is not a Hell hereafter that excuses, but here a corroding conscience
must center within them; that, like the Handwriting upon the Wall, imbitters
their delicious fare, damps their Frolickings, puts them into shiverings and
tremblings, though encircled with a Corone of Princes, finds them out in their
Retirements, and in a croaking Mandrake Groan pronounces, their accounts must
be balanced, their pleasures audited, that there must be sorrow in its Achme,
misery pulled up to an unimagined height. It ends not here, but commonly they
close up all with some sad Catastrophe. A Plebeian has seldom any eminent part
in a Tragedy, but mighty Princes, fond Lovers, warlike and haughty Heroes
compose the Scenes. We cannot call that a fair day which has a ruddy Morn, and
bright Noon, if the Evening shuts up it self with adismal blackness. Attend but
the Exits of those wretched persons, see this Squib run to the end of the Rope,
and it shall bespatter it self in pieces. Let us not pass a Judgment upon a
Pomegranade by a fair outside, denote him happy that flutters in an opulent
fortune; for their Jealousy and Fear ought to run parallel with their
felicity. O, unhappy is our condition, if God thinks us not worthy to wrestle
with miseries, to bear in our Bodies the Marks of our Lord Jesus.

11. The Destroyer must needs come in upon us, if the Scarlet Line hang not in
the Window, or finds not blood sprinkled upon the Lintel and Side Ports. God's
anger is screwed up to a strange pitch when he passes by us with his Rod, when
he will not so much as brandish his Sword at us. S. Austin says, That an
offender sometimes so exasperates his Maker, that he will not chastise him in
this life. Their condition is very forlorn, whom the Lord leaves to a future
punishment. How deadly will the blow be when God shall put fire to the Mine he
has been so long digging! How deep the Cup, how bitter the Potion that he has
been so long brewing! If many of the Saints of God, out of the Sense of their
own unworthiness, have had strange Titubations in the naming of that great and
terrible day of the Lord, a day that the powers of Heaven shall be shaken, how
much should an Impenitent tremble and quake, when he considers that at this
grand Assize the Lord will come with Fire, and with his Chariots like a
Whirlwind to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with Flames of Fire.

12. It Is now time that we remove from the Waters of Babylon, take down our
Harps from the Willows, and prepare to sing the Songs of Sion in a Glorious
Land; wade out of this Valley of Tears, and get up unto Mount Nebo ( Moses
glorious prospect) that we may see the Riches of the Celestial Jerusalem; and
yet we can view but an imperfect Landscape. For if the knowledge of all the
Sages in the World concentred in one person, he could give but a blurred Copy,
a dark Figure a faint resemblance of that extasied Glory, prepared for the
Saints, and Servants of God. 'Twas the most desired wish of S. Austin, to have
seen Rome when she was the Worlds Metropolis, heard S. Paul in the Pulpit, and
seen our Savior in the Flesh. But there he shall have his wish strangely
superlative, see a City whose Foundations are garnished with all manner of
precious Stones, where the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of
it, and in that Temple hear S. Paul, and Myriads of Angels, tuning their Harps,
and singing perpetual Hallelujahs to the Glorious Trinity; and, which
transcends admiration, see the Lamb wear the same Dress, checkered with the
rich Robes of the Deity.

13. There we shall have those Dotes Beatorum, which the Schoolmen so much talk
of, Visio, Dilectio, Fruitio in such perfection as no Line or Plummet wrought
by natures hand can fathom their Abyss. When there is Summum bonum in summo
gradu, it will be hard defining how good, how great they are. Here we speculate
and spell our Savior in his Word, in his last Will and Testament. But there we
shall behold the Word it self, Christ Jesus. God hid Moses in a Cleft of the
Rock, and covered him with his Hand, while his Glory passed by; he saw his Back
parts only, in transitu.

But when the great day of exaltation comes, that the Lord makes up his
Jewels, he will take us out of the Clefts and Vaults of the Earth (the Cabinets
where he treasures up his Dust) and set us on such elated Thrones, as Zacheus
his little Stature shall be no hinderance to take a full view of the Beatifical
Vision. We shall not look with admiration only, but with love and delight. Here
our eyes are commonly bleared with envy, when they behold the Grandeur of
another: but we shall rejoice at the Saints Coronation, have not the least
tincture of emulation if we see a bigger Crown, a brighter Glory. Our love to
Christ must needs be insuperable, which made us Coheirs with him in Glory; that
when one drop of his Blood had more of value than to make an adequatory
Oblation for the sins of the whole World, he would set a running all the Sluices
and Rivulets of his Body; nay, would have abated nothing of the whole series of
his passion, if but for the laving of thy one individual person. And if Christ
so loved us in the flesh, espoused us when we were full of loathsomeness and
deformity, he will flame out with greater Fires, put us into his own Bosom,
when the Refiner has melted off our Dross, washed us with his Fullers Soap,
when he sees us mounted to the Zenith of our Glory.

15. Aeneas, though esteemed pious among the Heathens, never had a nearer
access to Apollo's Temple, than to the Threshold or Porch of it. The Israelites
durst not touch the Borders of the Mount for fear of being stoned, or thrust
through with a Dart. And the Jews entered not into the Sanctum Sanctorum, but
the High Priests alone, and that once a year. Before God spoke unto Moses he
prefaced by Thunderings and Lightnings, and Mount Sinai, was altogether on a
Smoke, and the whole Mount quaked, and the people trembled. But when we have
our Materiality spiratualised, a Manumission from the corruption of the flesh,
we shall corns unto Mount Sion, the City of the living God, and to innumerable
Companies of Angels. The Planets, that have a predominancy over our Bodies,
here sparkle only a borrowed luster: these, we gaze on with great admiration:
yet at the general conflagration these Lamps shall be put out, as having too
dark Rays to shine in the Horizon of Glory.

16. And if a Saint of the lowest order in Heaven shall flash out more
refulgent Beams, than if all the scattered Stars and greater Luminaries were
stuck in one Sphere, made one splendid Ball of Light, with what hallowed Fires
shall we burn, when with the brighter Cherubims, and many eyed Seraphims, we
shall be set in one Carkanet, make up one glorious Constellation? How great our
light, when like so many Heliotropia we shall sit sunning our selves in the
presence of God himself? Hellen could never draw her eyes from beholding the
beauty of Paris; and Dido was sick of the same Disease.

-- Nequit oculos implere tuendo: She would never be satiated with the gazing
on the countenance of Princely Aeneas. But the Fire of their love was quickly
put out, (like the fairest Flowers they may be withered with too much smelling
to.) Age will dull the edge of a desirable Appetite, or in the height of their
Enjoyments disaster or jealousy enrage it to a Frenzy.

M. 1. Pandora's Box is open to every man. Here is no happiness whose Ligaments
are not soon broken, whose Compositum has not some dross. We are never fanned
with so smooth a Gale, but we are sometimes made to lower our Sails, some
Hirrecans are raised to make a Ruffle. And if our Halcyon Days make up a few
Climactericks, we are glutted, have a saturity of Enjoyment. But in Heaven we
shall see God Paternaliter, with a desire and love still to behold him, and
that without any anxiety, or the least decadency.

We have seen some persons that have had such a symetry of parts, such an air
in their Countenances, such a plenitude of Perfections, that has wrapped the
Beholders into wonder and astonishment. If Corruption can put on such charm,
how bright shall we shine, when quickened with Celestial Fire; though invested
with the same flesh, yet spun to a finer Thread; though kneaded of the same
Atoms, yet finer searsed, cast in a fairer mold: our Bodies shall be clarified
into Soul-Matter, and our Souls flame out with the Fires of a Divinity. No less
than an Apostle assures us, We shall be made partakers of the divine nature; be
so rarefied, so spiritualized, have (as the Schoolmen venture to call it) an
Identification with God in the state of Bliss.

2. Here we have a Film, a Cataract in the eye, that Luminary, our
understanding clouded with a Cimmerian Darkness; at best we see but in
Aenigmate, darkly, or like things we behold in the Water, that appear with
crooked and distorted forms. But when that great Oculist of Heaven unseals the
eyes of our understanding, shows us Magnalia Dei, those abstracted
speculations, which are now inscrutable and past finding out, shall then be as
plainly figured, as if writ with a Sunbeam, and we shall behold the inside of
things with a clearer perspicuity, than we do now their outside or colors.
There we shall understand why the sin of one man should be the sin of every
man; why God would not cancel the Worlds Obligation without that inestimable
Blood of his dear Son, when he might have satisfied himself with a meaner
Sacrifice, or taken away the cause by denying the Tempter access into the
Garden; show how the world was made, whether by a fortuitous Concourse of
Atoms, as our Sectaries in Philosophy have it; how the earth hangs upon
nothing; how Moses did all his wonders in Egypt; unriddle the Sacred Mysteries
of the Deity, and those inextricable knots of Divinity, which have unsheathed
so many Swords, caused such Clashes and Disturbances, shall be all enodated,
presented as in a Mirror to our Understanding.

3. Here we may stand on Tiptoe, look into the Elyzian Fields through the
prospective of Faith, but we view them at a great distance, and commonly we
have weak Beams, and an unsteddy hand, but there those faint means will become
useless: God will pull off his Mask, throw aside every Umbrella, and give us a
patefaction of all his Glory. When Mount Tabor sparkled with the Beauties of
Christ's Transfiguration, and the Apostles were showed the gorgeous Apparel
they should be decked with hereafter: no wonder if Peter desired there to fix
their Tabernacles. If such a Stage as Mount Tabor can present a Scene so richly
dressed, when a few Saints descend and traverse it; how illustrious will the
sight be, when we see the Great Jehovah, and Myriads of Angels, pleno orb, in
their full Glory. We shall not only see these Transcendencies, but be that
which admits of no emblematizing, adapted, made congruous, and sympathetick
with Celestial Perfections.

4. Stars have their Malevolent Aspects, the brighter Luminaries their Spots,
and the most splendid Diamond is not every where transparent. But in Heaven
there are no Errata's, the beatified Saints cannot contract the least stain. No
unclean thing enters into those Holy Habitations, breath nothing but the sweets
of love, have such a fullness of every delicious thing, that there can be no
addition: for, if there could be any increment or decrement, then there were no
perfection. Ibi vita sine morte, veritas sine errore, felicitas sine
perturbatione, all things sublimated to the most extasied purity, and that
without any change, without any disturbance, no night but an endless day.

5. Things are best illustrated by their Contraries. The Northern Men, that are
benighted for six Months together, salute the approach of the Sun with a more
exceeding joy, than they that face him every day. The Beauties of the Spring
receive a better Welcome after a stormy Winter. Rest will be most joyous to
those who have undergone a troublesome Pilgrimage. The clarity of Heaven will
appear more lucid to them that sat here in darkness. Take a Prisoner out of a
dark Dungeon, and set him before an unclouded Sun, and he shall not be able to
make him a fixed Object. And what is the Radiancy of this Sun to the Son of
God? This Spark to that glorious Diamond, this Daddock-wood, this Glowworm to
that Morning Star? When God shall raise his Servants out of their Beds of
Obscurity, remove them from the dark Chambers of the earth, and show them the
glittering Mansions above, they shall be like Cherubims, full of eyes, give and
receive light, and nothing shall weaken, their improved Optics, though
millions of Suns shine in one Horizon in their Meridian of Glory. These Suns
shall never exhale an ungrateful Cloud to obscure them, never be an
interposition to eclypse each others light; their joys shall not be levened
with the least sorrow. That clear Sky shall not contract the least spot, and
which is more, time shall never wrinkle them.

6. It Is a conceit of the Poets, that in Elysium their Goblets were always full
of Nectar and Ambrosia; and as they still drank, their Cups were replenished to
an overflowing. The Saints have better assurance for the Permanency of their
Paradisian Bliss. Mutabimur in immutabilitatem: We shall be changed into an
unchangeableness. Our Crowns shall continue the same splendour, our Robes the
same Lillied Purity, our Palms the same Verdure and Fragrancy. Here we are in a
continued fluxibility, have Springs and Palls, Summers and Winters, Droughts
and Inundations: But in our final Estate there is neither Efforescentia nec
canescentia; no ebbing or flowing, no extinguishing of that Vestal Fire; no
falling of that Golden Leaf of endless Glory. Because our time is here short,
we cut it into shreds, reckon by Minutes, Hours and Days. But when we have once
cast Anchor in the Ocean of Eternity, non est heri nec hesternum; there shall
be no distinction of Days, no reckoning Lustres or Olympiads, but have one
perpetual Pentecost, a never ending Jubilee.

7. The Arithmeticians are so bold as to tell you, they can set down how many
Corns of Dust make up the Globe of the Earth. They will go a strain beyond
that, and say they can give a number to as many Grains, as shall fill the
spacious Concavity betwixt this and the Firmament. The Mathematicians take the
height and dimension of the remotest Planet, put a Girdle about the Heaven it
self. The Philosophers will tell you of what stuff the Stars and Spheres are
made. It would not only pose Archimedes, but baffle the Angels themselves, to
draw imaginary Lines about the highest Heaven, sum up the Calends of Eternity.

8. Here you have a Picture with a Janus Face; on the one side the Features
shadowed with a black Coal, a blubbered Face, dishelved Hairs; but he that
makes a curious inspection shall find, though black, yet she is comely, discover
a life in that sorrow, beauty in that carelessness. On the other side, there are
only some few Lines drawn to show, that something more excellent should there
be shadowed. Zeuxis being hopeless of pourtraicting a comely Venus, limn'd only
the back parts, leaving the rest to fancy and imagination. At best, we can draw
but in Watercolours those incomprehensible Glories. For if Paul, a Star of the
first Magnitude, after he had been caught up into Heaven, and viewed the
splendid Equipage of that place, confessed that he saw things unexpressible,
and heard things unutterable, it is not for Dust and Ashes to bedribble with a
rude Pencil such superexcellent perfections. But so much satisfaction we find
as to discern a strange disparity betwixt the service and the reward,
affliction and Glory; the one so light and momentany, the other so weighty and
e^^^nal, that it is but as a dust in the Balance, an Atom to the Earth, a drop
to the Ocean; the one a punctum, the other admits not any Philosophical
Commensurations.

9. Let us then, like wise Merchants, lay out for that rich Pearl of eternal
life. There are (says the Prophet) that buy much with a little. For taking up
the Cross of Christ, enduring a few temporary outrages, we shall sit with him
on his Throne, arrayed with a blaunched Vesture. For if we suffer with him we
shall also reign with him. Jacob served his Uncle Laban seven years for Rachel,
and they seemed but as a few days, for the love he bare to her. If we desire
the Espousals of Eternity, we must cheerfully undergo a few Medicinal
Corrections, feed upon Husks, since it brings us to the fatted Calf. It was an
earnest of a strange affection in Agrippina Occidar modo imperet; I care not
how they dispose of me, so that Nero reigns. But holy Job looked for a better
return of his Imbitterments, when he took up that stout resolve, Though the
Lord should kill me, yet will I trusl in him. And likewise S. Austin, Domine
hic ure, hi seca, ut in posterum sanes.

10. It matters not how soon we get upon this pale Horse, since he transmits us
into Abraham's Bosom; though he sears us with an hot Iron heated in
Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, so he marks us for his; how soon he imbalms and
conduits the Body in the Grave, so he serve it up for a refection at the Supper
of the Lamb. If he unskrew the Wheels and Gimmers of this Building, it is to
give it (like a foul Watch) a new scowring. Though he cut down the Trunck, yet
care shall be taken of the Root. We may dispense with a transplantation when he
gathers us from Briars and Brambles, plucks us out of a barren soil to set us
in a more fertile Land. Though our Flower sheds his Beauties, hangs down the
Head, and dies, yet the Seed shall still be preserved; like China Earth, such
stay in the Grave shall beget a transparency. Though he undress the Soul, throw
the Body into the Valley of dry Bones, and there lodge it for thousands of
years, yet they shall appear Tanquam somnus unius horae; but as the sleep of
one hour. And though sent to that slate of Dormition, such names, as have not
defiled their Garments, shall be registered in his Ephemerides, in such
indeleble Characters, as no Index expurgatorius shall ever blot out; and in his
good time he will visit the Sepulchers and Coemeteries of those dead, recall the
Souls from their Widdow-hood, put unctuous matter into every dry Bone, cloth
them with Sinews and Flesh, and spread such a Covering of Skin upon them, as
Moses's Face (when illustrated) would appear but as a darkening Veil; and all
to meet our Redeemer in the Clouds, that he may in this lovely Dress usher us
to unspeakable Glories, to Heaven, the Haven of our endless Rest and Happiness.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by William Leach at the Crown in Cornhil, near the
Stocks-Market.
THe Sphere of Gentry, deduced from the Principles of Nature: an Historical and
Genealogical Work of Arms and Blazon. By Sylvanus Morgan: Folio, price one
pound five shillings.

Scepsis Scientifica: or confessed Ignorance the way to Science, etc. By Jos.
Glanvil, Fellow of the Royal Society: Quarto, price 6 shil.

Catholic Charity recommended in a Sermon by Jos. Glanvil, Rector of Bath:
Quarto, price 6 d.

J. Goodwin on the Holy Spirit: Quarto, pr. 7. s.

The Genesis of the World Explicated and Illustrated; a new Piece of Philosophy
in English: Quarto, pr. 7 s.

A Discourse of Infallibility. By Viscount L. Falkland, Quarto, p. 4 s.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of London, at Guild Hall Chapel on January 30, 1677. By Henry
Hesketh, Rector of Charlewood in Surrey, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty, Quarto, p. 6 d.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of London at Guild Hall Chapel, Feb. 17, 1677. By Edward Young,
Fellow of New College in Oxford: Quarto, p. 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lords assembled in
Parliament, in the Abby-Church of S. Peter's Westminster: upon the Fast Day,
appointed April 10, 1678. By William, Lord Bishop of S. David's.

The dangerous and almost desperate State of Religion, Represented in a
Discourse upon Ezekiel, 37.3. By Henry Hesketh, Rector of Charlewood in Surrey,
and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty: Quarto, p. 4 d.

The Schools Probation, or Rules and Orders for certain set Exercises to be
performed by the Scholars on Probation Days, Made and Approved by Learned Men;
for the Use of Merchant-Tailors School of London: Octavo, price one shilling
six pence.

Joan. Buxtorfii Epitome Grammaticae Hebreae, p. 1 s. 6. d.

A Cap of Gray Hairs for a Green Head, or the Father's Counsel to his Son:
containing wholesome Instructions for the management of a man's whole life. The
Second Edition: Enlarged by Caleb Frankfield: in Twelves.

Directions for true Writing, in particular for such English Words as are alike
in sound. By Richard Hodges: Octavo, p. 1 s. 6 d.

The Mystery of Rhetoric unveiled, wherein above one hundred and thirty Tropes
and Figures are severally derived from the Greek into English, together with
lively Definitions, and variety of Latin, English and Scriptural Examples,
pertinent to each of them apart, eminently delightful and profitable for young
Scholars. By John Smyth, Gent. Octavo, p. 2 s. 6 d.

An Apology for the Church of England, in point of Separation from it. By the
Right Reverend Father in God, William, Lord Bishop of S. David's. Octavo.

ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 9. read make. p. 29. l. 21. r. our. p. 30. 11. r. distract and
discourage. p. 36. l. 11. r. hid. p. 38. 17. r. functions. p. 39. l. 13. r.
temperantiae. p. 42. l. 22. dele the p. 50. l. 21. r. blazon. p. 54. l. 21. r.
dankness. p. 64. l. 18. r. ea^ing. p. 67. l. 8. r. destruction. p. 81. l. 2. r.
long sought. p. 10^ l. 12. r. winy. p. 111. l. 7. r. this. p. 132. l. 4. r.
would die, mo^^ readily. p. 136. l. 6. r. Ray. p. 163. l. 19. r. gawll. p. 165.
l. 21. ^ sraight. p. 177. l. 12. r. savor.


