A CASE OF Great and Present Use.

Whether we may lawfully hear the now Conforming Ministers, who are
re-ordained, and have renounced the Covenant, and some of them supposed to be
scandalous in their Lives?

Considered, and Affirmatively resolved.

By a late Eminent Congregational Divine.

London, Printed, for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lyon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1677.

The Case. Whether we may Lawfully hear the now Conforming Ministers, who are
Re-ordained, and have Renounced the Covenant, and some of them supposed to be
Scandalous in their lives?
Answer.
FOr the resolution of this Case, there is a threefold Consideration pertinent.

Consideration I.
About the Duty it self, Hearing the Word.

There are four ways by which at this day the great God conveyeth the Knowledge
of himself and his Mind unto sinful Man: 1. His works of Creation and
Providence: Psalm. 19.2. 2. The suggest of Conscience, even the remainder of
God's Image in us. 3. The word or Law of God Written, Expounded or applied in
ordinary Preaching. 4. The Church, which is the Ground and Pillar of Truth, the
Knowledge of God and his Mind is more especially there held forth, by the gifts
given, and Offices therein appointed by Christ. These are distinct ways and
methods of God, by which he is pleased to make known himself: and we are
obliged even by the Law of Nature to attend when God does speak; it is
therefore an undoubted moral Duty, to attend the speaking of God in whatsoever
way by Providence brought unto us.

The Scripture with the Interpretation and Application thereof, commonly termed
Prophesying or Preaching, is one of the forementioned means by which God makes
known himself to us, this is a National gift according as God in his Providence
shall dispose: Psalm. 147.19, 20.

Such National or Public Preachers may be said to have their Call from Christ,
he having a hand in ordering the motions of Providence for the good of his
Church: John 5.17. And particularly in this providential sending of Ministers,
Mat. 9.38. and this is the calling and sending mentioned, Romans 10.15. The Lord
in these administrations, by Preachers thus sent, according to the good
Pleasure of his Will finds out a People before they seek him. This is a
dispensation of God to Men as his Creatures.

For Application to the Case.
The Word of God interpreted and applied by preaching in this providential way,
is a choice Mercy and Gift, wherewith God has blessed this Nation for many
years, to the Conversion and Edification of many thousands. The Governors
thereof have successively according to their Light made diverse good Laws and
Statutes for Improving this Mercy for the best advantage of the Nation, as
appears in that,

1. There are Schools and Universities maintained for the bringing up of
Persons in Learning; also there is a constant settled maintenance for
encouraging of such as shall be sent out to the several parts of the Nation in
this great work.

2. There is a sum of Doctrinal Truths, which in the enlargement and
application, are sufficient both for Conversion and Edification, which the
Preachers are to assent; and there is provision made by our Laws that such
persons only who are sound in the Faith be employed therein.

3. The Inhabitants of this Nation, are required to be present, and to give
attendance to Instruction, that they may Learn the Fear of the Lord.

Assertion.
These things being so, although some of us do enjoy the Instruction of our
Pastors being in a Church relation, yet it is a duty that we and our Families
frequent also, (as we have Liberty and Opportunity, the more Public and
National Ministry) for these Reasons.

Reason 1.
Where the Lord has appointed various ways and methods, in which he will draw
near to us, and manifest himself, we ought to make use of all in their place
and season. This is a several and distinct way or appointment of God, not only
in respect of Gods works and our Consciences; but also in respect of the
teachings of Church Officers, as appears in these particulars.

1. The one is Cultus Naturalis, from the first Commandment, directed by the
Light of Nature; and the other is Cultus Institutus, a duty of the second
Commandment, and our direction herein is only from Gospel Light.

2. In respect of the Persons that are the primary Object of each. Prophesying,
that is, Church Preaching, serves not for them that believe not, but for them
which believe; It is principally for building: for a Church State supposes
them Believers; though such preaching has occasionally its efficacy is
converting weak, and more directly in relation to the Children of Members. This
National or Providencial preaching, is principally for Conversion, and has for
its primary and main object, persons in their natural condition; such a
Preacher was Noah, 2 Pet. 2.5.1 Pet 4.6. Mat 16.3. Preaching is before
believing, and believing before any Church Ordinance: There were Preachers in
all Nations, and in every City, before there were Churches in every City.

3. The one is from Gifts only as necessarily requisite, but Church Instruction
supposes the person to be not only of some eminency in Gifts, but Grace also,
and set apart to office according to Christ's appointment.

And now having seen the difference of these two methods, the Consequence will
follow; they ought to be attended with due reverence each of them.

Reason 2.
As we are Members of Churches, so we are Subjects and Members of this
Commonwealth, and are obliged thereby to observe the lawful command of our
Governors, and to be examples therein to others. As members also of this Civil
body, we ought to Join with it in a thankful acknowledging this happy
Providence of God, by which we and our Children after us maybe instructed,
which may be a means to have it continued, and a neglect thereof would give
just cause to fear the contrary.

Reason 3.
If Church Members, or any one Godly Man has a Warrant to forbear hearing such
Ministers upon this account of unlawfulness, then all Godly men ought at all
times so to do; and if so, the Examples of the Godly to the generality being
very leading in the matters of God, this Ordinance thereby will be little
frequented, and of less efficacy to those that do come to it. And by asserting
it unlawful to hear such Ministers, we imply, it were better for the Nation
there were no preaching but in particular Churches; and if so, what can we
expect will become of many thousands in an ordinary way of Salvation that have
no benefit at all by our Church-Instructions? We are to walk wisely, yea,
mercifully toward them that are without.

Objections Answered.
Object. 1.
Where there is no true Church, there can be no true Ministry: the Church of
England is no true Church, Ergo, etc.

Answer.
There may be a Lawful and True Ministry, or Administration of the saving
truths of God, though the Nation, or any parcels of it as yet be in no
Church State. We say each particular Church materially considered, is part of
the Church Catholic. The matter must needs have being before the form can be
introduced. No Man becomes a Member of the Catholic Church but by his
effectual calling, and that is by preaching the Word. I conclude therefore each
particular Church to have its production from such an Administration, and not
this Ministry to have its original or state from the Church.

Object. 2.
The National Ministry is Antichristian, derived from Rome.

Answer.
If Antichristian, its either so from their Standing, as deriving their
Ordination thence, (of which in the third Consideration,) or from their
Doctrine: if any such doctrine be preached, it is the miscarriage of particular
persons, and contrary to the National provision. The Articles of Religion, to
which the Ministers are to conform their Instructions, are Orthodox, and framed
for the casting and keeping out of Popery.

Object. 3.
It offends our weak Brethren; it is a complying with the Corruption of the
times, its an approbation and encouragement to Conformity.

Answer.
These, and other Objections of the like nature, have their weight and place in
practice when the matter is indifferent, and may be done or left undone without
Sin, and not in relation to any moral duty. Though I know gathering of Churches
in a Congregational way, preaching without Ordination, Baptizing of Infants and
the like, as well as hearing a conforming-Minister, are a great offense to some
that are truly Godly: yet may I not say, If such a Fellowship, if such
baptizing, and the rest, offend my Brother, I will do no such thing while the
World, stands lest I should offend. It were sin so to resolve, because these
are moral duties, and not left to my liberty, as Meats and the rest, 1 Cor.
8.13. and Act. 8. wherein the nature of indifferent things is laid down.

Consideration II.

About refraining a Moral duty for the evil mixed with it, or in the persons
performing it.

1. As we are not to do evil that good may come of it, no more ought we to
leave what is morally good undone for the evil that is some way mixed with it.
Zeal for good is to be preferred to that which is against evil. The greatest
good is better than the greatest evil is bad. Whatever good thing we do, tends
toward our Union with the chiefest Good, the refraining of evil not so
immediately.

2. Betwixt things indifferent, and what is morally good, you have this
difference. If there be any mixture of evil with the one, it becomes wholly
evil, there is nothing of good in it to give stop or preponderate; but what is
morally good will remain so still, though mixed with evil. We may allay the
worth of it, as baser Metals mixed with Gold, but yet it is Gold still, and may
be perfectly severed.

3. When I would do good, says the Apostle, evil is present with me. I cannot
hear, or read, or pray, and the rest, but with a mixture of Sin, yet upon this
account I may not cease from, or neglect a known duty, not though materially
considered the evil accompanying being greater than the good; as in meditation,
when blasphemous thoughts arise, etc. To omit a known duty is a sin of
wilfulness, the evil from me in it is but infirmity only; The least wilful sin
is greater and more provoking than the greatest Sin of Infirmity.

For application to the case.
1. Governors otherwise pious and zealous, yet not so knowing in matters of
Church orders, may possibly in the discharging of their duty, and doing this
good work, occasion a mixture of evil with it; Being persuaded that Preachers
and Preaching, will be accepted with more reverence, and become more effectual*
if by persons ordained as well as examined and tried, for their fitness, and if
accompanied also with Set and Solemn Forms of Prayer and other Vniformities,
they therefore by their Laws establish and enjoin these things. The persons
also appointed to this work (though not approving all that is imposed) through
infirmity yield and submit, rather than let so good a Work fall.

2. The things therefore objected as evils, by which some are deterred from
hearing, are the infirmities of other men mixed with the duty; I say
infirmities, for so in Charity we ought to judge. Now if I may not omit a duty
in respect to the evil mixed with it, which is my own, much less may I thus
leave an Ordinance for the evil that is another man's, no way mine, or to be
charged upon me. This were to make another man's sins or infirmities more mine
than my own.

Objections Answered.
Object, 1.

We cannot judge such imposition, and submitting to them, infirmities,
especially after so much Light and Reformation.

Answ. 1.
If the known Integrity and Piety of some of them who have Conformed is such,
that there is ground to hope what they have done herein is through want of
Light, misapprehension or the like Infirmity, we may then conclude that the
grossness, wilfulness, or whatsoever may make those actions more than an
Infirmity in any other Conformist, must arise only from the internal frame or
badness of the mind and intentions, for externally they are the same. If so,
then it is nothing at all to us; to them it is, Prove. 21.27. for in respect of
the lawfulness of our joining with the administration, or unlawfulness, whether
it be done with a better or worse mind, is not observable by us; outward and
visible fins only pollute others that be in relation. If Envy, Pride,
Hypocrisy, or the like evils of the mind did so, we mould be constantly guilty
of other men's Sins, and without remedy.

Answ. 2.
Whatever Sins are in the person as to himself, they are to me but as Sins of
Infirmity, that is, such evils adhering to the worship as I have no power to
prevent, I may and ought to mourn for such mixtures, as for my own infirmities,
but avoid them I cannot without I avoid the duty.

Object. 2.
There is much Error mixed with the few Truths they Preach, as Popery,
Arminianism, etc There are also invective reflections, yea railings against the
People of God.

Answ. 1.
What is morally good will bear the mixture of a great deal of evil, and yet
retain its goodness still: the goodness being from God, who is a greater good
than Satan, or Sin, is an evil.

Answ. 2.
We cannot expect from men of ordinary gifts that Truth be preached without the
mixture of Errors more or less: We know but in part, therefore are to prove all
things, and hold fast that which it good, Heb. 5.14. A Saint, as other
Creatures, though weak and newly born, has a raft of what is Food suitable,
and what sincere.

Answ, 3.
As for those intemperate expressions and reflections oh the People of God, I
confess it is sad, but were there not such against Paul and his Party? Phil.
1.15. yet notwithstanding they are to be heard even by the same persons they
enveighed against for the Truths sake.

Object. 3.
The lives of most of our Conformists are vile and abominable, full of Pride,
Covetousness, Luxury, Drunkenness: how can we expect a Blessing on their
Labors, though they preach truth and good Things?

Answ. 1.

The mixtures in Sermons are nearest, the irregularities of their calling the
next; the Sins, of their Conversions farthest from their Doctrine, and
therefore have less efficacy at such a distance to prejudice it.

Answ. 2.
Its God's Word, and not their own, they Preach. Truth is blessed from the Lord
for its own sake, and his whose it is. When Christ blessed his Disciples with
the promise of his presence, Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with you always, even to the
end of the World, it is to be applied rather to their Doctrine then Persons,
for they were sometimes left to humane Infirmities in their lives, and they
lived not, to the end of the World. If it be not Truth, though an Angel from
Heaven bring it, no blessing will come with it; but if it be Christ that is
preached, whoever is the instrument, there is matter of hope and rejoicing,
Phil. 1.15, etc. Some preached Christ who were not sincere, though at the same
time others who were blameless preached the same Truths. What then? says Paul,
verse. 18. Notwithstanding, every way Christ is preached, and therein do I
rejoice, and will rejoice. Those Peter mentions they fed the Flock, the Flock
then heard them, and were instructed by them: yet we are told those Ministers
were Covetous, Ambitious, took up their Ministry for filty Lucres sake; And
were Lords over Gods Heritage, More cannot be objected against our Ministers
that Conform, than might against the Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's time;
either in respect of their Doctrine, which was laden with Traditions; their
Standing, which Was not according to Law, their lives, which were Vicious: yet
Christ not only permits, but requires us to attend the Truths they deliver.

Consideration III.
About partaking with another man's sins.

This arises from some special relation, as a moral touch: which is either in
respect to the person transgressing, or the Sin it self.

1. Out Relation to persons, may either be 1. Transient, or Occasional. For a
man becomes guilty with him that sins, by applauding, approving, or
encouraging him in his Sin; Joh. 2.10, 11. Romans 1.32. and in some cases by
silence, being present when some gross Sin is openly committed. Or 2. Our
Relation may be set and stated; either Civil, as between Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, etc. This will not be much to our purpose: or Sacred,
viz. that Settled Relation that arises from Gospel-Communion, as in particular
Churches between Officers and Members, and one Member with another. By virtue
of this Relation, Sins are transmitted from one to another with the greatest
celerity and efficacy; A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump.

The evil of another, and that duty we join in, may so relate, as I may partake
of his evil, though I act nothing with him but what is a Duty on my part.
Receiving of Rents and Tenantship are so nearly related, that if the person
with whom I partake thus, have forfeited his Tenant-ship, and of right is no
Tenant, yet by my accepting of Rent from him, I make him one not withstanding
his forfeiture. To exercise a Judicial Act, relates so much to the Person
legally constituted a Judge, that if I submit my Cause to him that is not so,
and suffer, I sin against my own Liberty. In each of these what I do is good,
but partakes somewhat with the evil of another, In our Spiritual affairs, that
is a full instance, 1 Cor. 10.18. They that eat of the Sacrifice partake of the
Altar; that is, from the Relation and Connection betwixt the Altar and the Gift.
Mat. 23.19. The Altar sanctifies the Gift. It is either not a Sacrifice, or
not a Lawful Sacrifice, but by reason of the Altar.

For Application to the Case.
1. My being present, and hearing of a Conformist, no Approbation of the evil
of his Conformity, and so no Occasional or Transient Relation is raised
thereby. Approbation is an act of the mind or heart; It is not showed to him or
others by me, until it be expressed outwardly by my words or gestures which I
have not in this case any occasion to do; his evil being done elsewhere, and
formerly, and not in our presence that now hear him.

2. Nor is there any Set or Standing Relation between him and me, though he
Preach and I Hear him constantly: This creates no Church Fellowship or
Communion. To Instruct and Learn, is an humane or natural converse, and differs
not from teaching or learning any other faculty, though the Subject matter I
hear be divine. It Is true, by the addition of a special institution, it becomes
a Church-Ordinance: so giving of Alms, visiting of the Sick, and the like,
which are actions of Common humanity, when brought under a special Institution
do thereby become as much Church-Ordinances as Preaching. 2 Cor. 6.14. What
fellowship has Light with Darkness? or a Believer with an Infidel? that is, in
Respect to Church Communion and fellowship, there is none: yet a Believer and
an Infidel may Preach and Hear, may Teach and be Taught, Act. 17.1 Cor. 14.
Romans 1.13.

3. For any special Tincture derived from his evil to the Duty we perform with
him; it must be either from the Sins of his Person, or his Ordination: The
former has been spoken to. As for the evil of his Ordination, it relates not
to his Preaching, by and such near alliance, as that the one may not be done
without the other. It is the duty of all Christians (says Ames) to do their
utmost to advance the Kingdom of God, and therefore to teach others the
Knowledge of God. Why may not a man Preach and Instruct Others, if he be able,
by word of mouth* as well as by Writing and Printing Theological Discourses?
This latter was never questioned by any sober man.

Objections Answered.
Object, 1.
My prsesence at such men's Preaching, if I be silent and give no Testimony
against them, will be an encouragement to their Way.

Answ. 1.
If I had no other just and apparent reason for my being present, it might be
so interpreted, but my presence relates, and ought so to be judged, unto the
Word Preached. If I be present in some consecreated place adorned with Images,
to hear a Sermon, my presence ought not to be interpreted a Countenancing those
Superstitions, but the Preaching of Gods Word. When the Preaching of Christ,
and a malicious Spirit, was in one man, Paul's rejoicing at the one, was no
Countenancing of the other.

Answ. 2.
We do not so easily derive guilt or pollution by being present or in the
Company of Sinners, though we do not testify against them, when they are not in
Spiritual Communion with us. A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, but no
more. The Contagion goes no further than the Relation. The Apostle, 1 Cor.
5.9. lays down clearly this difference from that verse to the end. He speaks
of judging, that is censuring of others, that we may prevent partaking with
them in the guilt. By judging, we are to understand not only the Censure it
self, but the telling our Brother, the reproving, convincing, and other private
duties in relation thereunto, and avoiding their Company afterward: and it is
applied with distinction of persons in respect of their relation to us: There
are Fornicators of this World, ver. 10. and such are without, ver. 12. Now
there is not that obligation lying upon us to reprove their Sins, as if a
Brother be a Fornicator, ver. 11. In some cases we may be silent, and leave the
former to the Judgment of God, ver. 13. But in no case if he be a Brother.

Answ. 3.
To Reprove or give Testimony against an evil, is a tender duty, and we may
easily miscarry if the rules thereof be not strictly observed. 1. Especially,
if public in the Face of a Congregation come together peaceably to worship
God. 2. And the Person an Elder, at least so reputed generally by the
Congregation. 3. The Sin also must be a gross Sin, and apparent so to the
Assembly. But if it be doubtful, as in our Case, whether it be a Sin, or such a
Sin? whether committed upon the place, or formerly we know not where, nor how
long since? if possible he has repented of it, or is able to clear himself at
least from the grosness of it? I say, in such a case, were he a Brother, and in
this Relation, I have no Call to reprove, or give a public testimony, in such
time or place especially.

Answ. 4.
This Objection renders not my coming to hear an evil, but my not reproving. I
am the rather bound to come, for I have hereby not only an opportunity to
receive, but to do good, if such reproving be a duty.

Object. 2.
Ordination and Conformity, and Common Prayers, and Ceremonies, are connexed
with Preaching, as one entire Service; by partaking therefore of the one, we
contract the pollution of the other.

Answ. I.
What God himself in a moral way joyneth together, no man may separate, only
God himself: But what God in Nature has joined together, he gives us leave to
separate, as Chaff from Wheat, etc. And so likewise for what man joyneth
together, especially in the Service of God, and such matters thereof as God,
has not required; A Set Liturgy or Stinted Form of Prayer for Matter and Words
to be used (much less to be inseparably joined with Preaching) is not required
by the Lord, nor indeed is there any such necessary dependence by our Laws.

Answ. 2.
Ordination is so necessarily connexed with Preaching, either by God or Man:
Scripture Light mention Preaching and Hearing as duties, Romans 10. whereas yet
there could be no Ordination; Nor are they so inseparably joined by our Laws:
But if they were, it is sufficient to my Conscience that God has not so joined
them. Our actings, and the reasons or grounds of them, are not to be
interpreted in Church Matters by Humane Laws; If they were, it would be
difficult to inhabit in some Commonwealths with a good Conscience. Our living
within the precincts of such a Parish, our Laws interpret a being of the same
particular Church with them for all Church-Ordinances: but this being man's Law
only, we judge our selves not so necessarily involved by our habitation. A
Church according to Scripture is a Spiritual body: The Limits are part of the
essence and constitution of such a body, and therefore ought to be Spiritual
and of the same nature, and not merely humane; as is the division of Parishes.

Answ. 3.
To speak more properly, we cannot say neerness by an external disposition of
things connexeth them anymore, than Unity makes kindred, or of one Blood. No,
it must be where there is such a dependency of things, that the being, at
leastwise the orderly being of the one is not without the other. In this Sense
Baptizing, breaking of Bread, and other Ordinances that relate to, and
necessarily depend on an Office, and connexed with it; and so our being called
thereunto, and invested therein; and if the person with whom I partake, be
either not in such an Office, or in any apparent disorderly way, I partake with
his Sin; so near are these Duties related in their orderly Administration. But
Preaching in a Providential way, as by persons gifted, and out of their Charity
administering to us, or by Provision of the Magistrate, is altogether of another
nature. And though Ordination and Preaching be joined together in the vulgar
esteem; yet it is not the voice or sanction of Man can bring things into a
nearer Relation, than the Spirit has set them.

Object. 3.
Why may we not as well go to Common Prayer?

Answ.
If there were no other things to be objected against those Prayers, but
Ordination, Conformity, or other Sins of the Ministers, questionless we may:
for we question not to join with, them in Prayer before or after Sermon, more
than with his Preaching.

Object. 4.
Where there is any better Preaching then Ordinary, especially in the City, it
is so thronged, as by that time Prayers are ended, there is no hearing.

Answ.
It is one thing to abstain upon such an account which is prudential only, as
upon the account of bodily infirmity: another thing to abstain upon the opinion
of unlawfulness. Now the thing contended for, is to vindicate the Lawfulness of
hearing such Ministers, notwithstanding what has been objected to the
contrary, and to deliver us from an error of very ill consequence: for this
Opinion, that it is unlawful to hear such Ministers as have been spoken of, is
an error of very ill consequence, in many respects.

1. It puts us upon such singularity, as by which we divide in our practice,
not only from our Brethren of the Presbyterian persuasion, but likewise from
diverse of the soberest Separatists. Where a good Conscience necessitates us in
many things to differ from other Godly Brethren on each hand, it is a sad
Providence to have these differences increased by erroneous Conscience.

2. Except it be the reading of Scriptures, this Ordinance alone, of all other
public Ordinances amongst us, has by the good hand of God been kept and
continued by our National Establishment free in it self from all disputable
Mixtures and Impositions; And the benefit and fruit of this Public Ministry,
has accordingly been visibly great, as in any part of the World. Let us fear
therefore lest we our selves now by raising groundless scruples, lay this as
low, as others by their unwarrantable additions have done the other public
Ordinances.

3. In most of the misperswasions of these later times, by which men's Minds
have been corrupted, I find in whatsoever otherwise they differ one from
another, yet in this they agree, that its unlawful to hear in public; Which I
am persuaded is one constant design of Satan in the variety of ways in Religion
he has set on Foot by Jesuits amongst us. Let us therefore be the more aware
of whatsoever tends that way.

4. Such reasonings against hearing, though they convince not the unlawfulness
of it, yet they leave such prejudices in the minds of them which are tender, as
perplex and render Hearing less profitable and edifying, even to those that are
persuaded of its Lawfulness. To bring the lawfulness of known Ordinances under
dispute for some circumstances affixed, has ever been of great advantage to
Satan, whether in such disputes he prevails or not: For men are either beaten
wholly off from the duty, or perform it with a more remiss and unsuitable
Spirit, which lies more directly in the way to prevent a blessing, than the
evils of others we ordinarily Object. Those disputes about the morality of the
Sabbath, as they have prevailed with many to a total neglect, so with more to a
remiss observance, though convinced of it as a moral Duty. If for Substance the
Duty be so evident, as not to be liable to a dispute in it self (as this of
Hearing is): then Satan fastens Scruples about Circumstances; which prevailing,
we have as little benefit from the Ordinance or Duty, as if it were not.

FINIS.

