England's Advocate, EUROPE'S MONITOR: BEING An Entreaty FOR HELP, In Behalf of
the English Silk-Weavers AND Silk-Throsters SHOWING Their Misery, and the Cause
thereof; And what will only Cure both Them and the Evils England's Trade groans
under, and other English Manufacturers, from the like Desolation.

In a LETTER to a Member of the Honorable House of Commons.

LONDON: Printed by George Larkin, Jun. and are to be Sold by J. Nut, near
Stationers Hall. 1699.

ENGLAND's Advocate, etc. In a LETTER to an Honorable Member of the House of
Commons.
SIR,
(1.) YOurs of the 20th past, acquaints me that you have lately rece^ved a
dismal Account of the Decay of Trade; and partic^larly of the Silk Manufacture
of England, and the Deplorable Poverty of the generality of Persons concerned
in it, and related to it, which you say is so startling and amazing, that you
cannot but call in question the Sincerity of the Relator, and the Truth of his
Narration: And therefore you earnestly desire me, of whose Integrity and
Experience, you are pleased to say, you make no doubt, that I would deal fully
and freely with you, in declaring what Truth there is in it; and if any, then
what may be the Causes thereof, and what Remedies I think may be proper for it.
Now though I question my own Ability for so great an Undertaking, yet I cannot
altogether deny so good a Friend; and if I should fail in giving you the
expected Satisfaction, yet I will never deceive you with Falsehood, but
according to the best of my knowledge and skill, shall act impartially, as one
who has only the Common and True Interest of his Country in his Eye: And
herein I shall restrain my self chiefly to the Weaving Trades in and about the
Cities of London and Canterbury, of which my many years Experience will not
suffer me to be ignorant; not doubting but that Norwich, Bristol, and other
Trading Places, will speak loudly for themselves, as having too just Cause: And
I heartily thank both you and all those worthy Members, who you say are willing
to Relieve us, but heartily sorry that it cannot be done at present; the state
of Affairs being such at this instant time, that if the Petition of the
Weaver's Company had been Received, it could have done them no present
kindness. But since you tell me, That if I can give you convincing
Satisfaction, you will communicate it to others, who may be capable of doing us
some good Service ere long, I will adventure to try what can be done.

(2.) The Weavers and Silk and Mohair Throsters of London, are so very Numerous
a Company, that according as they flourish or fail, most other Trades feel the
good or ill Effects of it; and they are of two sorts, either the Masters or
Fabricators, or else the Workmen and Servants, being far the greater Number,
and in which are to be included multitudes of Women and Children; for they are
Trades which employ variety of hands, and enables even Children, at least in
part, to get their Livelihood, to the great Relief, Ease and Comfort of their
poor Parents. And here, if I could without sighing remember the Blessings of
Peace and good Management, I should tell you, That from the Restoration of King
Charles the Second, to the beginning of the present Revolution, this profitable
and necessary Broad-Weaving Trade was increased 19 parts in 20, to what it was
before. And although the Foundation of our Desolation, which was before (as it is
said) by Br -- -- y attained, began its Effects toward the end of that Kings
Reign, and that vast quantities of India Wrought Silks were brought over, it
was chiefly to the prejudice of the Woollen Manufacture, for then the better
sort of Women scorned them, and they were mostly used instead of Serges,
Tammies, and Norwich Stuffs: But that produced such dismal Effects, that the
Growth of several Years Wool lay to Moth-eat, till that happy and Ingenious
Invention of both Silk and Worsted Crapes, gave new Life both to the Wool and
Silk Manufactory, (for Burying in Woollen would not do it) and rendered the
Indian Silks and Stuffs contemptible to all sorts of People, and to the
Advantage of all parts and places where it was settled; whereby great multitudes
of other Trades and People, who had their dependence thereon, prospered and
lived well; many Fields were turned into Streets, and Houses Let, before they
could be finished; and multitudes of Strangers were entertained, and had full
Employment in the Weaving-Trade; the Brewer, the Baker, the Butcher, the
Victualler, were well paid; and that I am sure could be no damage to the
Landlord; and the Nation abounded with Men and Money, in which two things, with
God's Blessing, the main Strength of a Kingdom consists.

(3.) But alas! we may now say with the Brazen Head, Time Was: For Now there is
such an utter Decay of Trade, especially of the Weaving Part, and its
Dependancies, that a Master, who formerly employed Twenty, Thirty, or more,
cannot now employ Four, nor find them full work: The rest are put to miserable
shifts, and at best they are forced to take up with spare Diet, and the worst
of Provisions, and that many times not very wholesome; and to purchase This,
they are fain to strip their Houses, and sell the Furniture by degrees, till
from one thing after another, it comes to the very Bed they lie on, and they
are reduced to a wad of straw for their Lodging, and a few shavings for a
necessary fire, to boil a little Water Gruel, or a Beasts Liver; and when all
is spent, then the upper Garments, if worth any thing, go to the Broker, for a
small pittance of Money, to get a little Recruits for Belly-Timber; and thus
starved inside and outside, they spin out a miserable Life, faintly walking,
all Tattered and Torn, more like Ghosts and Shadows than Living Men and Women,
till being able no longer to hold out against Weakness and Want, they drop into
their Graves: And though the Weekly Bills may call it Consumptions, Convulsions,
or by other such Artificial Names, yet if the Searchers would speak out, or
your Worship would summon a Jury of Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor,
from Algate, Bishopsgate, Cripple-gate, Shoreditch, Stepny, S. Georges, and
Southwark, with the Precincts and Hamlets thereunto belonging, I am confident
they would bring in their Verdict, That no small number of them dyed of a
Disease in plain English called Starving. And this is the more to be lamented,
because it befalls the better and honester sort of them: for those, whose
modesty will not let them beg, nor their honesty suffer them to steal, when
they can find nothing to set their Industry at work, their hearts sink, they
hide their heads for grief and shame, and so pine away with want: And thus
those Men are lost, who would improve Trade, and be exceeding profitable to the
Commonwealth.

(4.) To this you may add the Consideration of the many Houses which stand
empty in these and suchlike Places, which formerly were crowded with two or
three Families: And as for many Houses which are inhabited, they are suffered
so to be, rather to prevent the heavy payment of three or four shillings Tax in
the pound, falling on the Landlord, than for any hope of more Rent he has from
the Tenant: Nay, I know some who would gladly lose their Houses, would the
grand Landlord accept and acquit them. Perhaps you will think it strange, if I
should say, I know the Men that are Ruined and Undone, by having whole Ranges
of Houses given them, only for being become bound to pay some Ground-Rent, that
was covenanted for before the Building; and yet of this kind, you may easily be
informed of diverse instances, in the Tower-Ham^lets, and New Town; and
notwithstanding all this Loss and Desolation, yet within a few years in those
places, they have been forced to double their Rates for the Poor; and when that
would not do, then to add an Additional Rate of Six Months to the year; and
some Parishes, that were hundreds of pounds beforehand some years since, are
now run deep in debt, with endeavoring to support their Poor, and to prevent
this miserable Poverty growing upon us; and all to no purpose; for never did
the Poor swarm at that rate as now, and still daily increase; so that no Man
can have a spare Fa^thing to give away, but once in an hour he shall have three
or four assaulting his house with doleful complaints to beg it, and things grow
daily so from bad to worse, that in a little time we may fear to see begging
and stealing to become the two most general Professions or Employments in the
Nation; and if there be no remedy for these things, or none will be taken, we
shall certainly ere long from the most flourishing Kingdom of Europe, become
the most despicable People under the Cope of Heaven.

(5.) I fear I have surfeited you with Complaints; but that I may now afford
you a handle, whereby you may do your Country some good service, of which I
know you so zealously desirous, that you never spared any honest Pains which
might tend to produce that Effect, I shall now lay before you, what I apprehend
to be the principal Causes of this daily increasing Poverty and Misery; and
that consideration in course will direct to the Remedies: But before I come to
the standing Causes among our selves; I shall take notice of one thing, which I
take to be an accidental Cause, and yet a great present furtherance of this
Mischief, and that is the free Admission of so many French, Walloons, and other
Foreigners amongst us: Not that I against all Foreigners, much less against the
Relief of Men in distress, of which I am confident you will bear me witness;
but I think our Charity to others might be so managed, as not to be
uncharitable to our selves. For many complain, that they enjoy several
Immunities and Privileges more than the Natives themselves, which is grating,
provoking, and uneasy: And they also urge the large Contributions from time to
time made to them, which I should never grudge, but that I find this use to be
made of them, by the help thereof to work under the Heads of their own Party at
lower Rates, than the English could, at the rate Provisions now are; and by
this means they got the Work out of their Hands, and the Bread out of their
Mouths: And so long as those Contributions lasted, they did, and would hold it;
but now they fail, I am informed that several of them think of transplanting
themselves into other Countries; and so doubtless will the English too, rather
than starve at home (but I fear Europe cannot afford them Relief) for Trade
will run thither, where it meets with encouragement and sits easy; and at this
rate the Nation will be in danger to be much dispeopled as well as
impoverished; which can bode no good, if not wisely prevented.

(6.) But that we may come more close to the matter; the Design of Trade is to
supply our want, and increase our wealth, and therefore ought to be managed to
those ends: But if it multiply our Inconveniences, or exhaust our Riches, such
Trading is riding Post to ruin, and therefore a speedy stop ought to be put to
it: For this reason let Men talk what they please of a free Trade, and leaving
it uncircumscribed, they must at last allow it to be limited by such Rules and
Maxims, as may make it beneficial and not hurtful to a Nation; but to set
them, so as to make them obligatory and effectual, belongs to Authority, where
I leave them, and proceed to make good my Promise.

(7.) And here, I cannot but take notice of one mistake, which multitudes of
wellmeaning Persons make; for whereas it has been wisely provided, that our
own Commodities should be manufactured at home, many have thought, that by
wearing fine English Cloth, they were the great Consumers of English Wool,
which is a great Error: For it has been proved more than once before the
Parliament, that no Cloth of above 10 s. per Yard white, or 13 s. per Yard in
mixed Colors, sold at Blackwell-Hall, has one Dram of English Wool therein,
unless by Accident, and so all the better sort become only the Consumers of the
Socove or Spanish Wool; and by this means Hair-Camblets, Prunello's,
Callaminco's, Velvets, Silks, and such like wearing, has been, and is much
disused, for the purchasing the Materials, (whereof they were here made,) our
own Cloth-Manufactures were in great quantities exported, and to which a great
stop by that means is made; so that hereby a double Manufacture is discouraged,
and a double Gain to the Nation lost: For he that wears a Hair-camblet Coat or
Cloak, or Prunello-gown, or any sort of Hair or Silk, Velvet or Shag, is in the
effect a more true Consumer of English Wool, than he that wears Cloth;
Grograin, or Mohair Yarn, of which the aforesaid Commodities are made, being
generally the Product or Exchange of our Coursest English Woollen Cloth, by
which Vend the Clothier is encouraged; and the preparing the Yarn, which comes
in for it, gives a great and comfortable Employment to vast Numbers of People
in the several Manufactures thereof: And before this War, we had attained to
that Perfection, as not only to serve our selves in Hair-Camblets, which before
used to be sent us from Brussels and Holland, but had gained such a Preference,
as to serve the wisest Paris and French Merchants, where and to other parts, we
had a very profitable Trade, in the former times. I could not say less, to
undeceive many, who did not understand how by this means the Silk and
Mohair-Yarn-Trade, is much impaired, and English Clothing it self damnified,
which is one, though no great cause, of this Deplorable Poverty. Nor would I be
thought, by informing of this Mistake, to undervalue the home Consumption of
our own Woollen Manufacture.

(8.) As to what you hint in relation to the War, the late ill State of our
Coin, and the present Dearness of Silk, I am confident that they have had very
little Influence in this matter; and that if the public good of the Kingdom in
general had been preferred before the particular and private Interest of a few
self-designing Persons, the first and last of these had rather been to the
Advantage of the Silk Manufactures both Weavers and Throsters, with all their
Dependants, than to their Detriment. For setting aside the Act prohibiting Silk
coming but by long Sea in the Time of War, I am confident, that I can convince
you and all reasonable and unbyassed Men, that the War would have been greatly
to our Advantage; and the Scarcity of Money might have been supplied by Credit
for that time, had it not been ruined by other means. The dearness of Silk, if
it be so in all other parts, hurts the Trade no more than extreme Cheapness
would: But to insist on these things, as I might, would swell my Discourse
beyond my design; and therefore I shall proceed with all possible Brevity to
what I am confident is the bane of the Silk Manufactures in England, and in the
consequence of it, of the Woollen also.

(9.) The unreasonable and indiscreet Preference of India Manufactures, whereby
so vast a Manufactory and Profit is carried from us thither, especially of that
of India Silks and Stuffs, has almost wholly overthrown and unhinged this
profitable and necessary Trade of Silk throwing and weaving, by which vast
Multitudes of People of both Sexes young and old lately lived comfortably, and
so did all its dependants. First in the winding it raw, whereby Thousands of
Seamens Wives and Children, and other People many Miles round the City (who now
starve) earned their Bread, to perfect it for the Throster; to spin which again
afforded a good livelihood to those that double the same to be thrown for the
Weavers Use, after the Dyers have gained their livelihood by Dying it. The
Winders, Warpers, Quillers, Draw-Boys, had good subsistence by their Attendance
on Weavers, (besides other Trades, as Harness-makers, Turners, Loom-makers,
Reed-makers, etc.) twenty, thirty, or forty of which Weavers used to be
employed by one Fabricator, which numbers many of them have now nothing to do,
but are driven to this miserable Choice, either to beg, steal, or starve. And
before this prosperous Trade was ruined, every Master according to his Stock
and Credit, provided beforehand for a Spring Trade, and was certain of a
Market in February or March, had he never so many hundred pounds worth of Goods
by him; and the whole Summer following all hands working early and late were
little enough to supply the Mercers; though many that had good foresight, and
large Stocks and Credit, would then be providing a fresh Stock of Goods proper
for Winter VVare, for which about Michaelmas Term they failed not to find sale;
and by this means the whole Clothing Trade of England was upheld, (which now
sinks) The Turkey and Italian Merchants sending our Coth, Serges, Bays, Says,
etc. to Turkey and Italy for Silk to employ these numerous People, who lived
upon and expended the Productions of our own Land; and whether the very
Carriage and Return of their several Cargo's in our Coasting Trade to supply
them, be not of more advantage even to our English Navigation, than the
East India Trade, I leave to their Judgments, who shall consider, that this
last serves chiefly to destroy our most skilful Seamen, which their former
Employments from New Castle, Chester, and other parts, had made; it being too
frequently observed, that scarce half the Ship's Crew comes safe again to
England, that set out from thence for the East- Indies.

(10.) This great inconvenience, or rather mischief, was first brought on us
about 30 years since by the East India Company's sending over several of our
English skilful Weavers, Dyers, and Pattern-drawers, etc. to instruct the
Indians in such Methods as suited the European Fancies; before which time, all
things they sent were contemptible, and the Ladies thought them scarce good
enough for their Kitchin-Maids; but now so esteem them, that our Silk
Manufactury at home is on the brink of destruction, and England it self will
next feel it, and all Europe too, if they be no wiser to prevent it, as I shall
now endeavor to demonstrate.

(11.) The Advocates for our East India Trade are pleased at all times, to
extol and magnify Merchandise and Navigation, as the Foundation of our Wealth
and Prosperity; and doubtless they are very likely to maintain it, who take the
Course to leave us nothing in the end to Merchandise withal; for what better
can be expected from them, who carry away our Money, and destroy our
Manufactures? And therefore these eloquent Gentlemen ought to consider, that a
due improvement of our own Productions by Labor and Industry, was the
Foundation of our Merchandise, and still must support it, or it will fail in
time, as also our Lands will sink in value, and the Nation be dispeopled; and
for this reason by great Mistake was the East India Company lately obliged to
export yearly a 100000 l's worth of our VVoollen Manufactures, which imposition
proved as unprofitable to us, as it was unnatural in it self: For they cannot
sell Cloth in those Places, whence they bring those ready wrought Silks, which
destroy our Manufactury at home, but were forced to vend it at those Markets
where the Turkey Merchants had otherwise sent it, and so became a hindrance to
their Trade, which is more profitable to us; and when they imposed the wearing
of Woollen on their Soldiers under Penalty of losing their Pay, I am credibly
informed, that they could never bring them to it, unless on Pay-days, and then
not without grumbling, the heat of the Country making them unable to endure it.
Now let it be considered, that the Management of our Lands and Sheep produces
that Wool, which after by the Labor and Industry of diverse Manufacturers (too
many to be particularly named) is wonderfully improved; and while they are
doing that, wear our courser Wool and Leather, spend our Butter, Cheese, Corn,
by which many others are maintained a^ home, and by the Product of their
labors Navigation maintained abroad: For their improvements in several Parts
are in several Cargo's sent to Turkey, Italy, Spain, and other Parts, whereof
part returns in unwrought Silk, and other necessary Commodities, part in Silver
from Cadiz, which the East India Company put a stop to, and send it away to the
great Mogul to bring home those Commodities, which if preferred, not only
ruins all those Manufacturies of Wool, but also the Turkey and Italian Trade,
which in return of those Commodities, brought hither Raw Silk; and this they do
by bringing over their vast Cargo's of ready wrought Silk from India, in lieu
of our good hard Silver and Gold, which is sure to return to our use no more,
than the Woollen wherein we bury our Dead. This done, their Cargo's are exposed
on their Stage at St. Hellens, where our Females are charmed, and fall so
desperately in love with them, that no other form or manner of Silk than what
they last brought, must be the Standard of our Mode and Fashion; so that when
our London and Canterbury Weavers against the Spring-trade, have provided many
Thousand pounds worth of Lustrings, Tabby's, and other as good Silks as the
World can afford, in comes an East India Ship freight with Dammask and Sattins,
which being exposed on their Stage, makes the Mode for that Spring; and the
English Fabricators must keep that years Goods, or sell them to vast loss, and
then are constrained with vast Costs and Charges to alter their Fashion for the
next year, when in comes more East India Ships with Goods of quite another
form, and all the Weavers are in the dirt again: And thus for several years
have the London and Canterbury Weavers been disappointed, and Numbers of them
undone, to the utmost Degree of Poverty; and many of them not getting any Sale
for their Goods thus provided, at so little as 25, or 30, or more per Cent,
loss, have left off, and fallen into the w^rsted Weavers; and I doubt not but
that famous Corporation and City of Norwich, has and will feel the ill Effects
of it: For the London Weavers not being tied to those Rules and Methods, which
the Norwich Weavers, for the Credit of the Kingdom and themselves, had obliged
their Members to, for making Goods free from Deceit, (as the Colobester
Bays-makers do) have in part justled them out of their Trade, by being thus at
their liberty: But now Norwich for its own preservation having taken off that
restraint, (which otherwise had been commendably kept on) Spittle-fields will
not be able to maintain that Trade, which at best here, is but a starving one,
to the poor Workmen; and therefore Norwich having set her Members at liberty,
Spittle-fields Workmen must in a short time beg, starve, or be kept by the
Parish.

(12.) This is a sad, but true History of the decay and misery of the weaving
Trade, which is partly caused by the self-endedness, and pernicious Trading of
some particular Merchants; partly by the vain and fond, I am unwilling to say
vicious Humor, of the Females. For the Mercers dare not buy any thing
considerable, but what is Indian, or what he must pretend to be so; and who can
blame him for dealing therein, when otherwise the Draper, as things stand,
would deprive him of his Trade? And now they cannot but confess, that their
great care is how to provide good store of (...) an East India Sale; and if in
the Intervals they spare any, it is to buy the Labor and Pains of the Weaver
for little or nothing, and sometimes part of the Silk into the bargain. And I
assure you, Sir! it almost makes my Blood chill to think, that the best of our
Fabricator's business (that little they now do) is so to counterfeit the
Indians, that the Mercer may vouch it for such with confidence.

(13.) But this matter is accounted nothing with many; and they commonly say,
That the Silk Weaving and Throwing, with all its Dependants, had better be
destroyed, than the East India Trade obstructed or Prejudiced: For (say they)
though they do send great store of Money away to purchase the Indian Silks and
Toys, yet they bring great Profit to the Nation, by returning back Money from
most other European Countries, and so the Nation is by them enriched. In answer
hereto, though I have much to say against the Truth of this, yet at present I
will not quarrel with any of their Importations or Exportations, as such, let
their Trade be as great as they can desire; though I am sure in the end it will
prove much to the Prejudice of Europe in general, and more especially to us;
but that which I now complain of, is the home consumption of those
Manufactures, which will inevitably destroy not only our Silk, but our VVoollen
Manufactures: And that I may commend you to a complete Judge in this Case, Pray
read the Essay upon the Indian Trade, whom I take to be the best Advocate for
that Company this Age has afforded, and I suppose he may have been as well
paid for it: It is pity so fine a Pen should be employed in so bad a Cause; but
for his ingenious Confession of that Truth, which if rightly considered gives
it up, we may forgive him. And thus says he, p. 12. As to the East India Trade
in general, if all would by common Consent agree to have no further dealing to
those Parts, this side of the World by such Resolution would certainly save a
great and continual expense of Treasure; for that Europe draws from thence
nothing of solid Use, Materials to supply Luxury, and only perishable
Commodities, and sends thither Gold and Silver, which is buried there, and
never returns. And then p. 13. concludes, I cannot find what is become of the
800 Millions dug out of the Earth, unless 150 Millions of it be carried away
and sunk in the East Indies. A very fair Confession of the true matter of Fact!
And who are the Fools? As for Spain and other Countries, who manufacture not
what they use, they may with some color of Reason be indifferent in their
Preference; but for us to do it, and set the World an Example so to do, is no
better than Folly, if not Madness; who for the love of India Manufactured
Silks, Tinder Calico's and Muslins, throw away our Gold and Silver, never to be
recovered, when we might have good Cambrick and Lawns, and other German Linen,
and Raw Silk to employ our People, in exchange for our Woollen Manufactures;
which because we will not, we lose both our Trade and our Money, which we might
keep at home, or send abroad to better purpose.

(15.) O but, says this and other East India Advocates, Money is but a
Commodity, and Trade must not be circumscribed but free: That by their bringing
East India Silks and Stuffs cheap for our own use, we may find other Markets
for our Manufactures abroad. But why then such a bustle and flourish at other
Times, when contending for the Balance of Trade with the European Countries?
But I grant that Gold and Silver is but a Commodity, which we ought to be
willing to part with, when there is a good cause for it: But then it ought to
be considered what kind of Commodity it is; it is the Sinews of War, the Glory
of Peace, and the Life of Trade, without which, Workmen cannot well be
employed; the more any Nation has of it, the more Wealthy and more Powerful it
is; the less they have, so much the more mean and inconsiderable they are; so
that to let our Money go from us, is to part not only with our Wealth, but our
Strength. Besides, Gold and Silver is not a Commodity of English Growth; if we
make the Fleece into Cloth, and send it away, the Sheep affords us another
Fleece the next year; but send our Money away, and none comes up here in the
room of it: And when other Nations have it, they bid it welcome, and are
unwilling to let it return again; and therefore the safest course is to make it
stay at home, unless when our own real advantage, necessity, or safety requires
the contrary; and therefore some have compared it to the Blood in the Body; or
rather the Spirits in the Blood; wasting makes us languish, great exhausting
kills. But that you may more plainly see the difference, pray observe, that if
Money be but a Commodity, so is fine China Ware also, and being we can do such
fine things with worse Fools than our selves, suppose for once we should send
all our Contemptible Cupboards of Plate, with all our other Gold and Silver to
the Indies, and have it returned in Delicate China Ware, either for Use or
Trade, should we not be monstrously enriched? For Fancies sake, I will relate a
story, which I long since received for Truth, when I little thought of having
this occasion to use it: The Lady of a Worshipful Knight, Sir R. K. of E --
obliged him to make her a return of 100 l. in this pretty Commodity, with which
she finely adorned her Closet, under the Window of which was an Out-house, and
she keeping a pretty Pug, and going abroad in her Coach without him, up skips
the Monkey from the Wall to the Top of the Out-house, and the Lady having left
her Closet-Casement open, in he marches, and admiring how prettily it rang and
tinkled, as he jumbled them together, he never left off the Frolic, till he
brought it all to its Intrinsic Value. Sir, I shall leave the Application to
your self; only I think I may say, That the Consumers of Indian Silks are much
as profitable to the Kingdom, as Pug was to his Lady.

(16.) It Is commonly said, That far fetched and dear bought, is good for Ladies;
nor do I envy them any Finery, provided it be not purchased with the Ruin of
their Country: But when they shall consider that by these means their Husbands
Rents must fall, the Useful and Profitable Trades of the Kingdom fail, and
their Country be Dispeopled by Death, or necessitating the Inhabitants to
flock to other Places, where they can get a Livelihood, and all this to enrich
a far distant Insidel Country, by impoverishing our selves, I hope they will
grow so wise and good humored, as to part with one Piece of Vanity, which is
so pernicious.

(17.) And further, if this be not the effect of that Devouring Trade, how
comes it to pass, that Silver is 5d. per ounce more worth than Money, only to
be sent to the Indies to be buried, and Cadiz and Holland, and all Places,
dreined to obtain it on any Conditions, but that the Nation must be ruined to
enrich a few Men by management of a free Trade, as they are ready always to
call it, when we talk of any, though never so needful, Prohibiting of never so
small a Branch of it? But I think this free Trade to be a Contradiction, as
matters were managed.

(18.) If you please thoroughly to consider the Management of this East India
Trade, you will be forced to acknowledge, That had we not sent Indian Linen
upon the Scots, to the great detriment of their Scotch-Cloth-Trade, (the
principal Manufacture of that Kingdom) it is believed they never would have
thought of an East India Company, by which they hope to be even with us, by
imposing Indian Toys upon us by way of requital: And what detriment it will
occasion in the Irish Affair, small time will discover. And when other parts of
Europe (which have not yet taken up that course) shall warily inspect what we
have been, and are now doing; Will they not think of setting up the same Trade,
and impose their freight of Indian Goods upon us, as we have done upon them?
only I can hardly think, that any but our selves, will be so indiscreet, to
send their Money Abroad, to the destruction of their Gainful Manufactures at
Home, unless pure Revenge tempt them to it; that the same Trick may not be
always played upon them, but that in requital, they may Trick others, as well as
they have done them: and I verily believe, that a few years will bring it to
this pass, and then we shall say, Who would have thought it? And when I
consider, how many Undone Weavers, have set up Alehouses, till they have had
little Trade, except to tipple one with another, till they have broke
themselves again, and the Brewer into the bargain; it is to me an unlucky
resemblance, of what the European Trade in time must come to, when it is one
Kingdom with another, chiefly for Indian Geugaws.

(19.) Nor can there be any doubt, but that the Great Mogul and his People,
when they observe the mad Esteem we have for their Manufactures, will follow
the European Examples, and advance their Prizes (as they have already done of
late) and by laying on Great Duties, and Prohibiting Raw Silk, and Cotton Wool
and Yarn, especially now they find they can have our Gold and Silver for it,
ready Manufactured there; for the remedy of which, nothing but the Learned
Doctors Observation before-cited, can give Europe an Effectual Cure: But would
they agree together in an European Parliament, or Council, not to Consume, or
fetch any Indian Manufactures; this would perfectly cure the Evils the European
Trades groan under; for the Remedying of which, it may be observed, how every
Kingdom and Country has strugled to help themselves by unreasonable Duties,
and unnatural Prohibitions, upon one another; the effects of both which are, to
impoverish all the Manufacturing People, though for the present, it may seem to
enrich the Governing Part, yet it is all to the destruction of the European
Trade; and we may struggle our hearts out to relieve our Poor, for so long as
this Indian Gangreen is nourished among us, nothing will Help, nothing will Do;
because the loss of the Silk Manufactory in England, will certainly sink the
Exportation of the Woollen, in propo^tion, and render all Workhouses in
Countries and Corporations Ineffectual, as does already appear.

(20.) Less matters, and even Trifles in respect of these, have Alarmed our
Forefathers; yea, and have had some influence on our selves of late; I shall
make at present, choice only of two instances, out of many, I mean the Dying,
and the Buttonmaking Trade. For the benefit of the Dyers, and improving that
Trade, it was enacted, That no Dyed Silk should be Imported; and about the
latter end of the Reign of King Charles the Second, it was also by Law enacted,
That no Foreign-made Buttons should be imported into England, with which our
Dutch Friends before had plentifully served us. And does the Weavers and
Weaving-Trade deserve no Consideration, which is Twenty times the value to the
Kingdom more than both, and Employs more than a hundred for one? And even the
Buttonmakers have had the good fortune this very Sessions, to be Relieved and
Supported by this Truly English Parliament; for in consideration of their
Numbers, and Poverty, they have secured them in their Trade, and that much to
the Advantage of the Turkey Merchants: And though their numbers at Macklesfield
and Sherbourn, and the adjacent Country, are great, yet I am confident, I
could name one Parish in London, wherein not many years since, before this sad
decay of Trade, the Weavers, Throsters, and their dependents, exceeded them
all; How Numerous then would they be, if computed in all places? But the
Buttonmakers may thank God, that they had not an East India Company to cope
with, and I am persuaded, that could the Weavers, be secured against only the
English consumption of Figured, Stich'd, and Stripped East India Silks and
Stuffs, they would be contented, and might be a Happy Prosperous People again,
and both the Turkey and Italian Merchants, Twenty times more benefitted, than
by the Button Bill; and the Blessing would go round, for the Woollen
Manufacture would feel the good effects of it; and less than this, can never
preserve them from total Ruin, in a short time.

(21) And to say the Truth, our Weavers, some years since, were but little
beholding to some back Friends, who when they found they had too good a cause,
and the Prohibiting Bill had passed the House of Commons, persuaded some, to
gain a total Prohibition of all European Foreign-wrought Silks; for not having
cause good enough fairly to Try it out with them, they devised this way to hug
them to Death, with that pretended kindness, and destroyed the Bill, by
insisting on what is Unreasonable: For if the English Weaver cannot vie in
Frugal Living, and Cheap Working, with those Countries, that purchase their Raw
Silks, and Necessaries of Living, much at the same Rate themselves do, they
will then deservedly suffer; but to oblige them to contend with a numerous
multitude of Salvages that have their Silk to work upon for almost nothing, and
want neither Fire nor Clothing, while Two pence in Rice, will sustain a Family
of four or five for a week, is very hard measure, and unmerciful doings, unless
such methods are taken, as may reduce the value of Lands, and all its
Productions, to such low Rates here, that they may work on an equal foot: But
how cheap soever the East India Company may buy these Goods, England, and all
its Ladies, shall and will pay dear enough for them, rather than go without
them; so that unless they are by some means or other effectually Restrained,
England must be Undone to gratify a humor of vanity, and enrich a few, who
care not who, nor how many they Ruin, so they may but Grasp all into their own
hands; for otherwise one would think that the Productions of the Growth and
Soil of India, such as Pepper, Saltpeter, Rice, Cotton-wool, and Yarn, and
numbers more, together with what Wrought Silks they may export, might be
sufficient Gain, to content Reasonable Men; and as for Persian Taffaties, and
Plain Silks, the Weavers would not contend the matter.

(22) But to Prohibit the Wearing any thing, that may be Cheap Bought, which if
the East India Company do, the Gain is to England, though they sell never so
dear to those who Wear and Consume it; which I take to be in the Body Politic,
like overgorging with Meat and Drink in the Natural Body, which is weak and
languid, and thrives not with it, unless in some great Wen, Excressency, or
other Deformity; and if this be all we are to regard, it may as well hold good
in other instances; and then let us suppose, that when our India-Sbips freight
Bullion from Holland or Spain, they should also there take in a good quantity
of Spanish Wool, and so save the Charge of bringing it to England, and then be
sure, not to forget to take along with them a few Worcestershire
Cloth-weavers, and Cloth-workers, to instruct; and all sorts of Work and
Labor, being performed in India twelve times as Cheap as in England, and four
Shillings worth of Spanish-wool, making a yard of Cloth worth Fifteen
Shillings, which at this Rate, will stand them but in Five Shillings, then
there will be Ten Shilling saved for their Navigation and Profits, and so
England's the Gainer; and the Silver they may send to Bengal and Persia, for
Raw Silk, to employ the Mogul's Subjects in other parts to work up, (as they
already do) and so return back both the Cargoes of Silk and Cloth together, and
at once disband all, both our Needless Clothiers, and Silk Weavers; this will
do the work effectually, and leave us nothing to do at home, which must
certainly make us a Rich and Industrious People, or no People at all
considerable in a very little time: For I am sure the project is not more
ridiculous, nor less pernicious in one respect, than the other. And where we
are likely to find this Market they talk of, for our own Manufactures, is
little less than a Miracle, and looks more like what the Vulgar call a
Vertuoso-fancy than any possibility. For can we be so besotted, as to imagine,
that the World should be become so fond of us, who are so Careless of our
selves; that in spite of our Teeths, they should be studiers of, and
industriously provide for our Good, by becoming Customers for our Manufactures,
which we our selves slight and cont^mn; or can it be thought reasonable to
believe, that when we have brought our own Plantations, the Spaniards, and
other Places, to the use of East India Silks, Cotton, Cloths and Stuffs (which
our own great Preference and Esteem, not only tends to, but effects) we shall
still have the better Markers abroad in some Newfound-Lands, or Countries to be
found out; where we may vend our Silks, Cloths, Bays, Serges, Perpetuana's,
Norwich-Stuffs, and the like Commodities; and it would be worth any Man's while,
to get Information, what Market in this World, is not already fully stored and
cloyed with these Commodities, whether those prepared by the East India
Traders, must go to the Prejudice of other more Excellent and Beneficial
Merchants; unless they know how to carry them to the World in the Moon.

(23.) And if our Common Prints, do not Prevaricate, Flanders and Venice have
lately declared their sense of this Evil, by a Prohibition of Indian
Manufactures; and though the French King, for many years past, has driven away
so many thousands of his poor Subjects to seek their Bread in other Countries,
of which England has entertained the greatest part; and the most of those that
were Manufacturers, were no other way capable of earning their Living, but by
the Weaving Trade; yet he has manifested his constant care, to support, and
afford a good Maintenance to those that remain; as may appear, by his Edict of
October 26. 1686. whereby he not only Prohibits the wearing of all sorts of
East India Silks and Callico's, but also, under a severe Mulct, Prohibits the
Imitation of their own made figured and flowred Silks by Printing; and commands
their Prints and Tools to be Broke and Utterly Destroyed: And in the last War,
when they took and sold many of our East India Ships, they sold not the
Manufactured Goods, but under this Caution and Obligation, That they should be
again Exported: And by another Edict of -- -- 1694. For the Preservation of the
Button-makers Trade, He Prohibits the wear, or use, of Buttons, any other ways
made, than with the Needle; and by all ways and means, endeavors that Bread,
the staff of Life, may be sold Cheap. Now if we, to the great numbers of our
own People, must, contrary to our former Laws, entertain and admit all
Strangers that come, and give them right to work in our Trades, is it not
highly unreasonable to pour in upon us such vast quantities of Indian
Commodities, as destroy the Principal Manufactures; in making of which, both
the English and French Weavers must get their Bread, or Starve; whilst at the
same time we Prohibit Irish Cattle, Distill our Corn, and Export it too, if
Cheap.

(24.) I cannot think such like Proceedings, to be very consistent with good
Reason and Policy, and must crave your Pardon, if I tell you, That I believe
this East India Trade of Goods there Manufactured, for our own Consumption at
home, is far more Prejudicial, not only to our own Silk Manufactures, but to
England in general, than were those wicked audacious Persons, of whom so many
were Hanged for Cliping and Coining; for if they followed both Trades, and
Coined their Clipings, it was no loss to England, for what we wanted in weight,
we had in tale; and could we have paid therewith our Foreign Bills, it would
have been of greater advantage to England, than the East-India-Trade; but for
those Rogues who only clipped, they deserved a double Hanging, for they were one
great Support of the East-India-Trade, their Meltings furnishing them with
Silver for a long time; the want of which now puts them to their shifts, and
makes them pay so dear for it.

(25.) Thus, Sir, I have laid before you what I apprehend to be the Causes of
this desperate Decay of Trade, which will day by day more clearly appear, as
our Poverty increases; and hence the Remedies are visible, if applied by a
Powerful Hand. But because you are urgent for my further Opinion herein, I
shall point at some, though very briefly, they having been hinted at all along.
It is an old and true Observation, That the knowledge of the Distemper is more
than half the Cure; our Home-Consumption of East India ro^g^t Silks, is the
Decay both of our Clothing and Silk Manufactures, the Weavers, Throsters, and
all their Dependants; and impoverisheth all Places where those Trades decay.
But after the due Improvement of our own Productions by Manufactures, as has
been already insisted on, A due Consideration of that truly Noble Turkey Trade,
is the next thing that can and will give us considerable Relief. Let only such
Encouragement be given, that those Gentlemen who spend their Youth in Travel,
and to gain Experience in that Trade, and after venture Great Estates therein,
when they return and settle here, and send others their Factors abroad, to do
as they had done before them, may find a good Market, amongst other their
Commodities, for their Silk and Grogram Yarn, (which are the Principal Returns)
and then the Clothier and the Tin-Merchant shall never want a sure Sale, and
good Price for their Commodities; and I dare appeal to those Gentlemen, whether
any thing else can produce this good effect; and be bold to say, That the Arts
and Policy the French King is now making use of, to beat our Merchants out of
that Trade, will do England more mischief (if not prevented) than all our
tedious War: For it is this inforceth many of them, for the employment of their
Estates, to strike in with the East-India-Trade against their Judgments and
Inclinations: For seeing we are resolved to ruin our selves, they will come in
for part of the scramble. For it is plainly thus: The Mercer can sell nothing of
English Silk, but with great loss to Himself or the Weaver, and for this reason
the Weavers are forced to desist their Trade, the Silk lying on the Silkmens or
Throsters hands, by which means the Merchant wants Sale, and ships away no more
Cloth or Tin, and gives order to his Factor in Turkey, to forbear buying any
more Silk, or Grograin, or Cotton-Yarn, whilst the French buy up all, and give
great encouragement and life to their Manufacturers at home; for want of which,
our Trade is so destroyed, that our Poor need not scoff at Wooden Shoes, for
they must go Barefoot. I could give you several Links of the like Chain of
Destruction to our Spanish, German, Italian, and other Trades, whereby the
other parts of our Woollen Manufactures (as Bays, Serges, Perpetuana's, and all
sorts of Norwich and other Stuffs) suffer the same Detriment from one and the
same Cause. But sure I am, the Case is extremely altered with the Weavers,
since Cannon-steeet both sides the way was nothing but Weaver's Workshops. But
by what is before said, it appears that making the Turkey-Trade prosperous,
would in a great measure cure the Evil we groan under, and prevent their
sending their Silk and Grograin Yarn to Holland, which they are now
necessitated to do for want of another Market. And I could be content the
forementioned Author (though a professed East India Advocate) might judge between
us, for what valuable causes these beneficial Merchants, as well as the
Weavers, must be thus cramped and cripled in their Trade; Which he asserts, p.
14. That Europe had been richer by a full Third Part than they are, if that
Trade had never been Discovered or Undertaken; and that it bears hard only on
those Countries that consume those Commodities. But for those who will consume
them, to the destruction of their own valuable Productions and Manufactures,
and the carrying away all their Wealth in the end, I think they want a Lord
have mercy upon them.

(26.) For my own part, I do not think but that the Departure of those
Multitudes of Strangers would be a great detriment to the Turkey Traae, and
that their abiding here might be of great advantage not only to that, but to
England in general, if matters be so ordered that all may have Work: For
multitudes of Industrious People are the best and surest Riches and Strength of
a Kingdom, if wisely employed. For that in the Manufacturing of Grograin Yarn
into Hair Shags, Tammies, etc. I verily believe there is now about London
upwards of twenty French for one English, either of Masters or Workmen therein.
I mention this, because it is the great Opinion, of the multitudes of English
who want Bread, That prosecuting and driving away Foreigners, would give Relief
to their Want; and so far has it prevailed, that by incessant importunity they
obliged the Company, for the better considering of the matter, to call a full
Court; and further by their pressing Entreaties had engaged a number of those
that were or had been their Work-masters, to represent their case to the Court;
and in order to their Relief, to request, 1. That the Company would put their
Bylaws in execution. 2. That they would give them leave to prosecute,
according to the Laws of England, those that had not served seven years an
Apprentiship to the Trade. 3. That they would admit no more Foreigners to work
on the Trade. To all which the Company gave all those that appeared full
satisfaction, That they lay under an Obligation neither to do, nor to abet, or
suffer any thing to be done contrary to the Agreement made with their Church;
but that they would endeavor so to represent their case, that there might be
Relief both for them and the Strangers also; but for acting thus, the Company
is sharply upbraided, and warmly reflected upon by the poor mistaken Multitude:
For though this has been some small cause of their Poverty by accident, as has
been before mentioned; yet cannot cure the Evil they labor under: But if I
might, I would Advise or Persuade (for it is unreasonable in this case to talk
of Forcing or Prohibiting) People of all Qualities, Age or Sex, to the wearing
of Garments and Ornaments of Silk or Grograin Yarn of English make; for this is
the return of English Woollen Cloth, and nothing could conduce more to the
advantage of the English Merchants Trading to Turkey, Spain, Italy, and other
European Parts, and is double advantage to England. The truth of which may be
further demonstrated in one small but fresh instance, by which I believe more
than one Merchant have been no small Sufferers, I mean the great and sudden
disuse of Mohair Fringes, together with the decay of the Weaving and
Button-making Trade, by which means some thousand pounds worth of Mohair Yarn,
which otherwise might have been sold for ready Money at a Price, so sunk and
fell in its value, that it is since sold for one third of what might then have
been had for it; and I believe, that reckoning the decay by the Worm eating
into it, and the loss of Interest, even that third part was likewise consumed
(which had otherwise been laid out again in Cloth and Tin, and sent to Turkey)
as the Proprietor can tell by woeful Experience: And I am sure that our Women's
great esteem for Thread Fringes was a great occasion thereof, and a great
kindness to the Dutch. And therefore I entreat and beg of you, that you will
use your utmost Interest and Rhetoric to persuade and prevail, that Camblet
Cloaks, Coats and Gowns, Silk Mohair, and Mohair Fringes and Buttons, and
Manufactures here made of Silk and Grograin Yarn, may be the Wearing preferred
and encouraged: For this is the true Interest of the Turkey Trade, and in it
the great Interest of England.

(27.) From what has been said, I think it may plainly appear, That no less
than a Prohibition or stop of the Home-Consumption of all sorts of East India
Silks and Stuffs, except plain Persian Taffaties, and suchlike of plain make,
can preserve the Silk-Weavers and Throsters of England, and those great Numbers
that depend upon them, the good consequence whereof has been already fully
demonstrated: For if this be not granted, those Trades must utterly decay and
sink; for as matters now stand, by reason of the forementioned Dangers, few
Men that had an Estate would for the three years last past adventure it, the
loss being so certain; and as for such as have and do trade upon Credit, they
are forced to such miserable shifts as at last ends in extreme Poverty: And the
cause it self, (I mean England's Interest) is almost totally yielded up; deep
despair, together with disability, having so dis-spirited and sunk the Minds of
the English Silk Manufacturers, that there is not Silk provided to supply the
Mercers Shops, though they should be willing to buy; all stand at gaze, and are
only concerned to see what the Parliament would do with them; they are falling
into extreme despair, in vain contriving to find out New Employments. And
therefore I beg of, and beseech you, good Sir, for GOD's ^ake, for your
Countrey's sake, and for the sake of those Numberless Multitudes of Poor before
menrioned, that you would employ all your Interest to gain some effectual
Prohibition of wearing any flowered, spotted, or strip'a Silk of Indian Make;
and then I doubt not but such a good Act, with example, would not only gain the
preferrence at home, but also afford an opportunity, not only to our own
Plantations, but also to many Neighboring Countries, to follow the Example;
our Factors in most places commonly sending their orders for such Commodities
as our selves most prefer and use. Nor let any think that such a Prohibition
would be impracticable, if resolved upon; for the firm Resolution of an English
Parliament is of force sufficient to prevail in any good Cause which they shall
heartily espouse; as may be seen in the Business of Burying in Woollen, and the
French Al-a-modes and Lustrings, which I believe to be totally suppressed: And I
am confident the East India Company themselves would not attempt the breach of
such a Law, if it were once obtained; and the Interlopers, or private Traders,
might be easily prevented, and such Rules proposed, as might deter any other
parts from imposing them upon us, under the notion of their own Manufactures:
But if the greatest Evils must meet with no good Endeavors of Redress, we must
be of all People most miserable. Therefore, Dear Sir, endeavor that something
may be done by the Parliament, before they Rise, that may at least give hopes,
that their Cause shall in due time, be thoroughly Considered: Such a Promise or
Vote would give New Life to as many as can struggle out another season, and
hopes of good in time to the rest; but the contrary, Utter Despair. For I think
I may truly say, what looks like a Prophecy in one of their Papers about three
years since, when contending for this Bill in Parliament, That if it were
granted, is would in a small time so invigorate the Minds of all Fabricators
both in Silk, Wool, and Grograin Yarn, that they would contend with all other
Difficulties, though Money should continue as scarce as at present; and that the
contrary would discourage those of greatest Ability, to that degree, that the
Out-Parishes of London, the Tower Hamblets, and the Wool-Manufacturing Towns of
England, would not be able to support their Poor. And whether the Truth of this
last part has not been verified to purpose, I dare appeal to the Ministers,
Church-VVardens, and Overseers of the Poor: And I am sure all the Inhabitants
of those Places must and will give a sad Testimony both to the Truth of this,
and what will be the only Remedy we can hope for, and that is, the Prohibition
requested: For had that Act then passed, it had saved the Lives of many who
have since perished, and preserved the Trade both of Weavers and Throsters
above double the Number they now are.

(28.) And for your further Conviction, it may not be unseasonable here to add
to the two forementioned Acts concerning Button-making and Dying, a third
instance of our former care, and that is, The Act to prevent Silk coming ready
Thrown from India. For can any reasonable Man living believe, that such care
should be taken of Dyers and Throsters, and at the same time the Weavers be
wholly neglected, unless it be that the Dyers and Throsters, had and did make
friends in Parliament, but the Weavers had none to inform in their behalf?
Besides, the Provision it self, is ineffectual and ridiculous, if it be not
reasonable to grant this Prohibition; for no Silk is weaved, but what is first
thrown and dyed; and therefore so far as Silk-throwing and Dying, has relation
to VVeaving, those Acts are insignificant, and now both those Trades are very
sensible, that not only the VVellbeing, but almost their Being, depends upon
the Preservation of the Silk-VVeaving, and that they should have a very poor
Trade, to be only employed in Throwing and Dying for Stitching and Sowing
Silks, and some small pittance for the Stockin-Frames, and the Button and
Fringe-makers; and it is worrh observation, that the East India Companies
fingers itch'd, to gain this point also; for they did lately bring over a
considerable quantity of Indian Thrown and Dyed Silk, which the Throsters and
Dyers coming to the knowledge of, they bestir'd themselves, and made a Seizure
thereof, but the business was patcht up I know not how; for the East India
Company durst not contend it, but are, or seem contented for the future, not to
bring it over so Thrown or Dyed, but are resolved to do us a further kindness,
and save us the labor of the VVeaving, the prevention of which, is the only
remedy we have to preserve our selves and England from extreme Poverty.

(29.) Sir, In behalf of those great Multitudes, concerned in this
Controversy; I earnestly Entreat you, to use your Interest with those
Gentlemen, who now have the management of the India Trade in their Power, that
they would be so kind to their poor Contrymen, as to grant willingly what is
here desired; for it is not Reasonable to think, that the Offer made by them to
those Weavers, who treated with them, will either be accepted by them, or
allowed by the Parliament; which was to this effect, That if they would so
assist them, as to gain an Abatement of Customs, upon Raw Silk, Cotton Yarn,
and other unmanufactured Commodities for Trade, they would be contented to load
all Wrought Silks with Duties, to such a degree, as might make it more
profitable to bring the said Raw Silks and other materials to be Manufactured
here, than to bring the Wrought Silks, Stuffs, or other ready Manufactured
Goods. But I shall offer you some Reasons, why I think this Project will not
take, or if it do, would be of no good use or Benefit.

1. Because this would give a vast Advantage to the Indian Trade, beyond that
of the Turkey and Italian Merchant, and so would more and more obstruct and
destroy those more Beneficial and Necessary Trades.

2. So Great a Duty, would be a strong temptation to all Private Traders and
Sailers, to venture their all in this Commodity, which is so Portable.

3. It would be no less temptation to other Nations, especially our French and
Dutch Friends, to impose them upon us.

4. The forementioned reason of our Ladies humors, and unaccountable Fondness
of this Commodity, plainly shows, That nothing but an absolute Prohibition of
wearing thereof, can effectually prevent the Mischief; for with them it is all
in all, if it be East India; be it never so dear, never so ugly, it then
Pleases, and no Price is too great for it.

(30.) Now this being plain matter of Fact, and evident Truth, What a dangerous
condition are all our English Manufactories in, which are not already secured
by Law, against this devouring Trade? As for the Throwsters and Dyers before
mentioned, they are little Significant, if the Weavers be not Preserved and
Secured; but if, as the East India Company pretends, they have a dear Bargain,
and will have what they have bought, which they say, is no less, than a freedom
to bring not only Materials of Trade, and Productions of that Countries Growth,
but also whatsoever Manufactures they can make advantage by; then in few years
they may, and doubtless will, Undo all before them, if not in the former
instance of carrying Spanish Wool to be there Manufactured, yet in projecting
and making such Cloth of Cotton Wool, for Men's Garments, as shall as much
outvye (or at least be thought so) our English Cloth, as Indian Silks are
thought by our vain Ladies to surpass English. The Fanmakers they have already
beat out of the Pit, little being left them to do, unless to mend and repair
the breaches that happen to Indian Fans in their passage: I cannot say they
have as yet carried over any Stockin-Frames, but that they will not do it, is
improbable; and then what will become of our ingenious Frame-knitting, and
those thousands of poor People, that in several Counties of England, earn their
bread by Knitting with Needles, when we shall have East India Silk Stockins,
far Cheaper, than here they can be made of Wool? But not to tire your
Patience, Thus may the Vpholsterers, the Hatters, the Tailors, the
Imbroiderers, the Glovers, and others, too many to be named, be swallowed up by
this All-Devouring East India Trade, if they have this unlimited Power; for had
they not the Materials themselves Cheaper there, than here, (which yet they
have by much) the very difference of charge in Workman-ship may destroy all
before it, the Necessaries of Life, affording the Indians a better livelihood
for a penny, than the Englishman for a shilling; and then by the Greatness of
their Stock, bringing over whatever they deal with, in such Vast Quantities,
and by their Interest in Persons of the best Rank and Quality, they can (by
these and other like means) give the Preference to what they please; so that
unless you can believe them to be strange Self-denying Men, they may at their
pleasure, Ruin, in a manner, all the Trades and Manufactories of England. I
have lately received Information of one instance of this Nature, which mightily
concerns us, which is, That several Molds and Tools, for making Pewter, have
been lately made, and carried down in Coaches, near to Thames Street, supposed
to be for the use of the Spaniards and Portuguese; they having obtained our
Tin, on Terms likely to destroy our Manufacturing of Pewter: but I doubt and
fear, That they are rather prepared for the East Indies, where there is plenty
of Tin; and then we may bid farewell to the Pewterers Trade; and if it should
be so, our Cornwall Tin-Mines, will also receive a Mortal Wound: This matter is
worth a full discovery, which by all the enquiry I have made, I could not yet
attain to, but for so much as I relate, I am well assured, though all the
Mold-Makers deny the thing, which makes me the more suspicious, that they are
going the same way, which the English Weavers, Patterns, and Pattern-drawers,
formerly went; but wheresoever they go, I fear it will be much to the Prejudice
of England.

(31.) But I am not willing to be mistaken as an enemy, either to the
East India Trade or Company; I heartily wish a friendly Reconciliation of all
Parties, and them a Trade as Large and Prosperous as their own hearts can
desire, could it be consistent with the Public Welfare of England, which if
the loss of the Silk Manufacture would advance, I should gladly see it
Sacrificed to so good an end: But I am sure, and Truth it self compells me to
declare, That the greater the East India Trade is in general, the greater
Prejudice it is to Europe. But since the error has spread like a general
Infection, and every Kingdom and Nation, that can, striveth to outvie each
other in this bewitching Trade; may the English exceed all, and be Prosperous;
and it is, and always was my opinion, That an Incorporation, or Company, Wisely
and Honestly Managed, is the best way to carry it on, and prevent being
Insulted or Imposed upon by the Great Mogul, or his, or any others Subjects;
but then here lies the great danger, That such a Body can Command, or Request,
or Oblige, and such a Purse can Fee and Bribe at that extravagant Rate, as to
make Friends amongst Inconsiderate or Covetous Men, to the carrying on any
Cause or Interest they pursue, tho^ never so destructive to the Public Good,
unless the Legislative Power please to interpose and prevent it: Nor have I the
least intent to Reflect, either on particular Persons, or Miscarriages; I have
as much Respect for, and great an esteem of most of those Persons concerned in
that Trade, as any man whatsoever; and I do verily believe, that many of them,
would never contend in this matter, had they thoroughly and impartially weighed
and considered the Evil Consequences thereof; but the greater part, is either
actually governed by the less, or else subtly managed and governed by a few,
whose Interest, Power or Parts, overtops the rest; and if these judge, that
having paid their Money, they may make the best Advantage of their Bargain, and
pursue their Designs, whoever Suffers, the rest follow their Leaders, without
further Consideration: But with their good leave, I think Eight per Cent, and
as great Security as can be given, or desired, to be better than any Trade, and
I hope will not entitle any Persons to a further Right of Undoing others, and
the Ruin of our Home Manufactures. But our Wise Legislators, must and will be
Judges in this Case, and to them I refer it. And it is worth their most serious
Consideration, That when we have brought the Spaniards to be as much in love
(as our selves) and to use these Indian Silks and Stuffs, for whose Clymate
they are more fitting than for ours, they may not come under the Government of
a Prince, who will quickly teach them Navigation enough, to exchange their
Western Cargo's of Bullion, for these Eastern Silks and Stuffs, without our
help, which will likewise destroy, at least, a Moiety of our Woollen
Manufacture.

(32.) And with submission, I do think this further matter may not be unworthy
the Consideration of that August Assembly, That whilst the French send their
Ships to India, both for Materials, Productions, and Manufactures of that
Country, they carefully Support and Increase their Home Manufacturers, and now
buy up Silk (beyond what they ever did) and Grograin Yarn (which formerly they
did not) in Turkey, whilst our Turky-Merchants Factors only look on; because
the Manufacturers of England, being Ruined by this Indian Torrent, nothing will
sell here at the Price they must give there: And thus the French secures his
Interest at Home, and likewise comes in for a large share in the desolation of
those Manufacturing Countries, that undo themselves, or will be thus Destroyed:
And who can blame the Turkey Merchants for desisting their Trade? For our
Weavers and Silk Throwsters cannot, as matters are; and for that Reason have
not provided to supply the wants of the Mercers, the two last years, which if
they had or did, yet the Turkey Merchants have not Silk to carry on the Trade,
and for this reason must desist to buy Cloth; and thus the destruction of
England's Trade approaches; and that the fall of Lands in value will soon
follow, is certain; the late advance of which, proceeds more from the Judgment
of GOD upon these parts of the World, than any other cause: For now both Corn,
and Wool, and all other like Necessaries, advance not in their value by the
goodness of Trade, but by the ill Crops, and scarcity thereof, (chiefly in
other Countries) which must be again repayed by the advancing the Price of the
Productions of other Countries, (as we do in Claret, as well as Silk) and if we
cannot do the one as well as the other, we lose our Trade: And matters may be
as well managed for the support of our Manufactures, as they are by others for
their own in other parts: And we may then give as good a Price in Turkey as the
French, and also prevent the Dutch from buying up here those Necessaries of
Silk, Grograin, and Cotton^arn, for which our Turkey Merchants now can find
little other good Markets.

(^3.) Having confined my self chiefly to the particular Interest of the
Weaving Manufactory, I have avoided those Arguments, that are or may be brought
to prove the prejudice the East India Trade is, to the General Trade of the
Kingdom, as well in the Materials for Trade, as in the Manufactured Silks,
which I truly think it is. But those Arguments have been already handled by
much better Pens in several Printed Tracts, and especially in a late Piece by
that indefa^ig^ble Champion for Norwich, Mr. Loam, i^ his late Answer to the
most considerable Ob^ections that are brought in defense of the said Trade; as
also in his Case of the English Manufact^ Trading in Wool, presented to the
Parliament; and for this Reason both the Turkey, and other Merchants, may judge
this my discourse to be of little concern to them, Raw (...) Cotton Yarn and
Wool, pre^udicing their Trade as well as if ready Manufactured, but to me the
Remedy of that seems unpracticable, unless all Europe would agree to damn the
East India Trade it self, as to that particular; and we had better be subject
to one evil, than to that and a greater; such as I take the dispeopling our
Country, by Destroying our Manufactures to be: And could these Materials, be
the return of our own Productions (as it is by the Turkey Merchants) and not of
Bullion (as it is by the East India Merchant) I think it might be much at one,
to the English Interest, whether they had them from India or Turkey; yea, and
as it is, we might the better bear it, if these Commodities were again exported
with such advantage as they sometimes pretend, but without proof: For when they
have been pressed with that dangerous Argument of sending away our Money to the
Indies, they insisted on this in their Defense, That nine parts in ten of their
Wrought Silks imported, were again exported; but when in the last Controversy
they defeated that good Bill in the House of Lords, then finding the Nation was
bewitched to the use of their Silks, and to a belief of the Necessity and
Benefit of their Trade, but chiefly depending on the Friends they had made,
then they changed their Note, and loudly proclaimed that the East India Trade
would be nothing worth, if they might not be allowed to use them in England;
for that (as they then truly said) Nine parts in Ten, were consumed here. I
hope all these Reasons will prevail for the Prohibition desired.

(34.) As to what is commonly objected of the Dutch Practice herein, and Profit
thereby, it has formerly been truly and wisely observed, That one Parish in
London consumes more East India Silks than all the Seven Provinces of Holland:
And such an Imitation of their Practice, had saved me this labor; as to the
largeness of their East India Trade, I know they have had a great share in the
Ruin of Europe, for the enriching themselves; but in this particular of
wrought Silks, we have greatly outdone them. For it is observed, that one
English Ship has at once brought more of that pernicious Commodity, than all
the Dutch Fleets the year round, and that for considerable time past. But if we
would do well, we must with the promoting our Navigation likewise consider that
we have a large Tract of fruitful Land, rich Mines, profitable Sheep and
Cattle, and these we must likewise improve to the enriching our Country with
People, and so as they may live by their Labor.

(35.) Sir, I fear I have quite tired your Patience, upon which I will not
trespass much longer, and therefore now drawing to a Conclusion, I solemnly
protest, that to the best of my Judgment and Knowledge, I have herein declared
or writ nothing for any other motive, end or reason, than the Good of my
Country in general, and which I am sure the Support and Welfare of those poor
Manufacturers, for whom I am a compassionate though mean Advocate, tends to: And
I cannot omit to tell you, That some laugh at, and ridicule the Notion of
Peoples perishing and starving, which I before mentioned: And indeed, some
years since, who would have imagined that such a thing could be, in such a
plentiful Country as England? But alas! I am now daily an eye or ear Witness
of the contrary. And if that Person who receives a bruise or stab, and for some
time after lives and lingers, and at last dies thereof, is as certainly
murdered, as he that is stabbed to the Heart, or his Brains beat out; I am
certain that for some years past, many have perished for want of necessary
Food, Raiment, Lodging and Fire, according to the absolute necessity of our
Climate, and so perishing and dying by degrees, I cannot but judge them as
truly starved, as if they had been kept from Food and Raiment altogether; only
perhaps they may be said to perish more miserably, because more slowly.

(36.) If I am herein guilty of any Error, it is of my Judgment, not my Will;
and I shall readily submit to any Conviction I shall be made sensible of; and I
do expect to be sharply attacked by such as my Education renders me incapable
to contend with: But I have so great Satisfaction in the Goodness, Justice and
Reasonableness of this Cause, that I fear nothing; and doubt not but the
Righteousness thereof will raise me up Seconds that will better maintain the
Reasonableness of what is here desired, for that vast and Necessary Body of
English Silk-Weavers, Throsters, and their Dependents, viz. As firm a
Probi^ition against the Home-expence of figured, flowered, stitched, and
stripped Silks, as Wit can invent, or Law make; and then to expend their plain
among us, is more, or at least as much, as they ought to desire, if they value
the Public Good more than their Private Interest. And by this means would
Employment be provided for Disbanded Soldiers, of whom great numbers belong to
the Weaving Trade, and its Dependants.

(37.) And for Conclusion and Confirmation of all I have said, I refer you to
that great Master of Trade and Merchandise, Sir Josiah Child, who by his late
little acting in the East-India-Company, seems to adhere to this his former
Principle, (however it is said his Practice sometime greatly contradicted it)
and with which the Weavers concluded their former Paper to the Lords, when last
defeated: And thus says he, Whatsoever advances the value of Land in Purchase,
improves the Rent of Farms, increases the Bulk of Foreign Trade, multiplies
Domestic Artificers, inclines the Nation to Thriftiness, employs the Poor, or
increases the Stock of the People, must be procuring Causes of Riches: But a
Foreign Expense, especially of Foreign Manufactures, is the worst Expense a
Nation can be inclinable to, and ought to be prevented, etc.

In fine, Sir, It Is believed the Liberty given the Press was, That you might
constantly receive full and free Information in all things relating to Public
Affairs, and the Good of the Kingdom; and that, to the best of my Knowledge and
Judgment, I have given in this Case; and I bless GOD I have not writ this for
Bread, or any other Interest, but as before said: And I thought that the making
it more Public than for your single Satisfaction, may not be Unacceptable or
Useless. And whatsoever your Wisdom determies herein, or whatever my own
Sentiments, or Belief, is thereof, I shall Acquiesce with all Due Submission,
for I am, Sir,

Yours to Command, A. N.


