A NARRATIVE Of the late ACTION Between the FRENCH AND Confederate Armies, On
Saturday, the 1. of August, 1674.

With an account of the Grand Officers, and Numbers of Common Soldiers killed
and taken Prisoners on either side.

Being two Letters, the one from Brussels, and the other from Paris.

LONDON, Printed for Phillip Brooksby in VVestsmithfield. 1674.

Brussels, August, 3/13. 1674.
YEsterday in the Morning, his Highness the Prince of Orange, and General
Souches, intending to pass their Army over a small River hard by the side of a
VVood. After a considerable part of them were got over, a strong party of
French Troops that lay in Ambuscade in the aforesaid wood, furiously sallying
forth, made an attacke upon Nine Regiments that were yet left behind, of whom
Three Regiments were immediately cut off, and almost totally destroyed, and the
rest forced to give ground, not able to withstand the fury of the French onset.
The fight whereof obliged those that were gone over the River to repair back
again to their succor; but in the mean time the French had made themselves
Masters of the Prince of Oranges Carriages, which w^^^ soon after retaken, and
three times won, and lost that day.

For the Prince of Conde sending in another fresh party of six thousand Horse,
which were met by some of our Troops of equal number and resolution put them to
a stand, and so succors being sent in from each side; both the armies became
in short time actually engaged in a fierce and bloody battle (...) the ground
on which they fought was very rough and craggy, so that the Horse though they
omitted not to use their utmost endeavors could not do that service as might
otherwise have been expected, Our Rear-guard being Spanish Troops received most
detriment, wherein the Dutch felt almost an equal share, being forced to
retreat toward the Imperialists, who composed the Van: The fight continued
with much fierceness and obstinacy on either side for many honrs, but at last
the French retreated into their Trenches, and the confederate Armies after some
pursuit, be took themselves; the Prince of Orange to his former Post, and the
Imperialists to Mons.

Certain it is there has been a very great loss of men on each side in this
notable action, but as to the certain number report as it is usual on such
occasions, speaks very variously, some telling of twenty thousand in all
destroyed, others sixteen thousand, but the most moderate and probable account
is ten thousand, which we here do thus proportion six thousand five hundred of
the French, and three thousand five hundred of our Confederate Armies. Amongst
the former are great numbers of persons of Quality, so that it is confidently
reported that not lefs than four hundred of the French Nobility and Getlemen of
note are cut off on our side, Monsieur De Cavier, and Baron de Beck are killed,
Prince Charles of Lor^^^^ (...) Pio, and Count Weldeck wounded, the Prince of
Salm, the Duke of Holstern, and the Count Marode, and the Marquised Assentar
being all wounded were taken prisoners, of which we hear the laft is since dead
of his wounds.

All reports agree that the Prince of Cr(...) in all things both as to Conduct
and Courage, (...) admiration.

Nor do we hear of any Commanders (...) their Duty, on this glorious Occasion,
particularly the (...) Governor of Maestricht has signalized himself by
extraordi^^^ (...) of Courage, which may silence their envious reports (...)
endeavored to fully his Honor about delivering up of that ^own; our
Governor, the Count Monterey by an Express (...) all the great Guns in this
City to be often discharged, (...) so ^mply sung in all our Churches, and
Victory to be burnt in all our Streets for Joy of our Success in this
Engagement.

Paris 5/15. at 12 at Night.
AFter a long expectation we have certain advice of a Battle between our
Forces, and the Confederate Troops, wherein the Dispute has been very sharp and
bloody and yet we have much reason to believe that the success i^^lu^ed to our
side, for that we are certainly informed, that our Troops have out of and
utterly defeated the Enemies Rear-Guard, and because we have taken Prisoners
several of their principal Officers, As the Marquess of Assentar, the Prince of
Salme, and others, with a considerable number of Common Soldiers, a great deal
of plunder, and some Cannon; The Prince of Con^e was in extraordinary danger,
being more than once dismounted; and the Duke of Eng^ien his Son wounded so.
Likewise are Monsieur Rochfert, Monsieur Montal, the Chevaleir de Fourill^s,
the Count of Lussanna, and diverse other Commanders of Quality; and as we are
told between 4000. and 5000. Common Soldiers lost on our side, but near twice
as many on the Enemies.

We hourly expect to hear of a second Engagement, the rather for that the
Marshal Turenna is, as we at told, forward on his March, to Join with, and
Reinforce the Prince of Con^e, with his Troops.

FINIS.

