A Letter of Resolution concerning the Doctrines of the Trinity and the
Incarnation.
YOU are pleased, Sir, to demand of me the general Reasons; why the Unitarians
(or as others now call us, the Socinians) have departed from the Catholic
Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation: in which all other Sects and
Denominations of Christians do agree; and contend also for them as Fundamental
Doctrines?

It Is true, Sir, that we are alone, in our Belief or Opinion of but one GOD, or
(what is the same) but one who is GOD; even the GOD and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: And as we are alone, so we are a little Flock: If our Reasons
were no more considerable than our Number, we should be very contemptible to
our Opposers. The Case was once otherwise; there is no Ecclesiastical Historian
but has noted the time, when All the World was against Athanasius, and
Athanasius against all the World. But it avails very little, that we can say,
Fuimus Trees, suit Ilium. And that which you have demanded of me, is, What are
our Reasons; not how it has come to pass (or by what Persecutions) we have been
reduced to so small a Number?

I answer therefore; Our first Reason is,

The Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation, have no solid or good Foundation
in Revelation, or Holy Scripture.

A Stranger in this Controversy, who hears the Sermons or reads the Books of
some of our Opposers, would think, that the Question between us and the
Trinitarians is on their side as clear in Revelation, as it is confessed to be
on ours in Point of Reason: for this is the Fault with which they continually
charge us, that we exalt Reason above Revelation; and that we pretend, that a
Force, how great soever, is to be put upon the Words of Revelation, rather than
we will admit of any Doctrine which is contrary to Reason.

Now, First; It Is not true, that we prefer our Reason before Revelation: On the
contrary, Revelation being what GOD himself has said, either immediately, or
by inspired Persons; it is to be preferred before the clearest Demonstration of
our Reason. But because we cannot suppose, without Disrespect and Injury to
GOD, to his Goodness and Veracity, that he has so made us that our Faculties
should be deceived, in what they clearly and distinctly perceive; and because
GOD has in Revelation frequently appealed to our Faculties, to our
Understanding and Reason; therefore we conclude, that what is clearly and
distinctly discerned by Reason as true or false, is so. And from thence we
infer; that what is false in Reason, can never be true in Revelation, or by
Revelation. So that whatsoever in Revelation does seem to contradict Reason,
can be nothing but our Blunder; our unskilful injudicious and too close
Adherence to the mere Letter and Words of Revelation.

It Is so true, that we ought to interpret the most clear Revelation, so as not
to contradict evident Reason; that if we neglect this Rule, we shall often times
make Revelation contrary to, and inconsistent with it self; as well as to or
with Reason: We shall be forced (for Instance) to say, the Lord Christ is a
Rock, a Way, a true Vine, a Door, and twenty more such different and contrary
things; because Revelation has clearly and expressly called him all these.

I desire therefore to know, Why our Opposers take care not to make themselves
contemptible by maintaining it is a Scripture-Doctrine, that the Lord Christ is
a Rock, a Way, a true Vine, a Door; on the Account that such a Doctrine, though
founded on the express Words of Holy Scripture, is contrary to Reason: and yet
have no regard to avoid the Imputation of Folly, Incogitance and Inadvertence,
by contending this is a Scripture-Doctrine, which is no less contrary to Reason
and natural Light; even this, that there are three Almighty and Infinite
Persons, and yet but one GOD. No Man ever had by Nature or Reason, nor can have
any other Notion of Three Gods, but only this; Three Infinite and Almighty
Persons. Is it supposable, that GOD should give forth contrary Manifestations
of himself? that he should teach us by Nature and Reason, to apprehend one GOD
as but one Almighty and Infinite Person; and yet command us by Revelation to
believe, one GOD is Three such Persons? Or can we our selves obey contrary
Commands, or believe contrary Manifestations, concerning the same thing, at the
same time?

This Foundation being laid, we say, Three Divine Persons, an Almighty Father,
an Almighty Son, and an Almighty Spirit, distinct from both, being in Reason
and common Sense but the Periphrasis and Circumlocution for Three Gods; so that
we can have no other Conception of Three Gods, but only Three such Persons:
that Revelation which (by Confession of all Parties) obliges me to believe but
one GOD; can never be supposed to require me to believe Three Almighty Persons.

So also, Reason assuring me, that the Disproportion between Infinite and
Finite is such, that they can never be commensurate, or made one and the same:
That Revelation, or Holy Scripture, which tells me GOD is infinite; that the
Heaven of Heavens contains him not; cannot be interpreted or understood as
bidding me believe, that a Person who is GOD or an Infinite Person (and such,
they say, every Person of the Trinity is) can be Whole and All Incarnate, that
is, united and commensurate to a finite Man.

We abide, Sir, by this Argument; here we fix our Foot, never to be removed:
that the Inconsistence of the Trinity, and the Incarnation with Reason and
natural Knowledge, being undeniably evident, therefore those Doctrines can have
no real Foundation in Divine Revelation, that is to say, in Holy Scripture.

But, Secondly, As we consider that though Revelation is to be preferred before
Reason; and always interpreted by Reason, for the Causes already given: so we
cannot but profess our selves surprised, that any should have the Confidence to
pretend, that there is clear and express Revelation, on behalf of the Trinity
and Incarnation? In the Name of Wonder, what do these Gentlemen mean by express
and clear Revelation: do they mean that they have found out some Texts, which
directly and expressly say, There is a Trinity of Divine Persons, who are but
one GOD; or which say, The Son or second Person of the Trinity was incarnate?
If they have any such Texts to produce; we shall grant them, they have an
express Revelation for those Doctrines. But in very Deed they mean no such
thing: but by clear and express Revelation they mean what was never meant by
any but themselves; nor by themselves in any other Case or Question, but this
of the Trinity. They mean, the Trinity and Incarnation are provable, by certain
most remote and strained Consequences, from some such Texts of Revelation or
Scripture; as either are of suspected Authority and Credit in the Original,
among the Learned of their own Party; or are denied by the Learnedest of their
own side, to be truly translated, or finally are interpreted by their own
principal Critics, in such manner as Socinians and Unitarians interpret them.
What is this but to say, that is an express Revelation, which is only an harsh
and doubtful Consequence, framed by themselves; and that is a clear Revelation
for these Doctrines, which the best and most knowing of their own Party
interpret to a contrary Sense?

Perhaps, Sir, you may be a little surprised at what I here affirm: but so it
is, and I make challenge to any of our Opposers to convict me of Falsehood; that
there is no Text of Holy Scripture alleged for the Trinity or Incarnation,
which all the Catholic Doctors, and some or other of the most discerning and
eminent Interpreters and Critics of the Protestants, have not acknowledged,
that it is not to the purpose of the Trinity or Incarnation. The Texts that are
cited for the Trinity or Incarnation, are either out of the Old Testament, or
out of the New.

As to the Texts of the Old Testament, the Learned among our Opposers (of all
Persuasions) laugh at those that pretend to find the Trinity or the
Incarnation, in the Books of the Old Testament: It Is universally agreed among
the more Learned Trinitarians, that (to use the Words of an Author and Book,
licensed by the famous Faculty of the Sorbon) Ex veteri Testamento nihil
praeter umbras, i. e. There is nothing urged for the Trinity out of any Book or
Books of the Old Testament, but mere Umbrages and Shadows. J. Salabert. Haeres.
domitae, par. 2 da.

Then for the New Testament, all the Catholic Doctors own, what D. Petavius
(the most learned Writer of the most learned Order among them) has thought fit
to express in these Words. They that would prove the Trinity out of only the
Words of Scripture, without taking to their Aid the Churches Interpretation and
Authority, Sudant plus satis, and suo artificio vincuntur, i. e. They sweat to
no purpose; and are beaten at their own Weapon (Scripture) by their Adversaries
the Socinians and Arians. D. Petav. de Trin. l. 3. c. 11. s. 9.

Protestants indeed have been somewhat more careful of such free and general
Acknowledgmets; because they know there is no trusting to Tradition, and the
Authority of the Fathers; on which the Catholics (so called) wholly rely in
these Questions. Notwithstanding, even Protestants have, among them, given up
to us, all their Scripture-Strengths. That Text cannot be named, which some or
other of the Learnedest Protestants have not, either interpreted as it is
interpreted by Socinians and Arians; or expressly said, 'twas not intended by
the inspired Author concerning the Incarnation or Trinity, or any Person
therein. I demand such a Text of our Opposers; and do here profess, that if
they name it not, it is because they cannot.

I will leave it here with you, Sir, Whether this first be not a just Exception
to these Doctrines: even this, that they have no sufficient Foundation in Holy
Scripture, by Confession of the most and the learnedest of our Opposers; and
that being evidently false in Reason, they cannot possibly be true in Divine
Revelation or Scripture.

Our Second Reason against them, is;

There has never yet been any Apology or Defense made (nor can be) for the
confessed Inconsistency of these Doctrines with Reason; but what is equally
applicable to the Transubstantiation, or any other absurd and impossible
Doctrine.

Our Opposers being sensible, how great a Prejudice it is to their Cause, that
their Doctrines are so directly contrary to Reason, so utterly inconsistent
with our natural Knowledge and congenit Notions; which were given us by GOD to
be Tests or Touch-stones, whereby to discern Truth from Falsehood: they have
therefore turned themselves all ways, to find a Remedy for this Evil.

The Sum and Force of what they have been observed to say, either in their
Books or Sermons, is as follows. The Trinity and Incarnation are indeed
incomprehensible Mysteries: but Almighty God has a Right to require of us, to
believe on his Word what we do not comprehend or understand. He has already
posed us with diverse Mysteries and (seeming) Contradictions to our Reason and
Capacities, in finite, visible and ordinary Objects; thereby to prepare and
dispose us, to receive with an humble Faith, what he shall please to reveal in
his Word, concerning Objects invisible and infinite. Whatsoever is matter of
pure and mere Revelation, is not to be judged by either Reason or Sense:
concerning such things there is a Necessity to acquiesce in Revelation only;
how unaccountable and wonderful soever they may seem. And if Revelation is so
express and clear concerning them; that we would believe, were it not for their
(supposed) Contradiction to Reason: in that case Reason must submit to
Revelation; else we fall into the horrible both Impiety and Foolery, of giving
the Lie to God, and preferring our Knowledge before his. What is the Union of
the Soul with the Body? how do the Parts of Matter hold together? are Bodies
made up of divisible Parts, or of indivisible? If we cannot answer these, and
diverse such like Questions, without involving our selves in great Difficulties,
and even in Contradictions: Why do we wonder, that there may be some (seeming)
Contradictions, in what we are taught about the Divine Nature, or GOD? Which of
the Attributes of GOD is not as incomprehensible, as the Trinity or the
Incarnation? Do we comprehend GOD's Eternity, by which he possesses eternal
Life, all at once; or his Immensity, by which he is whole and all present in
every Point of Space? Can a finite Mind comprehend Infinite Wisdom, Infinite
Justice, Infinite Power, or ought else that is infinite?

How many have been as confident, that the very Notion of a Spirit implies a
Contradiction; and that it is not possible there should be Antipodes: as any
Unitarian can be; that the Trinity is a Contradiction to Reason, and the
Incarnation impossible? This should make us cautious and modest; it should
serve to instruct us, that it is easy for us to mistake our own Shallowness, and
our Errors, for Impossibilities and Contradictions to true Reason.

Finally, As hot as the Unitarians are against Mysteries, and incomprehensible
things; themselves, for all that, advance as many and as great, as those which
they oppose.



You know, Sir, that I have elsewhere answered particularly and severally, to
all the Parts of this Defense: but here I will be content to answer in general;
that what will prove every thing, will prove nothing. This Defense or Proof
will serve as well for the Transubstantiation, or any other absurd and
impossible Doctrine, as for the Trinity or Incarnation.

I am resolved to keep close to clear and express Revelation: therefore our
Savior himself having said expressly, that he is (...), the true Vine, John
15.1. I maintain that as 'twas certain by Sense to those who conversed with
him, that he was a true and very Man, so it is certain by Revelation that he was
also a true and very Vine. That any Person should be a true Man and yet a true
Vine, is indeed an incomprehensible Mystery: but Almighty God has a Right to
require of us, to believe on his Word, what we cannot comprehend or understand.
He has already posed us with diverse Mysteries and (seeming) Contradictions, in
visible and ordinary Objects, both of Sense and Reason: thereby to prepare and
dispose us, to receive with an humble Faith, what himself should reveal in his
Word. That the Lord Christ is a true Man, and at the same time a true and very
Vine, is a Point of pure and mere Revelation; and no way knowable by Sense or
Reason: therefore as to his Viney Nature we ought to acquiesce in Revelation,
without further Scruple or Inquiry. The Revelation concerning it, is so clear
and express, I am (...), the true Vine; that to quarrel with this Doctrine, is
to give the Lie to God, and prefer our Knowledge before his. What is the Union
of the Soul with the Body? How do the Parts of Matter hold together? Are Bodies
made up of divisible Parts, or of indivisible? If we cannot answer to these and
such like Questions; without involving our selves in great Difficulties, and
even in Contradictions: Why do we admire that there may be some (seeming)
Contradictions, in our Lord Christ's being both a Man and a Vine? Do we better
comprehend, how GOD possesses eternal Life all at once; or how he is whole and
all present to every several Point of Space: than we apprehend, how the Lord
Christ may be both a Man and a Vine? Who can comprehend infinite Wisdom,
infinite Justice, or ought else that is infinite? but if we do not comprehend
those Attributes, why do we pretend to comprehend the Extent of infinite Power;
or to say of it, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further; thou can make a
Man or a Vine, but can not make an humane Vine, or a Viney Man? How many have
been as confident, that the very Notion of a Spirit implies a Contradiction to
our Reason; and that there can possibly be no Antipodes: as any
Anti-Scripturist and Idolater of Reason can be, that it is a Contradiction and
impossible, that a Man should be a true Vine, and a Vine a true Man? This
should make us cautious and modest; it should serve to instruct us, that it is
easy for us to mistake our own Shallowness and Errors, for Impossibilities and
Contradictions, to true Reason. And as hot as some (many perchance) be against
this Scripture-Mystery, that a Man is both a Man and a Vine; themselves find
greater Mysteries in the same Holy Scripture. It Is (for Example) a greater Leap
from Finite to Infinite, and from Man to God; than from Man to Vine downwards,
or from Vine to Man upwards: whatever Explication will make the former of these
but possible, will make either of the other two easy. We shall have no
Difficulty in apprehending; that a Man may be a Vine, and a Vine a Man; if we
can get but the Glimpse of a Conception, how a Man may be GOD, or GOD a Man; or
how there can be such a Person as GOD-MAN.

If you tell me, Sir, that this Parallel is somewhat too light in so serious
and grave a Question, as that depending between as and the Trinitarians; I must
entreat you to show me, where I have made a false Step: for if I have made
none, I must take leave to tell you; the Parallel is no more light than the
Doctrines which gave occasion to it. Mean and childish Errors are never so
effectually and successfully detected; as by the most familiar and easy
Parallels: and he that makes the Comparison, is not to be blamed; but he or
they that gave the Occasion of it. I think the Parallel I have made, serves to
show, that we are never to talk of clear Revelation or express Revelation, in
Excuse or Defense of absurd Doctrines; but that it is necessary to interpret all
both Speech and Writing, in Consistence with common Sense and our natural
Knowledge. In fine, it serves to establish this Rule; if the Person speaking or
writing, is fallible, we must try the Truth of what is said or written, by
Reason: but if he is infallible, it is always his meaning, that we should
interpret what he has said or written, by that Reason and according to those
natural Notions, which he has bestowed on us chiefly for that purpose.

I pass to our Third Reason, or third Exception, against these Doctrines.

These Doctrines are as little consistant with Piety toward GOD; as they are
with Reason and with natural Knowledge.

Piety (in proper Speaking) is that part of the Christians Duty, which he owes
to GOD. And though the Goodness of GOD had diverse other Ends (Ends respecting
the Comfort and Good of his Creatures) why he was pleased to make what he has
made: yet it becomes us to esteem and regard Piety, or our Duty and Service to
GOD; as the great End that we ought to pursue.

The chief Parts or Branches of Piety, are Praise, Love, Faith, Devotion,
Obedience. Let us see what Agreement these, or any of these, have with the
Doctrines of which we are discoursing.

1. The respectful and thankful Recognition, both in our Minds, and by our
Words, of the Works of God, and of his Divine Attributes; is what all Men call
the Praise of GOD. But does he or she thus praise GOD, who ascribe his Works,
Creation, Conservation, Miracles, all providential Acts, to any other Person or
Persons besides him, who is indeed the Author of them? But when besides this,
we give to the Gods of our own devising, the Glory of all the incommunicable
Attributes, even infinite and underived Wisdom, Justice, Power and Goodness;
when we affirm, that in all these Properties they are equal to the supreme
Father and GOD of Gods: what farther Detraction from his Praise can be
conceived, but absolute Atheism?

2. For the LOVE of GOD. How can we love the true God, in such manner as he
requires, with all the Heart, and all the Soul, and all the Mind; if we have,
and profess also to have as much Love for two other Persons, as for him who is
the only true and legitimate Object of our highest Love? If we consider that
Love which we owe to GOD, in its Causes; they are his supreme Excellence, and
his Merit and Desert toward us: if in its Effects they are a Conformity to his
Will; a Readiness, Proneness and Desire to suffer the extremest Evils, for his
Sake and Service. If therefore this Love be transferred, if it be communicated
to other Objects, besides that one to which we owe it: We do thereby and
therein ascribe to them his Excellence; we impute to them his Merit; we pay to
them his Dues. Is it no Impiety, or rather is it not a deadly Wound to true
Piety, thus to misplace the Propensions of our Minds, the Affections of our
Hearts, the Use and Service of our whole Man?

3. I do not say, How lame, but what a Monster is that Faith, that is made up
of contradictory Parts; of Propositions that destroy one another; of such
Inconsistencies, that in saying and affirming one, you (either expressly or
implicitly) deny the other?

In their Doctrine of the Incarnation they tell us; an infinite Person is whole
and all united to a finite Man. Is not this a contradictory Faith? does it not
confound Infinite with Finite, and make them to be all one? does it not destroy
all the Demonstrations of Geometry; and thereby contradict both our rational
Faculties and our Senses?

Their Doctrine of the Trinity is, in short, this. There are three Infinite,
Almighty, All-wise Persons, three eternal Beings, three absolutely-perfect
Spirits, and yet but one GOD. Is not this a contradictory Faith? Does it not
destroy our natural Ideas, our congenit Notions? For what are three Gods, but
three such Persons: and what is the Idea, Notion or Conception of but one God,
which is natural and congenit to every Man; but one Infinite Almighty All-wise
Person, one eternal Being, one absolutely perfect Spirit?

As to the late Attempts of some, to satisfy (in part) these Difficulties: you
know, Sir, how vain and fruitless they have been. Dr. Wallis says, the three
Divine Persons are only three Modes (that is, three Qualifications, or three
Respects of GOD toward his Creatures) and they make one GOD as Understanding,
Will and Memory make one Soul. But this, says Dr. Sherlock, is both Nonsense
and Heresy. How does Dr. Sherlock mend the matter? Why he has advanced an
Explication of the Trinity, which Dr. Wallis and other Orthodox Men have, in
Print, condemned as Tritheism; that is, as introducing three Gods; a far worse
Heresy than Socinianism. And thereupon they tell Dr. Sherlock, in Print also:
That though he has not been counted a Fool, yet it may become a wise Man to
change his Opinion. In a Word, they have (in civil Language) invited him to a
Recantation.

4. How is DEVOTION (another principal Instance of Piety) disturbed, by such a
strange and unaccountable Object of it? Devotion is senseless and irrational;
if the Object to be adored and worshipped, be not conceived by it. But such of
Necessity must be the Worship and Devotion of Trinitarians; if in their Prayers
they keep to their Belief. For they may talk of a Trinity; but themselves will
not pretend, that they can think it: they can have no Conception of it, no more
than of Words without Sense. We have seen very lately, that those who have
endeavored to make Sense of this (as they call it) Mystery, or to represent it
as a possible and intelligible thing; not only accuse one another of Heresy,
and demand a Recantation, but are generally disclaimed by their own Party. The
Party it self (if you mean thereby the general Body of Trinitarians) are for a
Trinity which no Man understands; or ought to pretend to give other Account of
it, than that it is an incomprehensible Mystery; and this Trinity they call
their GOD. And thus by their own Confession, that Blame and Reprimand which our
Savior gives to the Samaritans, is equally applicable to them; and what he
says of himself and the Jews, is verified in the Unitarians: Ye worship ye
know not what: we know what we worship, John 4.22.

5. As to Obedience; the last part of our Piety toward GOD, and the most
necessary: the Obligation to it, and all occasion for it is wholly taken away,
by the Doctrine of the Incarnation, and the Superstruction which Trinitarians
build thereon.

They say, GOD the Son being incarnate in our Nature, did by his active
Righteousness fulfill for us all Obedience. By his Sufferings in this Life, his
Death and Descent into Hell (which things they call his Passive Righteousness):
He more than exhausted all that Punishment, that is or can be due to Sin.
Whatsoever he did, was (they say) for us; and his Righteousness was meritorious
of Heaven for never so many Sinners: and what he suffered was in our stead
also; and one Drop of his Blood was sufficient to ransom and thousand Worlds
from the Demerit of their Sins: that is, from Hell and all other Punishments.
The manifest Consequences of these Doctrines, are these: (1.) Gospel-Obedience,
good Works, (or a good Life) are in us unnecessary and superfluous; some of
them have said, hurtful and dangerous to Justification and Salvation. (2.)
Heaven is so much every Sinner's just Due and Debt from GOD, without any
Amendment or Newness of Life on their Parts, that GOD would be unjust in giving
them no more, if more could be given. (3.) GOD should be unrighteous, if he
punished Men for Sin, though unrepented of: because we have in Christ our
Representative, both fulfilled all Righteousness, and suffered and paid a more
than sufficient Price of Redemption.

The notorious Decay of Christian Piety in all Places and Ages, since these
Doctrines have prevailed, plainly shows, That these are not speculative
Consequences only, but such real Consequences, as do much influence the
Practice of most Men. One may know and be assured, that it is these Consequences
and this Belief, which bolsters Men up in their wicked Courses; because these
are the things that comfort and support such, at their Deaths. The greatest of
Sinners go away with Peace of Mind; on the Reflection and Consideration of the
infinite Merits and Satisfaction of GOD their Redeemer. They have not, nor can
out-sin his Satisfaction and Deserts, and applying both to themselves by
believing in him; that is, by believing he merited and suffered for them in
particular: therefore they depart, assuredly expecting of GOD the Rewards that
are appointed to only Innocence and Well-doing.

I pray, Sir, desire your Friends who find Fault with us, for reviving (as they
say) unnecessary Questions, to take it into serious and impartial
Consideration; Whether Doctrines that have these Consequences, and also are
such Hindrances of the other Branches of Piety, ought not to be again (and
again) examined, whether they are (or can be) true?

The Fourth Reason against them is this;

They have crumbled the Christian Church, into innumerable and unreconcilable
Factions and Parries; so that there is no possible way of restoring Peace, but
by returning to the Belief and Profession of the Unity of God.

Next to Godliness or Piety, the Peace of the Christian Churches should be the
Wish and Endeavor of every Christian Man. But the Doctrines under
Consideration, have so divided the Churches called after the Name of Christ;
that there is no Agreement but among those Professors, who believe there is but
one GOD, or but one who is God. The Orthodox (as they call themselves) are so
multifariously divided, that they are not (perhaps) ten of them in a Party. The
whole Mobile indeed of them go under the common Name of Trinitarians; and the
Trinity and Incarnation are the general Tests of Orthodoxy, among them; but
this is an Orthodoxy only of Names and Words; for in interpreting those Words
and Names, I doubt very much, whether there are ten of them that are of a Mind.
And the Dissent among them is so bitter and unreconcilable, that the Anathema's
fly as thick and fast at one another, as at the Unitarians. As many Parties as
they are, each Party is heretical, and in a State of Damnation, in the Opinion
of all the rest. Their Divisions do respect some of them the Doctrine of the
Trinity; and some the Incarnation: I will reckon them up as they shall occur to
my Mind; without regarding that Method which might be given to Error.

1. The first Difference is about the Fili^que or whether the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father only, or from the Father and the Son? This Quarrel
divides them into two great and almost equal Parties; into the Church of the
East, and the Church of the West. The Eastern Church, that is to say, all Asia
and Africa, Greece, and the Islands of the Archipelago, all Muscovy, and the
Provinces of Illyricum, a good Part of Poland, and some Part of Hungary; all
these maintain, that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father only. But the
Western Church, that is, all the Roman Catholic Nations, and all the Reformed
or Protestants, contend that the Spirit proceeds from the Father and from the
Son. There is no Trinitarian but is in one of these Parties; and consequently
none of them, but who is an heretic and in a State of Damnation, in the
Judgment and Opinion of the one Moiety or half of his Fellow-Trinitarians. But
because this damning of one another, upon this Difference between them, has
been of late so confidently denied by Dr. Wallis and Dr. Sherlock; I am obliged
to take notice of the public Declarations of these two Churches, against one
another. The whole Western Church, in the first Canon of the second general
Council of Lions, says, Damnamus and reprobamiss, etc. i. e. We damn and
reprobate all such as presume to deny, that the Holy Spirit does eternally
proceed from the Father and from the Son. On the other Hand the Eastern Church
excommunicates as Scismaticks and Heretics all the Latins (so they call the
Western Churches which hold the Filioque; or that the Spirit proceeds from the
Father and from the Son) on every Holy Thursday, and all other principal
Holy Days. F. Simon Crit. Hist. of the Religions of the East, p. 16, 17.

2. These two mighty Parties are again subdivided, into a great many factious
Differences. Into those (for instance) who teach, that but one Person of their
(supposed) Trinity was incarnate; and those who contend that the whole Trinity
was incarnate.

3. Into those who say, all the Persons in the Trinity are equal; and those who
(on the contrary) ascribe to the Father a Prerogative and Superiority, above
the other two Persons; a Superiority not only (...) of Order, and (...) of
Dignity, but (...) of Power.

4. Into those who say the Son is (...), i. e. has underived Godhead, or is
GOD of himself; and those that hold he is GOD of GOD, that is, deriveth from
the Father, Being, Life and Godhead.

5. Into those who say the Son is so the Wisdom of the Father, that he is the
Wisdom by which the Father is wise; and into those who deny this, as little
better than Blasphemy; because it is as much as to say, that the Father (without
the Son) is (...) and (...), irrational and unwise.

6. In what Sense the three Persons are consubstantial (that is, have the same
Substance or Essence, or Nature) does unreconcilably divide them; the Ancients
from the Moderns, and the Moderns from one another. One Party says, Father,
Son, and Spirit, are generically (or if you will specifically) consubstantial;
that is, as three Men are consubstantial to one another, because all of them
partake of the same specific Nature, even the humane; or as three Guineas are
consubstantial, being all of them Gold. The contrary Party says, the Divine
Persons are numerically consubstantial, i. e. do all subsist in the self-same
Substance or Essence: as Understanding, Will and Memory, subsist in one and the
same Soul.

7. They dispute, whether upon the Incarnation of the Son, the Lord Christ
became two Persons; or was only one Person, whom they call by a compound and
monstrous Name (...), or GOD-MAN. If the latter of these, the Virgin Mary was
(...), Mother of God; if the other, she was only (...), Mother of Christ.

8. Besides the Dispute about the Persons, there is a great Controversy among
them, about the Natures in the Lord Christ. The Eutychian Trinitarians say, the
Lord Christ has but one Nature; the rest of them (called Melchites) affirm two
distinct Natures, an humane as well as a divine.

9. It Is controverted among them, whether in Consequence of the Incarnation of
the Son or WORD, there followed two Wills and two Actions in the Lord Christ;
or only one Action and one Will? Also,

10. Whether by Virtue of the Incarnation, the Body of the Lord Christ became
incorruptible, and exempt from humane Affections and Passions; or not? Farther,

11. Whether the humane Nature of Christ, being personally united to the Son or
WORD, were not by Virtue of that Union Omniscient; knowing even when the Day of
Judgment shall be?

12. Whether this Proposition be Orthodox, or on the contrary the Seed of the
Devil, one Person of the Blessed Trinity has suffered for us?

13. Whether the Son and Spirit have been once generated and breathed, and that
from all Eternity; or whether they are continually and always begotten and
breathed?

14. They all agree, that there are three Divine Persons: but to make this no
Agreement, they are divided in explaining what is to be understood by the Word
Persons. Some say, the three Persons are three Properties of the Divine Nature.
But these agree not; some making them to be Properties in the same numerical
Nature. Others take them to be discretive Properties in the specific Nature.
Others say, the three Persons are three Modes of Subsistence, or three
Relations, or three Respects of GOD toward his Creatures, or three Operations.
Others affirm the three Persons to be so many several or distinct intellectual
Beings and Spirits; as distinct from one another as three humane Persons (or
three Men) are.

15. To add now no more. They require us to believe, that three Almighty
Persons are but one God: but in what Sense or Manner, three such Persons make
one GOD, is not only disputed among them; but they are here also Apostates and
Heretics to one another. Some resolve this Mystery (as they call it) by an
Unity or Oneness of Affection, Will and Design, between the three Persons: as
St. Paul, speaking of himself and Apollos, says, He that planteth, and he that
waters, are one, 1 Cor. 3.8. Others say, the Son and Spirit are one GOD with
the Father, by their most perfect Subordination or Subjection to him: All three
making but one Menarchy, are therefore said to be but one GOD.

Again, some say, the three Persons are one GOD by their Emperichoresis, or
In-being in one another. But others by Emperichoresis, or being in one another,
understand only this, that the Relation of Father supposes and includes that
of Son, and vice versa; and not that by an impossible real In-being, the three
Divine Persons are as it were mingled, and so confounded.

We have been told by others, that the three Persons are three distinct Minds
and Spirits; and that the only possible Union of Spirits is mutual
Consciousness: So that (in short) the three Divine Persons are one GOD, as (or
because) they are intimately conscious to one another Thoughts and Actions.

Finally, Some say, the three Persons are one GOD; by their all having the same
numerical Essence or Substance.

There are, Sir, you see, no fewer than fifteen Divisions among our Opposers;
each Division consisting of two Parties at the least, some of them of four or
five. So there are in all about forty Parties of them; of which incomparably
the greater Number are Heretics and damned to all the other Parties among
them. Give me leave to make two Observations hereupon.

(1.) The great and common Boast of Trinitarians, even their Number; on the
Account of which they presume to call themselves the Catholic (or Universal)
Church, is merely a Boast. It may be (not untruly) said; They are the least of
Parties, that ever professed a Religion. To comprehend this, Sir, you need only
suppose, a Person resolving to join himself to their universal Church, and in
order thereto determining upon all the forementioned Heads of Controversy among
them. For by that time he has so done, that is, has chosen his side in all the
aforesaid Questions: It will be no less than a Miracle if he finds himself
Orthodox and Catholic, in the Opinion of ten Persons besides himself; it may
be, the universal Church will dwindle into his single Person. For these forty
Parties of Trinitarians are not all of them so many visible and associated
Sects or Churches; but diverse of them are Divisions and Heresies in one and the
same associated Church: the Members of the same Church are in these Points
divided, and heretic to one another. And the Number Forty affords. so many
Changes; that (as I said) perhaps it will be impossible to find ten
Trinitarians, who are entirely of a Mind in all the abovesaid Points and
Questions. This evidently reduces the (pretended) Catholic Church or Universal
Church, to a much more contemptible Paucity, than are the Worshippers of one
only GOD; or, as our Opposers by way of Jest sometimes call us, the little
Flock: to which (however) their Father has promised, to give them a Kingdom.

(2.) Whereas Trinitarians generally pretend; and that as an Argument which
ought to end all further Dispute about these Matters; that the Trinity and
Incarnation are Traditions derived down to our times, through all the intermediate
Ages, and by all the Churches professing Christianity: these Divisions among
them plainly demonstrate the contrary. For if the Trinity and Incarnation are
Traditions, how comes it to pass, that Trinitarians are in such contrary Tales
about them? how is it that not ten of them, perhaps not two of them, are in the
same Story concerning them? They agree in nothing but the Words Trinity and
Incarnation; and are forced to acknowledge, that those very Words are not only
unscriptural, but not very ancient. Tertullian among the Latins, and Clemens
Alexandr. among the Greeks, were the first of Christians, who used the word
Trinity: and for Incarnation, I do not remember it to be so ancient.

But I have often wondered at this Pretense of most Trinitarians, that these
Doctrines are Traditions from the first Ages of Christianity. On another
Account it is this; All the Critics (without excepting one) who have made a
Judgment of the Writings of the Fathers of the first 300 Years; and
particularly which of those Writings are genuine and uncorrupted, which wholly
feigned or otherways corrupted; I say, all the Critics constantly make this a
Note of Forgery or Corruption, if those Writings speak any what expressly or
evidently of these Doctrines, namely, the Trinity and Incarnation, and the
Questions on them depending. If these Doctrines were Traditions from the first
Ages, the higher we ascend in Time, the more express and clear would the
Tradition about them be: And in confessing that it is quite contrary, the
Critics, (that is, the more Learned of the Trinitarians) have given up the
Pretense of Tradition and Antiquity, and make it probable, I may say
unavoidable, that these Doctrines are not Traditions from the Ancients, but
Novelties, and Corruptions, and Depravations of genuine Christianity.

Whereas some have endeavored to evade this, by saying, Those Fathers have
made no distinct Mention of, or Determination in these Points; because they
were not controverted in their times, but afterward began to be disputed and
denied by Men affecting Novelty and Singularity. I answer, Nothing can be more
frivolous or false than this Pretext. For, 1. it is notoriously false, that
these Doctrines were not denied in the times of those Fathers. The Nazarens and
Theodotians are more ancient than any of the Fathers; and yet it is well known,
nay, confessed by all, that those Sects held the very Doctrines that are now
called Socinianism. 2. Admitting there was as yet none (or very little)
Controversy about these Points: yet because they are pretended to be the
Essentials and Fundamentals of Christianity, so that he that denies them, is an
Heretic; and he that knows them not, is no Christian; what can we rationally
infer but this, that the Fathers, who have not delivered these Doctrines in any
of their Writings, neither believed nor knew them; and that they are a part of
the gradual Corruptions which have so unhappily deformed the Church. 3.
Admitting once more, that there was as yet no Controversy about these
Questions, which is the thing for which these learned Men contend, and their
only Excuse on the behalf of those first Fathers; yet this makes wholly for the
Unitarians. For besides this Defect, the Fathers and first Ages have spoken in
their Creed, altogether as the Socinian Unitarians now do. The Creed called the
Apostles (because it contains the true Apostolic Doctrine and Tradition) was
the only Creed of those Fathers and Ages; it was, as one of them speaks of it,
their Regula Fidei immobilis irreformabilis, i. e. the unchangable unaltetable
Rule of their Faith. But this Creed expresses the very Doctrine of the present
Socinians, and not of the Church; as our Opposers themselves are constrained to
own. It attributes the Appellation GOD, and the Creation of Heaven and Earth,
to only the Almighty Father. It describes the Son as only a Man; declaring his
Conception by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, his Birth, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, without the least Intimation of an
eternal Generation from the Essence of the Father; or that he or the Holy Ghost
are GOD. It says no higher thing of them, than it says of the Holy Catholic
Church; I believe in the Holy Ghost, I believe in the Holy Catholic Church:
for so (all know) this Creed is read in the Original Greek, and by all the
Fathers.

Is it now, Sir, conceivable, that these Doctrines should be (as Trinitarians
pretend) a Tradition constantly preserved; when their own Critics reject the
Works of those first Fathers, as certainly spurious or forged, that speak any
what directly or explicitly of the Trinity, and other depending Points and
Questions; and when besides their common and only Creed is undeniably Socinian?

I deny not, Sir, that the Fathers of the first 300 Years, whose Writings have
been suffered to come down to Posterity, began to corrupt the true Doctrine
concerning the Person of our Savior; making him to be much greater than he
was. From about the Year 150, some of them were got into the Opinions, that
were afterward called Arianism or the Arian Trinity. But this I affirm, and
all the Critics among the Trinitarians do own it; that those Fathers spoke not
of the Trinity, and of the Points and Questions thereon depending, as the
Church now does: they so held a kind of Trinity, as not to destroy the Unity of
GOD; or that only the Father is truly and properly GOD. But this was a
Digression.

I proceed to our fifth Reason against these Doctrines.

They have been partly the direct and necessary Causes, partly the unhappy
Occasions of diverse scandalous and hurtful Errors and Heresies; particularly of
those which compose the gross Body of Popery.

It Is well observed by some, that one Absurdity (or Error) being introduced,
it is always the Ground and Occasion of many more. This Aphorism was never more
sadly verified, than in the Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation. For no
sooner were these Doctrines, by the Countenance of sanguinary and arbitrary
Edicts of the Bizantine Emperors, become the more general and current Belief
of the Churches, but there immediarely broke in after them, that Swarm of
absurd and heretical Doctrines which have no less than subverted the true and
primitive Christianity.

1. The firstborn of the Trinity was the Supremacy of the Pope. A few Bishops,
not a fifth Part of the Bishops of the Catholic Church, having presumed in the
Council of Nice, Anno 325, to determine for the whole Catholic Church so great
a Point as this; that there is more than one Divine and Eternal Person: they
sent the new Creed and Acts of that Council, to the Churches and Bishops who
had not been present at it; to be by them subscribed. Hereupon the Bishops of
Asia assembling themselves in about 30 provincial Councils, rejected the Word
Consubstantial (or of the same Substance with the Father) in which the whole
Mystery of Trinitarianism, and the Stress of the Nicene Creed, does lie: they
would by no means admit of this Word. So faith Marcus Ephesin, the most Learned
of the Greeks. Council. Florent. Sess. 5.

The Bishops of Germany and of Belgium (now the Low Countries) and of Gaul (now
France) and of the three Provinces of Great Britain, would not receive the
Creed of Nice; giving this Reason, that the Word Consubstantial is
unscriptural. So says St. Hilary, that great Adversary of the Arians and other
Unitarians, toward the beginning of his Book, de Synod.

The Bishops of Africa seem not so much as to have taken into their Archives or
Registries, the Acts, Canons, or Creed of Nice. For in the Year 418, in a
Contest between them and the Bishop of Rome; they sent to Constantinople and
Alexandria, for Copies of the Acts of the Nicene Council. Council. Carthag. 6.
Anno 418.

The Nicene Council being thus refused and despised by all the considerable
Nations professing Christianity: the Nicene Faction of Bishops began to consult
of a way, how to settle their beloved Doctrine by political Arts; and at length
they resolved upon this Expedient.

Anno 347, having got on their side the Emperor Constans; and finding that the
Bishops and Church of Rome were thoroughly in their Interests, they assembled in
Council at Sardica, and there made those famous Canons, on which (all learned
Men know) the Authority and Supremacy of the Bishops of Rome is wholly
grounded, and which those Bishops have ever since exercised. They designed by
these Canons, to secure the Bishops and other Ecclesiastics of the Nicene
Party (now called Trinitarians) in their Bishoprics and other
Church-Dignities; and to eject from time to time all Unitarians. But these
Politicians were quite out, in hoping for such an Effect: they were so far from
governing the Catholic Church by those Canons, that they served to no other
purpose, but the inslaving the Makers of them and their Successors to the Popes
of Rome. But for a fuller Account, Sir, of this Sardican Council (or rather
Conventicle) I refer you to the Acts of Athanasius, lately published, in which
the History of these Betrayers of the Catholic Church is fully related.

2. In the Year 431, it was concluded and determined by the Trinitarian
Faction, assembled in Council at Ephesus; that GOD the Son was truly and
properly incarnate in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, and was born of her; so that
Mary was not only (...), Mother of Christ, but (...), Mother of God, This
blasphemons and contradictory Conclusion being once made; immediately they fell
to worshipping and praying to her. If GOD the Son is to be worshipped and
invovated, shall we turn our Backs on the Mother of God? Shall not she be able
to help us, at least by way of Intercession, to whom the Angel said, Thou art
highly honored of GOD; and who was (as it were) Wife to GOD the Father, and
(in very Deed) Mother to GOD the Son? Father Simon, in the 3d Chapter of the
Critical History of the Religions of the East, says, It is chiefly since the
Birth of Nestorianism (that is since the Council of Ephesus) that so much
respect has been shown to the Virgin Mary. He means, she was not so much
worshipped and invocated, till that Council had determined against Nestorius,
that she is (...), Mother of GOD. But Father Simon will never be able to show,
that Holy Mary was at all worshipped or prayed unto, till the Ephesin Council
had decreed, that she is to be deemed the Mother of GOD. I do challenge him, or
any for him, to produce any Testimony of the Ancients for the Worship and
Invocation of Mary, that is so ancient as the Ephesin Council. This Father
should therefore have dealt as ingenuously and freely in this Case, as is his
manner in most others; or should have said nothing at all of this matter, but
have chose some other Instance to confirm what he had to say. He should have
owned what he knows to be the Truth, that as the Doctrine of the Incarnation
produced this impious and senseless Conclusion, that Mary is the Mother of GOD;
so that Conclusion was the Cause of the idololatrical Worship and Invocation of
her, by the far greater part of Christians; even by all Catholics (so called)
and by the whole Eastern Church.

3. After Mary was worshipped and prayed to, it soon became the Custom to pray
also to the Apostles and Martyrs, and afterward to other Saints, and reputed
Saints. For if Mary who (confessedly) was but a Woman and a Saint; though she
was Mother of GOD; can help us by her Intercession: Why may not others, who
were perhaps as great Saints as she?

4. The Practice of worshipping Holy Mary and other Saints, had been but a
little while received in the Churches; but it occasioned the Worship of their
Images and Pictures. For if the Saints are to be worshipped, then so too are
their Images and Pictures, with a relative Worship; that is, for the sake of
those whom they represent; and so that the Worship ultimately terminates, not
in the Image, but in the Saint. Even as the Royal Chair, or Throne, is
worshipped for the King's sake, though he be absent.

5. The Question about the Worship of Images, was long contested in the Church.
Those that stood for that Worship, thought it a very heinous Disrespect to our
Savior; that no Honor should be shown to his Picture or Image, no more than
if it were the Image or Picture of an Heathen God. And this was a very common
Argument and Allegation, against the Opposers of Image Worship. In answer to
this, the Fathers of the 7th General Council ( anno 754) said, There is but one
Image or Representation of the Lord Christ, (...), the Bread given to us in the
Sacrament. This Council consisted of 380 Fathers. But the contrary Party at
length prevailed; and it was concluded, both for the having and worshipping of
Images, and by way of Support thereto, that the Sacrament is not the Sign,
Image or Representation of Christ, but true and very Christ; the Bread and Wine
after the Words of the Consecration (though they agree not, which are the Words
of Consecration) being turned into the the real Body and Blood of Christ.

It Is true the Greeks used not the word (...) (Transubstantiation) till within
this 300 Years, but they used equivalent words, (...), and such like. If any
Wonder that such absurd and contradictory Doctrines, as the Transubstantiation
and the real Presence, met with so little Opposition, in the Greek and Latin
Churches; such an one may make these two Reflections. First, that those
Churches were led as it were by the Hand to those Doctrines, by certain
Consequences from the Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation, thus. There is
a Trinity of Divine Persons, one of these was incarnate in the Womb of the
Virgin; she is thereupon the Mother of GOD; if the Son of GOD is undoubtedly to
be worshipped, then so too is the Mother of GOD; if Holy Mary, then others who
were as much Saints as she; if Christ and the Saints, then for their Sakes
their Images also, which are Signs of them. But Christ has appointed the
Sacramental Elements, as the only Signs of his Body: This is a Difficulty
indeed: Therefore to defend Image Worship, we will say, the Sacrament is not
the Sign, but the very Body of Christ GOD-MAN. Secondly, it may be farther
considered, that these Churches having already swallowed so many palpable
Contradictions to Reason, Scripture, and first Antiquity in the Doctrines of
the Trinity and Incarnation; they now stuck at nothing. It became now the Note
and Mark of an Heretic, to talk of Absurdities and Contradictions, in any
Doctrine whatsoever; and the Character of a Catholic or Orthodox Person, if
one had no regard at all to such things, but only to help forward the Humor
and Current of Superstition; that is, to believe incredible Tales about the
Saints, and monstrous Opinions concerning GOD, and the Sacraments of the Church.

6. That the Holy Scriptures are not a a complete Rule, not sufficient to
direct our Faith and Practice, without the Aid and Help of the Churches
Tradition; all know is one of the Errors of the Roman Catholics, and which
they could never yet be persuaded to give up. Ask them, what ground they have
for such an Opinion? They answer as one Man; It Is notorious and undeniable that
the principal Articles of the Christian Faith, the Trinity and Incarnation,
cannot be proved by only Scripture. They profess openly and ingenuously, that
the Unitarians have certainly beaten all their Opposers at those two Weapons,
mere Scripture and Reason.

7. Another Birth of the Trinitarian Doctrines is the Papal Indulgences, with
all that Merchandise of Souls that has followed upon them. First, and by way of
Foundation it is supposed, that the Lord Christ is GOD as well as Man; and that
he being GOD incarnate in our Nature, his Righteousness and Sufferings must
needs be of infinite Value. Next it is held, that the Sufferings of Christ, who
is GOD-MAN, and of the Saints, are the Treasure which he has given to the
Church; which Treasure is to be dispensed by his Vicar, even the Pope or Bishop
of Rome. The Dispensations of this Treasure to particular Persons, by the Pope
himself, or those who are by him authorized, are called Indulgences; and have
been bought at mighty Rates, by those who thought they had need of them, either
for themselves or their dead Friends.

8. The last of their Paradoxes which I shall now mention, and which is common
to all Trinitarians, and is (by their own Confession) a necessary Consequence
of the Incarnation, is their Doctrine of the Satisfaction.

The Holy Scriptures say, Almighty God of his Grace and Goodness does pardon
our Sins, on the Conditions of Faith and Repentance on our Parts. The
Scriptures are so express in ascribing our Pardon and Deliverance from Hell and
Damnation, to the Mercy and Grace of GOD forgiving us; that Trinitarians dare
not directly deny it so to be: but then because they pretend that GOD was
incarnate, and suffered in our stead, they are forced to this Conclusion. That
God has freely pardoned, and yet was infinitely overpaid for all our
Transgressions and Sins. That of his mere Grace, the Abundance and Riches of
his Grace, he will pardon and save the Penitent, because he has received for
them a Price of Redemption, able to redeem as many Worlds; as he is pleased to
pardon or save particular Sinners.

These are the Branches growing upon the Trinitarian Stock; these the Fruits of
that Tree: But such as the Fruits or Consequences of these Doctrines have been,
such also was their Original and Extraction; as we shall see in the next, which
is our sixth Reason or Exception against them.

They are of Paganick or Heathen Descent and Original, and were introduced into
the Church by the Platonic Philosophers, when they came over to Christianity.

One of our Disputes with the Trinitarians is concerning the Original of these
Doctrines, from whom they are derived, or by whom they were invented? He that
is generally (and indeed deservedly) confessed to have written the most
learnedly on this Subject, is D. Cudworth, in the Intellectual System. The Sum
of what he says, up and down, in that large Book in behalf of the Trinity, is
this, The Christian Trinity is the very same with the Trinity of the Platonic
Philosophers: Yet we are not to think, that the Platonists were the first
Authors or Devisers of the Trinity: Plato learned it of Parmenides, Parmenides
of the Pythagoreans, Pythagoras from Orpheus and the Books of Egyptian Hermes,
and other. Hermaic Books, which Books contained the Arcane Theology of the
Egyptians. The Magisk or Chalday Oracles, and the Mithraick Mysteries, both of
them derived from Zoroaster (a most ancient and sage King of the Bactrians and
Persians) express also the Mystery of the Trinity. The Romans had their
Capitoline Trinity, which they derived from the Phrygians, they from the
Samothracians. This Consent of Philosophers and Nations makes it more than
probable, and no less than certain, that the Trinity was no humane Invention,
for how should so many jump in the same groundless Conceit; but a Theology of
Divine Original, even a Part of the Cabala Tradition or oral Law of the Jews,
which they had from* Moses, and he from GOD, which also is the Opinion of
Eusebius and Theodoret, the ablest Historians and Antiquaries of the Primitive
Church.

To make up weight I will fling into the Scale three Authorities, altogether as
considerable and authentic, as any of these alleged by Dr. Cudworth. Let them
take the Grecian Trinity, which is much older than the Roman, Phrygian or
Samothracian: Let them take the Books of Hystaspes, another most ancient and
sage King of the Medes; which Books are celebrated by Lactantius, and other
Fathers. We will also give them the Sybillin Oracles or Verses, which speak so
expressly of the Father, Son, and Spirit, and even of the Incarnation, that no
Trinitarian or Arian can deliver himself more explicitly or evidently.

He says, How should so many Philosophers and Nations jump in the same
groundless Conceit? Therefore the Trinity is a part of the Jewish Cabala or
Oral Law, and was from them borrowed by other Nations, and by the Philosophers.
I omit that the Nations and Philosophers by him mentioned are but few: But all
Men know, there was an incomparably greater Consent of Nations and Philosophers
in Polytheism, or the Acknowledgment and Worship of many distinct Gods. And
that Consideration should have made this learned Author aware, that a
surprising Consent of many is not always the Effect of a divine Tradition, but
too often of a diabolical Suggestion, or other Causes.

Again, supposing the aforesaid Consent of Philosophers and Nations; yet it is
very odly fathered by a Protestant Divine, on a Cabala Tradition or Oral Law of
the Jews. It Is one of the Principles of us Protestants, to disclaim all
(pretended) Cabala's and Traditions, whether of Jews or Christians; and to
believe there never was any other Divine Tradition, but only the Books of the
Old and New Testaments.

I am ready to dispute this Point at large with any of our Opposers, whenever
they shall think fit again to insist on it. In the mean time I take notice,
that indeed the Pharisees having devised of their own Heads diverse Doctrines
and Rites; to give them the greater Authority, they called them Traditions, and
pretended they were a Cabala or Oral Law, delivered originally by Moses. But
the sounder part of the Jews themselves, even all the Karaits disown any such
Tradition or Law* And our Savior, whose Authority I hope may be equivalent to
Eusebius or Theodorets, calls these Traditions and this (pretended) Law, not a
Theology of divine Original, but Doctrines and Commandments of Men, Matthew.
15.6, 9. Nor is there any mention or least Intimation of such a Cabala or Law,
in any of the Books of the Old Testament. And it seems incredible, that among
so many of the Holy Writers there should be no where found so much as any
Allusion to their Cabala, if indeed they had acknowledged or known of any such
thing: Why did not Esdras, when he collected into one, the scattered and
dispersed Canon of Scripture, without omitting the Proverbs of Solomon, and
others, or his Book of Love; why did he not at the same time commit to Writing,
and publish the Divine Cabala, of so much more Authority and Concernment, than
diverse Pieces by him published and added to the Law?

Furthermore, admitting the (pretended) aforesaid Consent of some Philosophers
and Nations, and also a Tradition, Cabala, or oral Law of the Jews: yet it is
certain the Trinity is no part of that Cabala: For all the World knows that the
Jews, though they strictly adhere to their Cabala, yet are so far from
acknowledging a Trinity, that this Doctrine is the very Stumbling Block which
hinders their entering into the Church. That whole Nation, and all the Sects of
them, hold the Christians to be Polytheists and Idolaters, on the Account of
the Doctrine of the Trinity. They pronounce Christianity to be a much worse
Idolatry than Jeroboam's Calves: Which were not two fictitious Gods added to
the true one; but only Images of the Cherubims, as the Cherubims were
Hieroglyfick Resemblances of the one true GOD. So that though the ten Tribes
were guilty of a kind of Idolatry, by their worshipping the true GOD under
forbidden Resemblances, (for though the Cherubims themselves were set up by
GOD's Order; yet not for Worship, or to common Sight) they were not
Polytheists; they owned with all the rest of the Jews, but one Divine Person.

I doubt not, Sir, but that you perceive, that the whole Force of Dr.
Cudworth's Argument, from the (supposed) Consent of some Nations and
Philosophers, is enervated; and that such (pretended) Consent, notwithstanding
the Trinity, is not (as he says) a Theology of Divine Tradition, but merely and
solely of Paganick and Heathen Extraction; and brought into the Christian
Church by the Platonic Philosophers, when they came over to Christianity.

I could now tell you, Sir, that whereas Dr. Cudworth brings in his
Philosophers, Oracles, Kings and Nations, as believing and asserting the
Trinity; even in the dark times of Heathenism: this is all mere Flourish and
Rhodomontade. For, first, as to the Books of Hermes, Zoroaster, and Hystaspes,
as also the Sybillin and Chalday or Magic Oracles, they are all of them
Forgeries, partly of the Jews, a little before the Nativity of our Savior,
partly of the Christians of the second and third Centuries. And this is so
generally agreed, and so clearly demonstrated by the Critics, that I was
extremely surprised to see such Authorities alleged in a Book written by Dr.
Cudworth, a Man (if any other) of true and real Learning. But so it is, that in
the Defect of genuine and solid Proofs, the most Learned must have recourse to
such as their Cause will afford. Next, as to the Nations and Philosophers by
him mentioned; the Authors that knew those Nations and Writers, better than at
this Distance of time we now can; particularly the most learned Plutarch and
Laertius; these Authors say, that those Philosophers and Nations did not hold a
Trinity, but a Duality of Principles or Gods, that is, a good and a bad GOD.
And by what they say of those Gods or Principles, they seem to mean no more
than what we are taught in Holy Scripture, concerning GOD and that malign (but
subordinate) Spirit called the Devil and Satan.

But you will say, the Platonists held a Trinity of Divine Persons. Yes, some
of them did: I say some of them; for the more learned Platonists (such as
Jamblichus, Proclus, and Plato himself) did not think their (imagined) Trinity
to be the supreme GOD; but that over their Trinity there is one most simple
Monadick or solitary Being, who is GOD of Gods, and the first Author of all
things. If you ask, How the vulgar Platonists came to stumble upon a Trinity? I
answer; They finding that the first Philosophers had called GOD, Hen and
Tagathon, or the One and the Good; as also Logos Nous and Sophia, or the Reason
(or WORD) the Mind and Wisdom: And finally, Psyche, the Soul, because he
pervades and governs the World, as the Soul does the Body: They being the most
fanciful and Enthusiastical of all Men, exceeding the Quakers in Enthusiasm,
and the Behmenists in Fancifulness and Affectation of Mystery; mistook the
aforementioned Properties of the Divine Nature for Persons, or wilfully and
affectedly allegoriz'd them into Persons. Hen and Tagathon ( the One and the
Good) they made to be the same, even the Father and Fountain of the Deity;
because all Number proceeds from One or Unity; and because Goodness (as these
Philosophers often speak) is better than Reason or Wisdom. Nous, Logos, and
Sophia, (that is, Mind, Reason, and Wisdom) being but equivalent Words, of
these they made the second Person; or (as some of them call him) the Son.
Psyche, or the Mundane Soul was the third; because Reason or Wisdom is better
than, and superior to all things but Tagathon or Goodness.

There is, Sir, a certain Fate always attending on Error, by which she is first
or last betrayed and exposed, even by those who seek to maintain and defend
her. Therefore though Dr. Cudworth has spent so mamany Sheets in discovering a
Trinity among several Philosophers and Nations more ancient than the
Platonists, yet he has somewhere unsaid all again, and confessed that the
Platonic Trinity was nothing but an Affectation or Blunder of those
Philosophers; and as I just now said, either their Mistake or their Exchange of
the Properties of the Divine Nature, for so many Divine Persons. His own Words
(at p. 206 of the Intel. System) are these; We have proposed the three
principal Properties or Attributes of the Deity. The first whereof is infinite
GOODNESS with Fecundity; the second infinite WISDOM or Knowledge; the third
infinite active and perceptive POWER. From which three Divine Attributes and
Properties, the Pythagorians and Platonists seem to have framed their Trinity.
So at legnth this learned Person has given it up to us, after so great
Endeavors to prove the contrary, that the Trinity is of mere Paganick and
Heathen Original, the Device or the Mistake of the Platonists.

Our last Exception or Reason is this.

As the Trinity, when first brought into the Church by the Platonists, did by
its natural Absurdity and Impossibility, give a Check and Stop to the Progress
of the Gospel; so ever since it has served to propagate Deism and Atheism, and
to hinder the Conversion of the Jews and Mahometans, and the Heathen Nations
not yet turned to Christianity.

You cannot, Sir, expect in a single Letter, a large and ample Proof of this
Assertion of mine: but however I will say hereupon enough to convince you, or
any other unprejudiced Person, that I am able to make such a Proof of it
(whenever it shall be denied by our Opposers) as will very much surprise the
Idolaters of these Doctrines.

For the first Part of this Assertion, I will now content my self with the
plain Acknowledgment of Lactantius, Instit. l. 4. c. 29. This learned and
eloquent Father, disputing concerning these very Doctrines, says, Fortasse
quaerathic aliquis, etc. Here some one may perhaps ask, How, though Christians
profess to worship but one GOD, yet we seem to believe and hold two Gods, GOD
the Father, and GOD the Son? This Doctrine has been a great Stumbling Block to
many, who confess that in other Points of the Christian Doctrine, we speak what
is probable and fit to be embraced, but in this they think we sumble, that we
hold a second GOD, and him also a mortal one, or one who could die.

You may please, Sir, here to take notice, that the Reason why Lactantius
mentions only two Gods, the Father and the Son; was because the Divinity of the
Holy Spirit was not yet believed, or (I think) so much as mentioned by any. The
Council of Nice it self durst not say the Holy Ghost is GOD; no, nor the
Council of Constantinople in express Terms: For as Petavius has noted the Party
of the Pneumatomacht ( i. e. those who denied the Divinity of the Spirit) were
yet the more powerful Party in the Church. D. Petav. de Trin. l. 1. c. 14. s.
14, and 21. See also Huetius, Origenian. l. 2. c. 2. q. 2. sect. 10.

As to Deism and Atheism: Some (other-ways discerning Men) have not Judgment
enough to distinguish between the corrupted and the sincere Parts of Religion,
but they consider the whole of Religion together, and judge it to be all of it
false, or all true. From these two sorts of Men proceed all the Deists, and
most, if not all Atheists. The Atheist reiects all Religion whatsoever, for the
sake of some unaccountable and absurd things, which vulgarly pass for the
principal Articles of Religion. The Deist, far more judicious, rejects hereupon
only all positive or revealed Religion, and takes up with natural Religion, i.
e. with the Belief of a GOD, whose Power and Wisdom he plainly sees in the
Structure and Contrivance of the World, and with the Dictates of Reason, and
our congenit and natural Notions concerning moral and immoral, or good and evil.

This, Sir, is not a Place to argue either against the Deist or Atheist; I had
here only to observe, that from the absurd Corruptions of true Religion, by
injudicious or fanciful Men, have and do arise all the Deism, and most part of
the Atheism with which our Age is infested.

There is so much the more Reason for our utmost Endeavors, to withstand the
farther Progress of those two, Deism and that Pest of Atheism, by purging
Religion of all the contradictory and impossible Doctrines which give occasion
to those Mistakes, because Christianity has already lost so much ground to
Mahometism or Turcism. Mahomet is affirmed by diverse Historians, to have had no
other Design in pretending himself to be a Prophet, but to restore the Belief
of the Unity of GOD, which at that time was extirpated among the Eastern
Christians, by the Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation. They will have it,
that Mahomet meant not his Religion should be esteemed a new Religion, but only
the Restitution of the true Intent of the Christian Religion. They affirm
moreover, that the Mohammedan learned Men call themselves the true Disciples of
the Messiah or Christ; intimated thereby that Christians are Apostates from the
most essential Parts of the Doctrine of the Messiah; such as the Unity of GOD;
and that he is to be worshipped without Images or Pictures, in Spirit and in
Truth. But whatsoever the Design of Mahomet was, it is certain Mahometism has
prevailed over greater Numbers and more Nations, than at this Day profess
Christianity: Nay, it has worn Christianity out of great part of Europe, most
of Asia, and all Roman Africa; not by Force and the Sword, for the Mahometans
grant Liberty of Religion to all the conquered Provinces of Christians; but by
that one Truth in the Alchoran, the Unity of GOD. The Naturalness of their
Belief of the Unity of God, and the unreconcilable Inconsistence of the Trinity
with that Belief, make it impossible ever to reconcile the Mahometans (whether
Turks, Moors, or Persians) to Christianity. This is that by which both they and
the Jews are perpetually and without Hope of regaining them, alienated from us,
that they suppose the Trinity to be the Doctrine of all Christians; and from
thence conclude, that modern Christianity is no better nor other than a sort of
Paganism and Heathenism.

The Nations also who are yet Pagans, reject Christianity for the sake of the
corrupt Doctrines against which we are arguing. Of this there has been a
calamitous Instance in the Tartars. This warlike People, who have made
themselves so terrible by their Cavalry, to the great Kingdoms of Poland and
Muscovy, and even to Germany it self, were lost to Christianity by Occasion of
the Doctrines of the Trinity, etc. In the Year 1246, Pope Innocent IV sent an
Embassage to Bati Cham of Tartary, inviting him to the Christian Religion: Bati
received the Embassage civilly; but when he heard from the Religious sent to
instruct him, what were the chief Points of the Christian Faith, the Trinity,
the Incarnation, the Transubstantiation, etc. He thanked the Pope for his
Kindness, and promised to make no Incursions into the Christian Countries for
five Years next ensuing; but withal declared himself not satisfied with the
Christian Religion, as represented to him. Immediately after the Saracens sent
a like Embassage to Bati, recommending to him (says the Historian) Mahometis
sectam tanquam plausibiliorem, i. e. The more plausible Sect of Mahomet: And
these prevailed, Bati and the whole Nation of the Tartars submitting to
Mahometism, in which they continue to this Day, and are both the Shield and
Sword of that way of acknowledging and worshipping GOD. L. Surius Comment.
rerum in Orb Gest.

These, Sir, are the Damages sustained by Christianity, by occasion of these
Doctrines: I believe by that time you have well considered them, you will
conclude, these Doctrines will never repair half the Wastes they have already
made in our Holy Religion; and that they are honest Men who are jealous of, and
desirous to inquire very strictly into the Grounds of such Paradoxical
Persuasions as have already given such deep Wounds to our common Cause of
Christianity.

I will conclude, Sir, for this time, with only telling you, that the Reasons I
have given, might all of them have been much amplified and illustrated; and
some of them greatly exaggerated. But that is a Design hardly practicable in a
Letter; the Brevity of a Letter even constrained me to lay before you what I
had to say in few Words, and in a plain and sincere Discourse, without the Arts
or Pomp of Rhetoric. Nor am I offended at it; for our Cause needs not those
Helps. Till our Opposers can extinguish Reason and common Sense in Men; while
there are any left who are not wholly Priest-ridden, who have not abandoned the
Conduct and Guidance of Reason and natural Knowledge for that of a Confessor,
that is to say, a Divine Light for an Ignis fatu^^s, or Will-a-wisp: So long (I
think) we need not be very sollicitous, whether our Discourses or Writings
concerning these Doctrines, be altogether so labored and artificial, as our
Opposers must take Care that theirs are.

SIR, I am your most Obliged and Assured.

FINIS.

