A NARRATIVE OF THE PROCESS AGAINST Madam Brinvilliers;

AND OF Her Condemnation and Execution, For having Poisoned her father and Two
Brothers.

Translated out of FRENCH.

Licensed July 17. 1676.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.



LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Edwyn, at the Sign of the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street. MDCLXXVI.

A NARRATIVE Of the Process against Madam BRINVILLIERS.
THE Prosecution of Madam d'Aubray against Madam Brinvilliers, was the last
duty which she could tender to the memory of Monsieur the Lieutenant Civil, her
deceased Husband. After she had bewailed his death, she ought to revenge it;
and the grief to see her self robbed of a Husband so dear to her, and in so sad
a manner, begot in her those just resentments she has shown against the
Authors of her unhappiness. Could it ever have been believed that the Poison of
which he died should have been given him by Madam Brinvilliers, his own Sister,
for whom he had always a great tenderness? Could one have mistrusted the hand
of one so well beloved by him? And could one with too much Zeal prosecute the
Reparation of a Crime so heinous, committed under the shelter of a friendship
endeared by Nature and Affection? The noise which so notorious an Action has
made in the World, deserves that the Public should be instructed of the truth
of things, that every one may applaud the just Prosecution of Madam d' Aubray,
and see the effect of it, without having compassion on her who wanted it for a
Person, who ought to have been so dear to her.

Madam de Brinvilliers was of Quality, being the Daughter to the Sieur d'
Aubray Lieutenant Civil; an Employment worth 50000 livres yearly: She was
Educated with great care: She had both of Wit and Estate more than was
necessary to make her happy: In her Family she had no other example but of a
perfect Honor, and irreproachable Virtue: To conclude, all things seemed to
promise in her a Life quiet, honorable and regular, answerable to the merit of
her Ancestors and her Relations. She was married about the year 1651. to the
Marquis de Brinvilliers: But Love and Interest does strangely corrupt the Mind,
what tincture soever it may have of Honor and Virtue, with violent Passions,
which seconded with opportunity and other means, become at last solely
predominant; first one accustoms himself to imagine things, then to wish them,
and finally to execute them, the Impression of a severe Education is effaced by
degrees, and one falls insensibly into the disorder occasioned by those
passions, and so becomes capable to commit the greatest Crimes.

St. Croix, the miserable St. Croix, the most wicked Wretch of all mankind, was
known to the Sieur Brinvilliers; he had seen him at the Army; and this wicked
Man, who was of mean Birth, without any Estate or Fortune, did industriously
seek his friendship, to profit of the excessive Expenses which the Sieur
Brinvilliers made. The Familiarity he had with the Husband, was soon converted
to the Lady: He had a great deal of Wit, and knew the secret of engaging her;
and after having, according to the Rules, performed all the part of Men
passionately in Love, he became so absolutely after of the Heart of the Lady,
that he completed her ruin, together with that of her Estate to which her
Husband had very much contributed, and made her Mind susceptible of all the
wicked Impressions he gave her.

The Familiarity of Madam de Brinvilliers with St. Croix, soon made a noise in
the Family: Monsieur the Lieutenant Civil her Father used his utmost endeavor
to break it; and not being able to succeed by ordinary means, was forced to
have recourse to the King's Authority, whose Order he obtained to Arrest the
Gallant, which he did as he was in the Coach of Madam Brinvilliers, conveying
him to the Bastille, where he remained a Prisoner a whole year. What rage did
not this create in these two Lovers, whose Pleasures were thus disturbed, in a
manner so outrageous? The desire of revenge does easily seize a Spirit full of
despair; but what could Madam Brinvilliers do without an assistance as wicked
as was that of which she was deprived? Could she in any other find those
Counsels and Helps for the executing the Revenge she meditated against her own
Father?

In the mean time St. Croix was in the Bastille, where he learnt very strange
Lessons of an Italian, who was a Prisoner with him, and was a great Artist in
making of Poisons: He finding a man enraged with the affront he pretended to
have received, and believing him capable of the greatest Crimes, imparted to
him his most detestable Secrets. In short time St. Croix became very expert in
them; and after his liberty, came and presented himself to Madam Brinvilliers,
in a capacity to offer her a sure way to be revenged. Their correspondence grew
more intimate than it had been before, and was increased by the opposition it
had from others: And now their principal thoughts were how to prevent the
Disquiets that might be given them, and to revenge those they had already
suffered: Wherefore the Relations must be put out of the way, who were always
troublesome in this particular; and Poison was the Infallible Means which Madam
Brinvilliers and St. Croix composed at one Glaser an Apothecary; on the other
hand she had an Eye to the Estate of her Family, which would be a great help to
re-establish her ruined Fortune. She then resolves, and being animated with
these three motives of Love, Revenge, and Interest, she receives from St. Croix
the Poison which she gave her Father, who in 1666 going to Offernon, which
belonged to him, to settle matters with his Tenants; Madam Brinvilliers
accompanied him; and taking the advantage of the time, she put her poison into
some Broth which she gave him, which worked so violently, that he was
immediately taken with extraordinary Vomitings; and all other the effects of
it; insomuch that he was forced to return to Paris, without finishing his
affairs. He lay in great torment till his death, which followed soon after. Oh
the miserable Wretch, that could poison her Father with her own hands.

Messienrs her Brothers remained yet, and they inherited the trouble and
impatience their Father had had, at the dishonorable commerce of their Sister
with St. Croix; they used their endeavors to break it, and drew upon
themselves the same revenge. See the manner. St. Croix had had a Servant named
la Chaussee, worthy of his affection and confidence; him they got into the
Family of Monsieur d' Aubray the Counselor. Had the private Engagement this
Fellow had with St. Croix been known, without doubt he would have mistrusted
him, and never have trusted him in his Family. But this Secret was kept from
him; and this Misereant had all the opportunity possible to poison the whole
Family.

One day as he waited at Table at the House of Monsieur Aubray, the Lieutenant
Civil, where Monsieur d' Aubray the Counselor dined, he affected to stay in
the room when all the other Servants were gone out for the second Course, and
having put some of his Poison into a Glass of Drink, he gave it to the
Lieutenant Civil; the Dose was so strong, that the Lieutenant, at the first
tasting it, rose from Table in an amazement, crying our, Brother, your Men
would poison me. Could one believe that so just a suspicion should not have
been further examined, and that they would have been satisfied with the excuse
of the Servant, who said, That the Glass had, without doubt, been used to give
a Purge to one of the Servants that was sick, and that that had left a
bitterness behind it, which the Lieutenant perhaps tasted.

At length la Chaussee finished what he had before begun: For attending
Monsieur d' Aubray the Counselor to Villiquoy, where was likewise Monsieur d'
Aubray, the Lieutenant Civil, in April 1670, he had opportunity to mingle his
poison in a Pie; of which seven persons that did eat were very ill; but
Monsieur the Lieutenant Civil was extremely formented: He returned from
Villequoy the 12 of April, altogether changed through what he had suffered; his
pains continued, and accompanied him to his death, which was in June following.

Monsieur d' Aubray the Counselor held out longer; but la Chaussee. had all
the opportunity imaginable to give him another Dose, being in his Family. He
died soon after, with the same symptoms, and with the same circumstances as his
Brother. After their death, they were both opened, and by the report of the
Sieur Bachat their Physician, it appeared,

That for the three last days, which Monsieur the Lieutenant Civil lived, he
grew lean; very dry, lost his appetite, vomited often, and had a burning in his
stomach: And having been opened in the presence of him, of Duvaut and Dupre
Surgeons, and Gavart an Apothecary, they found his stomach all black, the
Liver gangreen'd and burnt, etc. which must have been occasioned by poison, or
a humor which sometimes is so corrupted, as to have the same effects as poison.
That Monsieur d' Aubray the Counselor was sick three months, his distemper
being violent, and like to that of his Brother, viz. a violent Fever; no
appetite, his body burnt, and parched outwardly, great restlesness in body and
mind, which are almost undoubted signs of poison. Nevertheless it may happen,
that a Cacochymie may have the same effects.

The death of so many in one Family, made a great noise every where; and
whether through what the Physicians might have said, or through the
extraordinary symptoms of a disease, so rare and unknown, and yet common to a
whole illustrious Family, the report went, that Messieurs d' Aubray were
poisoned; La Chaussee, the cruel Minister of the passions of others, had so
cunningly behaved himself, that never any suspicion was had of him: He had even
so far gained the favor of his Master, that to recompense his services, he
left him, as he was dying a Legacy of 100 Crowns. But behold what discovered
all these things, which otherwise must have been wrapped up in an eternal
silence, and buried in the grave of Messieurs d' Aubray.

Saint Croix being suffocated with the vapors of the poison he prepared for
others, died so suddenly, that all his Goods were sealed up by the Officers,
whose care it is, before his greatest Confidents knew of his misfortune. La
Chaussee imagining, that he might be able to draw some advantage from this
accident, came thither, and made his opposition in these terms.

Opposition of la Chaussee, who said, That it is seven years since he served
the deceased: That he had within two years given him to keep for him 100
Pistols; and 100 Crowns, which were in a Linen Bag behind the Window of his
Closet: And that in the said Closet are several Papers which concern him; which
said Moneys and Papers he demands.

This Wretch, to whom nothing was due, by this Act gave occasion for the
suspicion which was had of him; and his contrivance, which engaged him in the
affairs of St. Croix, made him do and say things; which brought him to that sad
death of being broken upon the Wheel.

In the mean time Madam de Brinvilliers was in terrible pain to know what was
become of the little Cabinet, which was in St. Croix's Closet, in which were
all the poisons. She went to find out the Commissary to get it into her hands
at what price soever; she was not sparing of her money; she offered and did all
that was possible to have it, before it was opened.

The Familiarity which she had had with this wicked Wretch was public, every
one was informed of it, and therefore no body wondered that she had made him her
confident, to keep that Cabinet for her; but her very eager and extraordinary
manner of demanding it gave occasion for some suspicion; which made the
Officers the more difficult in the matter, who proceeded with all exactness to
take off the Seal, and to make an Inventory of the said Cabinet, as follows.

In the Closet of St. Croix was found a little Cabinet about a foot square; the
Key was found on a shelf in the Closet. At the opening of the Cabinet was found
half a sheet of Paper, written as follows.

I humbly pray those, into whose hands this Cabinet may fall, to do me the
favor to restore it with their own hands to Madam the Marquis of Brinvilliers,
dwelling in the New Street of St. Paul; seeing that what is in it concerns her,
and belongs to her only; and that there is nothing which can be of any use or
profit to any other person whatsoever. And in case she be dead before me, to
burn it, and all that is in it, without opening or stirring any thing: And to
the end none may pretend cause of ignorance, I swear by the God, whom I adore,
and all that is most Sacred, that nothing be imposed, which is not true, in
case my just and reasonable intentions, in this particular, are contravened. I
charge both in this and in the other World their Consciences for the discharge
of mine, protesting, that it is my last Will. Done at Paris this 25 of May,
1672. Signed, St. Croix. And below was these words. There is one Packet
directed to Mr. Penautier, which must be rendered him. There was likewise found
a Packet, sealed with eight several Seals, on which was writ, Papers to be
burnt in case of death, not being of any consequence to any person. I humbly
pray those, into whose hands they may fall, to burn them; and I charge their
Conseiences to do it, without opening the Packet. In this Packet was found
two others, filled with Drogue de Sublime.

Item, Another Packet with six several Seals, on which was the same
Inscription, in which was found half an ounce of Sublime in powder.

Item, Another Packet with six several Seals, on which was the same
Inscription, and in it were three other Pacquets; in one was found half an
ounce of Sublime; two ounces in the other, and a quarter of an ounce of Vitriol
Romain. In the third Packet, Vitriol prepared. In the Cabinet was found a
square Viol of a pint, full of clear Water; which having been examined by
Monsieur Moreau, Physician, he said, He could not tell the quality of it, till
he bad made an Experiment.

Item, Another Viol of a quarter of a pint of clear Water, with a whitish
Settlement at the bottom; of which Moreau says the same as of the former.

A little Earthen Pot, in which was three quarters of an ounce of Opium.

Item, A Paper folded up, in which were two drams of Sublime in powder.

A little Box, in which was a kind of Stone, called the Infernal Stone.

Another Paper, in which was an ounce of Opium.

Apiece of Anthimoine, weighing three ounces.

A paper with Powder, under a cover, on which was written, To stop the loss of
blood in Women. Moreau said, That it was made of the Flowers of Quince, and of
the Core of dried Quince.

Item, Was found a Packet, sealed with six Seals, on which was written, Papers
to be burnt in case of death, etc. as above; in which were found thirty four
Letters, which, its said, were written by Madam Brinvilliers.

Item, Another Packet sealed with six Seals, which had the same Superscription
as above, in which was found twenty seven several pieces of paper, on each
whereof was written several curious Secrets.

Item, Another Packet with six Seals, on which was the same Superscription as
above, in which was found 75 Livers, directed to diverse particular persons.

Thus you have seen the Inventory of this dreadful Cabinet. Will it not be
said, that St. Croix was very Religious, and that he was very well with Heaven,
seeing under the reverence of all that was Sacred, he pretended to rob the
World of the knowledge of the Legacy he left to Madam de Brinvilliers A^
execrable Man* must he escape Humane Justice! and could not Paris have the
pleasure, to see this public Enemy of the lives of men, so much the more
dangerous, as the more secret, suffer by the hand of the Hangman a thousand
torments, to revenge as many deaths, of which perhaps he was guilty*

Who does not see the great Interest which Madam de Brinvilliers had, to get
his Cabinet into her own hands? she omitted nothing to effect it; and when she
saw her endeavors were vain, she resolved to withdraw her self. She departed in
the night from her Lodging, and appeared no more, But as a person who
endeavored by her flight to avoid the just punishment of the Crimes of which
she was guilty.

Finally, by the counsel of her own Relations, she retired out of the Kingdom
to seek among Strangers the security, which she could not have in her own
Country. She flies then, while Lamane Procureur, qu Chastelet appears, in the
Verbal Process concerning the taking of the Seal. The Act follows.

Has appeared Alexander de Lamane, Procureur of the Dame de Brinvilliers, who
says, That if in the said Cabinet, as is alleged by the Widow of St. Croix,
there has been found a promise, signed by her, of the sum of 30000 Livers; it
is a thing that was gotten of her by surprise, which even in case her hand be
proved, she supposes she is able to show why it should be declared Null.

This Promise or Obligation was found in the Cabinet of St. Croix; the Date is
remarkable, for it was at the same time that the Messieurs d' Aubray were
poisoned. In the mean time, la Chaussee affrighted with what he was told of the
strange things that were found in St. Croix's Closet, showed so much of
confusion in his actions and discourse, that he increased the suspicion men had
before of his crimes. He was Arrested, Convicted, Condemned, and Executed.
Madam de Brinvilliers was involved in that prosecution, and from that time was
judged criminal: And on those Proofs that then appeared against her, and those
that were produced afterward, she was Arrested at Liege, where, after having
wandered through several Countries, she lived under a false name.

The better to understand her case, it is necessary to examine what has been
said by the Witnesses, and what she has done, said, or written her self. Which
we shall briefly do.

The two first Witnesses against her, are the two Confidents of her Crimes, St.
Croix and la Chaussee. For what regards St. Croix, we need only read the Paper
found in his Cabinet. It is unnecessary to add any reflections, which may
render it the stronger against Madam Brinvilliers, every one may see with what
execrations he assures, that the whole Cabinet belonged to her, etc. Then
consider the great eagerness of Madam de Brinvilliers to get this Cabinet into
her hands, as, among other Witnesses, the Clerk of the Commissary Picard
declares, who depones:

That Dame Brinvilliers came to his Master about ten at night, asked to speak
with him: To which he answering, His Master was in bed, she bid him go up, and
tell him, That she came to demand a Cabinet that belonged to her, and would
have it without opening. The Commissary having sent down word that he slept,
she said she would send her Servant for it the next Morning.

Now see what la Chaussee declared after having been put upon the Wrack,
touched without doubt with remorse, which ordinarily closes the last minutes of
a wretched life,

La Chaussee being released from the Wrack, Monsieur the Rapporteur being
withdrawn, about half an hour after la Chaussee prayed him to return: He told
the Rapporteur, That he was guilty; that St. Croix had told him, that the Dame
Brinvilliers had given him the poison, to poison her Brothers; that he had
poisoned them in Water and Broths; that he had put a Reddish-water into the
Glass of the Lieutenant Civil at Paris, and a clear Water into the Pie at
Villequoy; that St. Croix had promised him 100 Pistols, and always to keep him;
that he had given St. Croix an account of the effect of the poison. That St.
Croix had given him often of those Waters; that St. Croix had told him that the
Dame Brinvilliers knew nothing of his poisonings, but he believes she knew of
them, because she always discoursed to him of his poisons; that she would have
obliged him to fly, and gave him two Crowns to be gone; that she asked him,
Where was the Cabinet, and what was in it; that if St. Croix could have put any
body near Madam d' Aubray, Wife to the Lieutenant Civil, he would perhaps have
done it to poison her; that he had a great mind to poison the said Lady.

This Declaration of a Dying Man, needs no Commentary. The difficulty which
seems in those places which appear to contradict each other concerning the Dame
Brinvilliers, in that St. Croix said, he had received the poisons he gave to
her Brothers from her, and yet that she knew nothing of his poisonings, is very
easy to be explained. It may be that of all the poisonings of St. Croix, she
did only precisely know of those of her Brothers: but for those it is very
plain she did know them; and that she gave the poison, that is, that she
consented, advised, and ordered the poison. That Wretch St. Croix has perhaps
destroyed so many persons; and has so often given new poisonous Waters to la
Chaussee, that he was ashamed to boast of all his Crimes, even to his greatest
Confidents: so taking this particular expression out of the general
Declaration, it remains notorious that she knew of his poisoning tho Lieutenant
Civil, and the Counselor her Brothers. Let Us now pass to the other Witnesses.

Cluet Sergent says, That he saw la Chaussee serve as a Lacquey to the
Counselor d' Aubray, whom he had likewise seen in the service of St. Croix;
that he had told Madam Brinvilliers, that if the Lieutenant Civil did know that
la Chaussee had belonged to St. Croix, that he would not take it well; that she
had answered him, Good God, tell it not to my Brothers, they will give him the
Bastonade, it is better that he get something than another. Wherefore the
Deponent said nothing to the Sieurs d' Aubray, though he saw la Chaussee go
daily to St. Croix and to Madam Brinvilliers, who courted St. Croix to have her
Cabinet, and would have him give her his Note for 2 or 3000 Pistols, or that
otherwise she would cause him to be stopped. That she had said, That she would
not have any body see what was in the Cabinet, that it was a thing of great
consequence which concerned her. The Deponent adds, That after the opening the
Cabinet, he telling Madam Brinvilliers that the Commissary Picard had told la
Chaussee that he had found strange things there, she blushed, and changed the
discourse; that he asked her whether she was accessory, and that she answered,
wherefore I* that la Chaussee ought to be sent into Picardy; that it was long
since she had been at St. Croix Lodging to have the Cabinet, and that if she
had got it, she would have caused his throat to be cut. This Deponent adds
further, That saying to Briancourt, that la Chaussee was taken, and that he
would tell all, he answered, Behold a lost Woman! That the Demoiselle d' Aubray
having said that Briancourt was a Rascal, he had answered, That she knew not
the Obligation she had to him; that some would have poisoned her and the
Lieutenant Civil, and that he had prevented it. That he, the Deponent, had
heard Briancourt say that Madam Brinvilliers told him, that there were ways to
make away with people that displeased her, and that she always talked of poison.

Edme Huet, Wife to Brisceir, says, that St. Croix went every day to Madam
Brinvilliers; that she saw in a Cabinet belonging to the said Lady two little
Boxes, in which she saw Sublime in paste and in powder, which she knew very
well being the Daughter of an Apothecary. Adds, That the said Lady having one
day Dined with company, and being brisk, showed her a small Box, saying, There
was wherewithal to revenge her self on her Enemies, and that it was full of
Successions, and then put it into her hands, and being returned from her
Gaiety, said to her, Good God, what have I told you? do not tell it to any
body. That Lambert Clerk of the Palais had told her the deponent, that he had
carried the said two Boxes to Madim Brinvilliers from St. Croix; that la
Chaussee went often to her House; that not having been paid Ten Pistols which
were owing him by the said Dame, he went and made his complaints to St. Croix,
and threatened to tell the Lieutenant Civil what he had seen, which was the
reason that the said Ten Pistols were paid him; that the said Dame de
Brinvilliers and St. Croix carried always poison about them, to make use of if
they were taken.

Laurence Perrelle living with Glazel the Apothecary, deposes, That he has
often seen a Lady come to his Master with St. Croix, that the Footman told him
it was Madam de Brinvilliers; that he would lay his Head it was to compose
poison; and that when they came, they left their Coach at the Foire of St.
Germain.

Marie de Villeray, a Gentlewoman attending the Lady Brinvilliers, deposes,
That since the death of Monsieur d' Aubray the Counselor, la Chaussee came to
find the said Lady, and spoke to her in private; that Briancourt told her that
the Dame Brinvilliers was the death of honorable Persons, who might be a help
to her Children; that he daily took Orvietan for fear of being poisoned; that
he was afraid of being murdered, because she had told him her secret
concerning poisoning; that Mademoiselle d' Aubray ought to be acquainted with
the intention some had to poison her; that there was likewise a design against
the Governor of the Children of the said Lady.

Francois des Grais exempt, deposes, That according to the Kings Orders he
seized at Liege the Dame de Brinvilliers; that he found under her Bed a
Cabinet, which he sealed up; that the said Dame desired of him a Paper that was
there, which was her confession, and that he refused her; that on the way to
Paris the Dame de Brinvilliers told him, that she believed it was Glazel which
made the poison for St. Croix; that St. Croix had given her a meeting at the
Cross St. Honor, showed her four small Bottles, and told her, See what Glazel
has sent me, that she asked him for one; that St. Croix told her, that he would
rather die than give it her.

Adds, That at Mastricht Theria would have corrupted his Archers, and offered
them 1000 Pistols if they would save her.

Theria being confronted, says, (he was obliged to witness against her, to save
himself) That being parted from Mastricht, la Violette told him, That the Dame
Brinvilliers had a Pin, which she would put into her mouth; upon which he said
to her, That she was very miserable, and that he very well saw, that what was
said of her was true, that she had poisoned her whole Family. To which she
answered, That if she had, it was through wicked Counsel. That one has not
always good moments.

Claude Rolla Archer deposes, That seeing the Dame de Brinvilliers would
swallow a Pin, he said to her, What, will you make away with your own life? Are
you not contented to have poisoned your Family? To which she answered, If she
had done it, it was through wicked Counsel.

Anthony Barbier Archer deposes, That he was present when the Dame de
Brinvilliers was arrested; that being at Table, and drinking out of a Glass,
she would have bitten a piece of it. That she had told him, That if he would
save her, she would make his fortune. That she had written several Letters to
Theria. That during the whole Journey, she did all she could to swallow Glass,
Earth, and Pins. That she proposed to him to cut the throat of de Grais, to
kill the Valet de Chamber of Monsieur the Commissary. That he should take and
burn the Cabinet; that to that end he should bring a lighted Match to burn all.
That after being brought to Paris, she had written to Monsieur Penautier of the
Conciergeric; that she gave him the Letter, and that he made her believe he
carried it.

Frances Roussel say, That she has been in the service of the Dame de
Brinvilliers. That she gave her one day some preserves to eat on the point of a
knife; that she was ill presently after. That she gave her likewise a piece of
Gammon of Bacon, which she eat, and since that time has had great pains in her
stomach, it being as if her heart was pricked. That she has been three years in
this condition, and believes she is poisoned.

There were several other Witnesses, who deposed against Madam de Brinvilliers;
but should we particularize them all, they would fill many sheets: Let it
suffice, that nothing was heard from them but of poison. Briancourt has not as
yet spoke but perhaps he will one day discover to the world the truth of many
things, of which he is the depository.

Let us now look into the conduct of the Dame de Brinvilliers, in what she has
said and writ: She is a clear Witness against her self; and without stirring
from her, you may find a conviction of all her crimes.

A good and pious action may remain unknown to the world, and the mind of Man
made for virtue, gives it self thereunto without the knowledge of any one;
while a wicked person cannot disguise his crimes, and that his Soul
continually, alarmed with the fear of being discovered, puts on his
countenance the true color of his apprehensions, and publishes to the world
the crime he would hide. This Morality's not her seasonable; but it is certain,
that we see few wicked actions, which the carriage of the Authors do not sooner
or later discover.

Let us examine what were the sentiments of the Dame de Brinvilliers. We find
she had an extreme Love for St. Croix, and a great desire to restore her ruined
Fortune; the rage and despair to see her Love offended, and her Pleasures
disturbed, put into her thoughts many things against her Relations; and the
hope of the advantage of so ample a succession, made her follow with her
pleasure the first dictates of her revenge. She expects all from the cunning of
her Gallant, to whom she shares her Estate. She relies much upon her own
quality, and on the great Relations she still had. Finally, abandoning her self
to Love and Interest, she gives the poison to her Father, and causes the same
to be done to her two Brothers. Behold the crime, none see her conduct which
discovered it. And first let us examine the promise of 30000 Livers made to St.
Croix, received by him, the date of which agrees with the time of her poisoning
her Brothers; and who will not judge, without making any farther reflection,
but that it was the price of their lives. She lived in greater familiarity with
St. Croix than before; she favorably receives la Chaussee; she boasts of the
services he had done her. Can any one doubt, but that this was a deference she
had for her Accomplices? But let us proceed, and observe her eagerness to have
that Cabinet, her despair that she could not effect it. Let us follow her to
London, thence into Germany, and other Foreign Countries, where she still
carried with her the fear and apprehension of the punishment she had merited.

These sufficiently discover her guily. But now let us see what she answers for
her self in the Interrogatories that were put to her.

She said, That she withdrew out of France, because of the affair she had with
her Sister-in-law. That in her Cabinet were several Papers of her Family, and
amongst others her General Confession; that when she writ it, her mind was
wholly distracted; that she knew not what she writ, her Spirit being wholly
discomposed, to see her self in a strange Country, without assistance of her
Relations, reduced to borrow a Crown.

Being interrogated on the first Article of her Confession, what House it was
she set on fire? answered, Never to have done it; that when she writ it, her
mind was distracted.

Being interrogated on six other Articles of her Confession, answered, That she
knows not what it was, and that she remembers nothing thereof.

Being interrogated whether she had not poisoned her Father and two Brothers,
said, She knew-nothing of it.

Being asked, whether it was not la Chaussee who poisoned her Brothers, said,
She knew nothing of it.

Being asked whether she knew not, that her Sister could not live long, for
that she had been poisoned; answers, That she foresaw it, for that her Sister
was subject to the same infirmities that she was. That she had lost her memory
since the time she writ her Confession. Confessed to have left France at the
advice of her Relations.

Being asked wherefore that advice was given her, answers, Because of the
affair of her Brothers. Confesses to have seen St. Croix after he came out of
the Bastill.

Being asked whether St. Croix had not persuaded her to make away with her
Father, says, She does not remember; neither does she remember whether St.
Croix gave her any Powders or Drugs; or whether St. Croix said, That he knew
the way to make himself rich.

Being asked wherefore she made a promise of 30000 Livers to St. Croix, said,
That she pretended to put this sum into the hands of St. Croix, to make use
there of when she should have need, believing him to be so much her friend, as
not to let it be known to her Creditors. That she had an Indemnity from St.
Croix, which she has lost in her Journeys. That her Husband knew nothing of
this promise.

Being asked whether this promise was made before or after the death of her
Brothers, said, She could not remember, and that it was nothing to the purpose.
And afterward she said, That St. Croix caused one of his Friends to lend her
the same sum, and desired her to make the said promise to him.

Confesses to have been twice at Glazar about some indisposition.

Being asked about the Letters written to the Sieur Penautier, says, That if
she did write to him to cause Martin to escape, it was to try the fidelity of
Barbier Archer, in whom she pretended to have great confidence.

Being asked what interest she had to ask advice of Penautier, said, That she
prayed him, that if he had any Friend, to employ them in her affair.

Being interrogated wherefore she assured him, that she would do what ever he
advised her; answered, Knows not wherefore; but that the condition in which she
was, demanded counsel of all the world.

Being asked wherefore she writ to Theria at Maestricht, to take away the
Process, said, She knew nothing of it.

Being asked wherefore in her Letter to Theria, she said, She was a lost woman,
if he did not get the Process into his hands: said, She did not remember.

Said, That she did not perceive her Father was ill, neither in his going to,
or return from Offemon, in 1666.

The Cabinet of St. Croix having been showed her, said, That it did not belong
to her, that she knew it not.

Says, That she had had no dealing with Penautier, but for 30000 Crowns, which
he ought her.

That her Husband and herself had lent Penautier 10000 Crowns, which he repaid;
since had had no commerce with him.

That it was with the advice of her Parents that she reclaimed the Cabinet
found with St. Croix.

And now we might insert the Copy of the many Letters found in St. Croix's
Cabinet, which declare the great confidence they had in each other, and the
engagement that was between them: See one more remarkable than all the rest.

I have thought fit to put an end to my life, and for that purpose I have taken
this evening of that which you so kindly gave me; It is of the composure of
Glazer. And by that you shall see how willingly I sacrifice my life to you. But
I do not promise you, that before I die, I shall not expect you in some place
to bid you the last Adieu.

One may be cruel to others, but rarely is one so to his self; one often
threatens himself, but seldom punishes; pardoning himself for the most part, in
hope to escape public Justice. And thus Madam de Brinvilliers outlived her own
threatenings; which lets us however see the use she pretended frequently to make
of such a Remedy, and the excess of fears which tormented her, and inspired her
with such dismal resolutions.

The Letters which she writ to Theria at the time that she was Arrested at
Liege, do sufficiently manifest that she then looked upon her self as a lost
Woman.

In the first Letter she writes to him, That he should come in diligence and
take her out of the hands of her Guard.

In the second she wrote, That they were only eight persons, that five might
rout them.

And in the third, That if he could not come and relieve her out of the hands
of those that carried her away, that he should at least attache the Commissary,
that he should kill the Horse of his Valet de Chamber, and two of the four
Horses that drew his Coach; that he should take away the Cabinet and the
Process, and that he should throw them in the fire, otherwise she was lost.

The Letters she writ during her Imprisonment to the Sieur Penautier, gave
likewise great evidence against her; in which she sufficiently declares her
fears and apprehensions, tells him of the danger she was in, gives him an
account of her carriage, and that she disguised things as much as she could,
etc. Which Letters were still brought to Monsieur the Procureur-General by
Barbier the Archer, in whom she had so much confidence as to entrust the
dilivery of them

Finally, none can doubt, but that Heaven, the great Revenger of wickedness,
permitted that when she was seized, there was found in her Cabinet a faithful
Relation of her Life: Those that speak in her favor, call it a Confession, and
under that name would bury in silence all it contains. The Dame de Brinvilliers
said that she writ it when she was in a frenzy, and her mind distracted, and
that it ought to be rejected as of no proof. It is a Memoire of several Sheets
of Paper, where appears nothing of disorder or fury, but in these horrible
crimes that are there related. This being a frank Confession as well of those
crimes of which she was accused, as of many more, did contribute very much to
the clearness of her Conviction; of which there was before sufficient proof.

Thus far you have an account of the Crimes that were charged upon the Dame de
Brinvilliers, and of the most considerable particulars of her Process, which
depended some time, the Judges spending whole days in the Examination of
Witnesses, the confronting them to the Lady accused, and receiving her defense;
who in the mean time was guarded very strictly to prevent her offering any
violence to her self by poison or otherwise.

But now she enters upon the last Scene of her Life, and comes to suffer the
shame and punishment which her evil Actions had merited: for the Judges after
long and serious Consultation at last condemned her, and accordingly pronounced
sentence upon her. And because she had not made any Confession of the Crimes of
which she was accused, it was ordered that she should be put to the Wrack, to
extort that from her by torment, which hitherto she wanted ingenuity to do of
her own accord.

The 17 of July was appointed for the execution. In the morning early she was
called upon, to be put upon the Wrack; which she prevented by a frank and open
Confession of all matters: She avowed the Crimes of which she was convicted;
Gave an account of several things that before were not so fully know. And as to
her self did not spare to give the History of her whole Life, and of all the
Actions of it: She lamented her acquaintance with St. Croix, the cause of all
her misfortunes; and for the rest, behaved her ^elf with a great deal of
Resolution and Christian Disposition. And though she was very weak, having
suffered much by sickness; yet with a great deal of firmness and undauntedness
she went to suffer what the Public Justice of the Land had inflicted on her.

From the Prison in the Concirgerie she walked barefooted, and naked, only
covered with a Linen Robe, carrying a large Wax-Taper in her hand, accompanied
with the Officers of Justice, and 500 Archers, (who are as it were the Sheriffs
Men) to the Church of Nostre-Dame; where kneeling before the great Gate of the
Church, she made her Consession; that done, she was put into a little Cart, and
carried with the same Guard to the Greve, the ordinary place where Malefactors
are executed, where a Scaffold was erected: being come thither, she entertained
those that were about her several hours with a Relation of all the remarkable
passages of her Life, which she did, without any the least sign of fear or
apprehension of her approaching death; yet with a great sense of the wicked
Actions she had committed, for which she desired the pardon of all good people.
It would be too long to particularize here all she said: It is enough to add,
That having almost wearied her self with much speaking, she concluded all with
the usual acts of Devotion, and undauntedly submitted her Neck to the Ax: Her
Head being cut off, it was together with her Body burnt, and the Ashes thrown
into the Air.

FINIS.

