CONSIDERATIONS ON THE EXPLICATIONS OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY, By Dr.
Wallis, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. S -- th, Dr. Cudworth, and Mr. Hooker; as also on the
Account given by those that say, the Trinity is an Unconceivable and
Inexplicable Mystery.

Written to a Person of Quality.

Printed in the Year MDCXCIII.

CONSIDERATIONS on the Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, etc.
SIR, it is the principal Design of both Testaments, by Confession of all
Parties, to estabish the Worship and Belief of one only God; 'twas for this
that all the Books of the Old Testament were written, and delivered to the
Jews; and for this the New was bestowed on the Gentiles.

Of Jews and Gentiles, as the Apostle observes, There were none that
understood, none that sought after (the true) God: They were all gone out of
the way; they became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was
darkened: Professing to be wise, they became Fools; and changed the Truth of
God into a Lie, by worshipping the Creature, and doing Service to them who were
not by Nature Gods. This was the Condition of both Jews and Gentiles, when
first the Law, and then the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the
Image of God, shone out upon them. In the Law, the Jews were charged, Ye shall
have no other Gods but ME: and again, Thou shall know no other God but ME. In
the Gospel the Gentiles are taught, There is one God, and there is none other
but He: There is no other God but one; God is one. Exodus 20. 3. Hosea 13. 4.
Mark 12. 32. 1 Cor. 8. 5. Gal. 3. 20.

These and an hundred more such like, clear and express Declarations of holy
Scripture, have been the occasion, that the Unity of God, or that there is but
one God, is the first Article of Faith, both with Jews and (true) Christians.
From the Christians and Jews, it has been learned and embraced by all the
Mahometans, and is now the general Belief even of the Pagan and Idolatrous
Nations: for tho these last own and worship many Gods, yet they (commonly) own
but one who is Supreme, Infinite, Almighty and Pre-eternal; they make the other
Deities to be but the Ministers of his Providence and Will, and their Mediators
with Him.

But that there is an Almighty and All-wise Mind, the Maker of Heaven and
Earth, and of all the Creatures and Kinds in them, we discern plainly by the
Order, Beauty and Stability of Things; and more especially, by the admirable
Designs in the Whole, and in all the Parts of the Creation: But as this Divine
Beauty and Order, and those numberless and most useful Designs, Aims and Ends
seen in the Creation, do evince that there is a Thinking, Designing and
All-powerful Mind, whom we call GOD; so they no way intimate to us, that there
is more than one Creating and Governing Mind, or GOD. They demonstrate to us
(beyond exception) that one such Mind there is, but not that there is more than
one: therefore we may say, that we can own and worship but one such Mind, or
but one God, because we know of no more. Of one we are certain, by the Order
and Design of the Parts in the World: of more than one, we have no manner of
Proof; therefore we cannot own, or worship, or but talk, or even think of more.

But the Revelation made to us in holy Scripture is Categorical, Apodictical,
Express and Direct: there we are told plainly, and in terms, There is no other
God but one; there is one God, and there is none other but He; the Lord thy
God, the Lord is one; God is one.

As this Doctrine is so clearly delivered in Scripture, so good Christians have
been always very jealous; that neither directly nor indirectly, neither in
express Words nor in Consequence, any thing should be said or held contrary
thereto. They have considered, that Polytheism and Atheism are much the same
thing: as it is much one to acknowledge, and contend for more Kings of England,
others besides King William, and to renounce or deny him to be King of England.
Both the Covenants, the Old as well as the New, are between Us on the one part,
and the one true God on the other part: he covenants to be our God, and our
exceeding great Reward; we covenant to be his People, and his only: this
Covenant is manifestly dissolved, and the Premium, or Promise of Eternal Life,
annexed to our Faithfulness to this Covenant, is utterly forfeited; if we take
to our selves any other, besides Him with whom we are in covenant, and who
alone is true God.

The Guilt of Polytheism, or of affirming more than one God, being so very
great; and the Forfeiture thereby made so unspeakable, and the Unity of God
being so often and so expressly delivered in holy Scripture; it is an amazing
Circumstance, that Polytheism is not only found among Christians, but is also
the more general and prevailing Belief of Christian States and Kingdoms. It is
true, we all agree in the words, There is one God, and there is none other but
He: but when we come to explain our selves on these words, the incomparable
Majority of Modern Christians are found to affirm three Gods, and not one only.

One would have thought that these words, Thou shall have no other Gods but ME,
the Lord thy God is one Lord, thou shall know no other God but ME, there is
none other God but one, God is one: I say, one would have thought these
Declarations to be so plain, and so uncontestable, that a Question could never
have arose concerning their meaning. But so it is, that there are a great many
Senses given of these Words, which Senses are contrary to, and destructive of
one another.

The Doctrine of the Unitarians concerning God.
THe first of these Senses is the Unitarian. For the Unitarians say, there is
none other God but one, God is one; the plain, obvious and indubitable meaning
of these words is this, there is but One, who is God, or a God: One God, say
they, is to be understood in the same natural, sincere and unsophisticated
Sense; as when we say one Sun, one Earth, one World. When the Scriptures, say
they, speak to us of so high an Object as God; when they tell us, there is one
God, and there is none other but He; when they declare this Faith to be the
very first of all God's Charges, or Commandments to Men; without doubt they
speak without Artifice or Querk, they have no double or deceitful meaning; they
don't lay Snares for us, by intending such a meaning as is contrary to the
usual, the grammatical and proper Sense of the Words.

There is but one God, say the Holy Scriptures; where can be the Ambiguity of
such usual and plain Words? the meaning of the Terms One and God, is perfectly
known to all Men; Why do we study Subtilties and Finenesses, with which to
deceive our selves into Polytheism, and to destroy the Simplicity of the Faith?

When God says in the first Commandment; Thou shall have no other God but Me,
he speaks to all Men, to the illiterate, to the sincere, and even to Children,
as well as to those who are practiced in the Arts of deceiving and being
deceived, by a Disguise of Words, and by captious Forms of speaking. If his
meaning therefore was, there is an Almighty Father, who is God; he has an
Almighty Son, who also is a God; and besides these, there is an Almighty Spirit
distinct from the other two, and a God no less than either of them: if (I say)
this was his meaning, would he have couched it in such words as these, There is
none other God but one? or in these, There is one God, and there is none other
but He? or would he have said, Thou shall have none other God but ME? Could the
Wisdom of God it self find no other words but these, which are so directly
contrary to such a meaning, by which to express himself; and that too to those
who were utterly incapable of apprehending such a Sense in them?

These are the words which God spoke upon Mount Sinai, with Thunders that shook
the Earth and Heavens, I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other God but
ME. They tell us his meaning was, there are three Almighty, All-knowing, and
Most good Persons, each of them (singly and by himself) God, and all of them
jointly Creators of all things: Now who would have thought it, that this should
be the meaning of no other God but ME? Without doubt, the Texts and the meaning
are as far from one another, as any the most contradictory Propositions can be:
and till they can remove this first Commandment out of the way, it will be
impossible for Men of Sense to be of the Trinitarian Persuasion; I mean, if
they be also sincere, if they suffer not themselves to be blinded by the
Interests, or awed by the (vain) Terrors of the present false World. Our
Opposers themselves grant, that when the Israelites first heard this
Commandment, they understood it, and could then no otherways understand it, as
the Unitarians now do, namely thus, Thou shall never own any other Person as
God, but only Me who now speak to thee. God Almighty suffered this Sense of his
Words to pass current for upwards of 1500 Years: But then, say they, he sent
our Savior and his Apostles to give another Sense of them; nay, a contrary
Sense. The Apostles and our Savior had it in Charge to tell us, that no other
God but Me, was as much as to say, God the Father, and God his Son, and God the
Holy Ghost, three Divine Persons, each of them Almighty, each of them
All-knowing and most Good, and each of them God. But I verily think, had the
Apostles indeed pretended this to be the Interpretation of the first
Commandment, they would not have found a single Person who would have believed
or received them. For these good Men had not (nor desired) Penal Laws, Prisons,
Confiscations, Deprivations, Exclusions from the common Privileges of the
Society, by which to awe Men's Minds, to profess, and even to believe that black
is white, and white is black. It would have been told them by all their
Hearers, that the Sense of Words is unalterable; and that even the greatest
Miracles cannot authorize an Interpretation evidently contrary to the Text. If
the Speaker had been only a Man, yet the Sense of his Words when actually
spoken, can never be changed by any Authority whatsoever: If Heaven and Earth
were miraculously destroyed to confirm an Interpretation that disagrees with
the Natural and Grammatical Sense of the Words, it will (for all that) ever
remain a false Interpretation.

Cardinal Bellarmine is extremely puzzled with this Difficulty; he saw plainly,
that the first Commandment (and other Texts of the Law) is conceived in such
words, that the Israelites could not think there were three Divine Persons, but
only one Divine Person. But the Reason, says he, of this was, because the
Israelites having lived long in a Nation where they owned and worshipped many
Gods; if they had been told of three Divine-Persons, (or of God the Father, God
his Son, and God the Holy Ghost) they would most certainly have apprehended
them to be three Gods. This, says the Cardinal, is the Reason why the Doctrine
of the Trinity was reserved to the Times of the New Testament. Bellarm. de
Christo, l. 2. c. 6. Notandum est, Deum in vetteri Testamento noluisse
proponere Mysterium Triuitatis express, quia Judaei incapaces erant, and quia
recens exierant de Egypto, ubi colebantur multi Dii, and intraturi erant in
terram Chanaan, ubi etiam multi babebantur Dii, ne videlicet putarent, sibi
tres Deos proponi colendos^ voluisse tamen Deum adumbrare hoc Mysterium; ut cum
in Novo Testamento praedicaretur, non videretur omnino Novum. q. d. The
Doctrine of the Trinity was not propounded expressly to the Jews in the Old
Testament; they were incapable of it, because coming out of Egypt where many
Gods were worshipped, and entering into Canaan where also many Gods were
acknowledged, the Jews would have thought that three Gods had been propounded
to them to be worshipped. Nevertheless it was hinted, or shadowed to them, lest
when it came to be preached in the New Testament, it should seem altogether a
new thing.

In reading the Works of this Cardinal, I have often had this Thought, That
provided his Works were but bulky and learned, he never cared what other
Property they wanted: no one can deny that his five Books against the
Unitarians, entitled by him De Christo, are the most learned of any that have
been written against us; but they have no Wit, and are (throughout) most
injudicious. What can be more unthought or silly, for instance, than this vain
Elusion? God speaks to the Jews, says he, as if he were but one Person,
because they (living among People who acknowledged many Gods) would have
mistaken three Divine Persons to be three Gods. How came it to be more safe or
seasonable, or less liable to Misinterpretation, to instruct Christians in the
Belief of three Divine Persons; than it would have been to teach the same
Belief to the Jews? The Jews, says the Cardinal, would have mistaken, they
would have thought the Trinity (an Almighty Father, an Almighty Son, and an
Almighty Spirit) to be three Almighties, and three Gods; so this Mystery was
not preached to them. What a Narrowness of Thought and Consideration is implied
in this Answer; for, was not the whole Christian Church taken from among such
Nations, who all worshipped and owned many Gods? The Reason alleged by the
Cardinal, if it were good for any thing, must also have prevented the
Revelation of that (pretended) Mystery to any of the Christian Nations and
Churches.

I might also ask the Cardinal, why he has so much better Thoughts of
Athanasius, than of Moses, and the Prophets? Athanasius knew how to compose a
Trinitarian Creed, in the most express and particular manner, that might be
delivered out to all the Churches, without the least danger of leading them
into any Mistake about it: but Moses and the Prophets, tho inspired by God,
wanted this Dexterity. They, poor Men, were forced to speak (falsely) of God, as
if he were but one Person, not a Trinity of Persons, lest they should commit
some dangerous Blunder in the wording of their Doctrine, and so lay an occasion
of Polytheism in the way of the Jewish Church; but Athanasius, and the Nicene
Fathers have happily got over this Difficulty, they have blessed the Christian
Churches with a pair of Creeds, worth an hundred first Commandments.

But to be short; the Unitarian Explication of the Texts, which say there is
but one God, is, that there is but one who is God, or but one Divine Person,
but one who is Almighty, All-knowing, and perfectly Good. Our very Opposers
confess that this was the ancient and first Sense of the Words, so the Faithful
understood them for 1500 Years together. They confess too, it is a very Natural
and a very Rational Sense; that it has no Difficulties, no Mysteries or
Monstrosities in it. They are constrained also to own, that the
beforementioned Texts alleged by the Unitarians, are so read in all Copies
both of the Hebrew and Greek, and can no other ways be rendered from the
Original Text; or more clearly thus, as to these Texts there is no Variety or
Difference in the reading, in the Copies of the Original, nor any Uncertainty
in the Translations of those Copies. This is a very great matter, and cannot be
said, nor is so much as pretended, for the Texts are urged by Trinitarians;
they have been often challenged to produce but one Text for their Doctrine of
the Trinity: but either it is otherwise read in the most Ancient and Eminent
Copies of the Greek and Hebrew, or it is easily and naturally rendered and
translated to another Sense; or it is given up by their own (ablest)
Interpreters and Critics, as wholly impertinent, and no Proof of the Doctrine
in question. From these confessed and acknowledged Premises, we have these two
necessary and unavoidable Consequences. 1. That the Account which the
Unitarians give of God, and his Unity, is the very Voice of Nature and Reason,
supported by such Texts of holy Scripture, as have neither Uncertainty nor
Ambiguity. 2. That the Trinitarian Faith is at best but precarious, uncertain
and doubtful; because it is not only disclaimed by Reason, but it has no other
Scripture-Proofs but such, concerning which there is no Certainty, either how
they are to be read in the Originals, or how they are to be translated from the
Originals into the Modern Languages. No Faith or Doctrine whatsoever can be
more certain than the Proofs are on which it is grounded: if those Proofs are of
suspected Authority and Credit, or of uncertain meaning and sense, the Doctrine
it self must be altogether uncertain, suspicious and precarious. But because
you expect from me a Letter, not a Volume, I will say no more now of the
Unitarian Hypothesis, but will briefly (as I can) compare and consider the
Hypotheses, or Explications advanced by our Opposers.

Of the Explication by Dr. J. Wallis.
ALL Men know, that the Difference between the Unitarians and their Opposers
the Trinitarians, is (in few words) this, Whether there be more than one Divine
Person, or more than one Person, who is true and most High God? The Unitarians
say there can be but one Divine Person; because, not to mention the
Scripture-Proofs of it, a Divine Person being as much as to say a Divinity, or
a God; if you say, there are more Divine Persons, you therein and thereby say
there are more Gods. As three Angelical Persons are three Angels, and three
Human Persons are three Men: so three Divine Persons in Grammar and common
Sense, are three Divinities; which (all grant) is as much as to say three Gods.
So they. But, says Dr. Wallis, Here Is a reasoning why it is grounded on this
silly Mistake, that a Divine Person is as much as to say a Divinity, or a God;
when indeed a Divine Person is only a Mode, a Respect, or Relation of God to
his Creatures. He bears to his Creatures these three Relations, Modes, or
Respects, that he is their Creator, their Redeemer, and their Sanctifier: this
is what we mean, and all we mean, when we say God is three Persons; he has
those three Relations to his Creature, and is thereby no more three Gods, than
he was three Gods to the Jews, because he calls himself the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

Three Human Persons, say the Socinians, are tres Homines, or three Men, and
three Angelical Persons are three Angels; therefore three Divine Persons are,
in Grammar and common Sense, three Divinities, or Gods: Where, I pray, did they
learn this Stuff? Not from Tully; that learned Orator, and great Master and
Director of elegant and proper speaking, would have taught them, that an Human
Person is not as much as to say Homo, or a Man, but is a Qualification, a
Capacity, a Respect, or Relation of one Man to other Men. n^o unus tres
Personas, says Tully; i. e. I being but one Man do sustain (or am) three
Persons, that of my self, that of my Adversary; and that of a Judge. See here,
one Man sustains (or is) three Persons, an Advocate, an Accuser, and a Judge,
without being three Men: Why should it be thought incredible, or harsh, to say
with the Church, three Divine Persons are but one God, when Tully makes those
three other Persons to be but one Man?

This is the Sum of what Dr. Wallis has said in eight printed Letters, and in
three Sermons that were preached to the University of Oxford.

Sermons that have been preached to the University, and not censured by them,
must be supposed to contain nothing Heretical, no nor Dangerous, Scandalous, or
Heterodox. But besides that these Sermons have passed so great a Test, as that
of the University of Oxford, the Doctor assures us, that he has been thanked
and complemented, in a great number of private Letters, on account of his
Sermons and Letters: some of these Letters written to him have been published;
and it does appear, they were indeed written by able Men. We must also take
notice of two other Considerations in favor of these Letters and Sermons of
Dr. Wallis: the first is, that Dr. S -- th (Author of the Animadversions on Dr.
Sherlock) having taken particular notice of the Letters written by and to Dr.
Wallis, speaks respectfully of the Authors of them, calling them Reverend and
very Learned Persons, without making the least Reflection on his Doctrine, as
Heretical, or as Heterodox. The second is, Dr. Sherlock himself, tho Dr. Wallis
had expressly said in his Answer to W. I. that Dr. Sherlock's Doctrine does
imply Tritheism, and that so much had been proved upon him by W. I. yet does
Dr. Sherlock, who is so little wonted to carry Coals, pass by this Affront and
Imputation which no Clergyman ought to bear; nay he even fawns upon the Oxford
Doctor, in his late Answer to the Stander by.

But a very surprising thing has happened; Dr. Wallis writes in Defense of the
Trinity and the Athanasian Creed; his Explications are allowed by the
University of Oxford, and even applauded by great numbers of Learned Men who
profess to be Trinitarians: and yet after all, the Socinians in their
Observations on the Letters of Dr. Wallis, profess that they are of his Mind;
they even say, that in Honor of him they are content to be called Wallisians.
This is very odd; for it follows, that either the Socinians are the true
Orthodox, and their Opposers Tritheists; or else, that this good Doctor is a
Socinian, and knows it not.

Those that say, without doubt the Socinians understand their own Doctrine, are
very picquant upon Dr. Wallis; they pretend themselves very desirous to be
informed, what might be in the Doctor's Mind, to apologize for the Athanasian
Creed and the Trinity, and yet to asperse at the same time his own Patriarch
Socinus, and his dear and close Friends and Brethren the Unitarians; especially
in such an heinous manner as we see in his third and fourth Letters. They say,
either the Man is Wood, or he has written after that fashion, only to give
occasion to the Socinians, as in effect it also happened, to appear more
bright, by a through and unanswerable Vindication of themselves: for so it is,
that wronged Innocence and Virtue are rendered more conspicuous and lovely, when
injurious Calumnies are wiped off.

They say farther, that it is not to be much regarded that so many have
complemented Dr. Wallis for his Letters; for what Assurance have we that the
Writers of them are not secret Socinians, and that they only banter the good
Doctor? As for the University of Oxford, to whom these Sabellian and Unitarian
Sermons were preached, it is very usual for the old Men that preside in that
University, to sleep at Sermons, especially at dull ones. But you are not to
think, say they, that these Sermons or Letters were ever licensed to the Press
by the University; or that the Doctors there understand so little, as to
mistake a disguised Sabellianism or Socinianism, for the Trinity of the
Catholic Church.

The three Persons, says Dr. Wallis, are but three Relations, Capacities, or
Respects of God to his Creatures; he is their Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier;
and in this Sense of the word Person, God is three Persons. But then because
God has also the Capacity or Relation of a Judge, and of an Oeconomus, or
Provider, and many more; we must not say that God is only three Persons, he is
five at the least, besides I know not how many more.

Furthermore, this newfangled Socinian or Sabellian has introduced a Trinity
of Divine Persons; that were but of yesterday. The Churches Trinity are all of
them from all Eternity; Coeternal, says the Athanasian Creed; before all
Worlds, says the Nicene Creed: but Dr. Wallis his three Divine Persons, the
first of them begins with the Creation, and the second is no older than the
Crucifixion of our Savior; for God was not a Creator before he created any
thing; nor a Redeemer, till those words were spoken by our Savior on the
Cross, It is finished, i. e. The great Work of Redemption is accomplished.

The three Divine Persons believed by the Church, begat one another after a
wonderful manner: Will Dr. Wallis, being the oldest Divine of England, instruct
Novices that are desirous to learn, how his Persons begat one another? How did
Creation beget Redemption, and from all Eternity, that is, before either of
them were; for Creation it self is but Coeval with the World: and how was
Sanctification, we must not say begotten, for that is Heresy when you speak of a
third Person; but how did it proceed from Creation, and from Redemption?

Dr. Wallis, say they, will find it as hard to account for these Difficulties,
as to double the Cube, or even to square the Circle, which the most learned
Mathematicians think to be impossible. He is not, say they, to think that he is
Orthodox, because he has escaped the heavy cudgelling that has all fallen on
Dr. Sherlock; it is not because his Doctrine, but because his Luck has been
better than that Doctor's. In a word, whereas the Church believes three real
subsisting Persons, Dr. Wallis has taught a Trinity of External Denominations,
or Accidental Predications only. Creation, Redemption and Sanctification are
Acts of God's free and sovereign Will: he was under no necessity to create, to
redeem, or to sanctify; they are all Effects of his most voluntary and every
way free Love: if therefore the Mystery of the Trinity, so much hitherto
contested, be nothing else but Almighty God, considered as the Maker, Redeemer
and Sanctifier of his Creatures; it is a Trinity only of three Denominations or
Names, and of Predications purely Accidental; and besides that, it is no manner
of Mystery, but the most intelligible and obvious thing in the Word; nor was it
ever denied, either by Sabellians or Socinians.

Thus it is, Sir, that diverse learned Persons speak concerning the Trinity
maintained by Dr. Wallis: I, for my part, will add nothing to the Observations
I have formerly made on Dr. Wallis his Letters; only (I pray) take notice here
with me, how well the Cadmean Brethren agree among themselves. Three Divine
Persons, says Dr. Wallis, are the three Relations of God to his Creatures; he
made, he redeemed, he sanctifies them; this is the Holy Trinity. Out upon it,
says Dr. Sherlock, it is Nonsense and Heresy both; for the Divine Persons are
three Beings, three Minds, three Spirits, all of them living, subsisting, and
conscious to one another.

No, no, that is as much too much, says Dr. S -- th, it is neither so nor so,
but as I have explained it in my eighth Chapter of Animadversions on Dr.
Sherlock. The Explication of the Trinity by Dr. Sherlock, says Dr. S -- th, is
a treacherous and a false Defense of that Mystery; he has advanced a Notion,
that immediately and unavoidably infers three Gods: and if he had lived in the
times of the sixth General Council, he would have incurred the Penalty of
Deprivation. Pref. p. 2, 7, and 8.

Well, I hope Dr. S -- th has at length told us the very true Doctrine about
the Trinity. Yes, he has (without question) laid down the very Explication of
the Schools, the Doctrine or Explication generally received in Universities; I
doubt not it would be approved by most of the Chairs of our European
Universities, or Schools of Learning: he has verily acquitted himself like a
Man of Learning and Wit. For all that, Dr. Cudworth, in his Intellectual
System, has largely and clearly proved these two things. 1. That this Trinity
of the Schools is quite different from the Trinity held by the Fathers, and
that by them it would have been reckoned no other than Sabellianism. 2. That as
the first Inventors of it were Peter Lombard and the Schoolmen; so it has no
other public Authority, but that of the Fourth Lateran Council, held in the
Year 1215. He says, it is a gross piece of Nonsense; that it falls not under
Human Conception; neither (says he) can it be in Nature. This is the Judgment,
which this great Philosopher and Divine makes, of the Explication propounded
and defended in Dr. S -- th's Animadversions on Dr. Sherlock. And in very deed,
Dr. S -- th's Explication can (fitly and properly) be called by no other Name,
but an absurd Socinianism, or Socinianism turned into Ridicule; as we shall
see, when we come to consider it, in particular.

Mr. Hooker, the celebrated Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity, gives yet
another Explication of the Trinity; he descibeth it to be the Divine Essence,
distinguished by three Internal and Relative Properties: this Explication
differs as much from Dr. Wallis as any of the rest; for Dr. Wallis's three
Persons are all of them External Denominations or Predications. But these
Differences, Sir, among our Opposers, will appear to you most clearly, without
my needing to point at them; in the Accounts I am about to give, of their
several Explications of their Trinity, and the Observations I shall make on
them. Therefore I pass on, to the Explication given us by Dr. Sherlock.

Of the Explication by Dr. W. Sherlock.
FOR Memory and Method's sake, and because the Division is so just; we may
distinguish the Accounts, or Explications of the Trinity contrived by our
Opposers; after this manner. There is, first, the Trinity according to Tully,
or the Ciceronian Trinity; which makes the three Divine Persons, to be nothing
else but three Conceptions of God; or God conceived of as the Creator, the
Redeemer, and Sanctifier of his Creatures. Dr. Wallis, after many others, has
propounded and asserted this Trinity, in his Letters, and his Sermons to the
Patris conscripti at Oxford. He found in Tully, Sustineo unus tres Personas; of
which he mistaketh the meaning to be, I being but one Man, yet AM three
Persons: says the Doctor hereupon; Why may not God be three Persons; as well
as one Man was three Persons?

The next is the Cartesian Trinity, or the Trinity according to Des Carts:
which makes three Divine Persons, and three Infinite Minds, Spirits and
Beings, to be but one God; because they are mutually, and internally, and
universally conscious to each others Thoughts: Mr. Des Carts had made this
Inventum to be the first Principle and Discovery in Philosophy, Cogito, ergo
sum; I think, therefore I am: and he will have the very Nature of a Mind or
Spirit to consist in this, that it is a thinking Being. Therefore, says Dr.
Sherlock, three Persons can be no otherways one God, but by Unity of Thought;
or what will amount to as much, as internal and perfect Consciousness to one
another Thoughts. Any one may see, that Dr. Sherlock's Mutual Consciousness,
by which he pretends to explain his Trinity in Unity, was by him borrowed from
the Meditations and Principles of Monsieur Des Carts: his System was hinted to
him, by that unhappy Philosopher who has razed (as much as in him lay) the
only Foundation of Religion; by resolving (so absurdly, as well as impiously)
the Original of the World and of all Things, not into the Contrivance and Power
of an Almighty and All-wise Mind, but into the Natural Tendencies of Bodies, or
as he calls them, the Laws of Motion.

The Third is the Trinity of Plato, or the Platonic Trinity; maintained by Dr.
Cudworth, in his Intellectual System. This Trinity is of three Divine
Coeternal Persons, whereof the second and third are subordinate or inferior to
the first; in Dignity, Power, and all other Qualities, except only Duration.
Yet they are but one God, says he; because they are not three Principles, but
only one; the Essence of the Father being the Root, and Fountain of the Son and
Spirit: and because the three Persons are gathered together under one Head,
even the Father. This, says Dr. Cudworth, is the Trinity of Plato, and the
genuine Platonists; and is the only true Trinity: all other Trinitarians
besides the Platonists, are but Nominal Trinitarians; and the Trinities they
hold, are not Trinities of subsisting Persons, but either of Names and
Denominations only, or of partial and inadequate Conceptions.

The fourth is the Trinity according to Aristotle, or the Aristotelian or
Peripatetick Trinity; which says, the Divine Persons are one God, because they
have the same Numerical Substance, or one and the self-same Substance, in
Number: and tho each of the three Persons is Almighty, All-knowing, and most
Good; yet it is by one individual and self-same Power, Knowledge and Goodness,
in Number. This may be called also the Reformed Trinity, and the Trinity of the
Schools; because the Divines of the middle Ages, reformed the Tritheistick and
Platonic Trinity of the Fathers, into this Sabellian Jargonry; as Dr.
Cudworth, often and deservedly, calls it. This is the Trinity intended by Dr.
S -- th, in his Animadversions on Dr. Sherlock, especially at chap. 8. The
Author or first Contriver of it, was Peter Lombard, Master of the Sentences,
and Bishop of Paris, who died in the Year 1164. It never had any other Public
Authority, says Dr. Cudworth, but that of the fourth Lateran Council; which is
reckoned by the Papists among the General Councils, and was convened in the
Year 1215. He might have added, that the Doctrine of P. Lombard was disliked
and opposed by diverse Learned Men, and censured by Alexander the Third, and
other Popes; till Pope Innocent the Third declared it to be Orthodox. It may be
not unprobably said, that an Unitarian was the true Parent of it; for it is
said, that Peter Lombard took his four Books of Sentences, for so much as
concerns the Trinity, out of a Book of P. Abelardus concerning the same.

To this Trinity (of Aristotle and the Schools) we must reckon the Trinity of
Properties; which (we shall see hereafter) is so variously explained, as to
make even diverse sorts of Trinities: yet I refer all the Property-Trinities to
this fourth Distinction of Trinities, the Trinity according to Aristotle;
because they are all grounded, on the abstracted or Metaphysical and Logical
Notions, of that Philosopher; nor can they be understood, without some
Knowledge of his Philosophy.

We must add to all these, the Trinity of the Mobile; or the Trinity held by
the common People, and by those ignorant or lazy Doctors, who in Compliance
with their Laziness or their Ignorance, tell you in short, that the Trinity is
an unconceivable, and therefore an inexplicable Mystery; and that those are as
much in fault, who presume to explain it, as those who oppose it.

I have propounded to my self, to discourse briefly on all these Trinities; I
have begun with the Trinity of Marcus Tullius Cicero, or, if he pleases, of Dr.
Wallis: I have said of it, as much as is necessary; the next is the Trinity
according to the Philosopher Des Carts, but the Discoverer of which is Dr.
Sherlock.

When Dr. Sherlock came out with his Vindication, in Answer to the Brief
History of the Unitarians, and the Brief Notes on the Creed of Athanasius: the
more ignorant of the Doctors and Rectors, and all the young Fry of Lecturers
and Readers about Town, were his Hawkers to cry it about, and cry it up. They
questioned not, what such a Master in Polemicks had delivered; especially with
so much Assurance and Confidence, and with so much Keenness, and Contempt of
the poor kicked Note-maker, and Epistler. But the more learned among them, said
from the very first; that indeed Dr. Sherlock meant honestly, and he might have
propounded this Explication to his private Friends, to be considered and
debated: but it was liable to too many obvious Exceptions, to be published to
all the World; without great Corrections, in the manner of Expression.

But the Socinians presently saw their Advantage; and resolved to make use of
it: accordingly, in about four or five Weeks time, out came their Observations
on the Vindication of Dr. Sherlock; which in some Editions of them are
prefaced, with the Acts or Gests of Athanasius. Here they tell the Doctor, that
he has published a worse Heresy, than even ours is held to be, by our
bitterest Opposers; in one word, that he has revived Paganism by such an
Explication of the Trinity, as undeniably introduces Tritheism, or three Gods.
They show him, that his Error was condemned by the Ancients in the Person of
Philoponus; and in the middle Ages in the Person and Writings of Abbat Joachim:
but more severely since the Reformation, in the Person of Valentinus Gentilis;
who was condemned at Geneva, and beheaded at Bern, for this very Doctrine. They
demonstrate to him, by a great many unexceptionable Arguments, that a Mutual
Consciousness of three (supposed) Divine Spirits and Minds, having each of them
his own peculiar and Personal Understanding, Will and Power of Action, is so
far from making three such Spirits to be one God in number; that it is the
clearest and the certainest Demonstration, that they are three Gods.
Mutual-Consciousness makes them to be a Consult or Council, a Cabal or Senate
of Gods, if you will; but by no means, one Numerical God, or one God in Number.

The Observations of the Socinians opened all Men's Eyes, to see and acknowledge,
that Dr. Sherlock had greatly overshot the Mark; and that it was necessary, he
should yield his Place to some new Opponent, who (in these Disputes with the
Socinians) would speak more cautiously. All Endeavors therefore were used by
his Friends, to persuade Dr. Sherlock to be quiet: and because such an Example
had been made of him, they stopped a while all Sermons and other Tracts, that
were going to the Press against the Socinians. The Politicians among them
feared the Success of a War, that in its Beginnings had been so unsuccessful:
they said to one another, we need not trouble our selves with the Socinians;
because being Masters of all the Pulpits, we can sufficiently dispose the
People to the Orthodox Belief, without the help of printed Answers and Replies.

It Is about three Years, since these Observations on Dr. Sherlock's Vindication
were made public; and all this time, he has very peaceably taken the
Imputations of Heresy, and Paganism; tho he had said in the Preface to his
Vindication, That having dipped his Pen in the Vindication of so glorious a
Cause, by the Grace of God he would never desert it, while be could hold a Pen
in his Hand.

The Socinians did not design to give him any farther Trouble: but Dr. S -- th
not able to endure, that such Aspersions should lie at the Door of the Church;
could not refrain from declaring to all the World; that the Church had suffered
nothing, in the Defeat of Dr. Sherlock. He professes, that the Charge drawn up
against Dr. Sherlock, by the Socinians, is true; for he has in very deed
advanced an Explication of the Trinity, says Dr. S -- th, which immediately
and unavoidably infers three Gods. Pref. p. 2.

It not being the Design of Dr. S -- th, in his Animadversions, to prove the
Truth of the Doctrine of the Trinity; but only to explain or declare it, that
is, to notify in what Sense and manner it is held by the Church: we must say,
that his Performance is an accurate, and learned Work. He concerns not
himself with the Socinians; but only rescues the received Doctrines of the
Church, from the Misrepresentations of them by Dr. Sherlock, who either
understood them not, or ventured to depart from them. Nor do we concern our
selves with Dr. S -- th: but whereas he is the only Writer, since the Revival
of these Controversies, who has indeed understood what the Church means by a
Trinity in Unity; therefore we must take leave to say, and will also prove it;
that this his true Explication of the Trinity, is (for all that) a great
Untruth, or rather a great piece of Nonsense. Dr. Sherlock's was a Rational and
Intelligible Explication, tho not a true one; it is not Orthodox, as Orthodoxy
is reckoned since the Lateran Council: Dr. S -- th's is a true and Orthodox
Explication, of what the Church intends to say; but it is neither Rational, nor
Intelligible, nor Possible. But of that in its proper place; for I must next
examine the Trinity according to Plato, defended by Dr. Cudworth.

Of the Explication by Dr. Cudworth.
IT will be necessary, in the first place, to declare Dr. Cudworth's
Explication, more largely and clearly, than has been yet done. In accounting
for the Doctrine of the Trinity, he professes to follow the Platonic
Philosophers; with whom, says he (not the Arians, as some suppose, but) the
Orthodox Fathers perfectly agree. These held a Trinity of Divine Persons,
Coeternal indeed; but not Coequal: for the Son and Spirit are inferior to the
first Person, or the Father, in Dignity, in Authority, and in Power. They are
so many distinct Substances; not one numerical Substance, as has been taught
by the School-Doctors, and the Lateran Council. For tho the Fathers said, that
the three Persons have but one and the same Substance, Essence or Nature; they
did not mean thereby one and the self-same Substance or Essence in Number, but
the same Essence or Substance for Kind, or Nature. Because each Person of the
three, is Spiritual, Eternal, Infinite, a Creator, and necessarily existent,
therefore they were said by the Fathers and Platonists, to have the same
Nature, Essence or Substance; and not because their Essences or Substances,
Physically or Properly so called, are one and the same Physical Substance in
Number. In few words; says he, this famous Term Consubstantial (or of the same
Substance) was never intended by the Platonists, or by the Fathers, to deny (as
the Schools do) three distinct individual Essences, or to denote one Numerical
Substance or Essence; but only to signify, that the Trinity believed by the
Orthodox is not made up of contrary or unlike Natures, (as the Arian Trinity
is) but of Persons all of them Homogenial, all of them Eternal, Spiritual and
Uncreated. They that shall deny this to be the Doctrine of the Fathers, will
find themselves obliged to answer to two things, which are indeed (fairly and
truly) unanswerable: The first is, Why those Fathers who contend for the
Homo-ousios (consubstantial, or of the same Substance) do yet expressly reject
the Tauto-ousios and Mono-ousios, or of the self-same Substance and Essence in
Number? The Tauto-ousios and Mono-ousios (or of the self-same Essence or
Substance, in Number) is the very Doctrine of the Schools and Moderns; but is
denied by the Fathers, as mere Sabellianism: which invincibly proves, that by
one and the same Substance and Essence they meant, not one and the self-same,
or one in Number; but one for Kind, Nature or Properties. Secondly, They must
also satisfy the Citations of D. Petavius, and S. Curcellaeus, and these in the
Intellectual System; which do all of them severally (and much more conjunctly)
clearly show what the Sense of the Fathers was, about Homo-ousios, and
consubstantial.

It appears by this, and abundance more the like; that Dr. Cudworth had the
same Apprehensions, concerning the three Divine Persons, with Dr. Sherlock:
they both apprehend the three Persons to be as distinct and different, and as
really three several Intelligent Beings and Substances, as three Angels are, or
as Peter, James and John are. Dr. Sherlock says, they are however called one
God, because they are internally conscious to all one another Thoughts and
Actions: but I do not believe, that Dr. Cudworth would have allowed so much to
the Son and Spirit, as to be internally conscious to all the Thoughts and
Actions of the first Person; he always speaks of them, as every way inferior
to the Father: he will not allow them to be Omnipotent in any other respect,
but only externally, that is to say, because the Father concurreth Omnipotently
to all their external Actions, whether of Creation or Providence. Dr. Cudworth
desires to distinguish his Explication, from all others of the Moderns, by this
Mark; that it allows not the three Persons to be, in any respect but
Duration, Coequal: for (says he) three distinct Intelligent Natures or
Essences, each of them Pre-eternal, Self-existent, and equally Omnipotent ad
intra, are of necessity three Gods, nor can we have any other Notion of three
Gods; but if only the first Person be indeed internally Omnipotent, and the
other two subordinate in Authority and Power to him, you leave then but one
God, only in three Divine Persons.

This is Dr. Cudworth's Explication. Every one will readily make this
Exception: he thinks, either that there is one Great God, and two Lesser
Ones; or else only the first is true God, and the other two in Name only. The
Doctor foresaw, without doubt, this Objection; therefore see, how he has
endeavored to prevent it. First, he reports some Answers of the Fathers, to
this Difficulty; which Answers he expressly rejects. For some of them said,
that the three Persons are one God, by their Unity of Will and Affection:
Others said, they are one God, as all Men or all Mankind are called Homo, or
MAN; namely because they All have the same Specific Nature, or Essence, or
Substance, even the Rational. For as all Men have the same Specific Essence or
Nature, which is the Rational; so the Divine Persons also agree in one Nature,
namely the Eternal, Spiritual and Self existent. But Dr. Cudworth confesses,
that an Union of Will and Affection is only a Moral Union, not a Physical or
real Unity: and as three Human Persons would be three distinct Men,
notwithstanding the Moral Union in Affection and Will; so also the three Divine
Persons will be three distinct Gods, notwithstanding such an Union in Will and
Affection. As to the other, that the three Persons are but one God, by their
having the same Specific Nature or Essence; or as some call it Substance,
namely because they are all of them Spiritual, Self-existent, and Coeternal; he
calls it an absurd Paradox, contrary to common Sense, and our common Notions
of things: for so all Men will be but one Man, because they have the same
Specific Essence or Nature, namely the Rational; and all Epicurus his
(Extramundan) Gods will be but one God.

Then, he propounds diverse other Explications, which he neither approves,
nor expressly rejects, tho it is plain that he disliked them: for the
Explication on which he insisteth, and which appears to be his Sense of the
matter, is this that follows. The three Divine Persons are one God, because
they are not three Principles, but only one; the Essence of the Father being
the Root, and Fountain of the Son and Spirit: and because the three Persons are
gathered together under one Head or Chief, even the Father. He adds here
expressly, that if the Persons were Coordinate, (i. e. equal in Authority,
Dignity, or Power) they should not be one, but three Gods.

This is at large Dr. Cudworth's Opinion: the short of it is; that the three
Persons are as really distinct Beings, Essences, or Substances, as Dr. Sherlock
has imagined them to be. And as their Substances or Natures are not one, but
three; so also must their Understandings, and other Personal Powers and
Properties. The Doctors differ only in this; that Dr. Sherlock makes the Unity
of the three Persons in the Godhead, to consist in the Mutual-Consciousness of
the Persons; But Dr. Cudworth in this, that the Father is both the Principle
(Root or Fountain or Cause) and also the Head of the other two Persons. They
neither of them believe one Numerical, but one Collective God: one God, not who
is really one God, but is one God in certain Respects; as of Mutual
Consciousness, or of being the Cause, Principle and Head of all other Beings,
and of the second and third Persons.

Dr. Cudworth contends by a great number of very Pertinent and Home Quotations;
that his Explication (I mean, that part of it which makes the three Persons, to
be so many distinct Essences or Substances) is the Doctrine of the Principal,
if not of all the Fathers, as well as of the Platonists: and I (for my own
part) do grant it. For I am persuaded, that no Man has read the Fathers, with
Judgment and Application, but he must discern; that tho they do not express
themselves, in the incautelous, unwary and obnoxious Terms used by Dr.
Sherlock, as neither does Dr. Cudworth; yet the Fathers as much believed the
three Persons are distinct Minds and Spirits, as Dr. Sherlock does; all the
Difference (as I said) is only this, that they and Dr. Cudworth do not use his
very Terms. They do not say in express words, three Minds, or three Spirits:
but the Comparisons which they use, and their Definitions or Descriptions of
what they mean by Persons, are such; that it cannot be questioned by any, that
they apprehended the three Persons, to be three distinct Spirits, Minds and
Beings, having each of them his own Understanding, and all other Personal
Qualifications. It is indeed apparent Tritheism; and that was the true Reason,
why the Schools advanced a new Explication: but because the Schools durst not
find fault with the Fathers, or seem to depart from their Doctrine; therefore
what the Fathers intended of one Specific Essence, or Nature, or Substance,
that the Scools interpreted of one Numerical Substance, Nature or Essence; but
of that hereafter, when we examine their Doctrine in its own place.

Dr. Cudworth being so great a Philosopher, as every one knows he was, found
himself very hard put to it, what to say (colourably, and reasonably)
concerning the Persons of the Trinity. He saw, that either he must say, that
they are but one self-same Essence or Substance, in Number; or that they have
distinct and several Substances or Essences. To say, that they are (or they
subsist in) one self-same Substance or Essence in Number, is such Jargonry in
Philosophy; that is to say, in the Nature and Possibilities of Things; that he
never speaks of it, without a just mark of Contempt: it is Nonsense, says he,
and it is impossible; and besides that, it is Sabellianism, and a Trinity not of
Persons, but of Words and Names.

Well, shall we say then, that the three Persons are three distinct Substances;
is it not plain Tritheism? No, says the Doctor; for the Persons are not equal:
the Father is both the Principle or Original, and the Head of the other two
Persons; and besides that, he only is Omnipotent ad intra. But then, will some
say; indeed this Explication leaves us but one God, which is the thing we
looked after: but it is, by utterly abolishing the Godhead of the Son and
Spirit; it makes only the Father to be really God, the other two Persons are
so only by a certain Dependence on him, both in Origination and Acting. As bad
as this Consequence is, and as clear; Dr. Cudworth is forced to swallow it, and
to sit down contented with it: he thought, it should seem, it is better
somewhat to strain the use of Words, than the Natures and Possibilities of
Things. It Is hard indeed, that we must say, one Supreme and two Dependent
Persons make but one God; but it is harder to say, three Persons have but one
Substance or Essence in Number. Words are Arbitrary Signs, applied to things
according as Men please, and therefore are capable of Alteration in their Use:
but the Nature of Things is absolutely unchangeable; three Persons can never be
one Substance, Essence or individual Nature. No Philosophy, but that of Gotham,
will allow; that one Intelligent Substance can be more than one Person: but
diverse Philosophers, especially the Platonists, have called three Distinct,
Intelligent, Divine Substances, one (...), one Di^inity, or God; therefore
nothing hinders, but that so also may Christians. To this purpose Dr. Cudworth,
in diverse places of his Intellectual System.

But it is now time to make our Observations on this Doctor's Explication;
which I shall do the more carefully, because I am persuaded, that all the chief
Fathers were in his Sentiments, that the three Divine Persons are three
distinct individual Substances or Essences in Number; which by the Schools and
all the Moderns, is granted to be Tritheism: and because it is evident by his
Intellectual System, that this Doctor understood all the Philosophies, Ancient
and Modern, in the most perfect manner; and was himself one of the ablest
Philosophers we have known. His Explication has these Parts. 1. That the
Divine Persons are (one Specific, but) three distinct, particular individual
Substances or Essences in Number, or in the Reality of Things: and that
otherwise, there could not be three Divine Persons, but only one such Person.
2. That three distinct, individual, intelligent Divine Essences or Substances,
commonly called Persons, are yet but one God; because tho they are three in
Number, yet they are one in Original; for the second and third Persons are
derived from the Father, as their Fountain and Cause. 3. Tho they are three
Persons, yet they are but one God, because they concur to all the same Actions
both of Creation and Providence, under one Head, even the Father. The Emphasis
of this lies in their concurring to all the same Actions; but principally in
this, that they concur to the same Actions under one Head, which is the Father.

1. That the Divine Persons are three distinct, particular, individual,
Intelligent Substances, Essences or Natures; and that otherways, that is, were
there but one self-same Substance or Essence in Number, they should not be
three Persons, but only one Person. I have granted, that if there are three
Divine Persons; those Persons are (of necessity) three distinct, individual
Essences or Substances: so that, as to this first Proposition, the Doctor and
the Socinians are perfectly agreed; all that we deny, is, that three such
Essences (or Persons) are, or can be but one God.

But tho the Socinians allow, that three Persons must be three distinct
Substances or Essences, yet all the Modern Trinitarians utterly deny it: the
reason is, because they saw plainly, that to say there are three distinct
Essences, or Substances, is to grant (in effect) to the Socinians what they so
much contend for; namely that the Doctrine of the Trinity does imply three
Gods. Three distinct Divine Persons, says Dr. Cudworth, are three distinct
Divine Essences or Substances; it is true, say the Socinians, and we grant this
to the Doctor: no, say all the Modern Trinitarians, three distinct Divine
Essences, are not only three distinct Divine Persons, but they are also three
distinct Gods; if once we grant that the three Divine Persons are three
Essences, the Socinians will extort it from us (as an unavoidable Consequence)
that we teach three Gods.

The Truth is, since the Lateran Council, which determined in favor of P.
Lombard, against Abbat Joachim and the Fathers, that there is but one only
Divine Essence or Substance in Number; I do not believe, there has been any
Divine of note but Dr. Cudworth and Dr. Sherlock and some few who may have
borrowed it from them, who durst ever publish it in Writing, that there are
three distinct Divine Substances, Essences or Natures, or that every distinct
Person is a distinct Substance. They all saw, that so to say, is to introduce
three Gods: for if you say, there are three distinct Intelligent, Almighty,
Allknowing and Pre-eternal Substances, Essences or Natures; you have actually
said, there are three Gods, because you can possibly give no fuller nor other
Description of three Gods. If one All-knowing, Almighty Essence or Substance,
is one perfect God, to whom nothing at all can be added; it is no better than
fooling, or effrontry, to deny, that three such Essences or Substances are
three Gods.

This plain and clear Reason has constrained the School-Divines to depart from
the Explication of the Fathers; and has also obliged all the Moderns, to follow
the Schools, and forsake the Fathers. Yet so, as out of good Manners, to deny
that the Fathers ever held more than one Divine Essence or Substance: but I
have shown before, the Ground of that gross (and I doubt not, wilful) Mistake,
of the Doctrine of the Fathers. But Dr. Cudworth thought, that he had found an
Expedient, how he might keep sincerely to the Fathers, and yet not be guilty of
Tritheism: for, says he, tho there are three distinct Divine Essences or
Substances, vulgarly called Persons; yet the second and third Persons or
Essences are derived from the first; and they all concur to the same Actions,
under the same Head or Principal, even the Father. Therefore,

2. To that, the second and third Persons are derived from the Father, as their
Fountain and Cause; therefore they may be reckned as one God with him. Here
begins the Controversy, between the Socinians and the Doctor. They grant, that
every distinct Person is a distinct and particular Essence or Substance; but
they deny, that three distinct Divine Essences can be understood to be one God:
Unity of Original, or that the second and third Persons are derived from the
first, will not help the Doctor, no not in the least. The three Divine Essences
(which are called Persons) are one God, says this Doctor; because the second
and third are derived from the first: Why does he not say too, that three Human
Essences (or Persons) whereof the second and third derive themselves from the
first, are one Man? He may as well say this, and as soon persuade it, as the
former: the Son and Grandson derive themselves from a first Human Essence (or
Person) called the Grandfather; two Brothers derive themselves from their
common Father: Does this Unity of Original make them all to be but one Man? If
not, neither can Unity of Original make the Son and Spirit one God, with their
Fountain and Cause, even the Father. It is a reasoning, altogether unworthy of
Dr. Cudworth; the Son and Spirit are particular Substances or Essences, derived
from the Essence of the Father, as their Principle or Cause, therefore they are
one God with the Father: for then, all Angels, all Men, nay and all Beasts,
shall be one God with the Father, who is their Cause and Principle. Unity of
Original is so far from proving, that they are one God with him; that it even
demonstrates the very contrary: for if they are derived from the one true God,
they themselves cannot be that one true God; no more than the Effect can be the
Cause, that very Cause whose Effect it is.

These Arguments are so clear, and withal so very obvious; that I wonder much,
that Dr. Cudworth foresaw them not: but it may be, he foresaw them; but thought
withal that even all these Consequences are better, than to admit such a
Monstrosity in Philosophy, as three Persons having only one selfsame Substance
in Number. All things, how hard soever, would go down with him, but only that;
but that can never be agreed to, by a Philosopher.

3. His last Subterfuge was this; the three Divine Essences (called Persons)
are but one God, because they concur to all the same Actions, of Creation and
Providence, under one Head the Father, who only is Almighty ad intra, or really
Almighty. How many Rarities has he boxed up, in a very little compass? 1. Here
is one Almighty, who together with two other Persons, is one God. I would know,
how two other Persons can contribute to make him a perfect God, who without
them is Almighty? The Scale is already full, if Almightiness be there; we need
no more Weight: and least of all, the Weight of two Impotents. If the Son and
Spirit are not Almighty ad intra, or not really Almighty, but only as the
Father Omnipotently concurs with them; they are Impotent: for every Person and
Thing, that is not Almighty, or cannot do all things, is impotent to some
things.

Dr. Cudworth, being so accurate a Philosopher, saw evidently, that three
Almighty Persons are (of necessity) three Gods; therefore he will admit of but
one Almighty Person, even the Father. But then, he should have looked a little
further, or closer; and he would also have seen, that when he had found one
Almighty, there was no need to add to him two Impotents, to make him a complete
God; or (as he speaks) to make up the Intireness of the Divinity. 2. It Is
altogether as rare, strange and surprising; that the Son and Spirit are one God
with the Father, because they are gathered under him, as their Head and
Principal. Does not the Doctor prevaricate? does he not say these things, only
to establish Unitarianism, so much the more strongly? For if you say first,
that the Father is the Head and Principal, and the Son and Spirit are subjected
to him; and then, therefore they are one God with the Father their Principal
and Head: this, in a Man of so great Sense, looks like mere Prevarication; for
it is plain to all, that he should have inferred the contrary, namely, therefore
only the Father is God. We shall see the Weakness of Dr. Cudworth's Reasoning,
so soon as ever we apply it to any other Instances. The Son and Spirit are one
God with the Father, says he, because he is their Head and Principal:
therefore say I, the Servants and their Master, the Subjects and their Prince,
the Children and their Parent, are all one Governor; because the Subjects,
Servants and Children, are gathered under their Prince, their Master and
Parent, as their Principal and Head. Will the Doctor allow of this (last)
Consequence; if not, he vainly urges, or insists on the other. 3. But the Son
and Spirit concur with the Father, to all the same Actions, both of Creation
and Providence; and therefore may be said to be one God with him.

If the Doctor could prove, that the Son and Spirit concur to the same Acts, of
Providence and Creation, with the Father; he would thereby prove, that there
are three Gods, not that the concurring Persons are one God. Many Carpenters,
for instance, concur to make a Ship, under one Head or Principal, the
Master Builder: Many Colonels and Captains concur to the marshaling of an Army
under one Principal and Head, their General: Are therefore all these
Carpenters, Colonels and Captains, one Master Builder, and one General? That
there is but one Master Builder, and but one General, we grant; but the
Captains and Carpenters, concurring with their Master Builder and General, are
not one with the General and Master Builder.

I do not think it necessary to make any further Reflections, on such impotent
Reasonings: I will leave it with you, Sir, to judge, Whether Dr. Cudworth has
given any new Strength to the Trinitarian Cause, by reviving an old forsaken
Explication!

If we will give a Name to Dr. Cudworth's Explication of the Trinity, we must
call it Mollis Arianismus, a moderate Arianism. The Arians were divided into
two Parties, the high or rigid Arians, and the Ariani Molles, or the moderate
Arians. The former of these (being the Eunomians and AEtians) strictly followed
Arius; they believed that the Son was created by the Father, or God, but a
little before the Creation of the World; and that the Spirit was the Work or
Creature of the Son: and further, that their Substances or Essences were
altogether unlike; from whence they were also called Heterousians. But the
moderate Arians were content to say, that there was no conceivable Duration or
Time, between the Being of God or the Father, and the Generation or Creation
(for those are with them equivalent Terms) of the Son; the Father made or
generated the Son, so early, that there was no conceivable Portion of Time
before the Son was; no more than was absolutely necessary, for giving to the
Father the Priority of Existence, and his Title of Father: and as to their
Substances, they are Consubstantial; by which this sort of Arians meant (and
the Church then meant no more) that their Substances or Essences are alike, or
the same for Kind and Properties, tho not in Number; that is, the Essences of
these three Persons are all of them Spiritual, Eternal and Infinite, tho only
the Father is Infinite in Power. These moderate Arians were received to
Communion by the moderate Trinitarians; and particularly by Pope Liberius. Dr.
Cudworth holds their very Doctrine; he allows only the Father to be
Omnipotent: and tho he says, that the Son and Spirit are also Eternal; yet he
cannot deny, that there must be some Priority of the Father, as the Fountain,
Principle and Cause, before the Son and Spirit as Effects. In a word, the
moderate Arians ascribed as much to the Son as Dr. Cudworth does.

Were Dr. Cudworth alive, it would not be expedient to make this Judgment of
his Explication; but being dead, it cannot hurt him. He is retired to the true
Mount Moriah, or Land of Vision; where he no longer guesses, by prudent and
wary Conjectures, but he knows and even sees how these things are. God and
Nature, after which he enquired with so much Application and Freedom, are now
known to him: and he now rests from his excellent Labors, out of all danger
from the Malevolence of the present evil Generation; with whom it is a Crime,
not to take every thing upon Trust, on the mere Credit of those who have been
before us. As if it were the way to Truth; not to enquire, but to believe; not
to examine, try and judge, but to pre-suppose and take for granted, every thing
that has been told us, by Men in Power and Place. This is the Spirit that now
prevails in the Church: and on the contrary, an ingenuous Freedom in enquiring
and examining, tho it be nothing else indeed but an honest and necessary
Sincerity, is now called Heresy, and Schism; and is, if you will believe them, to
be punished with certain Damnation. We have however, in the mean time, this
Satisfaction; that it is God, who shall at last judge us: He that has said to
us, Try all things, hold fast that which is good. But I pass to the Trinity
according to Aristotle, defended by Dr. S -- th.

Of the Explication by Dr. S -- th.
I Have already done Right to Dr. S -- th, and his Book: if he takes it amiss,
that I observe also some Defects in it; he ought to show his Patent, by which
he is constituted the only Animadverter on the Books of others.

If he has received any Personal Wrong, or Affront from Dr. Sherlock; he is
the more excusable, that his Book has so much more Scurrility, than Argument:
but the Injury must have been very great, to excuse him wholly. He has noted
some Errors, either of Inadvertency and Haste, or of the Pen; in some
Expressions and Words used by Dr. Sherlock: he imputes all these as faults of
mere Ignorance or Dullness to the Doctor. This was somewhat barbarous: nay it
was more Barbarity in Point of Morality or Manners, than ever Dr. Sherlock was
guilty of, in Grammar or Speech.

Dr. S -- th will not (at least has not yet been able to) persuade many, that
Dr. Sherlock wants the Qualifications, or the degree of the Qualifications, for
which Dr. S -- th has deserved Esteem: the World thinks, there is a great deal
more in Dr. Sherlock to be commended, besides his Preferments; it is only
wished, that both these Doctors had something more of the Tenderness, and
Catholic Charity of Genuine Christianity, tho it were accompanied with lesser
Abilities or Learning.

Dr. Sherlock has published an Essay, toward vindicating and explaining the
Difficulties of the Trinity, and Incarnation; the Method he has taken, is
wholly new, and is a Mistake, but it was meant well: and I do not think, that
setting aside some Authorities or Quotations, Dr. S -- th has said any thing
against it, which Dr. Sherlock will much value. The Arguments used by Dr. S --
th, are only Metaphysical Reasonings; easily advanced, and as easily destroyed.
Dr. S -- th's is the true Explication; that is to say, as Orthodoxy is reckoned
since Peter Lombard, and the Lateran Council: but Dr. Sherlock knew it to be
Nonsense, and therefore adventured to propose another; he put forth his Hand,
to save the tottering and falling Ark, and it is made an inexcusable Fault. But
I will pass from the too Cynical Doctor, to his Book and Explication.

It Is not till Chap. 8. that he begins to bless us, with the Catholic and
Orthodox Account, of his Trinity in Unity: but at length, at Page 240. out
comes the Secret; with this Preface to it. The Doctrine of the Church, and of
the Schools, concerning the Blessed Trinity; so far as I can judge, but still
with the humblest Submission to the Judgment of the Church of England in the
Case, is this. Truly, I am heartily sorry to hear it; that Dr. S -- th, at
these Years, has no fixed Religion of his own, no not concerning the Trinity it
self: but is ready to turn with the Wind; is prepared to renounce a Doctrine
and Explication, which he believes to be not only true, but Fundamental; if the
Church commands him. Mr. Milbourn makes the same Complement to his good Mother
the Church, in his late Book against the Socinians; as I have noted in my
Answer to him: but Mr. Milbourn is somewhat excusable, because he has not yet
received any of the Rewards, due as he thinks to his Industry and Learning; but
Dr. S -- th is full, and even overflows with the Blessings of the holy Mother.
It should seem Dr. S -- th thinks, he has not yet enough; else he would
never be so over-mannerly, as to put his Faith it self afloat, and that too
with the humblest Submission, at the Command of his Reverend Mother. We may
infer however, from these public Professions of the Writers, that could the
Socinians get Mother Church of their side; all her Champions would also come
over to us: for it is not (it seems) the Cause, that they defend; it is not the
Trinity or Incarnation, that they value; but our Mother, our Mother the Church.
If Dr. S -- th makes so light of his own Explication, that he is ready to fling
it into the Kennel; at the first Nod, that the Church shall make: he cannot
wonder, that the Socinians will handle it, will look on both sides of it, will
view it in a clear Light; before they bargain for it. Well, see, here it is:

The Personalities, by which the Godhead stands diversified into three distinct
Persons, are called and accounted Modes. Therefore for understanding the
Mystery of the Trinity; we must declare, what is properly a Mode (or Manner) of
Being: It is not a Substance, nor an Accident; which two make indeed the
Adequate Division of Real Beings: but a Mode is properly a certain Habitude of
some Being, Essence, or Thing: whereby the said Essence or Being is determined
to some particular State or Condition, which, barely of it self, it would not
have been determined to. And according to this Account, a Mode in things
Spiritual and Immaterial has the like Reference to such Beings, as a Posture
has to a Body; to which it gives some Difference or Distinction, without
superadding any new Entity or Being to it. In a word, a Mode is not properly a
Being, whether Substance or Accident; but a certain Affection cleaving to
Being, and determining it, from its common general Nature and Indifference, to
something more particular; as we have just now explained it. As for instance,
Dependence is a Mode, determining the general Nature of Being to that
particular State and Condition, by virtue of which it proceeds from, and is
supported by another: and the like may be said of Mutability, Presence,
Absence, Inherence, Adherence, and such like, viz. that they are not Beings,
but Modes or Affections of Being; and inseparable from it so far, that they
have no Existence of their own, after a Separation or Division from the Things,
or Beings to which they belong. Animadver. p. 240, 241, 242.

Behold the Birth of the Mountains! We are kept in suspense seven long
Chapters; at length in the 8th, at p. 240. of his Book, he gives forth this
Oracle. That the three Divine Persons, so much talked of, are neither
Substances, nor Accidents; and consequently, says he, no Real Beings. Nay,
they have no real Existence of their own; but are Modes, Habitudes, or
Affections of the Divine Substance, or the Substance of God: they are in the
Godhead, or in the Substance of God, such as Mutability, Presence, Absence,
Inherence, Adherence, and such like, are in the Natures, or Substances to which
they belong. Or if you will have a great deal in one single word, the very
Iliads in a Nut-shell; they are Postures: or what amounts to the same thing,
they are such in Spiritual and Immaterial Beings, that a Posture is to a Body.

I must needs here tell you, Sir, the Story of the Princess Dulcinea del
Toboso, Mistress to the Renowned Don Quixot, of the Mancha in Spain. This
famous Princess had the Honor to be Mistress of the Affections of the so much
celebrated Don Quixot: for her, he traversed Mountains, Deserts, and other
dreadful Places; for her he encountered Giants, Knights-errant, and other
formidable Dangers; and at length for her, to satisfy his amorous Passions
toward her, he retired to a place called the poor Rock; where he spent much
time in lamenting the Disdains, the Cruelty and Hard-heartedness of his
Mistress toward himself, as is largely related in the History. Don Quixot was
waited on in his long Travels and Adventures, by his Esquire Sancho Pancha, who
greatly pitied his Master, that he should serve so rigorous a Mistress: but the
Esquire had one Scruple in his Mind, Who this Dulcinea del Toboso should be?
But while Don Quixot was tormenting himself, at the poor Rock; he unluckily
happened to drop some words, by which it evidently appeared, that Dulcinea del
Toboso was only an imaginary Lady or Princess: and that indeed she was no other
Person, but a certain coarse Country Wench, Daughter of the Farmer Alonso
Zanchez, and for her Plainness called Joan. Ta, Ta, cries Sancho Pancha, and is
the Princess Dulcinea, our Neighbor Joan Zanchez! By my troth, a sturdy Queen;
well may my Master languish for her, for I am well persuaded, she has no
regard or sense of Love-matters: but it is a good-natured Wench, etc.

Methinks, Sir, there can be nothing more pat, or proper for this place, than
this Story. For just such a Disappointment do we all meet with, in the
Explication for which Dr. S -- th has made us wait so long; as Sancho Pancha
had when he found the Princess Dulcinea, was Joan Zanchez. Dr. S -- th had
raised the Expectation of his Readers, in no fewer than seven Preliminary
Chapters; in the eighth he promises in the Title of it, the long-lock'd for,
the much-desired, Catholic, and Orthodox Explication of a Trinity of Divine
Persons, in the Unity of the Godhead: but when all comes to all, he tells us,
the three Divine Persons are nothing else but the Substance of God, or the
Godhead, diversified into three Postures. Never were Men so bilk'd before as
his Readers are, at this News; it is the Princess Dulcinea turned into Joan
Zanchez!

Was it worth while, to fall upon Dr. Sherlock in that outrageous manner, only
because he would not call the three Divine Persons, three Postures of the
Godhead, or the Substance of God in three Postures? Dr. Sherlock, poor,
senseless, illiterate, Cantabrigian Ignoramus, thought, that these words Father,
Son and Spirit implied something that was real. He imagined, that the Notion
which all Men naturally have of a Father, his Son, and a Spirit distinct from
both, must be filled up with something that will honestly and satisfactorily
answer to such Names and natural Notions of a Father, a Son, and a Spirit
diverse from both: therefore, says he, seeing these Persons are Spiritual, and
Immaterial, and Intelligent; I call them three Minds, three Spirits, and three
Beings. But the Adepti of Oxford will make him know his Mistake; First, Dr.
Wallis tells him, Three Persons and one God, is as much as to say, three
Respects of one God to his Creatures; he is their Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier, and in this sense is called three Persons, tho he is indeed but one
God, and but one Being: but Dr. S -- th answers, it is neither so nor so; three
Divine Persons are the Substance of God, in three Gambals, or Postures; or in
three such I know not what is, which have the same or like Reference to Things
Spiritual and Immaterial, that Postures have to Bodies. The three Personalities
are that in the one Substance of God, which Mutability, Presence, Absence,
Inherence, Adherence, and such like (changeable) Affections and Habitudes, are
in the Substances to which they belong. He thinks, it should seem, that the
Faithful must put their Trust in three Postures; and worship Mutability,
Presence, Absence, or something which in Spirituals is like to them; something
which is no more in the Deity, than Postures are in Bodies. I fancy Dr.
Sherlock will object to him, that it is of the Nature of a mere Habitude or
Modality, to be changeable: and that the Personalities in the Divine Nature (or
God) are not alterable or changeable. He will say too, it may be, that there is
no mere Modality but may be away from the Nature, or Substance to which it
belongs; without any damage to the Essential Perfections, of such Nature or
Substance: but you cannot take away the Personalities, or the Persons, from the
Substance of God, without lessening the Perfections of the Godhead. Therefore
we must not say, that the three Divine Persons, are only the Divine Substance
with three Modes.

The three Divine Persons, he says, are the one Substance of God diversified
in three Postures. But how shall we conceive, that the Substance of God in the
first Posture, or in Posture A, begat the same Substance of God (in Number) in
Posture B? and how does the third Posture, or Posture C, proceed (for under
Pain of Damnation we must not say of this third Posture, how was it begotten)
from the Substance of God considered in the Postures A and B? The Divine
Substance, say they in Posture A, or in the first Mode, generated the Divine
Substance in the second Mode, or, as Dr. S -- th speaks, in Posture B; and the
self-same Divine Substance in the first and second Modes, breathed (you must
well mark that) the self-same Divine Substance in the third Mode, which is
Posture C. Now how shall we understand such Gibberish as this? may they not as
well tell us in plain terms, that to be Trinitarians, it is necessary that we
should renounce at once all good Sense, and content our selves for ever with a
Cant without Sense?

The Persons, as distinguished from the Substance of God, are only
Personalities; which is to say, three such Modes, as Posture, Mutability and
Dependence; says Dr. S -- th. They that hear this, will presently say Dr. S --
th and the Socinians are very near to an Agreement; we are like to have this
tedious, intricate and dangerous Controversy fairly ended, by the rare and
particular Dexterity of Dr. S -- th. For he has taught us, that all the
Difference is indeed nothing: both Parties confess one self-same Substance,
Essense or Godhead, only the Orthodox contend for three Postures in this
Substance; and the sullen, conceited Socinians hitherto seem unwilling to allow
of more than one Mode or Posture; but under the Institution and Instruction of
such a Teacher as Dr. S -- th, they will return to the full Acknowledgment of
the whole Truth.

Dr. Sherlock had said, that there are some who make the three Divine Persons,
to be nothing else but three Modes; and he makes thereupon this Note, Can any
one think that the Father begat only a Mode, and called it* his Son? Let us see
now, how Dr. S -- th rates him for this piece of Ignorance. No, good Sir, no;
none that I know of, is in danger of thinking or saying so: no more than that
Socrates begat only the Shape and Figure of a Man, and then called it his Son;
or (to turn your own blunt Weapon against your self) no more than God the
Father begot another Self-consciousness, and called it his Son. Animadv. p.
291. And at p. 241, 242. and often elsewhere, he says, the Personalities, by
which the Deity stands diversified into three distinct Persons, are by the
generality of Divines, both Ancient and Modern, called and accounted Modes. So
that in short, let all the Dunces take notice for the time to come, that Dr. S
-- th, with all the Ancients and Moderns at his Heels, says, pronounces and
declares, in manner and form following; the Personalities in the Godhead (not
the Persons) are three Modes, Affections, or Habitudes, of the Divine
Substance, Nature, or Essence.

Now were I Dr. Sherlock, I would not grant to this arrogant Adversary, the
least Tittle of all he contends for. It is certain, there is nothing more
common with the Metaphysicians, who follow the Schools; than to call the three
Persons, three Modes; and sometimes more largely, three Modes of Subsistence of
the Divine Substance, or the Substance of God. Dr. Sherlock may well defend it,
that neither has he mistaken the Modalists, nor have they mistaken in what
they mean to say. He may say, it is indeed true, that in all other Persons,
Human Persons and Angelical Persons, we may be so nice, as to distinguish
between the Persons and the Personalities: for Example, the Personalities of
Peter, James and John, are only Modes or Properties peculiar to these three
Persons, by which they are ultimately distinguished from one another, and from
all other Persons of the same Specific Nature, namely the Human; but the
Persons of Peter, James and John, besides those Modes and Properties, take in
also three distinct intelligent Substances, in which those Modes suosist. It is
true, I say, that Human (and also Angelical) Persons may be thus distinguished
from their Personalities; but it is otherways in the three Divine Persons: the
three Divine Persons are properly and truly called only three Modes; the reason
is, It is supposed by the Modalists, that in the Godhead the three Persons have
all the self-same individual Substance or Essence in Number; and that they have
also but one self-same Understanding, Will and Energy (or Power of Action) in
Number; contrary to what happens in all other Persons, whether Human or
Angelical, who all have distinct Substances, distinct Understandings, Wills and
Energies, as well as are distinct Persons: this being so, it is evident, that
the very Modes or Personalities in the Godhead, cannot be distinguished from
the Persons; we must say, that the three Divine Persons are three Modes,
because they are distinguished from one another by nothing else, as all other
Persons are. All other Persons are distinguished by their distinct Substances
their distinct and several Understandings, Wills and Energies; as well as by
their peculiar Modes and Properties: but in the Godhead there is no such
Distinction; it has one self-same Substance, Understanding, Will and Energy;
it is only distinguished by its Modes, and those Modes are distinguished from
one another by themselves only. Briefly, Dr. Sherlock may say, that all the
Modalists acknowledge no other Distinction between the three Divine Persons,
than is between Modes; they are not distinguished by their Substances, nor by
particular Understandings, Wills, or Energies of their own: therefore we,
properly enough, call them three Modes. Dr. S -- th may wrangle as long as he
pleases; he may (if it be for his Credit) write such another Book of
Inadversions, as this upon Dr. Sherlock; but when he has done and said all he
can say or do, all Men but himself will perceive that these two Propositions
are the same for sense: this of Dr. Sherlock, which he imputes to the
Modalists, and which Dr. S -- th so much abhors, the three Divine Persons are
only three Modes, of Subsistence, in the Substance or Essence of God; and this,
which Dr. S -- th owns, and makes to be the Substance of his whole Book, the
three Divine Persons are the Substance or Essence of God, diversified by three
Modes of Subsistence.

But above all; I would not have Dr. S -- th please himself overmuch in this;
that he has cited some Passages of the Fathers, which describe the
Personalities of the Father, Son and Spirit, by Modes. Justin and Irenaeus have
called them (...), Modes of subsisting; others call them Properties: but by
Modes, Properties, Characters, and such like, the Fathers meant quite another
thing, than Dr. S -- th and the Moderns do; they meant what Dr. Sherlock and
Dr. Cudworth mean. By a Mode and Property they meant that discriminating
Character, by which the Individuals of any Specific Nature are distinguished
or differenced, from all the Individuals of the same Species or Nature. For
Example, the Individuals of the Specific Nature of Humanity, are particular
Men; and all these Individuals or particular Men are discriminated,
characterized, differenced or modified, each by his* particular Properties:
Peter from John, Peter and John from James, by particular Properties,
Characters or Modes, both of Body and Mind; one (for instance) is bigger*
taller, wiser, or some other the like, than the other. This was what they
meant, when they described Personalities by Modes, and when they said there
were three Properties, Modes, or Characters in God: they meant not in the least
to deny, that each Person is a particular Substance, Essence or Nature,
different in Number from all other Substances, Essences or Natures; or to deny,
that each Person is a particular Being: they meant only, that each Individual,
or each Person, besides the common Specific Nature, (that is, besides the mere
Human, Angelical or Divine Nature) has also some particular Properties or
Characters; which ultimately distinguish him, from all the Individuals or
Persons of the same Species, Specific Nature, or Kind.

It is not true therefore, what Dr. S -- th pretends, that by Modes of
Subsistence the Ancients meant no more, than certain such Habitudes or
Affections, as Mutability, Presence, Absence, Posture, or such like: they meant
real, discretive and characterizing Properties or Qualifications; and by Person
they meant, a particular, individual, intelligent Substance or Essence, and so
modefied or characterized. They were far from dreaming, that the three Divine
Persons, an Almighty Son, an Almighty Father; and an Almighty Spirit distinct
in Number from both, were only one individual Substance distinguished, or
diversified by only three such lank and meagre Affections, as Absence, Posture,
Adherence; or any other that are no more in a Spiritual Substance, than those
three are in Bodies; to which they add no Perfection, and from which they are
(every Moment) separable.

But the Socinians are not concerned, what becomes of the Dispute about Persons
and Personalities in God; whether they are adequately the same, yea or no; and
again, whether the Moderns who follow the Schools, agree with the Ancients in
their Notion of them: for I will put to Dr. S -- th a plain Question, to which
if he is disposed to give a clear and Categorical Answer, it will appear to all
Men, that either he falls in with Dr. Sherlock, or with the Unitarians; that is
to say, he is either a Tritheist, or (what, I doubt, he will as much abhor) a
Socinian.

He says, there is one only Divine Substance, Essence or Nature; and thus far
we agree with him: but he adds, this one Substance is so diversified by three
Modes, Affections or Habitudes, or something like to them, that we must say
(under pain of Heresy and Damnation) that this one Substance is three Divine
Persons, a Father, his Son, and a Spirit distinct from both. Therefore I ask,
have the three (pretended) Divine Persons, each his own proper, peculiar and
personal Understanding, Will and Energy; so that there are in the Divine
Substance, or in God, three distinct (All-knowing, Almighty) Understandings,
Wills and Energies, as there are three distinct Persons; as Dr. Sherlock has
affirmed? Or have the three Persons but one only self-same Understanding, Will
and Energy in Number, as there is but one self-same Substance in Number? If he
says the former, he joins Hands with Dr. Sherlock; and is guilty of Tritheism,
no less than he: for three (Omniscient and Omnipotent) Understandings, Wills
and Energies, without doubt, are three Gods. If there be three Omnisciencies
and Omnipotencies, of necessity there must be three Omniscients and
Omnipotents: but that is Tritheism, even in the Judgment of Athanasius himself;
who expressly denies three Almighties, or three All-knowings. And indeed I do
not think, Dr. S -- th will say, that each Person has his own proper and
personal Understanding, Will or Energy; so that there are three distinct
Understandings, Wills and Energies in what his Party call the Godhead: I see
his Book is written with more Judgment and Precaution, than Dr. Sherlock's; or
even than any that I have seen, that have been written in Defense of the
Trinitarian Cause. But if he denies, that there are three (Allknowing,
Almighty) Understandings, Wills and Energies; he is a Socinian, he has granted
to us the Point in Controversy, he grants the whole that we contend for. They
will allow him to say, there are three Persons, or three thousand Persons in
the Godhead; so long as he grants but one (Omnipotent) Energy and Will, and but
one (All-knowing) Understanding or Wisdom. If this be granted to us, it is plain
to every one who gives but never so little heed; that the Question about three
Persons, is a mere Strife of Words; and the Authors of the Brief History, and
Brief Notes, are (tho not in their Words, yet in their Senses) as Orthodox as
Dr. S -- th and the Schools. I will affirm, we have no need of our Brief
Histories, or Brief Notes; we need not make an operose Proof of our Doctrine of
the Unity of God, from the Holy Scriptures or from Reason: the whole
Controversy with the Church is ended, in the Resolution of this short and plain
Question; Is there more than one All-knowing, Almighty Understanding, Will and
Energy? If you say, there is but one such Understanding, Will and Energy, in
one self-same Divine Substance; you may talk of as many Persons, Fathers, Sons,
Spirits, Modes, Properties, Respects, Nothings, as you please: we will only
peaceably advise you, that these are mere empty Words, that have nothing to
answer them in the thing under Consideration. When you have granted to us, that
there is but one Divine Substance, and but one Omniscient, Omnipotent
Understanding and Energy; what you add more of Persons, Properties, Thingams,
and call them a Trinity, it is an Addition only of Words and Names; not of
Realities, or Persons that are properly so called.

These things being so, and so very evident* I cannot wonder, that so
discerning a Philosopher as Dr. Cudworth, never speaks of the Trinity of the
Schools (maintained by Dr. S -- th) without calling it a Nominal Trinity, a
Trinity of Names and Words only, a disguised Sabellianism: which is to say,
Unitarianism or Socinianism dressed up in the absurd Cant of the Schools. But
whereas the Schools deform the sincere and easy Notion of the Unity of God, as
it is held by the Socinians and Sabellians, by transforming it into a Fantastic
Trinity of Nominal Persons, or of Persons who are Persons only in Name, not in
Truth and Reality: therefore Dr. Cudworth says farther, that this Trinity is
Jargonry in Philosophy, a Trinity that falls not under Human Conception, and
which cannot be in Nature. Intellect. System, p. 605. Elsewhere he scruples not
to name it, the Philosophy of Gotham.

These are the just Characters which that great Philosopher and Divine gives of
the Scholastic Trinity of Dr. S -- th: he gives his Reasons up and down in
the Intellectual System; but it is not necessary for me to report them, when
every one may see them in the Author himself; and besides they are too
Philosophical, to be put into a Discourse which I design for the Use of the
less learned, as well as of the learned.

I have done with Dr. S -- th's Explication, for this time: If he is angry with
me for the Reflections I have made thereupon, I protest it is without just
Cause. I have used no disrespectful Language; I have acknowledged, and do
acknowledge the Worth of the Man, and all other Perfections in his Book, but
only this one, that it maintains an unjustifiable Explication. The Method or
Structure of his Book is Natural, Elegant and Judicious; the Words, Expression,
or Phrase, is proper, forcible, clean, and well chose: it has very many
agreeable Turns of Wit, which render it pleasant to an ingenious Reader. As
this Author has a great deal of Wit, so he has known how to govern it in this
respect; that he is witty, without Buffoonry. This is a Conduct, not very usual
in those that have much Wit; commonly they know not how to manage it; and among
other unjudicious Neglects, they forget the Where and When, and other such like
Circumstances; they are so taken with their Talent, as to be always using it,
because they know not that everlasting fooling is true and mere fooling. But I
wish that Dr. S -- th in exercising his Wit, had remembered the who, which he
has utterly forgotten: and that was utterly an oversight, and a very great
one. He cannot excuse himself, by pleading the many Contradictions in Dr.
Sherlock's Book: a candid Man would not impute them to the Author, but to the
extreme Obscurity of the Subject; when the Subject it self is contradictory,
there will be many Contradictions committed in defending it. I doubt not that
Dr. Sherlock will find many Contradictions in Dr. S-th's second Chapter.

Having done to Dr. S -- th this Right, he ought not to be out of Humor, that
I as a Socinian, have attacked his Explication; as I have some other Learned
Men: I mean no Disrespect thereby to him, or them; I acknowledge their Personal
Merit, but cannot give up to them so sacred a Truth, as the Unity of God, or
consent that it be disguised and deformed.

Of the Explication by Mr. Hooker, Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity.
MR. Hooker, tho he was none of the Fathers of the Catholic Church, is not of
less Authority in the particular Church of England, than any one of the Fathers
is: and it must be confessed he was not only a very good, but a very learned and
discerning Man. But it is observed of him, that in speaking of the Trinity, he
speaks somewhat incorrectly: this was a Doctrine which he took for granted,
there was no Dispute in his time about it; so he has delivered himself, not
with his usual Precaution and Judgment. He says, That the Substance of God,
with this Property, to be of none, does make the Person of the the Father. The
very self-same Substance in Number, with this Property, to be of the Father,
makes the Person of the Son. The same Substance, having added to it the
Property of proceeding from the other two, makes the Person of the Holy Ghost.
So that in every Person there is implied both the Substance of God, which is
one; and also that Property, which causes the same Person really and truly to
differ from the other two.

I must observe, in the first place, hereupon, that Mr. Hooker in this matter
has not spoken over critically and correctly; nay, hardly Orthodoxly: I mean,
as Orthodoxy goes among the Learned of his own Parry. He says that the
Substance of God, with these Properties, to be of none, to be of the Father,
and to proceed from the other two, make the Persons of the Father, Son and
Spirit: now to be of none, to be of the Father, and to proceed from both, are
but other Words for this Sense, to beget, to be begotten, and to proceed. But
that Father of Modern Orthodoxy, Peter Lombard, whom we have already twice
mentioned, denies that these (beforementioned) are Properties in the Substance
of God, or that they can belong to it: he says, Essentia Divina non est
genera^^, nec genera^^, nec procedens; i. e. the Substance of God neither
begets, nor is begotten, nor proceeds. It Is impossible to make this consist
with Mr. Hooker, who expressly ascribes those Properties to the Divine
Substance or Essence, and says, that being in the Divine Substance, they make
it to be three Persons.

What shall we do here? Shall we say, Reverend Hooker has mistaken, and missed
his Sons (who are all the Church of England) into an Error concerning the
Trinity? Has he ascribed to the Divine Essence, Properties, which he calls
Persons, that are not in it? To give up Hooker, is to dishonor the Church of
England it self; to part with Father Hooker, is to endanger the very Surplice,
and even the Cross in Baptism; nay, that Book of Books the Common Prayer. If
Mr. Hooker could err about the Trinity; What will the Fanatics and Trimmers
say? Will they not be apt to pretend too, he may have erred in his profound
Dissertations and Discourses for the Rites and Discipline of the Church?

I am afraid, for all that, we must keep close to Peter Lombard, Master of the
Sentences, and of the Modern Divinity: he has been espoused by all the Popes
since Innocent the Third, by the Lateran Council which was General, and by the
tacit Approbation of the whole Church ever since.

I doubt, it is not much more passible, that Mr. Hooker says, that the
Properties, to be of none, to be of the Father, and to proceed, do (together
with the Substance of God) make the Persons of the Father, Son and Spirit. It
is not true, that those are the Properties which make the Persons: he might
say, that they make the Persons to be Father, Son and Spirit, or to have that
threefold Relation among themselves; but they do not make the three Persons to
be Persons; or thus, they do not make (as he speaks) the Persons. To be of none
makes the Father; but I deny, that it makes (as Mr. Hooker affirms) the
Person of the Father: the Character, or Property which makes the Person of the
Father, is quite another from the Property or Character that makes the Father.
To beget, to be begotten, and to proceed, are Properties which constitute the
Relations of Father, Son and Spirit: but they are other Properties, which make
the Persons of the Father, Son and Spirit.

Concerning the Properties or Characters which make the Re^^tions, all Learned
Trinitarians are agreed; they acknowledge them to be these three, Active
Generation, (not, as Mr. Hooker mistakes, this mere Negation to be of none)
Eternal Passive Generation, or to be begotten, and Eternal Procession: but
concerning the Properties that make the Persons, they are not so well accorded.
The Ancient Divines said, the Property that makes the Person of the Father, or
the peculiar Property and Character of the first Person, is Monarchy; the
Property of the second Person, is Wisdom; and of the third is Love. Others
said, that the Property of the first Person, is Beatitude and Rest; the
Property of the second is Operation: others had still other Conceits, all of
them false.

But allowing now the way of speaking, used by Mr. Hooker, what a Riddle has he
propounded? Here is the self-same Substance (in Number) unbegotten, and yet
begotten: the Divine Substance with the Property to be of none, or to be
unbegotten, is (says he) the Person of the Father; the self same Substance (in
Number) with the Property to be of the Father, or to be begotten, is (or makes)
the Person of the Son. Can the self-same Substance (in Number) be of none, and
yet be of the Father; be unbegotten, and begotten too? Are they not
contradictory Terms, and therefore not to be applied to the self-same Substance
in Number?

They will say, Mr. Hooker does not affirm, that the self-same Substance is
begotten and unbegotten; this indeed were a ^^t Contradiction: but he says,
that as it is in the Father, it is unbegotten; as in the Son, it is begotten.

But do they reckon they have to deal only with Fools? What if I should say, my
Hand as in my Pocket, is unskalded; but at in my Glove, it is skalded: would it
not be a Contradiction, for all the Blinds of in the Pocket, and in the Glove?
The self-same Hand in Number, cannot be burnt, and unburnt; the Place in which
it is, will not palliate such a Contradiction: in like manner, the self-same
Substance cannot be begotten, and unbegotten; because you are pleased to
pretend, you consider it sometimes in one Subject or Person, sometimes in
another. In whatever Person a Substance is, it must either be a begotten
Substance, or an unbegotten; it cannot possibly be both: if it really remains
unbegotten, then it never was begotten; but if in process of time it has been
begotten, then it cannot still be unbegotten.

Why do our Opposers choose to maintain such extravagant Paradoxes, rather than
acknowledge so easy and natural a Truth, as the Unity of God? Rather than
receive the first Commandment, in its natural and obvious sense; rather than we
will sincerely (and without Disguise or Juggle) own that there is but one only
God: we will choose to make our selves scorned by all sensible Men; by saying,
the self-same Substance (in Number) is begotten, and unbegotten; it is of the
Father, nay it is of Father and of Son, and yet it is of none.

Let us consider Mr. Hooker's Catch, in three Human Persons. He will say, the
Substance of John is begotten, as John is the Son of Peter; but John's
Substance is unbegotten, as John is the Father of James: and yet it is the
self-same Substance in Number, that is thus both begotten and unbegotten.

Is it so? but if John's Substance be really begotten, I will ever stand in it,
that his Substance is not unbegotten: it was begotten by his Father Peter,
therefore it is a begotten Substance, not an unbegotten.

Some one may say, but is not John's Substance unbegotten, in respect of John'
s Son James; tho it was begotten by Peter? By no means: for if Peter begot
John's Substance, then John's Substance is begotten, tho his Son James begot it
not; and consequently it cannot be said to be an unbegotten Substance, in any
respect whatsoever.

In short, they would have us to say; John's Substance is unbegotten, because
it was begotten by Peter, and not by John's Son James. I deny, that it is a
proper, or a true way of speaking: for if the Substance has been begotten by
any whomsoever; it must never after be called unbegotten, on this absurd
account, that it was not begotten by James, but by Peter.

Farther, whereas Mr. Hooker says, the Substance of God, with this Property to
be begotten, or to be of the Father, makes the Person of the Son: I ask, is
then the Substance of God begotten; I pray, who begat it? They must answer, the
Father! But did the Father beget the Substance of God? Do they not say, that
the self-same Substance that is in the Father, is also in the Son? But if so,
then if the Father begat the Substance of the Son, or of God, he begat his own
Substance. Can any one beget his own Substance? Is it not a Contradiction, a
manifold Contradiction? Is it not as much as to say, he was before he was? He
that begets his own Substance, begets himself: but he that begets himself, is
thereby supposed to have been before he was.

I know, it has been said by some Divines, God is self-originated or
self-begotten. But it is utterly false; they ought to have said, he is
unoriginated or unbegotten. As God is not originated or begotten, by another;
so much less by himself: not by another, for then that other must be before
him, at least in order of Nature; not by himself, because then he must be
before he was.

But to finish with Mr. Hooker, I will show his Followers, that in pursuance of
his Explication, they will be forced to say; that as the Father begat the Son,
so the Son destroys the Father. And I make challenge to them all, to rescue
their Master's Explication from that fatal Consequence. Begotten does always
destroy unbegotten; when once a Person or Thing is begotten, that self-same
Thing or Person can be no longer unbegotten. If therefore the Substance of God
unbegotten, makes (as Mr. Hooker contends) the Person of the Father; and the
self-same Substance begotten, makes the Person of the Son: it unavoidably
follows, that the Generation of the Son is the Destruction of the Father;
because the Property or Characteristick of the Father, even unbegotten, is
destroyed out of the Divine Substance, by the Characteristick of the Son, which
is begotten. Unbegotten (that is to say, the Father) remains no longer in the
Divine Substance; if begotten (that is, according to Hooker, the Son) has
taken place in it.

O that our learned Opposers would vouchsafe, to consider these things
impartially: that they would not reckon it is their Glory, to defend received
Doctrines, only because they have been long received, and by many; as if
Prescription or Numbers could alter the Nature of Truths and Untruths. Which (I
pray) is more honorable, to own a clear and necessary Truth; or to set one's
self to darken and to obstruct it? I confess the latter requires more Wit,
especially against an able and dexterous Defendant; but it is the other that
deserves greater Praise, especially before God, because it argues Sincerity and
Justice. But I pass to the last sort of Trinity, the Mystical Trinity.

Of the Mystical Trinity, or the Trinity of the Mobile.
THE poor common People are first made to believe, by the help of corrupted
Copies, and false Translations of the Bible, that it is a Scripture-Doctrine;
that there is a Trinity of Divine Persons, an Almighty Father, an Almighty Son,
and an Almighty Spirit distinct and different (in Number) from both Father and
Son. But because this (at the very first sight) appears contrary to Reason and
common Sense; therefore in the next place they are told, that they must
consider this Doctrine, as a Mystery, impossible indeed for us to understand,
yet necessary to be believed, because God has said it. How many things, say
these Teachers, are there in the Works of Nature, which we understand not, no
more than we can understand the Trinity: and yet we believe them to be, as
assuredly; as if there were no Difficulty, in conceiving how they should be.
As, that there are Antipodes, whose Feet are opposite to our Feet, and who walk
with their Heads downwards, with respect to our Parts of the World. Again, that
a Spirit can move a Body from place to place: tho Reason first assures us, that
there can be no Motion without a Resistance; and then, that a pure Spirit can
meet no Resistance, from Matter or Bodies. Also, that the Parts of Matter or
Bodies hold together; tho no Cause can be assigned for it, but what appears
immediately to be unsufficient, nay ridiculous. All these are great Truths, and
we believe them, even contrary to the Verdict of Reason: how much more ought we
to believe the Trinity, which has been propounded to us, as an Article of
Faith, in the Word of God it self, tho our fallible and frail Reason reclaims,
and kicks perhaps against it? When the Socinians, say these Gentlemen, have
accounted for all the Mysteries of Nature and Art; let them begin to object to
the Trinity, that it is a Mystery, and that it has sundry Contradictions to
Reason: but till they do the first, it is nothing else but a bold Impiety to
insist on the other.

It must be confessed, Sir, that this is the most plausible Pretense; the
strongest Hold, as well as the last Resort of our Opposers: when we have drove
them from all other Posts, here they take Sanctuary. I will therefore take care
to remove this Occasion, and Cover of Error. I say,

1. I might leave it wholly to Dr. S -- th, to answer this Pretense of some of
his Party. At p. 2, and 3, etc. of his Animadversions, he shows at large, what
is a Mystery; he says, that a Mystery is a Truth revealed by God, above the
reach of Human Reason to find out, or to comprehend. He vindicateth this
Definition, part by part; he says, p. 3. first, a Mystery is a Truth; by
which, says he, I exclude every thing from being a Mystery, which is absurd,
or contradictions. Now we desire nothing else of our Oppo^^^^, but that they
would abide by this Account of Mystery; that it is not something absurd, or
contradictory, but only some Secret revealed by God, because it was above Human
Capacity to discover it, and sometimes also even to comprehend how it can be.
For there is a vast Difference between my not being able to conceive how a
thing should be, and a clear Apprehension and Sight that it cannot be. There
are (it may be) Mysteries, which we cannot comprehend how they should be: but
that three Divine Persons, or three distinct Almighty and All-knowing Persons,
should be but one Almighty, but one All-knowing, or but one God, a Man (who
considers but with never so little Intention and Sincerity) clearly sees, that
it cannot be. In short, that it is not a Mystery, but (as Dr. S -- th speaks) an
Absurdity and a Contradiction. In a word, we do not reject the Doctrines of the
Trinity and Incarnation, because they are Mysteries; but because they are plain
Contradictions to Reason and common Sense, and consequently Untruths: for
(without doubt) Reason and Truth are but two Names, for the same thing; and
clear Reason is no other thing, but clear Truth.

2. I consider, that what will equally serve to excuse all the Nonsense, and
impossible Doctrines, that are to be found among Men; we cannot admit of it, as
a Defense of the (pretended) Trinity and Incarnation: especially in Opposition
to such powerful Proofs, both from Scripture and Reason; as may be, and
actually are alleged against those Doctrines. A Papist, for Example, does
(with equal color) alledg this Pretense, for his Transubstantiation. He says,
It Is a Scripture-Doctrine, delivered in these express words, This is my Body:
and how many things are there in the Works of Nature, which we comprehend not,
no more than we can comprehend the Miracle of the Transubstantiation; and yet
we believe them to be, as assuredly, as if there were no Difficulty in
conceiving how they should be, or that they can be. Such as the Antipodes; and
that a pure Spirit can ^^^ve a Body, in which it finds no Resistance; and
that the Parts of Matter or Bodies are continuos, or hold together: and many
the like. Thus do the Papists argue; and I deny, that this Pretense can be
wrested from them, by any Trinitarian: for it is the same Defense that the
Trinitarian makes for his Doctrines of the Trinity and the Incarnation. Our
Opposers will not vouchsafe, so much as to hear Catholics and Lutherans, when
they plead Mystery, for the Transubstantiation or the Consubstantiation: I
desire of them therefore, to give me but one Reason, why that Plea is not as
good in those Controversies, as in these of the Trinity and Incarnation.

The Author of two Dialogues, concerning the Trinity and the
Transubstantiation, finding himself pressed with this Difficulty, answers to
this effect, that there are a great many more Texts of Holy Scripture for the
Trinity, than are pretended for the Transubstantiation. But this is no Solution
of the proposed Difficulty: for it is not at all the Question, which Doctrine
has most Texts alleged for it; but only, whether the Pretense of Mystery, be
not a Plea as rational and allowable, against all the Exceptions made against
the Transubstantiation, as an impossible, inconceivable and contradictory
Doctrine; as it is to the same Exceptions, when urged by the Socinians against
the Incarnation or Trinity? But whereas that Author insists upon an Answer,
wholly foreign to this Difficulty; and is so careful to bring together, from
Cardinal Bellarmine, all the Texts alleged for the Trinity: he is desired to
name to us so much as one Text for either of those Doctrines; that is not given
up to the Socinians, by some of the most Learned Interpreters and Critics of
his own Party, as indeed no Proof of the Trinity, the Incarnation, or the
Divinity of the Son or Spirit. What avails it, for a Man to talk of the great
number of Texts, which he can alledg; when the ablest Persons of his own Party,
do (in the mean time) ow^ the Unsufficiency of every one of them in particular?
If he thinks he has cause to deny, that the Socinians have this great Advantage
on their side; whenever he shall do it publicly, I will bear the Reproach, if
I do not justify what I have said, by Citation of particular Authors of the
first Note and Rank among our Opposers.

3. Our Opposers urge, that there are (and the Soci^^^^s themselves believe) a
great many Mys^^^^^s in Nature; of which no Human Reason can give an Account,
nay Reason objects against them, and professedly contradicts them: as that a
pure Spirit can move a Body, In which it meets no Resistance; that Bodies or
Matter consist of indivisible Parts; and such like. Well, suppose the Socinians
should grant these, or other unaccountable Mysteries, which not only are not
comprehended, but are contradicted by Reason: What then? Why, then they are
very inconsiderate, to deny (as they do) the Trinity and Incarnation; on this
account, that it is contrary to Reason, or implies Contradictions and
Absurdities. But our Opposers should have thought better of this Objection,
before they laid so great a Weight on it; even the Weight of their whole Cause.
For tho we should grant, that we believe some Mysteries of Nature or Art,
against which Reason objects, and many ways contradicts them; yet is this no
Plea for the Trinity, or the Incarnation. For if we believe Natural or
Artificial Mysteries, it is because we plainly see that so the thing is: we see
or we feel, or have some other undeniable Proof of the thing; some such Proof,
as no rational Man will or can resist. Does any Man believe Mysteries, or
wonderful Tales, contrary to his Reason, and the Reason of all other Men;
without a most manifest and uncontestable Proof of them; without some such
Proof or Proofs, as undeniably evince the thing so to be? But will our Opposers
pretend, they have any such Proofs for the Incarnation or Trinity; such
manifest, such evident, such uncontestable Proofs, that no sober Man, or no
reasonable Man can except against them, or refuse to admit of them? I do not
think they will pretend to it, if it be but for this only Reason, because the
Socinians are confessed to be a Rational and Learned Party. Are those Evidence or
Proofs uncontestable, which are rejected, not without some Scorn, by some of
the learnedest, and most unsuspected of their own Party? Are they
uncontestable, that not only may be interpreted to another Sense, but also are
either otherways read in the best Copies of the Hebrew and Greek, or may be
otherways translated from those Languages; and all this, by confession of the
more ingenious of our Opposers themselves? Briefly, we say, Mysteries there
are; and it may be such Mysteries, as are even contradicted by Reason; that is,
are in some respects Contradictions to our present (short-sighted and frail)
Reason: but when we believe there are some such Mysteries, it is because they
appear to our Senses; or are proved to us by some such either Reason or
Authority, as no reasonable Man, much less any Number of such Men, does or can
deny to be uncontestable. And otherways, all the unwarrantable Nonsense in the
World may be imposed on us, under the Pretense and Cloak of Mystery. But now
the Doctrine of the Trinity, has not only no uncontestable Proofs; but the
Pretenses for it are so feeble, that none of them can be named, but is not only
rejected, but despised by some of the learnedest of our Opposers themselves.
They would persuade us to acknowledge a Mystery, full of Contradictions to the
clearest Reason, and to indisputable Texts of Holy Scripture; and supported in
the mean time, only by some Texts that may be interpreted to a Rational Sense,
that is, to a Sense that has nothing contrary either to Reason, or to the
unquestionable Parts or Texts of the Holy Scripture. For Peace sake, we would
do so, if it were some light matter that they urged on us: but when the
Question is, about one or more Gods, one or more Divine Persons, we judge it
advisable, not to be too facile in admitting such dangerous Mysteries;
Mysteries that would destroy the Allegiance and Homage that we all owe to the
one true God.

I have done, Sir, with the Explications of our Opposers. You see what they
are: Dr. S -- th's Explication is only an absurd Socinianism; or Unitarianism
disguised in a Metaphysical and Logical Cant. Dr. Wallis his Explication is an
ingenious Sabellianism; and in very deed differs from Unitarianism, no more
than Dr. S -- th's, that is to say, only in the wording. Dr. Sherlock's is such
a flat Tritheism, that all the Learned of his own Party confess it to be so;
and Dr. S -- th has written a very accurate Book to prove it so. Dr.
Cudworth's is a moderate Arianism; the Ariani molles ascribed as much to the
Son, as this Doctor does: and he denies as much to the Son, as they did; even
an Equality of Power, and Authority with the Father. Mr. Hooker's is a Trinity,
not of Persons, but of Contradictions: and he has advanced such a Son, as of
necessity destroys his Father. What the Mystical Divines teach, cannot be
called an Explication; they deny all Explications: we must say therefore it is
Samaritanism; for what our Savior says of the Samaritans, by way of Reproof
and Blame, that these Gentlemen profess concerning themselves, that they
worship they know not what.

These, Sir, are the Doctrines that we oppose; I shall leave it with you,
whether it be without cause.

Before I conclude, I beg your Leave to say two words to Mr. Basset, who has
answered (or thinks he has answered) to the Brief History of the Unitarians:
and to Dr. Fulwood and Dr. Edwards, Men of Dignity in the Church; but who have
not thought it below them, to use the very vilest Language, and the basest and
most ungrounded Scandals, that their Malice to our Persons, and their Ignorance
of the Points in question between us and the Church, could suggest to them.

These two Doctors tell their Readers, that the Unitarians deny the Omniscience
of God, or that he fore-knoweth contingent Events: that they deny his
Omnipresence, making him to be present in all Places, only by his Knowledge, and
his Power; that they ascribe the same degree of Power and Knowledge, and pay the
self-same Worship to the Lord Christ, whom they affirm to be a mere Man, which
they ascribe or pay to Almighty God; and hereby, say these Doctors, they are
guilty of an Idolatry that is equally evident and abominable. They pretend to
prove this Charge out of the Writings of Socinus, Smalcius, and some others of
the Party. I say now;

1. That their Quotations out of Socinus and the rest, are (for a great pa^^ of
them) as false and disingenious as those ^^ Dr. Wallis were: as any one will
see, who shall take the Pains to consult the Authors themselves.

2. They make it to be a great Heresy in some Socinians, that they deny there
is a certain Fore-knowledg of contingent Events: they say it is a Denial of
God's Omniscience. And yet all Men know, that very many of the most Learned
Trinitarians, have been of the same Opinion; Ancients as well as Moderns,
Protestants as well as Catholics. Nor have these Doctors so much as offered at
an Answer to the Reasons of Socinus and Crellius, concerning a conditional
Knowledge in God.

3. That God is Omnipresent, not in his Essence or Person, but by his Knowledge
and Power; is also held by diverse Learned Trinitarians: and it must needs have
been the Opinion of those Fathers, who either were Anthropomorphites; or held
that God is a Body, not a Spirit.

4. These Doctors have written against the Socinians, by occasion of the
English Books, that have been lately published, by those of that Persuasion:
they should therefore have attacked the Doctrine of those Books; they should
have described our Opinions out of our own Writings, not from the Books of
Foreigners. The English Socinians sincerely believe, that God is truly
Omniscient; that he foreseeth all Events, how contingent soever they may be to
us. They believe the real Omnipresence of God; or that he is present in his
Essence or Person in all Places, and not only by his Power, Knowledge or
Ministers. They honor, or if we must use that word, they worship the Lord
Christ; neither with the same sort, nor with the same degree of Worship, which
is due to God: they worship or honor him, with their Minds, only as one who is
highly exalted by God, above all Principality and Power, and every Name that is
named; and to whom God has given to be Head over all things to the Church. In
a word, they neither pay a higher Worship, nor impute a greater Power or
Knowledge to the Lord Christ, than the most Learned, and the far greater Number
of Trinitarians, impute and pay to the Human Nature (the mere Human Nature) of
Jesus Christ, in his present State of Exaltation.

We have said these things so often in our late Books; we have defended them so
earnestly, that none but Persons of little Honesty, or great Inconsideration,
would object to us such Opinions as these beforementioned. But these Gentlemen
had a longing Mind to be Authors; and who should they signalize themselves
upon, so popularly, as upon the Socinians: if they have got Reputation by their
Books, that is, by weak Arguments and strong Calumnies; it is with so very few,
that I do not think they will reap an Advantage by it.

But one of them urges, that Socinus was in this dangerous Heresy, that the
Soul of Man, after the Death of his Body, is in a State of Inactivity and
Unperception; in a word, neither perceives nor lives, till the Resurrection of
the Body: at which time, it receives Immortality, by the mere Grace or Gift of
God; but is not, of its own Nature, immortal.

I do acknowledge, that this seems to be the Opinion of F. Socinus; but, I
believe, of very few Unitarians besides. But this Error was common to him, with
some of the Fathers: the Learned Monsieur Du Pin has noted, that Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Minutius Foelix and Arnobius were in this Sentiment. There was no
Reason therefore to object this, to Socinus; as if it were a peculiar Opinion
of his; much less to the English Unitarians, who never defended it; nor, that I
know of, do any of them hold it.

As to Mr. Basset, there are two things very remarkable, in his Answer to the
Brief History of the Unitarians: the meanness and dullness of the Book it self,
it being written with no Vivacity, Wit, or Elevation of Thought; and the
undecent Insolence of the Author. His Book being such as it is, if the Brief
History cannot shift for it self, against that Reply to it; the Historian is
resolved it shall take its Fortune: he is persuaded, that when a discerning Man
has read Mr. Basset's Answer; if he again looks over the Brief History, he will
(at least) as much approve of it, as at first. Mr. Basset has said nothing,
that can in the least shake the Reputation of the Brief History; unless his
Reader will believe him, when he charges the Historian with false Quotations of
Authors. To this the Historian answers; that he has not made one false or
mistaken Citation: but Mr. Basset sometimes not understanding the Authors that
are quoted, for they are Greek and Latin; and sometimes mistaking the Sense of
the Historian, which he does very frequently; it has happened hereupon, that
he has charged the Historian with his own either Ignorances or Inadvertences.
But I am not at leisure to write a Vindication, every time that negligent and
ignorant Scriblers mistake my meaning; or the Sense or the Authors by me
alleged.

I reckon it to be his Insolence, that a Person who had nothing to offer on
these Questions; but what was very trivial and vulgar; should yet give
disrespectful Language, without any the least Provocation given by the
Historian. He says, for instance, that indeed the Foreign Socinians have been
learned and subtle Men; but he cannot say so concerning the English: but for
the Epistler, so he calls the Writer of the Brief History, because it is written
in four Letters; he says, Poor Wretch ought to have employed his small Talent
to honester Purposes, and not have sought for Reputation only by his Nonsense,
his Follies, and his Impieties.

This was a Mortification indeed, c^ming (as it does) from so great and worthy
a Hand: but the Comfort is, we are apt to be more advised, and bettered also by
our Humiliations. And yet I am still of Opinion, that as Mr. Basset thought it
requisite to answer the Brief History after the great Victory gained over it by
Dr. Sherlock: so there will not want many others, who will judge it no less than
necessary; to give other Answers to it, after this Triumph of Mr. Basset. But
however that be, I answer to Mr. Basset, as Moses did to Pharaoh, Glory over
me; I am resolved Mr. Basset shall have the Self-satisfaction, that he has
mauled the Epistler for ever. For I will not catch Flies, nor spend my
Artillery upon Mud-Walls; when I happen on some such Second, as Dr. Sherlock
found up against the Jesuits, Mr. Basset may hear from me, and not before,

I will not ask Pardon, Sir, for the length of this Letter; for you see to how
many it was necessary to make some Answer: but I ought not to forget, to give
you my Thanks and Respects, for the Liberalities and Favors, which you have
done to your

Humble Servant.

A LETTER to the Publisher from another Hand.
SIR,
I Heartily thank you for the perusal of this most learned and judicious
Letter, which I return you; and I congratulate the worthy Author, whom the
Divine Wisdom has made an Instrument for the vindicating of his glorious and
incommunicable Attribute of Unity, which he has in several Tracts even
demonstrated, not only by clear and express Scriptures and obvious Reason, but
also now at length from the Confessions of the Trinitarians themselves, the
Infringers of it. For whilst each one condemns the several Explications of the
rest, as either inconsistent with the Unity, or the Trinity, they do all in
their turns bear Witness to the Unitarians, that their Opposition to the
Trinitarian Doctrine is well-grounded and reasonable, and consequently their
Doctrine of the Unity the Truth of God. For if each one of their Explications
does either introduce the Worship of three Gods, or the Heresy of Sabellianism,
as they call it, the turning the Son and Holy Ghost into Names and Operations
without any real Distinction of Persons, or Things answering those distinct
Names, as it plainly appears they do; then it undeniably follows, there is no
such Trinity as they imagine, but a Numerical Unity of Person and Essence in
God, as the Unitarians hold; and as some Trinitarians contend in their
Opposition one to another. It remains then that the Trinitarian Worshippers,
especially the common People, do seriously and in the Fear of the one most High
God, consider, what Notions, Conceptions, or Idea's they have, of an Infinite
and Almighty Holy Ghost distinct from the Almighty Father and Producer of them:
For they cannot possibly escape the Condemnation of one of the highest Crimes,
even the Worship of three Infinite Real Gods, or two Imaginary Ones, or two
Names without Notions; that is, they know not what, as this Author expresses
it; Condemnation I say, not only by the Unitarians (who worship the Father only
as God in the highest and strictest Sense of that Term) but also by all the
Trinitarians, that hold not the same Opinion, or have not the same Notion.

I know the Times of Ignorance God winketh at, as well now, as before the
preaching of the Gospel; but after he has made his Unity manifest, and
vindicated it from the Scholastic Subtilties and absurd Distinctions, that
have been invented to hide the Truth, he then commands all Men, to whom this
Evidence comes, to repent. Inconsideration or Negligence will not now excuse.
Men must not say or think (as they commonly do) this Point is too high for me
to determine; for they have already determined it, whilst they profess to
believe in, and to worship three equal ones, a Father, a Son, and a Spirit.
Neither can they alledg the Universality of the Trinitarian Faith: For besides
(as this Author observes) the worshipping of many Gods was formerly, and is now
far more universal; we see that this Opinion and Worship, which soever it be,
is condemned by at least four to one of those that go under that common Name of
Trinitarians. The rise of these diverse and contrary Explications has been this
(as is observed by the Author in that which now obtains) that Learned Men
looking narrowly into former Explications, have found them inconsistent with
the Oneness of God, and therefore have devised somewhat either more obscure,
that would hide the Contradiction, or somewhat more consistent with the Unity,
tho it destroyed the Trinity; or more consistent with the Trinity, tho it
destroys the Unity, as Dr. Sherlock has done. And perhaps others like him may
devise other Hypotheses, taking it for granted from the Prejudices of early
Education and customary thinking, that the Trinity is a Fundamental of
Christianity. But we see here they labor in vain to reconcile manifest
Contradictions: and in believing the Son and Holy Spirit to be equally God with
the Father, they offend against express Scriptures and clear Reason, upon the
account of their own Reasonings upon obscure Texts; and therein transgress the
plain Principles, both of Natural Light and Revelation, which require, 1. That
nothing be held for Truth contrary to evident and Fundamental Truth. And, 2.
That obscure Passages are to be interpreted by clear Passages, and the Current
of Scripture, and not otherwise. The Jews walking contrary to these Principles,
was the cause of rejecting Christ and Christianity, and it is indeed the ground
of all Error whatever. In vain do Men press a great many Texts (that have, even
in the Opinion of Learned Trinitarians, another meaning) to prove that the Son
and Holy Ghost are God; till they can reconcile that Inference to plain
Scripture and evident Reason. In vain does the Author of The Snare broken (who
could not overcome the Prejudices of his Education and Converse) persuade Men
to lay aside their Philosophy, and wholly to betake themselves to a Scriptural
Consideration of the (...); by which I understand, they must take the words of
Scripture without understanding them, or reconciling them to other Scriptures,
or even the Current of Scripture or common Reason. Do they think that Scripture
is to be interpreted contrary to it self? Or, that Divine Wisdom has made the
Belief of Contradictions necessary to Salvation?

It seems strange that Christians should be very zealous in the Punctilio's of
the Worship of God, Ceremonies of Posture, Gesture or Apparel; Forms of
Addresses to God, the wording of Faith to an Iota; and yet go on in the Worship
of one God the Father, and of two distinct from him, God as perfectly as he;
and in which their Worship terminates equally with him. They can love God the
Father with all their Hearts and Strengths, and two Persons distinct from him
with the same All: they can give all to one, and all to another, and all to a
third, and never question the Possibility of it; as if there were a Trinity in
Unity in every Man; that his own Heart were three Hearts, to be bestowed all
and entirely upon each of three Objects, and yet be but one Heart still. But
whither am I carried? This Author needs none of my Notes or Illustrations: and
indeed both he and all others that have labored in this Controversy, may
surcease their Pains henceforth, and leave what they have already said to the
Judgment and Conscience of all considerate and sincere Men. I am,

Sir, yours, etc.


