THE HISTORY Of the Affairs of EUROPE In this present Age, But more
particularly of the REPUBLIC OF VENICE.

Written in Italian by BATTISTA NANI Cavalier and Procurator of St MARK.

Englished by Sir ROBERT HONYWOOD, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet, betwixt
the Middle-Temple-gate and Temple Bar. MDCLXXIII.

Whitehall, March 4. 1671/72
THE Original of this History being written with much Prudence, Gravity, and
Eloquence; the Right Honorable Sir John Trevor, Knight, His Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State, does Permit and License this Translation to be
Printed and Published.

Jo. Cook.

TO Sir Walter Vane Knight, COLONEL OF HIS MAJESTY'S HOLLAND-REGIMENT.
Dear Brother,
I Began this Translation in the Circumstances of an uncomfortable old Age and
ruined Fortune, brought upon me, rather by public Calamity than private Vice,
or domestic Prodigality. And I undertook it to divert the melancholy hours,
arising from the consideration of either. And as the intention was private, and
without the least thought of making it public; so I judged it every way best
not to exceed those limits, till some, acquainted with the affairs of those
times, desiring it might see the light, and I then considering the Friendship
that has always been betwixt us, and that particular owning a share in all my
misfortunes, and a readiness to be assistant to me in them: I thought it did of
right belong to you; and that I might without vanity own also so much of
public, as to publish to whomsoever shall read this Book the true value and
sense I have of your Love and Kindness to me and mine, exercised with a
Generosity without many Examples.

I therefore desire you (Dear Brother) to accept it, not as that whereby you
receive any thing but the Testimony of the Respect I bear you, and retribution
I owe you; yet I presume I shall not deceive you, if I promise you, that are a
heedful Reader, that you shall find in it Reflections useful for the way you
are in both of Court and Camp, and matter to give you occasion to acknowledge,
it may deserve a place amongst the best of Modern Writers, if not the first,
unless it have received too much disadvantage by the unskilfulness of the
Interpreter. But I will not raise that expectation by so weak an Argument as
mine own Judgment, but leaving it to yours, subscribe my self

Your Affectionate Brother and Humble Servant Robert Honywood.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Reader,
NEXT after Writing Books, Translating them, and Printing those Translations,
are the worst offices we do the Public. For as not many of the one deserve the
light; so the same proportion must hold in the other. Yet, where the one and
the other are exercised with Judgment, and in profitable and noble Subjects,
they cannot want a just value among wise and sober Men. For, though I confess,
nothing has of late so much thronged the Press as Romances and Plays, with
things of a light and fanciful Nature, and that this very Book has found
difficulty to creep forth, as being not of that form; yet I dare assure thee,
thou shall find in it, if thou be Romantic inclined, Truth in matter of Fact
out-doing Fiction; if thou love History, thou shall find the best Ancient and
Modern Historians emulated and imitated; Civil Wisdom and Policy curiously
observed; the Trade of War, if thy way be Martial, strenuously carried on;
Vices and Errors, Persons and Actions civilly censured; Virtues set up on high
to be the better seen; and the Commonwealth, from which this History takes
its Name, in Difficulties wisely deliberating, in Resolutions vigorously
acting; in making Treaties Cautious, in executing of them Faithful and
Constant; sparing in time of Peace; prodigal of their Treasure in the necessary
occasions of War; and at all times punishing Fraud in it equally with
Rebellion: So that, if the Inventor of those Glasses, which showed by
reflection at the foot of one side of a Mountain what was done on the other,
was famous for it, though but a Knack; why not this Author much more, who from
behind the Mountain of Time represents to thy view, not only what has been
actually done in the busy years treated of in this History, but what were the
secret Counsels, and who the Authors of them; and also by Reflection what will
be done in the World till Ambition and the Passions of Men shall cease and be
no more. Thus, Reader, though good Wine needs no Bush; yet since sophisticating
is now so universal, I thought to give thee Advertisement, and leave it to be
tasted by Thee.

TO THE MOST SERENE PRINCE DOMINICO CONTARINI DUKE of VENICE.
Most Serene Prince,
I Have undertaken to write this History, not out of any vain design to publish
my own name, but by an impulse not unworthy commendation, to eternize my duty
to my Country, where it having pleased God to give me my birth, and make me
partaker of its liberty, I have thought it a small thing to dedicate to it the
short moments of my life, if I could not find out some way besides to continue
my obedience even after my death, and leave a monument to my fellow Citizens,
and the World, of the famous actions and signal deservings of so high and
mighty a Commonwealth. This Work was begun amidst the fatigue and labor of
many other employments, and for the most part in Ambassies in Foreign Courts
and Countries, and would have run the hazard amidst the distractions and the
management thereof, of having been destroyed even as soon as it was conceived,
if by stealing time from my rest, and rest from my self, I had not taken pains
to present it at last at the feet of your Serenity.

Your Serenity ought in justice to accept it because you commanded it, and in
your goodness to bear with it; and its faults may appear more innocent, and
many of its defects excusable, whilst in place of that honest leisure and quiet
which study requires, I was obliged to suspend my Pen, as often as my Country
was pleased to require from me, in several occasions, the usufruit both of my
life and endeavors: I have taken Truth for my Guide, as being the soul of
History, and a duty which ought to be stipulated by every Writer with God and
Man.

This I may say, that I have not wanted courage to speak it, nor means to
discern it. Because, besides the Writings of so many (though some not
sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of things, or free from passion, have
preferred the sparing of truth before silence;) the access to Princes, the
negotiating with Public Ministers, discourse with those who were the Actors of
the things most remarkable, the view of situations and places, have fully
informed me with what passed abroad; I have had means to be instructed at home,
not only by the free access to our public Records, and the most secret
Counsels, but because they have been managed in a good part by my Ancestors and
Relations, and some of them by my self. Nevertheless I have not suffered my
self to be defiled with partiality, but passing by the privilege of venerable
antiquity, which to a face of Truth has another closely adjoining, that of
Falsehood; I have chosen to expose my self to trial, and perhaps to reproof, and
that I might render a testimony of more authority to posterity, to write of the
present Age to the Age it self.

I know it is a sacred thing to compose Histories, and not to be undertaken but
with an upright mind and undefiled hands; and that for that cause the memory of
them was consigned to the Temple, under the faithful custody of the Chief
Priests, as the witness or trust of those that went before, and the treasure of
those that should come after, not to be handled but as a religious thing, and
with great caution. In sum, the Historian taking to himself an absolute
Dictatorship, nay an authority more than humane, over times, persons, and
actions, governs fame, measures desert, penetrates intentions, discloses
secrets, is, with an undistinguished arbitrament over Kings and People, the
Judge of Ages past, and Master of those to come, absolves or punishes, deceives
or instructs. Whence, not without reason, the Pen of Writers may be compared to
that Lightning, which striking out but one Letter from the Name, Caesar
Augustus, made him a God; because praise is a thing so tender, that one dash
makes illustrious and a little blot infamous, and the censure of the world
thereupon is so severe, that it either consecrates to eternity or proscribes to
infamy. For my self, Most Excellent Prince, I know not what else to wish, but
that every one would take upon him to read this work with the same disinterest
and innocent mind with which I have writ it, confining my confidence to this
one thing, that the present Age will not be so unjust to me, nor so ungrateful
to posterity, as to deny me the opinion of sincerity, and the merit of
obedience.

For the rest, the August name of your Serenity, which will be one of the
principal subjects of my ensuing labor, when I shall come to adorn it with the
years made signal by your glorious Government, is chosen the Tutelar Deity of
this first part, to that end the work may defended by the shadow of your
protection at present, as it will in a little time be made famous by the
splendor of your Heroic Virtues, which being acknowledged by this our Age for
peculiar gifts from Heaven to our Country, will be reverenced in time to come,
as Examples in a free Commonwealth of a great Patriot, and a greater Prince. I
presume not to insert my private observances toward your Serenity, amidst the
public considerations of my duty: I only implore a benign reflection of your
powerful approbation, as a comfortable Ray of that fortune, with which your
Serenity, Governing with happiness and wisdom, after glory gotten in the
dangers of so long a War, shall confirm with Victory and Peace, perpetuity and
security to our Country.

Of Your Serenity The most humble and most devoted Servant BATTISTA NANI.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE.
THE Republic of Venice, consecrated from its very beginning to Religion and
Liberty, had its prosperous birth in the fifth Age of our Redemption. If it may
be said, that the age of States is better measured by power, than time, its
Infancy lasted for many Ages, during which, with uncorrupted Laws and Manners,
and the security of their situation, they frustrated the fierce assaults of
barbarous Nations, and the ambition of other Princes. The first time she took
up Arms, was in defense of Piety and Justice; afterward they were employed
against those, who envying their Liberty, went about to disturb their Quiet.
And so the Francks and Huns being repulsed in the inmost parts of their Channels
and Ports, she began to be more considered, and the Government through the
Concord of the Citizens, and the Authority of the Laws, to settle and grow up
into a more strong complexion. Liberty was no sooner secured, but there arose
Contests about Empires. The first undertakings in that Age, were against the
Dalmatians and Istrians. Those of Ancona, and others of the Seacoasts were
also conquered, so that having gotten with the price of Blood, the dominion of
the Adriatic Sea, as a Patrimony, she increased in Wealth and Power to such a
degree, that she not only repulsed, but very often overcame the Hungarians,
Sarazens, Greeks, Normans, and those of Pisa, and Genova, enriching her self
with their States and spoils. Her expeditions into the Holy Land were very
powerful, united with the Francks; she destroyed the Grecian Empire, and alone
undertook the Defense of Pope Alexander III; with the success of her Arms
abroad, (a thing that seldom happens) she rectified all things at home, and
brought her self to that Constitution, which at this Day we see her in; equally
durable and wonderful. No body was able now to resist her at Sea; and in the
15th Age of Christ she empowered her self with considerable additions at Land.
She got Friuli, Padua, Verona, and Vincenza, with large Territories; and
passing the Mineio, squaring her Empire, extended her Borders to the River
Adda, and Po. She had Romagna under Protection, and Puglia in Mortgage. But as
she grew Great, others grew Envious; whereupon after the Year 1500. all the
Princes of Christendom, and some of them against the style of their own
Interest, united to restrain her increasing Power. This was a terrible shock,
the Destiny of the Commonwealth alone being exposed to hazard against the
Fortune of all Europe. But the Prudence of the Government, the Constancy of
their Minds, the Faithfulness of the Common People, and the Reconciliation with
France, extricated all their difficulties; Liberty in the close remaining
unviolated, and the Empire for the most part confirmed. But her State, which
was to be looked at as the Basis of all Italy, could not be in trouble without
putting the whole Country into a Convulsion. Insomuch that although the
Venetians after the Peace of Bologn, saw themselves in a Calm, the rest lay for
the most part under the slavery of Strangers.

The Commonwealth at this time was encompassed by Sea, and by Land, with two
great Powers; divided according to the four Cardinal points of the World, East
and South with the Ottoman Family, and West and North with the House of
Austria. She therefore fixed her thoughts in the Arts of Preservation, and of
Peace, watching upon what was fit for her and her Friends, and for her own, and
common Liberty. The Turks gave her two great Attacques by Sea in the Years
1537, and 1570. carrying away rich and great spoils. But the famous Victory of
Curzolary signed Peace for a long time, during which they strengthened the
Defense of their Empire, beautified their City, gave vigor to their Forces,
furnished their Arsenals, and laid up a no small Treasure. She maintained a
very long quiet in Italy, and though the Wars betwixt France and Spain did for
many Years disturb it, she notwithstanding observed a constant neutrality. The
whole Country settling afterward into a most Happy Peace, kept not without
jealousy by the Foreigners themselves, the Venetians made it their business to
preserve that present tranquillity, sometime diverting the storm at the first
appearance, and sometimes, according to the occasion, opposing themselves with
Declarations and Treaties. The War which happened betwixt France and Spain in the
beginning of this present Age, did not penetrate into Italy. Some stirs
occasioned by the Interest of the Grisons were quieted. The differences risen
with Pope Paul the Fifth were terminated with increase of reputation, and
advantage for the Republic; and that thunder of War, which was threatened by
Henry the Fourth, vanished with his death. All things thus contributing to the
Peace of Italy, Wisemen nevertheless were not free from fear, lest many
disgusts lurking secretly in the hearts, and several designs in the minds of
Princes, there would be a new Rupture, so soon as any occasion or pretext for
it did appear. And in that thought they were not long deceived, for in the
brightest Serenity of this Peace, the blow happened at unawares, with so much
slaughter, and so many mischiefs, that defiling Italy, it has put Europe into
confusion.

This shall be the subject, and first part of this work of mine; because as the
Interests of the Republic refer principally to those two great powers of
Austria and the Turks, with whom it borders; so the Narrative shall be divided.
And I will describe in this, the most notable events which have troubled Italy;
and in which the Republic has assisted with their Counsels, Arms, and
Treasures: And for the other part shall be reserved the Memorials of its long
and generous defense against the Ottoman Empire. And because Italy, being the
heart of Europe, cannot suffer a shaking but the rest must be moved, and have a
feeling of it, you shall read herein connexed the Affairs and Actions of the
chief Princes of the World, the Conduct and Maxims of their chief Ministers,
with the Revolutions of States, and so many other accidents, as make the Age no
less Unhappy than Famous, and the Relation equally important.

For the better knowledge of the things to follow, it is needful to look a
little back: Princes, though Mortal, are the Genii of the World. The effects of
their Counsels outlive their Lives, and are like the Stars, whose influences
remain long, though they disappear from our sight. When Arragon in the Person
of Ferdinand the Catholic was joined to Castile, and all the Kingdoms within
the compass of Spain were in a manner united together, comprehending also the
Islands of the Mediterranean, and both the Sicilies, there was laid the
Foundation of a vast Monarchy. Fortune, to second the design with vast Riches,
about this time discovered a new World. The Provinces of Flanders fell
afterward in, changing only the Line of Blood, but without the least
alteration in the series of their Maxims and Interests. In Charles the Fifth,
the Crowns of the Empire and Spain, and their great power were conjoined
together. He neither wanted Wisdom nor Fortune to establish an Universal
Hereditary Monarchy: but as all ages are for the most part barren of Princes of
consideration, so his seemed as fruitful, having Francis the first King of
France, and Solomon Emperor of Turkey to oppose him; The first, his Peer in
courage; the other equal, if not Superior, in Power. Charles therefore thought
it best to leave the hopes and means to his Successors. Italy by reason of its
situation, Nobleness, Strength, Riches, and a certain fatality, which destines
her to bear Rule, has always been the first Object of great Conquerours; and
Charles failed not to increase his Dominion thus, joining the Milanese to
Spain, and putting a foot into Tuscany. But he quickly found, that every foot
of ground cost a Battle; That the Princes were impatient of the yoke, and
Strangers were ready to assist: He therefore thinking the Counsel most safe to
encompass her without, that so at last she might fall insensibly into his hand,
attempted to cajole Germany, and leave the Empire to his Son. The design
failing him, and he from a religious consideration, a satiety of Fortune, or
from domestic Interests, betaking himself to a private life and the repentance
of having been so great, leaves to Philip the Second, the hereditary Kingdoms
of Spain, with their vast appurtenances. The Peace of Italy passed as in a
mystery and by tradition from Father to Son; who no less wise than great,
applied his Ax to the root of that, which might most disturb the design of his
Monarchy. He employs therefore all his power against England and France, but
having consumed Armies and Treasure in vain, while he was distracted by the
revolt in Holland, and although he had added Portugal to Castile, and with it
the increase of a vast power, yet at the end of a few years, he found
sufficiently his Credit, Money, and Strength weakened. He then makes trial of
peaceable means, giving to the Provinces of Flanders remaining in their
obedience (to the end to reunite the rest) a Prince of their own. He left
France to the destiny of its domestic revolts; and Italy charmed with the
deliciousness of Peace, and the opinion of their present felicity.

Philip the third succeeded him, a young Prince, of singular Piety, but wholly
unacquainted with Government, and contenting himself with the Royal dignity,
left the power to his Council, Favorites and Ministers. These judged it
necessary to go on in the same Maxims of Peace, because in France they found
Henry the Fourth, a formidable and vigilant King, who having gloriously made
his passage through the jaws of an adverse fortune, suffered not himself to be
gulled by prosperity, but would be ready to disturb, and prevent whatever
designs they should have against him. Truce was therefore concluded with the
United Provinces of the Low Countries; and to divert the scourge of the French
Arms from Italy, procuring the Duke of Savoy to make Peace upon disadvantageous
terms, they thought it a great conquest, that they had shut out the French
beyond the Alps. And now fixing their thoughts on those advantages, which time
and occasion uses to offer to those in Power, silently extending themselves by
little and little, they got their limits enlarged, and their Kingdoms and
Territories better united; and last of all under the title of Honor and
Protection, holding dependent, and in a manner subject diverse Princes of Italy,
who being not able to resist, and believing themselves abandoned by the French,
yielded to what they thought their advantage, or rather to necessity. And so
besides the places in Mount Argentaro in Tuscany, and Porto Longone in Elba,
the Forte Fuentes, built in the entrance of the Valtelline, and Garrisons put
into Final, Monaco, Piombino, Correggio, and other little Fiefs of the Empire,
the Net was spread, and the design made public. These things going thus on,
one by one, some by Negotiation, and some through the conjuncture of time,
(although they awakened jealous thoughts in some, yet they seemed not of
importance to disturb the Peace; under which, some not remembering, that one
ring is not a Chain, yet a Chain is formed of many rings,) thought themselves
secure, and others happy. But by the death of Henry the Fourth, France falling
into a long minority, the Spanish Ministers judged the conjuncture fit to reap
their advantages with Counsel, and with Arms. And to say truth, the occasion in
Italy seemed favorable; because the French, as has been said, being excluded,
and now fallen under the government of a Child, and of a Woman, and Ministers
divided in their private Interests, the Country was believed so low in courage
and strength, that if at any time strangers in the attempt to subdue it, had
gotten great company, both People and the Princes themselves, would now place
their safety and greatest glory in yielding their obedience. Some by a
pecuniary Interest were already dependent upon Spain; others by blood, and
others by pretensions. The Popes taken up in the care of Holy things, or
distracted in the concerns of their own Family, side always with the strongest,
so that the safety and protection of Italy was now committed to the Venetians
alone. Nevertheless it was judged, that they also would prefer Peace before all
things, either from the experience of the hazards, and events of former Wars,
or because Monarchies being subject to various changes and accidents, it was
believed, that time might produce such successes, from which they thought their
Republic, as standing upon a more sure foundation, exempt, and free. But in
this general Quiet and Peace of Europe, there wanting rather pretexts than
minds to disturb Italy, it was abundantly supplied by the death of Francis
Gonzague Duke of Mantua, happened in the flower of his Age, about the last of
October 1612.

He left for posterity to his House Mary; yet at Nurse, to the Estate, two
Brothers, Ferdinand a Cardinal, and Vincenzo; and to Italy, a sad series of
Calamities and Troubles. By his Marriage with Margarite, Daughter of Charles
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, it was generally believed, that the Peace of Italy
would have been established, composing thereby the pretensions of those two
Houses upon Monferrat. They had their ancient Original from the very root of
the succession to that State from the Paleologhi and the Gonzagui, and after
many litigious proceedings, Charles the Fifth, Emperor, as Sovereign of the
Fief, did rather foment than extinguish them, by a certain sentence whereby the
possession was adjudged to Mantua, leaving undecided to Savoy the right of
certain donations of Lands; and of the Dowry of Blanch Wife to Charles the
First Duke of Savoy; which though it exceeded not 80 Thousand Crowns, yet with
the interest of a long time, came near to a Million. In the Marriage aforesaid,
it was studiously endeavored to balance all Interests, besides the Dowry in
Money and Jewels, the Father ceding in favor of the Daughter and her Posterity
the Revenues of Monferrat; and there was a line to be drawn, which was to
distinguish the confines, much entangled with Piedmont, upon some lands whereof
those of the house of Gonzaghi having a right, they renounce it and made a
mutual exchange of several places for common convenience and advantage. But the
affections of Princes being not to be bound by those Bonds, which among private
men pass for Sacred, designs ceased not, nor were pretensions extinguished.

For the Line, they could never find a point where to begin it, but that of the
life of Duke Francis being cut, they fell back into discord, and the confusion
of their former Interests. Margarhite, called the Infanta, according to the
custom of Spain, in regard of her Mother, Daughter of the Catholic King,
Philip the Second, who in her young days was left a Widow in the house of
Mantua, retained very lively affections for that of her Father; whose maxims
and sense were so deep imprinted in her, that she played that part which was
most pleasing to the Savoyards.

Carlo Emanuel was then Duke of Savoy, who it may be said, had with much virtue
adorned, and as much ambition embroiled two Ages. He was born in the 61. year
of the last, and with him at a birth, Generosity, Courage, and the desire of
Dominion. In the 19. year of his Age he succeeded his Father in the Estate,
important for its situation, plentiful by its Fertility, and for its extent
considerable, but not proportionable to his mind.

Being environed with two so great powers as are France and Spain, he could not
but know how difficult it would be to make conquests, and as impossible to keep
them. Nevertheless the divisions of France having opened a way to the surprisal
of the Marquisat of Salusses, and other great attempts, he espoused, together
with the Daughter of Philip the Second, a partiality to that Crown, and the
Maxims thereof. But the assistance of his Father-in-Law (who had no mind to
make him greater toward the Confines of the Milanese) not being such as hope
and desire had suggested to him, he at last concluding a Treaty with Henry the
Fourth, more to the advantage of the Spaniards than himself, adheres to France,
and enters with Henry as a sharer in these designs, which that great King upon
firm foundations had laid against the Austrian Monarchy. His treacherous and
sudden death discharges him, leaving Carlo in the grief of his lost hopes, and
in fear of the revenge of Spain; which nevertheless having pacified by sundry
means, and the Hostage of one of his Sons, since he had not been able to make
his profit with the great Ones, he now purposes to disturb his Neighbors of
more moderate power. The death of his Son-in-Law gives him the occasion, and on
the first notice of it he dispatches, as his Ambassador to Mantua, the Count
Francisco Marteningo, and afterward the Marquess of Lucerna to console his
Daughter. She then publishes her self with child, to suspend a while the
succession of Ferdinand the Cardinal, and leave the Government fluctuant and
uncertain. Soon after the Prince Vittorio Amadeo her elder Brother arrives, and
at the same time the Count Guido di San Giorgio, a Subject by birth of
Monferrat, but by discontent with his own Prince, becomes a near Confident of
Carlos, was by frequent goings and comings, driving on a secret Treaty at Milan.

The Mine at last was sprung, for Vittorio persuades his Sister, with her
little Daughter, to return home to her Father, or at least to retire to a
neutral place, as might be Milan; and if in consideration of the Child not yet
born, her going out of those Countries were not approved, he insinuated that
there was Monferrat, where she might remain with more decency. That it was not
fit that a young Princess should remain amidst the said memorials of her past
contentments, and under the eye of the Cardinal her Kinsman, as young in years,
as jealous of the Succession. That the Daughter ought to go with the Mother:
not to separate the affections of Nature, and to bring her up with that
tenderness, which is proper for a mothers care. Under such appearances was hid
a more secret mystery; for as the Fief of Mantua did not admit to the
Succession any but Males, so by that of Monferrat, Women were not excluded. In
Mary therefore was considered the security of that important State, and
therefore Carlo desired to have her in his power: For grant, that Practice and
Right have excluded Women, when any of the Maleline is remaining of a degree
never so remote; nevertheless if to his own right, he should have been able to
join that of the Princess, there was no doubt, but it would have much
strengthened the cause. Ferdinand, that well knew, what those instances meant,
defended himself with several conveniences and excuses. That the Duchess
could not stir from Mantua, while she carried in her womb the pawn of the
felicity of that State. That it was not the custom, that the Princes of
Gonzagui should be born in any other place, than where they command. That his
Niece much less ought not to be removed out of that house, where possibly
Fortune designed her Heir and Mistress. If the object of the Palace of Mantua
were a place too sad and mournful, others were not wanting, and particularly
that of Goito, wherein to divertisement was joined safety and convenience.

But Carlo's to the Governor of Milan, who was John Mendoza, Marquess of
Inoiosa, intimates, that that business was to be managed by the Authority of
Spain. Was it fit that the Child, Niece of the King, should be brought up by
him, who was Uncle by the Fathers side, and Competitor of the Command; where
should this tender Pledge of the Fortune of Italy be better placed, than under
the Royal care of him, who is the Arbiter of it? That the Child did possess in
her self the right of Monferrat, so near and important to the Milanese. If she
should carry it in Dowry to some troublesome and unquiet Prince; and if, wanting
Issue male, as from the Complexion of the Princess was prognosticated, the
Line of Nivers, now naturalized in France, should come to succeed, what would
become of the Affairs of Italy, and the Authority, which without control the
King at present enjoys there?

These reasons, which, as the Report went, were quickened with rich gifts, moved
the Governor to speed the Prince of Ascoli with a great number of Soldiers,
to demand with a high hand both the Child and the Mother; Ferdinand was
astonished betwixt wrath and danger. It seemed a great matter, that the only
Issue of that Family should be ravished from its Fathers house. But on the
other side, to the power and will of so great a Monarch there was no resisting.
Nevertheless taking counsel suitable to his fear, and pretexts from the present
state of Affairs, he answers. That his Niece, being Niece to the Emperor, and
Queen of France, he was not to dispose of her alone. That he declined contest
with his sister-in-law about the Guardianship, and referred it to him who is
Sovereign of the State. With this Ascoli and the Prince of Piedmont depart,
either respecting the name of so great Princes, or rather because unexpectedly
meeting with a reluctance in Ferdinand, things were not yet concerted and
adjusted to proceed further.

Ferdinand presently gives notice to the Imperial Court, and into France, of
this jealous accident, in which it appeared, that the security, liberty, and
dignity of all was concerned, because betwixt power and violence, there being
no mean, but that of reason; if to will and interest right should give place,
nothing in the World would any longer be safe, and unviolated. Matthias of
Austria was now Emperor of Germany, and his Counsels, as the World thought,
governed by Melchior Cardinal Gleselius, and supposed, that as the Prince, so
the Minister was little inclined to the Spaniards: And therefore naturally
abhorring all that was pleasing to them, and holding it for a Maxim, that the
shadow of their Authority in Italy would more serve to oppress the Emperors,
than augment it, the Emperor decrees, That the Tutelage of the Niece did
belong to Ferdinand, absolving him from any defect of age, required by the
Common Law; neither did the Queen Regent of France differ from that Judgment,
and being angry at the proceedings of the Savoyards, declares her self to
maintain the Decree, giving them to understand, that she would not endure, that
the Niece should be removed from her Fathers house and State, not without some
kind of threatening Carlo to resent it, whenever he should employ Art or Force
about it; and with this it was believed, that the designs of Savoy were for the
present suppressed, and the thoughts of Spain laid aside.

All this was seconded by the Council of the Venetians, who having after the
death of Francisco sent to Mantua, under the pretext of private Affairs,
Ferrante da Rossi their General of the Artillery, a great Confident of the
Gonzagui, had charged him to observe the tendency of things, and the accidents
thereupon. By this means Ferdinand held a strict communication of all things
with the Republic, and still encouraged him not to bend under the weight and
troubles of the new Government, to maintain his Interest, and the Decorum of
it, and to lose no time to make use of his dexterity among the great Princes,
and to procure with all his power the good offices, and assistances of his
Allies, so to be able to make a counterbalance to Spain. The Senate also
pressed seriously Pope Paul V. the Emperor, and the Crowns, to awaken
necessary reflections for the diverting these calamities and imbroilments,
which mature Judgment foresaw to be at hand. But Margaret's supposed being with
Child being now vanished with time, Ferdinand above his Purple assumes the
Title and Power of Duke, and at the same time the Prince of Piedmont appears at
Goito to carry away his Sister, and his Niece, now the pretext of her being
with Child ceased. There was there besides, Isabella Duchess of Modena, only
Sister of Margaret. And here by artifices and fears Ferdinand was overcome to
be content, that, his Sister-in-law retiring her self to Modena, her Daughter
should be carried thither also, with solemn promises, that she should be sent
back to Mantua, whenever Margaret should have a mind to return into Piedmont.

But this Concert was no sooner divulged, but France in particular ascribing
the Dukes consent to his own inexperience, and the corruption of his Ministers,
it was remonstrated to him, to how many hazards he exposed that only Child, and
to how many cross interests he abandoned the Family. What was the Duke of
Modena able to do against the artifices of Carlos, or the commanding power of
Inoiosa? He should have considered, that by the Succession, if God should
enrich her with Posterity, there would remain betwixt Mary and her Sons divided
hopes, pretensions, and designs. Ferdinand, acknowledging all to be truth,
afflicted himself; but taken at his word, knew not how to recall it, when Caesar
Duke of Modena, considering the weight of the Charge trusted to him, that drew
along with it the satisfaction of the Crowns, flips the knot, and refuses it.
Vittorio departs then with his Sister only, and with them a sharp thorn was
pulled out of the heart and eyes of Ferdinand. But they were no sooner arrived
at Milan, but the Governor dispatches a Courrier to Mantua, to require the
Princess to be delivered to her mother; who bringing nothing but the accustomed
answers, he sends thither the Captain of his Guard, Diego Leiva, and to Modena,
Camillo de la Torre, that by both the Dukes might be admonished, the one to
deliver the Child, and the other to receive her. He of Mantua denying his power
to disobey the Emperors Decree, sends the Bishop of Diocaesarea to Milan, to
make his excuse for it, with order also to go on to Vercelli to console
Margaret, who lived there; and withal to insinuate the project of marriage,
which had been so often formerly spoken of, as the only means to confirm in the
blood of Margaret the posterity, quench the pretensions about Monferrat, and
unite affections.

But as Ferdinand, taking counsel from his interest and the present
Conjuncture, had not showed himself averse; so Carlos would never come to any
resolution, sometimes alleging discontents, sometimes requiring satisfactions,
and at last declaring, that he would not again, in favor of a second marriage,
quit the right of Monferrat. He had his thoughts rather bent to espouse his own
interest with the Fortune of a War; and for that purpose, superadding new
pretensions to the old, he requires the restitution of the Dowry of Margaret,
with the Jewels, not only which she had brought, but those that had been given
her in honor of the marriage: all which by the Cardinal Duke, were resolutely
denied.

Amidst these Negotiations, Carlos was transported to higher thoughts. And
calling to Council at Vercelli his Sons and Ministers, proposes his disgusts at
the Duke of Mantuoe, the reasons he had to resent them, together with the
opportunity of greatning himself; and lays forth the appearances, which
flattered him to believe, that what with Negotiations, and his Army, all things
would succeed well. Martinengo, Voghera, and Lucerna, his chief Counselors,
judging the designs to be greater than could be effected, with great passions
show their dissent: and the first with so much freedom disswades, that he
incurred displeasure and distrust; but Verua, and St. Giorgio, of which the
one, having an Estate in Monferrat, desired to bring it under the Dominion of
his own Prince and Master, and the other being made odious to his natural
Prince, affected to change him, seconded the inclinations of the Duke. His
custom was for the most part to consult within himself, and to resolve
according to the dictate of his own prudence; which being the infallible
Counselor of the wisest Princes, was very often in him defiled with the
suggestions of ambition, always hazardous, seldom happy. Having some Troops on
foot, part being the remains of the League with France, part a Guard against
the Jealousy of Spain, he saw before his eyes a State exposed, and disarmed,
which the Duke of Mantua could not defend, but with bewailing and complaints.
He believed, that the Princes of Italy either stupefied, or slumbering in a
profound Peace, would hardly be brought to awaken: That the Venetians, more
considerate than the rest, beside his entertaining of a mutual confidence with
them, were wont rather to tolerate things done, then approve the designs. The
Emperor had nothing remaining in Italy but the name, and for the two Crowns,
he feared them not, the one having a minor King, and the other the Kingly Power
afar off. The Milanese, disarmed and unprovided, was governed by Mendoza, his
Confident, and little capable in matters of intricacy to play a wise part, or
resist force. It was true, that in Spain the Favorite, Duke of Lerma, showed
himself averse to him; but he chiefly reflected, lest the fear that he should
draw a French Army into Italy, in the distaste of it, would render the natural
weight of those Counsels more grievous.

In conclusion, he deliberates to give a blow at unawares; because, when he
should have put himself in possession of some part of Monferrat, before the
minds of those that were remote would be stirred, and the Forces of those that
were near could unite, and Princes in the darkness of the general Jealousies
could discern their proper Interests, some time would spend; during which he
hoped to find his security, and advantages; they well understanding him to be
as active and nimble in Negotiations and Treaties, as they knew him wise and
courageous in Arms.

Monferrat is a large Country, enriched with Cities, Villages, and People,
equally fertile where it is extended into Plains, and where raised into
frequent Hillocks. The Rivers, Po and Tanaro, water it, (besides other lesser
rivulets) the latter in particular running through the midst of it, gives to
the part toward the Sea the name of the lower, and to the other, which on this
side more amply enlarges it self, that of the upper. The Metropolis is Casal,
and opposite to it is, if I may so say, a narrow slip, belonging to the
Milanese. But on the side of Piedmont it extends it self more fully, cleaving
in sunder, as it were, that State; and whereas in some place in runs inward
even to the Alps; at another it comes up close to Turin; interrupts the
Navigation of the River Po; cuts off Commerce: and if in one part it divides
the Territories of Ascoli and Vercelli, in another it does almost encompass it.
In effect, if the reasons for conquering of it were to be taken from profit and
convenience, the Duke of Savoy had great motives to desire the having of it. In
Casal the Duke of Vincenco had planted a strong Citadel, under pretext to
secure it from the Savoyards, but with no less intention to preserve it from
Spain, who having the Milanese in the middle betwixt Monferrat and Mantua,
obscures much of that luster, which from States, otherwise so considerable,
would accrue to the house of Gonzagha. There were no other places of strength;
the fidelity of the people, most inclined to the present Government, serving as
a sufficient defense; and that Jealousy much more, which being reciprocal
betwixt the Milanese and Piedmont, did not permit that the one or the other
should consent to the Conquest.

But Carlos with his abovesaid designs going out of Vercelli in the silence of
the night, having commanded that the Government of Chierascho should at the
same time attempt the Surprise of Alba, and the Count of Verua attacque
Moncalvo, himself drew toward Trine; and there applying a Pettard, with the
noise whereof the small Garrison taking the Alarm, and, together with some of
the Inhabitants, putting themselves in defense, the Pettardier with twelve
others at the first Volly were killed. The Surprise vanished, Carlo stops at
Gabbiano, to hinder relief, expecting the rest of his Troops and Cannon; at
whose arrival, having first dispersed 200 Foot, which Carlo de Rossi, Governor
of Casal, had sent through by-ways for its succors, to the place in two days,
not without a report, that the Count of St. George had beforehand with money
and other inventions opened a breach. Alba was surprised without opposition,
and the Castle for want of Provisions rendered. At Moncalvo the Town quickly
yielded, and was plundered: La Rocca, strengthened with some relief, held out
fifteen days, and in the attacque the Duke substituted St. Georgio in the place
of Verua slain. With these three Posts, running a line along the Tanaro and the
Po, Carlo found himself in possession of a great part of Monferrat, in which,
what with contributions, what with booty, he hoped to make his Army to subsist
with ease. Upon this emergency, it is not credible how much the Princes of
Italy appeared moved, and the people themselves amazed; because, by reason of
the long Peace, there remained but few that could remember the insolence of the
Militia, and the slaughters of Armies. The Discipline of War was turned into
delight, and luxury. These successes now being increased by fame, and made
greater by opinion, no discourse was heard, but of so many Enterprises at one
time, so many successes almost in one night, the gaining of a whole Country in
a moment, and an Army of above twenty thousand men was seen in the field,
before it was known that there was any Levies made. The Princes, taking the
true measure of such an attempt, judged it of little continuance, nevertheless
apprehended that the effect would be unquietness to the Neighborhood, and
disturbance to all.

The Venetians therefore in a serious manner exhorted Carlo to the moderation
of more peaceable Counsels, viz. That the situation of his Country being the
Guard of the Peace of Italy against strangers from without, he ought not to
disturb it within: That it was but an ignoble acquisition, and not to be
preferred before common quiet: That he should think of Interest, and of Glory
also: That the greater Powers began to awaken, which would make themselves
Arbiters and Parties to the Peace, as well as to the War: And therefore if he
took Arms at present out of courage or humor, such accidents were like to
follow, as would not give him leave to contain himself, nor to lay them down
before he saw States in ashes by one common flame, and that to begin in his own
Countries: What reputation could be added to his person, famous for so many
notable actions; or what happiness to his House, esteemed no less for the
largeness of his Territories, than for being adorned with the virtues of so
many Princes? Therefore they conjured him not to leave to his Sons, to his
Friends, to Italy, nay to all Europe, so lamentable an inheritance of blood;
but by a speedy giving way to Accommodations and Treaties, confirm, that wise
Princes hold prudence by the hand in making Peace, and Generosity in rescuing
injuries.

Such considerations came not much pleasing to the Duke, who trusting in his
fortune and dexterity, dispatches his Confessor to Milan to undeceive the
Marquess, that the Bishop of Diocaesaria should be Prisoner at Vercelli, a
Report spread abroad upon keeping the Gates of the Town for some time, the
better to cover the secret of the Surprises, and withal to inform him, what his
pretended disgusts, and the reasons and fitness of his proceedings were. All
this passed in public, but in private with humble excuses justifies, that he
had not taken the Kings consent in what he had done, and offered several
projects to the Crown of great advantage, but such as sometimes seeming
difficult, and at others specious, perplexed Mendosa; who, just as Carlo did
imagine, knew not how to resolve either for Peace or War. Ferdinand, who under
the protection of Spain thought himself secure, and from the consideration of
the Counsel of the Government of Milan, though admonished by others to take
heed of them, found himself disarmed, was no less surprised in his mind, than
in his Monferrat. He considered the Emperor and the French far remote; and if
the one could assist no otherwise than in name, the other divided in their ends
and counsels, would have been able to protect him rather with words than Arms.
The friendship of Spain carried jealousy with it; if offended, it made it
formidable to him. He knew the Pope was accustomed to employ only his good
offices: Therefore turning himself to the Venetians, to whom no one thing could
happen more grievous than the disturbance of Italy, opens to them in filial
confidence the state of things, and his necessities.

The Senate handled it as a consult of great moment. Some, representing to
themselves the novelty of War, the charge of Armies, and the cares attending
businesses of that weight, inclined rather to be spectators, than take part in
them; saying, What hazard can the Republic apprehend from a War, which is not
on its own Borders? But what War was that to be, which frighted only with the
discourse and name? the gain of a few places open and unfortified, being but a
robbing the right which would be re-taken so soon as it came to the knowledge
of the greater Princes: That there would not want Mediators in the management
of the business: That the powerful Neighbors would stop the progress of the
War; and that the Republic had hitherto placed her safety and glory in Peace,
which had enriched and adorned her. It was resolved notwithstanding by that
major power, to maintain the cause the most oppressed, both because Mantua
should not be forced to precipitate himself into the protection of a more
interessed assistance, and that Savoy, finding that Duke assisted, and
despairing of further progress, should be inclined to Peace. They sent
therefore to reside at Mantua Antonio Maria Vincente, their Secretary, with
money to raise and maintain 300 Foot for the Garrison of Casal. They afterward
had a mind to persuade the Pope into the same counsels; but he excused himself,
doubting lest the example of his declaration should draw along with it, that of
France and Spain for one side or other; contenting himself only fully to
approve what the Senate did, and to lay foundations for a Mediation of Peace,
dispatching Innocentio de Massimi, Bishop of Bertinaro, to Turin, to Mantua,
and to Milan, to the end, that, in order to it, the Crowns forbearing Arms,
might exercise and improve that Authority, which they desired the world should
take notice they had in Italy.

Ferdinand hastens to fortify Casal, and Carlo de Gonzague, Duke of Nevers,
puts himself also into it; who casually touching on the Coast of Genoa, sent
the Prince Vincenzo, his Brother, thither, who passing through Milan,
remonstrates to the Governor; How much the Authority of the King would be
debased, if a neighbor State, not only under his protection, but secured by
his own word, should be invaded by a Prince, who aspired to greater matters,
and who, if he durst at present in the face of the Spanish Ensigns, reputed
with their shadow alone sufficient safeguards to those that depended on them,
possess himself of Monferrat, would not be long before he set on foot his known
designs upon the Milanese.

Mendoza was wavering betwixt public considerations, and his private
affections; and Carlos Emanuel, to keep him in perplexities, making, as may be
said, a War of Wit with him; now sending his Son the Prince Vittorio, then
dispatching Ministers, and then again changing the persons, all with various
and vast projects, with pressing instances, excuses, and submissions becalmed
and confounded him. His most special Offices consisted in Treaties, that he
would not interrupt his progress, offering to render all again upon the
recompense and satisfaction of his Rights. Sometimes he declared, that in the
places taken by him, he would set up Spanish Colors; but would keep them by
his own Garrisons. He gave out, that he would refer all his pretensions to the
Arbitrament of the most Catholic King; but his chief bait was, to offer the
Conquest of Casal to Spain, contenting himself with the open Country, if the
King would consent to his keeping of Monferrat. The Governor was not in a
condition to embrace such offers, how specious soever, because, besides the
artifices of the Duke, who, before he could well consider one, did still, to
confound his mind, propose another of more hard digestion; he knew, that being
disarmed, if he should consent to the Dukes Propositions, he left not only
Monferrat as a prey, but the Milanese it self exposed; and that Carlo, either
to conserve his Conquests, or to advance himself to greater designs, might with
the same facility, either by calling in the French, or stirring up the
Italians, have the opportunity to make use of the occasion to drive the
Spaniards out of that Country. For that cause, showing himself in appearance
severe, he intimates to him an entire restitution of every thing, believing
that the Authority of that Monarchy would have been a Weapon of sufficient
strength even without force. By the Pomp of the same, he incourages the Princes
not to fear disturbances in Italy: and in particular, Alphonso della Queva,
Marquess of Bedmar, King Philips Ambassador with the Venetians, assures them,
that without noise or trouble one of the Dukes should be restored, and the
other chastised. That for maintaining the Peace of Italy, the intentions of the
King did concur with theirs. That there was no cause to fear any body, or any
thing to be troubled at, whilst the Power of Philip was still the same. That
his goodness would not admit novelty or disturbance in that Peace, which was so
happily enjoyed under the shadow of his Authority.

The Governor with various Arts fenced with the Duke of Mantua (who often
repeated the instance of succors) persuading him to put himself into Casal, to
give courage with his presence to those Troops which he prepared for his
assistance, and to speak with him as he passed by. Others admonished Ferdinand
to the contrary, because the Prince his Brother, being in Monferrat, it seemed
not fit, that both should go and expose themselves, and be put in the power of
the Spanish Ministers, leaving the Niece in Mantua open to any treachery or
surprise. Yet to show his respect to Inoiosa, which was only that to which he
pretended, and to render that Civility, which Savoy had practiced by so often
sending the Prince of Piedmont his Son, he was willing to go to Milan; whence
from the discourse he had with him, he brought away nothing but riddles, and
dark sayings, and returned to Mantua with a terrible jealousy, that the
Governor were already overcome by Interests, or affections of the Enemies
Family.

Inoiosa, having in former times born Arms under Carlos's Command, and for a
reward, having the Marquisate of St. German conferred on him, professed himself
so straightly obliged to him, that at his coming to Milan, before he entered on
the Government, he had a desire to speak with him, and carried both Presents
and Favors. This confidence thus begun, was even to this present nourished by
the Duke, sometimes with public Offices, and then with means more secret. From
whence, though in the Council of State discourses of the business, and the
motion of Troops were carried on against him with some kind of sharpness; yet
it was well known, that there was a more secret Juncto of three persons only,
his Confidents, which governed the mind of the Marquess, and sweetened all. This
made the Duke so confident, that, although some Troops, long in raising, were
sent to the Confines of Piedmont, he nevertheless overrun all Monferrat, laid
it waste with Sword and Fire, and devoured in his hopes the keeping of the
rest. All that therefore being insufferable to him, which contested his
pretensions, and opposed his vast designs, or discountenanced his taking up
Arms, he could not bear, that the Venetians should give assistance to the
Gonzaghi. Provoked therefore with a vehement spite, he calls Vincenzo Gussoni,
who resided with him Ambassador for the Republic, and complaining to him of
it, exhorted him to withdraw himself out of his Countries, because, the people
having an ill impression of the assistance given against him, he could not
assure him of that security in his Court, which the Law of Nations required to
his Character. The Senate from thence conceiving, that the presence of their
Minister was disliked by the Duke, or suspected, commanded him to depart. But
the Duke having resolved to set Italy on fire, that he might make his advantage
of the ruins and ashes, ambition and wrath blowing him up, seeing now the
Spanish Army to face him, threatened to bring the French into its bowels; and
when the Pope exhorted him to Peace, he protested to overflow the Country with
Heretics; and if the Venetians should succor Ferdinand, he boasts that he
would incite the Turks, and bring Pirates into the Adriatic Sea.

The Spaniards proposing to themselves to make a War of Authority, and to
regulate the Interests of the Princes with their Mediation, or the show of
their power by their Army, were not at all willing that any body else should
meddle with it. But the Emperor believing his Authority so much lessened, as
that of the Spaniards increased, deputed Francisco di Castilione, that in his
name he might bring things to a Treaty, admonish Carlo, and besides intimate to
him the Imperial Ban, if laying down Arms, and restoring every thing, he should
not contain himself within more moderate bounds. Mendoza provoked by the
general clamor, saw at last a necessity to arm: And thereupon distributing
numerous Patents throughout Italy, Germany, and Switzerland, had in a little
while a very gallant Army on foot.

Neither was Carlo wanting to himself, but to his warlike Provisions interposes
Treaty, offering to deposite in the hand of the King of Spain his rights, and
the places possessed; provided the Princess Mary might be brought to Milan,
there to remain with her Mother. This had an aim to sow Jealousy betwixt
Ferdinand and the Spaniard; because as much as the Governor, knowing the
advantage, and the Decorum of the Crown, adhered to it by Interest and
inclination, so much it behoved the Duke for his own safety to abhor it.
Neither did Castilione dissent from it, who besides a certain aversion,
contracted as a Borderer, and of lesser power, with the Lords of Mantua, though
his Allies, for his private respects easily preferred the satisfaction of Spain
before the Emperors Commission. A Writing then was drawn up in Milan, in which
it was promised to Carlo, that the Child should be brought into that City, not
to be removed from thence, but with the approbation of the Emperor Matthias,
and the consent of Ferdinand the Uncle. Neither fell it out otherwise than the
Savoyards had projected: for the Original being sent with an express Command to
the Duke of Mantua to sign it, and without delay to execute it, he, encouraged
by his friends with promises and counsels, resolutely denies to do either;
highly complaining, that the Governor with so much assumed Authority should
dispose of his Will, without his knowledge, and of the Blood of the House of
Gonzagha: whereupon their spirits imbittering, the Bishop of Bertinoro
endeavored to sweeten them with more mild propositions, insinuating, that the
places possessed should be deposited into the hands of the Pope, of the
Emperor, and both the Crowns, and that to the end, that within the term of
four months the pretensions might be decided by the foresaid Princes, or such
other, as the Parties should choose.

But this pleased neither of the Dukes, and least of all the Governor of
Milan, who abhorred to admit of Companions to his King, either in the
management of the Treaty, or of the War. He nevertheless embraces every
proposition, which might gain time and appearance, coolly fomenting that War,
which in the beginning he might with resolution alone have suppressed. Hereupon
Carlo, letting him know his intention to send the eldest Prince into Spain, to
the end that the Son might represent more lively to the King the Fathers
reasons, and the Successor in his States might serve for a pledge of the
obedience of the whole House, though for all that he publicly denied to
suspend the Declarations against the Duke, to which he was solicited; yet he
was willing by all means to let time spend. From such proceedings the Venetians
well understood, that Treaties would not be sufficient to untye this knot, but
that they must quickly have recourse to the Sword. Therefore, according to
their resolution, they arm themselves, receiving into pay 5000 stranger Foot,
strengthening their Garrison with the Trainedbands, and appointing several
Deputies representing the Authority of the State in the chiefest places. They
sent Antonio Priuli, Cavalier and Procurator of St. Mark, Proveditor General
for the Land; but they entertained not that thought alone, because from the Sea
also the destiny of Italy malignantly scattered poisonous seeds of future
calamities.

For understanding of which thing, to be spoken of on this occasion, it is
needful to take the relation from a higher beginning. It seems, that many
States, in opposition perhaps to the natural Ambition accompanying Empires, are
exercised with some troublesome Enemy or other, which being rather able to
defeat, than overcome, continually provokes and infests. Such to the State of
Venice ought to be termed the Vscocchi, whom not being able to extirpate by
chastisements, nor to bring under by force, though for the most part beaten,
and as frequently punished with the Ax or Halter, rose up still more bold and
troublesome. Where Istria closes also the Confines of Italy, lies the Gulf
Flatanico, at this day called Quarnaro. Thereby the abundance of Islands and
Rocks, splitting as it were the Continent into pieces, the Sea in that bosom
has several entrances and Channels, with so great uncertainty of navigation and
winds, and with such turnings, that if Nature have reserved it for the
sepulcher of shipwracks, Pirates have made choice of it as a nest for their
thieveries. Thence even to Dalmatia runs a most dangerous ledge of Rocks and
flats intermingled, nevertheless with diverse places inhabited, as Fiume,
Bucchari, Segna, and others belonging to Hungary, which were under the
Dominion, or much rather under the Government of Ferdinand Archduke of Austria,
Cousin to the Emperor Matthias. The opposite Islands are subject to the
Republic. The Vscocchi having there their habitatoins at land, from thence
infested the Sea; a people, if we look to their original, not ignoble, boasting
to derive themselves from certain valiant men, who when the Turks became
Masters of the neighboring Provinces, impatient of that Barbarians yoke,
withdrew themselves to live secure and free in the mountains; but it being
difficult in the poverty of Fortune, to preserve the original nobleness of
their blood, they became degenerate; and being transported from place to place,
were at last by the Emperor Ferdinand received into Segna, to the end they
might defend that Frontier from the Turks. The place was little, but by the
situation very strong. Many of the poorer sort retiring thither, together with
many banished and fugitives out of the Dominion of the Venetians, it quickly
became a receptacle for debauched people, that turned the Discipline of War
into Thieveries, and instead of fighting with the Turks, when the Peace was
made, continued to provoke him with Depredations and Incursions. The complaints
of many, that were spoiled and oppressed by them, cried loud at the Ottoman
Port, whereupon the Turks threatened high to come with their own Forces, and an
Army by Sea to drive them thence, and destroy them. They pressed the Republic,
to whom the Dominion and Custody of the Sea belonged, to curb and punish them,
and with a fast becoming Barbarians, pretended to exact from all Christendom
the revenge of the faults of a few insolent Pirates.

The Venetians nevertheless resent it, sometimes hearing they had passed over
and violated their Confines, and at another, that they had robbed their
Islands, and Territories, at all times disturbing Navigation, and spoiling
their Ships. And for this, they complained to the Austrians, requiring remedy,
and over and above remonstrating to the rest of the Princes, how dear the spoil
of these Villains would cost, if the Ottoman Port were provoked to Arms. But
'twas no easy matter to have it mended, reasons laid before the Austrian still
meeting with the opposition of private Interests, which protracting the
business, the remedy was always promised, but never performed. The Venetians
therefore declared, that they would not suffer such an infamous ulcer in that
bosom: whereupon they employ their Arms to bridle and punish them, but with
little success, because in that Labyrinth of Sand and Sea, greater Ships were
of no service, and the lesser were not always able to resist surprises nor
storms. Galleys therefore were of use for the guard of the Channels mouths, and
Forts and Castles to shut the passages; Armed Barks gave chase, and as many as
they could take, the Hangman dispatched with the most infamous punishments. The
predictions were at last verified: For the Turks, irritated with so many
vexations, broke out into a War in Hungary with the Austrians, and for many
years infested them with great usury of ruins and blood. The employment of the
Vscocchi elsewhere hindered not, but that toward the Venetians they went on
from injuries to further offenses, forming a cause of War from that which
hitherto seemed as it were matter only of exercise: kept in at Sea, they broke
forth at Land into Austria, and leaving every where in the open Country
inhumane marks of cruelty, they attempted also Towns fortified. Repulsed at
Albona, they made their entry into Fianona; where giving all things to the
spoil, they set up the Imperial Standard, and would have exacted an oath of
fidelity from the Inhabitants; but within a while they left it, fearing to be
attaqued there.

The Venetians, not behind-hand with them, made an Inroad into the Austrian
Dominion; but they went not forward, as they might have done, out of the
consideration of the Interests of Christendom, then ready to sink in Hungary.
The Emperor very much disturbed with the clamours of these his people, orders
the Archduke to remedy them, and he sends to Segna, Josepho Baron of Rabbata,
who by punishing some, banishing others, and delivering up Fugitives to the
Venetians, would quickly have pulled up the evil by the roots, if, he being
killed by the Vscocchi, incapable to suffer any strict Discipline, if, I say,
with the return of those that had been banished, and the impunity of so heinous
an offense, the evil it self had not been fomented. Whereupon the Vscocchi fall
again to their depredations, violating in their passage against the Turks, the
Dominion of the Republic by Sea and by Land, and against the Venetians
themselves, robbing without any distinction all sorts of shipping. Guards being
placed to keep them in, as if besieged, the Emperor sends to Segna the General
of Croatia, who, during the six months he remained there, curbed the disorder;
but he being gone, and they at liberty, they passed through the Territory of
Sebenico to plunder Scardona, a place belonging to the Turks, who thought
themselves so highly offended, that not being able to satiate themselves in
exaggerating the damages, and jealousies that the Subjects of the Republic it
self had a hand in them, sending a Chiaux to Venice to require satisfaction,
could hardly with all the reasons they could give be appeased. The Vscocchi
succeeded not, through the opposition of the Convoy, in the surprise of a
Merchant Gally, which, with a rich Capital of Eastern Commodities, was sailing
from Spalato to Venice; but they took near Rovigno a Frigate with Letters and
money belonging to the Republic. Siege by Sea was then laid more straightly
before Fiume, Bucchari, and Segna. Whereupon the General of Croatia returns
into those parts, making restitution of some things taken, and punishing some
of the offenders; by which, together with the interposition besides of several
Princes, the Senate was induced to cause the Siege to be withdrawn.

But such remedies giving time, rather than cure, to the evil, the Vscocchi
return to their former mischiefs, and ravaging at Sea, the Siege was again
laid; whereupon the Subjects of Ferdinand, who suffered much, making grievous
complaints against the Vscocchi themselves, he sends two Commissaries, but to
little purpose; for at the same time some of the banished did not only infest
the Sea, but entering Pola, by a certain opening in the Wall, plundered several
houses, and with the booty retired into Segna. Some part of it was restored,
but afterward by the Truce, concluded in Hungary, the Austrian Ministers
restraining with great care all attempts of the Vscocchi against the Turks,
they brake forth with more violence on the side of the Venetians, plundering
several Vessels in the Port of Veglia, and robbing at Sea all sorts of
shipping. The Pope himself complained of the damage he suffered in the Commerce
of Ancona; whereupon the Commissioners were sent by the Archduke, which
condemned their Barks to be burnt; but the Vscocchi delivered them from the
flames, in a manner, by force, spoiling some of the Islands, and in Istria it
self seeking the Territory of Barbana. They entered also into the Country of the
Turk; but returning with a great booty, it was taken from them by certain
Venetian Galleys, with the death of many, and taking of others, which were
immediately hanged at the Sail-yards. But all chastisement served but to
irritate them the more; and although Commissioners were frequently sent from
the Archduke, yet plainly a connivence of his Ministers appeared, receiving
every where the Villains, and keeping the Booty. They took one of their
Commanders, being Prisoner with the Venetians, the rest had a mind to attempt
his rescue by the arrest of some chief Officer; which design failing at
Rovigno, because the Town had put it self into a posture of safety, plundering
only certain Barks in the Port, they lighted afterward at Basca upon Girolamo
Marcello Governor in the Island of Veglia, and carried him Prisoner into a
certain Cave or Grotto near Segna. This extravagancy could be no longer
dissembled, and the Republic much moved, complaining of it, the Archduke
caused him to be set at liberty, sending to Venice the Commander of Fiume to
offer satisfaction, and reparations. But the Senate, who had observed that an
offender was now and then punished, but the fault not amended, would no more
give ear to discourses, nor slacken the Siege, which did greatly incommodate
the Austrians, if the Vscocchi were not unroosted out of Segna, and the
Seacoast thereabouts.

For this cause the Emperor Matthias, sending for the Archduke Ferdinand to
court, to appease the further exasperation, and accommodate the business,
wrought so much, that it was agreed betwixt Girolamo Soranzo Cavalier,
Ambassador for the Republic, and the Emperors Vice Chancellor, that the
Archduke should pass his promise to Matthias, to hinder the going forth of
Ships, and to keep the Sea free from Pirates, to drive the unquiet Vscocchi out
of Segna, and to punish the guilty, forbidding all protection to them, and the
Banditi of the Republic: And besides this, to change the Governor of Segna,
and supply the place with a Garrison of the German Nation, that might for the
future be able to bridle them. Of all this the Emperor gave the Venetians his
faith, and they on the other side were to raise the Siege, and deliver three of
their principal Prisoners.

The Senate, as a gratification to the Emperor himself, embraced these
conditions, the Prisoners were released, and the Guards removed. But slippery
being the Faith which springs from Interest only, it was not long before they
relapsed into the former mischief; because the Garrison put into Segna, soon
wanting pay, disbanded in a moment; those few driven away were readmitted, and
the shipping being left in their power, they returned to their piracy. It
happened, that the Vscocchi returning from plundering of Trebigna, a Turkish
Town above Castel-novo, with twenty Ships in Triumph; Felix Dobrovich a
Venetian Commander with as many attacques them, taking three, and chasing the
rest became master of a great Booty, and a considerable number of Prisoners.
But they, not at all thereby discouraged, entering through the Territory of
Sebenico into the Ottoman Dominion, carry away much Cattle, bringing them back
in safety the same way they went, not without grievous complaints of the Turks
against the Republic it self. The Republic report it to the Imperial Court,
summoning the Emperor to the observance of the things promised, and that by
the means of Augustine Nani, and Francisco Contarini, Cavalieri, sent
Ambassadors extraordinary to congratulate with him his assumption to the
Empire. But while the Venetians were busied in this their complaint, the
boldness of the Vscocchi transcends all patience and remedy. They enter with
six Barks in the night into Mandre, a Port of the Island of Pago; where,
through the carelessness of the Guards betwixt sleep and the security of their
own Port, was the Galley of Christofero Veniero, Vice Admiral, softly stealing
upon her, surprised, killing as well him that slept, as him that offered to
resist. Lucretio Gravisi, one of the Marquesses of Pietra Pelosa, and many
others, being made, one by one, to climb out of the Galley into the Ships, were
killed with barbarous inhumanity. Flinging the dead bodies into the Sea, the
Galley was carried away, the Cannon dis-imbarked at Segna, the spoil divided,
and the action applauded by that barbarous Crew. Against Veniero, preserved for
greater torture, they afterward satiate their hatred with all possible scorn.
He was butchered at a Feast, suffering with great constancy a death, which with
all the rules of Barbarism they studied to make horrid to him, and terrible to
all. His reins were no sooner cut, but ripping up his breast, his heart was
immediately roasted, and devoured for a dainty; his blood spilled in bowls, or
eaten with bread dipped in it; his head placed in the most perspicuous place of
the table, proverbiated and scorned. At the advice of such atrocity, the City
of Venice was horribly inflamed, it was no where related but with interruptions
of astonishment, and fears, some raging at the affront, all were ashamed of
what had happened.

The Kindred cried loud for revenge, and all the people solicited for
resolutions and resentments. But the Senate keeping themselves to more
considerate Councils, heard one, who, to provoke them, spoke to this purpose:
How long shall these Robbers abuse our slowness? Surely we have given a notable
lesson of prudence and patience. Fathers, you have here before you the
dismembered mangled body of Christopher Veniero, here is his head cut off, and
scorned, here drops his blood, here the caresses of so many well deserving
Subjects are Suitors for the revenge. The Uscocchi hitherto have spoiled the
Turks Country, violated our Borders, overrun our Islands, disordered Istria,
disturbed the Sea, and robbed our Ships. We have spread our nets, set up
Gibbets, punished the Pirates by our judicial Laws. Their insolence
notwithstanding grows greater. Our gentleness is too highly slighted. They at
present prey upon the honor and dignity of the Commonwealth; our chief
Commanders are made their Prisoners; our Galleys are carried away; our Ports
violated; the Sea defiled with the blood of our Citizens; our Subjects are made
their Slaves, and basely killed. Are the Children of this Country then born to
be a laughing stock to the Uscocchi? or do they preserve blood in their veins
to no other purpose but to satiate their cruelty? what is become of the noble
Spirits of our generous Ancestors? Those venerable Carcasses, that left us the
Dominion of the Sea for a legitimate Inheritance, are sensible from their
graves of this affront. Those that conquered the Adriatic Sea with their
blood, will reproach our sufferance to see it stained with infamy. The offense
is done to the Sovereignty, and therefore belongs to us to resent it like
Princes. Private men have the right of speaking, complaining, and showing their
duties; Princes are their own Judges, and from them is no appeal but to the
most High God alone. Shall we yet stay to rouse up our selves, till the
Uscocchi, who in their pride have under our eyes already run over Dalmatia,
Quarnaro, and Istria, shall be entered into the never yet violated bowels of
these Waters? Now they have tasted Patrician blood, who doubts but they feel a
greater itch to cruelty and barbarism? They must be forced by Arms, and we must
seek these wild beasts in their very Caves and Dens. Who shall ever take up
Arms more justly, or who can exercise them with more Generosity? We have
hitherto been at a slow but great charge. The Fleet is numerous, and ready;
Albania and Dalmatia will supply us with Soldiers. Nothing is wanting but to
dispose our minds to it, and unite our Forces. Being shut up every where, and
invaded in several Quarters, they will be constrained at last to receive the
punishments due to so many horrible offenses. If Ferdinand be innocent of their
faults, he will abandon them to Justice; if consenting to them, it will not be
fit for us longer to bear it. But let us suppose him interested, and resolved
to maintain their defense; we shall still be stronger both at Sea and at Land.
Matthias, a just Prince, has pawned his word and says to us. But to
superfluous and unnecessary cautions, every thing seems to assent. What is the
Empire else but a vast Engine composed of so many pieces, that it either gives
way, or falls to the ground before it moves united? The Austrians delude us,
the Turks threaten us, and, if our Subjects are pleased with this our
slackness, strangers do scorn our sufferance of the injuries. This is a Decree
fatal to our Country; if this ignominy be not wiped out, it will be necessary
to begin to forget the fact, and seek to hide it from posterity.

To a discourse so full of heat, another answers more calmly: Passions
themselves have their periods, and being the adulterers, not the spouses, of
the mind, it is fit to repudiate and change them. Against the outrages of the
Uscocchi, who is there that has not his mind moved with a just resentment? The
surprise of the Gally, the slaughter of the Captain, and the blood of so many
besides, has with great reason stirred our affections. We have sufficiently
with tears, as private men, satisfied the ashes of our well deserving Citizen.
But here, as the Compendium of the Republic, we are assembled to deliberate as
Princes. For Gods sake let maturity more than revenge preside in our Council.
Scorn and disdain are a weak Weapon to him that wants prudence, or strength.
Who will burn his house to preserve it from the insult of Robbers? They will
fall at last, as they have often done? The wickedest, I say, of the Uscocchi
will fall under the hand of the Hangman. Let us restrain their courses, let us
besiege their Harbors, and that with a generous prudence and constancy, till
no one such poisonous root remain unpluckt up. Let us yield no more to
promises, or Treaties. Let us practice revenge befitting a Prince; and if the
Austrians shall not apply more wholesome remedies, let us procure it of our
selves with a strong hand, but in its proper season. Shall we then begin to
make War before we are thoroughly armed? Or shall we at present divert our care,
and applications from the affairs of Italy, to involve our selves with the
Uscocchi at Sea? Let us take them in their time. But if at present the Duke of
Mantua be overpowered, if injustice triumph, and power prevail, what shall
become of us, and the common Interests? It is an easy thing to make War in
discourse, and in the Marketplace; but at Land, and at Sea how much blood is
spilt, how much treasure spent? Where shall we find the Uscocchi to join equal
Battle with them, whose Victories are wont to be gotten by surprise? Where
shall we place a Siege, if their strength consist in running away? We have to
do with a Coast without Ports, and with Mountains impenetrable. They are
protected by their situation, and by Princes; we have no cause as yet to be
ashamed; we have an Enemy (if a Crew of Thieves deserve that name) that vexes,
provokes, and insults, and yet in an honorable way, like Soldiers, we know
not where to find them, and fight with them. In some cases there is nothing to
be done, but to overlook and dissemble, and, as we are wont in a whirlwind, to
pass through the troublesome dust with our eyes shut. With which Treaties, with
Arms, and with time, we shall at last overcome the Uscocchi. But at present
they deserve not so much honor, as to be made the celebrated Authors of a War,
that will every where be talked of: A War which began with the Uscocchi, will
necessarily go on with the Austrians, and possibly end with the Turks. Veniero
Martyr of the Country, himself inspires from Heaven more moderate counsels, and
prays for Peace, and tranquillity to the Commonwealth.

By the consideration of the Affairs of Italy, the minds of the Senators were
prevailed upon; to which bending their chief care, holding a mean betwixt the
public good, and the opinion of the vulgar Common People, they resolve, that
at present Philippo Pasqualigo, General of Dalmatia, should prosecute the
Vscocchi, straighten Segna by Sea, and increase his strength with 20 armed
Barks, a 1000 Albanian Foot, and 500 Croats. To Matthias and Ferdinand they
caused vigorous complaints to be made, requiring the chastising of the
offenders, the restitution of the Gally, the Cannon, and the Booty; and in
Spain they made lively Remonstrances of all that had happened. And to say truth,
the minds of men in both Courts at so bloody a story appeared greatly moved.
Nevertheless the Cannon was not rendered, nor the Gally; the first being
disposed of into several Forts, and the last running ashore was beat to pieces
by the Sea: Only by the Emperor three Commissioners were named, that they
might meet with as many of the Republic in Fiume. But the Senate, that
understood, delay was the thing aimed at, by such longsom remedies in a
business, whereof the World was witness, refused to admit of any Negotiation,
till that were performed which was agreed at Vienna. For which the
Commissioners having no power, they retired from Fiume, whereupon the Siege
continuing, and there happening such accidents as more and more stirred men's
minds, they quickly broke off the thoughts of Peace.

The thing most minded now, was Monferrat; where Carlo remaining still in
possession of what he had taken, while it was believed, that he would at least
have expected the arrival of the Prince in Spain, moves on a sudden, and
provoking Fortune, and hastening his disgrace, marches with his Army, leaving
it doubtful, whether it would go toward Pontestura, or Nizza de la Paglia.
Into the first, as nearest to Casal, were carefully sent 400 Foot, and to
procure them greater respect, they bore the Colors of Spain; whereupon the
Duke marching on, falls upon the other, the Count of St. George speeding before
to invest it. The place being weak, and having scarce any Wall about it, had
little other defense but the fidelity and valor of Manfrino Castiglione, a
Gentleman of the Milanese, who with some small Garrison commanded it. The
Savoyards battered it from three places. The Governor on the other side
exercised them with frequent Sallies, and making an example of the baseness of
some, who inclined to render it, gave time for its relief. Carlo, to hinder
that which by way of the Sea might come from the great Duke of Tuscany, or
others, takes Altar, a place situate on the Confines of the Genovesi. But the
Governor of Milan being not able to resist the exclamations of those of
Mantua, and those stinging Satyrs, with which he was jeered, dispatches Antonio
di Leva, Prince of Ascoli, with 5000 Soldiers to join with the Prince
Vincenzo, who waited for them with 3000 more. Their march was slow, as if
Ascoli would give time to have it rendered, hearkening to the Imperial
Commissioners propositions for a suspension of Arms for 15 days; but refused by
those of Mantua, the Army at last came near to Nizza, which Manfrino defended
beyond all belief. Carlo then having made use of all his art, public and
secret, to hinder Inoiosa from sending in succors, seeing him appear within
his view, pretending respect to the Spanish Colors, retires. A Garrison of the
Kings presently enters, and the Governor of Milan having gained the point of
Authority, neglects the recovery of what remained, which with very much ease he
might have done. The Prince of Ascoli, withdrawing the Army, goes himself to
Milan, and those of Mantua remained facing the Savoyards, not without some
Skirmishes, and Factions; whereof that of the greatest moment was, the Mantuans
vain attempt upon Canelio, with the loss of above 100 Soldiers. Hostility
going on in this manner, Ferdinand, that wanted every day more and more
assistance, sends according to custom Frederick Gonzagua to Venice to return
the Complement of his Succession, and to give thanks withal for the succors,
which with a considerable sum of money, for provision of Victuals, and
Ammunition for Casal, had been liberally furnished. Besides which Cosmo, grand
Duke of Tuscany, had resolved to assist him with 2000 Foot, and 300 Horse; but
having demanded of the Genovese passage through their Country to send them into
Monferrat, and afterward of the Pope to get them at least into Mantua, he
found it every where shut, as well from the considerations of not declaring
themselves, as from the solicitations of the Spaniards, who loved not to see
the Italian Princes assist one another, and so have a waking eye upon their own
Interests; and therefore had endeavored to divert them by several reasons. But
Cosmo being thereby more inflamed, to manifest himself a free Prince, and
abhorring the example, that it should not be lawful to assist his friends, and
much more the consequence, that all ought to depend upon one sole Potentate,
presses the Duke of Modena for passage; who yet at the instance of Inoiosa
denies it; and Count Balthazar Bia coming from Milan into Tuscany attempts to
dissuade Cosmo from asking of it any further.

But the Grand Duke, sending the men appointed for the succors under the
Command of the Prince Francisco, his Brother, and joining to them 10000 of his
Country Militia, with six Cannons, to the Confines of the Modenese, where
finding the passage of the Mountains shut, and barricadoed, and no friendly
instances for passage, receiving from the Duke Caesar's Soldiers no other
answer but Vollies of shot, the Florentines resolutely gave the assault, and
forcing the defenders to give way, whether by force, or secret connivance of
Duke Caesar himself, gain the passage, taking their Quarters upon the Mantuan
Territory; but thereby, and for the security of Victuals becoming burdensome,
Ferdinand sends them back upon the first hopes of Peace. He hearkens upon this
occasion to a certain project of Marriage with a Princess of the House of
Medici, it being evident from what had happened, how advantageous it would be
for the Princes of Italy to unite themselves in the strictest bonds of
correspondence and affection for the lessening that Authority, which Strangers
arrogated to themselves; for which purpose the great Duke also, though with
wariness, set on foot Propositions for Unions and Leagues; but all fell to the
ground without effect, because as to the Marriage, the Duke did not find
himself so free from the dependence of Spain, as to be able as yet to resolve
it; neither would he quite break off the renewed Propositions of a new
Alliance, which was suggested to him with the House of Savoy; and for those
other Alliances, few of the Princes durst hear the discourse of them, much less
own them; and the Venetians themselves in that Conjuncture judged them rather
advantageous and desirable than possible or seasonable. The sense and judgment
of Strangers upon the present Interests arrived now in Italy.

Mary, Queen Regent of France, having her self been much moved at the dangerous
and disadvantagious condition of the House of Gonzagha, declares to uphold it
with Treaties and Arms. Nevertheless some of her chief Ministers inclining to
Savoy, and others not well affected to the Gonzaghi, brought it again into
deliberation: That it would not be wisely done of them in the time of a Minor
King, by arming the Kingdom to put themselves to the necessity of trusting
Armies to the Command of the great Ones. That upon the Confines of Savoy no
other could be employed but Desdiguieres, Governor of Dauphin, who by
authority and credit, being reputed the Head of the Hugonots, would give so
much more vigor to that Party, by how much the increase of reputation and
power should be given to him. They added, That it was impossible that both the
Crowns should amicably agree in one and the same affair of Italy; whereupon
going about to restrain the proceedings of Savoy, they might possibly meet with
the power of Spain against them, and by one accident or other discompose the
accomplishment of those reciprocal Marriages, which had been so lately
concluded. This was enough to persuade the Queen to employ her authority rather
than force; because, besides giving her self to pleasures, and a peaceable
Government rather than troubles, she had in the Marriage of the King, her Son,
with the Infanta, and of her Daughter Elizabeth with Philip Prince of Spain,
placed the strength of her authority; notwithstanding that upon the publishing
of that Treaty all Princes, in amity with her, grew jealous, and the Genius it
self of the French Nation disliked it. In favor therefore of her Kinsman
Ferdinand, she imploys nothing but good offices and entreaties in the Court of
Spain, by which she seemed rather wholly to refer the affairs of Italy to that
Kings arbitrament, than any way assist the Duke.

True it was, that in Madrid the Ministers, conformable to the pondering Genius
of that Nation, had made long and wise reflections upon the whole emergency,
and at last, not so much for the satisfaction of France, and the instances of
the Princes of Italy, as for that ancient aversion of the Favorite to Carlo,
the Secretary Vargas was dispatched to Milan with a short Order, but
substantial, that Carlo should restore all; and not doing it presently, be
constrained by Arms. Vittorio, who was landed in Catalogna, received a Command
not to go forward till it should first be known, whether his Father yielded
obedience or no. Such was published to be the Commission of Vargas, and taken
for a good providence to Italy, and magnified for the justice and uprightness
of the Kings intentions. Yet some from the carriage of the Spanish Ministers,
and from things subsequent, took upon them to judge, that there were more
secret orders to make advantage of the conjuncture of affairs; but Princes
alone having knowledge of the truth of such secrets, the people can but guess
at the counsels, and believe according to the events.

Carlo, to divert the effect of so severe a Commission, endeavored to amuse
the Governor, offering (provided he might keep what he had gotten himself) his
State and Forces to run the Kings Fortune against whomsoever. In conclusion he
offered to restore every thing, one place excepted to be kept as the pawn of
his Rights, till the case should be decided; but Inoiosa sends to him Francisco
Padiglio General of the Artillery, a man formal, and nice in the points of
Honor, who in few words, and with a severe superciliousness intimates to him
an entire restitution, delivering Letters from the King directed to the Duke
himself, by which in very concise terms he orders him to perform all that the
Governor of Milan should prescribe him. Carlo in the height of his spirit
raged, being touched in the very heart of his dignity; but forsaken of all, he
could do no other but yield to the more powerful. Without giving a precise
answer to Padiglio, he sends Count Lovis Crivelli with Propositions to the
Governor which carried the appearance to protract time. They therefore being
rejected, it was intimated to him anew, that he should restore all, or the
Prince of Ascoli with the Army should march to the Walls of Trin, and, in case
of resistance, the Governor would transport himself thither, resolving to hang
every one who should dare to help to defend it. Carlo offers then to resign;
but about the reception there arose a Punctiglio betwixt the Prince di
Castiglione, and the Governor, each insisting that the sole name of his Master
might be used; but the one having nothing but authority, and the other the
power, it was agreed, that both should concur. Trin in consequence was
delivered to Castiglione; and Alba to Ascoli, and Moncalvo to John Bravo, a
Spanish Colonel, and were all presently put into the hands of such as Ferdinand
had deputed. The Garrisons also in Pontestura and Nizza were withdrawn, all
with great applause to the Court of Spain, if further actings, and the period
of the calamity of Italy might have stopped here. Concerning this restitution,
there had been drawn an hasty Writing betwixt the Prince and the Marquess
Crivelli, assisted therein for Savoy, and Annibal Chieppio for Mantua, in which
mention was only made of the Consignation, and not a word spoken of their
reciprocal pretensions, nor of the reparation of damages, which Mantua
required, or an Act of pardon for those of Monferrat, which Carlo desired.
Moreover, besides having spoiled the Magazins of Arms, Cannon, and Victuals at
his going out of Trin, the Count de Verua protested, that Carlo would sharply
revenge whatsoever molestation should be offered to St. Giorge; because he knew
well, that Ferdinand had an implacable hatred to him; who afterward
proscribing him with others, as Rebels, caused his house to be razed to the
ground. Such roots not plucked up in time quickly begot jealousies, and soon
after hostility with new disasters: nor indeed were all men in Italy pleased
with such a Peace; because it appeared, that the Governor hastening the
performance of the resolutions to put himself out of engagement, and to
preserve the appearance, had not sincerely separated himself from confidence
with Carlo; but as if they two had colluded together for some secret and
unknown designs, the Duke, at the time the places were rendered, reinforced his
Troops, and the Governor armed.

Ferdinand standing exposed betwixt the artifices of the one, and the power of
the other, was in great fear; and thereupon the Venetians continued to him the
payment of the 3000 Foot, and strengthening themselves with 2000 others, they
solicited passage and Levies in Switzerland; Gregory Barberigo, who was going
Ambassador to the King of England, staying some time at Zurich for that
purpose. The first disturbance to the quiet was the reparation of damages, and
the oblivion to Rebels: For Ferdinand would not give way to the one, and chose
to keep the other on foot to oppose it to some of Carlo's pretensions. Carlo on
the other side publishes in discourse and in print, that the Governor had
promised him to restore the banished into the possession of favor, and their
Estates, abolishing all mention of damages, provided he consented to have the
Infant Princess brought to Milan. In effect, the Governor pours forth
threatenings, and protests against Ferdinand, if he should not acquiesce in his
will, and that with such vehemence, that thence forward all the Princes, being
aware, that under the pretext of a long Peace servitude was slipped in, were
offended at the terms of obedience, and command, in which he declared himself.
Monferrat was the chief sufferer both from the frequent Incursions of Carlo,
and the Quarters, which the Spaniards, under the title of protection, kept
there; whence it was universally believed, that the Governor of Milan had
brought things to that pass, that without Peace, and without War he thought it
the most probable way to get it for that Crown. Other Princes made it their
business to allay the disgusts; and Castiglione particularly in the name of the
Emperor, admonishes the Marquess to use more complacency toward the Princes:
whereupon from threatenings turning himself to entreaties and friendly offices,
the effect was, that Ferdinand, induced thereto by the Councils of the
Republic, offers to refer all his rights to the Pope, the Emperor, and the
King. But Inoiosa not approving to admit Companions to his King, neither in the
pre-eminence, nor in the business, in place of an answer, which was expected,
sends to Mantua Anthony Piementelli, Governor of the light Horse, to demand
afresh the Princess. The Order came from Spain, and the Governor, who had
suggested it, executed it with such urgency, that it looked, as if he had a
mind to take her away by force.

Piementelli represents seriously to Ferdinand; That the King himself took due
care for the education of the Niece; That she belonged to him, not only by
blood, but by authority and interest; and being advantaged by his alliance, and
affection, she might be brought up in Milan, as in her own house; That the King
was so far from trusting her unto Savoy, that he had imposed upon him the
respect due to the interests of Mantua; The pledge of the quiet of Italy being
placed in the Child, it was in every respect fit she should be deposited into
the hands of the King, who even to jealousy professed himself her security,
and Guardian. Of what was Ferdinand afraid? if his Countries were so happily
recovered under the Royal protection? Can he possibly distrust, that she, who
is near to them both, may not be in safety, and with a decorum under it? Can he
possibly fear, that by such means the Child should be ravished from him, by him
who restores him to his State, repairs his damages, and protects the Family?
That he was to remember, that the resentments and power of great Princes are
not to be sweetened and appeased but by obedience. The Duke was vexed at such
discourses, knowing Piementellis persuasions accompanied with authority and
power, and his own replies assisted only with reason, and entreaties: yet he
defended his negatives with alleging the respect, which he professed to the
Emperor, and Queen Regent of France, who had seriously pressed upon him not to
alienate the Niece; and to justify himself, required time to send some
Minister of his to Madrid. But Piementelli being not at all satisfied
therewith, refuses to depart without the Princess, when she falling sick, and
he being brought to see, that she was not in a condition to be hazarded in a
journey, it served for a just excuse for his departure.

The Duke with all speed sends into Spain Scipione Pasquali Reserendarie, and
another Minister into France to represent his excuses to the one, and solicit
the assistance and good offices of the other Court. The Governor, at the same
time he sent Piementelli to Mantua, not to show partiality, had dispatched
Sanchio Luna, Castellan of Milan, to Turin, to signify to the Duke he must
disarm. Carlo foreseeing, that his disagreeing with Ferdinand tended to make
them both fall under the Dominion of Spain, not being willing flatly to deny
it, carries himself with several pretexts, and in particular, that hearing
there was a Rendez-vous of some French upon his Borders, Spanish Regiments to
quarter in Piedmont, to the end he might be in readiness to march whithersoever
need should require. The Spanish Ministers observed well, that his aims were
either to draw in, and at the same time set on the French, or betwixt ill
Quarters and bad accommodation to consume the flower of the Forces of Milan.
Rejecting therefore the Proposition, they pressed him to disarm, and the
Secretary Vargas going into Spain passed by Turin, to know Carlo his positive
intentions. He in the presence of Vargas caused a show to be made of disbanding
some Troops, but it was rather a reforming, because sending home the Militia of
the Country, which might easily come together again, he kept on foot the
Strangers. Neither did the Governor proceed in forms disproportionable;
whereupon not being able to penetrate into the present Councils, nor make a
judgment of future accidents, the minds of the Princes remained perplexed
amidst the several Interests, and in no less suspicions.

The Venetians making these Interests their business, remonstrated to the
Catholic King the glory of moderation, and the securing of the Peace. They put
France in mind, that the Interest and Honor of the Nation would suffer
prejudice, if they should wholly abandon the arbitrament of the affairs of
Italy to others. They demanded from the Pope the care of his Pastoral Office;
and of Matthias the Authority of the Imperial name, to confirm quiet. But the
Spaniards in place of facilitating peace, and doing offices to the Princes for
it, imposed such conditions, as appeared to all no less displeasing than a War,
because they at Madrid finally expressed the Kings intentions to be; That the
points of the Rebels, and damages, should be referred to the Pope, the
Emperor, and himself: That the Princess should be brought to Milan; the Mother
marry with Ferdinand, and both the Dukes disarm; the Forces of the King being
sufficient to execute whatever should be needful for relieving the oppressed,
and suppressing the refractory.

Carlo stormed, and Ferdinand resents highly, that at one and the same time his
Niece should be violently taken out of his house from him, and his own will
forced to the Marriage. Nevertheless not seeming to dissent, he interposes for
excuse, that it was fit, that together with the Marriage, all diffidences
should be reconciled, and the Rights of the States adjusted. In this uncertain
state of affairs ends the year 1613; in which, for what concerns the Venetians
at Sea (besides what we have related of the Vscocchi) four Galleys of Barbary
meeting at Saseno to rob, were by Girolamo Cornaro, Proveditor of the Fleet,
chastised with the taking of one, and putting the rest to flight: two Christian
Ships with many Slaves being by this means rescued out of the Pirates hands.
This served rather for an example than was of much consequence. There appeared
a greater danger arising from the attempt of Octavio d' Arragona, who with
eight Galleys of Sicily, passing beyond the Island of Scio, had surprised
twelve Turkish Galleys, and taken seven with a very rich booty, and a great
number of Slaves. The Ottoman Port, taking the outrage to be as great as the
loss, published their threatenings to revenge themselves without distinction
upon all Christians, and in the Spring to put a powerful Fleet to Sea.

The Venetians, as nearest and most exposed, made ready some armed Ships, and
ordered the number of Galleys in Candia to be increased. James King of England,
upon this rumor of preparations, and threatenings, though in such Interests he
may with reason be said to be separate from the World, offers the Republic, in
magnificent terms, his Forces, when they should be invaded by the Turks. The
Republic publishing the offer, that it might serve for a terror to the Turks,
and an example to the Christians, answered both with thanks and applause.

Carlo, Duke of Nivers, about this time had conceived grievous thoughts against
the Turks, and much greater than those, which the condition of a private Prince
could bear, and under the name of a Christian Militia had engaged in several
Provinces where he had been for that purpose, several men to follow him. In the
parts of France he had some few Vessels ready, and carried on an Intelligence
in Morea. Being now at liberty from that business, which had so long kept him
in Monferrat, he went to Rome to communicate his designs to the Pope, demand a
Squadron of his Galleys, and the authority of his endeavors to move the
Princes of Christendom to set upon that vast Empire, not with Leagues, which
were long and doubtful in treating, but every one with the Arms, which lay
proper for him. The Pope encourages the Venetians, as the most powerful at Sea,
in great earnest; but they measuring the business according to piety and
prudence, offered considerations to the Pope, of how much mischief might happen
from provoking so powerful an Enemy, without hope of bringing him under:
Nevertheless offered, having above all others just provocations of interest and
revenge, to concur with all their power, when the other Princes of Christendom
should resolve upon it indeed, and lay aside those jealousies, which
unseasonably distracted Italy at present. The Popes zeal being applauded in
other Courts, all offering, and no body performing, the project fell quickly
into silence.

ANNO MDCXIV.
With the new year the affairs of Italy were much changed; for the two Crowns,
having reposed in the Marriages concluded the secret of their union and power
for the oppression of others, under the pretext of removing the War out of that
Country, introduced servitude there. The Dukes of Savoy and Mantua made their
complaints upon like terms; the one, that his Army and his Daughter were
violently taken from him; and the other, that his will, and his Niece were
disposed of without his consent. Carlo aggravated with greater vehemence,
telling the public Ministers of Princes, which resided with him; What
signifies the requiring of my laying down Arms else, but to exact from Italy a
Tribute of the basest slavery? I respecting the greatness and the authority of
the King, my Kinsman, have yielded up at his beck my Conquests, and my hopes,
and now am paid with ingratitude, and scorn. My rights are buried, Marriages
are imposed upon me, I am commanded to disarm. Can slavery have any thing in it
more base, and miserable? Shall I then give up for Hostages the Guard of my
security, and shall my Countries Subjects, my Family, and my own Person remain
disarmed, and exposed to the ambition of another? What testimonies of most
partial affections have not I given to Spain? One of my Sons, though in great
Command, is notwithstanding, if I may say so, a Prisoner, and a Slave amidst
the Spanish Guards. The other, who is the Heir to my Estates, I have delivered
into the Kings hand for a pledge of Fidelity. All this is not sufficient, but
now it is imposed upon me to disarm. Who shall secure my Fortresses from a
potent Neighbor? Can the Spaniards possibly think to satisfy the jealousies
of my mind, by the same way they make it lawful to dispose of my Daughter? The
Governor of Milan disarms not, though protected by the name, and defended with
the shadow of so great a Monarchy; and shall Piedmont be left destitute of all
help? It belongs to the weaker, to beware of the more powerful; and in the
defense of a man's self, and the protections of Subjects, the Laws, and
obligation of Principality make all equal, why should Fortune alone
predominate? If Spain can gain this point with me, we Princes of Italy shall
from hence forward lie at his feet, either fearing punishment, or asking
pardon, without other glory, than to be at the pleasure of his Ministers,
either subdued by Arms, or deluded in Treaties. An unwary Peace has brought us
to this pass, and a more base obedience will degrade us from all Authority and
Command. Such were the complaints of Carlo, who, though the Governor
threatened, France suspected, his Country lay open, and his two Sons were in the
power of the Spaniards, courageously professed to dye armed, no less than to
live like a Prince. Many had a fellow-feeling with him, insinuated also by
their own fear and interest in the first offense, taken at him for his
unseasonable taking up of Arms.

The Queen Regent of France, to make appear a shadow of her Authority,
dispatches at last the Marquess de Couvre Ambassador to the Princes of Italy;
but Carlo, knowing that he brought nothing but offices, and pressing instances,
that the Marriage might be accomplished, and Arms laid down, when the Marquess
was arrived in Piedmont, went to Nizza, taking his pretext from some commotions
by reason of grievances, which were risen amongst those people; whereupon the
other staying some days, and having discovered what the matter was, seeing
himself laughed at before he was received, passed hastily to Milan.

The Spanish Ministers, notwithstanding the apparent Confidences betwixt these
Crowns, could not endure to have in Italy a Frenchman for Companion or
Opposite, laboring by all possible means, that not only the authority, but the
name of that Monarchy should not be revived again in that Country; insomuch
that the Governor declares to him, in excuse that he did not admit him, and
withal not to disgust him, that, the Duke of Mantua having, by sending a
Minister into Spain, transferred to Madrid the seat of the Treaty for those
affairs, they were to be managed there, and not elsewhere. The Ambassador then
going to Ferdinand, to show himself not wholly useless, besides general
offices, and consolations, exhorts him, bating the delivery of the Niece, to
consent to the Marriage, and the rest of the points. With this also the
Councils of Castiglione, and the Resident of the Venetians agreed; because it
being discovered, that Italy could promise little of it self, and that
Strangers did conspire to her prejudice and destruction, it seemed best, that
the impending storm should in some measure be diverted; and therefore they
solicited the Duke for his consent, to the end that for matters of no great
concernment, the fault of having disturbed Italy might not be laid on his
shoulders; always excepting the Niece, who was thought a price worthy of the
danger of a breach, and War. That which was the desire and prayer of all, came
doubly confirmed from Spain, as a precise command, and particularly that the
Marriage should be consummated, with the agreements made with the Duke Francis
excepting the line, and cession of Rights; for their minds being by this new
band united, the King would have seasonably provided for that, which his
authority and the general quiet required. Ferdinand, out of a firm belief that
Carlo would oppose it, feigns to show compliance with Spain, to yield to their
will; only solicited, that the marriage might be accomplished, under the the
word of the King, Emperor, and France, that he should no more be disturbed by
the Savoyards with Armies, and that the Niece might not be taken out of the
Family; and for the rest, in consequence of the marriage he assented to the
pardon of the Rebels, and not to keep on foot the pretension of damages, but to
make use of them against some pretensions of the Savoyards; all which he
declared to repre^e^^ for the public good, and not to restrain the Kings will:
But the Prince Vittorio returned from Spain, who, after the news of the
restitution of the places possessed in Monferrat, being admitted to the Court,
was from the pride of the Grandees, and the jealousy and aversion of the
Favorite, though the Kings Nephew, received with coldness and scorn, related
to his Father the absolute will of their Councils; That he was to obey or
submit, otherwise they threatened to punish and chastise him, in design to bring
down that natural height of his spirit, which made him suspicious to the
Spaniards. That the Duke of Lerma spoke of his interests with hatred and
disdain, vaunting that if heretofore he had diverted a Marriage betwixt the
King and one Carlo 's Daughter, he did now also know how to afflict and
mortify him. Such thoughts as these served the Duke fitly as so many
provocations to shake off the yoke; and therefore inveighing against the
pretensions of the Court of Spain, he refuses to consent to the marriage of
Margaret with Ferdinand, if the things in dispute were not first agreed, and
that his pretensions might find such advantage, as he fancied to himself was
due: But foreseeing, that the Spaniards would quickly follow their commands
with force, he arms the best he could; invites some French of quality to his
Service, raises men in the Valleys, and in Bern, imploreth the favor of all
far and near, and in particular where he knew, that for interest or emulation
the power of the Spaniards was suspected, he used all his Art to insinuate
himself. With a considerable pension he obliges the Count John of Nassaw to
serve him, and begets a particular confidence with Maurice Prince of Orange.

The Governor of Milan, that saw himself against his will engaged in a War of
Reputation and Puntillio, neglects not any means to increase his Forces. Italy
thus filled with Armies, the Princes grew more and more jealous, and
disordered. Monserrat almost no less possessed, than oppressed by the Spaniards
Quarters there, gave Inoiosa occasion to insinuate underhand to Ferdinand,
that that Country languishing betwixt Jealousies and Armies, it would be more
advantageous for him to exchange it for another less contentious and exposed.
But the Duke alleged for excuse the discomposure of the present affairs, and
the consideration he had of Italy, which being accustomed in the greatest calm
to fluctuate amidst jealousies, would in this Conjuncture be tossed up and down
with more violent discontents. The Spaniards, to say truth, had alone the power
in their hands: For the Queen Regent had recalled almost as soon as he
appeared, the Marquess de Couvre into France, contenting her self for that time
to have laid a stone of Foundation for her Authority, to build upon when a
better Conjuncture should make way for it; there discovering it self just at
that instant in that Kingdom one of the wonted storms of that Climate. For many
of the great Ones having united themselves under the Conduct and Command of
Conde, first Prince of the Blood Royal, pretended with a plausible pretext to
hinder the Marriages with Spain, as if the Maxims and Interests of that Crown
would thereby be introduced into the Government of France. The more secret
motive nevertheless arose from the Interest of some, who proposed to make their
profit in that Crisis, which the King, being near going out of his Minority,
gave hopes to afford private advantages, and the hatred and envy of all
concurred against Concino Concini, called the Mareshal d' Ancre, who, brought
by the Regent out of Italy, was from mean Parentage, by her great favor
advanced to the chiefest place of Government.

Carlo, who from France expected jealousies rather than succors, was not ill
pleased to see that disturbance, and the mind of the Regent distracted. He
entertains therefore a Confidence with the discontented, and they, sending the
Seignor d'Vrfu to Turin, insinuate with several Propositions, that setting
aside the Arbitrage of the Crowns, the differences betwixt the two Houses of
Savoy and Mantua, might be referred to the Duke of Nevers, their common Parent.
But that business, however neglected by France, was not so easily to be taken
out of the hands of Spain, which held it fast by so many bonds of Authority and
Power. The stirs now in France quickly vanished, and a Conference held at
Soissons quiets all, with the promise in appearance of the Regent, to defer the
consummation of the Marriages till the States of the Kingdom were called. And
for this the united Princes conceived great merit to themselves, participating,
by the means of the said Seignor d'Vrfu, the agreement to the Venetians, and
inviting them to cooperate, that the accomplishment, which would be troublesome
to the Nation, and formidable to all, might be wholly disappointed. The more
secret conditions notwithstanding consisted in private advantages; for to Conde
was given the Castle of Amboise, to Nevers St. Menehoud, and to all in general
great recompenses; fruits accustomed in France to be reaped from that, which
elsewhere was punished by the Hangman. In Milan the suspicion of the Mediation
of France disappearing, and the Treaty reassumed, the Savoyards and Mantuans
joined issue for a meeting in the presence of the Governor to mediate the
Peace of Italy. Castiglione wearied himself with many Expedients, and because
Carlo as the recompense of his rights proposed, that some part of Monferrat,
and namely the Canavese might be yielded to him, he insinuates the Marriage of
Margaret with Ferdinand, and of his Sister Eleonora with the Prince Vittorio,
giving to the Savoyards certain Lands near unto Turin, of about the value of
5000 Crowns yearly Revenue. But all was turned topsie-turvy by the Governors
insisting, that Carlo should disarm, intimating that without more ado he should
perform it within six days. On the other side Carlo undauntedly denies it, and
knowing himself in the necessity to provide himself of Friends, fixed his eye
upon the Venetians, whose Correspondence always heretofore having been improved
by him with all sorts of offices, had had effects considerable, and honorable
for Italy; but at present had been interrupted by his transport of anger for
the assistances of the Republic to Ferdinand, for which the Ambassador
Gussoni was discharged; and although by means of Hippolito Cardinal
Aldobrandin, he had endeavored to renew it again, nevertheless in the Senate,
which always maintains the point of its dignity, he had found a deaf ear to
whatever he had proposed.

But now pricked forward by the urgency of more resolute reflections, he sends
to Venice Giovani Jacomo Piscina, a Senator of much wit, and voluble eloquence,
who was received by Dudly Carleton Ambassador of England. That King showed
himself beyond measure partial for the Duke, by improving with such a
friendship that rest of authority, which he had a mind to assume in the Affairs
of Italy; and therefore the Ambassador labored exceedingly, that he might be
introduced, remonstrating to the Senate, that to the testimonies of ancient
respect, the Duke added at present one more apparent, than possibly could be
desired, by sending an Ambassador express, who should soon be followed with a
Leiger, to cast himself into the arms of the Republic, and to open his heart
to them, hear their judgment, and embrace their counsels. He interposed the
entreaties of the King, and passing to more serious apprehensions of the
present Conjuncture, he considered that the affections of Princes, except in
things belonging to Religion and Justice, did adjust themselves according to
Interest and Time: the Punctilioes and Formalities rather befitting private
men, ought not to divert Princes from the substance of more weighty affairs. He
moved them to reflect, that if the Italians disunite, all would sink under the
burden; but joined together, would with impunity despise Foreign powers. He
pressed upon the Conjuncture and necessity of the times; whereupon at last,
after some difficulty, Piscina was admitted into the College, to open to them
all that had passed betwixt the Duke and the Spaniards. He insisted much upon
the violences, which they presumed to offer him; deplored the condition of the
Italian Princes; added the consequences of the example no less than the motives
of the common Interest; despaired, through the pride of the Governor of Milan,
Castiglione being weary of proposing Expedients, and Ferdinand having called
back his Deputies to Mantua, of a good end of any Treaty. He therefore stirs up
the Senate to reflections and remedies, how to uphold the Dignity of Italy,
which if it reverenced that Assembly as the Tutelar Deity of its Liberty,
Carlo, as eldest Son of the Republic, desired to have it for his Director and
Father.

The Venetians consoled the Duke, and assured him of their affection, and good
offices, and exhorting him to an agreement with Ferdinand and to Peace, that
neither of them should omit any thing to render that respect to Spain, which in
the disproportion of their Forces might be compatible with the Dignity of a
Free Prince: They at the same time earnestly pursue in all the Courts their
sense and desire of Peace, moving some to be Mediators, entreating others to
facilitate the rejoyning of the Treaties; in Spain particularly, and in Milan
not missing to represent the dangers of the War, and the calamities. But
Inoiosa shows himself rather provoked than satisfied with Piscina's journey to
Venice; whereupon the Republic grounding their own jealousies upon those of
his, the aspect of affairs continued to look more and more troubled: And she in
consequence to arm her self, substituting Antonio Lando, Procurator di St.
Marco, into the Generalat to Priuli, committed the Levy of 2000 Foot to the
Prince Lewis d'Este, newly entered into their Service. Of the Switzers she
procured, as has been said, passage and Levies; but neither being to be
obtained without a League, the Ambassador Barbarigo applies himself to the
management of it, remaining some time for that purpose among the Grisons, a
people no less gross by nature, as they are rough by situation; but with them
he found no disposition to renew that, which being formerly stipulated with the
Republic was lately expired; because, besides the venality of their friendship
and interests, opposition was made by Pascal, the French Minister, who by
rendering the passage of Rhaetia common to others, thought it would be a
derogation to the pretended Authority of that Crown. Whereupon he goes back to
Zurich, where, and at Bern, being the seats of the best Government, and
greatest Power of Helvetia, it was no hard matter to adjust an Alliance. And in
the Diet, called at Baden for that purpose, the project of the two Cantons was
approved, notwithstanding the violent opposition made by the Governor of
Milan, who could not suffer, that a way should be opened for the Princes of
Italy to arm themselves; which if it served not wholly to discompose, might yet
for the present prolong the Treaty.

In the intricacy of so many affairs, the thorn of the Vscocchi still pricking,
Vsseim, Chiaus of the Ottoman Port arrives at Venice, with a bundle of
complaints for the damages done by those Piqueroons, but he was sent away with
the impression, that the Republic it self were no less sufferers by them:
which continued the Siege for the restraint of their courses, and the revenge
of injuries. Nevertheless frequent disturbances and assaults were heard of 400
of them, who roading along the shore, and chasing away the Guards came to St.
Michael, a Rock opposite to Zara, where landing, and some being left as a guard
to favor the retreat, the others passed through the Territory of the Venetians
to plunder Islan, a Town of the Turks, returning with many Slaves and a rich
booty, without withdrawing the Guard from the Rock, till they saw the Venetians
in motion to drive them away by force. Felice Dobrovich, Governor of the
Albanese, took one of their Barges, which was condemned to be burnt, and the
men to be hanged. After this, Pasqualigo came to be General of Dalmatia, and
Lorenzo Veniero of Albania, and still more and more straightened Segna, doubling
the Guards, and having an eye every where; so that the Vscocchi, having the Sea
shut up, had no choice but to turn themselves to free-booting at Land. As well
the Subjects of the Venetians, as the Austrian Inhabitants in Istria upon the
declivity of Monte Majore, have a custom upon the change of the seasons for
their flock to change their pasture. At the very time of the heat of Summer,
those of the Venetian Subjects were, in the Territory of the Archduke, secured
by the public faith of the Lieutenant Governor of Pisino, that by none
whomsoever, and especially the Vscocchi they should be molested. But 200 of
them ransacking the Country, took away a considerable number, without the least
respect to those of the Austrians, to whom nevertheless restitution was quickly
made to the so much greater astonishment and indignation of the Venetians, as
by how much oftener they had required theirs in vain. Veniero thought it not
possible longer to dissemble the loss, and the affront; whereupon landing his
men, he orders the Reprisal of a good number of Cattle upon the Lands of
Ferdinand. The Vscocchi on the other side, besides the late Incursion into
Istria pillaged upon the Island of Ossero the two Villages of Lussino, Mandre
in that of Pago, and the Rock of Provecchio.

The Venetians land again upon Ferdinands Country, but found it defended by a
Militia in pay: whereupon engagements going on, and War with flying Colors
declaring it self openly, some Troops of Horse were sent out of Dalmatia to
Pola, and the Senate made choice of Marco Loredano for Superintendent in
Istria. The Emperor dispatches the Count of Echemberg, General of Croatia, to
Segna, to hinder the progress of imbitterments and offenses. But the wound,
which required fire and sword, was either fomented by lenitives, or became
corrupted through the delay of remedies. Echemberg by means of the Count de
Cesarea gets knowledge from Veniero, what it was the Republic required, and
having for answer, that they pretended the punishment of the guilty, the
restoring of what had been taken, and above all, the performance of the
agreement of Vienna, he insists to have the Siege raised. But the Venetians
through past experiences denying it, he having only chastised some guilty of
other facts, but left those, that took the Gally, unpunished, and appropriating
to himself the last booty brought from the Islands, departs out of those
Quarters. These Pirates, seeing that the bait of their Robberies was still
pleasing to the taste of the great Ones, took greater confidence, and some few
of them, who feigning fear were retired far off, being returned to Segna, were
well received, as before. The Venetians then foreseeing that it belonged to
them to apply the remedy, and that it ought to be such as might at the same
time spur on the Austrians to Peace, Antonio Civrano, their Captain of the
Gulf, disbar^s Soldiers betwixt Laurana and Velosca, and ravaging the Country,
burns some Towns, and brings away a great booty of Cattle. So that the Thunder
of War did not yet cease from afflicting, but continued burning in several
parts, and particularly in Piedmont, where the Interests of the two Houses were
no more disputed, but the Authority of Spain, and the liberty of Savoy. The
Governor, as has been said, positively requires Carlo to disarm, and will
besides have him promise in writing, not to molest the Country of Ferdinand;
and for the disbanding of his own Army declares, that the King his Master was
to receive no conditions but from his own moderation; nor went further than the
offer of his own word to the Pope, and the Emperor, not to offend Piedmont.
But the Duke in the one considered the decay of the Age, and in the other the
frailty of that Authority; and therefore, for his indemnity, desired also a
promise from the Venetians, and above all, that the Governor would take away
the jealousy, which so great an Army gave, and that the disbanding might be
alternative; in which, in token of his reverence, he offered to begin first on
his part.

But Inoiosa refuses every thing that might have but the resemblance of
Capitulation, much less the show of parity; and although by his own inclination
he was far from breaking, yet he could not avoid, by strict reiterated
Commissions from Spain, coming to a protest, letting the Duke know so much by
Luigi Gaetano Ambassador of that Crown in Turin; and himself at the same time
marches with his Army to the Borders of Piedmont. But the Duke not at all
frighted, nor rendering himself at his threatenings, bidding Gaetano be gone,
delivers to him to be carried to the King the Order of the Golden Fleece,
denying to retain so much as the bonds of honor from him, who threatened him
with chains; and immediately going to Asti assembles his Army. The Governor
without dispute was superior in number, and there being arrived in those parts
some thousands of men from Spain, it was observed, that they were convoyed and
disbarked at Genoua by the Prince Filibert, a Son of Carlo's, General at Sea,
in ostentation, as it were, that the Son should be made the Minister of the
Fathers chastisements. But Inoiosa passing Sesia, quarters at Caresana in the
Vercellese, in a belief, that the Kings Army having fame and reputation, the
Duke at the first appearance of it would have humbled himself and yielded. But
Carlo, in a defense so necessary, knowing he should be excused by many no less
than commended by all, leaving to the Governor the blame of having first
moved, passes to the other side of the Sesia, entering into the Novarese, and
there surprising Palestre, burns certain Villages, returning with booty,
Prisoners and an elevated mind. The Spanish Chavalry, to be even, marching
along the Sesia, met with a notable Encounter, where they would have come off
with the worst, if the Prince of Ascoli, with a great body of Foot, had not
seasonably come in to their succor, so that the Savoyards received a blow, and
the Marquess di Caluso, Governor of Vercelli, taken Prisoner by the Spaniards.
The Germans of the Kings Army burnt Caresana and la Mota, and the Savoyards in
revenge fired some Towns of the Milanese; the burning of the Bridge, built by
the Spaniards at Villatta over the Sesia, not succeeding, which the Duke
attempted, so to have cut off their Camp from the Milanese.

Such resistance, among the Spaniards, had the qualification of a heinous
offense; and Inoiosa showed himself so disordered at it, that to Augustino
Dolce the Resident at Venice, who persuaded to more peaceable remedies, he
sharply answered; That if the Grandeur of the King abhorred to take away what
was another, it equally belonged to his power to mortify the contumacy of the
Duke, whose offenses were gone so far, that they left him nothing in his power
but punishment and correction. For pardon, he was to have recourse to the Kings
clemency at the Court it self. To this discourse followed a Declaration in
print, which devolved to the King all the State of Carlo, which held of the
Milanese. And Castiglione at the same time, by suggestion of the Spaniards,
thunders forth from the Frontier the Ban of the Empire, if within a certain
time the Duke should not lay down his Arms, and bear due respect to Monferrat,
and every other Fief of the Empire. The Spaniards themselves nevertheless would
have desired something more of the Emperor, and particularly, that Piedmont
might have been as a prey to whosoever could possess it, and that the Governor
of Milan might have been the Executor of the Ban. Against these two
paper-blows, Carlo without much ado defends himself by one of the same stamp,
and therefore with a Manifesto denies, that his house did hold any portion of
his States of the Dukes of Milan, and to the Emperor he accuses the Prince de
Castiglione for suspect, sending an Ambassador into Gremany to inform him
better.

After Piscina, arrives also at Venice Carlo Sc^glia, Son of the Count of
Verrua as Ambassador in Ordinary: both together press the Senate for
assistance, who choosing first to make trial of the ways of Peace, made choice
of Renieri Zena Ambassador Extraordinary to go first to Milan, and thence to
Turin, to pass offices seasonable for Peace. But their minds being equally
incensed, they inclined more to wish the Republic a Partner in the War, than a
Mediator for Peace. The Governor, to render the Venetians suspect to Carlo,
pressed, that the Duke of Mantua might yield up to him 2000 Foot, which were in
Casale, being the residue of those paid by the Republic. But the Republic
understanding the instance, hindered it, notwithstanding that Monferrat, for
Passage, Victuals, and Quarters, was altogether at the disposition of the
Spaniards. In Madrid, so soon as they heard the spoil Carlo had done in the
Milanese, the Ministers were so much the more easily inflamed with anger, by
how much they had not been accustomed to find resistance in Italy. They
therefore swear his ruin, execrating his name, and the impudence he had to
violate the Royal Army, Standard, and Confines; and reproaching Inoiosa of
faint heartedness, stir him up to more rigorous resentments. But in direct
opposition to the ordinary government of the World, it might be said, that the
severe influence of the higher Region, which in Spain was that ill will, the
Duke of Lerma bore to Carlo, was mitigated and corrected by that of the lower
and nearer, which in Milan was the Marquess Governor; because finding the
Milanese was invaded, and on all sides open and undefended, he immediately
abandoning the Posts of Piedmont, retires within his own Confines, to the so
much heightning of the Duke, that he esteemed and published him conquered.

The Governor incamps not far from Vercelli, to secure the building of a great
Fortress, which, being a mile in circuit, he placed within the Kings Confines
in a situation very commodious; for it did not only serve to bridle Vercelli,
but to cover the Milanese, and shut up a passage open enough to strangers for
the Invasion of that State: An old design of the Spanish Ministers; but, not to
raise jealousies in time of quiet amongst the Princes with novelty, defered to
be put in effect till this present Conjuncture. It was named Sandoval, in
honor of the Duke of Lerma: and Inoiosa amuses himself there without further
action for several weeks, with great reproach from those who would have wished
rather, that he had marched into the bowels of Piedmont to chastise the Duke,
and lay waste the Country. The season, to say truth, for the employment of
Armies passed in this interim, and gave time, that in the name of the King of
France, who, though come out of his Minority, left the burden of the Government
to his Mother, arrives as Ambassador in Italy Carlo Marquess of Rambogliet, to
persuade and press the Duke of Savoy to disarm. It sufficiently appeared, that
the Councils of that Crown tended to make a Peace at the charge of the Dukes
Honor and Estate, and it was made the more evident, that while Rambogliet
passed the Alps, Monsieur de Sillery was on his way from Paris into Spain to
concert the exchange of the two Spouses on the Borders. Carlo utters his mind
with bitter complaints, that both the Crowns conspired against his dignity and
security. But Rambogliet, passing by the consideration of what was fit, judged
warranty enough the word which France offered with an order to Dighieres to
march immediately to his assistance, if any molestation should come upon him
from Milan; otherwise if he should continue refusing to lay down Arms,
threatens him to give a summons to all the French, of which the greatest
strength of his Army consisted, to abandon his Standard and Service.

The Duke considering, that succors, after a loss received, would come too
late, and be unprofitable, judged, that the safest guard for a Prince consisted
in his own strength; another man's word, faith, and orders would not want
evasions and pretexts. He says; I am divided from France by Mountains,
Precipices, and Rocks, and separated from the Milanese with narrow Ditches
only. How often may the seasons and the snow contest for me the passages from
France? The King has the name, the Queen the power. The Marriages are desired,
the bonds to join interest with Spain are hastening. If that Crown abandon me
falling, I shall be laughed at when I am down. If I lay down Arms in the fear
of my armed Enemy, who shall secure me from blows? Upon the dispatch of a
Courrier, Armies are not so quickly ready for motion. Whither shall I direct my
complaints, and who shall be the judge of my wrongs and my offenses? Reason
without force is little differing from a trick of wit; and on the other side
force without reason passes for the height of justice. With such reasonings the
Duke counseled himself not to yield, and Julio Savelli, the Popes Nuntio,
having proposed, that the Army might be consigned to the French Ambassador, to
the end the disbanding might be treated by a Peer with equal dignity, he
refuses it: not to subject himself to the judgment of both, while he contended
with the predominancy but of one of the Crowns.

All the Spanish Ministers in Italy, seeing it difficult to bend the Duke to
the respect pretended by them, solicited Inoiosa, that since he had threatened
with so much earnest, that he would not employ force so faintly, it seeming to
them, that the Arms of that Monarchy were fallen below that opinion of
Invincible, into which they had endeavored to invest her. But the edge of the
affairs at Land by the Governors slackness seeming to be blunted, they
deliberate to employ a maritime power to torment Piedmont on all sides. The
Fleet, making a course into Sicily to defend it from the attempts, which the
Turks threatened in requital of what had passed the year before, sailed within
sight of Navarino, where the Turks lay; but without hazarding a Fight: they
losing two of their Galleys, which were sent out to discover, both retired.
Part of the Spanish with Philibert sailed into Spain; but the Squadron of Italy
with the Merchant Ships of Genoa, which were in the Kings Service, making a
good body, attempt the enterprise upon Oneglia. The Dukes Territories face two
ways toward the Mediterrarean; the one, where toward the West the River of
Genoua terminates, betwixt this and France the County of Nizza interposing it
self, with very strong places, and a very safe Bay: The other, in the midst of
the same River opening amongst craggy Rocks ashore, where Oneglia is situate. A
little Town, but more inward, commands certain Valleys with many Villages.

The Spaniard, finding they had not a power to attempt Nizza, nor being willing
by such an undertaking to make France jealous, turned their design toward this
other, which being encompassed by the Genouese, and divided from Piedmont by
the cragginess of the Appenine, was not to be relieved. Alvaro Bassano,
Marquess de St. Croix, coming near it with twenty four Galleys, disbarks in the
Territory of the Genouese, and from within their Confines (so near are they to
the Town) plants his Cannon to batter it. The Marquess Dogliani defended that
very weak place for five days, having made some little Fortification at a
Monastery. At last renders it with honorable conditions, and a part of the
Garrison with the Cavalier Broglio enters into Marro, a Castle upon certain
steep Rocks, which commanded the Valleys. With the arrival of the Galleys of
Sicily, the Spanish Forces being increased to 5000 men, Giovanni Girolamo Doria
attempts to take it, and succeeds sooner than could have been imagined, because
the Governor in a certain Faction was killed.

The Genouese having denied passage for the succors, which under the Command
of St. Georgio the Duke had sent, he revenges himself by taking Zuccarello, a
Fief of the Empire protected by the Genouese, and situated to do them great
mischief. In further resentment, he had in his mind greater designs by the
surprisal of the Citadel of the Capital City it self, which was to be executed
by certain English Ships; but being discovered, gave only to understand, that
amidst the straights of a most dangerous War, his mind was still carried forth
to great Conquests. To manifest the friendship, renewed with the Republic, he
had received in Asti the Ambassador Zeno with all possible honor, and having
heard the inclinations and Councils of the Senate tending to Peace, one day,
all fire and courage, he spoke to this purpose; I deny not but the
deliciousness of Sovereignty, the good of Italy, and the felicity of the World
are placed in Peace. But what is that Peace which an Enemy offers, who has War
in his heart, and in his hands? Let us, I pray, draw it out in its proper
shape, and well consider if we can tell how to distinguish it from baseness,
servitude, and infamy. I do not see but an imperfect mixture, which is
compounded of these two Elements only, Empire and Obedience. The one I hold
from Heaven common with the King. The other is not known in my Family. Liberty
is a Twin of Dignity; they have Chance, Fate, Accidents common; the one is not
offended, but the other resents it. Oh let us once resolve to attempt great
things, and not distrust Fortune! We shall find that power, which in
perspective appears terrible, to grow less from it self, and vanish like a
shadow, if we shall have hearts to go near it. Let us join our selves together,
and in that union vindicate the contempt Strangers have of Italy, because at
discord. What cause more just to shake off the yoke, which is made more
insufferable by our own patience? where can the Republic better employ their
Power, their greatness of Mind, and their Treasures than to the relief of an
oppressed Prince, and oppressed for no other occasion, but because he would
live and dye like a Prince. The Republic has large Confines with Spain, but
by this League may enlarge them, even to Piedmont. This State shall be all at
her devotion, and she shall be able to say, that she environs the Milanese more
than she is encompassed by it. My own breast, and those of my Sons shall be the
Frontiers of the Republic. If she attacque, we will draw the gross of the
Enemies force on this side; if invaded, we will divert the mischief with the
hazard of our lives and blood. God has given to the Republic and to me two
flourishing States, which are balances to Italy, scourges and tongs to the
Milanese. We have need to bind and unite our selves without delay; for if the
Spaniards should come to disadvantage one part, the other will be made of no
use. We are both armed, and to what purpose consume our selves betwixt
jealousies and expenses, without other advantage, but not to be overcome? The
Republic abounds in Arms and Money, and to me men are not wanting. What a
number of people should we have begging passage, if we had once declared War,
and I have the Keys of the Mountains? We will cause floods of stranger Nations
to come down into Italy, whither the Spaniards can have no passage but with
slow voyages by Sea, and most tedious marches by Land. If France will not be
with us, it will not be against us. And when War is once declared, it cannot
be, but that the French, at least privately, will run to our Colors. To a
duplicated vigorous Invasion how will the Milanese be able to resist, lulled
asleep in a long Peace, and under the shadow of an imaginary reputation, with
weak places, an unwarlike people, and so remote from succors? I invite the
Republic to the spoils, not to dangers. I will be the first that shall invade,
I will take some place or other, and then if the Republic will go before, and
give the Princes of Italy an example, we shall not be alone. Those that cover
themselves most under the wings of that Monarchy, will be the first to pluck
the feathers out of them. The Indies, Spain, and Flanders are not places we
ought to be afraid of, but the States of Italy are the fetters of our slavery.
Let us free our selves from them at last: for in the Milanese, as in the
Center, the Register of all the Monarchy being kept; disorder that, the rest
will lie dismembered and remote; nor shall we any more fear to have the
Spaniards our enemies, when we shall not have them so near Neighbors.

Such generous conceptions were heard, but not approved by the Senate, so long
as there appeared any hopes of Peace; and believing withal, that Carlo, in the
love of a great War and general Conflagration, to enlarge amidst fire and
destruction the greatness of his States, and the luster of his Name, did refuse
to prefer his own and common quiet before the vast ambition of his nature. The
Duke failed not to do the like with others, using the same instigations to the
King of England, the States of Holland, and the Princes of the Union in the
Empire, and with the same success: For, the first as ready as he was to
interpose good offices, was as backward to consent to the War. The Hollanders
professed to follow the Kings example, and Germany did not yet own its
Authority and Power.

The Governor of Milan, to second the maritime undertaking, yielding to the
reproofs and accusations of those that envied them, rather than following his
own inclination, in Autumn moved the Army, though afflicted with several
sicknesses, and in their march incommodated by excessive rains, which
overflowed all the Country. Having passed the Tanaro in view of the Duke, who
endeavored to hinder him, he found himself perplexed; because the Siege of
Asti, considering the season, and the Dukes strength, who was there in person,
was not advisable. To quarter at large, served the Enemy for pastime, who being
vigilant, and bold, would harass it with continual surprises. He resolves
therefore to retire in all haste into the Country about Alessandria, against
the opinion of Giovanni Vives, Spanish Ambassador in Genoua, the fierce
incendiary of this War, and of other principal Ministers, who would have rather
disposed of the Armies lodging into the Territory of Asti, while the Troops of
Santa Croce should have taken their Quarters about Ceva and Mondovi, to torment
and oppress Piedmont. Carlo, on the other side, commodiously enjoys his
Lodgings upon the intermixtures of the Fiefs of the Empire, to the great relief
and sparing of his own Countries. In the Spring the Armies were reinforced,
and great provisions made, but the Duke with a new blow of a Treaty, being
solicited by the Mediators, signs a paper for Peace, in which he consents to
disarm, retaining only wonted and necessary Garrisons. It was promised him,
that within fifteen or twenty days after the Governor should also disband his
Army, and give his word to the Pope and King of France not to offend him, and
in case of default, the Princes, called the Defenders of the Faith of Inoiosa,
and Vindicators of the Duke, should do it with Arms. The Prisoners, and places
taken, were to be reciprocally rendered, and Ferdinand was to restore to Carlo
the Dowry and Jewels of Margaret; other things in controversy betwixt these
two houses were to be decided within six months after, or to be determined by
Law, if any difficulty arose. The Dowry of Blanch was to be restored within
two years, and the Rebels to be pardoned.

It was much doubted, whether to this project, which secured few things, and
left many undecided; Carlo, for the desire of quiet, and apprehension of the
Enemies Forces, or to gain applause, and to interest the Mediators in his
cause, would give his consent. But if that were his intention, the design
deceived him not; for the Treaty being carried by the Nuntio and Rambogliet to
Inoiosa, with an assured hope, that he would approve it, because the Ambassador
of Spain at Paris had also notified the Proposition to the Court, they found,
that by a late Commission from Madrid, all power concerning Peace was taken
from him. It is not to be believed, how much they were offended at it; but not
being able to obtain more, they demanded at least a suspension of Arms for
forty days. The Governor denies that also, Thomaso, who was Carlo's youngest
Son, marching out of Vercelli with twenty Companies of Foot, and 700 Horse,
surprises Candia, a great Town in the Milanese, and giving it to fire and
spoil, brought away a great booty. For which the Governor and the Mediators
equally complaining, the Duke endeavors to excuse what had happened by his
Sons being far off, and not knowing of the Treaty, but the Spaniards
compensated themselves with the taking of Monbaldona and Denice, Towns in the
Mountains of Piedmont.

ANNO MDCXV.
King Philip being not to be persuaded to treat with Carlo de pari, all
endeavor was in vain to get the Treaty approved at Madrid, notwithstanding the
Pope with his own hand wrote earnestly to him about it. Neither were the French
much pleased with it, because Rambogliet, more desirous of the glory to
conclude it, than applying himself to the means of having it well executed, had
not well provided for the Interests of Ferdinand. Diverse Princes of Italy in
the vanity of their obsequiousness, had offered to the Governor of Milan their
Militia, and he seasonably accepting the offer, either to take from Carlo the
hope of assistance, or to boast his predominancy, intimates to all, they should
either according to the band of Capitulations, or in testimony of their
affection, perform it. By the investiture of Siena he required 4000 of the
Grand Duke; of Modena, Parma, and Vrbin, each a Regiment of Foot; of Genoua as
much, and a certain number of Luca. Cosmo sends 2000 Foot, on condition they
should not go out of the Confines of the Milanese, and disburses besides pay
for 400 Horse. From the Dukes of Parma and Vrbin was sent a third, Modena alone
his excuse was admitted, either from his inability, or kindred, he having a
Daughter of Carlo's for his Daughter-in-law. Those of Luca gave liberty to the
Spaniards to make Levies in their State, and the Genouese were exempted from
their assistance, by the necessity of being vigilant for their own safety round
about them, and by their known aversion to the Savoyards. Besides all this,
many private men of the richest, having their private interests dis-joyned from
the public, furnished the King upon several conditions with some millions. So
did Italy study to overcome it self by it self!

The Venetians, who in the long Peace had, for the honor and safety of the
one, and the others Fortune, gathered together a great Treasure, had now in pay
12000 Italian Foot, divided into four Bodies; the Commanders of which were,
Camillo Cauriolo, Giovanni Baptista Martinengo, Giacomo Giusti, and Antonio
Savorgniano. Giovanni Baptista General of the Infantry being dead in a decrepit
age, they received into their service Pompeo Justiniani a Genouese, who had
made himself a name in the War of Flanders. To visit the places, and
particularly Peschiera, to the end the Fortifications might be reformed to the
use of modern defense, they sent three Senators, Giovanni Garzoni, Nicholo
Contarini, Benedetto Tagliapietra, who joining with Lando, General, and
Girolamo Cornaro, chief Commissary, upon hearing the opinions of the Chief of
the Army, should resolve upon that which was judged fit. Hereupon they resolved
to levy 3000 Foot more, desiring they might be strangers, in regard Italy,
degenerating by idleness, has with liberty lost military virtue. Order was
given to the Ambassador Barbarigo to conclude a League with the two Cantons,
Zurich and Bern, which consisted in promises from the Republic, to assist them
with a sum of money, if they should be invaded; and for the Cantons, to permit
the Levy of 4000 Foot of their Nation, whenever they should have occasion: in
consideration whereof, it was agreed, that the two Cities should each receive a
yearly pension of 5000 Ducats, conformable to the custom of the greater
Potentates, from whom the Helvetians extract gold with their Valor and their
Swords. The League notwithstanding was not yet published, because, to assure
the passages in the Grisons Country, it was agreed, that Barbarigo should go
thither with the Ambassadors of the two associated Cities. That people, who of
their government make a mystery also of trade and gain, unmindful of the
benefits received from the Commonwealth, of their own liberty, and of their
obligation to open the passage to the Cantons, suffered themselves to be
seduced by the Ministers of France and Spain to deny it.

Both the Crowns agreed therein, to the admiration of many; because, if it
served the Spaniards turn for the subjecting of Italy to shut up every passage
whence it might have relief, it did as much disserve France, who by frustrating
the union of the Republic with the Grisons, helping to introduce the Spaniards
there, it was clearly evident, that they prevailing in cunning, power, and
money, would quickly exclude the French themselves. Barbarigo could not
overcome the opposition; therefore going on to his Ambassie for London, leaves
in Zurich Christofero Suriano Secretary, resident in Helvetia. In the beginning
of this year, the Governor of Milan appeared at the head of a flourishing Army
of 30000 men. The Savoyard had not above 17000; but if in the one, the valor
of the General was wanting, in the other the courage of the Duke supplied it.
The Prince of Castiglione, by order of Matthias, who complained that he had
been left out in the project of Peace, and that the judgment of the Dukes
pretensions were deferred to others, sends to Carlo the intimation of the
Imperial Ban. He imprisoning him that secretly put it into his hands amongst
other papers, appeals, with many protestations of obedience, to the Emperor
himself, who, without much ado, at the intercession of the Dukes of Saxony,
from whom the House of Savoy boasts its Original, lets all things fall into
silence and oblivion. The Duke himself, by means of the Venetians, renews the
project heretofore set on foot by Castiglione, of the reciprocal Marriages of
Margaret, and Eleonora, with Ferdinand, and Vittorio, with equal Dowries, and
with a certain Parcel of Monferrat, which might regulate the Borders; but it
behoving Ferdinand to depend too much upon the Spaniards, it served for nothing
but to give time to Carlo, the better to justify himself, and inveigh in
discourse, by endeavors, and in print, against the Government of Spain. For
this purpose served wonderfully certain Dispatches directed from Madrid to
Inoiosa, which falling into the hands of Carlo, gave him means to publish the
Orders they contained, to invade Piedmont without delay, before the friends of
Carlo, and those that emulated the Crown, could be ready to relieve it. Upon
this Intelligence, Carlo sollicites those far off, and stirs up those that were
near. But many believing, that a bridle was more necessary than spurs to his
fiery spirit, in place of assistance counseled him to incline to Peace.

James King of England, hiding the intern weakness of his Kingdom under a great
Cloak of Authority, and honoring his own quiet with the name of Studies and
Learning, contributes nothing but his good offices, commending him to the
Venetians, as a Prince animated with the ancient Genius, Valor, and Luster of
Italy; and for a better appearance, orders his Ambassador at Venice to go and
reside in Piedmont. The Hollanders forbid the Levies to the Count of Nassau,
which Carlo desired, and in France some paid the penalty of having transgressed
the Kings Orders, by going to serve him. Carlo, to justify himself in that
which was imputed to him, viz. that too immoderately he desired War, calling
one day the Ministers of Princes, then with him, desires their advice to what
conditions they would counsel him to condescend, protesting that bating
Dignity, which was the Pupil of Principality, he was willing to any thing. The
Ambassadors of England and Venice, applauding greatly his understanding of
things, carried it to the Governor; but he finding himself not yet authorized,
nothing could be done, but to expect the resolutions from Spain, whither the
Senate with serious Letters to the King himself ceased not to exhort earnestly
to Peace.

At last the Spanish Ministers explain themselves; That at the intercession of
so many Princes the King did graciously oversee all that humiliation, which he
might pretend from the Duke; but did require, for the public Peace, his
disarming no less than the adjustment of the differences with Ferdinand. Upon
which they declared themselves more fully to Monsieur de Sillery: That it was
to be understood, that Carlo, retaining convenient Garrisons, should disband
his Army, and the Emperor should be Judge of their pretensions of Monferrat;
in the mean time, Hostility, and offenses ceasing, the places possessed with
the Prisoners should be restored. They promise moreover, so to dispose of their
Army, that no Prince of Italy shall have cause to be jealous of it.

This being arrived at Turin, the Duke having always feared, that the Spaniards
would have him disarm, the more easily to wound him, joining to difficulty
delays, denied to consent, that those that had followed his party, being
Subjects of Ferdinand, should remain excluded from pardon, and that his own
rights to Monferrat should be buried for ever in the wonted tediousness of the
Imperial Court. With this he got so much time, that the Spring opened the field
for the action of Armies. The events of the War had not hitherto been suitable
to the power nor dignity of the Princes, employed only in plundering, spoiling,
and burning. The Spanish Chiefs in the mean time endeavored to show themselves
in more becoming Achievements. The first occasion was given by the Inhabitants
of Roccaurano, who being weary of quartering some insolent French, called in
the Spaniards to help to drive them away. The Marquess di Mortara, Governor of
Alexandria, who was very much one of those who above all others kindled the
fire, marched in great haste with 5 or 6000 men, in hope that getting into that
Town through a place in the Walls, which lay open to take also Cortemiglia, and
so to incompass Piedmont on that side, he might have the opportunity to do it
much mischief. But the Duke, who had a most vigilant eye to observe the first
motions of the Spaniards, sends presently St. Giorgio into Cortemiglia, and
himself going from Turin with 7000 men, meets Mortara in Bistagno, a place
belonging to Monferrat, situated upon a height commanding a High way, which
goes from the Sea into the Milanese. He attacques him there, and wanting his
Cannon, which by reason of the speedy march was stayed behind, he thought with
the Spade to make a breach. But the Spaniards, with Muskets and frequent
Sallies killed some of the boldest in the Assault.

Inoiosa, at his wits end, to see the Dukes courage, and the danger of the loss
of those men, which was the flower of the Spanish Soldiery, hastes thither
with a great Body; neither did the Duke stir, till he saw him camped, and then
with excellent order retires in his sight without being molested. It was then
generally reported, that the Spaniards, by not following the Duke inferior in
strength, lost a signal Victory. But they marched away to Asti, a City lying on
the Frontier of the Territory of the Alexandrino, environed with several
parcels of Monferrat, with a Campagnia round about it, enclosed with many
little Hills of equal fertility and beauty. At the foot of these, the City
stands upon a Plain; which afterward presently rises and terminates, where an
old Castle stands above it, incapable of fortification or defense. The Tanara,
a little way from it, runs from the Southward, and the Versa a small River on
the other side. The City being of a large circuit, and the Walls old, the Duke,
who was got thither first, places the hope of the defense in keeping the Enemy
far off, intrenching himself both on the Hills, and in the Plain. The
Governor, to disturb Piedmont on all sides, leaving about Sandoval 6000 Foot,
and 500 Horse, and by consent of Ferdinand, having placed Garrisons in St.
Damiano and Vlpiano, Towns of Monferrat the first on the side of Asti, and the
other just before Turin, found himself 24000 strong in view of the Duke. The
other not more than 15000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, had entrenched them longst the
Versa, and at the first appearing of the Spaniards having sent a gross of
Cavalry toward them, they engaged in a Skirmish so hot, that the Governor
found it necessary to employ all his, when at last the Savoyard giving way to
their number, Inoiosa had liberty to form his Camp. He designs afterward,
ascending the Hillocks, to get behind the Duke, and constrain him to abandon
the Plain, and to command the Town it self; for although Carlo had fortified
some Posts, nevertheless the shortness of time had not permitted him to perfect
them. The Prince of Ascoli then taking the Land of Castiglione, opens the way
for that whole Army to march thither, and the Savoyards abandoning the
Campagnia and the passages of the Rivers, betook themselves to their own
defense, making choice of two principal Posts, the one committed to the French,
the other to the Switzers, with some pieces of Cannon: These two Nations making
betwixt them 10000 Soldiers. Against the first came the Spaniards in a
well-designed order, and Pietro Sermiento, who led the Vantguard, attacqued
them with great courage. The Cavalry of Savoy, who flanqued the Posts in a
Plain a little below, attempted in full speed to stop them, but were repulsed
by other Troops that interposed.

The Spaniards advanced booldly without losing their order, but where now and
then the straitness of that way required it, or the Vollies of Muskets made
them to open. But where the first were killed, or wounded, the second File
taking their place, they gained the height, where they had not only liberty to
put themselves again into order, but plant two pieces of Cannon, by which the
French taking fright, turned their backs. Certain Troops of Horse, who
endeavored to rally them, and stop the Enemy, the place being steep and
narrow, was the cause of greater confusion and disorder. Giovanni Bravo, which
led the second Battaglion of the Spaniards, seeing the first master of the
field, marches beyond it, and gives upon the flanck of the second Post: neither
was the resistance greater there; for the Switzers, some flinging away their
Arms, others forgetting they had them, with their flight gave no occasion of
further dispute. The Duke alone with equal skill both of a Prince, and a common
Soldier, directing the fight, mingling himself where he apprehended disorder,
and either staying where the danger was greatest, or flying thither whither
need required, gave proof of great valor by animating the weary, rallying the
faint-hearted, and reproaching the fugitives. But he found it fit at last to
yield to the cowardice of his own men, and the number of his Enemy: not to lose
all his Cannon, he caused two pieces to be flung off the Hill, and to be
recovered in the night. Three others were brought into Alexandria in great
triumph.

On the Savoyards side Francisco di Sylva, Brother of the Duke of Pastrana, was
Prisoner, and dyed a while after at Turin of the wounds he had received. The
common opinion now was, that to prosecute this Victory, and make Italy tremble,
nothing was wanting but Carlo at the Head of the Spanish Army, or the Spanish
Army under the Colors of Carlo. But the Spaniards halting there, gave time to
the Enemy, who weak and much in disorder, was retired into the Town to recruit
their courage and strength, in such sort, that the one did not overcome, nor
the other lose. The Governor applies himself to fortify a great
Circumvallation, taking in Hills, and doubling Trenches and redoubts, to defend
himself as if he had been the weakest, and in a condition ready to be overcome.
The Duke keeping himself more close, runs forth a line notwithstanding, as if
he would attacque the enemies Camp; and at last lays a Fort under their nose,
notwithstanding many Skirmishes, and other Feats of War. The Spaniards, as the
more provoked and insulted, breaking ground, run a line with many Works toward
the Fort; but the Savoyards having taken and fortified another Post of certain
houses in the middle, turned another way. With Fire-batteries, but afar off,
they play upon the City, and the Dukes Camp, who with 1800 men assaults the
Quarter of Gambaloina, burning their Parapet of Gabions, but were at last
repulsed. The Governor with his slackness made War to himself, and found the
greatest to arise from the Situation and the Elements. Upon the Hills they
suffered for want of water, and the filth of the Army causing sickness, men and
beasts dyed. Lodging in the open Air, the heat, the nourishment, the unripe
fruits corrupted health. The Camp was not to be distinguished from an Hospital
or a Churchyard, so great was the number of the sick and dead. From whence,
although the Army was reinforced with the Troops left at Sandoval, and others
come to them by Sea, it was nevertheless not half so strong as when it sat
down before Asti.

Carlo, as to his Quarters, had greater commodity, but in other things was in
no less difficulty, because his own Country being not able to supply the
charges, he had so frequent experience of Mutinies among the stranger Militia
for want of pay, that oftentimes he could not distinguish whether they were a
greater burden or assistance to him. In this state of affairs Rambogliet
arrives at Asti, and the Spanish Cannon in honor of the Mediation suspended
their Battery. But the Duke even in this precipice of Fortune practicing the
arts of wit, interposed always the difficulties of requiring honor and safety.
Zeno, and the Ambassador of England failed not to beset the Duke with many
reasons, and he acknowledged, his happiness lay in peace; but added, that as
Fortune obliged him to yield to the more powerful, so to expose himself to
dangers, to obedience, and humiliation, were not the counsel of prudence, nor
permitted by his Fortune. He insisted upon the Governors disarming, or that
the Republic might be the Warranty of the Peace: knowing in it to be stability
of Government, and a faith not subject (as in the Pope, and in France) to the
vicissitude of time, the mutation of Princes, and the corruption of Ministers.
The Senate seriously weighed of what importance that was, because great Princes
not being to be constrained to performance but by the same faith with which
they promise, if the Spaniards should profane theirs by reason of interest, the
Republic put it self into great trouble.

Nevertheless the desire of Peace prevailing, they command Zeno to sign, and
over and above to promise assistance to the Duke, when (others failing) France
alone should concur in it. Such orders arrive very opportunely in Piedmont,
because Rambogliet having a little before pressed the Duke in vain with
threatenings and protests to consent to the Peace without any such caution, was
ready to take his leave, commanding those of the Nation to follow him, and with
much ado had yielded to a short suspension of his journey at the instance of
the Ambassadors of England and Venice. But Zeno giving his word, the Duke, who
had dexterously directed his counsels to such an end, threatened by one party,
secured by another, and entreated by all, under-writes the Treaty, which took
its name from Asti. Carleton and Zeno deliver it to Rambogliet; he and the
Bishop of Savona, the Nuntio succeeded to Savelli, carried it to the Governor
of Milan, and being greedily received by him, he confirms it with a Writing,
which he put into the hands of the French. The Capitulation for disarming
contained, that the Duke, except some Companies of Switzers, should within a
month disband the Strangers, and of his Subjects should only keep on foot so
many as sufficed for Garrisons. He gave his word not to offend the States of
Mantua, and to refer his pretensions to the judgment of the Emperor. On the
other side Rambogliet promises for France, that the Subjects of Ferdinand,
which had served Carlo, should, with the security of their persons, be restored
to the enjoyment of their estates; Prisoners and places to be reciprocally
rendered: And for the Dukes security, France declares him to be in their
protection to assist him with all their power, whenever he should be molested
by the Spaniards; and Orders were consigned to him to oblige Dighieres to march
to his assistance, without expecting other Commission from the Court. And
because it was known, that some Levies were making by private persons out of
Italy in favor of Carlo, he was obliged to communicate the peace to his
friends, and stop all proceedings; and on the other side it was agreed, that
for six months the Spaniards should not require of him passage for Flanders.
But concerning the manner of retiring, it was also agreed, that the Duke at the
entreaty of Rambogliet withdrawing 1000 Foot out of Asti, the Governor should
retire from the Hills to Croce bianca, and to Quarto, places belonging to the
Jurisdiction of Asti; after which Carlo, leaving a convenient Garrison in the
Town, should remove his Army further off, and then the Governor should return
into the Milanese, where, as to number and time, he should so dispose of the
Army, that neither to Savoy, or any other, there should remain any occasion of
suspicion. In this manner the Duke seemed to have preserved his dignity and
indemnity, and Italy applauded him, and most especially the Venetians, who with
their Council had maintained the Common Interest. By the Expedition, with which
these first steps were accomplished, great hope was conceived, that all the
rest would have been duly executed; whereupon the Venetians reform a great
part of their Militia, and reduced the payment of Casal to 1000 Soldiers,
giving passage to the Duke of Mantua for 500 Germans, which, as an independent
Militia, he thought fit to bring in there.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE.
THE stormy blasts of Piedmont quieted by the pacification of Asti, a continued
dissembled connivence of the Princes of Austria at the uncontrollable boldness
of the Vscocchi, amassed in the minds of the Venetians a great heap of
resentments and revenge. Some believed, that the suffering and permission of
the villainies of that most wicked people proceeded from the want of power in
the Austrians; because it being necessary, for keeping them in order, to
maintain a Garrison in Segna, the Archduke had not the means to defray the
Charge. Others judged, that it was interest and profit to keep that Frontier of
the Turks armed without charge, and besides to exercise a certain pretended
Jurisdiction, though a thieving one, by Sea. Neither did there want that
thought, that the Archduke was encouraged by the Spaniards, because, having
discovered, by what had passed in the affairs of Savoy, the Republic to be
jealous above all things of their own and others liberty, they took pleasure to
entertain and distract her in and by so troublesome an exercise. This is
certain, that if upon the continual complaints of the Venetians, the Emperor
inclined to the remedy, those of the Archdukes side did always infeeble his
earnest and interposed delays. In order to this, it fitly happened, that John
Prainer, dispatched by the Emperor as Commissioner to punish the insolences,
and find means that the Treaty of Vienna might be executed, was, when he came
to Ferdinands Court, hindered from going forward, as if it were not seemly to
yield, while in Arms, to Conditions, and during a Siege about those places of
refuge, where the Vscocchi were freely received, where their booties were kept,
and the spoils, together with the dignity and patience of the Commonwealth,
were publicly exposed to sale. The Garrison in Fiume and other places were now
increased with German Soldiers, who now and then assisted the enterprises of
the Pirates with engaging the Colors and name of the Austrian Princes, who
authorizing their transgressions, rendered the enduring of them more difficult,
and unworthy of the Venetians. In the beginning of the year one action did much
exasperate men's minds, too much disturbed already. For Antonio Giorgio, who
governed the Isle of Pago for the Venetians, seeing Scrisa just over against
him, where was Carlopago, a little Fortress, but a nest of the most infamous
amongst the Pirates, suffered himself to be deluded by a false Treaty to
attempt its surprise, and with six Barks only, and a few Soldiers, without the
General Veniero his knowledge, was by concerted signs drawn on; but no sooner
disbarked, but being received and environed with an Ambuscade, left his life
there with eighty others, part Soldiers, and part Inhabitants of Pago, whom he
had brought along, as to a sure Victory. His own Standard, with another
Colors, and one Bark, remained in the hands of the enemy.

This success was variously interpreted by both parties; but in effect both
reckoned themselves offended, though amidst so many dissatisfactions there was
occasion given for Treaty; for that the Lieutenant of Pisino by his Letters to
some of the chief Venetian Ministers, proposed an interview of Commissioners,
but Giorgio Justiniani, Ambassador for the Republic at the Emperors Court,
remonstrated, That they were no more to treat about adjusting differences or
confines, but the faith of the Princes. That the Treaty of Vienna was in force,
concluded by the Imperialists, and executed by the Republic. That to gratify
Matthias, Prisoners were set loose, Guards removed; but on the other side, what
was there practiced but cruelty and rapine? That complaints had several times
been made to the Emperor and Archduke of Islands laid waste, the Sea infested,
whole Territories given to spoil, of Colors taken, Galleys surprised,
Patricians killed, some intrapped by fraud, and others drawn in by treason. On
the other side does there appear any Forces garrisoned in Segna, according to
the agreement? Whence have the Uscocchi been driven away, or where punished?
Are their Barks burnt? Are the Confines, the Subjects Navigation, and the Sea
free? It is not denied but that the Emperor commands, the Archduke dispatches
Ministers; but let it be to execute the old agreements, and not to contest new
ones. That the Republic, knowing common happiness to consist in Peace, was
ready to forget what was past, but as much resolved not to endure loss and
invasions for the future.

These reasons were admitted by the Emperors Ministers; but being opposed by
the Archdukes with various delays, gave occasion for new accidents, which
hastened open War. Lorenzo Veniero, General of the Venetians, brought up from
his youth in Sea-affairs, could not bear the memory of the Gally surprised, and
the insult of Giorgio killed. He observed Novi to lie before him (a place of
the Jurisdiction of Frangipani upon the Seacoast, and situated high) defended
by some of those Cannon, which being taken on the Gally aforesaid, were brought
in thither by the Count Niccolo, now Governor of Segna, in triumph and memory
of the action. Resolved therefore to cancel that indignity, and to get them
again by force, disimbarking men with Ladders and Petards surprised it by
night. In the assault and fury of the Soldiers, all fell by the Sword who
offered to resist. All things were given to spoil; but the Church-furniture and
sacred Vessels, not spared in that military license, were upon severe
inquisition restored. The Town, with such Barks as then there, was burnt; the
Salt-pans destroyed, the Governor made Prisoner, but above all the Cannon of
the Gally were brought away.

They on the Archdukes side aggravated this success as a manifest provocation
of War, forgetting, as is usual to them that do the wrong, the insults which
the Venetians had suffered; who on the other side maintained, That they had no
reason to respect the Walls and Dens of the Uscocchi, more than they had
preserved the Towns, Waters, Ports, Confines, and Territories of the Republic,
their Galleys and armed Ships, which were their floating Fortresses. But
Ferdinand not satisfied with such reasons, sequesters the Revenues of the
Subjects of the Commonwealth which lay in his Country, obliging the practice of
the same toward those of Ferdinand. On the Borders of Istria they prosecute
Hostility, both the Vscocchi alone, and often in conjunction with the Archdukes
Soldiery; whereupon some going out of Pogdavia, made prey of the Cattle of
those of Poppechio, who were not long without making themselves amends. A while
after, about 800 Germans, Soldiers, and Natives, returned from attempting an
Incursion of more moment. The Corsi, who guarded the Confines of the Republic,
falling into their Rear, forced them to abandon their booty, and retire upon
the Carso; whence going deeper into the Country, they spoiled Cernicale and
Cremosich, Towns belonging to Benvenuto Petazzo, a turbulent Fellow, and who
above all others troubled the Confines. The Vscocchi made an attempt upon
Veglia, but were repulsed, and Felice Dobrovich scouring that River with armed
Barks, destroyed and sunk many of theirs. It was now foreseen, that going thus
on from irruptions to offenses, it would quickly come to an open breach.

Some Princes therefore interposed themselves, and in particular Pope Paul, to
Matthias, to the Republic, and to Ferdinand, contributed his incessant
entreaties for Peace, complaining, that two of the principal powers of
Christendom should fall to Wars, and kindle a fire on the Frontiers, and under
the view of the Turks, who alone would enjoy the warmth and profit. His
considerations to the Republic were; That having with so much wisdom quenched
the War of Piedmont, they would with the like zeal for public good, pass by
offenses and revenge. To the Austrians he represented The blemish, that
redounded to their splendor of their August name, from the protection of
Piratical Thieves and Robbers. That the Uscocchi being now rendered the
abomination of the World, they should give up to common revenge that infamous
sacrifice made fat with the goods and blood of so many men. The Austrians
answered with excuses, and the Venetians insisted with reasons; That there
remained after so long time no place for a longer patience, but that which was
unworthy of Principality. That they had for many years past by the insolences
of the Uscocchi, the complaints of their Subjects, and the threatenings of the
Turks. From the many relapses they judged the remedy desperate; and what then
was there more to be expected? It was fit at last to do right to themselves,
and justice to their people, and to give protection to their Navigation. Proper
defense is suggested from nature, from use, and from necessity. The burning of
so many places were almost to be seen from the Capital City, and the cries of
innumerable persons afflicted heard there: Instances, prayers, complaints
themselves had never had any effect. It was now in vain to propose Treaties, if
those already concluded were not fulfilled. The Senate had been willing, not
once, but many times, not to appear suspicious, to trust to promises; but it
was not sit out of too much credulity, to let her self be any longer deluded.
He was therefore to convert his offices to the Austrians, and with his paternal
Authority require their observance of the things promised; for the conditions
accorded, and the proceedings since, made it easily to be discerned, who it was
that was against Peace.

At this instant of time happens to be proposed in the Imperial Court a
suspension of Arms, and the Venetians accept it for two months; during which,
the Vscocchi were to abstain from their courses, and to be removed from their
maritime places. But the Archduke refuses the prescription of time; whereupon,
by new intercession of Princes, the Senate gives consent, that there should be
a cessation without limit, with promise nevertheless, that during the same, the
mischiefs should be remedied, by cutting them up by the root, which could no
otherwise be done, but by removing the Vscocchi. The Archduke then pretended,
that the Guards before Segna and other places should be removed; but the
Venetians, taught by former experience, would not without further security
consent. Thus, while they differed in opinion about the Treaty, Hostility going
on, and growing hotter, Petazzo, to repair his losses, attempts the Villages of
Hospo, and Gobrovizza in Istria; but being repulsed by the Guards, spends all
his spite against Benedetto da Leg, Proveditor in that Province, publishing
him banished with a severe sentence. Leg proceeds against Petazzo in a way of
justice, he having first practiced the same thing. Then applying himself to
more proper resentments, he burns the Town of St. Servolo, Prebenich,
Poghdaria, and Polina. Thence going down to spoil the Saltpits of Trieste (a
thing heretofore for the Dominion of the Sea practiced by the Republic in more
quiet times;) with about 800 Soldiers under Fabio Gallo, Colonel; provoked
those of Triest to come forth first with some Horse and 300 Foot, which
afterward, strengthened by Wolfango Frangipani, Earl of Tersaco, come in with a
great number of Germans and Vscocchi, found themselves strong 20 Companies of
Foot, and 300 Horse. The Venetians, who having some armed Barks on the shore,
had put hand to the work, seeing the enemy so much exceeding in number,
resolved to retire, and putting their men into two Squadrons, take the way
toward Muglia, which along the Sea is so narrow, that being assaulted by the
Archducalians, the Rear led by Gallo himself, could receive no assistance from
those in the Van; nevertheless withstood the Charge so long, till finding the
passage a little too open, he was able to put himself in better order. But
Gallo killed by a Musket Shot, his men fell into confusion, in such sort that
the other Squadron, commanded by Leg, falling into the same, the field with
200 dead, many wounded and some Prisoners, was left to the enemy.

The Austrians, animated hereby, spoiled five Villages, and in the Territory of
Monfalcon burnt seven, besides two plundered. Upon these successes Veniero, to
give courage to the people with his presence and Fleet, comes to the Istrian
shore, puts a Garrison into Albona, Fianona, and other maritime places, and
with eight Galleys attempts to take Moschenizza; but, the stone of which the
Wall was made being Cannon-proof, and the season not permitting a longer stay,
retires further off, after he had laid waste for 15 miles in length the
appurtenances of Monte Major. A design, the Germans now had upon St. Vincenti,
succeeded not, but the Venetians made spoil of Chersano, and then left it, not
to be engaged in the Siege of the Castle and the Church, which was fortified.
The Venetians, from these little doings called to greater thoughts, and
preparations, dispatched to the places most exposed their Lieutenants
Extraordinary; and chose Pietro Barbarigo, Procurator, Commissary General of
the Terra firma, and for General, Marco Loredano; with whom, for the better
directing the affairs of the Army and War, they sent Paulo Aemilio Martinengo,
giving Commission for 4000 Italians and some few Corsi. These preparations went
not so fast forward, as invasions and offenses did. The Senate knew, that their
great advantage consisted in prevention, and firmly believed, that from the
Mediation of Princes, the clamor of Subjects, and the damage of his own
Country, the Archduke would be induced to fulfill the Treaty of Vienna. But the
event succeeded not so happily as the intention was prudent, by reason of the
nature of War, which, contrary to a Labyrinth, admits not of a going out the
same way you go in. And though now the season grew toward the end of the year,
the Senate ordered Francisco Erizzo General of Palma, that sending forth some
Forces under Pompeo Justiniano, he should possess those open places, which lay
on this side the Lisonzo, and lodge them there to hinder the passage of the
Archdukes people; who gave out they would build Forts, and overrun the Country
to the Walls of Palma. It is here necessary to describe that part of the
Country, wherein, as in a Theater, we shall presently see the War confined,
which was made by puissant Forces, but balanced; carried on amidst many
distractions and reservations with unequal success, but at last overcome by the
Republic with Treaties more than Arms, and was followed with great jealousies.

Istria, a Peninsula of the Adriatic, confines with Croatia, where the Limits
of the Austrians separate those of the Venetians from the Turks. The County of
Pisino, subject to the Austrians, comes in betwixt; and Trieste, which gives
name to a little Bay or Gulf, faces upon the Sea. Beyond on this side are the
Mountains of Carso, not steep, but rough and craggy, and may well be called one
great stone; amidst these encompassed by the Sea and Lisonzo, lies in Friuli
the Territory of Montfalcon, subject to the Venetians; but where those Hills
terminate near to the River before mentioned, a large Plain extends it self to
the Julian Alps, which in ancient times was frequently made the door to let in
the Barbarians, and in these latter Ages the high way for the Turks.

Goritia, which gives the name to a County, is situate in this Plain, leaning
to a Hillock, which in its ascent leads to the top of the Castle. It is
defended by a strong Tower, there is a Bridge there over the Lisonzo, beyond
which the Campagnia extends it self with many Towns upon some little Hills.
Five miles lower upon the right shore of the River, lies Gradisca built upon a
Rock, of the form of an oblong square, with a good Castle, and heretofore
garrisoned by the Venetians against the Incursions of the Turks. It has beyond
the Lisonzo the Mountains of Carso, directly opposite, and on this side many
Towns environ it, as Lucinis, Cormons, Medea, Fara, Romans, and other places of
less moment; which nevertheless in the progress of the War will become so many
Ports, and so many Forts, which will consume Armies and Soldiers.

Toward the Mountains, out of which rises the Lisonzo, the Country is
straightened with certain narrow Valleys bordering on Carniola, and other
Provinces of the Austrians, who toward the Sea command certain Villages, and
in Maranuto, Castle Porpeto and Aquileia, though of these there remains nothing
but the ruins and the name, kept Soldiers. In those parts on this side the
Lisonzo, the Venetians made their Invasion, nor was it difficult to possess
every place; for except Medea, which they got with approaches and Trenches,
though it was in vain to resist, every one yielded at the first appearance. The
Garrisons without much ado quit the Tower of Aquilea, Castle Porpeto, and
Maranuto, which were demolished. On the other side of the Lisonzo, Eliseo
Pierantoni and Hugo Crutta, for a diversion, marched out of Monfalcon, and took
in Sagra, then left it: and Pompeo Justiniano did the same with Lucinis, which
was afterward much repented; for had it been kept, it might have served to get
the Bridge, and the Tower upon the Lisonzo, and by them to have straightened
Gradisca from succors; and passing to the other side of the River, which was
so many times after attempted in vain, might not only have shut up Goritia on
all sides, but taken it also, being open and exposed; as was the counsel of
Marc Antonio Manzano. But the Orders of the Senate containing only to lodge in
the Archdukes Country in Campagnia, without attacquing places, as not willing
to divide into so many parts their men, which consisted for the most part of
Trained-bands, Justiniano took up his Quarters in the Towns of Meriano and
Cormons. The Austrians, in disorder at the appearance of the Venetian Colors,
applied themselves with all speed to a vigorous defense. Gradisca was fortified
by Ricchardo Strasoldo, its Governor. The Count of Tersaco puts himself into
Goritia, and the Baron Adam de Trautmanstorf arriving soon after with Title of
Ferdinands General, ordered Repairs and Garrisons for both those places,
fortifying Rubia, St. Floriano, Vipulzano, and Dobra on this and that side of
the Lisonzo.

This first Rumor of War being spread abroad, sad judgments were made of it,
and the Princes discovered in themselves thoughts and reflections of no less.
The Duke of Savoy offers the Senate himself, his Sons, his States, and his
Army; and others were not wanting to animate to greater designs. In orders to
which, the English Ambassador being returned from Turin to Venice, exhorting
the Republic to reflect upon the state of things, while the Crowns of France
and Spain linked together by Marriages, did conspire at present in the same
Maxims to divide betwixt them, what with Negotiations, what with Arms, the
Arbitrament of Italy and the world, offered a League with his King; who, though
separated by situation, yet never by authority and prudence to the common
Interest, might with the moveable Bridge of his Fleet upon the vast Ocean, join
England to Italy. He remonstrated the association of the Northern Princes
against the vast designs of the House of Austria; and considering that those
friendships were never remote, which were made upon the ground of common
Concern, he besought the Republic to join their reputation and wisdom to that
League, assuring them they should find a candid heart and warm spirits amongst
those people, who are thought to have Sea and Darkness for their Element and
Climate.

The Senate, with many wary and respectful answers, entertains and cherishes
these good dispositions; but in their moderate counsels, did not consent to
conjoyn their Interests with those of Princes so far remote. As to the affairs
of Italy, in a belief, that the Peace of Asti was secure, Rambogliet had taken
his leave of Piedmont; but was no sooner gone, but the Duke of Mantua denying
to have given his consent to the oblivion, proceeded to execution against the
Rebels. The Venetians, interposing themselves, obtain, that suspending any
further act, he should yield that to their entreaties, which they perceived for
decency he would not yield to authority.

Carlo, as to the point of disarming, proceeds with great caution: because he
had a mind to hear the judgment of Spain concerning the Treaty of Asti; and
although he had discharged those of the Valleys and the French, yet he had with
them recruited some Companies of Savoyards, and delayed to discharge the
Swizzers, upon a difficulty risen about the accounts of their pay, and because
the Governor of Milan had denied them passage. These on the other side set at
liberty no Prisoners, nor were the places possessed reciprocally rendered, the
Duke himself not caring to be thought advantaged by the acquisition of some far
Fiefs. The truth was, that at Madrid, upon the advice of the Peace, there was
observed a long and severe silence both in the King and his Ministers, but
discourses were universally published so much the more licencious against
Mendoza, thought a man equally weak in the management of Civil and Military
affairs. It was nevertheless evident to those of the best Judgment, that the
facility contributed by him, proceeded from secret orders from the Duke of
Lerma, to the end the Marriages with France might be accomplished without
disturbances; after which, and the exchange of the Brides, a change of Councils
presently appeared. Spain in that business did certainly keep concealed one
great Stratagem of their Secrets; and had therefore offered to the Court of
France all assistance against whomsoever should disturb her; because the States
of that Kingdom having for a show been called and separated with good words
only, and the Committees to whom the reformation of abuses were committed done
nothing, the malcontents had again united themselves to the Prince of Conde,
and endeavored to stir up the Hugonots.

The Queen, that for her own interest was resolved, the Marriages, whatever
came of it, should be accomplished, sending the Mareshal de Boisdauphin with an
Army into Champagne to oppose the united Princes, and giving the Command of
another to the Duke of Guise to be her Convoy on the Journey, parts from Paris
with her Sons; and arrives in October upon the Confines of Spain, whither King
Philip was come also. The Kingdoms showing equal magnificence, each giving and
receiving the Brides, it looked nevertheless as if France only were to change
Interest. The little River Vidasso, which separates the two Kingdoms, joins
together at present the Spouses, and nothing was wanting of that, which from
ambition and luxury could be added to the greatness of the Princes. At the same
instant of time, the two Princesses in Boats loosing from the respective
shores, and it being observed, that in the Spanish Boat there was a Globe,
representing the World, placed under the Crown and Trophies of Arms, the French
would have it put out, presaging, as time, the ordinary Judge of Events, has
since made appear, that from this Marriage, in which the Spaniards placed the
strongest foundation of the universal Monarchy, is seasonably sprung up that
contention, which more than ever has opposed it. The Queen Mother receiving
her Daughter-in-law at Bourdeaux, the Marriage being not consummate, by reason
of her tender age, brings her to Paris.

The united Princes, notwithstanding the opposition of Boisdauphin, had passed
the Loire; but Conde being fallen sick in Poictiers, the rest were easily
persuaded to hearken to Propositions, which the English Ambassador and the
Duke of Nevers made for an agreement; whereupon the Treaty was concluded in
Londun, the Princes and others of their party, according to custom, rewarded,
France, but the Councils in Spain began to inveigh against the Capitulation of
Asti, because it was out of the way of the Dignity of that Crown, and the usual
Arts of its Ministers. Above all others, no man declaimed so much against it as
Pietro di Toledo Marquess de Villa Franca, a Minister, who with bold and
vehement counsels upheld the credit of those that showed themselves zealous
against it. He was allied in blood to the Duke of Mantua, and showed himself so
much the more averse to that of Savoy, and emulating Inoiosa. From his judgment
therefore and from his inclinations he appeared fit for the Government of
Milan, and was thereto chosen with this clear argument, that he was not a fit
Minister for Peace, who was the public Author of Councils for War. A
forerunning order, for show at least, was dispatched to Inoiosa, that the Duke
having disarmed, he also should license stranger Soldiers; whereupon Claudio
Marini, Resident of France at Turin, bringing an attest to the Governor, that
there remained nothing to be desired on Carlo's part to fulfill the agreement,
he discharging only the Auxiliaries of the Italian Princes, begins to reform
the rest. But behold Toledo, unlooked for, now arrives with a great supply of
money, and Inoiosa not able to bear the sight of him, because as one that
envied him, he came in word and deed to discredit the past Government, takes
his Journey for Spain, where the Governors of Milan having been accustomed to
arrive with applause, for having increased authority and enlarged advantages,
he being accused to have given occasion for discredit, by having managed the
Army weakly, and the Treasure with little fidelity, was subjected to censure;
in which being protected by the favor of Lerma, the Judges differing in their
opinions, the King assuming the cause to himself, absolves him. Toledo now in
Milan, giving no credit to the disarming of the Duke, excluding Marini from
negotiating, and declaring no more to acknowledge him for a Minister of the
Crown of France, laying aside the reformation of the Militia, applies himself
presently to the raising of new Forces.

ANNO MDCXVI.
In the very end of the year past, Marco Anthonio Memo, Duke of Venice, dying,
Giovanni Bembo gave happy presages to the Commonwealth, being taken up from the
Procuratorship of St. Marco into the highest dignity, after having gone through
considerable Employments, and the Command of the Sea; a person of much virtue
and a decrepit age, as is usual in the Government, in which men rise to the
height by long steps of merit, and not by the favorable wings of Fortune. The
Venetians, in the beginning of this current year, acquainting the Princes with
the motion of their Arms, and informing them of the necessity of making use of
them, added also their intentions to be as much distant from the desire of
Conquests, or the enlarging their State, as they should be inclined to Peace,
when the causes of so many calamities being removed, the Treaty of Vienna
should be put in practice; the Vscocchi should be sent far from the Sea, that
is, they which employ themselves in Piracy, and under three distinct names of
Adventurers, Hirelings, and Outlawed, formed but one Colluvies of people; who
without other profession but thieving, had wickedness for their trade. The
Archduke on his part failed not to represent to the Courts his sense and
complaints of being invaded in his own Country; which were variously hearkened
to, according to the diversity of interests and dispositions. The Pope and
France declared themselves to employ their offices for Peace with equal zeal
and affection. In Spain the Ministers at first seemed in suspense, yet offered
their interposition; and Toledo contented perhaps that the War should go on,
declared publicly in Milan, that the Venetians had reason to seek just
reparations; but soon after, seeking War more than the cause, they changed
their mind. Although some discourses, to give jealousy to the Venetians, were
scattered abroad of Ferdinands nearest Kindred, the Emperor and Maximilian
Archduke of Insbruch: yet neither of them departed from Neutrality; and the
Grand Duke of Tuscany went no further than entreaties for the Peace and good
Offices.

The Venetians appointing Ottavian Bono for Ambassador Extraordinary in
France, caused Vincenzo Gussoni, who had served in that Court for Ordinary, to
take his way to the Rhine, to improve the affections of those Princes of
Germany, which called themselves of the Union, to the end to oppose them to the
Emperor, if he should take part in the Interests of his Cousin with Arms, and
in the mean time inform them of the whole affair, and of their reasons not at
all separated from sincere desires of Peace; which produced such an effect,
that the Duke of Wittemberg, Head of it, offered to send an Ambassador to
Vienna to mediate the Peace, and the Elector Palatine moved Matthias with
Letters very effectual. But with Ferdinand the Negotiation proceeded not with a
pace equal to the common desire; for that Matthias soliciting him for a
suspension of Arms, accepted by the Venetians, he offended at the Invasion of
his Country, sends Ecchemberg to the Emperor, to offer him considerations, how
great the resentment ought to be after such offenses; and in case it should be
thought necessary to admit of a Truce, he yet understood that the places taken
should be first restored. On the other side, the Venetians scorned such an
extravagant Proposition, which seemed absurd to all, even to Toledo himself,
the execution never preceding the Agreement. They notwithstanding offered, in
case the Treaty of Vienna were accomplished within two months, to render all.
An offer, which being not only approved, but commended by the Emperors
Ministers, was notwithstanding rejected by those of the Archduke, to the great
advantage of the Venetians; because not liking that cause which condemned it
self, the Emperor angry at the Archdukes backwardness, did for ever deny him
those assistances, which he thought were due to the common interest of the
Family, and which he solicited with great earnest, and reproach sometimes to
the Favorite as long as any Hostility remained.

Thus the War from Injuries goes on to Treaties of Accommodation, and now at
last to new Engagements, contrary perhaps to the belief of those themselves
that were engaged in it. Now, to say truth, were the preparations
proportionable to the motions in several parts; for the Venetians in particular
having, in hopes of Peace in Piedmont, disbanded a good number of their
Militia, found their Army not sufficient for their necessity. Therefore till
men could be raised, they sent into Friuli the Militia of the Territories
thereabouts; and from the Archdukes side, notwithstanding the snow, Troops came
down from the Mountains. Those of Trieste with thirty Barks hastily got
together, attempted to make some disturbance, but were quickly by Giovanni
Giacomo Zane, who succeeded in Dalmatia into the Generalship of Veniero, with
certain Galleys repulsed. Those of the Archduke overrunning the Territory of
Pola, were also driven back. At the same time, in the Country of Montfalcon,
the Count Ferdinand Scotto put to flight 500 men, which attempting to plunder
it, he obliged to leave their booty. To enlarge the way for the supply of
Provisions, Francisco Justiniano had a mind to attempt Vipolzano; but his party
being but small, and those that defended it more numerous, he retired without
doing any thing. Daniello Anthonino with 300 Horse, stops a Party of the Enemy
near Dobra, which ran up and down the Country, and had wholly defeated them, if
he had had foot with him to have forced a strong house into which they retired;
but a little while after, he meets in a more open Campagnia Daniel Francol of
Trieste, one of the principal troublers of Istria, who being come out of
Gradisca with 300 Musketeers, was so beset, that after a brave defense,
himself, together with the major part of his men, were killed. The General
Barberigo, at his coming into Friuli, resolves by means of a Ford over the
Lisonzo to possess Chiavoretto, where near to its Fountain the River is
constrained betwixt the Hills. But Hettore Savorgnano, who had the Command to
attempt it, understanding by the way, more from report than truth, that it was
too well provided, returns without effecting other than that the Archdukes
people, comprehending the design and importance of the Post, put a stronger
Garrison into it. Trautmanstorf, having in this interim strengthened himself,
plants a Fort betwixt Goritia and Gradisca, to assure the communication of
those two places; after that, raises another on the other side of the Lisonzo,
called the Trinity, upon the Hills of Lucinis; obliging the Venetians to oppose
one at Medea, and to contract their Quarters.

To second the designs in Friuli, the General Loredano marching into Istria
with 2300 Foot, 150 Horse, and two pieces of Cannon, took Antignano, a great
Town in the County of Pisino, and left it garrisoned. By Sea Giovanni Giacomo
Zane coming to Moschenizza, takes it after two days resistance, and afterward
Barzech by assault. But in Friuli Pompeo Justianiano, made Maestro di Campo
General, offers himself to besiege Gradisca as a thing of no difficulty,
designing with Trenches and approaches to enter into the Ditch, and afterward
with Batteries and Mines to bring it to surrender, notwithstanding that by
means of the Hills of Carlo, which were directly opposite on the other side of
the River, there was an open passage for relief; and that being situate upon a
Rock, there was not much hurt or loss to be feared from the Cannon or the Spade.

It being resolved with better hope than counsel to attempt it, about the midst
of February with 2000 Foot and 500 Horse he takes in Fara, which on the upper
side lies upon the Lisonzo, betwixt Licinis and Gradisca. He soon after
abandons it to amuse the Enemy with the uncertainty of his designs; but having
viewed the place, returns unexpectedly thither with the whole Body, and
intrenching himself, fortifies the chief Quarter which hindered relief to the
Town by the River. The rest of the line, but that very large, was drawn on this
side the River from Cormons, Medea, and Meriano with Guards of Horse between.
The Army lying at large and about many Posts, consisted of 12000 men, of which
all could not be called Soldiers, in an age, in which men were rather bought
than chosen, and at a time when the Venetians were enough unprovided of a
stranger Militia. There was within the Town, besides Strasoldo, the Governor
Giovanni Perino a Walloon, with a Garrison of 1200 men. They seeming to make
little account of this attacque, suffered the Venetians to carry on their
approaches without disturbance. Only Trautmanstorf with the Horse frequently
molested the Camp; but the Skirmishes went on with equal success, without
contributing the least to the issue of the business, and without other
reflection but to have been the cause of the death, by a Cannon-bullet, of
Daniello Anthonini, a valiant Soldier. To the common sorrow for this accident
the Senate adds testimonies of honor to his Brothers; and to encourage
Posterity, caused an honorable Monument to be set up for him in the Cathedral
of Vdine. Some Works being finished, four Batteries with 24 pieces of Cannon on
them were raised in the Camp, some playing upon the Port filled with earth, and
the Bastions, others ruining the houses. Some of the Enemies Cannon were
dismounted, and a Cavalier or Catt beat down. Howsoever the effect of the
Cannon imitating a Thunderbolt, which with a great rumbling for the most part
does little hurt, was not answerable to the noise. A Half Moon defended the
Wall, and the Venetians entering into the Ditch, tried to mine it; but the stone
being hard, whilst they were laboring to pierce into it below, those within
had time to cut off a place of retreat above; but seeing themselves
straightned, they at last make a Sally at break of the day with three Troops,
one at the head of the approaches, the other upon the flanks, and forcing away,
the first Guards, which negligently kept that Work, they enter the Trenches.
Justiniano was seasonably present; but disturbed at the fright of his own, and
the boldness of the Enemy, and being put hard to it betwixt those that
abandoned him, and those that pursued him, hardly escaped from being taken. But
getting at last into a Fort that was near, the Enemy stopped not but at the
first redoute at the Battery, where Lelio Martinengo was with his Regiment,
with which giving courage to the run-aways, and with the Cannon, the Enemy
being put to a stand, he forces them to retire. Four Companies of the Venetians
were defeated; two Captains were killed, and one made Prisoner. A relief of
some Corsi arrived at this time from Fara, and supplied their place in the
Trenches, which the Enemy might in that disorder easily have slighted, and
filled up the Mine, if they had not alone made it their business to pursue
those that fled from them. The Besiegers, to retain their credit, attempted to
storm it. Oration Baglione, who commanded the first Squadron, made a brave
assault, and forced the Enemy to betake themselves to their cutting off; but
being hurt in the face with a stone, and many of his men killed about him, and
Francisco Justiniano for private grudge not seconding him, as it was his charge
to do, he was constrained to retire. At last springing the Mine, eight French
Soldiers, hired by reward, hazarded themselves at the head of some others to
climb the breach, which was wide enough. But three running away before they
came to grapple, and the five not being seconded by a Troop which should have
followed them, two of them were killed, one taken Prisoner, and the other,
after having been in the breach, retired.

Justiniano seeing that neither Courage nor Fortune favored the enterprises,
getting together a good number of Pioneers, endeavors to straighten the Town
more nearly, and to change the place of the attacque. Upon the first report of
the Siege of Gradisca, the Archduke Ferdinand trys more than ever to stir up
the Emperor to assist him; but he refusing to depart from mediation, did
nothing but nominate two Commissaries in Italy, which were Cosmo Grand Duke of
Tuscany, and Ferdinand Duke of Mantua, to the end they might procure an
adjustment of Peace; but they employed nothing else in it but some offices and
the name. The Spanish Ministers taking for a pretext that their King was allied
to the Archduke, thought the Conjuncture very fit for their design to promote
their greatness in Italy, that the Republic should be employed elsewhere; and
therefore declared in Madrid, that they could do no less than assist Ferdinand;
and the Governor of Milan sending the Marquess Andrea Manriquez di Lara to
Venice, he pressed, that to make way for a Treaty, the Siege might be removed
from Gradisca, his King promising to interpose with Ferdinand for a suspension
of Arms, and offering that the Town should remain in the present state, without
repairing or bettering any thing. This office was not free from jealousy,
because at that very time Gamboloita lodging in Giara upon the Adda, environed
the Territory of Crema; and there being 24 pieces of Cannon mounted in Pavia,
it was given out, that 8000 Soldiers under the Command of Zanchio Luna,
Castillan of Milan should move toward the Confines of the Republic. The
Republic kept the Frontier on that side well provided; however the Army in
Friuli, by such a diversion, remained much weakened, and by the Engagement of
the Army it self, the Frontier was much exposed.

The Popes Nuntio and other Ministers of the Princes interceded with the
Republic, if not for a Treaty, at least by connivence for a forbearance of
Hostility; whereupon the Senate, considering the instances of so many, the
difficulty of what they had undertaken, and the distractions in Lombardy,
answered in the same sense to all, That remembering the past provocations, the
injuries long suffered, and last of all their declared inclination to Peace;
for a greater proof of it they were contented to slacken the Siege, and
withdraw the Batteries, to give time to them, the Mediators, that employing
their affectionate offices to the Archduke, he might be induced to take away
the causes of those resentments, which depended wholly upon the Uscocchi.

Manriquez with this returns to Milan, and the Venetians withdraw from the
Posts nearest to Gradisca, retiring with the gross to Meri^no; after forty four
days attacque, and twenty five of Battery. The Negotiation upon these terms
seemed in a fair way: but it was not long before it changed its aspect, the
Pope making a Proposition, that the places possessed should be deposited; a
thing no ways pleasing to the Venetians; because, besides the doubt of
relapsing into the former slackness, and delays, it seemed no easy matter to
make choice of one, into whose hands to deposite them, while the Pope being
very aged, could not dispose of the will of his Successors, who for the most
bring along with them new affections and interests. The Emperor and Spaniards
were too near allied to one of the parties, and suspected by the other, the
lesser Princes falling not under consideration, as wanting power and credit, to
maintain reason and right against force. Manriquez then arriving a second time
at Venice, the Negotiation is made more difficult than before; because
persuading himself to obtain every thing with the same facility, he proposes,
That Ferdinand giving his word to Toledo, that the Commanders and most
mischievous of the Uscocchi should certainly be removed, the Republic should
presently restore what they possessed in Friuli and Istria, after which Don
Ferdinand should execute the foresaid remove, and the differences be adjusted
within a term limited. The Venetians highly offended, made this complaint, That
the conditions were by the Governor made worse, in place of better, which they
expected, in proportion to the respect they had showed to his offices, and that
he pretended to persuade them to a restitution upon the uncertainty of that
which might afterward be agreed on, the apparent banishment of some few not
sufficing to take away the encouragement from so great a number of such
mischievous Villains.

Manriquez hereupon returning without satisfaction to Milan, leaves the
Ambassador la Queva to pursue his instances, and he continues them with such
urgency, and withal insolence, ascribing the withdrawing the Siege to the
difficulty alone of the enterprise, that the Senate offended at it, openly
rejected his importunities. In the Emperors Court things were treated more
calmly; because the Archduke thinking it best to endeavor to adjust an
agreement without speaking of a cessation of Arms, the Ambassador of Tuscany
proposed, That to reconcile the diffidence of the Parties, and the punctilio,
the restitution of places possessed on the one side, and the execution of the
promises on the other should be practiced piece by piece alternatively, so that
one Article should be the defense of the other; A Proposition which then came
to nothing, but was the foundation afterward of the Peace, though with some
protraction of time; for it was necessary that it should be ripened under
another Climate more remote. The Republic in this manner tossed to and fro
with Hostility, with Jealousies, and with Treaties, the Duke of Savoy was not
much more quiet, but being hurried about amidst no less suspicions, it
happened, that his interests were interwoven with those of the Republic; nay
in such sort ingrafted, as may be said that the cause became common, and
therefore the Narrative with equal exactness ought not to be omitted.

Carlo covering with a profound dissimulation the jealousy he had of Toledo,
sends at his arrival in Milan the Seignor de Parela, not so much to complement
him, as to penetrate his intentions, and insinuate to him the conveniences in
fulfilling the Treaty of Asti, with restitutions and disarming. If the
Governor was new in his Office, he showed himself also a very Novice in the
discourse of Treaties and Peace, and so clearly expresses himself; That he knew
not to what a powerful King could be obliged: That he was bound to no Law or
Contract, but his own moderation and clemency. And if Carlo would make trial of
it, and cast himself upon his favor and Royal arbitrament, he should
experience that the bounty of a great Prince is the only restraint of his
power. As to the disarming he declares, That the Reputation of the King, the
State of Italy, the Motions of the Venetians, and the Concernments of Ferdinand
did not permit it. From such an answer was clearly understood the sum of
Toledo's instructions to consist in breaking the Treaty of Asti, to
re-establish either by Arms or Treaty the pre-eminency of that Crown in Italy.
The Duke neverthess upon his persuasions is reduced to write into Spain, and
make some kind of excuse for the things past, and press for the fulfilling of
that Treaty; but at the same time came Orders to the Governor of Milan to
press the Duke to ask pardon, to refer himself concerning the Capitulation to
the Royal Favor, and that Maurice the Cardinal his Son should go to the Court
of Spain.

All this being a bitter Pill for Carlo to swallow, Toledo sweetens it with an
offer to give him assistance to recover Geneva, and reclaim that City from
disobedience to their Prince, and their Apostasy from the Faith. This did not
at all satisfy the wary and wise disposition of the Duke, and so much the less
for having toward the end of the past year discovered some practices of the
Government against his own person, and came daily more and more to know, that
the eldest Prince his Son had been tempted by the Spaniards to solicit the
Succession, though he that retained toward his Father an affection equal to
veneration resisted all their suggestions. There was a Treaty in Zuccarello to
deliver that place to the Spaniards, which came to be discovered, and the
flight of the Colonel Allardi Provencal, who passed from the Service of the
Duke to that of the Governor of Milan, confirmed it. He gives out that the
Savoyards held Intelligence in several places of the Milanese, and particularly
in Pavia. But the Duke denied every thing, bitterly complaining that Toledo
should lay Plots to entrap him, corrupted the Governors of his places, received
his Rebels, and debauched his Soldiers.

Preparations for War were now strongly carried on, and the Agent of France
being gone to Milan to endeavor means to bring the Treaty to effect, Toledo
inveighing against the Duke, solicited France to force Carlo to lay down Arms,
promising that when by the restitutions he should have shown the respect due,
Spain should leave nothing to be desired from its just Greatness; declaring
nevertheless, that the present Arms tending to the relief of the Archduke, and
to bring the Venetians to a Peace, were to be reputed out of this case, and the
obligation of laying them down. But Carlo sustained, that by the Treaty not
only himself, but all Italy ought to be freed from the Jealousy of his Arms,
and offered the restitutions whenever Toledo should first disarm. These then
were the steps to a new War in Piedmont; and Carlo, informing the Princes,
especially those which were Protectors of the Treaty of Asti, represented the
opposition of the Governor, and with his own suspicions the common dangers.
The Pope, to prevent the impendent mischieves, appoints for Nuntio
Extraordinary Alessandro Lodovisio, Archbishop of Bologna.

The King of England presses anew, that the Republic and the Duke would enter
into the Northern League; but they, thinking it not an adequate remedy for the
diseases of Italy, King James applies himself to the ways of procuring Peace.
For the same purpose arrives from France Monsieur de Bethune Ambassador in
Italy, and underhand proposes a Marriage betwixt Christina the Kings Sister,
and Vittorio Prince of Piedmont: But Carlo receives it with a kind of distrust,
as if it aimed at disarming and amusing him. France, to say truth, was not now
in a condition to give the Duke that assistance of Arms which he earnestly
required; for, d'Ancre governing all by private Counselors, grounding himself
upon the Marriages contracted with Spain, and the impressions he received from
that Crown, had persuaded the Queen to imprison the Prince of Conde; upon which
many withdrew from Court, complaining, that promises and treaties served but to
ensnare and make ridiculous the unwary. So that the Duke of Savoy had little
more hope of assistance left than of the Venetians, who by the Jealousy they
received from Toledo, and for the Declarations of the King in favor of the
Archduke, were very much perplexed.

The Ambassador Scaglia then coming into the Senate, relates the series of the
former Negotiations, the endeavors of Carlo, the answers of the Governor, his
actions, the designs justly giving Jealousy to all, but to the Republic and
the Duke chiefly mischievous, then adds: It is known how much Carlo, a generous
and magnanimous Prince, in his consent to the Peace, has considered the
satisfaction of the Princes Mediators, and particularly of this Republic, on
whose word and warrant, and none other, he was willing to let his Arms fall out
of his hand. And now I beseech you, what is the state of Affairs? Treaties, the
just Rules of Friendship, are converted into the treacherous snares of
interest. Heretofore we fought armed; but now under the fraudulent name of
Peace we find our selves little better than without Arms, environed by a most
powerful King, exposed to dangers. It is uncertain how far the Spaniards will
extend the greatness of their power and arbitrage. If enlarging Dominion be
their design, no other man's state is more secure than that of Piedmont. True it
is, that my Prince stands the first exposed, and although he be strengthened
with his own generosity, and animated by the hopes of friends, yet he has
recourse, as to the inviolable Sanctuary of Faith, to your assistances. He
supposes them because of the treaties, the promises, and your friendship; I may
say, of your own interest: but let that be left to be weighed in the scales
alone of your greatest prudence. It Is certain, that common and greater troubles
are at hand. Toledo either imposes disarming, or threatens War. Betwixt two
great, and little less than equal, dangers, the Duke must either lose himself
in the one, or hazard himself in the other. Betwixt War and Servitude there is
no middle security. But to lose generously the State, is a courting of Fortune;
to stand the shock of death, is to yield a little beforehand to the right of
Nature; but to make himself a Slave, what will it be else but to subscribe to
the perpetual reproaches of Fame, and to the contempt of Posterity. Hitherto
the Duke has made resistance: he has done himself right, and repaid injuries.
Mendoza 's provocations have not gone scot-free; and now Toledo would overcome
him with treaties, promises, and threatenings. But Carlo supported by your
constant friendship, will equally despise their flatteries and their frights.
It properly belongs to your greatness and wisdom to blunt the edge of that
injury which is offered to the Word and Honor of Princes, and to resist that
pride, which thinks it self of no authority, if not feared. Does Philip
possibly forget the so many Kingdoms which he enjoys, largely scattered in all
the parts of the world? Do not the States of Italy suffice, which heretofore
made several Princes great? If Piedmont be not added to it, Monarchy, it seems
they conclude, will fall to the ground, without glory, discredited and
neglected. It is, O Fathers too true, that ambition has placed the Center, and
from thence it seems they draw the circumference. The Conquest of Piedmont is
but a step of ascent to the Monarchy of Europe; the States, the Treasures,
Liberty, Dignity this very Capital City, which is the representative of the
felicity and beauty of Italy, is destinated in their hopes to spoil, to fire,
and to slavery. Now at length they thrust themselves into your rights, they
assume the interests, they divert resentments and just revenge, and under the
specious title of assisting the weaker, they aim at nothing but establishing
Authority and Power. What more remains there in Italy free and beautiful, when
the glory of this Republic, and the generosity of my Prince shall be laid low.
Let those dangers, and the foreboding of them be far from us. O Senators, let
us join here, that we may not fear their threatenings, nor experience the loss
of our Arms; and if we shall be necessitated to make use of them, the labor
will be gloriously crowned by our constancy. Carlo is displeased to be a burden
before he can be of service to you; but he has heretofore offered you all he
has, and now he makes a present of his very will to you. Direct his Arms by
your counsels, who therein will be your faithful friend, and an inseparable
follower in this cause, in which not glory only, but common safety is in
question.

Scaglia by this discourse aimed to incite men's minds to those two affections,
which in Republics, composed of many, are powerful enough; the one relating to
private men, the other to Princes, that is, scorn and suspicion. But Carlo at
Turin to the Ambassador Anthonio Donato used with great art incitements yet
more moving; for discoursing things more narrowly with themselves, and of the
means of defense, he represented his state, wasted with the late Wars,
incapable to withstand the burden for the time to come, leaving him to
comprehend, that the Commonwealth not stepping in with effectual assistance,
he should be forced by necessity to some kind of agreement, though
disadvantagious, in which case the whole power of the Arms of Spain, besides
that of the Archdukes might fall upon them alone. The Senate being obliged to
deliberate upon so weighty a matter, it was the opinion of some, that so many
other Princes, equally Trustees for the Peace of Asti, standing Spectators, or
at least interposing nothing but desires and endeavors, the Republic alone
ought neither to espouse so great a quarrel against so potent a King; Saying,
That Wars were the Crisis, and most dangerous sickness of States, subject to
chance, to accidents, and the uncertainty of the remedies themselves. If the
Republic found one War at present not a little burdensome, why would they
distract their thoughts and forces into two several parts? Have they possibly
so much assurance of the Dukes faith, or so great proof of his constancy, that
it is firmly to be believed, that one day either beaten or flattered, he will
not abandon us? must the Army of Piedmont be maintained by the Treasure of the
Republic? But what Treasury will be able sufficiently to supply two such
devouring Gulphs? The beginning of a War was ready, and easy, the progress of
it difficult, and the issue uncertain. In sum, that Fortune makes sport with
Princes, and that of Princes those prevail, who with the greatest powers are
able to weary the adversity of Fortune. That the Republic in times of greatest
straight was wont to make use of the prudence of Councils before the noise of
Arms, whilst in affairs most difficult, time is the fittest and most wary
Counselor, which oftentimes gains that which Fortune cannot give. To the most
powerful what is the benefit of being Conquerours? And of the conquered, how
many are the dangers and losses which they reckon? Their Judgment therefore
was, not to pass beyond the offices of a good amity with Carlo, and that in
other Courts they should employ their exhortations to Peace.

But Nicolo Contarini, a Senator of a warm spirit, abhorring such slow
opinions, spoke in this manner: Whilst we lose the occasion of the present
Conjuncture, and thereby declare our opinions, that affairs for the future will
go on prosperously without our mingling in them, we our selves by our own
Counsels greaten the Enemy. We have so long neglected injuries, that now, being
proceeded to violence, we ought no longer to suffer them, nor indeed can we.
God presents us an occasion for our constancy, and withal gives us for a
Companion in it a Prince generous in common Interest. Can we possibly have a
mind to expect the enjoyment of our liberty precariously at the will of the
Governor of Milan? He violates Faith and Treaties, forces Savoy to obedience,
threatens our Dominions; which to you is so much the more compulsive, or more
miserable, by how much reason and justice, trod under foot by the more
powerful, do not give their votes for the Princes. Shall free Princes then take
up just Arms but at the good pleasure of another; and must they expect no Peace
but upon servile Conditions? Let the generosity of Italy once awaken, and let
us hear words worthy of Princes. But I would to God it were permitted at
present to resolve upon that which the Dignity, the Decorum, and Expediency
requires, and that necessity interposed not with Counsels more resolute and
precise. Fathers, if we will not have the War in our bowels, we must resolve to
nourish and keep it afar off. Well is that Treasure spent, and most happy those
cares, if they can remove from us the miseries, the calamities, and the
mischiefs which Armies bring with them. From Carlo what hostage of gratitude,
and what pledge of faith can we have more sincere, than the drawing the Enemy
into his own Country? And if we will have him yet more secure, how can the Duke
abandon Us, if he be abandoned of all? Amongst Princes there is no stronger
tie, than that which adjusts a conformity of Interests. They are the
heart-veins, which meet in the liberty of the one, and the safety of the other.
Both in a word are threatened and despised, and may at last be ensnared and
oppressed. The assistance of the Republic is necessary for Carlo, and a
diversion by him is necessary for the Republic; if by Arms or Treaty we
pretend to bring the Archduke to reason and quiet, we must give that fatal
Remora of the Forces of Spain employment elsewhere. I imagine, the charge will
be objected; but for what employment have our Ancestors left us a rich
Treasure, but to be serviceable at need to maintain honor, and make good the
greatest and most unlooked for emergencies. Do you think our servitude will be
less grievous, when we shall be bound with our unimployed Treasure, and bound
with the chains of our own gold? It is much better to fear, than make trial of
the Spanish Forces; and if we fear them, let us dispose of a defense far from
us. The rule of just is of equal extent amongst Princes. If Philip give his
most vigorous assistance to the Archduke; why should we offend in giving ours
to Carlo? To Carlo, with whom interest combines us, and faith given requires
it. After the promise given, deliberation and counsel are no more in our own
power. Let us look out Examples of old, and revolve the Memorials of fresher
date, we shall not find, that the worm of a promise falsified has ever
corroded the integrity of public faith: And that for this reason, because this
bond of things divine and humane cannot be loosned, but the order of the world
will be confounded, and civil societies left as a prey to opinions, interests,
and affections. If we will make our selves idle spectators of others
oppressions, we our selves shall deserve to be abandoned by all in our dangers;
and with what heart can we invoke God, much less our friends to our succor, if
obliged, and also required, we should leave the Duke in prey to Toledo?
Assistance is to be implored from Heaven it self with the right hand held up to
join endeavor to the vow, in imitation of the Mariners, that have the Helm in
their hand, and their eye on the Stars. God himself will assist our cause,
because this War, whether it be with Arms or Money, takes not counsel from
ambition, but is the resolution both of necessity and justice, in whose bosom
the Commonwealth has always found Peace or Victory. Let us courageously
adventure to take the resolution this day, because though the entrance should
prove difficult, certainly in the progress we shall meet with accidents of
hopes, friendships, interests, and succors that me think not of. I know, that
in great affairs it is dangerous to discover ones opinion, because the Authors
of resolute Councils are like to those that fling heavy stones into the air,
not without danger of having them return upon their own heads, rather than hit
the mark to which the hand directed it. I know also, that of good success every
body will be a sharer, and that if it prove unprosperous, the blame shall be
imputed to me alone; but if such respects persuade me to silence, the zeal for
my Country has forced from me this discourse.

The Senate was really inclined to comply with the Dukes instances, moved also
from their own concerns; whereupon they resolve to assist him, and though upon
no particular Treaty, yet it was done under the bond of common Interest, so
inviolable in the minds of Princes, that till the very end of the War the one
wanted not money, nor was the other failing in his faith. They immediately
consent the levy of 4000 French under the Command of Monsieur de Chastiglion,
at the charge of the Republic, that 2000 might serve the Duke of Savoy, and
the other pass by Sea into Friuli; but in the conclusion they remained all in
Piedmont. They disburse 50000 Ducats for another Levy, that the Marshal
Dediguieres offered of the same Nation; and to the end the Army in Piedmont
might be kept vigorous and contented, they contribute, besides other
extraordinary assistances, 72000 Ducats a month. The Duke had a close and
particular confidence with Dediguieres, and he, little regarding the counsels
of the Court, either corrupted by Strangers, or confounded in the private
interests of the Favorite, did not only leave the passage of the Mountains
open to the Soldiers, which in great numbers flocked to the readiness of the
pay; but was moved to go himself in person to Turin. It Is not to be doubted,
but Carlo thinking to gain great reputation to his Forces and Counsels, drew
him thither with the powerful attractive of gold: for the Mareshal grown old in
glory and the Wars, yielding easily to it, had gained from slender beginnings
equal reputation and wealth. The Duke versed in the management of things,
suddenly orders a meeting with the Mareshal that should make a noise, in the
presence not only of his own Sons and Ministers, but of the Ambassadors of
France, England, and Venice.

Bethune come into Italy with Court-impressions, approves the disarming of the
Duke; but upon better discussion of the business, the prospect of affairs, and
the state of the present Juncture being otherwise represented, Dediguieres
showing no less wisdom in his discourses than affection to Italy, it was
unanimously concluded, that first with Negotiation, and afterward, if need
should be, with Arms, Carlo his dignity and the common interest should be
maintained. Dediguieres offers to the service of the Republic 2000 men under
his Nephew the Count Sol; but the difficulty of the passage through Rhetia made
it without effect. Noble was the offer of the Duke of Maine, to come with an
Army levied at his own charge into Piedmont, and forcing the passage into the
Milanese to penetrate into the State of the Republic. But vast obstacles lying
in the way, though the Duke courageously boasted to overcome them, the Senate
accepted only the good affection; judging it also their advantage, that he
should reside at Court to make opposition to those, who in the disadvantages of
Italy understood not the loss of that Crown also. Willing therefore to procure
elsewhere a Levy of Strangers, they send to the united Switzers, to have 4000
men, and to the Grisons to obtain passage, Giovanni Baptista Padavino their
Secretary, who formerly having concluded the League, expired a few years since,
was very acceptable among that people, with particular applause of wisdom and
dexterity. He imploys himself together with Augustine Dolce Resident in Zurich,
by those means which suit with Rhetia, where poverty, the defect of the
Country, goes hand in hand with avarice the vice of that Nation. From France,
the Court taking it, as if the Republic did not procure those passages but for
their own safety, and the indemnity of Italy, came order to Gheffier not to
oppose it; but the Spaniards, engaged in the French Factions, as Auxiliaries,
were now grown to have almost the chief credit amongst them, drawing to them
the good will and inclinations of many. Their Minister thereupon circumventing
the people, calling Councils, and sowing Jealousies, put them in mind of the
mischiefs, formerly by the like Treaties suffered by the Count of Fuentes;
threatened anew to interdict Commerce, extolled the benefits of the vicinity,
and of the quiet; and intermingling gifts with his protestations and promises,
turned the people about as he pleased, imprinting upon them hopes, fears, and
jealousies, passions common to the ignorant vulgar. The multitude therefore
presuming themselves necessary to all, fancied also every thing to be lawful;
those few, which adhered to the ancient friendships, and knew that the liberty
of Government consisted in Justice rather than insolence, could prevail
nothing. Whereupon in a Pittach (for so they call the general Council of the
three Leagues) congregated at the instance of the Venetian Ministers, so far
were they from granting the passage, that they dispatched away Guards to the
places lying fit to hinder it, and recalled all those that were already in
service of the Republic. The aforesaid Ministers then agree to leave the
Country, leaving that popular passion to spend it self, and till those
seditious Conferences should be dissolved.

But the Spaniards, upon the consent of a great Levy among Catholic Switzers,
published that they would employ it immediately against the Venetians; to whose
Confines, having got knowledge of the concerts betwixt them and the Duke, they
send a great many Forces. The Cardinal Borgia not long after in Rome
endeavored, though in vain, to stir them up against the Pope, requiring
restitution to Spain of those assistances, which in the beginning of his
Pontificate had been largely given by the Spaniard against the Republic it
self. The Vice-King of Naples arming some Ships, professed to give jealousy to
the Duke of Savoy toward Villa Franca, and stop the Venetian Levies by Sea;
and to spread their applications and forces into all parts, published besides
to infest the Adriatic, the part, whereof the Republic is above all others
jealous. The Republic sends to Corfu the Proveditor of the Fleet, that it
might join in that Port after it had destroyed the Salt Pits of Trieste; and as
to the Terra ferma, the Confines were no sooner fortified, but Toledo was
quickly obliged to recall the Militia toward Piedmont, because the Duke was in
the field, in a condition rather to give than receive jealousies.

The Venetians now apply their mind more attentively on Friuli, and send to the
Camp Ferrante de Rosso and Francisco Martinengo, the one General of the
Ordnance, and the other of the Horse; persons advanced in years, and of tried
experience, to the end that with their help and counsel they might amend past
miscarriages. There went also the Prince d'Este as Governor General of the
Gendarms; notwithstanding that the Duke his Father, to please the Austrians,
had severely forbid him; and because the marketplace in Venice, which in its
discourses has its Arms so much the more sharp as they are secret, inveighed
against the Chiefs of the Army, with some sort of ignominy, Anthonio Priuli,
Cavalier and Procurator, was sent Proveditor General of the Army with supreme
Authority. And Barbarigo within a while after had leave to return home.

Giovanni Battista Foscarini and Francisco Erizzo were added as Proveditors, to
the end that they, with the General and the advice of the Chiefs of the Army,
might determine upon the state of affairs; but all counsel being in vain
without an increase of strength, assembling with all speed the most Troops they
could, especially of strangers, they made haste into the field. And to
Trautmanstorf also in the opening of the new Campagnia arrived from Hungary
1000 Foot, and he with money from Spain levies a Regiment of 3000 more, besides
500 Cuirassiers, which the Spaniards under Baltazar Marradas sent to assist
Ferdinand. Heightened therefore in courage with these and other assistances, he
passes to this side of the Lisonzo, and incamps at Lucinis, designing not only
to cover Gradisca, but to dispute the possession of the Campaign with the
Venetians. The design troubled them not a little, because they became obliged
to put themselves under the Walls of Palma for the defense of their own
Country; whereupon the business being put to debate, it was resolved to try by
all means to dislodge him by force. The Army then ordered accordingly, the
attaque by way of the Plain was assigned to Baglione with the Italians and
Corsi; that of the Hills, avoiding the steepy part of them, where was the Fort,
to Camillo Trevisano Proveditor of the Croatian and Albanese Cavalry with the
Strangers. Justiniano followed with the gross to assist where occasion should
lead him; and Barbarigo (not yet gone) was in the Army, assisted by Rossi and
Martinengo.

They began to march in the night, and Trautmanstorf was found in his Quarter
with 5000 Foot and 1500 Horse, fortified with confidence and the undervaluing
of his Enemy, rather than with Guards or Ramparts. Baglione surprising some
Sentinels, entered into the Quarter, possessing the Gate of a great Courtyard
which served for the entrance; but finding not the other, covered by the
situation and darkness, so readily as to advance further, the Germans had time
to take the Alarm, and make it good. Constrained therefore to retire hence, he
attacques in another part, and penetrates into certain Trenches; but the Enemy,
being now every where in Arms, and the Cannon playing from the Fort, found
every where a vigorous resistance. Trevisano upon the Hills had possessed two
Redoubts; but the enterprise not succeeding prosperously on the other side,
Justiniano commands the Retreat after two hours fight; during which, with some
few Soldiers, some Officers were slain on each side, and particularly of the
Venetians, Lucio Richieri, whose death was lamented, and honored by the Senate
with testimonies of Honor to his Family. The assistants joined again to the
gross, defied the Enemy with the sound of Trumpets; but Trautmanstorf, glad to
have had the better by accident, and as it were sleeping, came not forth, but
applies himself to the better fortifying of his Quarter. After this there
followed several Skirmishes and Incursions on both sides, but of little moment,
the most considerable being that of Trevisano in the Canal of Ronzina, which
lies in the utmost parts of Friuli fast by the Lisonzo, with the spoil of some
Villages, and bringing away booty. Anthonino his Brother, a young man of great
courage and extraordinary hopes, perished miserably in Meriano, killed by a
casual stroke, whilst the Soldiers in the idleness of the Quarter; being
fallen to blows, he was hastened to quiet them. But Summer coming on with
excessive heat, sickness increased in such sort in the Armies, that men and
horses dying, both sides thought it best to keep themselves for a time upon the
defensive only. Building of certain Forts was their only employment, those of
the Archduke raising one at Fara, which was called St. Pietro, and the
Venetians another at Foggiano, to cover the Territory of Montfalcon, and was
called Priuli. To that which was beyond the Lisonzo, Trautmanstorf opposes
another a little upon the side, called the Star, and at Gradisca caused to be
made a Ravelin, which covered the old Port. This last Fort vexed the Venetians,
because it might hinder the design of laying a quarter upon the Carso, at which
they aimed, so soon as their Army should be reinforced; whereupon command was
given to Francisco Justiniano, with some Companies of Corsi, and to Baglione
with others of the Albanese, to attempt the taking of it by Scalade; but were
beaten off by those within, and from the discovery of relief, which came behind
them, persuaded to retire. After this preparations go every where roundly on
for greater attempts.

Where Friuli confines with Carinthia, falls in one of the principal Roads,
which descends into Italy out of Germany, and there lies Ponteba a great Town,
and of good trade; it is divided by a Bridge, the part on the other side is
belonging to the Empire, and that on this to the Venetians. Trade, by reason of
common benefit, went secretly on under the tacit faith, and good correspondence
of the neighborhood, and the rather, because the Towns adjacent and Ponteba it
self were of the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Bamberg. Those of the Archduke
designed to make a sudden irruption into Friuli from that side, hoping to
ransack many places in their way to Gemona, and perhaps get into the more open
Country, and Trautmanstorf from the other side marching in thither, either make
the Seat of the War upon the State of the Republic, or at least with
inconvience and confusion divide their defense and Army. The Bishop being
persuaded to give his consent, there came down from the Hills into Ponteba 400
of his Soldiers to strengthen his Confines, and second the design. Guglielmo
Smit with 400 more of Ferdinands follows, and surprises the Venetian Ponteba
with the Inhabitants buried in security and sleep. Two Forts were presently
raised, one on this side the River kept by himself, and the other on the other
side, which he put into the hands of those of Bamberg. His intention was to go
on further when he should be reinforced with more Troops, which he expected,
but found, that the Pesants, especially those of Venzone, possessing the tops
of the Mountains, and fortifying the Highways with some Works, threatened to
oppose with Arms and Stones whosoever should dare to attempt the passage.

No sooner was the News hereof come to the Venetian Camp, but a sudden remedy
was judged necessary for an unexpected evil. And therefore the Proveditor
Foscarini hastens thither with the Generals Martinengo, Count Nicholo Gualdo
Governor of Vdina, and Marco Antonio Manzano, commanding the Cavalry of the
Country for that time. At Dogna upon the Fella, finding the Bridge broken, they
got it mended, and the Germans making opposition, such was the mettle of the
Corsi and Albanese, that flinging themselves into the water, and passing from
Rock to Rock, they so disabled Smiths people, that they were forced to retire
in disorder. The Venetians then pursuing the flight, entered mingled with them
into the Ponteba of this side, and passing the Bridge, the Bishops Soldiers
giving way, they take the Imperial also. The Germans were almost all of them
cut to pieces. The Plunder and Booty was great; neither did the resentment of
this surprise stop here, but invading the Confines of the Austrians, they
pillaged Malborghetto of the Manzano. A little above Trevisa, a place somewhat
bigger, and that making no resistance, became the prey of the Soldiers.
Terror spreading it self as a stone in the water which inforces one wave upon
another, the City of Villaco was upon rendering; but the Venetians not willing
to remove their Forces far from the center of the War, nor engage them amongst
those craggy Mountains, having fortified Ponteba retired. At the same time
Erizzo emulating his Colleague attempts Chiavoretto, where lay entrenched in a
convenient Post 800 Foot of the Archdukes, and 150 Horse. Livio Puppi, a man of
credit amongst those of the Country, advancing before the rest with a good
number of those who inhabiting the Mountains about Cividale are called Slaves,
attacques the Trenches, seconded by Giovanni Martinengo with the Soldiers in
pay. The Enemy were easily disordered, because the Horse instead of helping
them in those narrow passages, being not able to govern themselves, trod them
under foot, and brought them into confusion; whereupon every one provides for
his safety by a Retreat. The Albanese following the instinct of the Nation,
fell presently to pillage the place and the Quarter; which and their disorder
some of the Archdukes people perceiving, came down to fall into their Rere, and
snatched away one Colors. But being presently beaten back, left that place in
the power of the Venetians who fortified it. Trautmanstorf hereupon fearing, if
the Venetians should pass the Lisonzo thereabouts, to be taken napping,
abandoning the Quarter of Lucinis, goes to incamp himself in the Plain near
Goritia. The Venetians having gotten the chief end of their intentions, follow
him a little way, but without doing him any hurt, and being aware of it too
late invest Lucinis, and attacque the Fort there. It concerned Trautmanstorf to
preserve it, and therefore entertaining the Besiegers with frequent skirmishes,
he brought into it, through bypath, 200 Soldiers with several provisions;
but all in vain, because those within having no more water resolved silently to
withdraw, and leave it. The Venetians entered into it, appointing for Governor
the Count Alberto Pompei, and placed in the Town one of their principal
Quarters. The Fort also of Fara being viewed by Baglione, who was there hurt
with a Musket Shot, was immediately attacqued, and battered from a place of
eminence, which for want of powder, Captain Sibit quickly rendered upon
honorable conditions, there marching out 230 Soldiers besides some hurt. In
the heat of these good successes Erizzo attempts Vipulzano, where being about
100 Soldiers in a great house, he batters it with three Cannons, and
demolishing part of the wall forces it to render, to go out with their swords.
Tolmino, which is a great Town on the other side the Lisonzo in the Mountains,
was attempted by the Count Gualdo with 500 of the Country Militia and some in
pay; but the Castle discharging some Guns, the Peasants that knew not to
distinguish where there was danger, or safety, hearing the noise disbanded,
obliging the Count to retire but with a few.

The Venetians now increased both in strength and courage, thought of passing
the Lisonzo and marching toward Goritia; the Archdukes Army for want of pay
being diminished by the abundance of Run-aways: but the death of Pompeo
Justiniano interrupts the design. He was marching in the Country toward
Lucinis to view the situations and the passage of the River, when death seized
him by a shot of a Musquetton from the other side of the Lisonzo, which stroke
him in the reins, and brought him within a few hours after into the Quarter,
where coming to extremity, he expired with the piety and constancy becoming
every Christian Soldier. His life, made famous in the Wars of Flanders, where
he got the name of Bras de fer, because having lost his natural one, he made
use of one of Iron, deserved peradventure to have met with death in a more
honorable occasion. But in War chance balances the events, not
distinguishing, for the most part, in the last action, baseness from valor.
The Senate so much the more careful to adorn the memory of the dead, by how
much the Common people were ready to blame his conduct when alive, acknowledged
the services he had done, by giving yearly pensions to his Mother and his Sons,
and defraying his public Funeral, caused a Monument to be erected for him in
the Church of St. Giovanni and St. Paul with an Equestrian Statue. In place of
the dead was substituted with the title of Governor General of the Armies
Giovanni de Medici, natural Son of Cosmo the First, Grand Duke of Tuscany, who
in the Wars of France and Hungary had acquired great fame. The Prince d'Este,
to avoid any emulation with Medici, was sent into Lombardy, whither also de
Rossi was transferred, to observe in those parts the jealous proceedings of the
Spanish Army. Before this new General was arrived in Friuli, the Venetians
attempted to execute the design of Pompeo Justiniano to raise a Fort upon an
height covered with Chesnut-trees, on the other side being a Rivulet which runs
betwixt the Hills of Lucinis, and from thence to batter the great Tower and the
Bridge, which toward Goritia lies over the Lisonzo; but no sooner came any
Soldiers to seize that situation, but they of the Archdukes side apprehending
the design, flocked thither in great numbers, and after long skirmishes obliged
them to retire; and planted a Fort there called St. Bosco.

The Venetians nevertheless, a little more backwards raised another, and with
some great pieces destroyed the Bridge, which was of great convenience to the
Enemy; but Trautmanstorf a little above laid another upon Rafts covered by a
certain turning of the Chanel, and fortified it with some Trenches and Cannons
upon the River it self. The Venetians thereupon withdraw their Battery, become
now of little profit, and in the Hills more distant from Lucinis made another
Fort, called from the Family of the Proveditor, Erizzo, or from its figure the
Star. After this, doubting lest the Enemy strengthened with many Companies
under the Spanish pay, and by Isolani with some Troops out of Croatia, should
possess the Plain of Mainizza betwixt Lucinis and Fara, another Fort was laid
there in form of a square, and of a more considerable circuit, to which the
General Priuli gave his own name. So that all that Campagnia became a
circumference of Forts, and a defense of Redoubts and Trenches, dispersing and
employing all that Soldiery, which united into a body might have been able to
undertake some more generous adventure. The season proper for the management of
Arms being past in this manner, Excursions were made on both sides, with equal
damage to certain Villages in the Mountains.

Henry Count d' Ampierre, French by Nation, was no sooner come into Ferdinands
Camp with 500 Hungarian Foot, and 400 Horse, but attempts to get himself
reputation, by going out of Gradisca and falling into the Venetian Quarters at
Romans, where in a large circuit a few men were lodged: And it happened that he
brake in upon them; but the Soldiers recovering their first disorder, and
putting themselves in defense in a great house which stood in the midst,
obliged them to retire. To repay them in the same coin, Camillo Trevisano
passed at noonday the Lisonzo, which in that season was very shallow, and
forces a Quarter of Walloons, who save themselves by flight, he retiring in
good order, upon the confluence of the Enemy from all parts thither.
Trautmanstorf, to resent it with equal boldness, passes with all his Horse to
this side with more happy success; for having driven in certain Guards
advanced, he meets with Trevisano come out of Lucinis with few Companies of
Capelletty on Horseback. Five Companies of Cuirassiers a little behind were to
serve for their Retreat with some Corsi, placed in ambuscade betwixt Ditches
and Hedges. But the heavy Horse of Trautmanstorf shocking the light ones of the
Venetians, obliged them in the charge to such disorder, that in place of
rallying behind the Squadrons of the Cuirassiers, they forced in upon them, and
confused them in such sort, that they drew them to run with them. The Germans,
pursued to the Trenches of Lucinis, by which and the Forts being repulsed,
thought fit to retire; the Infantry remaining a prey to the Enemy, who cutting
off their way, they were either cut to pieces or dispersed; Francisco
Justiniano and Giovanni Domenico Ornano, Captain of the Corsi, being Prisoners.
Foglia a French Captain was killed, and on the Archdukes side Trautmanstorf,
Marradas, and other chief Officers were slightly hurt. Justiniano a while after
was exchanged with Father Valerio a Jesuit and Ferdinans Confessor, who,
contrary to the orders of the Republic, passing through their Country in a
disguised habit, came to be a Prisoner.

From Dalmatia and Istria came at the same time advice of several successes;
for the General Zane dis-imbarking at Scrisa, suddenly by night plants his
Cannon, with such a fright to the defenders, which consisted of Germans,
Segnans, and some Vscocchi (whose principal nest it was) that they sent out to
treat of a surrender. Giovanni Sarsich, one of the very vilest of the Vscocchi,
Captain of the place, considering that for him, made criminal already of
heinous offenses, there could be no place in the agreement, attempts to make
his escape; but finding the passages stopped, enters the Town again, animating
those of his party, who despaired of pardon, to defend themselves. The others
intimidated with the threatenings of the General, that, if they delayed till the
first Volly of his Cannon, he would give them no quarter, rising up against
Sarsich cut off his head, sending it with the Keys of the Town to Zane, who
received them at discretion, giving them all afterward liberty and life,
except the Vscocchi, who lost their heads by the hand of the Hangman. The
Cannon taken away, Scrisa was utterly demolished; and afterward attempting to
land at Buccari, succors, by reason of the importance of the place, flocking
from all parts, the season permitted not longer stay for the Galleys there. In
Istria, whilst the unwholesomness of the air consumed the Soldiers, taking
away also some of the Chiefs, as it happened to Martinengo, and the Cavalier
Thomaso Cocapani; to the General Loredano, Anthonio Barbaro was appointed to
succeed. Trautmanstorf made a course thither to oblige the Venetians, as
afterward happened, to quit the Posts possessed about Zemino, which is a Town
of some moment in the County of Pisino, and wasted the Country about Polesana,
a fruitful Plain of that Province. But being called back into Friuli by the
successes of Ponteba and Chiavoretto, it gave opportunity to the Venetians to
ruin the Austrians harvest. Luigi Giorgio, Proveditor of the Cavalry, sacked
Verma; forced a strong Monastery near St. Pietro di Selve; burnt the Suburbs of
Vmber and of Lindar, with the death of some of the Vscocchi, one of the Chiefs
whereof, called Andrea Ferletich, revenged himself by robbing seven Barks and a
Frigate in the open Port of Selve. Barbaro also at last falling sick by reason
of the ill air, the Generalat was conferred upon Maffeo Michaele.

All these successes in both these Provinces of Friuli and Istria served rather
to entertain than decide the War: But in Piedmont the rupture broke out with
greater noise; for Bethune, having with the Governor of Milan used means and
instances for Peace and for disarming, had after twenty days received in
answer, that the Duke having not sincerely performed the disbanding of his
Militia, and having broken the Articles of Asti, neither did the King think
himself obliged to them: Nevertheless declared, that when Carlo should have
effectually disarmed and restored, he then would give his word not to offend
him; but for the general disarming, he would not consent to it, by reason of
the proceedings of the Venetians, rendered suspect as well by the Invasions made
upon the Archduke, as for the succors given to Carlo. He added a promise by
word of mouth of a suspension for a month, when the Duke should give his word
in the same manner to Bethune, not to offend the Milanese. Carlo consents to
it, persuaded by Dedigueres; and induced with many reasons, or rather forced by
the Authority of the French Ministers to forbear, if not provoked by Invasions
and Hostilities; upon conditions nevertheless to retract his word, whenever
the State of the Venetians should be assaulted by the Spaniards. But the
Governor, whose aim was by such a Proposition to make the Venetians jealous by
making them believe, that the Duke by little and little would be engaged in
other Treaties with other counsels, draws near to the Frontier of Piedmont,
casting several Bridges over the Sesia and Tanaro to facilitate his attacque in
several parts, and give time for the springing of a great Mine elsewhere,
capable to bring the Dukes affairs to the last gasp, if the Treacheries
contrived, and the Forces now ready, might be able to proceed with equal steps.

There was in France the Duke of Nemours, a Branch of the House of Savoy, and
next to the succession into those States, if the Line of Carlo should come to
fail. He postposing certain private discords in being, about his appanage,
showed himself very earnest in maintaining the common Interests and Grandeur of
the Family; and on that score had promised Carlo a Levy of French to help to
defend Piedmont. But having in his heart the motives of interest and ambition,
which more vigorously stirred him up to have a view afar off, of the succession
to those States, hearkens to the insinuations of the Governor of Milan, who
represented to him, that he might accellerate the hopes, rendered almost
impossible by reason of Carlo's numerous issue, if he would turn his Arms
against his Kinsman, and conspiring with Spain to his expulsion, reap as it
were without hazard a most rich booty. Nemours no sooner heard the offer, but
he readily embraces it, consenting to hold those States in Fief of that Crown.
Such a cozening blow could not succeed but by surprise and a carriage of great
secrecy; he therefore continues to assemble his Levies with deep dissimulation,
making a show to employ them for Carlo's assistance; but the concert was when
he should be entered into Savoy, where it was designed to give him his place of
Arms suddenly, and with all his Force to march into the heart of the Country,
and in the surprise and so great a confusion possess himself of all that which
could not resist; and at the same instant a great strength raised by the
Spaniards in Burgundy were immediately to hasten to his succors, while Toledo
with the powerful Army of the Milanese should make such an impression into
Piedmont, that they should not leave to Carlo, betrayed by his own, and at the
same time assaulted by his enemies, any way of safety, nor hardly of escape.
But he, always vigilant, having got knowledge, that money had been furnished by
the Governor of Milan to Nemours, came to discover the bottom of the secret,
and orders the Marquess of Lants Governor of Savoy, that he should have a
careful eye upon the Troops of Nemours, and receive them but in one place, and
that far from any Town. It seemed, that Nemours was displeased at this
distrust, and at last doubting to be suspected, sends to the other side of the
Rhosne 1500 men; who seduced by the Officers, endeavored to fortify
themselves in Clermont, and another Town near-by. Lants immediately dispatches,
to drive them thence, some Troops, which sent to Carlo by the Duke of Main,
were passing through Savoy; whereupon the former, that did not willingly bear
Arms against him, in whose name and under whose pay they had been raised,
repass presently the River, before Nemours, with other Forces, or any of the
Burgundy Troops now upon the way, could arrive to strengthen them. Toledo
expecting that the design beyond the Mountains should discover it self, stays
with his Army of 30000 men at Villatta and Candia, his chief Quarters. And the
Duke lodges in the Vercellese at Caresana and la Motta, with his Army of 20000;
Forces unequal, not only for the number, but for the esteem and power which
gave reputation to those of Spain: whereas on the Dukes side there appeared
scarce any thing considerable but his own courage and the constancy of his
friends.

Toledo himself had a little after it had been given, retracted his word for a
suspension of Arms, displeased that the Duke should reserve to himself a power
to assist the Venetians; and although Bethune took the trouble to go to Pavia
to propose one more general, which might comprehend the Venetians also, he
found opposition, and the Governor was heard to declare himself, that as
things stood, he had no power but to assist Ferdinand. And so the War hereupon
breaks forth into Piedmont, receiving its first motion from 200 Spanish Horse,
which on the other side of the Sesia overrun the Country toward Stroppiana
for booty. The Duke believing them more in number, went to meet with them, and
obliged them to retire. He afterward attempts to burn the Bridge, which Toledo
had over the Sesia; but the Fire-boats, stopped by certain impediments laid
longst the shores, had no effect. He then enters into Monferrat, plunders
certain Villages, takes Villa nova, and casting a Bridge over the Sesia,
threatens to pass into the Milanese. The Governor sends 6000 men to recover
Villa nova, in the defense of which the Savoyards not willing to engage
themselves burnt it; and thereupon followed a notable Skirmish in the open
field, where were killed on the Spanish side, together with 200 Soldiers, the
Son of the Prince of Ascoli, and Lodovico Gambaloita Colonel of the Lombards,
an experienced and valiant Commander. The Governor aiming to enclose the Duke,
sends toward Gattinara a body of his Army, and with the rest takes his march
toward Crescentino.

Carlo was first posted in Sigliano, which is a place environed by moorish
grounds and waters, with one sole avenue, and very opportune to succor
Vercelli, if the Governor should attacque it. Seeing afterward the Enemies
motion toward Crescentino, taking with him his Cavalry, and 2000 Musketeers
behind them, passes in sight of them, and coming first he provides, and
preserves that place. Threatening as he passed to fire Livorno, a great Town of
Monferrat, he receives Hostages with promise of contribution. Several
Skirmishes happened; in one of which Francisco Vives, Son of the Ambassador in
Genoua, commanding 100 Horse, fell into the hands of the Savoyards. The
Spaniards frustrated in their first design vented their malice with burning the
Villages of Piedmont; and Carlo, of Monferrat, to be even with him, either out
of hatred to the Duke of Mantua, or because willing to proceed with a certain
respect toward the Milanese. Alphonso d' Avalos was Governor of Monferrat,
born in Italy, but by extraction and no less in affection Spanish, who having
several times provoked a rupture, experiences now the equal burden of the Arms
both of his friends and of his enemies. He assembles a certain number of the
Country-Militia; but Carlo fearing lest the Spanish Garrisons should practice
to get themselves into those places, which should make themselves most
troublesome to them, caused the Prince Cardinal Mauritio to take, as he did with
little opposition, and demolish Vulpiano.

Autumn was now come, and with so much rain, that the Rivers overflowed on all
sides. The chief bodies of the Armies were therefore constrained to halt for
some days, the Spaniards in Livorno and Bianze, and in Crescentino the
Savoyard. The waters at last making place, Toledo, who aimed at Vercelli,
commands Madruccio with the Germans to lodge at St. Ja, and he with the rest
goes to St. Germano, eight miles distant from Vercelli, a place, though not
exquisitely fortified, that had nevertheless a good Rampart, and a Ravellin
without. The Signor di Cro was Governor, with 500 Foot Savoyards, and 300 of
Piedmont; but scarce had the Spaniards plantted five pieces of Cannon in
Battery, but he, first overcome either by fear or infidelity, renders himself,
saving the plundering to the Town, and to the Soldiers their Arms. Carlo was
on the way to relieve it, when understanding the loss, enraged with grief and
anger he retired, and inveighing bitterly against the baseness of the
Governor, caused him to be arrested, and his head taken off; venting his fury
afterward upon Monferrat, Bianze, which made resistance against his Vantguard
experienced the utmost of rigor, and many Towns and Villages yielded to the
fire, sword, spoil, and contributions. Piedmont in the mean time was no less
afflicted with sword and burning, in that part especially situate betwixt the
Sesia and the Dora, though the Duke to restrain excursions had laid two Forts
in places convenient for it.

But Toledo, having his aim still upon Vercelli, feigns his march toward
Crescentino, when the Duke still marching in his flank endeavors to prevent
him. Each Army aspired to anticipate his Enemy, and be first in the Plain
called Apertole, where they might conveniently range themselves, and either
give or receive battle. The Duke hastened to pass, being the more earnest in
it, because Toledo made as if he would amuse and hinder him, and therefore
brings the best of his Forces into the Vantguard, in hope to come to blows. The
Spaniards feigning to attacque him in Front, charged with 10000 Foot and 2000
Horse his Rear, which consisted of 4000 French, and some few Horse, and in the
filing through a Wood was disordered; so that he was now put to fight with his
Enemy, with the situation, and with his own disorder; and although the Count of
St. Giorgio with 500 commanded Musketeers arrived to their relief, yet it was
so late, that it served only to put the Enemy to a stand for a while, till
night coming on the fight ended, and the French retired to the gross of the
Army. Though the number of the dead on the Dukes side exceeded not 200 Foot and
50 Horse, the Spaniards with reason ascribed to themselves the Victory, because
they remained masters of the field and of much baggage.

The Duke had the contentment to see the French blooded, hoping that the
ancient hatred and emulation betwixt these Nations being once awakened, they
would repair their losses, and bring no small advantage to himself. He retires
to Crescentino, and the Governor returns to Lucedio from whence he was come;
passes afterward to Venavia to begirt Vercelli from far, and orders the
Germans to take in Salizzolo, which lying on the way of Invrea, excluded all
succors from that side. Nevertheless Carlo had brought them in before; so that
under the Marquess di Caluso, who by flight had saved himself out of the
Spaniards hands, there was 5000 effectual Foot and 250 Horse, strengthening the
place in such sort, that Toledo judged the enterprise for that year too late
and unseasonable, and contents himself to possess those Posts only, which in
the next Campagnia might best serve for his purpose. To keep the Forces of the
Savoyards separated into several parts, Mortara the Governor of Alessandria
taking the field with few less than 5000 Foot and Horse, for the most part of
the Militia of the Country, takes in Canelli, and afterward Cortemiglia. The
Duke presently orders the Prince Cardinal to oppose him, joining 3000 Soldiers
of the Country Militia to 1000 French. Three hundred of the Monferrins lodging
in St. Sebastiano upon the Po, shut up the River, and infested the parts
thereabouts. A thousand five hundred of the Savoyards attaque this Port, and
with little ado cutting to pieces the defenders, raze it to the ground. St.
Giorgio attempted St. Damiano, but was repulsed, and Mortara at Cestiola had no
better success. Thus betwixt the parties passed several factions and
ambuscadoes, wherein Fortune gave little advantage to either.

But beyond the Mountains Nemours having got together about 7000 men, gave not
only jealousy to the Savoyards, but some apprehensions also to the
neighboring Provinces of France; whereupon Monsieur d' Allingcourt, the Duke
of Bellegarde, and Dediguieres, who governed the Lisonzo, Burgundy, and
Dauphine, having a Meeting in Lions (where also was Prince Thomaso, whom the
Duke his Father had sent with a good strength into Savoy) and falling to
reflect upon the intestine troubles of the Kingdom, and the artifices of
Strangers that might under this Army either be fomented or concealed, they
resolved to deny him passage, and by all fair means to persuade him to Peace.
It behoved him therefore to restrain himself within that narrow corner, which
served the Spaniards for passage of their Troops into Flanders. Being repulsed
at the Bridge of Gressin, which he attempted to pass, he was there abandoned by
the French, who in a body marched away with flying Colors. He was no sooner
got back with the Troops of Spain into the County of Burgundy, but he lends his
ear to an accord; and though he pretended some place in Sovereignty, and to
keep a Garrison in Nixi, as it were for his Appennage, nevertheless he was
contented that 50 Switzers should be left there for a year, and 50000 Crowns,
beside some hopes of having one of Carlo's Daughters for his Wife.

The prize and prey of fraud being come to naught, Toledo, to prepare for some
enterprise worthy of himself and of his Forces, applied so much the more to
straighten Vercelli, causing dal Luna to possess Gatinara, which stopped
another passage over the River to the Town it self. All this while Treaties of
Peace ceased not; the season now become very sharp, giving opportunity for it.
For that purpose Lodovisio already assumed into a Cardinalship, and Bethune,
conferred with the Governor in Trin, and with the Duke in Chivasso, and
finding in both an equal peevishness and punctuality not to be willing to offer
Propositions; they offered a rough draught containing, That the Duke for the
first step, licensing the French, the Governor should then retire out of
Piedmont, and quit the places possessed during this War. That he should then
also discharge the Switzers and Germans with a part of the Horse, and should
promise not to molest the Venetians. That Savoy should then quit all that had
been taken in this War, and that Toledo should at last do the same. The Duke
made no difficulty to give his assent, because the conditions were seemly, and
preserved common safety. But the Governor of Milan denies them upon the wonted
pretext, to have no power to meddle in the affairs of the Venetians otherwise
than by Arms. As for Savoy, he promised nothing more but his word to the Pope
and to France not to offend him, and to restore what he possessed when the Duke
with an effectual disarming should show an inclination to Peace, refer to the
Judgment of the Emperor the differences with the House of Gonzage, and render
the places taken. But Carlo not observing in these conditions any footstep of
the Treaty of Asti, saw Italy and himself involved in greater suspicions, and
the Venetians in more considerable dangers. And therefore to the faith of the
promises agreed on, and the gratitude of the succors received, he added this
consideration; That the Governor aiming to break this Union, the better to
oppress all, he could expect no other advantage by it, but to be the last
should perish in the common deluge. For this cause, although the Mediators did
de novo speak with him, and also with the Governor, discoursing of
modifications and reprises, and that the Governor insinuated to him particular
advantages, if separating from the Republic he would make a private accord, he
constantly resisted all their Propositions. In this management Bethune
encountered the Dukes kind acceptance and applause, and Lodovisio that of Spain,
it seeming that he now designed to lodge in that Monarchy the hopes, which
together with their habit many of the Cardinals use to put on. The Treaty being
now at an end, Bethune would have repassed the Alps, if the Venetians had not
prevailed with him to stay for the order and grace of the Treaty. Peace then
despaired of, all parties arm with great diligence, and the Governor making
great Levies every where, keeps his Army in great vigor. Carlo strengthens
himself with 6000 Foot and 700 Horse, which after the accord with Nemours being
of no use in Savoy, he causes to descend into Piedmont, and Dediguieres not
regarding the threatenings and protests of the Count of France, sends him 4000
Foot and 600 Horse, raised under the Venetian Pay.

The courage of the Duke and the gold of the Republic drew Soldiers in great
number, and Ernesto Count of Mansfelt arriving, in the name of the Protestant
Princes of the Empire, at Turin, offered as many as they needed. The Venetians
finding the difficulty great to get supplies through the straights of the
passages of the Grisons, resolved to make use of the Sea, although with greater
charge, agreeing with the Count Levestein for the Levy of 3000 Walloons and of
as many Hollanders under Count John Ernest of Nassaw. The Winter was spent in
giving orders, and making provisions, yet not wholly without some intermixture
of enterprises of War; for Ferdinand Duke of Mantua, the better to redress by
his presence the affairs of his States, being come to Casale, Carlo resolved
now to do him a public affront, causing several of his Towns to be plundered
under his nose, and Moncucco to be assaulted, which by its vicinity was very
troublesome to Chieri. Though Ferdinand desired to bring succors into it, yet
the Savoyards Cannon not giving time, the place was presently buried in its own
ruins, and the Governor coming forth without Arms, the Germans that were of
the Garrison being cut to pieces, the Monferrins had their lives given them.
These attempted a revenge upon Passerano, assisted by some of the Spanish
Horse; but being repulsed by the Peasants alone, left dead upon the place the
Cavalier Rivara, Governor of Trino, with the reputation of a gallant Soldier.
On the other side the Signor Varriea with some few French, recovered by Scalada
Salizuola, not well guarded by the Germans. Toledo, not to let the whole Winter
pass without some advantage, frames a design to surprise Crescentino, put upon
it by two Nephews of the Signor of Albigni, who upon some distaste with the Duke
had taken employment on the Spanish side.

But Carlo, with good Spies having his eyes and ears every where, came to the
knowledge of it, and carefully sending Prince Thomaso to change the Garrison he
brake the design. The Governor seeing, that remaining in the field did
diminish the Army without any advantage, orders Mortara, that abandoning the
Posts possessed, he should withdraw it into the most convenient and quiet
Quarters of the Milanese, leaving Garrisons in Trino for Monferrat, and in St.
Germano and Gattinara for Piedmont. But the Duke through excessive fatigue
falling to be crazy, was still active with his mind, ordering the Prince
Vittorio to attaque Gattinara where were 4000 Foot in Garrison. To dispatch it
quickly, the Prince had a mind to take it by Assault; but the French Officers
thinking it a hazard of too great difficulty, he would not engage himself in
it, but turned about to Masserano. This is a little Principality on the other
side the Sesia, where for the more strengthening the Vercelli on that side,
Toledo designed to place a Garrison; but whilst ratifications were expected
from Spain, concerning the recompenses with which that Prince was to be
contented, Vittorio breaks the Treaty with his Sword. The Princess, who alone
with her Sons was within it, from fear was easily persuaded to surrender. At
Creveceur, a place appertaining to the same, the dispute was something harder,
because Luna hasted from Milan with succors; but Vittorio going to meet him,
beats him, leaving Luna himself with many of his dead upon the place. The place
then renders of its own accord; and because it is a Fief of the Church, justly
excused to the Pope the force, whilst that Prince so perniciously conspired
against Piedmont. Caluso, Governor of Vercelli, drives the Enemy out of
Desana; but factions and further progress ended with the year, the Prince also
falling into a dangerous sickness. The Venetians were not well pleased to hear,
that Carlo sparing the Milanese which did offend him, should trouble the
Monferrat, which was innocent; and therefore attempted to set on foot a
Composure betwixt the two Dukes, and that in order to some kind of
reconciliation of their minds, they should speak together; but 'twas in vain,
because Ferdinand required, that as a Preludium to the future friendship, the
Savoyards should have regard to his State; and Carlo, who found not the French
willing to enter into the Milanese, by reason of the interests of that Crown,
alleged for excuse, that with invading it, he should have reinforced Toledo
with those assistances, which some of the Princes of Italy are in that case
obliged to give. He continues therefore in his insults and damages done to the
Monferrat, and so much the more by how much the Duke of Mantua, having a little
before married Katherine Princess of Medici, and thereby the former project of
Marriages being fallen to the ground, he had now no other remedy for his
pretensions, but to do himself reason with his Sword; whereupon in the places
taken, and particularly in the Canavese, he exacted an oath from the people as
their lawful Prince.


MANY believed, that King Philip being of an upright mind, and a most impartial
understanding, and the Duke of Lerma, both by Genius and Interest inclined to
Peace, that which followed in Italy was approved, rather than contrived in the
Court of Spain, and that it had its rise from that Triumvirat, which Pietro
Girone, Duke d'Ossuna Viceroy of Naples, Toledo Governor of Milan, and la
Queva Ambassador in Venice formed; who in their vast thoughts endeavoring to
banish Peace and oppress Italy, had their aim not so much to make themselves
famous, as the employment necessary to the King, and of advantage to
themselves. It was therefore judged, that the Councils of Madrid, engaged upon
their relations in a point of honor and reputation, in which the Nation is
beyond measure tenacious, did prefer this sole consideration before so many
others, which rendered the present actings prejudicial to the Monarchy; because
in some Princes hatred springing up, in others jealousies being awakened, it
seemed that all were afraid, and nothing was thought secure from the Power of
Spain, or sufficient for their avarice.

To inform themselves then of the mind of the King and of the Favorite, the
Venetians give command to Pietro Gritti their Ambassador, a Minister of a so
well tempered prudence, that phlegm was not predominant, nor did it yield to the
sagacity of that Court, no less considerate than circumspect, to represent the
present state of affairs; Putting them in mind of the ancient correspondencies
sincerely practiced with that Crown for the restraint of the Turks, the Peace
of Italy, and the good of Christendom, assuring them also, that the Republic
retained the same lively motives of esteem and affection toward that Crown,
united to the designs and intentions of a free and honorable Peace. They
declare withal, that having taken Arms to defend themselves against the
untolerable outrages of the Uscocchi, they pretended nothing of the Archduke
but the execution of things promised. That Carlo had nothing to require of the
Governor of Milan but the observance of things already agreed. To what purpose
then should Italy be scourged with Armies, and tortured with Jealousies, if
under the shadow of mutual faith, which is the most precious Crown of Princes,
all things might be quieted? The Ambassador added other conceptions which
might manifest, the Republic inclined to Peace, but resolved not to abandon
their own decorum or their friends. In Spain the Ministers had various
reflections thereupon. It seemed to some, that the arbitrament, which they
affected in the affairs of Italy, being rather called into doubt than
maintained, it was fit to re-establish it with some advantage before to admit
of a Treaty. Others apprehending, through the universal disgust of the Princes,
greater commotions and accidents, which time did afterward produce greater
indeed than could have been believed, were of opinion to embrace conditions of
composure.

Lerma, to make himself Arbiter of the War and of the Peace, inclines, that a
Treaty should be set on foot, but that it was to be transacted in Spain,
doubting lest the Emperor, resolved that the affairs of the Vscocchi should be
composed, if the management of the Peace should be in his Court, he should
constrain the Archduke to accept it; in which case the Venetians, free from a
diversion on that side, mihgt be able to revenge themselves upon the Milanese,
for those jealousies which the Governor had endeavored to bring upon them. It
was therefore answered to the Ambassador in the most lively expressions, that
the mind of the King, always conformable to piety and justice, was possessed
with equal motives of inclination to Peace with the Republic and with the
Duke; whereupon it was resolved in Venice and in Turin to dispatch to Gritti
powers to treat and conclude a Peace.

The Ministers of France and England did highly resent it, by reason of that
competition of Authority, which, in affairs of weight, Princes, though friends,
ascribe to themselves; prejudging unhappy success to the business, if, placed
in the self-will of the Spaniards, their authority were not qualified by the
power of some other Crown, which might be able to facilitate the Negotiation,
and warily inspect the conclusion. But although the designs and ends of the
Duke of Lerma were not unknown, Carlo nevertheless thought to have much
advantaged himself, by having brought the Spaniard to treat with him as an
equal; and the Republic hoped that the King thus interessed in the mediation
of Peace, the minds of the Ministers of Italy would prove less hostile and
troublesome. That Court being more given to delay than conclude, all things
began and proceeded very slowly; but the War was speeded in Friuli with so much
the more diligence, though in Piedmont with greater success. In Istria the
Venetians happened to take Zemino, a place strong and of importance. The Town
was easily taken, being abandoned by the Garrison; but the Castle was forced by
three Batteries, there marching out 300 Germans and some of the Country
Militia. In Friuli, Anthonio Lando Procurator, succeeding in the Generalat to
Priuli, there being arrived at the Camp a Renfort of good Troops, all diligence
was used to straighten Gradisca in earnest.

It happened, that as the Count d'Ognate, Ambassador of Spain to Ferdinand,
passed through those parts, to receive him with the accustomed honor of the
Militia there was a suspension from action for a little while; and the
Venetians in that interim to honor him by meeting him with their Army,
covering with some Squadrons of Cavalry a certain house, which stood betwixt
Meriano and Fara, very near to Gradisca, cast up earth about it, and, before
the Enemy were aware of it, raised a Fort in defense, which was afterward
called the Fort of the Compagnia, and was the beginning of the circumvallation
of the place.

But Medici desiring to stop up all the ways of succors, orders the taking in
of St. Martino di Cusca, and sends thither by night from Vipulzano and other
Posts Soldiers with necessary provisions. The Garrison had been surprised in
their negligence and sleep, if an accident had not procured their escape; for
in a very narrow Lane the Horse, which carried the Pettard, taking fright from
a certain rustling noise, set a running, with the shock of some, by whose Arms
in the wonted resonancy of the mountains the noise being augmented, those that
were behind, frightened with the confusion of them that were before, not knowing
what the danger was, and therefore thinking it greater, betook themselves also
to flight. The command of the Officers increased the disorder, who calling to
the Fugitives to make a stand, it was believed of those afar off, that they
meant they should rather double their steps in their flight. But being come to
a Village, and some gathering together there, the light clearing up by the
breaking of the day, they saw naught but the image of their own shame.
Nevertheless in consequence of the noise the Enemy being alarmed, hastened from
several Posts to relief, and d'Ampierre causing four Companies to advance,
orders them to assault the Village; but the Venetians being found covered with
some earth hastily flung up, one Company was defeated, and another left its
Cornet there. Whereupon the rest of the Archducarians having made a halt, the
Venetians had opportunity to retire to their Quarter, quitting the thoughts of
attacquing the Castle, into which succors were now entered. But to exclude the
Germans from all access of coming on this side the Lisonzo, there was another
Fort laid betwixt that of Lucinis and Priuli with two Cannons on it, which beat
upon the shores of the River.

Nevertheless there wanted not passages elsewhere, D'Ampierre falling in at
Cravaglio, a Village not far from Palma, upon the Company of Cuirassiers of
Girolamo Tadini, broke it, carrying away thirty Prisoners with forty Horse.
Marradas with 500 Musketeers and 300 Horse sets upon Chiopris, where one other
Company only had their Quarter, but without other success but taking Prisoner
the Lieutenant and some others, the rest defending themselves with so much
valor, that Marradas, before help could come from the neighboring Quarters,
thought good to retire into Gradisca, leaving 40 of his Party dead upon the
place. He was afterward sent into Istria, where after the Surrender of Zemino,
the people were wavering, and the more, because the Town of Gallignano was
ready to be lost, invested by Anthonio Barbaro, returned General into that
Province. Marradas brought succors into it, plundered here and there the
Country, and coming to Fionova burnt certain Vessels in the Port. Besides
these, the actions on that side were of no great moment.

But in Friuli, Lando was resolved to climb the Carso, it having seemed fatal,
because there was the open Sea, if till now any one had attempted the passage
betwixt the Mountains. The Enemy themselves discovered this deceit, because
some had made a doubt, that for want of earth, there was no lodging with
necessary defense upon those Rocks; but now it was seen, that they apprehending
that which was the Venetians very thought, raised a Fort upon those very Hills,
which was called Diana, taking its name from some Ladies, who to hasten the
work did labor about it. This did not only not divert, but promoted the
intention of Lando, who planting a Fort with his own name at Bruma, which with
two others reached to the Lisonzo, closed on the under-side the circumvallation
to Gradisca, whilst on the upper side the Fort of the Campagnia, joined with
good intrenchment to Fara and Meriano, fully stopped every passage.
Trautmanstorf made a great Sally, chiefly to view these new works: but being
beaten back by the Corsi, who had the guard of the Fort Lando, and the
Commander Colredo, who was there with him, receiving a Musket Shot, he retired,
ordering a half moon to cover the place on that side.

The Venetians nevertheless deferred for some days to pass the Lisonzo
thereabouts, because the Hollanders under Nassaw, who disimbarking at Monfalcon
were to take those Posts, were not yet arrived, and therefore they had thoughts
to attempt it on the upper side in the Chanel of Ronzina. Medici, to distract
the Enemies Forces, orders the attacque of several Posts: Sends Contino Mamoli,
Colonel of Greeks, to take in a house near to Gradisca, where placing some
Cannon, it occasioned some fright within the Town. Count Nicholo Gualdo took
St. Floriano in the Mountains, abandoned after a short defense by the Garrison.
But Cosmo de Monti, who with a Pettard was to attempt the Fort Diana, and the
Corsi, who had the charge committed to them to take in that of Bosco by
Scalade, were both repulsed. Medici was in the Plain of Mainizza, to the end
that under the favor of a battery the Horse might pass to the other side of
the River, and Trevisano with Count Ferdinand Scotto performed it with the show
of so much resolution, that the German Foot thinking themselves not able to
resist, quit the Trenches and the Posts, when the Cavalry gallopping to their
assistance stopped the flight, and the Officers with their Swords in their
hands killing some, brought back the rest to their Guards. The Venetians, who
had no other aim but to divert succors from the places attacqued, retired in
good order. But Erizzo, who with Giovanni Martinengo, Marco Anthonio Manzano,
and others, were marched out of Cividale to take in Ronzina, either deceived by
their guides, or retarded by the difficulty of the way, arrived not till it was
day, and so discovered; whereupon finding the Garrison vigilant and in order,
they could not apply the Pettard, neither did they think fit, by reason of the
steepness of the cliff, to make trial of an assault. Burning then certain
Villages, and routing a body of Peasants that would have stopped their passage,
they returned safe into their Quarters.

So many designs not succeeding, provoked Medici to new attempts; whereupon he
causes the Fort Bosco to be invested, where the excessive rains retarded the
Besiegers in such sort, that Trautmanstorf had opportunity, notwithstanding the
battery of two small Pieces, to pass the River with 600 Horse, and fall into
the Quarter of Piuma, which being ill defended by the Venetians in a great
rain, which beat into their faces, was abandoned. The Troops, now being
assailed also by the Fort, retired, and Trautmanstorf having gotten his design,
leaves Piuma, into which the Venetians re-enter. Re-inforcements now arrive in
both the Armies; in the Austrians 500 from the Archduke Maximilian, and 900
under the Spanish Pay, besides those which Ferdinand himself in good number had
raised; and in the Venetian 1000 Hollanders under Colonel Vassenhoven, and 3000
under Nassau. Better men and better chosen than these, Italy had not in a long
time seen, nor which carried with them more reputation and greater reflections;
for the Spaniards extremely vexed, that two so great Commonwealths, well
understanding one another, and which had fixed the center of their liberty in
common interests, had found the way to unite the Adriatic with the Ocean,
raged with great aggravations, holding forth the zeal of Religion, according to
that custom, that the most powerful do also love to appear the most pious, and
therewith beat the ears of the Pope, incessantly inciting him to oppose himself
against the entry into Italy of that sort of people, who being of a differing
Religion, might easily infect it.

But Simeon Contarini Ambassador for the Republic, in his grave and graceful
way of speaking, remonstrated to Paul; That the piety of the Senate, mindful of
the signal actions of their Ancestors, was an evident assurance of the
constancy of their Religion, which having always been promoted, should also at
present by good orders and most vigilant endeavors be protected. That this
Holland- Militia was for no other service but to defend the liberty, betrayed
by those who were to regard it, and ^ot to relieve it by such as ought to
assist it. Many Princes denied them Levies* stopped the passages, made
difficulty to give help to the Republic: though in the disadvantages done to
them they acknowledged their own proper safety was disputed. Were they
therefore to perish at another will? And to abandon that defense, which being
commanded by God, justifies a lawful use even of things more sacred? Must then
those friendships only be approved, which please the Spaniards? In their Armies
all Nations and Sects by Troops were promiscuously confounded; their Interest
justifies all Religions, because in alliance with them. That they now went
about to impose upon the Republic a Law scrupulous and severe, whilst lawful
in the necessity and intention to uphold their friends and themselves, and that
expressly, to preserve Religion no less than liberty undefiled.

Paul, who discerned that the apprehensions of Religion served for the use,
opinions, and designs of all, was easily appeased. This re-inforcement came
very seasonably to the Venetians, and would have been much more considerable,
if so soon as Nassau came into the Camp, there had not risen an implacable
dispute with Medici; because he pretending to command him, and he not to submit
but to the Captain General of the Republic, although at last it was agreed,
that Medici receiving orders from di Lando should communicate them to Nassau;
yet their minds remaining discomposed, there happened in the executions thereof
many delays and difficulties, which greatly served to confirm the conceit, that
Medici had a mind rather to protract the War without loss, than to end it with
advantage. And so he truly appeared fixed in the preservation of those Posts
wherein he had once set his foot; but in prosecuting he was always carried away
by violence, and with delays and errors corrupted the resolutions of others,
and his own counsels.

Proceeding on this and that side of the Lisonzo in concert, whilst Nassau
disbarked his men at Monfalcone, Lando passed upon a Bridge laid at Villesso,
secured by two Forts, and Giust' Anthonio Belegno with six Galleys battered
Duino, and pillaged the Coast of Trieste. Leaving the Posts about Gradisca well
provided, and a strong Body to keep the Campagnia, they had 6000 men upon the
Carso, who through several passages made their way to several Posts. In the
march there arose among the Switzers, who though not obliged but to serve in
Garrisons, were notwithstanding by large promises persuaded to take the field,
a little tumult, but was presently quieted, their Officers coming in, and
reproaching them with perfidy if they would not, and Cowardice if they durst
not meet the Enemy in the face, and join battle with them.

At the same time, on that side which lies above Gradisca, Francisco Strasoldo
with about 800 Horse wades through the Lisonzo, followed by Nicholo Contarini,
who to Foscarini was substituted Proveditor in the Camp, and Giovanni
Basadonna, Lieutenant General of Vdine, at the head of the Feudatarians. In the
Town of St. Michaele was made the place of Arms, all other open places giving
themselves up. Nassau besieges the Fort Diana, and ruining a part thereof with
the Cannon, obliged 100 Soldiers, which were within, to render themselves
Prisoners. The Imperial, which was a Fort a little more toward the River, but
of a greater circuit, and guarded by ^00 Foot, capitulated also, inrolling
themselves under the Venetian Colors. Baglione, being come to the utmost
hanging over of the Carso, fortifies himself there, and seeing the confusion of
the Enemy, much frighted with this Invasion, advertises Medici that il Bos^o
and il Parco di Rubia were abandoned; the banks of the River Vipao not
defended; all the Campagnia of Goritia encumbered with flight and disorder, the
Soldiers as well as the Peasants seeking to save themselves; whereupon his
advice was, that since fortune and opportunity fought for a Victory, he should
take possession of Fiume and il Parco. But the other with a superfluity of
caution fearing treachery, where the Enemy was running away, ordered to halt
there, that the Troops should be entrenched, and St. Michaele fortified.

There arose afterward new disputes with Nassau, and all things passing with
delays, the Enemy at first overcome with fear, took courage again, and bringing
Colonel Stauder into Rubia with 1000 Foot guarded that place, and defended the
Vipao. It seemed then, that that little River, which, where the Mountain
terminates, discharges it self into the Lisonzo, was become an Ocean, and the
Fort Bosco a Wall of Brass so; great was the resistance, so impossible the
fording! From two places with Batteries upon the Mountains was this Fort
beaten, and with another from the other side of the River toward Mainizza. But
Gradisca was in this interim more strongly begirt; for another Bridge being
laid by the Venetians at Fara, it closed all passage on the upper side also.
Nevertheless contrary to the course of the season, which was in the month of
June, there falling incessant rains for forty days together, not only the
Soldiers suffered very much in their Posts, but the Vipao overflowing, and the
Lisonzo much more, both the Bridges were broken, so that down the stream upon
floats some provisions entered into the Town. And now it seemed to be in
earnest, that time would render more inexcusable Medici his delayings,
discovering how much it imports not to make use of fair weather, or lose one
sole moment of occasion when it is offered. The Bridges however were repaired,
but always with great longsomness, which gave Trautmanstorf time to assemble
his Army in Rubia, and better to fortify the Vipao. This was his last action;
for, assisting at the raising of a Ravellin by a Cannon-bullet sent from the
Trenches of the Venetians, he unfortunately left his life upon the place. He
had without doubt maintained the War, and defended the Archdukes Country with
great resolution, and that with weak Forces.

The Venetians now made themselves believe, that, as it happens in the sudden
accidents of War, the minds of the Militia would be wavering, and the Chiefs be
divided in their opinions. But Marradas presently taking upon himself the
absolute Command, suffered not the Army to be sensible of the loss of
Trautmanstorf; undergoing the direction of the War with equal courage, and
perhaps a better and more vigorous conduct. The Hollanders had indeed the good
luck to take Parco, and to lodge themselves there; but in the attempt of it*
Bosco environed with a Wall in form of a Square, and about a mile in circuit,
but crooked and of unequal situation, they were repulsed. Gradisca
notwithstanding the succors began to suffer indeed; whereupon Strasoldo
attempts to send out those that were not useful for the defense; but the modern
Armies understanding no other commendation but that of overcoming, they were
forced by the Venetians to return into the Town. Some by stealth, under favor
of the Starfort drove down the stream by night, notwithstanding that the Guards
now and then took them Prisoners, bringing to the besieged some slender relief.
That Fort indeed served as a Citadel to the Town, and Nassau had offered
himself to take it when the others rendered themselves to him; but some urged to
the contrary, that that Garrison would serve to famish the Town the sooner,
beside the doubt, that having better defense it would not be taken with
Batteries, and the Besiegers then wanting earth be obliged to expose themselves
to hazard uncovered, if they would offend them.

But the issue proved, that the number of votes rather than the weight of
reasons prevailed. For these factions in Friuli passed seven months, during
which, first with Jealousies, afterward with Hostility, the Republic was again
greatly troubled in the Adriatic. Ossuna, Vice-King of Naples, did not so much
levy men for the succors of the Milanese, as he had proposed with a Naval
Force to molest the Venetians, knowing that he could no where touch it more to
the quick, than by infesting the Dominion of the Sea, and disturbing Commerce,
though with great damage to the Kings own Subjects, who drove a rich Trade with
the City of Venice. Nevertheless, against the gainsaying of all, and preferring
before all other respects, that which might bring apprehensions or disturbance
to the Republic, breaking the security of Ports, he had made booty of the
Ship, the Pilgrim of Rossi; and although upon the instance of the Ambassador
Gritti in the Court of Spain, command was given to release it, nevertheless in
the execution he always directly opposed the Orders of the King, either because
in the height of the pride of his mind he truly despised him, or because that
Crown was glad to cover their most secret designs with the disobedience of a
capricious Minister. The Venetians were not ignorant of it; and therefore fully
resolving to defend themselves, made it their business to increase their
strength at Sea with two Galliasses and some Ships, and made choice of thirty
Commanders of Galleys, to the end that according as there was need they might
on all sides be arming.

Ossuna seeing that the Vscocchi had lost many of their roving Nests, invites
them with the promise of a free Port and other recompenses to retire into that
Kingdom, caressing them more and more, as they became more offensive to the
Venetians. Whereupon under the countenance of such a protection, these Pirates
seized the Ship Doria, which with some other small ones was passing from Corfu
to Venice with Merchants goods, selling publicly under the Standard of the
Viceroy the spoil they had taken; and although the Receivers of the Customs in
the most principal Ports of the Kingdom exclaimed, that with Trade would also
cease the Tolls and Royal Entries, they were threatened by Ossuna with the
Gallows, if they should dare any more to complain. He naturally abounding in
the vanity of his tongue and thoughts, did not only apply to trouble the Sea,
but discoursed continually of surprising Ports in Istria, ransacking Islands,
and making his way into the most impenetrable corners of the Capital City.
Sometimes upon paper, sometimes in discourse he traced and drew out his
designs, ordered Barks with flat bottoms fit for shallow waters, modelled this
and that Engine, and hearkened so willingly to none as those that entertained
him with flatteries to his person, or facility in his undertaking.

Nevertheless, to say truth, that which he believed he should be able to
effect, was not so much, as that which he desired should be believed, designing
to keep the Republic involved in great expenses, and distracted to such a
degree, that it might be less able to offend the Archduke, or assist Carlo. He
then sends forth under Francisco Rivera into the Adriatic twelve well armed
Ships; and although, when they were ready to set sail, orders came from the
Court of Spain to suspend their going forth, it seeming strange, that at the
time of the beginning of a Treaty of Peace in Madrid, unsufferable injuries
should be done by the Viceroy of Naples, he nevertheless taking pretext, that
by some armed Vessels of the Republic had been taken a great Ship, which would
have gone into Trieste, maintains his resolution with a Writing extorted from
the collateral Ministers, who remonstrated, that it was for the honor and
service of the King, that Rivera should go out, and that the Venetians should
be kept under. These Ships bore only the Dukes Colors, to the end the design
might more secretly be carried on, not to let the War break out, nor leave the
Venetians in peace. This Invasion with armed Ships being against that Dominion,
which the Republic for so many Ages had possessed in the Adriatic, obliged
Giust' Anthonio Belegno, that commanded the Fleet, to assemble in Lesina that
part of it which he could soonest get ready, and from thence pass to Curzola,
to cover the Islands and the State, and in particular to break the principal
design of Ossuna to appear in the sight of Istria, to give countenance to
Ferdinands Army, and divert that of the Republic. It was no hard matter to
compass his design, because the twelve Ships set their course to Calamota, a
Port belonging to those of Ragusa, where they were received with great applause
of that Government, which to the prejudice of their Trade receiving very
unwillingly Law from the Venetians upon the Sea, gladly heard this novelty of
Ossuna's, and encouraging it with public services, permitted that upon these
Ships many of their Subjects should take employment. But Belegno following with
seven Ships, four great Galleys, thirteen Lighters, and fifteen armed Vessels,
Riviera doubting to be assaulted with disadvantage in that place, setting sail
with a fair wind crossed the Sea, and came to Brindisi. The Venetians followed
him, and not being able to fight them in that Port, which was well defended
with several Forts, the Admiral, which was Lorenzo Veniero, letting fall his
Sails, defied him four hours long with Cannonades; but the other not willing to
come out to an engagement, he ransacks all the Coast of Puglia. This motion of
the Spaniards had not only disturbed the Venetians, but greatly alarmed the
Turks, who taking jealousy, came down in great numbers to the guard and
preservation of their marine Coast; and because Ossuna, to the end he might
engage with him the Galleys of the Pope, of Malta, and of Florence, published
that he would attempt upon the Ottoman State: The Ministers of the Venetians
caused the contrary to sound aloud in all the Courts, it appearing that he had
sent to the Grand Vizier, Slaves and Peasants to gain him, and with all sorts
of offices incite him to make War against the Republic. For this cause the
said Princes did not only abstain from giving their Galleys to Ossuna, but used
all effectual means to divert him from sending abroad such rumors, knowing
that they tended to naught else but to provoke the Turk, and draw him into the
Adriatic, to the disturbance of the Kingdom of Naples, and the Ecclesiastical
State also.

But Ossuna stopping at nothing, so that he might gain at present, from the
boldness of the attempt, fruit equal to the rashness of the counsel, despising
the conscience of the fact, had brought into Naples as in triumph certain
Merchandise, as if it had been taken at Sea by his Ships, though in truth it
was the lading of the sequestered Ship of Rossi, and meaning by this applause to
spread his designs, he sends Pietro Leiva with nineteen Galleys to join with
Riviera. They passed altogether to Santa Croce, which belongs likewise to those
of Ragusa, and found at Lesina the Venetians inferior in strength, the Galleys
of Candia being not yet joined, nor those ten others with some Ships, which
with all speed were making ready at Venice. The Commanders then themselves, not
only crossed by the wind, but counseled chiefly by the disparity of force,
applied to nothing but their defense, placing on the Land certain pieces of
Artillery in convenient places. So the Fleets cannoned a whole day at random
with more shots than blows, and night coming on, the Spaniards stood away
before the wind, taking a Ship of Sali. There fell into their power also a
Vessel of Holland, which sailing with some Soldiers of those Levies, was like
to be taken by the Ships of Ossuna, and thought to find in the Port of Ragusa a
safe retreat; but that Government permitting the Soldiery to pass by Land to
Cattaro, put the Vessel into the Spaniards hands, who causing the Captain to be
hanged, turned their course toward Brindisi. From such passages as these the
Venetians more and more understood, what weight lay upon them of Arms,
Jealousies, and Negotiations; resolving therefore to maintain themselves in
liberty and safety, they deliberate greatly to reinforce their Fleet, without
weakening or distracting their Forces by Land. Conferring the Title with the
Authority of Captain General upon Giovanni Giacomo Zane, they caused besides
other provisions ten Galleys to be armed in Candia, which with a 1000 Soldiers
raised in that Island arrive at last in the Gulf to join with the Fleet, after
some retardment, caused partly for fear of falling amongst the Spanish Ships,
which they knew were laid for them, and partly for some regard had of the Turks
Fleet, which with two great Hulks and seven and thirty Galleys plied to and
again in the white Sea, not so much to be taken notice of for their force, or
the courage of the Turkish Officers, as for the Negotiations of Ossuna, who
commanding a nimble Frigate to the Captain Bassa, had sent him for a Present a
Kinsman of his, till then kept Prisoner with the Spaniards, and giving liberty
to a hundred other Slaves, invited him with such flatteries and with express
Offices to infest the State of the Venetians, and particularly to command their
Fleet to fall upon Candia. But the Turks themselves abhorring such wicked
counsels, set themselves rather to make a course longst the Coast of Calabria,
but without doing hurt that was of the least importance. The Port being indeed
thoroughly moved, threatened the Ragusians for the reception given to Ossuna's
Ships, and invited the Republic to join Forces with them to suppress (as they
called those Magistrates) the common Enemies.

But the Senate, though provoked by the example of the Vice-King, and invited
by so grievous injuries, not willing to confound the interest of State with
Religion, placed their defense in the justice of their cause and their own
Arms, not omitting every where and in all Courts the diligence, offices, and
forces to resist so great a power. The Spanish Ministers, to terrify with the
fame of vast preparations, gave out that the Fleet of Gallions, accustomed only
to the employments of the Ocean, coming within the straights of Gibraltar,
should advance into the Adriatic, and that there was a new Armature of many
Ships in Sicily; rumors in a good measure believed from the proceedings of the
Viceroy of Naples, who strengthened the Squadron of Leiva with certain Galleys
commanded by Octavio d'Arragona, and gave liberty to the Vscocchi to rove every
where, and rejoiced already in the conceit, that with their Barks they would
brave it within the sight of the Ports of the Capital City, taking Prises, and
doing mischief. This obliged the Senate to dispose of certain Galleys for the
guard of the Chioggia, and to pick out in Venice a number of people fit to bear
Arms, who being new, and therefore more apt to be discoursed of, than they that
were wont to be seen in War, kept the people in no small unquiet. During these
apprehensions, a false and short joy was the forerunner of greater trouble.
The Mariners of a Packet-boat bringing Letters with information of what had
happened about Lesina, scattered a report every where as they passed, either
from their own invention, or a willing credulity of others, that the Venetians
had obtained a great Victory; of which some bringing the first notice, the
people greedy of the news, and desirous of good success, without giving time
for greater certainty, overflowed with such an excess of satisfaction, that
running up and down with cries of applause, and making Bonfires in all the
streets, they were very near, if Guards had not been timely appointed, laying
hands on the person and house of the Ambassador la Queva, believed the
principal mover of the attempts of Ossuna. But the vanity of the report quickly
appearing, one more troublesome arrives upon it. The Spanish Fleet, increased to
the number of eighteen Ships and three and thirty Galleys, showing themselves
before Lesina, had provoked the Venetians to battle; and that coming out of the
Port, showed themselves ready for the Encounter: But the Spaniards discharging
their Cannon afar off, gave them the slip in the night. Showing themselves
again afterward with the advantage of a fair wind, obliged the Venetians, that
had it contrary, to stand upon the defense of the Harbor; whereupon the
Spaniards with the same propitious wind went and anchored at Trau vecchio,
pillaging certain Barks, and burning some Cabanes there. Zane afflicted that
the Enemy was so far advanced, and to see himself left behind, having no mind
to abandon the great Ships, and separate himself from them, hales them out of
the Port with such length of time as is usual in disorders of that nature, and
makes to Spalato, to suppress any Incursions and Hostility the Spaniards might
attempt upon that Coast. But Lieva in the mean time passing speedily with the
Galleys toward Zara for a booty offering it self casually to him, was diverted
from a greater Victory; because the orders, he had, imposed precisely upon him
to attempt the surprise and taking of Pola, or some other Port in Istria; but
coming in sight near Mortar, a shelf of Dalmatia, of two Merchant Galleys
(Vessels of great bulk for carriage, but not fit for fight, built especially
for the transport of Merchandise, which in great abundance pass by long voyages
reciprocally from Persia, Turkey, and Venice,) whilst, although newly come
under the Convoy of seven Galleys of the Fleet, they sailed with great
negligence, ignorant of what had happened at Lesina, possesses himself of them.

Upon the discovery of the Spanish Ships, the Merchant Galleys run ashore, the
men saving themselves, and the other provided for their safety with their Oars;
but one not so nimble remained, though void of men, in the power of the Enemy,
with some small Vessels which were Victuallers to the Fleet. By an action which
made so great a noise, the Alarm was given every where, which made the Spanish
Officers believe they should find no place unprovided, and having now the
Venetian Fleet coasting upon them, and being besides embarassed with the Prizes
and the rich Booty, crossing the Sea toward Mont Angelo, keeping close to the
shore, they got back to Brindisi, and then the Galleys went out of the Gulf.
Ossuna not at all satisfied that for a piece of thievery there was lost an
opportunity of a more important conquest, sharply reproved Lieva for it;
nevertheless boasting of the prey, caused the Wares and Ships to be brought
into Naples with solemnity, much rejoicing at the displeasure which appeared in
Venice, and in the hopes to bring the Republic into War with the Turk; because
many of those Ministers being interessed in the Commodities taken, and others
feigning themselves to be so, as that Court made profit by the complaints, so
they pretended to be repaired in the loss by the Venetians. Nevertheless Almoro
Nani Bailo had the good luck without much ado to stifle that noise, partly with
reason which distinguished the accident from the blame, and partly by change of
the King, which disordered for a time the Empire; whilst to Achmet that was
dead, passing by his two little Sons, Mustapha his Brother succeeded. But at
Venice they were not a little disturbed at the news of this success, and the
blame being laid upon the delay of moving the Fleet from Lesina, and no less
upon the negligent Convoy of the light Galleys, Pietro Foscarini was sent
Inquisitor to clear it, whether the Chiefs were to blame or not. To Zane was
substituted Veniero in the Generalship, and thereupon the Command of the Ships
being vacant, it was committed to Francesco Morosini. Some other Ships and
Galleys besides were ordered to be made ready together with the Gallion called
il Balbi, of a vast bigness. All Courts did now ring in favor of the
Republic, that under the pretext of Treaties and of Peace, the Spanish
Ministers had designed to give her a more cruel blow; and because it was
certain, that neither their Fortune nor Arts were pleasing to the Princes of
Italy, the Senate ordered Simeon Contarini, returning from his Ambassie of
Rome, to visit Cosmo the Grand Duke, who had denied his Galleys to Ossuna, and
withheld a certain sum of money, sent at first to Milan in assistance of
Ferdinand his Kinsman.

Thence he passed to the Dukes of Vrbin, Modena, Mantua, and Parma, giving them
all to understand; That the most potent Engine of Foreign power in Italy was
the patience of the Princes, for whom it was now time that they should
understand, how much the liberty of that Country was hated by Strangers, whilst
they accounted all that for the greatest injury which was justly made use of to
oppose their avarice and ambition. But being held, even all of them, in the
bonds of a greater dependency, they knew not what to do but wish better times
for the common safety, every one having a sense of the Commonwealths
sufferings; but no man moving in favor of it: Their greatest hopes then were
reduced to a diversion in Piedmont; for which the Venetians, besides the
monthly disbursements, furnishing 80000 Crowns as an extraordinary aid to the
Duke, had given him the means to draw Dediguieres once more into Italy, and to
maintain his Army in such vigor, that, whilst Toledo had his men yet in their
Quarters, St. Damiano was besieged, a Town environed with a thick Wall, and a
good Rampart of earth within it, and kept by Andrea Prando with 600 Soldiers;
but he, miserably burned under the ruins of some houses, the Garrison, without
a Commander, after five days battery was forced in a most furious assault.

Dediguieres had honored the Enterprise with his presence, and the Duke during
the contest running to and fro amongst the foremost, had his Horse killed under
him, with the loss of some few Soldiers, who being of no note remained, as
usual, buried in oblivion. The place given to pillage, was presently
demolished, and the Duke laying waste the Country, constrained Mortara and
Davalos for want of victuals to quit Alba, who were entered into it with 4000
men. And now finding in it 1000 Soldiers only ( Monferrines, mingled with some
Germans) the Duke causes the Count St. Giorgio to invest it, and after draws
near with the Army. The Governor, who was Alleramo, and one of the Counts of
St. Giorgio also, but a deadly Enemy to Guido, made as if he would hold it out
to the last, though it was in a manner open, yet environed on three sides with
the Tanaro, and other little Rivers. The Germans lodged in the Outworks, and
the Inhabitants had the defense of a Half Moon. The rains, which making the
highways deep in mire, retarded for some days the Besiegers in bringing their
Cannon, and the attacque hindered also succors to the Besieged; so that for
want of Ammunition they were forced to render. The City agreed for a sum of
money not to be plundered, and that the Garrison should not be French, the
Germans marched out with Arms and Baggage. The Town of St. Germano, where an
intelligence failed the Duke, was presently invested at large, and at the same
time that of Montiglio was assaulted by St. Giorgio. The Town taken, kept but
by 400 Monferrines, the Castle after a breach made is also rendered; for the
custody of which there arose a dispute betwixt the French and Savoyards with
the death of more than an hundred of each side. In this disagreement the
Capitulation was also broken; for entering in confusion into the Castle, they
cut in pieces the Garrison. Dediguieres after such successes, in which he
assisted with his help and counsel, returned to his own Government, whilst in
France the Court, to disapprove his partiality to the Savoyards, had suspended
several of his entertainments and profits. Toledo not regarding the slaughter
and losses of Monferrat, and resolving not to repair another damage by an
unseasonable consuming his own Forces, and prejudice his own advantages, stays
to reinforce and rest his Army till the end of May, and then coming into the
field, closely besieges Vercelli. So soon as he moved that way, St. Giorgio had
happily put into it 1000 Musketeers, and 200 Horse; so that the Garrison
consisted of 4000 men, and the Duke, encamped in the Town of Gabiano, had his
aim to take in Pontestura, so to cut off the Spaniards from that important
pass; but finding a defense in better order than was supposed, he forbore to
engage in it, to be in greater readiness to succor the place already battered;
and so much the rather, because having discovered several treacheries, it was
necessary both with his mind and person to be active in several places. In St.
Ja particularly some French Officers had concerted to put fire to the powder,
make the Prince Vittorio, who was there, their Prisoner, and give him up to the
Spaniards, who were to come in upon it to second the design. But they that were
found guilty by a Council of War of the Nation, to whose sentence the Duke
submitted them, suffered punishment by the hand of the Hangman. A certain
Provencal also was put in Prison for having attempted to corrupt another to
poison Carlo. He notwithstanding amidst all these accidents showed great
constancy, and professed to revenge himself for these treacheries upon the
Governor of Milan with Arms beseeming a Prince. Toledo, having enclosed
Vercelli with a large circumvallation, disposes Batteries in four places, to
which the besieged with much boldness oppose theirs; Garzia Gomez General of
the Spaniards Artillery being killed, and Alphonso Davalos so hurt by them,
that he dyed soon after. They attempted afterward with Sallies to drive the
Germans from a Post upon the brink of the Sesia; but all they did was to
demolish there a Fort, which was quickly repaired again. A great circuit of
Outworks was the defense of the place, and some Trenches also kept the
attacque far off, as much as was possible. But the besiegers directed
particularly their offense toward the Bastion of St. Andrea, and under which
the defendants, in the doubt they had to lose it, had made a Mine, that it
might rather serve the Enemy for a sepulcher, than a place to lodge upon. It
having not been possible to bring all things in abundance into the place after
sixteen days siege only, Ammunition was wanting, insomuch that they were forced
to charge their Cannon and Muskets with Tin and stones in the place of Iron and
Lead. Carlo to supply it in the best manner he could, at least with powder,
sends the Signor Fleuri with 200 Horse, and as many Sacks. But being met by a
Party of the Spaniards, the powder which they carried behind them taking fire
from the discharge of Harquebuses, thirty only got in, and the rest for the
most part, being a miserable spectable, were burnt. And now forty great Pieces
battered the Walls with great violence, but two Half-moons were bravely
defended, they within cutting to pieces in one Sally three hundred Germans, and
a hundred and fifty Horse. That which covered the Bastion of St. Andrea was
possessed by the besiegers, and regained by the besieged. At last upon
springing a Mine, the Spaniards made an effort to carry the place by a general
assault. As they had equal motives, so the valor was not unequal, both in them
that gave it, and them that received it; for if the one were driven on with the
rewards of glory and the pillage, the other were exhorted by the safety of
themselves, their Country, and their families. Fire and Sword with the shedding
of blood had pertinaciously their effect for a long time; but the Spaniards
were forced to retire, and in that instant 100 Cuirassiers sallying into the
ditch with their Swords in their hands made a great slaughter. Fifteen hundred
men, and amongst them some of note, perished on the Spanish side; of the
besieged the dead exceeded not a hundred. The Duke was in Livorno with 12000
Foot, and 1500 Horse; to whom joined 3000 Bearnese, and he expected a Renfort
from France; for by the death of d'Ancre the enchantment upon the Government
being discharged, the Maxims and Councils were also changed.

It has been already hinted, what power that Stranger had in the Kingdom. The
Armies depended upon his will, he issued forth the money, and disposed of all
Charges; so that he had the chief Ministers depending upon him, and the Queen
her self had placed the stress of her Authority in the maintaining of him. He
notwithstanding pretended to subsist of himself, holding places and governments
upon the Frontiers, and a Militia of Strangers, which acknowledged nothing but
his name and authority. But the people in general hated him, the great ones
abhorred him, and those that were friends to the Crown detested his maxims.
Howsoever having the Councils of Spain interessed in his safety, he thought in
the favor of that Monarchy to enjoy a strong support. Some there were that
doubted not but that his thoughts were to make himself be feared, and that he
might, when he believed himself no longer secure in France, sell to the
Spaniards himself, the places and the Kingdom, at a high rate.

That at least was instilled into King Lewis, who in the flourishing age of
eighteen years was amused by his Mother and the Favorite in childish toys, far
from the knowledge of any business whatsoever. He therefore, melancholy by
nature and loving solitude, looked with delight upon that Authority which he
had not yet enjoyed, and feeding himself with suspicions, nourished a bitter
hatred against d'Ancre. Diverse persons of great birth, of his own age, and that
had been bred up with him, began to find it strange to serve a Prince, and that
grace and favor should depend upon the Minister. They ceased not therefore
either with secret signs, imperfect sayings, or covered discourses, such
notwithstanding as Lewis understood, to go on censuring the present Government,
the condition of the King himself under the direction and tutelage of another.

Amongst all, Monsieur de Luines got the ascendant, a Gentleman of Avignon, of
no great birth, expressly put about the King, that he might take up his time in
hunting and hawking and other lesser pleasures. But he with these insnares him
in such sort, that he quickly made the whole Kingdom his Quarry. Corrupting
some of d'Ancres Domestics, he brings them to represent to the King his
actions, designs, and the means to preserve himself in his greatness, with so
much horror and detestation of Lewis, as yet without experience, that not
thinking himself secure, either as to his life or Kingdom, he resolves without
delay to rid himself of so formidable a Minister. His death was betwixt a few
resolved on; the King is persuaded to it out of a desire to exercise his
Office, and make trial of his Authority. Luines hopes to inherit the favor and
the spoil; and Monsieur de Vitri, a Captain of the Guards, who undertook to
kill him, thought to oblige the young Prince to him by the first fruits of his
command. The Mareshal then uncertain of his destiny, proudly entering into the
Royal Palace of the Louvre the four and twentieth day of April, sees the door
clapped to behind him, and in the same instant Vitri making a show to arrest him,
d'Ancre falls dead with the shots of three Pistols. The business was no sooner
divulged, but the Queen Mother, doubtful what should become of her self, breaks
forth into a flood of complaints. Those that had been of the Confidence,
fearing the same chastisement, dispersed in disorder. But the people, who are
moved with every blast, running amongst them upon a report that the King was
betrayed and wounded, took Arms; but assured of the contrary by the chief
Ministers, who rode through the streets quieting the tumult, turned their fear
into gladness, and detesting the life and name of the dead, let the World see,
That the luster of favor is glorious, but a thing so tender and weakly, that
going out with every puff it stinks at last, and is infectious. The Corpse
ignobly buried was taken up again, and mangled into little pieces was burnt,
the ashes carried through the streets to sell, and bought by many at a great
rate, to vent the public hatred and private revenge. The King greatly
rejoicing, that the judgment of the people did justify the violence of the
fact, sends away the Confidents of the dead, amongst whom was the Bishop of
Lusson, who retired to Avignon. The Marquess his Wife was publicly beheaded,
and the Queen Mother confined to Blois. And now those great ones, who, upon
Conde's imprisonment, had been kept from Court, returned. The Prince
nevertheless was not set at liberty, because the King, contented by his own
occasion to know his Authority, left the height of favor to Luines, and he
with wonted craft considering how to establish himself in that condition,
resolved, with the price of the liberty of two such Prisoners, to play the
Merchant with both for his own conveniences.

France with this sudden change might be said to be restored to it self, and
gained to Italy, because the King stood in much jealousy of the Spaniards, by
reason of their confidences which he had discovered with the Queen Mother and
with d'Ancre. The reconciled Princes were addicted enough to Savoy, and the
progress of the War in the Milanese gave that Crown justly to understand, how
much of its honor and interest, till now neglected, was treated there. And
therefore understanding the danger Vercelli was in, Lewis expressed himself to
the Ambassador of Spain, That if some sudden composure were not found out, he
should be constrained to make good his obligation, and maintain Carlo in the
Treaty of Asti. In this interim he gives the Duke leave to raise what French he
desired, and sends to the Borders of Savoy 6000 Foot and 2000 Horse to go
forward into Italy where there should be need. The Archbishop of Lions going in
great diligence to Rome, communicates to the Pope the intentions of the King in
favor of the Duke; and seeing a young Prince that inclined to War, and gave
from his Race future presages of his Government; every one believed a flood of
Armies in Italy was to follow, and an open Rupture betwixt the Crowns. And
therefore the Pope did not only double his endeavors for Peace, but an Union
was spoken of by some of those Princes (and particularly the Grand Duke) who
knew they had offended France by having superciliously adhered to the other
Party. The Spaniards apprehending at first Lewis's threatenings, and, to pacify
him, readily showing a desire to Peace, afterward being assured that that
Kingdom would not remain so quiet, but was within a while to expect a new
Crisis, which promoting with Arts, Friends and Money, and with the help of some
of the chief Ministers, who dis-inclined from having any thing to do with the
affairs of Italy, they proceeded in the siege and in their designs. The truth
was, that the first heat of the French cooling again, the most secret intention
appeared to be as not to let Piedmont be lost, yet so as not to break with
Spain. Thus with appearances, proposals and endeavors to hinder it, Vercelli
was near being lost; for all the Half-moons were now taken. The Neapolitans
with their approaches having cut their passage into the Ditch, had a breach
open in the Bulwark of St. Andrea; and toward the River on the other side the
Walloons had made another. The Garrison from duty and sickness appeared to be
greatly diminished, and for want of powder had at last resolved to take that
out of the Mine under the Bastion forementioned. No experiment to get some in
by stealth had succeeded: The Duke thereupon applying himself to force, draws
near to the Enemies Camp by night, placing longst the Sesia 9000 Foot with 1400
Horse, and 10 small Pieces. Three thousand Foot and 400 Horse were appointed
for the relief, and there stood in the Rear the French under the Marquess
d'Vrfe, Signor di Chiglie, and the Baron di Rairan, and the Italians commanded
by the Sergeant Major of the Marquess of Caluso, and the Signor of Parella.

When the Duke caused the Alarm to be given, the Arrierguard aforesaid divided
into several Parties, and d'Vrfe having passed the Sesia, met by a Body of
Horse, and forced to fight, was defeated with the loss of 600 men: But whilst
the Spaniards hasted to that side, 1000 men entered into Vercelli on the other,
with some powder, though not so much as was proportionable to the want. For all
this, Toledo slackens not his attacque, but re-inforcing with twenty Cannons
more his battery of the Fort St. Andrea, caused another assault to be given so
vigorous, that the effect was to see himself lodged upon the breach. The place
then capitulates, agreeing under honorable conditions to deliver the Town and
Citadel. The Siege lasted two months, during which were discharged 67000 shot
of Artillery. The Enemy lost 6000 Soldiers, and 67 Captains, besides some
persons of Quality. Giovanni Bravo with a strong Garrison enters into it as
Governor. The Marquess of Caluso, who came out of it, notwithstanding the
Fathers favor, was forced for a while to forbear the Dukes angry presence; but
being guilty of nothing but ill fortune, was quickly restored to his former
favor. The Duke with this loss felt himself touched to the quick, and
apprehended consequences yet worse, fearing lest Toledo should besiege Asti;
whereupon to divert that thought, and to show courage in his ill fortune,
finding his Army strong 18000 Foot and 3000 Horse, and not a little heartned
with Dediguieres presence, who, by the Kings consent being newly come again
into Italy, had brought with him some men under the Dukes pay, and some Troops
that carried the Colors, he resolves to enter into the Milanese. Leaving
Annona, la Rocca, and Rocchetta behind him, he invests Felisano, where the
French forcing the Barricadoes, and entering the Trenches, fifteen hundred
Germans together with the Inhabitants were cut to pieces, the Officers made
Prisoners, and nine Colors taken. Going thence to Quattordici, an open place,
where were lodged 300 men, leaving their Arms they were obliged to engage, not
to serve any more against Carlo. Out of Renfracore, which rendered it self, 200
Switzers were permitted to march out with their Arms and Colors, in respect to
the Nation, with whom the Duke was in alliance. Toledo, who in the Siege of
Vercelli had harrassed and diminished his Forces, had now separated them into
several Quarters to refresh; but moved with the Dukes bold attempt, assembles
his Army at Soleri. Nevertheless suffers Annona to be taken in his sight, a
weak place, but garrisoned with 2000 men, who after a short battery of six
Pieces marched out, life and Arms saved. La Rocca d' Arasso also, and la
Rocchetta, with the spoil of 500 Soldiers, yielded.

These successes contributed to the heightning of Carlo's reputation, who
always appeared above all misfortunes; but in effect the advantage was much
less than the noise, because they did not recompense the loss of Vercelli,
whereof not only the Duke, but the Venetians were very sensible. Nevertheless,
to uphold a gravity in the Negotiation equal to the constancy of their minds,
the Senate with the consent of the Duke, after the Invasions of Ossuna, the
taking of the Galleys, and the rendering of Vercelli, recals the powers give
their Ambassador Gritti to treat a Peace in Spain. For the dispatch to Madrid
of necessary powers concerning this Negotiation, the Archduke was carried to
the Court of the Emperor Matthias, and there had pretended, that the
Ambassador of the Republic should not appear in the Churches, or on any other
occasion when he was present. But the Emperor, not willing to pass beyond the
Mediation to a partiality, remained resolute to oppose it.

The Archduke had other greater concerns pressing upon his mind; for all the
Line of Maximilian the Second, though numerous, coming to fail without
posterity, the Fortune of the Empire was to devolve into his House. And for
that cause he was tied to the Spaniards in the bonds of greater confidence, and
they expressly promoted it with certain hopes to cast the Empire according to
their arbitrament, when it should fall upon Ferdinand. The Archdukes Albert and
Maximilian, Brothers to the Emperor, wanting issue, easily yielded their
pretensions and hopes; but it was a hard matter to bring Matthias to it, who
heard not willingly the discourse of celebrating in his life time the Funerals
of his Authority and Government. He nevertheless insinuates to him the cession
of the Title only of King of Bohemia, for prevention of those accidents, which
to Religion and the Family, in case of his death, might in the Interregnum be
feared; because it being not certain, whether it be Elective or Hereditary, the
minds of the people sufficiently prepared for it, might be moved; and if it
should fall into other hands, or to a Protestant Prince, the Election it self
of the Emperor would run a great hazard, in the parity of six other Electors
equally divided into Catholics and Heretics themselves. Upon such effectual
motives, the Emperor at last lets himself be persuaded; but the Spaniards,
although with all earnest they inclined to the advancement of Ferdinand, yet
would not quit their advantages in view; and therefore the consent of King
Philip, the Son of Anna Daughter of Maximilian the Second, seeming necessary,
they required a vast compensation for it. Upon this score it was divulged, that
the Towns of Istria should be yielded to them, with the County of Goritia, and
with all that more which the Archduke possessed in Italy; but that tended only
to give jealousy to the Venetians, although in truth all the Country was moved
at the report, doubting to be bound up, both by Sea and by Land, with such
Fetters as were not to be shaken off.

An agreement was afterward privately stipulated betwixt the Archduke and the
Count d'Ognate, which contained Philips cession of his Rights to the hereditary
Provinces in Germany, in favor of Ferdinand, and his Brothers, and of their
descendants masculine; but that failing, they to return to the House of Spain,
of which the Females were to be preferred before those born in Germany. In
recompense it was promised to give up Alsatia to the Spaniards, and to maintain
them in the possession: they bound themselves to grant reciprocal Levies, and
that the one should not confer benefits or favors on the Vassals of the other
but by the approbation of his own Prince or his Ministers. That part
nevertheless which concerned Alsatia was never executed, for fear of making too
great a commotion amongst the Princes of the Empire, and indeed of all Europe.
The design notwithstanding of uniting the two Houses, and extending their
limits, coming to be known, such was the jealousy of many Princes, that that
Treaty may justly be called the foundation-stone of the calamities of Germany,
and the Original of the great accidents that ensued.

But for the Treaty with the Republic, the Count d'Ognate having protested to
Ferdinand, that the management thereof would not be suffered to pass through
other hands than those of Philip himself, the Count Francisco Chefniller was
dispatched into Spain as Ambassador Extraordinary from Matthias, and the
Archduke (who shall henceforth be called King of Bohemia) and he carried the
resolute intentions of Matthias and Gleselio, his chief Minister, that by all
means a Peace was to be made. But at Madrid blocks in the way were not wanting;
for the Spanish Ministers pretended, that the Venetians should first restore
what they had taken, and then Ferdinand should fulfill the agreement, but
without burning the Barks, or banishing but some few of the Vscocchi; and for
the affairs of Piedmont, they insisted upon the Dukes disarming: after which
things they offered a restitution of all, yet without any prescription of time,
or obligation on their side to lay down Arms. But Gritti foreseeing that they
jointly aimed at the predominancy in Italy, and to weary out the Princes in
jealousies, sustained, that for common quiet and security the disarming of the
Milanese ought also to be concerted, and as to the interests of the Vscocchi,
insists, that those three sorts should be banished, which the Republic had
already declared; and for the rest, that the agreement in Vienna should be
precisely executed. For some kind of temperament it was proposed by Lerma, that
the Venetians should first render the places in Istria; Ferdinand then, to
perform the promises on his side, and after that the Republic should withdraw
their Arms out of Friuli, the word of his King remaining security for the due
execution of the Treaty. But in this present state of affairs the news
arriving, that the Hollanders were safely landed in Italy, Lerma in anger
protests to Gritti, that if the Treaty were not concluded within one day, he
would hold it for broken. The Ambassador complaining, that the means of
necessary defense should be converted into the pretexts of a most unjust War,
showed himself very indifferent, whether the Negotiation were continued or
broken. Chefniller gave out, that the Negotiation coming to dissolve in Spain,
the Emperor should reassume it elsewhere, and the Ambassadors of France and
England seeming to wonder, that Lerma should proceed with such passion, the
Secretary Arostighi comes to Gritti to excuse the Dukes heat, and to signify
to him in the Name of the King, that he held not the Treaty otherwise broken,
than that he reserved wholly to himself the power to approve the Articles
treated on, when he should know they were accepted by the Senate. The
Ambassador thereupon equally disapproves the things proposed and the form.
Lerma then at last calls together the Nuntio, the Ambassador of France, and
him of Venice, offering to the two first, that as to Savoy, the Capitulation of
Asti should not be altered, and as to the Venetians, they restoring the half of
the places possessed, and afterward the rest at twice, Ferdinand should also
go on alternatively in the execution of that which some years past had already
been agreed upon at Vienna.

Gritti, not at all satisfied with this, requires, that Ferdinand should first
settle in Segna the Garrison agreed upon, that then the Republic should quit
one place in Istria, and that, all the rest afterward being executed, Arms
should be every where withdrawn. Hereupon Lerma not dissenting, certain
Articles were drawn; but in the affair of Carlo the Ambassador sustaining,
that by reason of new accidents it was necessary there should be some
explication and addition to the Treaty of Asti, the whole business thereupon
was at a stand. Things standing in this posture at Madrid, Gritti receives the
revocation of his powers; for the Venetians and the Duke being exasperated to
extremity against the Spanish Ministers, thought it better to have the Treaty
transported to the Court of France, where the change of Government opened a way
to hopes of a better minding of the affairs of Italy. Gritti then had no other
Commission but to ratify and see that worded which should be concluded at
Paris by the Ambassadors Bon and Gussoni; and King Lewis was assured, that
Carlo being satisfied in the point of disarming, the Senate dissented not from
the substance of that which had been in Proposition at Madrid about the
Vscocchi; adding only in consideration of late emergencies the restitution of
Ships and the Merchandise stayed and made prize of by Ossuna: and the rather
because the reprisals could not be called just, whilst Spain declared not to be
in enmity or rupture with the Republic. Gradisca in the mean time being
brought to the last gasp, the Austrian Commanders employed all their power to
make it subsist. Several reliefs having not succeeded to get in by stealth,
they resolved passing on this side the Lisonzo with 600 Horse and 400
experienced Foot to attempt the Line to make way for the succors; but being
repulsed by the Guards of Horse upon them, the action proved very bloody. Of
the Venetians were killed Marc Anthonio Manzano, Pietro Avogadro, and Leonoro
Gualdo, persons of Noble birth, and all their Captains of Horse. The loss in
other respects appeared not unequal. The night following, the Austrians having
a mind to make another attempt, the breaking of some of the floats, upon which
they were to pass over, suspended the effect. But on the other side, a while
after they assaulted those Batteries which incommoded Rubia, and driving out of
the Redoubt, which was most advanced, four Companies of Switzers surprised in
their negligence, and killing some Cannoniers, who would have made resistance,
they entered into the Quarter even to the lodging of del Lando, where they were
opposed by some Corsi, till Don Giovanni coming with some succors forced them
to retire. The Battery was presently recovered, and some Cannon being unnailed,
and turned upon the Enemy, made a great slaughter amongst them. Marradas and
D'Ampierre still applying their minds to new attempts, laying a Bridge over the
Plain of Mainizza passed the River, and convoying some provisions with a great
body of men, finding the Line ill guarded, and having had the encounter only of
a few Horse, brings them happily into Gradisca. Nassau was commanded by the
Bridge of Fara with 600 Musketeers to charge them in the flank; but doing it
out of time, and the Germans under the favor of the Town fording the Lisonzo,
by the Hills of the Carso got safe into their Quarter. Marradas encouraged by
this, with 800 Horse and 500 Musketeers assaults some Quarters upon the same
Hills, forcing certain Trenches, and although at that time repulsed, yet upon a
second attempt he was able to bring powder and meat by the way of Dobredo into
the Fort Stella, from whence it was afterward carried into Gradisca.

The Camp of the Venetians was found weakened by its suffering, and the
Hollanders in particular, not accustomed to the Climate, were afflicted with
several diseases, of which Nassau himself dies in Monfalcone, and Lando falls
desperately sick. It was therefore resolved to reduce the Quarters into a
lesser compass, and to abandon St. Michaele, whence Marradas arguing a greater
weakness, took heart to assault them, but was vigorously repulsed with the
death of 300 of his own. Discovering afterward preparations to hazard anew
succors, the Venetians resolved to encounter it near to St. Martino with 300
Foot under Oration Baglione. The Enemy being discovered to be more than had been
supposed, which through by-ways conveyed a certain quantity of meal; the Prince
of Este, returned to the Camp in the place of Medici who was indisposed, gave
Baglione advertisement, that without engagement he should preserve himself till
He might arrive with a Renfort proportionable. But the Enemies eagerness gave
not time for the advertisement; whereupon the fight beginning, the Venetians,
who to cross upon several passages were obliged to an order too distant from
one another, were defeated. A Company of German Cuirassiers lighting on foot,
with their Swords in their hands, did the greatest execution, few saved
themselves; 80 were made Prisoners, the rest with Baglione himself, Verginio
Orsino, Lamentana, and Giamaco Alberti a French Captain, were left dead upon
the place. The Senate, to recompense with immortal memory to posterity a life
lost in the flower of his age, erected in the Church of St. John and Paul a
goodly Monument for Oration, who with equal testimony of his fidelity and
courage had in this War made his Name famous above any other. These reliefs to
Gradisca, though frequent, yet scanty, sufficed not to secure it from being
taken at last; the Germans therefore putting themselves upon new attempts by
artificial Fireworks, took upon them to burn the Bridge at Fara; but the
Engine being in disorder, it came to nothing. The Venetians on the other side,
to cut off communication with the Fort Stella, by means whereof succors entered
into Gradisca and some unprofitable mouths were got out, made a quarter at
Drausina, straightning the besieged in such sort, that the Fort wanted water,
and the Town was brought to extremity. The Inhabitants had sent to Ferdinand
the Baron of Each, to inform him, that now at last their fidelity was invaded by
the utmost necessity; and to Milan, the Bishop of Trieste, to solicit Toledo
to some vigorous diversion. He in the hottest of his actings in Piedmont had
always kept a good number of men on the Borders of the Venetians, and they
having kept them well provided, left no place but for reciprocal Jealousies and
good heed, till Vercelli coming to be taken, and the Spaniards increasing the
number of their Militia, suspicions were also increased on this other side; for
Ladders being making at Lodi, and other Preparatives given order for, it seemed
that the Governor of Milan had his eye upon some surprisal and attacques, and
particularly of Crema.

But in this very Juncture a Courrier from Spain brings the approbation of the
Capitulation of Peace as it had been first concluded at Paris, where the King
and his Ministers, desirous above measure that the affairs of Italy should be
composed without being obliged to employ their Arms in that War, had persuaded
Carlo to consent to disarm under the word and faith of that Crown, and the Duke
had not made difficulty to approve it, because despairing to recover Vercelli
by force, he desired by all means to have it by some Treaty. Then concerning
the affairs of the Venetians, the Duke de Monteleone Ambassador of Spain, not
having the powers necessary, had given assurance under his handwriting, that
at Madrid they should not recede a tittle from what had formerly been concerted
betwixt Lerma and Gritti.

The Ambassadors of the Venetians hereupon making no difficulty, persisted
only in the pretense that the restitution of the Merchandise and Ships might be
comprehended in the agreement. But resolutions and power concerning that point
being not yet come from Spain, the French Ministers glad to have happily gotten
the pre-eminence, which the Spaniards had endeavored with so much noise to
arrogate to themselves alone, for prevention of any evil accident, obliged the
foresaid Ambassadors to be contented, that King Lewis should promise in
writing to interpose with his Father-in-law his most effectual offices for the
restitution. The Venetians, to say truth, had instructions to the contrary; but
having a jealousy, that, the affairs of Piedmont being composed, in which the
Duke, inamoured with a secret Proposition of Marriage of a Sister of that King
with the Prince Vittorio, as a caution of the Treaty, showed himself contented,
the Republic should be left alone and exposed to an inundation of the
Austrians, after some hesitation gave their consent. Upon the sixth of
September then was a writing underwritten, in which, referring themselves, as
the Vscocchi, to the Articles already adjusted in Spain, there was added over
and above for the observance of them the word of France, and for the
restitution of the things made prize of, Mediations and Offices were promised;
to Carlo were confirmed the Articles of Asti, with the promise of France, that
Vercelli should be restored to him.

It did not, to say truth, appear, that the Capitulation did unite in the
expressions of it, as was desired, the interests of the Republic with those of
the Duke; but by Gritti, to whom the Ambassadors in France, as they had it in
commission, referred the extension of the whole Treaty, it was fully supplied.
So that in Madrid the 26. the September the agreement was signed, in which the
reciprocal consideration of the quiet of Christendom and of Italy being
premised, it was through the mediation of the Pope and France agreed, that
Ferdinand placing a Garrison of Germans in Segna, the Republic should render
one place in Istria at the choice of the Emperor and of Ferdinand; after that,
by the meeting of two Commissioners on each side it should within twenty days
be declared, that the Vscocchi, which were to be far removed from Segna and the
maritime places, were to be accounted Adventurers and Banditi, which employ
themselves in Piracies; except those that dwelt quietly in their houses, or
which had only been guilty of some Hostility in this present War. The Barks
employed in this Piracy were to be burnt. All this being performed, the
Venetians promised to withdraw their Garrisons from all places taken.
Nevertheless, from the beginning of the excution of the Treaty two months were
to be allowed, Fortifications and Hostility by Land and by Sea were presently
to cease on both sides, all things being to be executed within the said time,
and then Commerce to begin, which also was to take place, though the execution
should require more than two months. The Treaty of Vienna was word for word
inserted, and the point of free Navigation referred to another time; Prisoners
according to custom were released, and were comprehended under a general
oblivion those Subjects which had served on the other side. The Catholic King
for performance received the word of the Venetians, and he gave it reciprocally
that Ferdinand should not restore the Vscocchi, nor any one damage be felt from
them, suspending equally his Arms, and Hostility every where ceasing. Then, as
to what concerns Savoy, Gritti capitulates with Lerma, that the Treaty of Asti
should be executed, places and Prisoners restored, all offenses betwixt Carlo
and the Duke of Mantua laid aside; all which was to be ratified within forty
days, if in that interim no other accord were made in Italy with Toledo, which
in that case was to take place.

Concerning the restitution of things pretended by the Venetians by the
depredations of Ossuna, the Duke of Lerma consents not that they should be
mentioned in the Treaty, but orders la Queva, that in the Name of the King he
should give his word for it to the Senate. In this Treaty, which is called the
Treaty of Madrid, the will of Matthias that the affairs of the Vscocchi should
be composed had great influence; and also the desire of Lerma that the French
should not be engaged further in the affairs of Italy; as to other things
aiming rather to make an end of the War, than to confirm the Peace. When the
first advise from Paris arrived at Venice, the news was generally received with
great joy, and by the Senate so considered, that having obtained the expulsion
of the Vscocchi, and the observance always pretended of the agreement in
Vienna, their Rights were not only with great grace maintained, but their
intentions justified; and although they had not made by the War any particular
progresses of advantage, nevertheless the Commonwealth with great constancy
had without all accidents, never receded from the point, reduced Gradisca to
extremity, taken many places, lost nothing of their own, and at the same time,
resisting the jealousies of Toledo, defended the Sea from Ossuna, together with
the dignity of Carlo preserved the glory and common liberty of Italy, and
disputing Authority with the Spaniard, called in France to take part in the
Treaty and in the Warranty of the Conditions. Some nevertheless, more tenacious
in the customs of the Country, did not in the formality of the Treaty
acknowledge the wonted punctuality and obedience of the Ministers, because the
Ambassadors had transgressed their Commissions; neither did it appear, that
Manteleone had a sufficient authority; but that it was believed, that they were
still to depend upon the abstruse sense and mysterious counsels of Spain,
whilst possibly in Italy the Forces and the Courage slackning, and what
concerns Piedmont being executed, the Commonwealth would remain loosned from
the union with the Duke, and separated from the common interests. Amidst these
opinions the respect to France prevailing, to whom the mediation was
voluntarily offered, it was resolved to approve the Treaty, but at the same
time to recall the Ambassadors to imprisonment to expiate their disobedience.

Simeon Contarini Cavalier, was sent as an Extraordinary into France, to inform
the King of the just motives the Senate had for it; but Lewis being something
troubled that the Ambassadors should be punished for that, which in
contemplation of himself they seemed to have incurred, passed such effectual
Offices in their favor, that at last being once called home, the punishment
was pardoned. All being approved at Madrid, which had been agreed at Paris, the
advice of the conclusion was by an Express dispatched from the Court to the
Governor of Milan, causing him to be held up by the way, whom the Ambassador
Gritti sent to Venice, to the end that the knowledge of it arriving, before
others, to the Ministers of the Crown, they might, in the execution of the
things agreed, the better resolve that, which the conjunction and state of
things should counsel them; and to say truth, Toledo upon it was wavering
amidst various thoughts; for some persuaded him to cease from all action, not
to discompose the Peace, and others stirred him up to go on with his Arms. The
Bishop of Trieste above all showed what a great hazard Gradisca ran,
remonstrating that it could not hold out so long as the time prefixed for the
ratifications of the Treaty; in which case, in the very close of the War, the
Venetians would become triumphant, not without a blot upon the reputation of
the House of Austria, and ignominy upon their Arms. Toledo at last resolves
either to preserve it by a diversion, or to bring the Commonwealth to some
agreement whereby to save the place, or, if it should be taken, to oblige them
to restore it. And this he might put in practice with so much the more freedom
as he was more at liberty on the side of Piedmont, there being a cessation of
Arms, and Dediguieres repassed the Alps, in regard Bethune had the 9. of
October made an agreement in Pavia with Toledo himself, that the Duke some time
that month should restore what he had taken, and disband his Army, himself in
November to render all, and dispose of his Army conformable to the Treaty of
Asti. Going then in person to Lodi, and sending the Prince of Avellino to
Caravaggio, he environs on all sides the Territory of Crema, harrassing the
Country to the great prejudice of the Towns Camisano and Volpino. To resist
them there went out of Crema 300 Horse under Lodovico Vimercati with 200 Foot,
which obliged the Spaniards to leave their Booty; but they came near to Fara
with a greater strength in the Bergamasco, where by a narrow Lane that
Territory joins to that of Crema. Two hundred men having the Guard in that
place, of a weak enclosure, with a low Intrenchment, rendered themselves to go
out with their Swords after five hours fight. Romano, a great Town and of
importance, put it self presently into defense, Girolamo Cornaro Proveditor
General coming thither with Francesco Martinengo, under whom they joined some
Soldiers in pay, and some of the Country. Francesco Erizzo came thither with
title of Proveditor and Commissario. But Toledo, to straighten the
Commonwealth the more, demanded passage of the Duke of Mantua to make a
further inrode on that side, and published it was to bring a Garrison into
Castiglione.

The Venetians complained highly that Toledo executed in such manner the
Capitulations of Asti, which obliged him to free Italy from offenses,
jealousies, and molestations; and that he should no otherwise respect the Peace
of Madrid, which suspended warlike proceedings, and terminated Hostility, but
with doing new mischiefs, and contriving greater vexations. They therefore
endeavored to stir up France with the contempt Toledo showed of their
mediation, and with the obligation which engaged them to maintain to them the
Treaty. The Duke of Savoy after some perplexity, because the desire to recover
Vercelli sufficiently restrained him on the one side, and common faith and his
own interest advertised him on the other of the dangers the Republic was in,
offers to move immediately in person; and recals the Troops, which having
caused for the most part to pass out of Italy, in order to the execution of the
Peace, loitered under the Republics pay in the Country de Vaux in Helvetia, to
attend the issue of things. They stipulated besides at common charge a great
Levy of French, and another with Mansfield to be raised in the Provinces of the
Empire. Nevertheless these great preparations came presently to nothing,
because la Queva at Venice complying with the conclusion of the Peace, and
giving word for the restitution of the Ships, Galleys, and Merchants goods,
insinuates in order to preserve Gradisca a general suspension of Arms; and the
Popes Nuntio, with the Ambassador of France, pressing it also by their offices
and entreaties, the Senate was persuaded to order their General, that for
Friuli, Istria, and Dalmatia he should concert it with the Austrians; whereupon
at a meeting upon the 7. of November of Pietro Barbarigo Procurator, and who
was succeeded to Lando, who lay dangerously sick, and Marradas, they adjusted
every thing, proportioning how much victuals should every day enter into
Gradisca. Toledo now having obtained his design, published on his side the
Peace, and some Troops being licentiously run abroad toward Romano, though
repulsed by the Venetians with the death of twenty five of them, he punishes
the Officers, and leaving Fara withdraws his Army into the Milanese. Ossuna on
the contrary was mad at the name of Peace, and giving out that he would invade
the Gulf anew, invented two pretexts; the one unjust, from the coming over of
the Holland Troops; the other false, that there was a Fort building at St.
Croce. It was true, that Veniero was in that Port with twenty three small
Galleys, five great ones, nineteen Ships, and some armed Barks, with other
lesser Vessels, but without other design than to hinder the Spanish Fleets
entry, if they should attempt it, and divert the thoughts of Ossuna, who
divulged that he would fortify thereabouts some of the Rocks belonging to
those of Ragusa. The Soldiers, in truth, had done some hurt, not without the
consent of the Chiefs, to chastise the boasting of that people, and the
assistance given to the Spanish Ships. But those of Ragusa, by reason of the
smallness of their Country, thinking themselves lost, when they were scarce
touched, made grievous complaints against the Venetians to the Turks.

The Pope and the French interposed with Ossuna, and it was published, that
Philip himself by Letters under his own hand had seriously commanded him to be
quiet, and to restore to the Republic the Ships and Goods. But he feigning in
greater scorn obedience, and to be willing to deliver to Gasparo Spinelli their
Resident the Ships, speaking nothing of the Goods, but dissipating them
publicly, that Minister would not receive them to the prejudice of the rest.
The Duke not stopping his turbulent thoughts here, sends anew Francesco Rivera
with nineteen Men of War into the Adriatic.

The Venetians discovering him toward St. Croce, ranging their Fleet in order,
came near to them cannoning one another. But night now coming on, the Spanish
Ships set their course toward the Coast of Naples, and Veniero follows them so
close, so that in the morning some of the Ships were very near to those of
Spain. He with the incitements of honor animates all to the fight, and
labored to put the Fleet in order, something confused by the sailing in the
night; but besides shooting from far with the Cannon nothing was done, because
the Venetian Ships got into order with difficulty, and some of them not without
blemish abandoning that Post which the General had assigned them, they came not
to grapple; but a great storm following thereupon, they were forced to leave
the Enemy to contend against the Sea, the lighter Galleys ran toward Dalmatia,
and amongst the Rocks of Meleda there perished five. The great ones with the
Ships, the General himself being gone into the Gallion, Balbi followed the
Spaniards as far as Manfredonia; but by the same occasion of the wind, which
drove them upon the land, they were obliged to return to St. Croce. And Rivera
stays some time in Brindisi with his Ships ill enough handled.

But if there were a storm at Sea, the waves went not less high at Land about
the execution of the Peace of Piedmont; for that Bethune making a journey to
Mantua to induce that Prince to the pardon and restitution of Goods to St.
Giorgio, and the others comprehended in the Treaty, found him totally averse to
it. The mystery was quickly discovered; for the Venetians having also
interposed with the project of a Marriage betwixt Leonora and Vittorio, to
which, lest he should ally himself with the Sister of Lewis, it was believed
the Spaniards would not gainsay; yet it appeared that the Governor of Milan
kept Ferdinand to hard meat, strictly imposing upon him not to consent at
present with so much facility to France that which he had constantly heretofore
denied to Spain. Whereupon Bethune parts with this impression, that Toledo did
not like that there should be an entire composure betwixt the two Dukes, to the
end that by their divisions he at his pleasure might have a stone at his foot
to stumble the Peace. And he was therein the more confirmed, when coming to
Milan, the Governor would not rest satisfied in the truth of Carlo's
disarming, pretending, that though his Troops were discharged, yet they were
entertained out of Italy to be at the Dukes disposing.

Bethune extremely troubled a this proceeding, sends him a protest in writing,
charging him to be author of all the evils, which might arrive upon his so much
niceness. But Toledo not considering offices or protests, strengthened himself
continually with new Troops, and therefore it was but fit for Carlo to employ
himself in making greater provisions. St. Ja and Crescentino were put in
defense, and Piscina being dispatched again to Venice, there was proposed an
adjustment of a new consort and defense. With such ambiguity of mind and
thoughts ends the year 1617. memorable for the War, for the suspicions, for the
Treaties which disturbed rather than quieted Italy, and which out of it
scattered also mischievous seeds of new and greater calamities; for no sooner
had Padavino, a Minister for the Republic, appeared among the Grisons, but the
Governor of Milan sends Mora with orders, not only to hinder the League with
the Venetians, but with Propositions to conclude one with the Milanese.
Gheffier the French Minister opposes himself to these dealings of Spain: but
although the Orders of the Court divulged the contrary, he as much opposed that
of the Venetians; from which Casati the Spanish Ambassador, taking
encouragement, proposes in the Pittach a League hereditary for a perpetual
defense with exclusion of passage to every body else, and a prohibition to
Padavino not to proceed in his Negotiation, promising that done (to gain their
consent) the demolishing of the Fort Fuentes.

But so far was this Proposition from being approved, that a Union with the
Republic was rather universally desired, and that to such a degree, that for
fear it should be effected, the Ministers of both Crowns conspired anew to
divert it, by dividing the affections of those people, rendering jealous the
Commons, turning some about, and bringing them all into confusion. It was no
hard matter to compass their end, considering the affections of that wavering
people; whereupon some made an Insurrection in the Agnedina, and joining with
sixty Musketeers of Coira, attempted to drive away Padavino by force. Those of
Tosana whither he retired took him into their protection, breaking a Bridge by
which these armed men pursued him with great violence. But taking counsel from
the most experienced, they let that sudden motion, as they had seen it at other
times, vanish of it self; whereupon he retires into the Valtellina to Morbegno;
where neither being secure, by reason of Orders from those of Coira not to let
him remain there, he was obliged to return into the Bergamas^o. And so the
Soldiers which had been levied, disbanded without much difficulty, and over
and above every Pass was stopped to some Soldiers of the Republic, Grisons,
to give them their due, opposed that; but some of the chief prevailed, and
turning Justice into a Revenue, hoped to make their profit by it. This was the
foundation of that open discord, which did in a manner totally subvert the
liberty of Rhetia, which being equally in confusion and poverty, easily
prostituted it self to be the laughing stock of strangers, and to be changed
according to the private interest of the Inhabitants.

ANNO MDCXVIII.
The year terminating so tempestuous, 1618. in consequence begins with little
appearance of quiet. In Germany, the truth was, that the inclinations of
Matthias without question tended to Peace, whence although the Austrians, to
give all the honor to Spain, desired only that the Treaty of Madrid should be
approved, with the exclusion of that Writing stipulated in Paris; nevertheless
the Venetians dissenting from it both from decency, and the Warranty of the
Treaty, the ratifications were solemnly exchanged in Vienna. Giorgio
Justiniano, Ambassador for the Republic with Matthias, was admitted to
Audience with Ferdinand, to whom in an honorable discharge of his function,
omitting past diffidences, he represented the intentions of the Republic
toward his Royal person and Family, inferring from the present accord and the
mutual readiness to execute it, presaging of a lasting peace and felicity of
their Subjects, who from the affections of their Princes receive the most
benign or the most severe influences.

The Emperor, together with the King, had both a mind to nominate
Commissioners, for executing the accord, Pope Paul and Cosimo the Grand Duke
(but that served chiefly for State, and rather, to have Mediators) Confidents
to both Parties, if any difficulty should come to arise. Whereupon, it being
necessary that the Deputies should meet upon the place, from the Austrians were
sent the Barons, Carlo d'Harach and Giacomo Elding, and from the Republic
Girolamo Justiniano and Anthonio Priuli Cavalier, both Procurators of St.
Marco. The Island of Veglia was chosen for the place of meeting, both for the
convenience of the place, and because the Venetians even in that loved to keep
up a seemliness, bringing them home into their own Country. In the mean time
the Austrians being sensible of an Incursion upon the Frontiers of Croatia,
sent thither a part of the Militia which was in Friuli, abandoning the Post of
Rubia, and the Republic reinforced with some of their Soldiery their Army by
Sea, appointing Barbarigo Captain General over it, in whose place passed, out
of Istria into Friuli, Barbaro in quality of Vice-Proveditor General of the
Armies. Into Segna being brought the Company of Germans of Captain Suech for a
Garrison, Zemino was immediately delivered by Luigi Giorgio Proveditor General
of the Venetian Cavalry to the Commander Rudolfo di Colloredo.

All passed with somewhat greater length than was accorded, and it was caused
by various accidents and the quality of the business, rather than by the will
of the Parties; besides, because it behoved reciprocally to substitute new
Commissioners, Elding of the Austrians being dead, and of the Venetians in
place of Giovanni Bembo Duke deceased ( Nicholo Donato having possessed the
place less than a month) Priuli was assumed into the Principality. He resolved
to depart secretly from Veglia, and being met near to Venice by twelve
Ambassadors, not of the oldest, but of the most illustrious, with great
solemnity assumes the Government of the Republic. There succeeded as
Commissioner Nicholo Contarini, and to Elding Marquardo Baron d'Ech; but being
recalled a while after, the Plenipotence rested in Harach alone. The Commerce
was re-established, and there being 133 names of the Vscocchi agreed upon, they
were banished with their families, and threatenings of most severe punishments,
if they should dare to return. The Barks were burnt, and in them also was burnt
the Name of the Vscocchi, with which the Republic was rid of an unquietness
which had vexed them for many years. The greatest part of them were transported
to Carlistot, and other Frontiers of the Turks further from the Sea; some of
the boldest were received under the protection of Ossuna, and amongst them
Andrea Ferletich conveying away a Bark, made in his passage some pilfering upon
the Island of Arbe, at which the Venetian Commissioners highly moved, protested
to suspend the restitution of the places they possessed, if against the offense
visible severities were not made appear; whereupon Harach desirous to make a
speedy end of the business, because the Insurrections in Bohemia required to
haste the Troops thither, not being able to get Ferletich into his hands,
arrests by way of Hostage the Wives of three of his Followers, and banished
them all with a sentence of death, if they ever returned. With this and the
restitution of the Cannon of the Gally of Veniero, the Venetians delivering in
exchange those carried away from Scrisa, the Austrians having punctually
performed the agreement, the Republic presently delivered the places they
held; though on the one side the stirs of Bohemia, which greatly straightned
the Empire and Ferdinand, suggested a conjuncture to attempt advantages, and
the proceedings of the Ministers of Spain pricked them sharply forward to new
resentments and revenge: For Ossuna was so far from showing any inclinations to
Peace, that rather denying the restitutions promised, and continuing secret
contrivances and public designs, if he covered the one with silence, he
published the other with ostentation, and talked of nothing else; in his
Government keeping no other rule but his own will and Capricio, the conduct he
used was in all things most extravagant. To be subject to Reason and Law he
held an unbecoming servitude, violated the Privilege of the Church, trod under
foot the Nobility, carried himself insolent tnwards all, and oppressing the
Kingdom, insulted without distinction over all the Princes of Italy. Howsoever
his extravagances serving for a kind of excuse and cover, he seemed at the
bottom not only supported by the most secret counsels of Spain, but there was a
talk of prolonging his Government for three years more. The Pope foresaw that
this troublesome Spirit would over-turn again the Peace of Italy; insists
therefore with most effectual offices that he would be quiet, restore the
Prizes, and not disturb the Gulf.

But the Vice-King, all other excuses failing, offered to execute every thing
when the Republic should discharge the Hollanders. He nevertheless at the very
same time was providing himself with Ships in England and Holland; whereupon
the Republic rather than suffer Laws to be imposed upon them, from his
provocations found themselves constrained to provide by all means for their own
defense. The Spanish Ministers failed not to oppose themselves to it, and
therefore in England their Ambassador employed all means and art to persuade
the King to deny them leave to hire Ships, and to divert Commanders from
agreeing with them, and in Holland no endeavors prevailing, they gave out
threatenings, that so powerful a Squadron of their Men of War should meet them
in the Straight, that they must expose themselves to a Battle whosoever would
attempt the passage. All which notwithstanding, Pietro Contarini, Ambassador
for the Republic with King James, obtained his consent for as many as he
pleased, and Christophoro Suriano Resident in Holland provided twelve, fitted
in all points, which, equally slighting the boasting reports and the hazards of
a Battle, set sail for the Adriatic, and their courage not degenerating from
their design, six Gallions of Spain, with ten or twelve lesser Vessels facing
them in the Straight, passed happily, forcing the Ships which offered to oppose
them to retire with some loss to their own Coast.

The Venetian Fleet being augmented with so notable a Renfort, Ossuna from the
design of force turns his mind to negotiate with the Turk, on the one side
stirring up those of Ragusa to make great complaints of the damage they had
suffered, and insinuating on the other by the means of Caesar Gallo a Truce
betwixt Spain and the Port. But the Ottomans hearkened not at all to it,
involved in a War with Persia, and not at quiet in their own Country; for after
three months, Mustapha, as simple and unfit, was by the Muffti, the Caimecan
and the Chislar Aga, that had promoted him, being deposed; and Osman, eldest
Son of Achmet deceased, assumed into the Government in so tender an age, that
if the other had served only for a short Spectacle of Fortune, this as an image
of weakness, was forced to depend upon the Authority of the Ministers.

The complaints therefore of the Ragusians had scarce any access; and by two
several Chiaus, sent from the Port to Venice to communicate the assumption of
two Emperors, and by the extraordinary Embassy of the Republic, committed to
Francesco Contarini Cavalier and Procurator to congratulate with Osman, the
ancient amity remained confirmed. Nevertheless Ossuna boasting, expresses in
public that he would attempt against the Turks, raised Soldiers, joined
Squadrons, and pressed the Princes of Italy to join their Galleys unto his. But
every one understanding his intentions to trouble the Adriatic, denied him;
except the Pope, who sent them but with express prohibition to the Commander
not to enter into the Gulf. At Taranto he stops another Ship with Merchandise
which was going to Venice; and although for that and other things the Spanish
Ministers in Madrid affirmed to have sent express Orders both to abstain and to
render, he nevertheless equally despised the Commands of the King, and the
respect to the Commonwealth. He kept his Ships at Brindisi; published, that he
would invade Dalmatia, caused an armed Ship to make a course to Trieste, and
made the World believe that he designed the pillaging of Lazzaretto of Spalato,
where in an open place the Merchandises, which come of the Turkish Country, are
aired from the suspicion of the plague, and that not so much to satiate himself
with spoils, as to enjoy the benefit of the disorder, in which he hoped to
involve the Venetians, if to the Goods lost upon the Sea, the Subjects of the
Port should join their complaints and losses of such as were ravished out of
the custody, and, it may be said, the very bosom of the Republic. The Senate,
weary of such a vexation, orders its Captain General, that was ready with forty
two Galleys, six Galleonasses, and six and thirty Ships, being superior in
strength, to scour the Sea, free it from armed Ships, and take as many as he
could meet. He presently comes before Brindisi, and for a whole day invites the
Spaniards to come out; but knowing themselves too much over-matched, retired to
the innermost part of the Port, where being covered by the Town, the Citadel,
and a Fort, they could not be forced. He then sets his course longst the shores
of the Kingdom of Naples, and at last Ossuna, some of his more secret design,
as shall be said hereafter, being vanished, recals his Ships from the Gulf,
keeping them in Naples, although he had order to send them toward Spain.

But the Venetians took a great Ship of Ragusa, which laden with Salt, was
going from Barletta to Trieste, and burnt another of the same Nation, which run
her self aground under the Town of St. Catoldo. Out of Fortore they took
another lading Corn for Naples. All this being followed with the interruption
of Trade, and the grievous complaints of the Neapolitans, who represented in
Spain, that from that populous City was taken even their very nourishment, it
induced the Ministers at Madrid to recall the business of the restitutions out
of the hands of Ossuna, and refer it to the Cardinal Borgia, that with Girolamo
Soranzo, Ambassador for the Republic at Rome, it might more easily be made an
end of. But they having not been able to do the least thing but the Duke got
some kind of notice of it, he interrupts the proceeding anew, giving to the
Cardinals Auditor, who was come to Naples for that purpose, such an imperfect
Inventary of the Goods found in the Ships, that the Ambassador would not
receive it. But Santa Croce being arrived with the Galleys, the Viceroy put
into consultation what enterprise they should undertake, and proposed to enter
again into the Adriatic, to deliver, as he said, the Ports of that Kingdom
from a Siege. But Santa Croce dissenting, who inclined rather to some
enterprise in Africa, Ossuna designs to do it himself by sending by Sea to
Trieste a great succor of men to King Ferdinand, who by reason of the
occurrences of Bohemia, had great need of them. This coming to the knowledge of
the Republic, they command Justiniano their Ambassador in Germany, that he
should roundly declare to that King himself, that they would not suffer the
Jurisdiction of the Gulf to be violated, nor let Ships and armed men pass
under the eye of the Capital City; whereupon the King, who had need of the
assistance, yet desired not that the Peace with the Venetians should be
interrupted, represented seriously to Ossuna the sending of it some other way
more safe, though more long. Nevertheless, the Republic with a great Fleet,
resolved to guard themselves even from the same, and thoughts of the Duke, and
observing in the Governor of Milan a mind equally averse to Peace, upon the
arrival of Piscina at Venice, they command Renieri Zeno, who after Anthonio
Donato resided Ambassador at Turin, to stipulate new adjustments with Carlo.

The Venetians had heretofore in former occasions contributed to the Duke more
than two Millions in ready money; now they promised him ninety thousand Ducats
a month, when the Spaniards failing in the things agreed, it should be needful
to take Arms. The Duke on the other side ingages himself to make a diversion
with between fifteen and twenty thousand Foot, and two or three thousand Horse,
if any molestation was offered to the Republic. This being put into writing
with mutual promise not to make Peace or Treaty apart, was not at that time
signed; but being concluded upon the word and faith of the Princes Contracters,
the Publication was deferred as long as any shadow of hopes of Peace remained.
Upon this opportunity the Republic and the Duke pointing out to the other
Princes of that Country the horrid image of slavery which threatened them all,
insinuated the means to free themselves from it by a general Union, a thing
very easy, if toward common safety there was stirring in them a love equal to
that excess of respect they showed to the more powerful. The said Princes were
in truth little contented with the present state of things, expecting from what
part the hope of security and quiet would discover it self; not any
nevertheless had the courage to show themselves, and France it self preferring
Negotiation before a rupture sent to Turin a new Ambassador Monsieur de
Modene, not without the envy of Bethune, that he might persuade the Duke to
disband those Troops kept on foot out of Italy; but he had no power to dispose
of them, because being maintained by the pay of the Republic, it was fit to
have their consent for it. The endeavors then of the Crown were addressed to
the Senate, with a promise, to take away jealousies of powerful assistance, if
the Spaniards should hereafter fail in the least tittle.

This difficulty then removed (for the Venetians consented to it) the French
Ambassadors went to Milan to assure Toledo of the disarming, and he not being
able to show distrust, because they gave it him in writing, privily undermines
the Treaty by secret Propositions to the Duke of great advantages, if he would
separate himself from France and the Venetians, and offered him over and above,
except Casale, which he desired might be left to Spain, the rest of Monferrat,
provided he would not insist to have Vercelli restored. All aimed at delays,
and being not able to gain Savoy, he turns to Mantua, doing his utmost to
persuade that Duke not to be satisfied with the restitution of places, but to
pretend recompense of damages, and deny pardon to the Rebels. And this serving
no less for his purpose, to the end to persuade Carlo not to be too hasty in
rendering, he lets it be divulged that Ferdinand being restored to the
possession of Monferrat, the Gonzaghi would give it to the Spaniards in
exchange for other Possessions. There was indeed such a project talked of, but
never concluded, because it neither pleased the Duke of Mantua to deprive
himself of so noble a Patrimony, nor would Italy have suffered it, having at
last learnt it was better to resist the Spaniards by Arms than by Treaty.

All therefore served for the Governors purpose, who not being able to
overcome Carlo with his flatteries, endeavored to provoke him with disgusts,
and for that end his Secretary Carone being then with the French Ministers, he
caused him to be enjoined immediately to depart. The Duke in effect was angry
at it, and suspending the withdrawing of his Garrisons out of the places
possessed, which was at the instant ready to have been done, he calls presently
to him the French Ambassadors, as if the Treaty had been broken. But they
pacifying him, and dissuading him not to make sport for Toledo, who sought
naught but pretexts and difficulties, upon the 6. of April he restores seventy
four Towns of Monferrat, and retires out of Annone, Massarano, and every other
place feudal, delivering the Prisoners to the French Ministers. Of all which
assurance, contrary to what he could have believed, being given to Toledo, the
report was, that in a rage he brake out, saying, It appears the Peace must at
last be executed, since Heaven and Earth have fatally conspired to have it so.
He then releases his Prisoners, and restores St. Germano; but for Vercelli, it
seemed that the difficulty was a Labyrinth, notwithstanding that from Spain, at
the solicitation of the French Ministers, were arrived Orders and frequent
Courriers to restore it, and that to disapprove his proceedings, his remove
from his Charge before his time was published, the Duke of Feria being designed
to succeed him: But nothing availed; for first alleging, that it was not
agreeable to the honor of the Monarchy to render the place, while the
Ambassadors of France were in Milan, as if it were to extort it with the force
of threatenings and protests, afterward pretending that the Town of Garesio
belonging to St. Giorgio should be restored by Carlo, taking away both the
pretexts by the departure of the one, and the restitution of the other,
Vercelli was notwithstanding not rendered. At last the King of France giving it
out, that if the Spanish Colors did not boudge, he should be constrained to go
in person into Italy, they began slowly to carry away the Ammunition and the
Arms; afterward, to keep footing yet a while, he requires a new promise from
Carlo not to offend the Duke of Mantua. But the Ministers of Ferdinand
declared, they desired no greater security, and against the liking and
expectance of the Governor amply expressed it in writing. Amidst the
amazement, the World was in, to observe the proceedings of Toledo, and the
actions of Ossuna, it quickly appeared that the designs of great men are like
the springs of water, whose source is more hidden than their streams.

All had its rise from the issue that was expected of a treacherous Plot, which
la Queva, with participation of the forementioned, managed in Venice, where
having his Residence, he had served not only as a Director to their Arms, but
an Architect of Treacheries. There was neither deceit nor hostility, which
either in private or public he practiced not, prying into every thing, he
insinuated himself into all; whosoever resisted his corruptions, he laid
execrable impostures to his charge; to him that yielded to them, he proposed
most damnable designs. He fomented among some Soldiers of Holland kept in the
Lazaretti, a certain specious Tumult, raised up against their Officers; he
attempted to debauch many from the Colors and Service of the Republic, and to
bring in others to practice Treasons.

Amongst the chief of these, Ossuna sends a certain Jacques Piere, a French
man, of Normandy, and Pirate by profession, a man of great courage, but bred up
in evil, and capable of all sorts of wickedness. This Fellow feigning to be
unsatisfied with Ossuna, declares he would be revenged of him, passing to the
Service of the Republic, and was without difficulty received there with his
Camarade called Langlad, that had skill in Fireworks; although Simeon
Contarini Ambassador then at Rome, a man of profound wisdom, advertised, that
there might possibly some treachery of the Viceroys be discovered. But Ossuna,
to take away all doubt, showing to be angry, caused the Wife of Piere to be
detained, and with feigned Letters propounding to him great rewards, recals him
to his service. He on the other side, to make himself acceptable at Venice,
shows the Letters themselves, proposes many specious things, feigns to discover
the Viceroys designs, and suggests the means to oppose them. Having by this
means gotten himself into great trust, he was admitted with Langlad into the
Arsenal to exercise his Art. He had afterward secret meetings with la Queva,
and there continually passed secretly Courriers and Spies to Naples. They had
drawn into their wicked intentions Niccolo Rinaldi, Carlo, and Giovanni Boleo,
Lorenzo Nola, Roberto Revellido, Vincenzo Roberti, Captain Tornon, who had then
a Company in service of the Venetians, and some others partly Burguignons, and
the rest French.

The contrivance was, that under an English man, called Haillot, Ossuna should
send certain Brigantines and Barks capable to enter into the Ports and Channels,
of which they had every where taken the soundings; greater Vessels were
afterward to follow, and cast Anchor on the shore of Friuli, under the
countenance of which, and in the confusion, which the first were to make among
the people, the Conspirators had their parts divided; Langlad to give fire to
the Arsenal, others in several parts of the City, some to Pettard the Mint, to
possess the principal Posts, kill the most considerable persons, whose houses
were now marked with private tokens, hoping all to enrich themselves with rich
and unwonted pillage. Some things indeed were not easy to be put in execution;
but wickedness and avarice blinded them, with the imagination, that every
strange fancy was not difficult. At the same time Toledo having corrupted in
Crema Giovanni Berardo, Lieutenant of a French Company, and some of his gang,
held a correspondence with him, receiving Letters and directions to surprise
the place, for which end he had sent Soldiers to Lodi: But God with a Mist
frustrates such wicked designs. Whilst the Brigantines were in a readiness to
join together, expected by the Conspirators with such impatience, that every
day they went up to the top of the highst Steeples to discover them, some were
taken by piratical Pinnaces, others dispersed with a great storm; so that being
not able to get together again within the time appointed, they agreed to defer
the execution till Autumn. Piere and Langlad commanded to go out with the
Fleet, could not avoid going with Barbarigo the Captain General. The rest
remaining in Venice, ceased not to ruminate on the means of execution,
impatiently expecting the time. But discoursing frequently of it amongst
themselves, and to increase the number of their Accomplices, the confidence and
secret coming to the knowledge of some others of their Nations (treachery being
seldom so blind or so deaf that it has not some light, and rumors;) Gabriel
Montecassino and Baldasar juuen Gentlemen, the one of Normandy, and the other
of Dauphine, and nearly allied to Dediguieres, abhorring such wicked counsels,
discovered them to the Counsel of Ten. Being afterward made more evident by
the means of others secretly placed to hear, undiscovered, their conferences
and discourses; some of the Conspirators being imprisoned, the Treason was
confirmed both by Letters found about them, and the confession of the guilty,
who satisfied the penalty both with public and secret punishment. Some
nevertheless, frighted with the arrest of their Companions, saved themselves by
flight, betaking themselves to their Sanctuary, which was no other but Ossuna.
But Piere and Langlad, by an Order sent with diligence to the Captain General,
were drowned in the Sea, and in Crema, Berardo with his other Accomplices ended
their lives ignominously under the Hangman. The City dreadfully frighted at the
discovery of such a Conspiracy, and at the danger they had run to have seen the
Churches and houses burning, and the seat of the liberty and beauty of Italy
inwrapt in a moment with sword, fire, and a miserable destruction; by order of
the Senate prayers and devout thanks were given to God. But la Queva, who was
accounted the Director and Minister of such wicked designs, was in great danger
to have been from the fury of the people sacrificed to the public rage,
resolved to retire secretly to Milan, and the Senate already by an express
Courrier, had resolutely required of the King to remove him. Princes being
accustomed in such occasions to be pleased with the effects rather than the
means, in Madrid the actions of this Minister were disapproved, and to make it
certainly appear, answer was given to the Venetian Ambassador, that Luigi
Bravo was already designed to succeed him, and he to pass into Flanders to be
assistant to the Archduke Albert. Ossuna denies to have had any hand in it; for
when the event of such execrable practices is not such, that for advantage, or
for the ingenuity, is wont to make it commendable, there remains nothing but
the abominable image of ignominy, rejected and detested of the Authors
themselves. The World nevertheless condemned him for guilty, whilst the
Fugitives, it was evident, had their refuge with him; and the Widow of Piere
set at liberty, was sent to Malta with an honorable Convoy. All this falling
out at the time that the Peace was ready to be executed, the Senate was willing
deeply to dissemble it, having respect to the honor of the two Nations
defiled, the one with Treachery, and the other with Venality, by the occasion
of a few wicked Villains, which being execrated of good men, would be rejected
even by Nature her self, if she could as well revenge her self of a wicked man,
as it is necessary to uphold him no less than the good.

Unto this discovery, and the stirs in Bohemia, Italy was believed obliged for
their Peace; for now were the Ships of Ossuna withdrawn from the Adriatic, and
Vercelli was restored to Savoy. A little while after Feria, being arrived at
Milan, set his hand to a reformation, and to disband the Troops, deferred by
Toledo upon pretext, that the Republic was armed, and the Duke of Savoy
fortified with an extraordinary Militia. It only remained that the Duke of
Mantua should pardon his Rebels, and nothing else hindered his assent, but the
delay of the approbation from Madrid; whereupon the Ministers of France, who
desired to reap the glory alone, prefixed him a certain time, not without
protests, within which Ferdinand, with the good liking of Spain, should grant
the pardon. And thus one part of the unhappy Tragedy of Italy was at an end,
there remaining amongst the Princes, as after a great tempest at Sea,
agitations of jealousies and distrust, which quickly returned to new Wars and
discords.

Carlo could not quiet himself from the jealousies he had conceived against the
Spaniards, nor cease from those thoughts, which kept him always intent upon
novelty and his own advancement. On the other side, the Council of France
tended to keep him within bounds, not only to keep alive, through a confidence
with him, the Party in Italy; but also to oblige him in such sort, that he
should not give countenance to the Hugonots, in the thoughts which Luines had
to take out of their hands the places, wherein having been established in the
time of the Minority, rendered that Sect equal to the Royal Authority, if not
superior. The Marriage therefore, upon the going of the Prince Cardinal
Maurice to Paris, was concluded of Christine, Sister to the King, with Vittorio
Amadeo, Prince of Piedmont, nowithstanding that the Spaniards with much money,
scattered amongst their Partisans in the Court, had endeavored to hinder it.
The design nowithstanding against the Hugonots was for a while deferred,
because some disturbance rising in the Kingdom, Luines having not so suddenly
been able to resolve, whether to deliver the Queen Mother from her Confinement,
or Conde from his Prison, was most for his interest. Whereupon the Duke of
Espernon, a man of an inflexible spirit, habituated formerly in favor, an
object rather than a party in the flatteries of Court, receiving discontent,
because in the Council the precedence of the Keeper of the Seal had been
decided against him, and in the nomination to a Cardinals Cap, Gondi the Bishop
of Paris had been preferred before his own Son, retires to his Government of
Metz; where communicating counsels with the Marshall of Bouillon, he enters
into the Party to take away the Queen from Blois, which he secretly effected,
bringing her first to Lochies, and afterward to Angoulesme. The King came to
Tours, and the Kingdom was every where in Arms; when the Bishop of Lusson, whom
Luines secretly gave leave to quit Avignon, having a more than ordinary
ascendant upon the mind of the Queen, concluded an agreement, in which, with
the pardon of Espernon and his Followers, was promised to the Queen her self
the Government of Anjou, with that of Angiers, Chinon, and Pont de Ce. But de
Luines, not wholly relying upon this new-made friendship, takes Conde out of
Prison, and enters into familiarity with him; which causing suspicion in the
other Party, he both pursues new Intelligences and Levies of Arms.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE.
THE calm and quiet of the rest of Europe had till now rendered more
considerable the successes of the Wars in Italy, and the Treaties worthy of
greater observation; but men's minds began also elsewhere to be distracted, for
War creeping like a Cancer, corrupted all the parts of Christendom with
mutations of States, alterations of things, memorable Sieges, great Battles,
Actions famous, though very often unjust, with so much slaughter of People, and
calamity of Countries, that the present time might justly be called the Age of
Iron and Blood. The beginning of such grievous mischiefs brake forth in Bohemia
with the commotion of the Kingdom, which was believed the cause, and no less
warranty of the Peace of Italy. It will not therefore be besides the purpose to
deduce the motives and successes of it, because no otherwise than in the
Conjunction of the greater Planets, upon whom the most notable Effects depend,
the influences of the one alter the dispositions of the other; so in the
affairs and linked interests of Princes, the accidents, whether good or bad, of
the one part, are felt to be weighty in the other. King Ferdinand did now
appear adopted by Fortune to the hope and succession of the Empire, because the
Line of Maximilian the Second, though numerous, having no Heirs, the Masculine
Issue failing, the Dominions devolved to the other Line of Carlo, that was his
Brother; upon which Right Ferdinand having already received the Crown of
Bohemia, that of Hungary was now to be joined to it to make way for him to the
Imperial also, and in his person to unite the Sovereignty and States of the
whole House in Germany. But there wanted not oppositions and difficulties;
jealousies awakening in the stranger Neighbors through the apprehension of so
great a Potency, and doubt creeping into the hearts of the Germans themselves
to fall at length under the yoke of a base slavery, if the Empire should be
perpetuated in the Austrians, and in particular if they should confer it on
Ferdinand, in whom the power of all the hereditary Provinces, coming to be
united, they did believe, they should strengthen for ever after that Chain,
with which for a good while already they had found themselves begirt.

To the Policy of Princes, and to the Zeal of the People Religion equally
served for a pretext and motive; because Ferdinand, brought up in the Catholic
Faith, detested all sorts of error, and therefore by how much, not succeeding
to his Father, he found the Patrimonial Countries encumbered with false
opinions, so much the more with signal piety had he applied himself to promote
the true Worship, with such success, that at last those Provinces rejoiced to
be restored to the bosom of the ancient Religion. But this was not effected
without some sort of severity; so that many, not to leave their errors,
constrained to abandon their Country and sell their Estates, lived elsewhere in
poverty and discontent; and others droven away by force, and their Estates
confiscate, saw them, not without rancour, possessed by new Masters. In the
Empire therefore, in which the Religion no less than the Genius loves liberty,
there appeared great apprehensions, that where Ferdinand should get the power,
he would exercise the same reformation, and impose a yoke so much the more
heavy, by how much standing in need of money, and the Councils of Spain, he
should be governed by the Rules and Maxims of that Nation, so hateful to the
Germans.

Frederick Elector Palatine young in years, but of a high mind, troubled more
than any other with those thoughts, visiting for that purpose the Electors, had
diverted them from the Election of a King of the Romans, remonstrating, that if
the succession of the Austrians were not interrupted now that the right Line
failed, there would be no reason to hope for it when it should fall to
Ferdinand, who being upheld by foreign Force, and having Issue, would for ever
establish the Imperial Throne in himself and his posterity. Nevertheless, not
thinking it an easy matter to gain the Empire for himself, or any of the
Protestant Electors, he offered it to Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, for whom
concurring the Votes of the three Protestants, and a fourth of the Archbishop
of Cologne his Brother, the Election would be secure. But the Ministers of the
Pope and those of Spain opposed that Proposition; and therefore, besides
private interests, stirred up those of that Religion, which, the Empire going
out of the House of Austria could not, wanting so strong a support, but
extremely suffer. Great advantages being offered to Bavaria not to accept the
invitation, the proceeding vanished, which notwithstanding the Election of a
King of the Romans was deferred.

The Empire tossed to and fro amidst these Negotiations, Bohemia falls into
commotion. In that Kingdom, as it is the highest part of Germany, so it has
always been the most eminent Theater of Rebellion and of Heresy, and their
minds almost in all times have been divided into various Sects. That of the
Communion under both Species exceeded any other, having risen to that growth
amidst the past dissentions of the Emperors Rudolphus and Matthias; who, to
gain that sort of people, had to strives enlarged the liberty of Conscience,
and consented to such Privileges, that the Protestants, making use of the
facility of the Concessions, were by degrees, through urgent importunities,
arrived to a parity with the Catholics, saving in the Crown and the Majesty of
the Government. These Indulgences were commonly called Letters of the Royal
Authority, so much the more tenaciously kept by the people, by how much less
pleasing to the Princes, who by an ambitious necessity had granted them. For
this cause, if any doubt arose, they procured a restraint of them by judgments
in favor of the Catholics; and Matthias being no sooner gone to hold a Diet
in Hungary, but there came forth a certain Decree in favor of the Archbishop
of Prague and the Abbot of Bruno, who had opposed the building of two Temples
for the Heretics upon ground belonging to them.

The Bohemians, free from the bridle, which the presence of Princes carries
with it, assembled about this in Prague, and requiring a general Diet of the
Kingdom, to bring their grievances thither, and to promote their advantages,
whilst Matthias, so counseled by his chief Ministers, denied and deferred it;
they parted in a Rout from the College Carolino the 23. of May in the morning,
and coming to the Castle, and going into the quarter of the Chancery, and
asking for the Authors of such a refusal, finding the Counts Martinitz and
Slavata with Philip Fabritius the Secretary, esteemed the most zealous for the
Catholic Religion, they flung them out of the Windows. The miracle of the
success is convinced from the situation, the view whereof gives the lie to the
imprudence of those, who with false inventions have gone about to blemish it;
because to the place, from whence they fell, there joining a Precipice of a
dreadful height before you come to the earth, and being continued with a steep
declining to the foot of the Wall, forming a most craggy Ditch for the Castle;
all three of them falling right down, and certain shots of muskets made after
them, were taken up without hurt; only Slavata lightly scratched by the
resistance he made; nevertheless he was able to save himself in a house
adjoining. Martinitz disguised, went out of the City that very day, and the
Secretary hasted immediately to Vienna to be the first should bring the News.
The Mutineers bethought themselves, that, together with the chief Ministers,
they had precipitated peace, hopes, and pardon. And therefore easily possessing
and fortifying the Castle, the ordinary Residence of the King, they set
themselves to maintain by a proportionable force what they had begun with so
great violence.

The head of this commotion appeared to be Henry Count de la Tour, who to his
private emulation to Martinitz (to whom had been granted the Government of
Carlestein, the place where the Crown of the Kingdom is kept, taken away by
Matthias from la Tour, expressly from the suspicion of his haughty mind)
conjoined the public concerns of his Religion rather than his own interests;
for he, by occasion of the same, having been driven by Ferdinand out of his
Countries, with the loss of his Goods, expected, when he should come to the
Crown of Bohemia, to be used in the same kind. The people therefore being moved
with cries of liberty, a name dear above all others, when it is not, as it often
happens, from ambition and interest abused; and calling together the chief of
them to a particular Conference, he thus spoke: I call you not hither to yield
me your obedience or your oaths, neither do I aspire to the Crown or Scepter of
this unhappy Kingdom; but ready to run equal hazards with you, I invite you to
be Companions in your own liberty. I see, by your silence, amazement united to
the assent; and not without reason, because this unexpected light, which Heaven
here opens amidst the calamities, to which we are accustomed, comforts together
and dazles. Let us now begin to enjoy life and liberty, the Soul it self. Where
are the most worthy Privileges of the Kingdom of Bohemia? Where is the
reverent Authority of this unconquered People? Where is the exercise of
Religion so many times sworn to God? forbid that Conscience, that rare gift
from Heaven, should depend upon the will and promises of Princes! This usurped
Crown passes from head to head, as the Revenue and Inheritance of one House;
and to establish an everlasting Tyranny, being ravished before its time from
Successors, in spite of death, is never suffered to be vacant. Is not Dominion
without peradventure the peoples Patrimony, and the Dowry of the Common wealth;
and yet the Austrians without our consent have arrogated it to themselves? What
have we not hitherto suffered? The use of life comes now to be denied us, and
the usufruit of the soul contested; but all our past miseries will not be able
to call to your remembrance but some imperfect representative of the Calamities
to come. In sum, Rudolphus lived amongst us; Matthias has reaped us as the
first fruit of his ambitious desires; but what may we expect from Ferdinand,
unknown to us, and in himself rigorous, directed by the Counsels of Spain, and
governed by that sort of Religious Priests and people, who detest with an equal
aversion our Liberty and our Belief? He has been born and bred up in the
abhorrency of us Protestants, and why should we be forward to make trial of it,
if the persons banished, the Families displanted, the Goods violently taken
away, demonstrate too cruelly to us, that he would abolish our very being, if
he could as easily command Nature as he uses force? Woe to you, Bohemians, to
your Children, to your Estates, to your Consciences, if you suffer Ferdinand to
keep his footing in the Throne. And when will you attempt to shake off the
yoke, if you have not courage to do it at a time, when without power, without
guard, the Kingdom is in your own power, and that you have two Kings to oppose
you, one whereof is fallen, and the other totters? Assuredly you shall not be
alone, but as many Companions as you have in your Religion, so many friends
shall you have in Arms. All Europe will be moved, and you shall see in your
favor in some rise up the provocations of piety, and in others undistinguished
considerations of Religion and State. Such commotions are like the great
Rivers, which rising from very small Springs increased by many, as they run,
carry into the Sea the name of one, and the waters of many. Look upon those
happy people of Holland, who with more zeal than fear undertaking their
deliverance from Captivity, enjoy at present the famous station of Liberty and
Greatness. I dare assure you, that in all Ages the Generosity of the Bohemians
shall be memorable, that having flung tyrannical Government out of the windows,
has caused the glory to spring out, which from this Kingdom will easily
diffuse it self to the Empire; and though some appearance of violence has been
in it, necessity and piety will excuse the fact. There is no more place for
repentance or pardon, counsel or discourse avails no more, but only concord and
constancy. The Lot is drawn, Liberty or the Hangman; if Conquerours, we shall
be just, free, and Princes; if overcome, perfidious, perjured, and Rebels.

A little served to stir men's minds, incensed of themselves to thoughts of
Novelty; for if that flourishing Kingdom in its soil rise as it were into War
with fertile and almost continued Hills, the people are no less accustomed to
float amidst perpetual provocations of Religion and Liberty. It was then
decreed to shake off the yoke by the consent of all; and if there were any,
that in their minds were against it, yet knowing they were not able to resist
that universal violence, not to make themselves suspect, they made a show to
adhere to it with greater vehemence. To carry on the Government, a Magistracy
of Thirty with title of Directors was chosen. But what had happened at Prague,
was no sooner divulged through the Kingdom, but all was in revolt, drawing also
the importance of Lusatia and Silesia, Provinces annexed. The advice being
brought at the Emperors Court, there was a great division of opinions and
counsels.

Matthias by plausible means, letters, and persuasions, together with something
besides of concession, desired to reduce the Bohemians to their obedience, and
Gleselius strengthened him in that thought, out of the consideration, that
coming to Arms, the War was to be directed by Ferdinand, in which, if the
authority of the one might be rendered suspicious to the Emperor, the practices
of the other would be no less troublesome; against which, from the time when in
his younger years he was carried to the Government of the rebel Provinces of
Flanders, he had retained a certain aversion in his mind. Nor was the Cardinal
in his judgment a jot deceived; for Ferdinand, that inclined more, than to
pleasures, to the management of Arms, abetted by the counsels and favors of
the Archduke Maximilian, and of the Ambassador of Spain, no sooner saw the
Emperor levy some few Soldiers for necessity, but he asked the Command of
them. Matthias, troubled to deny him, resolves to grant it, but with such
restriction, that forming a Council of War of his Confidents, of which
notwithstanding the King should be chief, and limiting the Authority, he left
him no more than the shadow. All this was attributed to Gleselius, to whom was
imputed, besides venality in affairs, little propension to the concord of the
family and greatness of the Austrians, a connivence and superabundant facility
toward the Heretics; accusations which proceeded principally from the hatred
conceived against him by the Ministers of Spain; because to his utmost keeping
the King and Archduke, from the knowledge of the foreign affairs, he excluded
them also from those of the Empire; and in the affairs of Italy his inclination
to Peace had carried him to oppose their designs. Amongst the means studiously
thought on to take him out of the way, that appeared too sacrilegious to stain
the Purple of a Cardinal with blood, and in the City of Vienna to kill, as it
were upon the Altar, Bishop thereof.

It was then resolved to arrest him Prisoner, not regarding the affection and
authority of Matthias, which were his only refuge, not without hope and design
after the thing done, either to pacify the Emperor by flatteries, or curb him
with apprehensions. So being one day called to a Council in the Archdukes
Quarter, where the King was with Ognate, he was seized as he came in by
D'Ampiere and Prainer, and put into a close Coach with a hundred Horse for a
Guard, hurried apace toward Inspruch. Although the Princes themselves went to
communicate it to Matthias with many pretexts of Religion, of connivence,
advantage to the house, and of his own service, it is not to be said, how much
he was moved at it; because touched in the apple of the eye of his authority
and affection, it drove him to the extremity of passion; nor could he withhold
himself, both when awake, and in his dreams from crying out with a loud voice,
that Gleselius should be brought back to him again. There was an opinion, that
he had some thoughts to cast himself into the arms of the mutined Bohemians for
revenge. But the Cardinal Dietrichstein, a person of very great credit, did in
some manner pacify him, bringing into his Chamber the King and the Archduke to
ask pardon for the transport, with protestations not to intrude themselves into
his Authority or Government.

The Emperor required that promise in writing; but it was agreed, that he
should be contented with the word only; and the little while he lived, he
passed in continual apprehensions and melancholy, not without calling to mind
Divine Judgments, which to him from his Cousin retributed the spoil of that
Authority, which he but a few years before had with great violence extorted
from his Brother Rudolphus. And it in truth seems that the imprisonment of
Gleselius had set wide open the Sepulchers of the Austrians; for Anna the
Empress and Maximilian dyed presently after, and were soon followed by others.
The Prisoner was found to have neither money nor goods, and that absolved him
from the common report of corruption and avarice, he being discovered to be
poor, who under the benign influence of the favor of the Prince it was
believed had enjoyed Mines and Treasures. He was at last put into the Popes
hands, who exclaimed that the Dignity and Privilege of the Church was
violated, to the end that he might judge him for the faults committed, being
mixed of Religion and State. But after a year or two being restored to his
liberty, he lived quietly as he had been known to be innocent. During these
present domestic contentions of the Austrians, the Bohemians had made great
advantage of that time in furnishing themselves with arms, money, and friends.
Amongst the first that engaged in this troubled affair was Ernest, Count of
Mansfelt, natural Son of Peter Ernest, as famous for the mischiefs done with
small Forces, and the height of courage for the space of many years to the
Austrians, as the Father had been remarkable in the Government of the
Low Countries, and several other employments for his fidelity to Spain. He
being of an ambitious spirit, desiring by notable actions to make good to the
World his spurious birth, after having passed through many Charges amongst the
Austrians, renouncing the Romish Religion, made it his ambition to close with
Fortune in the greatest dangers. He was at that time in Piedmont in service of
the Duke, who, placing the principal security of his own quiet in the
disturbances risen in Bohemia, gave him leave to raise 2000 Soldiers, and paid
them for him for certain months, that he might carry them to the Bohemians.
Carlo over and above exhorts the Venetians to contribute to that cause some
secret assistance; but the Republic did not believe that it was fit for them
to engage themselves further than in their own defense, and in the common
Liberty of Italy.

Mansfelt was gladly entertained by the Bohemians, and honored with the Charge
of General of the Artillery, he with la Tour became the chief Parties in the
Revolt, which, to say truth, could not be more furiously conducted than by
those two Chiefs, one of which passed for desperate, and the other for one of a
most turbulent spirit. Mansfelt presently possesses himself of the Town of
Pilsen, and there remained now no other of consideration for the Emperor but
Buduais, where Carlo Count of Buquoy raised some Troops.

Such was the Praeludium of so many other calamities, which have since involved
Germany in many miseries, which were too much threatened her by a fierce Comet,
which about the end of the year appeared toward the North. And if it be true,
that at some great Crisis Nature it self is moved, the fall of a Mountain,
which burning a whole People alive overwhelmed Plurs, the greatest City of
those parts, might be reckoned as a prodigious Prognostic of the unhappiness
of Rhetia. And, to say truth, both for the business and the Arms the affairs of
Bohemia and the Grisons had a sufficient resemblance; because that in this very
year the minds of that people continued stirred and implacably disordered. It
happened, that the Venetians having published, and by the means of Anthonio
Antelmi solemnly sworn the Alliance formerly concluded with the Cantons of
Zurich and Bern, the agreement in consequence was, that in order to the Union
of the three Leagues with the Helvetians, the passages should be open for them;
but the Spaniards opposed it with so much violence, that some certain Horse,
raised under pay of the Republic by Colonel Sciavaleschi, were obliged to make
a stand, finding that the Ministers of Spain themselves kept their own Guards
upon the passes, doubting lest connivence or the venality of those of that
Country should let them through. To this business being afterward added fear
and force, Feria the new Governor of Milan, to incommodate Rhetia, and stir
their minds, stopped the passage of Merchandise; and Gheffier observing, though
there was no Minister of the Venetians in those parts, that in the Agnedina the
Election of a Ministrat (who is a temporary Head of their Government) after
some contests with the shedding of blood, was fallen upon a person of that
Faction, presented a certain Writing, in which feigning to control the
Treaties of Spain, struck more to the quick upon those of the Republic,
proposing that all other Alliances might be cast off, except that with France.

The Proposition pleased not the Commons, and so much the less, by how much the
Creditors of many Pensions from the Crown requiring payment of them, he offered
to satisfy only one of them, which was refused by the people with insufferable
scorn. Nevertheless their minds were generally wavering, because the chief
among them making Merchandise to their own profit of the public evils, made
themselves powerful with adhering to Strangers; and the poorer sort vexed with
this corruption and the severity of their judgments, did not willingly bear the
yoke. For which cause, taking Arms on a sudden in several places, they
furiously ransacked the Country, not knowing who was to be their enemy and
uncertain of their own designs. At Zernez they obliged Rudolpho Pianta to run
away, who with his Brother Pompeo, declared Partisans of the Austrians, rendered
themselves under that protection even as odious to all as feared by many; and
to him it was principally imputed to have been one of the sowers of discord: so
that they would have put him to a cruel death, if he had not made his escape by
flight. They run then to Coira, whence Gheffier, who by his proceedings was not
distinguished from a Minister of Spain, resolved to retire in haste to
Maianfelt; and as if the fury of the people had been capable of any order or
discipline, they deliberated to establish a Tribunal in Tosana, composed of
Judges Catholic and Protestants, who should proceed against those who should
have sold to Strangers the weak of the Country.

Under this censure many principal men perished; Giovanni Baptista Zambra by
the hand of the Hangman; Niccolo Rusca the Chief Priest of Sondrio dyed under
Tortures; the Pianta's were banished upon grievous punishments, and Giovanni
Bishop of Coira; the City it self being fined in the sum of 15000 Crowns.
Molina, Interpreter of France, Native of Rhetia, was in like sort banished, and
to Gheffier was intimated the leaving his employment; but he hoping that good
order would be so much the less durable amongst that people by how much they
wearied themselves to introduce it, took time to give advice of it to the
Court, Grisons also dispatched Letters and Deputies to inveigh bitterly against
him. There being also for the same cause of the Grisons some dissension risen
in some Cantons of the Switzers; to quiet it, as is the custom, rather with
conference than force, a Diet was called in Baden; where Gheffier appearing,
taxed the Venetians to have fomented this last revolution, in which there
appeared many of their party. But the Ambassadors of the Grisons, who were at
this meeting, maintaining the liberty of their actions and judgments against
those who had betrayed the Country, imputed to himself to have with all Art
given encouragement to the present turbulencies. But for a proof of their
indifferency, they had recalled those few Troops of their Nation who served the
Venetians, and had condemned in a mulct of money some Captains, who were not so
ready to obey them. But the Pianta's, to nourish the divisions, scattered
Letters and Libels; and having recourse to the Governor of Milan, to obtain
only 30000 Crowns therewith to arm their friends and adherents, they promised
to rise, and subject the Valtolina to him, which being subject to the Grisons,
but inhabited by people more civil, not willingly suffered the heavy yoke of
Democracy so corrupted. This, passing not without the Grisons knowledge,
caused, that to keep the principal Post they sent some Soldiers, which were
very useful to suppress also the disturbances, made by those of Como in the
dispute about Jurisdiction over certain places.

ANNO M.DC.XIX.
Many solicited the Venetians to send a Minister, to conclude a League quickly
during the predominancy of those most inclined to their Party; but they willing
to observe the issue of so strange accidents, not to confound things rather
than contribute to their remedy, forbore it. It quickly was made manifest, that
the people in their affection had but a short space betwixt their flood and
ebb; for they presently fell back into the contrary party. Gheffier and the
Spanish Minister, conspiring by concert to stir up a new Revolt, with money and
other endeavors raised some of the Commons under the pretext to abolish the
new erected Courts of Justice, and to restore the Bishop. About Coira there
happened betwixt the Parties a bloody Encounter, and according to the
reciprocation of force, sometimes making faulty, and sometimes giving
authority; another Tribunal was erected in that Town, which abolished the acts
of that of Tosana, called back the banished, and punished the Judges themselves.

The oppressed had recourse to the Venetians; but instead of assistance they
received Councils for a sincere reconciliation; for in effect, in that
confusion of affairs, they knew not how to design any advantage, and foresaw,
that the most powerful at last would reap the benefit. Nevertheless in the
Agnedina the tumult began of its own accord, and taking Arms, spread it self
through all the Country with so much violence, that the new Judges fled from
Coira, and those formerly banished absented themselves anew. In Cicer, twenty
nine Ensigns being assembled, they established a Tribunal of sixty six persons,
who taking a review of things past, were to act in such sort, that Gheffier
should not stay in Rhetia. All that had been decreed by the Judicatory of
Tosana was authorized by this, and what had been acted to the contrary made
void. It was enough for Feria, Governor of Milan, to have put the Country into
confusion, content at present to foment the disorder underhand, and whilst all
the Ministers of the Monarchy of Spain were assembled upon the occurrences of
the Empire, to apply himself to what in their absence at this time happened.
Matthias the Emperor, after a long sickness of mind, no less than of body,
expiring in the month of March, left, for the Election of a Successor, minds
divided, according to the difference in Religion. The Catholics, animated by
the Offices of the Pope, and upheld by the promises of the Spaniards, inclined
to Ferdinand, as one who being taken notice of for piety, might also be able
with puissant Forces to maintain the Dignity and Religion. On the other side it
has been said, how much the Protestants abhorred him. Whereupon the Palatine
labored all he could, that the Diet might be deferred, the better to concert
his exclusion; and the others were willing enough to observe the issue of the
present Revolts, taking for pretext, that the stirs in Bohemia ought first to
be quieted, and afterward in the general calm of the Empire choice made of a
Head to the satisfaction of all. But the Archbishop of Mentz, to whom, as
Chancellor of Germany, the Charge belongs, proclaims a Diet at Francfort, and
at last the Electors appeared there, either in person, or by their Deputies;
although to hinder it, there were some that infested the Highways, and kept
them in a manner besieged.

The Bohemians rejecting the Letters, by which Ferdinand offered clemency,
pardon, confirmation of Privileges, with Liberty of Conscience, and all that
which they could pretend, stir up those that were far and near. Upper Austria
unites with the Rebels, a few Catholics in vain contradicting, and declare to
govern themselves by themselves, till it should be decided, who ought lawfully
to succeed, pretending it did belong to Albert, Brother of the Emperor
deceased, notwithstanding his renouncing to it in favor of Ferdinand. And the
Lower would not have acted otherwise, and in particular Vienna, which was
pestered with Heresy, if Ferdinand, being then there, had not with his
authority and presence withheld it. In Moravia, the States being assembled in
Bruna, and having sounded one another minds, and estimated their Forces,
follow the same resolution in favor of the Bohemians; notwithstanding that a
little before that Province had sent to Ferdinand a succor of 3000 Foot and
2000 Horse, who, having understood in their march the resolution of their
Province, facing about in a general tumult, returned. The General only (who was
that Albert of Wallestain, who by that act of fidelity gave beginning to that
great Fortune, which in a few years carried him to an Ascendant, and afterward
to a Precipice, went on to Ferdinand, delivering a certain sum of money he had
in his possession for the payment of his Soldiers; but the Moravians had a
mind to fetch it again by force, detaining, till it was restored, in arrest the
Cardinal Dietrichstein, a faithful Servant to the King, who believing himself
more in want of faithful Counselors than money, although he was in great
necessity, for his liberty readily restores it. Ferdinand by all this was at
the very brink of passing to the succession, and the Empire in a calamitous
condition, and exposed even to the extremity of dangers; for la Tour,
solicited by some Barons of Austria, came near to the Danube, and being
furnished with Boats by those of his Party, passed it to the terror of the
Country, and of the City of Vienna, having as it were no Garrison but the
presence and constancy of Ferdinand, whilst the Soldiers within it exceeded
not 1500 Foot, and 200 Horse, who were to guard it from the Inhabitants, no
less than from Enemies, because they held Correspondence with la Tour, and had
treated to deliver him a Port. But he having lain still two days at Fischen,
lost the Victory; because, believing to conquer a City, by the same manner he
had made whole Provinces revolt with Letters and invitations, he wrote to
Vienna, and while he expected an answer, the University armed five hundred
Scholars; Victuals were brought in, and some Soldiers arrived. Most
opportunely of all came the succors of certain Companies of Cuirassiers, sent
by the great Duke of Tuscany to his Kinsman, which by the address of one
Santilier, a French Gentleman, falsifying their Colors, entered, passing
through the midst of the Bohemish Squadrons into Vienna, in that very instant
that the King was hard put to it by some, who insolently plucking him by the
Doublet, required the Concession of Privileges and Liberty of Conscience. But
hearing the trampling of the Horses, and unexpectedly seeing the Soldiers run
up and down the streets with their Swords in their hands, the fright was so
great amongst them, that they dispersed, and together with them the
Conventicles were dissolved, which they held in private houses, wherein also
store of Arms were gathered together.

La Tour, to give courage to his, drew near to the City, and lodging in the
Suburbs, besieges it, but for a few days only; for D'Ampierre with 4000 men
raised in Hungary, designing to join with Buquoy, who was strong 1000
Cuirassiers, Mansfelt attempted to hinder him in his way; but Buquoy fell upon
him so opportunely out of an Ambuscade, that he defeated him with a great
number of slain, and more of Prisoners. Upon this advice la Tour draws off from
Vienna, fearing lest upon this disgrace the Bohemians might be wavering. But
Fortune carried Ferdinand from a Siege to the Empire; for, fetching a long
compass, and arriving at last at Francfort, he was received there with infinite
applause, and the instances of the Bohemians being rejected, who endeavored to
exclude him, the oppositions of Saxony being overcome with recompenses, and the
Palatine at last forced to consent, he was the 28. of August adorned with the
Imperial Dignity, while at the same time the Bohemians resolve upon a new
Election of a King. Whether this Kingdom be Hereditary or Successive, is a
dispute which has long wearied Armies and Pens with various Judgments; some
approving reason, though over-mastered, others applauding the direction of
Fortune, and the Conquerours. As to that which concerned this business in
question, the resolution sprung both from the necessity of having a Director of
that confused Government, and from the want of a support by foreign Force. In
consideration of his nearness, his Religion, and his Power, they offered the
Crown to John George, Duke of Saxony; but he, hoping for more certain
advantages from the Austrians, refuses it.

The fame of worth and courage begot a great esteem of Carlo Emanuel Duke of
Savoy; so that he was invited by the Bohemians, and in regard of their Religion
and Liberty would have preferred him before all others; but it appearing
environed with thorns that were too sharp, neither Carlo nor any body else was
yet found, that was willing to accept it. It was then adjudged to Frederick
Prince Palatine, a young man, and in whom concurred his own high designs, and
the hopes to be assisted by others, being Son-in-law to the King of England. It
seemed to some of the more wary of that Party, that affairs were too far
advanced, the Austrians being put to a necessity of putting forth their utmost
strength, and the Catholics into the obligation of uniting themselves with
them. Therefore some of the Electors were not wanting, who dissuaded the
Palatine; Bavaria counseled from it, and the King of England himself
endeavored to divert him. He at first showing himself backward, was at last
seduced by hopes and ambition to despise their counsels. He had his chief
encouragement from the then present state of things; for although Ferdinand
were advanced to so remarkable dignity, his ruin was thought near hand;
whilst, being got free from many trains, which in his return from Francfort
were laid in the way, he no sooner arrives at Vienna but he sees all Hungary
risen in Arms.

The Bohemians having applied themselves to the Ottoman Port, to get a consent
that Bethlem Gabor, Prince of Transylvania, might raise Soldiers in those
parts, where many Heretics of the Country moved him to it, had no great
difficulty to obtain it, the Turks being always greedy to see the Christians
weaken themselves by themselves, and having now made a Peace with the Persian,
were so much the more vigilant, if amidst these discords a way might not be
opened to advantages of their own. This nevertheless, as it ordinarily happens
that the most wicked counsels are the least successful, instead of bringing a
prejudice to Ferdinand, served greatly to advance his Cause; for the
Protestants themselves, and the Catholics, which took Arms in his favor, upon
a specious pretext alleged, that it was fit they should all join for common
defense against the Infidels, to maintain that Frontier which defended Germany
and Europe from ruin. Nevertheless the motion of Gabor was at first with great
force; for with little opposition he makes himself Master of Cassovia with
upper Hungary. Afterward of Altemberg, and of Presburg, or Possonia, where he
found the Crown, worshipped by that people, as a testimony from Heaven of
lawful Empire. The Confederate Bohemians, to join with him, enter into Austria,
and failed but a little that they had not possessed the Bridges of Vienna, if
D'Ampiere and Marradas with a stout defense had not maintained them. They then
advanced toward Hungary, when Buquoy with 5000 men only meeting Gabor, who not
far from Possonia marched with 15000, knowing the Hungarians more fierce to
charge, than stout to maintain a fight, gave them battle, and defeats them. But
the Victory was not of that importance, as in the disproportion of their Forces
to hinder la Tour from joining with Gabor, and entering into Austria threaten
Vienna with a Siege; but the season being advanced into November, and Victuals
in the open Country through the licentiousness of the Soldiers being quickly
consumed, they were constrained to retire; and the rather because the Archduke
Carlo, Brother to Ferdinand, driven in the Revolt of Silesia from his Church of
Vratislavia, and having fled for refuge to Sigismond King of Poland, had
obtained of him a Levy of 10000 men, though without the consent of the States
of the Kingdom* and they under Homonay, a Hungarian Baron, being entered into
the upper Hungary, had defeated Stefano Ragotzi, Gabors General. The
Confederates for this cause resolved not only to leave Austria; but a Diet in
Hungary, in which was treated the conferring of that Crown upon Gabor, was
dissolved for fear; and Gabor himself, retaining his Conquests, yields to a
Truce, which though it ended not w^^h the Peace, nevertheless for ten months it
took away that troub^som distraction, giving opportunity to Homanay to pass
into S^l^a and Moravia; to Buquoy to go into the upper Austria; and to
D'A^piere to follow la Tour into Bohemia. And now the applications and thoughts
of the Princes were turned toward this Kingdom, and it might be said, that it
resembled a great Lake, in which many were fishing with various designs.
Ferdinand looked at it as his Patrimony; Frederick reckoned it as a gift
bestowed upon him; Saxony and Bavaria gaped after spoils; and there wanted not
those, who waiting upon accidents, hoped, when others were wearied out, to reap
for themselves the recompense of the War. The House of Austria at that time was
truly the die of the Fortune of Europe; some desired to raise her up, others
labored to bring her down; the most were to keep her in a moderate condition.
All parties therefore made use of the same pretexts of Piety and of State,
albeit that Princes of several belief joined themselves together, and Religion
made War to it self.

The eyes of the whole Empire were now turned toward the King of England,
because being so nearly allied to the Palatine, and in all affairs endeavoring
to thwart the advantages of the Austrians, it seemed that it would be difficult
for him not to engage in Arms. But in that Prince decorum and want of power
were commonly opposites. He being Scotch by birth, and come to the Crown by
inheritance, was the first that governed the two Nations, by natural Antipathy
and ancient emulation Enemies, and designing to reclaim the fierceness of those
people with ease and idleness, had set up his rest in Peace, and avoided as
much as possible the calling of Parliaments, without which having not the power
to impose Contributions, nor levy Money, he contented himself rather to
struggle with many straights and difficulties, than see them meet with a
jealousy of them, or being met, be obliged to separate them with the disgust
of the people, or with satisfaction of prejudice to the Supreme Power. These
Novelties of Germany coming to his knowledge, he first disapproves the
resolution of his Son-in-law to accept the Crown; afterward publishes at last
that he would assist him, and dispatching an Ambassador to Vienna, demands
impossible Conditions of Peace, proposing that Bohemia should remain to the
Palatine; whereupon from measures so fickle and ambiguous, the opinion was
universally confirmed, that he inclined more to foment the flames of the
Empire, than to extinguish them. Neither did the Kings of France and Denmark
aim at other ends, both offering to interpose, but neither caring to bring
things to a conclusion. Three Diets were held at the same time in the Empire,
and there were digested the common miseries under the form of several
interests. In Erbipolis or Wurtzburg the Electors Ecclesiastical, the Bishop of
that City, he of Bamberg, and others, together with Bavaria, and all those
Princes which formed the Catholic League, unto which the Duke of Lorrain also
was now joined, entering into an association, resolved to raise an Army, making
General of it Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, a Prince of most excellent
understanding, and who above all others, has had the wisdom out of the common
interests to draw private advantages, by merchanding time, and managing of
Fortune. The Pope also entered himself into this Union with a monthly
contribution, rather for decency than strength. All this without doubt was to
serve for succors and advantage to Ferdinand; as also in another Diet, which
the Elector of Saxony, with the Ambassadors of Denmark and the Princes of the
Lower Circle held, where he, prepossessed with promises of great advantages,
declares himself for the Austrians, magnifying the Rights of Ferdinand, which
would render the zeal to Religion unjust, if, in a cause so unrighteous,
assistance should be given to the Bohemians.

The Imperial Forces being in this manner remarkably increased, Ferdinand, what
with his own, and those of Spain, found himself sufficiently strengthened; for
the Archduke Albert from the Low Countries had sent him between seven and eight
thousand Soldiers, and as many being dispatched by Ossuna for the Milanese,
arrived about the end of the year by that way in Austria. On the other side,
the Fortune of Frederick declined in the very beginning; for in the third Diet
of the forementioned, of the Princes of the Union assembled in his presence at
Nuremberg, the City complaining, that the Contributions were distributed to the
benefit of a few, who assuming specious titles, and the Primacy of the Union,
enjoyed vast entertainments, decreed to arm themselves for their alone defense,
and not to furnish any money to the Army of Bohemia. Frederick was then obliged
to levy in his own Country about 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, with which entering
the Kingdom, he was in November solemnly Crowned at Prague. But he no sooner
put his foot into the Throne, but having conferred on the Prince of Anhalt the
Charge of Generalissimo of his own, and also of the Bohemian Army; la Tour and
Mansfield, who first commanded them, were greatly disgusted. And so the year as
to the affairs of Bohemia ended. Frederick signifies to the Venetians his
taking of the Crown, and they with Letters congratulated, at the same time
making choice to send to Ferdinand, according to custom, two extraordinary
Ambassadors, which were Augustine Nani and Simeon Contarini, both Knights,
though by reason of the turbulency of Germany their Mission was retarded for
some time, and in place of Nani, who fell indisposed, was substituted Francesco
Erizzo Knight and Procurator. The Republic, though strongly pressed, would not
interest it self in the affairs of the Empire; but for those of Italy continued
in a greater vigilance, because the designs of the Spanish Ministers not only
appeared discovered, but by the Treason disclosed in Venice, although
dissembled, men's minds there remained greatly moved.

Besides these, that which had happened in the Grisons came also to be
considered, by which the Republic did believe to understand, that that
Monarchy did aim to shut up on all sides the avenues and passes, so to besiege
her, and when an opportunity should require it, to give her some notable blow.
Neither did the Spaniards themselves dissemble the distaste, conceived in the
past occurrences, ascribing to her the resistance made to their designs, and
imputing to her, that what with succors to Mantua and assistance to Savoy, she
had equally aimed to blemish and overthrow their reputation and predominancy in
Italy. The Venetians therefore seek every where for assistance and friendships
far and near. It appeared not safe to rely upon France, now involved in
domestic broils; whereupon it was resolved to sign and publish the League of
defense with the Duke of Savoy, sending Girolamo Cavazza to the Dukes of
Mantua, Parma, Modena, and Vrbino, to communicate it, and to invite them to
enter into it, to recover once by a firm Union unto Italy its beauty and
esteem, and also, if occasion should be offered, the Privileges of Nature;
which having separated her by the Alps and Sea (as it were with strong Walls,
and an impassable Ditch) from Strangers and their Manners, has intended, that
she should not only enjoy the wealth, pleasures and benefits, which with a
large hand the benignity of the Air, and the pleasantness of the Country impart
to her, but should also breathe the two most precious Elements of sociable
living, Liberty and Command.

Not one of them had the courage to own his consent, though they all
applauding it, esteemed it the only defense of the common safety. Of the
greater Princes, to whom communication was given by the ordinary Ambassadors,
the Pope showed himself firm in indifferency, in regard of his Office of common
Father, and France promised to have an eye upon the affairs of Italy, though
judged, that to render its services more effectual in case of a new Rupture, it
was best not to declare it self further. The Spaniards showed themselves
greatly moved, judging this Alliance as a Seminary of Jealousies and
bitterness. In those Negotiations with Carlo, there was intermixed an example
of the domestic Discipline of the Commonwealth, in which Rebellion and
Peculat are held to be offenses equally to be execrated; for in the adjusting
of the account of Subsidies furnished to the Duke, it was found that one month
was wanting, and the money being issued out of the Treasury, it was easily
discovered, that it had been converted to the proper use of Anthonio Donato the
Ambassador in England. Opinion did not concur with the fact, because, in a
person adorned with excellent parts, particularly of wisdom and eloquence, the
fault was rendered so much the less credible, by how much the more he had
domestic representations of the highest integrity of his Ancestors, amongst
which his Uncle Leonardo, Prince of the Republic, and his Father Niccolo, an
honorable Senator, had given proof in home and foreign employments, of
inflexible minds to whatsoever fault or interest. Anthonio was at that time
Ambassador in the Court of England, and to clear this account, he had leave to
come to Venice; where haranguing in the Senate with great power and no less
hope to pacify men's minds by the merits of his Ancestors and his own Services,
he found, that in cases the most important, Justice did not hold the balance
to equalize merits with faults. Being summoned to Prison to render account as a
Delinquent, and yielding to it, he was banished with a Sentence of Death, and
Confiscation of Goods, his Name and Posterity cancelled out of the Order of the
Patricians. He retired himself into England; where Girolamo Lando succeeding
him in the Embassage, moves the King to discharge him thence. But the Senate by
the League with the Duke Carlo, believing by his strong diversion the State at
Land only secured from the attempts of the Milanese, and by that of the
Switzers judging to have provided themselves with little more than with the
appearance, and some numbers of Soldiers, applied themselves to an equal
strength of shipping and men also on the Seacoast, lest the Viceroy of Naples
should continue his thoughts to disturb the Islands and the Gulf. For this
cause they listened to a Proposition of Alliance, insinuated from the United
Provinces of Holland, in which, besides the common interest of Liberty and
Commerce, they had a great desire to strengthen themselves with some strong
support beforehand, if within a while the Truce coming to expire, they should
be exposed to a new engagement with the powerful Forces of Spain.

Christofero Suriano was at this time Resident for the Venetians at the Haghe,
who with much ripeness of judgment, and dexterity in the managing of persons,
had introduced himself into a confidence with the Prince of O^^nge and the
Chief of the States, and from thence collecting easily their sense, he
proceeded from discourses to a Treaty, for which some Deputies of the States of
the Provinces being appointed to treat with him, they set down in writing the
Conditions of a League of common defense. But being propounded in Venice for
the approbation of the Senate, opinions differed; for amongst those of the
College Giovanni Nani judged, that the Conclusion should be deferred,
believing that the Republic, though involved in great and grievous suspicions,
ought not at this time to entangle it self in that interest, which presupposing
a perpetual War put her into such and so great expenses and dangers, that the
remedy would be found worse than the present evils. And so he spoke to this
purpose; If it be true, that the faith of Princes is a bond not to be untyed,
and that Treaties of Leagues, as Marriages, make a Community of Fortune and
Interests, it is never too late to resolve upon a Decree which cannot be
retracted nor amended. A Decree which concerns an Alliance, not of those States
which govern their Councils by the alteration of things, by the vicissitude of
affections, by the corruptions of Ministers, and the change of Governors, but
of two Republics in their Constitution immortal, in their Maxims immovable,
and in their Word constant. An Union comprehending a short period, and a
limited number of years, yet extends it self to the most weighty affairs, and,
putting the Republic into a long and inextricable Labyrinth, draws along with
it consequences of great moment; because it has for its object a perpetual
War, in which with unwearied exercise of mind the United Provinces defend their
Religion and Liberty against a most powerful King, implacable in the offense,
and indefatigable in the resentment. That the Treasure of the Republic should
be poured forth to the assistance of the weak, that our aids should be the
certain Capital of the oppressed, that the Arsenals and Treasuries should be
common to Italy, there are so strong motives that it cannot be denied; but they
have not the same force for the affairs of Holland, and if they have force, by
ballancing the reasons, it is fit that we measure their strength. Our succors
perhaps will be large, yet unsufficient to be able to maintain a War, which
subsists upon terms of Liberty and Rebellion, irreconciliable with subjection
and Kingly Authority. A War extended to the four parts of the World, which has
no limits, nor can be bounded, which has emptied Spain of People, exhausted
the Indies of Gold, and swallowed the Blood and Treasures of Europe. The
Republic has always been most just in her undertakings, in her own defense
most circumspect, and in the assistance of others constant. What is now
pretended? is it to take Arms against Spain? have we Peace with him? is it to
preserve our selves? but what more safe remedy than the sparing the vital
spirits for our own occasions? Some desire to persuade those States, at the end
of the Truce to make an end of the War; but if in their intestine Divisions
having experienced greater mischiefs from Peace than hazards in the War, they
are thereto persuaded by their own interest; that diversion will surely serve
to our advantage, and that War will be carried on without us; under the shadow
of which Italy will take breath, and the Republic, protected by Heaven against
force and treasons, will happily enjoy a calm and quiet peace. Holland has the
assistance of their Neighbors, and they most potent Princes; some conformable
to their own Religion, others by a suitableness to their conveniences and
designs, and these can and will uphold her with puissant Forces. To what
purpose then hasten our Carrier, if by the steps of others, without wearying
our selves, we may arrive at the end of our advantages? The Republic has to
its praise assumed to her self the protection of Italy, has maintained it, and
does maintain it with glory; but it would be too vast a thought to espouse all
the differences of Europe, and have to do in every part of the World. If out of
prudence we have abstained from meddling in the affairs of Bohemia, why should
we pinch our selves with those of Holland? is it to obtain assistance? But that
people will not be wanting to be serviceable to us without a League, who agree
with all the World, where there is money and reward. I deny not, but that
friends are a great defense, and that in true Mesnagery that Treasure is not to
be valued, which keeps the Monster of War far off. But do the bonds of
friendship consist in Treaties only? The affections of Princes are there
joined, where the Interests are not separate. Who doubts but that the United
Provinces will embrace our assistance, as often as being in distress it may be
seasonable to give it, and render it to us again, when the Conjunction of
affairs shall show it to be necessary? We have hitherto at least drawn
Commanders, Soldiers, Ships out of that Country, open to the money of all.
That very money, which for the purchase of a friendship not necessary we are
here vainly so ready to disburse, shall be that, which in occasions more
needful and better shall bring us assistance. But if by unprofitable profusions
we shall exhaust our Treasury, we shall have an equal want of defense and
friends, and be put to beg of others, rather than receive relief from our
selves. As for my self, I look at those friendships most profitable, which upon
equal conditions have their rise from common conveniences; but in the case in
question, how unequal does the fortune and state of things appear! with the
Catholic King we may have Peace, nay we shall have it, whenever moderation
shall come to be in his Councils. But in Holland, where the obstinacy of a
false belief, and the desire of true liberty are contended for, there can be no
place for quiet. So that we shall be constrained to subscribe to a perpetual
grievance. Nor ought we here to believe we shall enjoy aids reciprocal, because
there being not place for a Treaty which can preserve from suspicions, or by
jealousies oblige to assistance, the Spaniards will be so wise as to make War
in Flanders in earnest, and in Italy in show, revenging himself of us by a
double blow, the one by the employment of the money we shall be obliged to give
Holland, and the other by the consumption of all our Forces in a long defense
of Land and Sea. Who knows not, that in the Maxims of Spain War is covered over
with art and time; and on the other side those of the Republic consist in the
preserving and defending her self without provoking and offending others;
always in their counsels and resolutions uniting prudence, justice, and time?

This opinion meeting not with the Genius and approbation of all, Sebastian
Veniero one of the Counselors, moving the Senate to anger no less than
jealousy at the proceedings of the Spaniards, discoursed in the contrary
sense: Nature has prescribed to living Creatures one Element; but Heaven and
Earth are too little for ambition. It will be a rare felicity to see Princes
contented with their own State, in an Age, in which good Conscience is no more
the reward, but Interest is the price of Reigning and of Victory. It is not
therefore false, that if private men have placed the praise of moderation in
being contented with their own, Princes hold the glory of their greatness
settled in the usurping what is another. This Age of ours makes it good, in
that the Monarchy of Spain standing possessed by Fortune, Counsel, and Arms, of
such vast Countries, being nowithstanding hunger-starved, and not to be
satiated with almost two worlds, assaults or attempts all that which carries
any likeness or splendor of Liberty and Empire. And amongst its Arcana,
discord has not the last place, which darkly insinuated and nourished every
where, either by the provocation of Religion, or under the title of Interest,
or the visard of Ambition and Prerogative, disuniting the minds of Nations, and
the intercourse of Princes, like a hidden Mine razeth the foundations of those
Dominions, which it cannot attain to by force. It fears nothing more than the
discovery of its machinations, or the concord of its enemies. Hence so many
Arts practiced on the minds of the Grisons, to divert them from our alliance.
Hence so many complaints for our League with the Cantons of Helvetia. Hence so
many invectives for our Levy of Hollanders; and hence so much noise for our
union with Carlo. But we ought to know, that where our Enemies are most upon
their guard, where they contend most fiercely, there is seated the pawn of
common safety. That it behooves the weakest to unite themselves against the most
powerful, is a rule and direction of Nature, and to have set that at naught,
has defloured the beauty, and almost ravished the liberty of Italy. The
occasion now presents to us the ready means to strengthen quiet to our selves,
and provide security for our friends, by embracing the invitation of Holland.
Experience puts us so much in mind, how fatal their Truce has been to Italy,
which during the trouble of those Provinces, was happy and quiet. But War
serving great Princes but for exercise, the flame, being quenched there, is
kindled again on this side the Mountains. Our Envyers now seeking occasion and
advantage for themselves more than quiet, greater flames lie hidden under the
warm ashes of a teacherous Peace. It belongs therefore to us to carry the
tinder some whither else. For if we resist an open Enemy with force, there is
no better guard from a secret one, than by the advantage of a distraction. Let
us not doubt but that War will suddenly break forth again in the Low Countries;
but too unequal, to say truth, are the Forces of the United Provinces to
grapple with those of so puissant Kingdoms. It is best then to reinforce them
with a powerful assistance, to the end that with equal prejudice to our
affairs, those States yield not to the flattering invitations of the Spanish
Ministers by prolonging the Truce, or fall not into great dangers, and at last
relapse under the yoke by a weak management of Arms. Nor let faint hopes
comfort us, that they are to receive sufficient assistances from the
neighboring Potentates; because we are not now to learn, with what winds, and
they moved for the most part by the breath of Spain, France is driven; and we
see England, that having nothing great but the name, has a King always in fear
to be constrained to a War, and his Ministers to continue Peace in Holland,
fixed in the same reasons which induced them to procure it. To him then, that
knows and experimenteth that he has the greater need, it belongs also to set
his hand to the remedy; otherwise, whilst one preserving himself by another,
and every one sheltering himself under the interests of others, more than his
own, we shall play the game of our Adversaries, who, fighting with one at a
time, are sure at last to conquer all. How can our Commonwealth pretend to be
assisted, if at her ease she will look on upon others wants? Do we possibly
trust in the Peace two years since concluded with Spain? but what fruit have we
hitherto enjoyed by it but the Invasions practiced by Toledo, the Restitutions
denied by Ossuna, the Treasons framed by la Queva, Provinces invaded, Towns
little less than surprised, the Confines more and more threatened, the Sea
roved, Commerce disturbed, and for the highest degree of hatred in others, and
dangers to our selves, the Turks solicited to oppress us? We may suppose the
intentions of King Philip to be good, but certainly the actions of his
Ministers cannot be worse: and nothing else hitherto has diverted the
discomposing of the Treaty, and kindling again the flames of War, but the
patience of them that have received and endured injuries. Of a Peace so full of
treachery, what more safe caution can we for the future procure for our selves,
than to have Companions, whether it be in Peace or in War? Otherwise, without
friends, we shall always find our selves, amidst troublesome suspicions, exposed
to open injuries and secret treacheries. And if War be calamitous, jealousy is
miserable. The friendships hitherto contracted are not sufficient to preserve
us. The Alliances with Savoy and the Switzers are an ornament to the Peace, and
a defense in War: But they open us not the passes, they furnish us not with
Soldiers, they protect not the maritime Provinces for us, but that this very
City, the worthy seat of Liberty, and Empire stands no less exposed to dangers,
than that she has almost been a prey to Treachery. Let us then unite our
selves with Holland; because if other Leagues defend our Dominion by Land,
since it is not the Spaniards interest to provoke anew a generous Government,
which has taught every one the art how to resist the more powerful; they will
in future also respect the Gulf, not to draw upon them the Arms of that
unconquered people, which disturbs their possession of the new World, and
triumphs in the vast Ocean of the Indies. By this means our Peace shall be
defended by faith, but much more by fear. If peradventure that rage be
objected, which in a great Prince will be conceived implacable: What occasion
will be for it? What, because we make Alliance with those Provinces, with which
Spain it self has concluded a Truce, acknowledging them for Sovereign? Shall
we then be so unhappy, that friendship may no more be contracted betwixt free
Princes? But may not our designs perhaps be to drive the Catholic King out of
his vast Territories? Our institution and the moderation of our counsels are
not accessory to that. The League will do him no hurt, if he promote not
injuries; and if he be offended that he finds resistance, what greater argument
to us to suspect his designs? But the charge possibly will be increased? But
where can it be better employed, than to preserve us from the worst of evils?
What serves our Riches too, if they lie idle, but for a provocation to War, and
a reward to a Conqueror? If our Ancestors have been provident to heap up
Treasures, it belongs to us to be as prudent in the using of it, and for fear
of growing poor, we ought not to imagine our selves always poor; for it is not
money but Country and People, which are the most opulent Treasuries of Princes.

This opinion prevailed. Orders then and powers being dispatched to Suriano, a
defensive League was concluded for fifteen years, in which, in case of Invasion
the Republic promised 50000 Florins a month to the States, and they on their
part an equivalent succor of Men, Ships, or Money, as the Senate should
appoint. For the solemn Ratification of it, the Here Aersen was deputed from
the Hagh to go to Venice, and from the Venetians into Holland Girolamo
Trevisano, Ambassadors Extraordinary. This League was no sooner published, but
contrary to that of Italy, all the considerable Princes of the North desired to
be of it. And for that purpose instances and frequent Ministers arrived at
Venice. In particular Balthazar Nei, Secretary to the Marquess of Anspach, and
Prince Magnus of Wirtemberg, in the name of the Protestants of the Union, and
of the Bohemians, came to demand assistance, the King of England strengthening
their demand with effectual offices. But the Republic resolving not to depart
from the defensive only, did not admit of their instances.

At the Conclusion of this League the Spaniards seemed to be greatly stricken,
and their Ministers contrived more and more to increase jealousies and
troubles, in particular Ossuna, who, confounding the promised restitution of
the goods made prize, with the show of new attempts, kept a Squadron of Galleys
ready fitted, with all their furniture, to offer at some surprise in the
Adriatic, with a doubtful report, whether he would fall into Albania to the
damage of the Turks, or of the Venetians in Dalmatia. In both these Provinces
he had Intelligences and Treaties; and keeping Soldiers along the Coast of
Puglia, gave out that he intended to send them to Trieste by Sea.

The Venetians constant in their resolution not to suffer armed Vessels to come
into the Gulf, ordered Lorenzo Veniero, surrogated to Barbarigo, deceased,
into the Procuratorship of St. Marc and the Charge of Captain General, to
hinder it and to oppose him with all his force. The Fleet was at Curzola, very
strong in Ships and Soldiers, and Veniero making choice of twelve light
Galleys, new cleaned, and five great ones, made a course to the Coast of
Puglia, clearing the Sea of some Pirate Pinnaces, by taking four, and making
himself Master besides of a Flemish Vessel, which laded Corn for Naples. He
afterward went back to Corfu to secure ten Galleys, which were coming from
Candia to join the Fleet, for which the Marquess of Santa Croce with a Squadron
of Naples laid wait in their course. But Anthonio Pisani avoiding the ambush,
keeping the other Coast, brought them safe. Veniero then joining with thirty
four Ships, which were in the Roads of Meleda, and two, which they had taken,
come from Vallona with Corn, scoured longst the Coast of Albania, where he took
three which laded Corn for Naples, where there was great scarcity. At last
coming to Pola, he discharged some Ships, which were over and above what he had
need of.

Freletich, that had done some mischief under the countenance of Ossuna, seeing
the Venetian Fleet advanced into Istria, had the boldness to enter into the
Gulf to make prey of some Ships; but being pursued by some Galleys, he ran on
shore on the Coast of the Kingdom, and leaving the Ship with the Arms of the
Viceroy in prey to the Venetians, with the death of some of his, saved for that
time his own life. At Naples also the Fleet at last separates; for being
informed of the defense the Republic had ordered in the Gulf, the Ships were
sent to Vado to land the Soldiers appointed for the relief of Ferdinand; and
the Galleys, under the Command of Prince Philibert, joined to the Squadrons of
the Pope, Malta, Genoua and Tuscany, passed into Africa to attempt upon Susa;
the Prince having first assured the Republic underhand (who, jealous of so
great preparations, ordered Veniero to assemble the Fleet at Corfu) that they
should fear no disturbance so long as he commanded. But finding the Pirates in
Susa upon their guard, and all Posts already in defense, all they were able to
do was but to throw down the first Port with a Pettard, and the second being
mured up, they were obliged to return with some loss: It being commonly
believed, as was divulged by the suspicious Genius of Spain, that Ossuna,
desirous for his own ends to consume those Forces of the King, had given the
Pirates notice of the design. Certain it is, that the right, those Pirates did
themselves, was greater than the loss; for a while after they ransacked the
maritime Coast of Spain, burning Orpesa, carrying away Booty and Slaves.

Philibert in his retreat sailed within sight of Cerigo and of Zant, where the
same night the Turkish Fleet, much greatned, appeared. Nevertheless, although
the Spanish gave out they sought it, to give them battle, they avoided taking
their course toward Naples, under pretext that the Turks being infected with
the plague, it was not fit to engage in a fight with them. But they staying a
while at Navarrino, returned at last, as usual, to winter at Constantinople,
without other prejudice but the loss of the Galley del Bei di Santa Maura,
which was taken by Octavio d'Arragona.

Ossuna applying himself rather to do mischief to the Republic, than minding
the molestations of the Turks, sends into the Archpelago under his Commissions
six Ships to rove, which were in particular to prey upon the Vessels of the
Venetians, and into the Adriatic sends the Ship called the Great Tiger, upon
which was Freletich to carry to Trieste a quantity of powder to the service of
Ferdinand. But being discovered by the Galliasses, and chased, she was forced
to save her self in the Port of Manfredonia. These were the last attempts of
the Duke, Naples had for several years groaned under the Tyranny of this
Minister, who, carried away by the two Furies of Luxury and Ambition, exercised
a dissolute Government, confounding things sacred and profane, setting Laws at
naught, trampling upon the Nobility, and infringing Privileges. The King had
commanded, that the Father Brindisi, a Capucin of a most holy life, gone
secretly out of the City, should come to the Court, although the Duke had
procured to have him stopped at Genoua, and to his relations being joined the
complaints of many of the Nobility, who were secretly gone to Madrid; his
Favorers, who had been entertained with vast gifts, part of his rapinous
pillagings, could no longer support him. He perceiving that his remove was near
at hand, accustomed to command, had for a good while been considering the means
to exchange his Government into a Sovereignty, and thought that not unfit for
his purpose of having turmoiled Italy, and rendered the Name of the Spanish
Monarchy so hateful to the Princes. He had besides, under pretense of
seditions, which himself raised, a Militia of Strangers under his pay, Ships of
War depending upon himself, and by flatteries had gained the Common people to
him, making use, as the means, of Giulio Genovino, they elect of the people a
man of sharp understanding, a prompt spirit, Inventor of Novelty, and a greedy
Disturber of quiet, proper to animate sedition.

As to the rest, he protected the people without distinction against the
Barons, and gave out that he would ease their grievances, and take away
Impositions; and passing by one day, where, to adjust the Impost, they were
weighing Victuals, he cut the ropes of the Scales with his Sword, giving to
understand, that he would have the fruits of the Earth unburdened and free, as
being the free gifts of the Air and of Heaven. Hoping that the Princes of Italy
would second his designs, he uses secret means to sound the Duke of Savoy and
the Venetians, informing the one, that all he had done had been by precise
Orders from the Court, and inviting the other to concur in the design of
driving the Spaniards out of Italy; but the Republic avers from such shifts,
and, always wary, would not so much as hear it. Carlo imparts the project to
the Court of France, and a person was sent by Dediguieres to Naples to observe
the state of things.

ANNO M.DC.XX.
The Court of Spain, which by the distance of its many Countries has it for a
Maxim to distrust the Ministers which govern them, heedfully minding the
proceedings of Ossuna, easily discovered his practices, and resolved to remove
him; but doubting that by sending a Successor from Spain, he might make use of
that delay to strengthen his disobedience, orders the Cardinal Borgia that with
all speed and caution he should transport himself from Rome to Naples, and
introducing himself into the Government, should dispossess Ossuna. The Cardinal
having gained the good will of the Governor of Castle nuovo, enters into it
secretly by night, and betimes in the morning the discharge of the Cannon
advertizes the City, that the new Viceroy being arrived, Ossuna was laid aside;
whereupon the oppressed rising in commotion, and the turbulent being
discovered, the Duke nevertheless upon the instant wanted not Arts to flatter
the people with fair words, and the Soldiery with gifts. But the former
uncertain what resolution to take, and the other, in particular the Spaniards,
averse from staining themselves with unfaithfulness; the Nobility, the Council,
the Ministers approving the change, he was forced to depart, detested by all
sorts of persons. By easy Journies to give time for pacifying the Kings
displeasure, and that the favor of his friends might get strength, he takes
his way toward Spain, where being received into prison, he was a while after
brought to the sentence and punishment of death. Before this change was made,
Rivera, who commanded the Ships of Ossuna sent into the Levant, comes with
three upon the Coast of Candia, where sculking in by-kreeks of the Kingdom,
remote and unguarded, by landing he had done some mischief. But having
afterward discovered at the Rock of Christiana one Ship riding separated from
his consorts (which was the Admiral Ship of Frederick Nani, a person of great
skill in the Militia by Sea, and of exact and severe discipline) setting up his
bloody Flag, came to attacque him. But Nani, to whom with eight Ships was
committed the Guard of those Seas, though then alone, weighing Anchor, and
charging him with so much courage, that two of his Vessels, not able to endure
his Cannon, were forced to leave the fight, and amongst them Rivera's own,
which made all the sail it could toward Italy; boarded the other which was the
Admiral of Naples, and after a hard contest took it. Besides the slain, the
Venetians had two hundred Prisoners, and found upon the Ship some of those
Cannon taken by Ossuna out of their Galleys. Retiring with this purchase he
meets the other Squadron, who showing signs of friendship were answered with
the like respect. The action was much commended, and by reason of the
provocation approved by those themselves who were offended at it.

The Senate well pleased, that their honor was vindicated against Ossuna, and
Rivera chastised, ordered the Prisoners to be released, and the Ship to be
restored to Borgia the new Viceroy, who in a friendly manner demanded it, and
had recalled the Ship Tiger from Manfredonia, and discharged Freletich with the
Vscocchi. Whereupon Feria vainly showed at Milan a particular resentment at
this success, in such sort that he threatened the Frontiers with an Inrode. But
the Senate ordering Andrea Paruta, Proveditor on the other side of the Mincio,
to repulse all sorts of injuries, provided it so well, that the Governor
easily let fall those thoughts. Two other sparks were amicably quenched, the
one of small moment concerning certain waters of the Forno, disputed betwixt
those of Monte, a Town of the Cremasca, and they of Postino in the Milanese,
which was also easily accommodated on the place by Anthonio da Ponte Governor
and Captain of Crema, and by Coiro a Senator of Milan, under the title of
Commissioners. The other carried a greater appearance; because the Prince of
Castiglione being under Pupillage, the Town of Meldole, subject to him, shook
off their obedience.

The Tutor who was the Signor di Solferino, went about to chastise it; but the
Duke of Mantua declared it under his protection, and sent a Garrison into it.
The other had recourse to the Gouvernour of Milan, who, to use authority and
force at once, sent thither ten Companies of Foot, five hundred Horse, and four
pieces of Cannon. But the Republic, who having those little States within
theirs loved not such disorders, and much less that Garrisons of Strangers
should be introduced there, sent some Soldiers to the Borders, and with the
Duke of Mantua and the Guardian passed effectual offices, remonstrating, that
as well the assistances as the enmities of the more powerful were equally
dangerous; that for a most trivial cause they were kindling a great fire which
would first burn their house, and afterward the rest of Italy.

To the Ministers of Spain it was also declared, that the novelty would be
extremely grievous, because Italy being not yet quitted from the late troubles,
might upon every emergency be put again into greater agitations. The Governor
of Milan, to say truth, judged not the matter such, as deserved to disturb the
present quiet; and commanding thereupon his Soldiers not to pass beyond the
Confines, interposes himself, adjusting the differences by punishing some of
the Mutineers, and pardoning all the rest. The minds of the Princes
nevertheless were so much disturbed with jealousies, that upon every accident
they were stirred up to apprehensions, even upon very rumors. The Town of
Sabieneda, which is of a situation of importance, not only to the Duke of
Mantua, but also to the other neighborhood, was yielded in Dowry to the Prince
of Stigliano, one of the chief Barons of the Kingdom of Naples. He being a man
of mean parts, allured by promises of honors, especially of being made a
Grandee of Spain, showed himself not unwilling to have a Garrison of that Crown
put into it. But his Wife, of a more masculine spirit, opposed both their
flatteries and threatenings, encouraged by underhand persuasions of the
Princes, and particularly of the Venetians, who would not willingly have
suffered it. Insomuch that the jealousy, which seemed to be raised on that
account, presently vanished. The Republic, amidst their vigilance in so many
places, omitting not the care of the domestic policy of their State, sends
three Judges throughout the Country to take a view of affairs for the right
administration of Justice, and removing of oppressions and grievances from
their Subjects. At Venice, Cardinal Francesco Vendramino, Patriarch, being
dead, was substituted by the Senate Giovanni Thiepolo, chief of the Church of
S. Marco, a man of singular charity toward the poor, and of great magnificence
in the building of Churches, which being proposed in the Consistory by the Pope
himself, was confirmed without his going to the Court of Rome.

Prince Thomas of Savoy about this time came to Venice, to give thanks for the
favors which the Republic had so largely contributed to his Father, and was
entertained and lodged according to the Magnificence belonging to so wealthy a
City. From the Eastern parts came some little distraction upon men's minds; in
that Ali Bassa, formerly Admiral, and one that showed himself very troublesome
to the Commonwealth, was at Constantinople promoted to be Grand Vizier. By
such Ministers is that Empire absolutely governed, whilst the Kings, buried in
Luxuries and the wantonness of the Seraglio, shut up from all but vice, give up
the supreme Authority in their affairs to the basest of Slaves. This man
bearing in his public Office the affections of a private man, and thoughts of
revenge for two Galiots, Men of War, taken a good while before by the Venetian
Ships, vents presently his spite against Buonricci, Interpreter of the
Venetian Bailo, who had prosecuted against him in the said business, causing
him to be most unjustly strangled. Amidst the Fast of that Nation, maintained
by the intestine discords of the Christians, neither the Right of Nations, nor
the practice or respect of Princes, is of any consideration; insomuch that a
little before also, the Ambassador of France had been some days in arrest, and
his Secretary upon false pretext put to the Torture. Now the complaints of the
Republic could not come to the King, but by means of the same Vizier, and he,
to stop every passage, revived the pretensions, that had been silenced, of
those of Bossena and others, who in the Prize of the Galley of Merchandise had
suffered loss, intending to oblige the Bailo to restitution. Moreover, setting
on foot most unjust pretensions upon the Confines of Dalmatia, he threatened
Invasions and Incursions. The Senate, who at the conclusion of Ossuna's
Government had disarmed Veniero, and reduced the Fleet to little more than
ordinary Guard, sent Anthonio Barbaro, Procurator, as Proveditor General to
take care of the Sea, and be assistant to Dalmatia against all injuries of the
Turks. But before he could be in a readiness, sixty Turkish Galleys laviering
without Corfu, with all signs and tokens of friendship, while one part only of
the Venetian Fleet was at Merlere with a force not able to resist, landed in
the Kingdom of Naples at Manfredonia, where the Governor of the Castle basely
presented the Captain Bassa with the Keys. The Turks contented themselves to
carry away out of the City and thereabouts Prisoners and Booty, retiring before
forty eight Galleys of Spain could join together at Messina.

At Constantinople the Ministers excusing to Giorgio Justiniano, Bailo of the
Republic, who made a sharp complaint of it, their entering into the Gulf,
alleged the provocations and mischiefs done them by the Spaniards. But the
Grand Vizier was soon after snatched away by death from the designs which he
proposed against the Venetians, and Vsseim succeeding him, one of more moderate
thoughts, with a present, according to the custom of the Country, lets fall
into silence the business of the Bossenians, applying his mind and forces to a
War against the Polacks, to which Osman pretended to go in person. For a
pretext of it were alleged certain differences raised by Gratiano Prince of
Maldavia, whom the Turks had a mind to dispossess of his Country, and the
Polacks, to maintain him. Others believed, as the truer motive, the instances
of the Protestants of Germany to divert King Sigismond from assisting Ferdinand.

It is surely true, that the Agents of the new King of Bohemia and of Gabor did
entice the Turks with a counsel as wicked as it was imprudent, to weaken a
private Enemy, for to strengthen the declared one of all Christendom. The Bailo
of the Venetians by express Order of the Senate, abstained from having any
thing to do with those Negotiations. But at Venice it appeared, as if the
Republic had been the Refuge of every one that desired succors. The Palatine
demanded an hundred thousand Ducats at least; Gabor, assistance: And for the
Catholic Ligue of Germany, Zaccaria Trattembach and Giulio Cesare Crivelli,
returning from Rome, were earnest for aid and free passage for Ammunition and
Soldiers, and that the Concessions of the Pope of certain Tenths upon the
Clergy of Italy might be extended also into their Country. But the Senate not
yielding to their importunities, nor diverting their thoughts from the affairs
of Italy, excused to all, with many reasons, their refusal. Neither could
France now, taken up in domestic confusions, be assistant to the affairs of
the Empire, but with good offices and counsels; and therefore had made choice
of the Duke d' Angoulesme with Monsieur de Bethune and the Abbot of Preo for
Ambassadors Extraordinary into Germany for various ends, not liking on the one
side, that the House of Palatine should be advantaged by that protection which
they had always given to the Hugenots; and desiring on the other, under the
title of Mediation, to introduce themselves into the business to foment the
disorders, or end them according to their own mind.

That Kingdom was surely in a very tottering condition; for the Queen Mother
had made so considerable a Party, that, to resist it, the Kings Authority
seemed not sufficient, nor Luines his favor. Nevertheless the Council being
corrupted, (the Bishop of Lusson, who presided, being gained by the Court with
great promises) it quickly fell to the ground. The King followed by very few
Troops, having quieted Normandy, and seized the Castle Caen, comes near to the
Pont de Ce, where the Duke de Rhetz, who with a greater strength was there to
defend it, abandons it, either terrified by a needless fear, or prepossessed by
the Cardinal his Uncle, who followed the Kings interest. From this success was
derived the confusion of all the Party, because their Forces were divided in
several Provinces, and the Queen in Angiers was exposed to dangers; whereupon
an agreement was on the sudden concluded, with a general pardon. The Bishop of
Lusson got for himself of the King the Nomination to a Cardinals Cap, and laid
by this Treaty the foundation of that greatness, which did afterward render
him one of the most notable and most powerful Ministers of Europe.

The King resolving to go on in restoring the Catholic Worship, and the
Ecclesiastical goods in Bern, a Country in the Pirenean Mountains, the chief
Shop of Heresy, and where the name without the presence of the King was not
known, but in a way of mocquery, or for some pretext; goes thither,
notwithstanding the cold and inconvenience of the season, and the delays and
arts which the people laid in his way; but at last, having suppressed some,
settled Religion, and trusted the places of strength to the most faithful, he
departs, leaving nevertheless seed sown in the disgusts of many of a War near
at hand. But in Germany the Ambassadors of France were come to Vlm, where were
assembled the Deputies of the Catholic and of the Protestant Parties, and
there, through their mediation, was firmly established; That they should not
offend one another Countries, Bohemia notwithstanding to be excluded, where,
without breach of the agreement, Hostility might be used. It seems, that by
such a Negotiation the ruin of Frederick was concluded; because the Austrians
being secured from France, not regarding the bare Offices of England, and
little fearing the Princes of the Union, which drove vain and uncertain
interests, enjoyed the advantage of the Arms of the Catholic League; Bavaria
being now gained with the hopes to have the spoils, and the Vote of the House
Palatine, his Kinsman but Envyer. In Milhausen the Electors held yet another
meeting, from which they send exhortations and entreaties to Frederick, that he
would lay down that Crown, which now shook upon his head; but he knew not how
to resolve to withdraw himself from Fortune, though she threatened to forsake
him. He was then by the Imperial Ban proscribed by Ferdinand, who committed the
execution of it to the Archduke Albert, to Bavaria and Saxony: All three near
about the same time marched with powerful Armies toward the month of August.
The most powerful attempt was from that which came from Flanders; because the
Archduke in his own name, but with the Forces of Spain, sent Ambrogio, Marquess
Spinola, with twenty five thousand men toward the Rhine; Louys de Velasco
being left with considerable Forces to defend the Frontiers toward the United
Provinces, with which the Truce being expired, they remained without
provocations, but also in great distrusts.

Giovacchino Marquess of Anspach, General of the Union, lay encamped with his
Army at Oppenheim, and had laid a Bridge over the Rhine, when Spinola having
obtained passage of the Archbishop of Mentz, and of some Princes and Cities,
for fear of the Army and the Imperial Ban, approaches toward him, and made
himself Master of Creutzenach without much opposition. He then makes as if he
would advance toward Worms, and Anspach moved for its succors; but the other
changing his march falls suddenly upon Oppenheim, and with a resolute assault
carries it, finding within it all the provisions which were made for the
Protestant Army. He therefore plants his place of Arms there, repairing the
Bridge which had been taken up, and carrying into the Lower Palatine, governed
by the Duke of Deux Ponts, great fear. The weaker places yielded without
dispute, and some of the Princes of the Union separated from it. Many taxed
Anspach of want of experience; but he excused himself upon the Orders given him
by the English Ambassadors to stand upon his defensive, without provoking the
Spaniards. To speak truth, that King made bitter complaints at Brussels and at
Madrid to have been amused and deluded with the hopes of Peace; nevertheless
not enlarging his hand in assisting, he continued by the luke-warmness of his
mediation to foment the proceedings of Spain.

The United Provinces showed themselves more earnest, who liked not at all,
that the Arms of the Catholic King should advance to the Rhine; Maurice
therefore Prince of Orange, passing it with 8000 Foot and 3000 Horse, sends
Frederick Henricks his Brother to join Anspach with a good Body of men; but he
losing the time unprofitably, the Hollanders returned, some few English only
under Horatio Veer remaining in the Protestant Army. If the Palatinate groaned
under oppressions, Lusatia experienced a scourge yet more cruel; for the
strongest motives of Religion not having been able to overbalance the most
powerful ones of interest, and remove the Elector of Saxe from adhering to the
Austrians, he enters into that Province, and taking Budissen the Capital City,
laid in ashes for the most part by the Bombes flung into it, all the rest
submitted to his will. From thence he sends 14000 men into Silesia, which,
threatening the Metropolis Vratislavia, made themselves masters of Glosgaw. This
Province and Moravia had a little before been overrun by the Cossacks of
Homonay, and Frederick, who held a Diet at Bruna, had been forced to save
himself from their swift Incursion with four persons only into Prague.

The Moravians sent four Ambassadors to meet with these Barbarians to offer
them money, that forsaking Ferdinands Party they adhere to their interest. But
the Cossacks with a cruel document killing two of them, let the other go free,
that they might relate what was the duty of their fidelity, and what punishment
they ought to expect from their rebellion. Those Provinces had an effectual
trial, that the yoke of War is more heavy than that of obedience. The upper
Austria also confessed it with tears and blood; because Buquoy having, during
the winter-season, gently tempted it with allurements and Treaties rather than
with Arms, Lintz being reinforced by Mansfelt with 2000 men, the Province was
then confirmed in the Rebellion. But the Duke of Bavaria being entered into it
with 20000 Foot and 4000 Horse, filled it with such a terror, that the people,
having neither defense nor excuse, knew not where to resist him, nor how to
appease him. The States of the Country assembled in Lintz, were willing to
propound Conditions of Peace; but the Duke despising them, because they had let
him come too near, upon the 4. of August caused the Gates to be opened by
force. Where some of the guilty being punished, the rest oppressed with a great
Garrison, and all chastised with the general sack and spoil of the Country,
obedience was re-established. It was fit to follow fortune while she smiled
with success; and therefore it was resolved to enter into Bohemia, to make an
end of the War while it was but beginning. The Duke then taking the one way,
and Buquoy the other, marched in such a distance, that the numbers did not
hinder their progress, and Victuals were supplied to all, each taking in such
places and Castles as lay in their way. At Buduais they met to speak together,
thence uniting their Forces, but not their minds, which for sundry emulations
were always in this Expedition at discord, they moved toward Pisec, and that
taken in they advanced to Pilsen.

The Army of the Bohemians superior in number, but an equal in prowess and
discipline, coasted upon them, and troubled their march. The Chiefs were
persons of no great reputation, and Frederick, in a Labyrinth of endless
interests, could not govern, nor would be governed. His endeavors to hinder
the Catholics from coming near to Pilsen succeeded not; but Mansfelt supplied
it with art; because in that place, as in his own Conquest, he had fixed the
seat of his Fortune. By proposing a Treaty he hoped to gain time, till the
season should be more advanced to afford him succors. Neither did the Duke and
Buquoy despair of drawing him to their party; because he feigned discontents,
which besides the custom of Mercenaries, wont to abandon their party in the
ambiguity of Fortune, they might easily give credit too in him that served a
foreign Prince and a distracted people. But he, after some days, feigning also
Orders from Anhalt, which in regard of his honor obliged him to make
resistance, discovers the fraud; whereupon the Catholics not willing to waste
their Forces in a long Siege, nor entertain Fortune with lingering hopes,
leaving Pilsen, went to Prague. Frederick assaulted from so many parts, and
worsted in all, was in disorder; the people stood in a fright, and the Army was
wavering. Near to Raconits the Armies met, and that of the Protestants was
driven from most of their Posts, Buquoy being hurt, which nevertheless hindered
him not to go on in his march. Anhalt perceiving whither the Enemy bent, sent
la Tour before to Prague with some Troops, and himself, leaving the Baggage
behind, by ways to rights hastens thither, to prevent their possessing of the
Wiisemberg or White Hill, in which might much consist the defense of the City,
of a vast circuit, open in several parts, and in many commanded, and that
within shot.

A little after arrive there also the Duke and the Count, so that both the
Armies were now near to Prague. The Bohemian, in the superiority of Forces
showing a distrust of courage, entrench upon the highest part of the Hill,
placing their Cannon in certain Redoubts, and part of their Soldiers in the
Park, called the Star, a place of pleasure for their Kings. There was in the
Austrian Army the Father Domenico of Giesu Maria, a barefooted Carmelite,
reputed for a man of singular piety, who stirred up the Chiefs to fight,
promising a certain Victory. But in the Council there was difference of
opinions, some considering the Enemies greater number, and particularly of
Horse, and others the disadvantage of the situation, in that the Soldiers
before they could come to handy blows with the Enemy, were to go a good way
exposed to the Cannon and Musket Shot. Some added the unevenness of the Hill,
which by several sloapings and in windings, gave the Bohemians means to
fortify themselves, and at every pass to make good their Retreat. But hope of
Victory and the greatness of the recompense over-ballancing dangers, the Battle
was resolved on. Anhalt kept the Ports of Prague shut to take away from the
Soldiers the hope of escaping thither. In the Army he took for himself the
right Wing, and assigns to Hollach the left. Frederick, though so chief a part
of the Judgment of Fortune, stood in a place a little remote to observe the
event.

Of the Catholics the Imperialists had the right, and the Bavarians the left
hand. Their Word was the Glorious Name of the Virgin, under the protection of
which, represented in the chief Standard, the Wing of the Bavarians moved, over
which, next the Duke, Giovanni Count of Tilly commanded. To come to the Hill
they were to file over a Bridge, and then to pass a dirty Valley, and in that
disadvantage the young Anhalt would have charged them, if the Count of Hollach
had not staid him; whereupon the Catholics dis-engaged themselves, and being
defended from the Cannon with the rising of the Hill, they advanced in better
order. Buquoy to avoid the Cannon-shot, to which his men, divided into three
great Battallions with Horse on the Wings, stood most exposed, hastened his
pace and came to the charge at the very same time that Tilly made his attaque.
The shouting of the Soldiers, the noise of the Drums, and the roaring of the
Cannon deafned Heaven, making the Hill a deadly Theater of outrage and
slaughter. The two Armies consisted of more than sixty thousand men. At the
beginning advantage smiled on the Bohemians; for young Anhalt, with the
assistance of the Count Slich, repulsed the first Charge, pursuing the Enemy
with the gain of some Colors, the death of Prainer, and dead wounds of the
Colonel Macau. The Protestants hereupon cry out Victory. But the Veteran
Squadrons of the Catholics, giving themselves not for lost upon the first
accident, nor suffering themselves to be overcome by clamours, returned so home
a Charge, that Guilielme Verdugo that commanded the Walloons, possessed one of
the Redoubts with three pieces of Artillery, and took Prisoners Anhalt and
Slich before mentioned. Fetheu turns the Cannon against the others, doing
execution, and bringing terror. The Hungarian Cavalry frighted with the
yelling of the Cossacks, and beaten with the thick hail of Muskets, be gave
themselves to a hasty flight, drawing after them a good part of the Infantry of
the Bohemians, Hollach abandoned by all, his Horse being killed under him, had
much ado to retire himself. Anhalt the General with his voice and with his hand
exhorted and labored to stop the Run-aways, and put them again in order; but
fear being deaf, he saves himself at last, after timely notice given to the
King Palatine to provide for his safety. The Regiment of la Tour, drawn up into
a Battaillon, was the last that was defeated after a great resistance. All the
Hill was seen covered with dead bodies and fugitives. He that had his Arms
loose flung them away, and many that were heavy armed perished in the Molda,
endeavoring an escape by the River, while the Gates of the City remained yet
shut. The Battle lasted not above two hours, the Conquerours wearying
themselves more in the slaughter than they had done in the fight. The Count of
Merode makes toward the five thousand Bohemians, which had their Post in the
Star-Park, receiving them into submission with their Colors in a bundle, and
with their Arms hardly obtaining their lives from the fury of the Soldiers,
who with the weariness of the spoil alone remained satisfied. The Cannon was
all taken by the Victorious with more than one hundred Colors. The dead on the
side of the Conquered were above six thousand, with as many more Prisoners, the
rest scattered and dissipated in such sort, that they could no more rally
themselves again. At the miracle of so great a Victory both Conquered and
Conquerours were overcome with amazement; that of the Catholics there were not
reckoned above three hundred slain. This Battle, which happened on the 9. of
November, confirmed the Kingdom to the Austrians, and to all the Catholics the
Empire.

Frederick got back into Prague, demands twenty four hours of Truce; but
Bavaria would grant only eight, within which he was to abandon the Title and
the Kingdom. He without other Reply, the next morning with his Wife and little
Children flies out of the City; leaving a memorable Example, That Ambition, a
splendid Guide, but little secure, like nocturnal Lights in the Air, leads him
that follows to destruction. By unfrequented ways he arrives at Vratislavia,
and the Catholics, the way being made for them by the Victory, might have
entered that night into Prague (for the Walloons came close to it on the highest
side of San Lorenzo) if the Chiefs, fearing under the darkness of the night the
cruelty, outrage, and villainies of the Soldiers had not forbid it. The
following morning those same Walloons, assisted by the Catholic Inhabitants,
by some open places and by Scalade got within the Wall. The Protestants being
retired to the other side of the River into the old Town, rendered themselves
without more ado. The Duke restrained as much as he could license and spoil.
After thanks rendered to God, and the Oath of Fidelity taken in the Name of
Ferdinand, he leaves his Troops in the Kingdom, and returns into his own
Country. The Prince of Lichtestein, left Governor of Bohemia, takes the Castle
of Carlestein, where the Crown of the Kingdom was kept by a Garrison of six
hundred, some English, some Scotch. Buquoy on the other side entering into
Moravia, at his appearance only reduced it to obedience, vipartiting there, for
a punishment, his Troops into Winter Quarters.

Frederick now found himself indeed cast out of the Throne, not so much by the
Arms of his Enemies, as by intestine disorders. He exercised a precarious
Command, every one of those who had lifted him up to the Crown, pretending at
his pleasure now to deny him obedience. The Count of Hollach, ill looked upon
by all, had the favor of his greatest confidence; the principal Bohemians had
conceived great disgust, and the most part of the Strangers had served at their
own charge. The Soldiers not being paid, had with their violences provoked the
Peasants. Religion it self, divided into several Sects, divided also men's
minds, and Frederick with Edicts in favor of his Calvanism had offended many,
and raised some tumult amongst the people. In sum, after this all loving
liberty, no body would be at the charge, or run the hazards of it; and many
being deceived, in the belief of making their private fortunes in the loss of
the public, denied to contribute, others did it scantily, and it was said that
some taxed at two thousand Florins, and not willing to give more than five
hundred, left after the battle, when they fled from Prague three hundred
thousand Dollers in prey to the Conquerours. In Hungary a Diet held in this
interim in the presence of an Ambassador Turk, and those of France and Poland
had not been able to conclude the Peace, and the Truce expired, the War began
anew, and D'Ampiere taking a view of Possonia, for the applying of a Pettard,
lost his life by two Musket Shot. Nevertheless after the battle of Prague,
Gabor inclined to Peace; but demanding the charge of Palatine of the Kingdom,
which is the same as Viceroy, he could not effect it. He taking the Kingly
Title, and soliciting the Venetians anew to assist him, did not obtain it,
although to incite them, he offered to cause the Town of Segna, formerly so
troublesome to them, to fall into their hands. The year 1620. ending with such
successes in Germany, although the Fortune of the Austrians appeared to be
bettered, yet men perceived that the War nourishing it self with its own blood,
increased rather, than had the least show of coming to a period. The affairs of
Italy went on as if measured by equal steps; for according to the accidents of
Germany, Feria did sometimes suspend, and at others promote his designs upon
the Valteline. In the Grisons for some months the peoples minds had been quiet,
rather than at concord; the banished underhand soliciting Feria continually
for assistance. Some of the Commons foreseeing themselves, that they were not
able to subsist of themselves, and believing that no Prince, more
dis-interessedly than the Venetians, were like to uphold their liberty, called
from Zurich, with an intent to make a League, Pietro Vico Resident for the
Republic, who had no sooner set his foot in the Grisons; but hearing of the
Revolt of the Valteline, thought best to defer his Negotiation to a more quiet
season.

The Valteline is a streak of Land, which exceeds not fifty miles in length,
and being of a various breadth, surpasses not twenty five, watered by the River
Adda, situate in the midst of the Mountains in the extremity of Italy, and
seems cut out by Nature to divide States and separate Confines. It has Tirol
toward the East, and the Milanese toward the West; on the North Rhetia
commands it, and on the South it borders with Brescia and Bergamo, Territories
of the Venetians. The River discharges it self into the Lake of Como, and on
the one side and on the other a Plain is extended, peopled therefore with many
Towns, and where the Mountains are any thing low, abounds with Corn, Wine, and
Cattle which feed it, and by imparting thereof to Strangers, inriches it also.
At its beginning and ending it has, as Appendixes, the Counties of Bormio and
Chiavena; the first joins to Tirol, and pierces with vast high Mountains deep
into Rhetia, the other on this side of the Spluga declining into a little Plain
faces to a Lake, which though it be a narrow part of that of Como, yet under a
diverse name is called the Lake of Chiavena. All this Country, subject to the
Grisons, sought with all impatience, conjunctures, and pretexts to withdraw
themselves from their Dominion, and matter of Conscience suggested to the
people motives very effectual; because the Leagues sending them Judges and
Magistrates, for the most part infected with Heresy, it seemed by their
founding of Colleges, and building of Churches, as if their aim were, not only
to spread it through the Valley, but also to introduce it into Italy, where the
true Religion residing as under Wardship, errors cannot be admitted or
tolerated. Upon this stock of universal piety, the banished grounded their
desire of being restored to their Country, and Princes their interest; the
Austrians in particular, who considered the Valtelline, as in effect it is, as
a Gallery, which uniting the Countries of Germany with those of Spain,
separates the Venetians and Italy from the assistance of Strangers. The Count
of Fuentes, who more than any former Governor of Milan had enlarged his
authority in that Province, was wont to counsel his King, that to put Fetters
upon Italy, Monaco, Final, and the Valtelline were to be possessed by him. Of
the two first the design proving easy, the last, as the most difficult, was
reserved for a better conjuncture, the Grisons making themselves considerable
by their adherencies, as well as their strength; and it appearing that the
Venetians, not only for their own, but were easily moved for another interest.
The Count notwithstanding lays the first stone, planting the Fort, which
commands the entrance into the Valley. Ferdinand by fast bonds being now
indissolvably united to Spain, nothing was wanting for the convenience and
strengthening of the common Monarchy, but to conjoyn their States, and if by
possessing the Lower Palatinate, a great passage was opened for Germany to
communicate with Flanders, by making themselves Masters of the Valtelline, the
one and the other were linked unto Italy. The principal persons of that Valley,
and in particular the Piantaes and the Cavalier Robustelli, offered to seize it
with so much facility, that Feria had no other thought but to enjoy the prize.
They represented the desires and invitations of the people groaning under the
yoke of a base Government, which having avarice for a Law, sold Authority to
Magistrates, that they might expose Justice to sale to the people. They
considered the Order of Nature it self in that unhappy Country perverted, where
the worst possessing more authority than the better, there remained nothing
that was not venal; Goods, Life, Honor, nay Conscience it self: nor could more
wickedness be practiced by the Judges, nor more misery be endured by the
people. What better opportunity was to be looked for than this, in which
Rhetia, torn to pieces with Factions, is neither capable to command nor to
obey, no not to it self?

France was encumbered with its own discords, and the Venetians while the
Conjuncture favored them, did rather divert blows than resent them, if given
on a sudden they came to succeed happily. Though Peace in Italy was at that
time most necessary for Spain, Feria nevertheless quickly assents to the
Proposition; for if it succeeded not, it cost only the banishment or lives of
some few; and if it took effect, he thought the advantage such as might deserve
at least some little hazard and pains. Besides the desire to signalize his
Government, he did believe he should not want excuses and accidents to color
his attempt, nor devices, or a Treaty to divert coming to Arms. These were the
causes of the new War in Italy; in the banished desire of liberty; in the
people zeal to Religion, and in the Princes Interest of State and mutual
Jealousies. In the month of July began the Revolt of the Valteline, into which
there coming down by concert three hundred men out of Tirol, the whole Country
rising in a tumult of a sudden, it seemed like a flash of Lightning which
overran it in a moment. The Governors of the Protestants, in particular the
Heads of the Families, which were to the number of three hundred, were killed,
and under the Cloak of Religion were committed execrable villainies, much
innocent blood shed, Estates violently taken away, and private revenges
exercised. The Catholics immediately chose new Magistrates to sway this new
Government, and fortified certain places of importance with money from Spain.
From the Milanese also Soldiers came filing on, and from the Fort Fuentes
Cannon descended, otherwise without this strengthening the fire would have been
quenched, while it was kindling. The Count Giovanni Serbellione raised men for
Feria; but the name of the Pope was pretended, the better to cover the design.
The Venetians more than any other seemed stricken with this accident; because
besides the increase of power to the Austrians, by whom they saw themselves
encompassed with a line of little less than five hundred miles, they saw also
the way stopped for any succors, but from Levies in their own Countries. And
for that cause both to the Pope and to the Austrians they made serious
remonstrances for Peace, prognosticating the evils to come, and showed the
distractions which would arise upon it. Bur all offices being vain, they apply
to strengthen themselves, stir up their friends, and give vigor to the
oppressed. Judging that their advantage consisted in not giving time to the
Spaniards, and the formerly banished to settle themselves in the possession,
they exhorted the Grisons to a sudden attempt to recover what they had lost, by
alluring the people with a general pardon and security to the Catholic
Religion in the Valley. They persuaded also the Switzers, upon the ground of
their Alliance with the Grisons, to take Arms, and promised on their side to be
assistant, disbursing money to the Grisons, and sixteen thousand Ducats to the
two Cities of Bern and Zurich to arm two Regiments. Indignation and common
interest not prevailing so much with that people as gold and private profit
moves them, in Rhetia with that impulse of money they raised twenty four
Companies, hastening therewith to provide Chiavena, upon which the Mutineers
had their eye. Seven entered into the Valley on that side, taking in at the
first assault Traona, and certain Trenches guarded by the Captain Carcano
Milanese. But coming with little order near to Morbegno, garrisoned by
Spaniards, they were repulsed. But they had their revenge at Sondrio, taking
the place. All this could not be acted without much slaughter and disorders,
the Grisons being blooded and enraged. Fear therefore spreading it self,
Friars, Nuns, and many other retired into the State of the Republic, which
gave order that the persons and holy things should be received and kept with
great care. Such an Invasion nevertheless was like a Torrent of a Land-flood,
which pouring forth all at once from the Mountains, quickly vanishes. Those of
the Valteline, reinforced from the Milanese with four thousand Foot, and four
hundred Horse, attacque them, and drive them from the Bridge of Ganda; thence
recovering Traona and Sondrio, they took also in the County of Chiavena, Riva,
and Nova. Animated afterward with this superfluity of Fortune, having a mind
to attacque Poschiavo, which is a Town of Rhetia, where, coming down from the
Country of Bern, is the straightest passage of the Valley, being beaten, they
returned back. The Protestant Switzers causing ten Colors to advance, partly
to secure Chiavena, partly to give courage to the Commons of the Agnedina, came
down to Bormio, strengthened with some Troops of the Grisons, and, forcing the
straights of the passages, drive the Spaniards thence with the loss of two
Captains. This County was of great concernment to both the Parties; because,
separating the Valley from Tirol, and without joining to it, communicating from
Rhetia with the State of Venice, it might from Germany and from the Republic
receive and give mutual succors. Andrea Paruta, General of the Venetians, sent
seasonably Arms, Ammunition, and Soldiers for its better guard, when the
Grisons and Switzers, impatient to expect so opportune a succor, and presuming
upon equal success in whatsoever they undertook, would needs advance into the
Valteline. But proceeding in their march without order, and disposing of their
Quarters without defense; all Discipline and Conduct failing, coming to Tirano,
and being resolutely received by a Body of the Spanish Soldiers, they were
defeated with the loss of two Colors, and the Colonel of the Regiment of Bern.
In place of retiring to Bormio, they thought of nothing but returning to their
homes, abandoning the Town and the County; whereupon those of the Valteline and
the Spaniards enter again into it without opposition. Feria gave out, that his
assistance was only in defense of Religion, for which there appearing no
caution offered to him which was sufficient, he denied to withdraw it, as was
proposed, to make place for some composure betwixt those of the Valteline and
the Grisons. But he knowing of what advantage discord amongst Enemies was to
overcome them, sows it among the Helvetians; whereupon the Catholic Cantons
rising up against the Protestants, shut the passes of entrance into the
Grisons, and having raised fifteen hundred men, with two Companies of the
Valleys threatened to enter into the Valley of Musocco, to assist those of the
Valteline, and such of the commons of the Grisons as professed the Catholic
Faith. The Cities of Zurich and Bearn dejected with the blow received at
Tirano, diverted by the threatenings of their Confederates, and amongst
themselves entangled by many arts and considerations, left Rhetia exposed to
their Enemies and in prey to their own disorders.

The Arch Duke Leopold, Brother of the Emperor, in this while armed in Tirol,
and publishing his pretensions of Sovereignty over some of the Commons of the
Ten Directorships, it appeared that his aim was to reduce all the Country to
the ancient subjection of the Austrians. The Affairs stood in this manner much
straightened, no succors appearing from France, but rather the Ministers of that
Crown in Rhetia made things more intricate; because at the instigation of
Molina, though against the mind of the Ten Directorships, Gheffier being called
to Slants, where the Pittach was held, he persuaded the People to approve
certain Articles, which nevertheless were to be confirmed by the Crown, by
which the judgment of Tava being abolished, that of Coira should be revived,
with the factions and enmities which in consequence went along with it. This
served to play the Spaniards game; for the Lega Grisa, protesting against these
deliberations, the Government thereby growing into greater confusion,
neglecting the Valteline, applied not remedies to the present evils.

The best resolution was to send Ambassadors to Venice, Hercules Salica
Cavalier, and Constantino Pianta, the first whereof dying before the declaring
their Commission, leaves to his Colleague the care of representing the need
which Rhetia had of the authority of their counsels, no less than of the
assistance of their Forces, the Government languishing in discord and
confusion, the People incapable to discern their evil, or discerning it to
apply the remedies: The Senate knew of what importance it was to take the
charge of a body, that not being able to govern, but rather disturb it self,
could be of no service but to incumber others also. Yet it being not fit to put
him in despair, they send back Pianta with hopes of good assistance, when the
people reflecting upon their miseries, should be willing to put a hand to their
own preservation. But in its more secret reflections, they looked upon Italy
henceforward in a condition not to be able of it self to bear up against the
Arms and Arts of the Austrians. They thought it therefore necessary, for the
remedy of one power, to raise up another of contrary interests and opinions,
since the balance of Europe consists in two Kingdoms which would be equally
formidable, if in the Spanish ambition were not corrected by sparing, and in
the French force was not weakened by inconstancy. The Senate sends Girolamo
Priuli Ambassador extraordinary to Paris, to the end, that informing that King
of the state of things, he might persuade him to assist his ancient
Confederates, and offer them for that purpose the union of his Forces. With
wonted incitements of profit and favor, Dediguieres upon the first motion
being come into Italy, to whom the care of that Country seemed committed,
speaks with the Duke Carlo at Turin, in the presence of Giovanni Pesari
Ambassador of the Republic. Several ends discovered themselves in that
conference; for the aim of the Venetians tended to nothing else, but either by
Treaty or by Arms to bring things to some kind of composure, that might restore
the Valteline to its former estate, and the liberty of the Grisons.

But Carlo who kept the Gates of the Alps, not regarding those other passages
aimed to draw the French into Italy, to the end that making a general change in
the state of things, his own might be advantaged according to success, and he
might enjoy the spoils of others losses. Now the only design of France, was to
interest it self no farther than by Treaty and name, proposing that the
Republic should charge upon it self the burden and the War; for which purpose
Desdiguieres, in quality of a private Captain, offered under their pay to raise
in an instant ten thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, and to pass them through
Helvetia into the Grisons; but the Venetians, excusing themselves upon the
season, so far advanced, which made the passage difficult, did not embrace the
proposal, insisting that they would not be alone; but that in the Cause which
was common the Crown also should concur, and the Switzers assembled then at
Badan upon these occurrences. Nothing therefore was concluded in Piedmont; but
in France Priuli, being arrived at Court, and found the King rid of the
disagreements with his Mother and the Voyage of Bearn, Declares the intensions
of the Republic to be, that Religion should be secured, and the Country
restored, to preserve to God and the Princes that which divine and humane right
had imparted to them. He offers the consideration, that Italy despoiled in a
manner of the ornaments of its liberty, of its strength, and of its beauty, did
apprehend destruction, being environed with a formidable power, watching on
occasions ready to take advantages, greedy of conquests, and tenacious in
keeping them. That in the support of that Crown alone was placed the hopes of
the Grisons, a people, it may be said, protected from their very beginning, and
by the constancy in their friendship ready to fall under the Yoke. True it was
that the Republic was concerned in the neerness, but nevertheless glory ought
to stir up the King, who was bound to render an account to public fame of the
distress of his most faithful friends. That Europe had hopes now in his youth
of fruits equal to justice and power, the one being due to the oppressed, and
the other required by his own and common interest. That in his Kingdom he had
by both triumphed over two of the fiercest Monsters, Heresy and discord. That
now Heaven reserved for him the honor of conquering the ambition of Strangers,
and overthrowing the slavery of Italy. That nothing was so much expected in
that afflicted Country, as the happiness of his conduct and authority to add
new examples to the old, that in its straits it was delivered by the Arms of
France. That Rhetia at present did implore him, and the Republic readily
offered it self to second his royal intentions with their endeavors, and they
not being sufficient, with Arms, mindful of the ancient friendship, and so long
correspondence by which Italy has always received honor and relief. That the
Valteline and Rhetia did expect it alone from this Union, equalizing by a just
Treaty the present advantages of the power of France with the benefits of the
vicinity of the Venetians.

France truly acknowledged the great mischiefs received in the fears of the
minority, and the civil discords, for having neglected foreign occurences, and
Monsieur de Villeroy being dead, an old man and trusty Minister, but most
averse to the affairs of the Grisons and of Italy, a great obstacle was
removed. Monsieur de Pisieux, then Secretary of State, in the name of the King
answers to Priuli, with full encomiums of the vigilance and prudence of the
Republic; that by sudden and seasonable assistance to the Swizzers and
Grisons, had endeavored to remedy the present evils, and prevent the future.
That the King would not suffer the wrongs of Rhetia, nor the oppressions of his
other Friends: That he was sending to the Court of his Brother-in-Law the
Marshal of Bassompiere Ambassador extraordinary, that he might endeavor the
quieting of the present divisions, by removing violence and restoring all
things to their first estate. In case that should not avail, that he declared
himself fully resolved to take Arms in conjunction with the Republic and
Carlo, both keepers of the liberty and security of Italy. All this was
communicated to the Pope, who being far advanced in years, and desirous to
repose his ashes, and adorn his Sepulcher with the memorials of Peace, was
greatly disturbed hearing it in danger and tossed up and down among the greater
Powers. Of such resolutions, which howsoever came to nothing in regard Treaty,
separated from Force, served not but to confirm the Spaniards in the possession
of the Valley, and of their minds the Austrians believed the Venetians to be
Authors. A War therefore of hatred rather than Arms breaking forth, the
Spaniards recall upon the score of their private interests their Ambassador from
Venice, and attempted in other Courts to introduce disparity betwixt their
Ministers and those of the Republic, contrary to the practice and use of the
other Crowns, which treated them as belonging to a Prince that for Sovereignty,
Power, and Titles was numbered amongst the Kings; so that all correspondence by
Treaty and Offices was wholly interrupted; whilst in such formalities the
present Age believes that if not the Essence the Covering and Vail of
Principality consists.

ANNO M.DC.XXI.
The Spaniards judging it their great advantage, that the business of the
Valteline should pass for a matter of Religion, to the end that amidst
applauses, excuses, and pretexts, some Princes might be restrained, and others
proceed with greater caution, applied all care well to impress the Pope with
that opinion, to their offices of duty joining other means, and in particular
to gain his Kindred, having for that purpose created the Prince of Sulmona his
Nephew Grande of Spain. Paul nevertheless, having had the teaching of a long
experience, preferred Peace before all flattery, nor did believe it fit, that,
confounding together the interests of Religion and State, the Popes ought to
expose themselves to the enmity of great Princes, or put themselves to have
need of the assistance of the more powerful. He applied therefore to a
neutrality, as a course more prudent, than what the Princes showed themselves
pleased with. But in the beginning of the year, having in a certain
ecclesiastical function superfluously wearied and inflamed himself, he passes
to Heaven to render an account of the World, over which for the direction of
Souls he had been for sixteen years placed in the Popedom. Ever since to the
Ecclesiastical Dignity a worldly Power has been superadded, and that the
corruption of the Age has with the veneration of holy things confounded also
humane respects, Princes have very often in the election of Popes caused to be
profaned with their interests, that which the Church possesses of most pure and
most to be regarded. But God that has espoused it with the Ring of his true
Faith, protects it from violence, confounds the counsels, punishes the
attempts, and preserving it by his holy Spirit, makes it clearly evident, that
though the Conclaves are not exempt from factions, and affections,
nevertheless, the counsels of man seldom succeeding, the lot falls where Divine
Providence directs it.

For the present by how much the suspense of the Affairs of the Valteline was
more embroiled, with so much the more diligence did the Princes effectually
labor to prevail with their partisans, to cause the Pontificate to fall upon
him, that either by his own inclination adhered to their wills, or in regard of
the Family and Kindred was like to be more easily gained. The will of the
Spaniards, and of the Nephew of the dead Pope inclined to Cardinal Campori of
Cremona, subject not only by birth, but by affection partially addicted to
Spain, and by consequence for the same respects abhorred by France, and it
appeared as though the election was not to be hindered, so strong was that
party, although together with his private enviers, the Marquess de Coure
Ambassador of France did openly oppose him. But the minds of the Conclave
unexpectedly altering, contrary to the opinion of themselves, all concurred
unanimous in Alexander, Cardinal Lodovisio, Boltognese by birth, who took the
name of Gregory the Fifteenth. He almost seventy years old, giving himself to
quiet more than business, leaves quickly the direction of Affairs to his
Nephew, now a Cardinal, who governed them through the whole course of this
Pontificate, with great ability and an authority supreme. The Princes
studiously contended to possess the Pope in their favor, in the business of
the Valteline, Favin sollicites those People to send Deputies to the Court of
Rome, that they might fill all with clamours and complaints, so to stir up
compassion toward those that made a show to breathe nothing but Religion and
Liberty, motives so powerful, that the one with reason possesses the chief
place in things sacred, and the other in civil. He sends also Giovanni Vives, a
known Minister of the advantages of the Monarchy, and of the disturbances of
Italy, and joins to him the President Acerbi; who, during his private Fortune,
had been familiar with the Pope, that so in public Audiences and private
Discourses, he might continually have his ears beaten with the incitements of
zeal and piety. The Ambassador of the Venetians on the other side endeavored
to represent that affair in a contrary shape, and separate from Religion.
Because that, If the Republic kept it with so much care unviolated in its own
Dominions, it could no less suffer it to be defiled amongst their Neighbors.
But it was not to be endured, that under a pretext of Piety, Interest should
intrude it self, to the possessing of a Country, to which the Spaniards had no
other title but that of their own profit and convenience, and the oppression of
others. The Pope was greatly perplexed at these beginnings, and desired a
composure of the business; and thereupon with his own hand wrote into Spain to
the King, and the Cardinal Lodovisio to his Confessor and principal Ministers,
representing; That to Italy, nay rather to all Christendom, there could not be
an appearance of a greater calamity by War, in which, amidst the zeal of
Religion, military License would slip in with the contempt of Laws, both divine
and humane, it being impossible for impiety it self and injustice to carrry on
a War by honest rules and innocent means.

There arrived at this time in Rome an Embassy from the Venetians, which
according to the pious custom of Catholic Princes is called of obedience, and
consisted of four chief Senators, that is to say, Girolamo Justiniano
Procurator, Anthonio Grimani, Francesco Contarini Cavalier, Procurator, and
Girolamo Soranzo Cavalier; the which, besides the accustomed offices, had order
to insist much upon the business of the Valteline. But Gregory, by a diversion
from that chief point, required with great earnest, that the Republic would
re-admit into their State again those religious people of the Society of Jesus,
which for important causes, in the time of his Predecessor, had been banished,
which being repugnant to many Laws and Formality, the indissoluble bonds of
Government, he could not obtain. Nevertheless the Marquess de Coevre, in
quality of Ambassador Extraordinary, passing from Rome to Venice, with the
business better laid, presses it home in the Name of King Lewis, and at the
same time the Bishop of Monte Fiascone, Nuntio Apostolico, with a Brief from
the Pope, and Letters from the Cardinal Lodovisio, did earnestly second the
importunity. But the Senate did not depart from their first conception,
remonstrating to the foresaid Ministers their Decrees and grave Considerations,
by reason whereof Princes in amity with them ought not to press them to that,
which was neither permitted to them to grant, nor could they deny without doing
displeasure to themselves. Some took upon them to judge, that this demand had
its rise from a higher account and more secret ends, it having perhaps been the
aim of some, to render the Venetians, who it was supposed would not have given
their consent, either distrusted by the new Pope, or little acceptable to
France at a time when it was needful to gain the good disposition of the one,
for the affairs in agitation, and to manage confederations and adjustments with
the other. In the mean time the hinge of the business of the Valteline being
fixed in Rome, with various turnings, passing also to other Courts, Feria
manages his business more happily, planting Forts at Morbegno, Sondrio, and
Tirano to establish himself in possession. Sowing in Rhetia incessant
divisions, the effect was, that he at last gained la Lega Grisa by Rams of gold
which equally over-turn Mountains, and the hearts of those people, persuading
them to send six Ambassadors to Milan. The Government being in this manner
divided, he could not have safer Hostages of their Venality, and of the ruin
of that unhappy Country. To give it the last blow, with four of the
Ambassadors, the other two dissenting, he concludes a Treaty, by which the
Custody of the Forts was yielded to the Spaniards, the Passes were to be open
to them, they with a show of words reserving to themselves in appearance the
ancient Alliance with France and Feria, promising assistance, if the other two
dissenting Leagues should not confirm the Treaty. This Monster of Ambition and
Interest was without form, begotten by an illegitimate Authority, but which
nevertheless served for an advantage to Feria's designs, to put the Grisons
into confusion, to remain in the Valley, and discompose whatsoever might be
resolved elsewhere. Gheffier attempted to oppose himself, but in vain, the name
of the French being either detested by the party most oppressed, or despised by
that already sold to the Spaniards.

Scaramuccia Visconti going hereupon into Rhetia, in the name of the Governor
of Milan, with money and promises, some of the Commons of the Grisa failed not
to adhere to the foresaid accord, induced thereto besides from the fear of some
Colors of the Catholic Switzers, who at the instance of Feria, being entered
into that Country, oppressed it with Quarters. And the Canton of Zurich in
opposition to them kept Soldiers in the other two Leagues; but esteeming no
mischief greater than charge, these would have been long before disbanded, if
the Venetians with ten thousand Florins a month had not kept them on foot. With
this encouragement la Cade and the Directorships took Arms, pretending by
forcible remedies to keep the Grisa in the ancient Union. Pompeo Pianta, the
supposed chief Contriver of the disagreements, was killed, and Visconti with
many of the Faction of Spain, were forced to retire in great haste out of the
Country; because to the first fury of that enraged people, nothing being able
to resist, the Catholic Switzers also with their Colonel Betlinger retired,
leaving Cannon and Baggage behind.

La Lega Grisa then joined themselves to the other; but Feria in hopes, which
quickly vanished, to keep the Torrent of these armed people far from the
Valley, did not only strengthen the Forts, but to facilitate the gaining of
Chiavena, caused an Invasion to be made into the Valley of Musocco, which alone
of the three Leagues is situate on this side the Mountains. The Inhabitants,
though Catholics, yet for all that not inclined to the Spaniards, having cold
and ice for the defense of their situation, hid themselves behind a great
Trench of Snow, whence sallying without being observed, they so unexpectedly
charged the Spanish Troops, that leaving five hundred dead upon the place, they
retired dispersed by several ways into the Milanese.

Thus every day were their minds as well as Troops more and more imbrued in
blood, and the Venetians finding in the Princes of Italy more apprehension of
the evil than resolution for the remedy, had recourse again to the King of
England, by the means of Girolamo Lando ordinary Ambassador, representing to
him the state of things to be in a condition of great contingency. James with
wonted magnificence of words answers; That he took to heart the security and
safety of Europe. That the Interests of Italy were always in his eye and in his
cares. That he held the Republic above all in a choice confidence and constant
friendship. And did therefore declare, that if his Son-in-law were despoiled of
his Patrimonial Countries, he would send a powerful Army into Germany to uphold
him. If the Hollanders should be invaded, he would not spare his assistance;
and if the Venetians should suffer any molestation, he would succor them with
the Forces of all his Kingdoms, and for an earnest offered a present Levy in
England of ten thousand Soldiers. The Senate by Letters express renders him
thanks in abundance, esteeming those magnificat offers for a grace, if not an
assistance. It was now no secret, that at this time the Spaniards themselves
kept the King in hope of the Marriage of Mary, second Daughter of Philip, with
the Prince of Wales, to the end to make him suspected by all, and beget a
belief in himself, that the restitution of the Palatinate should be one of the
chief Articles in that agreement. He nevertheless at Madrid presses also
effectually for the restitution of the Valteline, and Bassompiere, arriving
thereupon, pursues the same, the Popes Nuntio also and the Ambassador of the
Venetians contributing thereto their endeavors.

But the death of Philip the Third leaves for some days the business in
suspense. The face of the Court was a little before this much changed; for
although Lerma, with the Purple of a Cardinal, had thought to cover himself
from changes and accidents, yet it being difficult by honest means to maintain
the ascendant over the Genius of Princes, he escaped not the accustomed
malignant influence of Envy and of Fortune. Public discourses ran abroad, that
he had with poison procured the death of the Queen Margaret, by the cooperation
of Roderigo Calderone, who had a power over her mind, equal to that which he
exercised over the will of the King. The disorders in the Government being over
and above imputed to him, and in many things calumny, envy, and the interest of
a few being joined to what was true, his disgrace, from the hatred of all was
fiercely promoted. Having for some time since wrestled with many in this narrow
path of the ambition of Court, he met with no more fierce Competitor, than the
Duke D'Vceda his own Son, closely oyned up with Father Luigio Aliaga, he Kings
Confessor; so that there was not a corner that was not cunningly beset, even to
the inward retirement of Conscience, and the most secret Colloquies of the
Soul. The King at last yields to the general desire of the Court and Kingdoms,
and in honor of the Purple silencing his accusations, commands him to retire.
It remained a doubt, whether in an age, proclaimed by the wrath of Heaven, to
the mocquery of Favorites, the King would not have taken upon himself the
Government, when death, in the forty third year of his age, takes him away from
the troubles which Empire carries with it. His years would surely have been
more memorable, if he had been born a private man rather than a King; because
being better adorned with the ornaments of life, than endowed with the skill to
command, as goodness, piety, and continuance placed him in a degree higher than
ordinary Subjects, so the disapplication to Government rendered him lower than
was fit or necessary. By public defects, private virtues being corrupted, and
in particular keeping his mind in idleness, it was believed, that he had
reserved nothing for himself to do, but to consent to all that which the
Favorite had a mind to. Thus the Government of the World, recommended to
Princes as to the true Shepherds, falls into mercenary hands, making themselves
not understood but by the sound voice of interest, and the authority of
ambition, the people suffer ruin and calamity, and the Princes themselves
render account to God of that Talent, which they have suffered their Ministers
to make merchandise of. It is certain, that Philip in the agony of death, was
not so much comforted with the calling to mind his innocent life, as he was
troubled with the sting of conscience for his omissions in Government. The
report was, that the Maxims of Interest yielding in that instant to the Law of
God, the restitution of the Valteline was precisely ordered.

The Son, Philip the Fourth, comes to the Kingdom in an age so young, being but
sixteen years old, that the World had cause heedfully to observe, whether
ambition, the common disease of Princes, would sooner move or satiate him. But
it quickly appeared, that the Ascendant of Favorites was not yet set; for
dispatches being brought to the King, he delivers them to Gasparo di Gusman,
Conde d'Olivares, and he showing himself backward, though he desired it,
commanded they should be given to whom the Count would appoint. He feigning
modesty, assigns them to Balthazar di Zuniga, an old Minister, and of great
credit, but yet by concert; for Zuniga being his Uncle, they had agreed to
support one another; whereupon taking off the Mask, the Power fell to the
Count, who quickly honored besides with the Title of Duke, will be found with
this double attribute in the following relation to be more famous than
fortunate.

From the Republic, according to custom, were appointed an extraordinary
Embassy to the King Simeon Contarini Cavalier, Procurator, and Girolamo Soranzo
Cavalier. But Bassompiere, Valteline in such sort, that it was the 25. of April
concluded, That the Armies should be withdrawn out of the Valley, and the
Countries adjacent, and Religion with every other thing, as it was before the
year 1617, restored; France, the Catholic Switzers, and the Valesians obliging
themselves caution for it. To execute that much which was to be done, there was
to be a Meeting in Lucerna of the Ministers of the Pope, of France, and the
Archduke Albert in the Name of King Philip. The ancient Treaties of Rhetia with
the House of Austria and with Tirol were to remain untouched. Some other
Articles in favor of passage for the Spaniards were secretly added, which at
that time were not known. That notwithstanding, which was published, was more
than sufficient to make it understood, that both the Crowns conspired in one
and the same thing, which was to seek to delay the business; for France, the
agitation of civil discords not yet well settled, cared not so suddenly to
involve it self in those of Strangers; and Spain, in the instant of the new
Reign, thought it wise counsel to defer the War, and dissemble a Peace. The
Treaty, to say truth, contained but a huddle of things, little having been
decided, and all remitted to new Conferences. And therefore, although in Madrid
were published positive Orders to Feria, that he should withdraw his Arms, and
restore; the effect nevertheless did not appear; some ascribing it to accidents
suggested from more secret counsels, and the more simple reproaching the
Governor of Milan, as if he so tenderly loved the fruit of his own
contrivance, as not to be willing to part with it. But in Treaties faith will
fail as long as interest lives, and interest will be found as long as Princes
reign.

Feria, notwithstanding the advices of Peace, arms still more powerfully, and
in Germany the Archduke Leopold, interdicting Commerce to the Grisons and
Venetians, raised Soldiers, threatening the latter with Jealousies, and the
other with War. Thus the Mine sprung with great ease; for the Archduke having
possessed himself of the Valley of Munster, while the Grisons demanded the
restitution, alleging the Peace of Madrid so newly concluded, denies to be
bound to observe it, he having had no Minister there, nor given his consent,
and desired that Deputies might be sent to Felkirch, to the end, that by an
amicable accord those causes and suspicions might be removed, which had moved
him to possess it. The President Dole, in the Name of the Archduke Albert,
being arrived at the meeting in Lucerna, pretends to be treated as representing
Philip, stirring up the dispute of Precedence with the French, which expressly
the Articles of Madrid by designing a Minister of the Archdukes had aimed to
divert. During the delays to overcome this difficulty by writing, came new
Orders, Albert dies, and with him the Presidents full power failing, the
Conference dissolves. Neither were other hindrances wanting, Feria declaring
himself, that he would not execute the Treaty without the caution of the
Catholic Cantons, capitulated not so much for their power, as for their
neighborhood, and the dominion they have of passages. But they would not
interpose betwixt two so powerful Monarchs, and the common opinion then being
that Feria himself did strengthen them in that resistance. He also puts those
of the Valteline upon sending Deputies to Madrid, to make a clamor that
Religion was not sufficiently provided for, and he accompanies them with
Letters from the Senate of Milan, in which with motives of piety and Religion
were mingled consequences of convenience and advantage. He offers afterward to
make a show only that the Forts should be kept by the Catholic Switzers, but
that the Protestants should not abide in the Valley, till the Treaty should be
mended, and at the same time suggests underhand to the Grisons vain hopes of
having again the Valteline, if point blanck it should not be otherwise
conditioned, by some accord, in which the passages should be left free for
Spain. But it was not in the power of the Grisons to alter what was agreed in
Madrid betwixt the two Crowns.

All this while there arrived not a Courrier out of Spain in Italy, but orders
to the Duke were published for restoring and disarming, with an express command
besides to hasten Soldiers for the Fleet, whilst the Turks, unsuccessfully
involved in the War of Poland, and in the Black Sea employed in repelling the
Cossacks, left the White open to whatsoever attempts of the Christians. But
Feria, and the other Ministers having their minds more fixed on advantages in
Italy, than progress against the Turks, such discourses had no other end, but
to raise a jealousy in the Venetians, as if within the bosom of the Adriatic
some surprises and acquisitions were to be attempted in Albania; but the Fleet
lying idle in Messina, more numerous in Ships than provided with men, the
apprehension the Republic received from that side was but little and short.

But toward Lombardy jealousies did increase, because betwixt distrustful
Neighbors, either accidents frequently cause discord, or the more powerful
seeks pretexts. And so a contest and almost a breach arose for a very narrow
way which is called the Steccato, which to the Territory of Bergamo joins that
of Crema, imbayed and environed on all sides with the Milanese. By most ancient
contracts with the City of Milan, it is the absolute and undoubted Dominion of
the Venetians; but for convenience and shortning of way, a passage remains
open, not only for passengers, but was wont to be permitted to Soldiers, when
passage was demanded from the Governors of Crema. Now it happened, that a
Company of Horse sent by Feria to Soncino, attempted to pass without leave,
with the flying Colors advanced, and Arms uncovered; but was hindered by the
Guards. Feria in great wrath, and taking it for an affront to the Kings
Colors, sends store of Troops to the Confines, publishing, that he would pass
with a good Body of men without leave. But the Venetians making equal
provisions ordered Nicolo Contarini, Proveditor beyond the Mincio, that he
should hinder him with all his force. They at the same time offered the pass,
when according to custom it should be demanded, Spain, inveighing against
Feria, that by raising discontents, and preferring idle tales before the merit
of business, he aimed only to disturb the quiet. The Pope and the Grand Duke
seriously considering, that from a small cause worse accidents might arise,
employed their exhortations with the Governor of Milan to give place for a
composure, since the Venetians did not appear averse to consent, that that
Company should now pass, but without doing prejudice to the right of either
party, that afterward that might be determined by Commissioners, which right
required. Feria deputes two Senators, which were l' Arese and Salamanca, to
treat with Giacomo Vandramino Resident of the Republic, and they would quickly
have been agreed amongst themselves, that the Pass should have remained free
for a certain time, within which the business should have been quietly settled,
if the Duke, rejecting a while after all sort of handling, had not referred it
to the Court of Spain, and as though nothing but management of Arms had
belonged to him, he had not sent seventeen Companies of Horse with some Foot to
attempt the Pass by force; but finding it well guarded, the Spaniards thought
it best to make a halt. Many believed that in the heart of Italy there would
from this little spark have been kindled a Fire, which might have prevented
that, which upon Rhetia was foreseen to be but too imminent.

The Pope wrote briefs to the Republic; and orders Scappi his Nuntio in
Lucerna to go to Milan to mediate; but he no sooner arrives, but there rising,
as it happens in times of jealousy, one accident or another, he found that for
a contest only about Confines betwixt the States of Mantua and Bozzolo, Feria
was upon sending to the latter Soldiers and assistance, which could not be
done without incensing the Neighbors and stirring up the Venetians. From this
he succeeded to divert him; but for the way, it was agreed to expect
Commissions from Spain, where what had happened being received, as it deserved,
more calmly, and the Governor Caimo being deputed to treat with Luigi Cornaro,
Ambassador of the Republic, it was at last by the interposition of the Nuntio
agreed, that the company being sent again should pass without prejudice to the
rights of either; and also that the difference should be terminated within the
space of four Months, by Commissioners upon the place. And so in a cursory
manner it was punctually performed. But Luigi Mocenigo Governor of Bergamo,
and the Senator Piccinardi meeting in quality of Commissioners, could not agree
in a total decision of the matter, it seeming, that where Confines are in
dispute, force has greater place than reason, and is more in use; howsoever in
the course of the present suspicions, the passage was no more attempted by
Soldiers in Arms, and within a while Affairs and men's minds settling into the
former quiet, respect and good correspondence quickly began again. This
composure happened in the following year: But in this present upon the Borders of
Brescia, there was a certain light encounter; upon the occasion that a Chain,
laid by the Venetians over the River Oglio, which hindered the transport of
Corn, because of the scarcity of that years Harvest, was loosned by people in
Arms, and they of Seniga coming to hinder it, some of each side were killed,
and some hurt; which nevertheless, being reciprocally taken, as done rather by
the transport of the Borderers, than the command of the Princes, was easily
appeased. All notwithstanding serving to disturb men's minds, and adding as
considerations to those which the Affairs of the Valteline carried in too great
measure with them, the Venetians had agreed with the Duke of Savoy that he
should leavy four thousand men, to the end that from the side of Piedmont they
might make some seasonable diversion when there should be occasion

That nevertheless was not performed by the Duke, though the Republic had
disbursed their part of the charge; for Carlo in the vastness of his mind,
embracing many things, and always novelty of projects, had suffered himself to
be persuaded by Feria to surprise Geneva, possessed formerly by the Dukes of
Savoy, and once attempted by himself. For that purpose, the Governor of Milan
had not only offered him assistance, but sent certain Troops toward Savoy, to
be at his dispose, both to divert him from the Affairs of the Valteline, and
also give jealousy to those of Bearn, and the other Protestant Switzers,
Protectors of that City, that they might think no more of the Grisons. Nor did
the design fail, for the intention of Carlo, from the moving of Troops out of
the Milanese being discovered, those Cantons were in such a combustion, that
they presently recalled out of Rhetia all assistance and consideration of it.
The Venetians therefore resolved to interpose, and having procured Carlo to
give his word, that he would not molest that City, they carried it to the
Switzers to quiet them. Nor was Carlo very difficult in that promise; because
the plot being discovered, Geneva was in defense, and the Neighbors were so
ready with assistance, that the enterprise could not succeed.

Feria then recals his Soldiers, and opposes himself more powerfully to the
Grisons, who, weary of their own calamities, had resolved in a Pittach at Coira
by forcible means to get out of them, sending Soldiers down into the
Valteline, to try the utmost remedies of their strength. But the enterprise was
so ill managed, that it seemed a Monster begotten of despair; for that it was
an Army composed of the meanest sort of people, without Commanders, without
Counsel, without Provisions and Money, and in a manner without Arms, and
abounded in nothing but temerity, confusion, and enraged madness. Those that
sided with the Venetians dissuaded it, as unseasonable; but the Emissaries of
Feria and his Faction had put them upon it, to give a more apparent pretext for
the non-observance of the Treaty at Madrid. Six thousand men divided into three
Bodies fiercely descended into the County of Bormio. One of them possesses
certain Trenches abandoned by the Spaniards that kept it, fearing an attacque
from behind them. Another entered into the Town of Primai, and from thence to
Bormio. The third at the Bridge of Santa Lucia, mastering the defense thereof
gain Chiappina, and the Pass of Monbray, which shuts up the way that comes from
Venosta. Altogether stopped the Passes which could bring succors to the Fort
of Bormio, where they lodged in the Town, dissipating those few which they
found within it; but the Cannon from the Fort kindling a Fire in it, they were
constrained to go out into the Campagnia, and the Guards of the avenues, being
pressed by hunger, to abandon them in disorder, to provide themselves of
Victuals, gave opportunity to the Spaniards to possess them. At the same time
that they attacqued them in Front, they were assaulted in the Rear by the
Colonel Baldirone, who, with fifteen hundred Soldiers of Leopolds, from the
side of Tirol came down by the way of Monbray, and the Garrison of the Fort
making a sally, the Grisons who also had want of ammunition, were so
encompassed, that despair or courage would not have been able to have saved
them, if the darkness of the night covering them, had not facilitated the means
to many of hiding themselves in the Mountains, and from thence in small Troops
to retire home. After this success, Serbellone, with a greater Force supplied
him from the Governor of Milan, easily possesses Chiavena, and Baldirone makes
himself master of the Valley of Partentz, Poschiavo, and many other Towns and
places of the Agnedina, and of the Ten Directorships. Rhetia by these redoubled
invasions, was full of confusion and slaughter; nevertheless a Pittach was held
in Coira, which, if it proved always tumultuous, was at present void of all
order and form, every one pretending to give counsel to other, and no man
knowing what was fit to resolve.

There was a great contest about sending new Ambassadors to Milan, many
approved it, and the Ten Directorships opposed it: when Leopolds Army coming to
Coira, resolves the doubt and the meeting; for the people in a fright went out
to meet them, and renders them the Town, saving their Privileges, Government,
and Liberty of Conscience. Certain it was, that the Arch Duke desired to have
it, and pressed the Bishop to renounce the Church to him, to which are annexed
many temporal jurisdictions, and the dominion of one part of the Town it self.
In the mean time, to hinder the Switzers from succouring Rhetia, he causes a
good Fort to be laid toward Regatz, slighting the jealousies of the Cantons
and their displeasure, whilst not being able to resolve any thing, but by an
unanimous consent, they were obliged first to call a Diet for it. And because
Feria apprehended some motion from the Venetians, to keep the chief strength of
their Forces in Lombardy, he sends a great number of men to their Borders. But
there appeared a kind of breathing to Affairs, from whence it was least
expected; for Mansfelt, who sought War every where, and his profit from every
accident, being scarcely dis-intangled from the losses of Bohemia, with a
speedy march comes into Alsatia, with so great a diversion, and such success,
that he not only obliges Leopold to hasten thither with all his Forces, but
Feria to send thither (having the convenience of the passes, and of the new
Conquests) four thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, lessening the Garrisons
and the jealousies toward the Venetians, and in particular taking some
Companies out of Soncino, the which in respect to the Pass of the Steccato,
went round about the Territory of Crema.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE.
CErtainly the Valteline and Rhetia were not taken to be of little consequence,
as not to deserve the care of the Princes, both as to the seizing and defending
of them; such being their situation, that being possessed by Strangers, a snare
might be said to be closed upon the relief and liberty of Italy. The Venetians
therefore, to whom it more nearly belonged, became more earnest upon all
occasions in their offices and invitations with the French. But that Kingdom,
involved in new intestine discords, still languished from its first distemper,
and the remonstrances or threats of the King were little feared by the
Austrians. For Luines having formed a great design to take from the Hugenots
the places, which former Kings, under the title of security, had for a time
accorded to them, took pretext from a certain Assembly which they held in
Rochel, that since the successes in Bern, they complotted with overmuch
license things prejudicial to the Kings service, and declaring it suspect and
unlawful, followed the Edicts with an Army. That Party was weakened enough
already through disunion; for the Court had gained some of the chief ones, who
preferred their Interest before Religion, and amongst those Dediguieres; so
that there remained no more Chiefs of Authority amongst them, but Rohan,
Soubize, Chastiglione, and la Force, of several inclinations, and diverse ends
amongst themselves. Many of the people desired peaceable rather than turbulent
counsels, others adhered to the Chiefs, or followed the obstinate zeal for
their false belief. The Court designed to suppress them all, and, the sooner to
end the War, began it with great force, and with several Armies dispersed in
several Provinces. With one the Duke of Espernon curbs Rochel; and with
another, the Duke of Maine in his Government of Guyenne either confirms the
Towns in obedience, or forces the disobedient. Conde longst the Loire takes
Sancere, and the King with the most considerable part of his Forces besieges S.
Jean d' Angeli.

The Hugenots were not wanting to themselves, some serving in person, others
contributing money, notwithstanding all help from without failed them, Germany
being too much imbroiled, England not minding Foreign affairs; and Holland,
ready to come to blows with the Spanish Army, had more need of French succors,
than were inclined to assist the Rebels of that Crown. They were therefore in
many places obliged to submit, and St. Jean d' Angeli, though defended by
Soubize to the utmost, was forced at its surrender to accept of any conditions,
and to have the Walls razed. Such a resistance of such a place was of
mavelous use to the Hugenots to blunt the first fury of the Kings Army,
which, having rather done honor to some obscure places than overcome them,
sat down at last before Montauban, a good deal weakened, and not so fierce.
This was a very memorable Siege, because the place wanted neither
Fortifications, Commanders, Provisions, and Garrison; nor the Aggressors Force,
Discipline, and Courage. All Arts and Force of War were there practiced; there
were to be seen diversions attempted, ambushes laid, succors brought in, and
sometimes repulsed, thundering batteries, assaults with more rashness than
bravery undertaken and repulsed, with the shedding of noble blood, in such sort
that the Ditches of Montauban were the burying place of the most worthy and
valiant Soldiers. But at last some being weary, others disbanded, most dead,
the Army was much weakened, and the season so far advanced, that the King was
forced to raise the Siege, and withdrawing to Winter Quarters in Guiena, expect
the taking in of some small places; where Luines, by favor assumed into the
honorable Charge of Constable, surprised with a dangerous sickness, ends his
days; worthy in this of great praise, that he at least rough-hewed the great
design of uniting all France unto it self, which was afterward more happily
perfected by others.

These Engagements of France contributed much to advantage the Spaniards
designs, who with various Arts labored to continue them longer entangled in
the same; whereupon making show of friendship and zeal of Religion, they offer
succors to subdue the Huguenots, and particularly a Fleet to conquer Rochel.
And indeed, not only the Valteline, but in all parts else, the Arms of the
House of Austria went prosperously on, scarce finding opposition; for in
Bohemia there remaining but Tabor and Pilsen, which held for Frederick, the
first was by Tilli, who corrupted the Commanders, won with gold, and the other
by Marradas after a very long Siege. Silesia was quickly brought under by the
Elector of Saxe; and Hungary, Gabor having in vain sought succors from the
Turks and the Venetians, was forced to receive a Peace and Laws, Bethlem having
laid down the Title of King, and restored the Crown, with the recompense of
seven Counties in Hungary it self, and two large Dukedoms in Silesia.

There remained both the Palatinates, higher and lower, the Patrimony of
Frederick, in whose name Mansfelt, yet making War, was, as has been said,
entered into Alsatia, doing the Bishopric of Spira and other places on the
Rhine intolerable mischiefs, and in Alsatia it self, taking Haghenau, and with
a strait but vain Siege attempted Zabern. In favor also of Frederick some
other Generals of Armies discovered themselves, who, in imitation of Mansfelt,
had the boldness, with secret assistance from other Princes, to struggle with
the Power and Fortune of Ferdinand. One was John George, Marquess of Jagendorf,
of the House of Brandenburg, who, by reason of the Reformation of Religion,
which the Imperialists in the subdued Provinces executed with so much severity,
that it seemed to many a slaughter rather than a remedy or chastisement,
assembled many of the malcontents and some Soldiers to infest Moravia and
Silesia. Another was Christian, Duke of Branswich and Administrator of
Halberstat, who taking into his service some Troops of the King of Denmarks,
for that purpose disbanded, and having formed a considerable Army, harassed
Westphalia and the Catholics of those parts. Frederick, weary of the vexations
of a Crown so troublesome, and now desperate, being retired into Holland, gave
way, that under the protection of the King of England his Interest should be
managed in the Imperial Court, and that the Palatinate should defend it self.

But the offices of James were discredited by the weakness wherewith he
accompanied his force; whereupon, under pretext that the business of the Peace
and pardon of Frederick was to be deferred to a general Diet, as was desired
not only by England, but by Denmark and the Lower Saxony, the Army of the
Austrians marched. Upon Spinola's coming near the Rhine with an Army well
ordered and provided, the Princes Protestants of the Union being frighted,
condescended to a Treaty in Mentz, by which their Union being dissolved, which
consisted more in name than in a true concord of minds, they resolved to stand
neutral, and Spinola on the other side promises so to respect them. In the
Palatinate there being now, and that but with a very few Troops, only Colonel
Veer, an English man, and Obentrauta German, it would have been easy for
Spinola to have possessed it, if out of fear to have too much irritated the
King of England, and a desire he had to attempt some Exploit upon the
Hollanders, he had not consented to a Truce for some months. A Truce highly
disapproved by the Spanish Ministers, but which being of little continuance,
advantaged them in the pretexts of their attempts, because the Commanders of
the Troops in the Palatinate, encouraged with the succors which Mansfelt and
Halverstat gave out they would bring them, having by a pernicious Council
broken it, awakened the Spaniards, separated into Quarters, to assemble
themselves and besiege Franckental, after having taken Stein, which was done by
Gonzalo di Cordua, Spinola being elsewhere employed.

The King of England nevertheless ceased not by means of his Ambassador Digby,
at the Imperial Court to solicit the renewing the suspension of Arms. But
Ferdinand, impressed already with the thought of depriving Frederick of his
Electorship and Country, remits the Treaty to Brussels to gain time, and in
that interim the Duke of Bavaria, in a manner provoked by Mansfelt, who with
several Treaties for several months had deluded him, enters the Upper
Palatinate, and possesses it without opposition, the Country being destitute of
Fortresses or Forces. And the Duke, not to be wanting to the occasion and his
own advantages, to pursue Mansfelt sends Tilli to the Rhine, and orders him to
seize all that part of the Lower Palatinate, which lies betwixt the Rhine and
the Neccar. A blow which Maximilian believed doubly pleasing to the Catholics,
not only because it deprived the Heretics of that very strong Hold, but
because it prevented the Spaniards, whom the Germans did not willingly see
advanced into the Empire by such Conquests. The King of England was enraged to
see his Son-in-law oppressed, and himself deluded; but not having forces
proportionable to his anger, and his Authority serving no longer for a
sufficient cover for his weakness, had called a Parliament, according to
custom, to consider of Contributions and Provisions. But grievous complaints
were presently started, some desiring that the Treaty of Marriage betwixt the
Prince and the Infanta of Spain might be broken, and that a Wife might be given
him of a Religion comformable to their own; others pressing a Reformation in
the Government, with pretensions which were injurious to the Sovereignty, and
opposite to the nature of it; so that he dissolves it without coming to a
resolution.

The Palatinate then remained at the discretion of the Enemy-forces, nor was to
expect other succors but from Mansfelt, who, according to his custom, with sly
marches and unexpected arrives there, so unlooked for, that Cordua taking
fright, raises the Siege, retiring or rather running away by night, leaving in
his Quarters sick Soldiers, Materials, and Cannon. Thus ends this year famous
for War, kindled in so many parts; and to the end no corner of Europe might
remain free from the flame, in the Low Countries also the Truce being expired,
it fiercely breaks out again. Heretofore in the interval of greater Wars, that
of Flanders served the Spanish Monarchy for a standing Army, and to keep
Military Discipline in exercise. But exercise it self becoming violent and to
excess, consumed the most vital spirits of the Crown; the Soldiers of Spain,
the gold of the Indies, the vigor of Italy being not able to supply them. And
therefore a Truce for twelve years was willingly interposed, and might easily
again have been prolonged, if in Spain, at the expiration thereof, the counsels
of those had been continued who first settled it. But the Conde Duke, new in
Government, keeping the young King remote from affairs, took the measure of his
power from his own opinion and pride. by this means broken, his thought was to
break out into War, vainly believing to make the glory of the Monarchy appear,
if amusing France in the divisions of Religion, and dandling England with
Treaties of a Marriage, he should slight all others, and at the same time
molest Italy, overwhelm Holland, and triumph over Germany.

Spinola then having consented to a Truce in the Palatinate, as has been said,
marches to the Frontiers of the United Provinces, threatening many places. At
last encamps his Army near to Prince Maurice of Orange, who was at Emerich to
observe his motions, and having by a Stratagem induced him to draw a thousand
men out of Juliers, making a show to attacque another place, turns to that,
first invested by Count Henry Vanden Berg with six thousand Foot, a thousand
Horse, and six pieces of Cannon, and afterward by Spinola himself with the
gross, environed with Forts and deep Trenches. That Town, the Metropolis of the
Dukedom of the same name, is commodiously situate upon the Roer, a little
River, but in the middle betwixt the Rhine and Mase, does not less cover
Guelders on that side, than opens the way which leads into the very heart of
the United Provinces. Maurice labored exceedingly to put relief into it; but
at first waited upon by Spinola, afterward hindered by a strong
Circumvallation, at last drawn away by another body of men, which from
Brabant-side threatened Holland, he was forced to see it rendered after some
months resistance. Upon the motion of these Armies, the States sent to several
Courts for succors, and demanded of the Venetians those disbursements, to
which the League obliged, and which being comprehended in the Article
stipulated of Invasion, were by the Republic accordingly paid unto them.

ANNO M.DC.XXII.
The Prince of Echemberg, Favorite and chief Minister of the Emperor, having
in the end of the year past, in the name of his Master espoused, in Mantua,
Eleonora Gonzaga, Sister of the Duke, a Princess, which over and above her
Portion brought rare Beauty and singular Virtue; the most convenient passage
for the Bride lying through the Territory of the Venetians about Trent, she was
received and defrayed by Andrea Paruta, General di Terra firma, by order of the
Senate with suitable Magnificence. But at the same time the Count d'Ognate
disputed in Vienna the Rank and Dignity with Pietro Gritti, Ambassador of the
Republic, denying him the same Treatment and Title, which always formerly had
been practiced; and although Ferdinand, to whom Ognate in other respects had
made himself sufficiently odious, showed his great dislike of it, yet the
Spaniard persisting in his conceit, the Senate was necessitated to recall their
Minister, leaving at the Court Marco Anthonio Padavino Secretary, till such
time that by the alteration of affairs, minds coming to change and be pacified,
they might, as after a year or two happened, send again an Ambassador to
reside there. Amidst a heap of so many cross things, it served for some kind of
satisfaction, that in Naples the Vice-King, Cardinal Zappata, restored at last
the Galleys formerly taken, with the Merchandise remaining undevoured by
Ossuna, nothing was spoken of the remainder, nor more of the Ships; because
there having been much hurt done on either side, the liquidation would have
been difficult. The Admiral Ship of Naples was alone, as has been said,
rendered by the Venetians. Another molestation at Sea ceased about this time;
for Freletich, famous for many rapines and villainies, discharged out of the
Spaniards service, was entertained by the Grand Duke in Ligorn; but being weary
of quiet, and hungring after pillage, enters into the Adriatic to attempt in
the Quarnaro, wonted surprisals upon the Islands or Ships of Venetians; but
being taken by the Men of War, paid at last with many of his Companions for his
folly with his life. Amidst foreign relations, domestic examples, and
testimonies of the well regulated Discipline of the Commonwealth must not be
omitted. It is forbidden the Sons of the Dukes, for important reasons which
regard that temperance, which is most necessary among Citizens, during the life
of the Father, to accept Benefices of the Church.

It happened that the Pope conferred upon Mattheo, Cardinal Priuli, the
Bishopric of Bergamo, and he mindful of enjoying the freedom of his Country,
and to uphold in his Father the chief Dignity of the Commonwealth, refused it
with great applause of his Fellow-Citizens, and probably to the admiration of
those who know no other Law but that of Ambition and Interest. But amidst the
moderation of such an example, another above measure abominable pollutes the
City: For Anthonio Foscarini Cavalier and Senator was seen hanged upon the
Gallows, upon a calumny to have held a secret Correspondence with Strangers.
The fraud of some of the wickedest of men, proposing to themselves rewards, had
conspired against the life of the most innocent and eminent Patricians; for as
much as the Government in turbulent times calling to mind past Treacheries, and
considering the present hatreds, suspicions alone were easily disguised into
crimes. They addressed themselves to the Magistrate of the greatest Inquisitors
of State, and dividing the parts, some of Accusers, others of Witnesses, they
betrayed Justice and the Just. But this infamous Conspiracy could not last
long; for the hainousness of the offense being discovered, Girolamo Vano da
Salo and Domenico da Venetia as the principal suffered just punishment.
Foscarini, by a public declaration of his innocence, was restored, if not to
life, at least to his good name, and his family to their former luster, and
from common compassion promoted to greater degrees of Honor.

And now returning to the successes of the French Armies, whose motion was
depending also upon those of Italy, they proceeded against the Hugenots with
some sort of prosperity; for that Soubize being driven out of the Islands of
Rochel, the King in the mouth of the Chanel planted the Fort Louis, which
though it did not shut up the Town and Port, did nevertheless incommodate, and
was afterward the foundation of that memorable Siege. The small places of
Guyenne and Languedock were all rendered, being so much the more weak as they
were more numerous, whilst the Hugenot Party, composed of many, equal in
authority no less than in interest, instead of strengthening the vital and more
noble parts, applied themselves to the defense of obscure places, which at the
appearance of an Army or the first Volley of shot, were obliged to yield. But
gaining the Chiefs of that Faction, turned to a far greater damage. La Force,
upon a secret promise to be created Mareshal of France abandons it, and
Chastillon pretending to be ill satisfied with Rohan, retires himself.
Dediguieres declaring himself Catholic, obtained by it the Charge of
Constable, which is the highest in the Armies; whereupon by example and other
benefits magnifying his own advantages, he drew many that considered, such
notable rewards were not to be had from other than the King. A Peace therefore
with the Hugenots being procured by the Ambassadors of England and Venice, to
the end the King might apply himself to foreign occurrences, was diverted, the
endeavors, besides the allurements of present advantages, of the Apostolic
Nuntio who wholly opposed himself against it, the artifice of the Ministers of
Spain who craftily nourished the division, and the judgment of the Prince of
Conde, who with great aversion to the belief, in which he was born, implacably
solicited the War prevailing. But to the affairs of the Valteline, the
greatest stop was put by the inclination of Monsieur de Pisieux, Secretary of
State, who succeeded to Luines in the favor, showing himself irresolute in
business, inconstant in his word, and in all things a Minister of greater
cunning than ability. He professed great respect to the Spaniards, and in the
affairs of the Grisons published himself above measure solicitous to terminate
them by Negotiation; but particularly with ambitious designs and hopes
imbarking in the pretensions of the Court of Rome, he procures the Expedition
of the Ambassador Monsieur de Sillery, his Uncle, to Gregory, and assents so
much the more willingly, that the seat of all that management should be in that
City. Amidst these considerations the business languished, and if upon the
attempts of the Governor of Milan and of Leopold, any complaint and threatening
came forth from King Lewis, it quickly cooled again, being deluded by new
projections; for the Spanish Ministers making the tumultuary motions of the
Grisons the excuse of their Conquests, the Negotiation in Madrid being turned
topsie turvy, referred the Treaty to the Court of Rome, where the common Father
residing, the Mediator of Peace, the Prince, who, for what concerned Religion,
had the greatest interest, showed them selves always ready to execute
whatsoever he, for the good and security of the same, should prescribe.

At the same time the business came to be disturbed by new Propositions; for in
Madrid the French Ambassador consents to a certain Writing to deposite the
Forts in the hands of the great Duke of Tuscany, and although at the beginning
in France they seemed to oppose it, because it made a rent in the first Treaty,
the insinuations nevertheless of the Marquess of Mirabel, Ambassador of Spain,
prevailed above the considerations of that of the Venetians, which showed the
confounding of the business and the delusion of the Proposition; so that it was
accepted with a change only of the person, trusted into, the Duke of Lorrain,
as more acceptable to the French. In Spain, time, men's minds, and the business
being tired out with such kind of proceedings, Feria in Milan precipitates
himself with so much the more haste, to conclude with some Ambassadors of the
Grisons (those of Switzers, who were come thither to assist the weakness of the
others, being excluded from the Negotiation) three Treaties, one with the
Milanese, another with the Valteline, and a third with the Archduke. In which
was agreed. The subjection of the Ten Directorships to Leopold, a perpetual
Confederation with the Milanese, openness and liberty of the passages to the
Spaniards, reservation of the ancient Alliance with the Crown of France, and
the substraction of the Valteline from the Sovereignty of the Grisons; in place
whereof twenty five thousand Crowns were to be paid unto them. It was difficult
to discern which in these conditions was greater, the violence of Feria, or the
baseness of the Ambassadors, only excusable, that to dispose of the Liberty
and Dominion was not in their power. Nor did the Commonalty dare to oppose it;
but being assembled in Ilants, suborned by fear and force, notwithstanding the
Ministers of France protested against it, they approved every tittle of it. The
Venetians would not alone undergo the burden of redeeming the Grisons Liberty,
whiles France involved themselves in Treaties, but observing accidents and the
issue of affairs, furnish themselves with all sorts of provisions; and the name
of Mansfelt being famous for courage and a numerous Militia that depended on
him, they agreed with him under the Title of General beyond the Mountains, and
the yearly entertainment of twelve thousand Ducats, though he were not in
actual service, that he should be obliged to come to them when necessity
required, and bring them twenty five thousand Foot and five thousand Horse,
which under the pay of the Republic were to be conducted by such passages and
to such places, which according to opportunity should be concerted. This served
to make sure of a Militia in exercise, and a General of reputation to make a
diversion, if, while Rhetia were oppressed, and succors excluded, the
Republic should be invaded by the Austrians.

But the affairs of the Grisons took a new aspect, though not lasting, as it
usually happens, as much from the indiscreet violence of him that oppresses, as
from the inconsiderate license of a people that rise in commotion. Some of the
Commons, no longer able to suffer the misery they endured, fell into a Tumult,
and in their fury making use of all sorts of Weapons, with staves and stones
killed the Garrisons of the Austrians. In Sciers, where the Tumult began, a
hundred Foot were cut to pieces, and in Grus three hundred more, with whose
Arms the Mutineers being strengthened, at Miolans a more numerous Party was
slain. At the important Pass of Steich toward Tirol were left six hundred men
in guard, the others coming to Maianfelt and Coira gave such encouragement to
the Inhabitants, that they constrained the Garrisons to retire into the
Castles, and render themselves a little after with an obligation to set at
liberty certain Grisons, which were then Prisoners in Tirol. Three hundred
Soldiers that were in Castles offered to render, saving their lives, but that
people would give them no other conditions but from revenge to be cut in
pieces. Those of Tirol attempted to recover Steich; but being repulsed,
retrenched themselves in number of six hundred close to the Pass; others from
other parts of Rhetia, where they were in Garrison, coming forth joined to keep
the field; but being through the knowledge of the situations over-matched by
those of that Country, were obliged to give way and retire with loss. Upon so
prosperous beginnings, driven on by that fury which the Spirit of Liberty
suggested, the banished appeared; and although Feria employed all sorts of
offices, to the end the Catholic Switzers would shut certain Passes, which are
betwixt some of the Cantons where Dominion is promiscuous, the Protestants sent
secretly succors, and the Venetians at the persuasions of the French
Ambassador with a greater wariness supplied some money, that they might
provide themselves with Arms and Ammunition. To so great a Tumult Feria applies
no other remedy but well to provide the places possessed: then having
experienced more than once the advantages of a Treaty and of time, believed,
that the multitude, although it should prevail in force, at last by devices of
wit would easily be brought under. He then insinuates a suspension of Arms with
the Archduke, Gheffier favoring it, being not yet gone out of that Country
where his opinions had frequently been fatal. Some that were partial, spread it
among the common people, and in the Assemblies, where the Popular triumphed
with various discourses of their own prowess and their liberty regained; That
now blood and revenge had been sufficiently satisfied, that the ancient valor
of Rhetia was gloriously recovered out of ignominy and slavery. That all
enjoyed with applause the glory and liberty purchased with so much merit by a
few. That a People could not render it self more considerable to Strangers, nor
more dreadful to Neighbors, than to bring great Princes to be sensible of
their misdoings, and oblige them to just resolutions. That now to hear them and
adjust with them, a short Truce was necessary, that might somewhat allay the
boiling heat of men's minds, suspend the sharpness of the War, and divert
accidents which might irritate affections with prejudice, or alter the state of
things to the Wars. That it was necessary also to reform the Government so much
disordered by the late Commotions. And how could that be done, the Commons
remaining separate, and the best Patriots with their Arms in their hands
dispersed into several Posts? Of whom then were they to be afraid? The
Austrians being new driven away, and Liberty recovered; neither could ought
else be pretended to be done but to preserve it with good orders, and restoring
the ancient Institutions. That now Autumn and the approaching Winter did
persuade it; but that they ought to be doubly secured both by the season and by
faith. That the Proposition came from the Enemy but was approved by friends
themselves, and thought by the French Ministers to be seasonable.

Some were not wanting to advise them to dive into the Treachery of the Peace;
That the designs of the Austrians were to cast in a Remora to warlike
proceedings. That the invincible Valor of the Grisons had in many occasions
been taken notice of in the field, but their credulity as much discovered in
Treaties, which springing from the candor of their faith, and the simplicity of
their education, leaves them more exposed to the deceivings of Wit than to the
blows of the Sword. That the Archduke, though busied in repelling Mansfelt,
would nevertheless within a while turn his Arms and his Designs against unhappy
Rhetia. To what purpose propound a Truce but to disarm the people, separate the
Commons, and lull them asleep in the false security of idleness? That their
Liberty, laid in wait for, could not protect it self better than by the
jealousies of fraud and the force of Arms. That they should then believe
themselves more secure and defended from the Austrians, when they should have
more discovered them to be enemies.

Affections, as is the wont of popular Governments, prevailed much more than
reasons, and those which dissented, being the few and the wiser, the multitude
on the other side ignorant of that which was in deliberation; the suspension of
Arms with Leopold was embraced, in that instant that Mansfelt marching toward
the Low Countries left him also free from his distractions. A Meeting after the
Truce being held in Lindo under the name of fully establishing the Peace, there
met there the Deputies of the Archduke, those of the Grisons, the Ambassadors
of the Switzers, Casati for Spain, and Molina the Interpreter of France. But
while the Grisons being disbanded, rested upon the security of that Treaty,
Sults, Leopolds General, invades Rhetia, and having overcome the opposition at
the first Passes, though with some blood, possesses with one sudden motion both
the Agnedina's, the Valley of Partenz, Tava, Majanfelt, and Coira, without that
they of the Country could join together for their defense. Being then fallen
back into their former miseries under the yoke of Arms, there was no doubt but
that the Grisons would submit to the Treaty, because that of Milan was
concluded and confirmed. The ten Directorships remained at the dispose of the
Archduke, who obliges them not only not to permit other than the exercise of
the Catholic Faith, but reserves to himself a power to plant Fortresses,
displace Garrisons, and to keep them at present in Majanfelt and Coira. It was
to no purpose that Molina and some Switzer Cantons made their protests against
it; for the Commons of the Cade and the Grisa having a Meeting in Coira
approved all, renouncing the Treaty of Madrid, reserving to themselves no other
hope but to supplicate Feria for some moderate Reformation in that of Milan.

In this manner passed this year in the Grisons, in the end whereof France
began to apply more attentively its thoughts to it, being free from domestic
War, having concluded a Peace with the Huguenots under the Walls of Monpellier,
a strong Town of Languedock. The King in this Siege meeting with greater
difficulties than supposed, and not regarding the endeavors to the contrary,
although suggested with many Stratagems of Conscience and State, and slighting
the aversion of Conde himself, who goes from Court and out of the Kingdom, gave
his assent to it. Many of the Conditions nevertheless not being performed,
which the Huguenots published were promised to them, as to dismantle the Fort
Louis, not to put a Garrison into Monpellier, nor place a Citadel there; the
opinion was afterward believed, that Pisieux had appeased the complaints of
the Nuntio, by telling him that the Huguenots could not more easily be ruined
than by assuring them, disarming them, and deceiving them. But whatsoever the
intention was, sure it is, that it was judged in Italy that affairs were to
change their aspect; for the King being come forward to Lions, found there the
Duke of Savoy with his eldest Son, and having fully understood the proceedings
of the Austrians, discovered their ends, and examined their designs extended
into several parts, it was resolved to oppose them, and the Meeting being
transferred to Avignon; where meeting for the King the Constable Desdiguieres,
the Garde-seau, Mareshal Schomberg, and Pisieux; for the Venetians, Giovanni
Pesari their Ambassador, and the Duke himself of Savoy in person, the means
were discussed of uniting themselves, so as to employ their Forces in favor of
the Grisons, and by some diversion trouble the Austrians elsewhere. The
conclusion of the Articles was deferred till the next year.

The King in that interim returned to Paris, and Carlo into Piedmont. At the
report only of such a Meeting, it is not to be believed how much the Ministers
at Madrid were moved at it, who resolving to artifice to join threats and fear,
declare to the Popes Nuntio themselves no more bound to the deposition of the
Forts, protesting, That such a Rupture would arise betwixt the Crowns, that
neither the Authority of the Pope would be sufficient to set it right again,
nor his own life so long as to see an end of the Slaughters and Calamities
which would follow upon it. In effect, the affairs of Rhetia could not be
otherwise repaired but by puissant Forces, because they were forsaken by all,
and destitute also of Mansfelts diversion in Alsace; for, as much opportunity,
as the jealousy, risen betwixt the Spaniards and Bavarians, which kept those
Armies idle at the Rhine for a time, had given for his progresses; so much also
did their Union, which at last followed, contribute to take it away. To say
truth, the successes in those parts were no less important than worthy the due
observation and reflection of all Europe. Mansfelt with his Army, Adventurer,
as might be said, giving a Lesson to other Captains, who have since known
largely enough to make use of it, how to make it subsist without Pay and
without Country, by Contributions and Pillage out of Alsace marches toward the
Palatinate, publishing that he made War in the name of Frederick. He
nevertheless intermitted not Treaties at the same time, and at that very
instant had by him Deputies of the Infanta Isabella Governess of Flanders, and
had in a manner concluded with large Conditions to be created a Prince of the
Empire, with the perpetual Fief of Haghenau for himself and his descendants,
besides great sums of money, and such places in the Spanish Army as to be
subordinate to Spinola only.

But behold Frederick now appears in this Army, having passed by reason of the
length of the way through many dangers; for weary any longer to be amused and
deluded with dilatory hopes, he parts from Holland, and in a disguise with two
persons passing by Sea to France, from thence crosses Lorrain, through the
midst of the Enemies Troops; and at one lodging meeting with some Soldiers,
and feigning himself to be of the same profession, the better to conceal
himself, was constrained amidst the round of the Cups to imprecate his own
person. At Landau, where Mansfelt had a Garrison, he discovers himself; thence
at Germersheim finds the Count himself encamped, who received him with great
applause. The Marquess Frederick of Dorlach, came thither to him, who had
declared himself for that Party with an Army in great order, and the Count then
discharging the Deputies of the Infanta, they possess the Bishopric of Spire,
and recover Manheim, and other places of the Palatinate, giving some little
blow to the Troops of Tilli, who attempted to oppose them. Halverstadt also
advanced after he had gained the City of Paderborn, where he solicited for
Divine vengeance, exercising against the Catholics all severity with savage
cruelty, extorting all their substance, exposing Churches to plunder,
converting the Ornaments of Divine Worship and the Relics of Saints into
money to pay the Soldiers. Upon these proceedings were the Spaniards and
Bavarians with the Renfort also of the Imperial Troops, obliged to join against
the common Enemies, betwixt Vimfen and Hailbrun, upon the side of the Nec^ar.
On the other side by most pernicious counsel the Protestants separate, while
Dorlach by private jarrings having made himself incompatible with Mansfelt,
divides from him; but being scarce lodged in the Village of Over-Ersheim,
understands, that Tilli marched toward him, when putting himself in order in
the Campagnia, he environs himself with Wagons, forming a large circuit, with
his Artillery in fit places marvellously well placed.

Tilli on the other side presenting battle, had ordered his Army upon a long
Line, with bodies of reserve in the Rear, and with some Cannon in the Front;
but receiving great hurt from those of the Enemy, his Troops were near taking
flight, and abandoning the field, when a Cannon-shot falling in the middle of
Dorlachs Squadrons, where among the Baggage was the Ammunition, with a horrible
blow sets the powder on fire. The fire spread it self into all parts; and
Carts, living Creatures, and Soldiers flying in a moment into the Air, fell
down in ashes, with less unhappiness than they who half burnt lay in a pitiful
manner roaring and bewailing themselves. It seemed surely a blow from Heaven,
which in an instant destroyed whole Squadrons, and those that being further off
remained untouched, uncertain whether that terrible sound was a Thunderbolt,
or at least a Mine, being frighted ran presently away, leaving that unhappy
field covered with ashes and bones. The Catholics, animated by so happy an
accident, overcoming without fighting, failed not in the flight to pursue them,
with no less slaughter than that which the fire had caused. The Marquess with a
few more hardly saved his life, but not his Country; for that coming to be
contested by his Nephews, Ferdinand adjudges it to them, and the Archduke puts
into possession William the Elder, who, having been brought up in the Court of
Flanders in the Catholic Religion, banished immediately every other Belief.
Upon the advice of so great a blow Halverstadt makes haste, and with twelve
thousand Foot, and more than eighty Companies of Horse arrives at Hochst, a
small place a little below Francfort, upon the side of the Main with design,
having passed the River, with speedy marches and avoiding fighting to join with
Mansfelt, and give new vigor to that Party. But spending more time than he
believed in the building of a Bridge, he saw himself overtaken by Tilli, who,
joined to Cordua, was thereby become stronger in number, and pursued him to
constrain him to a battle. He, sending the Baggage with almost all the Cannon
to the other side of the River, hoped to amuse the Enemy with Skirmishes, and
to delude him at last, by bringing himself and the nimblest of his Troops into
safety; but the Austrians having seized the passages, pressed him in such sort,
that he could not avoid the shock.

They fought then under the Walls of Hochst for some hours, Halverstadts people
at first making great resistance, though from twenty four Cannons, fitly placed
by the Catholics, they received great loss. At last, all order being
confounded, the Cavalry were the first that showed their backs, running to the
Bridge, where all being in confusion amidst the noise, flight and throng, they
pressed in such sort, that the Bridge yielding under the burden brake, and many
falling into the River, what with their Baggage, and what with their Arms, were
drowned. All order and direction now wanting, it was no more a battle but
slaughter. Men fell in heaps, and so their Horses, and every one seeking a way
to escape without finding it, no man resisted longer, or delayed common danger,
Fortune showing the way of safety to very few. Halverstadt himself takes the
River, and little was wanting but that the Incendiary of Germany had been
quenched. After such a defeat, being got to the other side of the Main, he
endeavors to rally what he could of the Cavalry; for the Foot were almost all
cut to pieces, and so he joins Mansfelt, who, not at all disheartened by such
blows to the common Party, carries him to the relief of Haguenau, besieged by
Leopold, and where he had left his spoils and booty, and placed the very hopes
of a most assured refuge. Nor did the attempt succeed ill; for the Archduke by
the supposed distance and weakness of his Enemies, lodging with more security
of mind than defense, advice, unlooked for, being brought to him that they were
come near, sends a thousand Horse to discover, which being met by Obentraut,
and beaten, brought back such fright and terror into the Camp, that it was
raised as in a tumult with disorder and loss. The place saved, it was yet
expedient for Mansfelt to try another Exploit for enlarging his Quarters and
Provision of Victuals, that Country being already eaten up; whereupon he makes
choice of Zaverne as fitter for his purpose than any other. The Palatine was
all this while in his Army, serving only for a show and a name: But King James,
inveigled by wonted Arts, persuades him to withdraw himself; for that the
meeting, to find a composure of his affairs, being brought back to Brussels,
the Austrians seemed not to know how to be assured of the Palatine, so long as
they saw him in the hands of Mansfelt and Halverstadt, their so bitter Enemies.
And he also adheres so much the more willingly to that counsel, by how much he
saw Dorlach wasted to nothing, Halverstadt weakened, and Mansfelt (wont, as the
fortune of Arms wavered, to apply himself to Treaties) was always suspected by
him, lest one day he should sell him, and sacrifice him to his own interest.
But he was no sooner returned into Holland, and by a public Declaration, (to
show his sincerity so much the more to the Austrians,) discharged out of his
service Mansfelt and his Followers; but he perceived, that from an Enemy
offended and in Arms, he that had no Forces could expect but hard Conditions of
Peace; for there was offered to him but a small pitance of his Country with the
rest to his eldest Son after the death of Bavaria, on condition that he should
pass from Calvinism to the Catholic Faith. But such offers being openly
rejected by Frederick and the Ministers of the King of England, the business
was again referred to a Diet in Ratisbone.

By such Negotiations Peace being retarded, the War was more vigorously
prosecuted. Heidelberg, the ancient Seat of the Palatines, was by Tilli taken
by force, and Franckental reduced by Cordua to extremity; so that the King of
England, who published that he held that Country under his Protection, desiring
by some appearance, though laughed at by the World, to cover the contempt, not
being able to succor it, consents to a Truce of fifteen months; during which,
Franckental, and the rest of the lower Palatinate should be deposited in the
Spaniards hands to restore them to the King, if within that time there were not
a Peace concluded. So the English in that state of things, contenting
themselves only with a promise, abandoned, soon after, the hopes also of
recovering that place, the which for many years went not out of the hand of the
Spaniards, till the new changes of Fortune, and the times obliged them to
render it. But Mansfelt was constrained to raise the Siege from before Zaverna,
both because the Catholic Armies, being at liberty from the employment of the
Palatinate, threatened to draw toward him, and that the Duke of Lorrain, not
being willing to suffer him to nestle himself upon his Borders, was preparing
to relieve it. He nevertheless at that very time, when his Martial attempts
succeeded not, sets on foot a Treaty with Tilli in his own and Helverstadts
name with offers to change his Party; but his artifices, now so many times
discovered, were by the Austrians with equal arts deluded. He nevertheless with
a flourishing Army, and cried up by Military men, kept himself in great
reputation of equally valiant and wise, so that to strifs he was earnestly
pressed with offers from all parts. He inclined not, though he were invited to
it by the Venetians, in regard of the affairs of the Valteline, to pass into
Rhetia, apprehending that, amidst the difficulty of the Passes and the
Straights of the Mountains, he might consume that Army which was accustomed
with great spoils to maintain it self in the spacious Provinces of Germany; but
he equally hearkened to the instances of the Huguenots of France, who with
cries and provocations of Religion called him to their succors, and to those
of the States of Holland, who with equal motives of their Religion, with
greater recompense, sued to him for assistance.

At last not being able to subsist longer in Alsatia, whilst the Armies of
Tilli, Cordua, and Leopold flanked upon him, and reflecting, that with the
Huguenots it was rather to maintain a broken Faction than a settled
Principality, he resolves to go into Holland. It was therefore necessary to
keep his intention secret, and deceive with many various reports and diverse
marches, as he did: For having with great artifice disarmed the Duke of
Lorrain, who expected nothing like it, of a sudden he marches into the middle
of his Country, and in revenge that he had disturbed him in the Enterprise of
Zaverne, put it into so great confusion and fright with such bitter losses,
that the Duke was constrained to give him passage, furnish him with Victuals,
and persuade him to vent that Military storm elsewhere. Nor did the Count fail;
for the license of his Soldiery being satiated in Lorrain, he enters into the
Bishoprics of Verdun and Metz with such terror to the neighboring Countries,
that Paris it self was in a fright, whilst the King, by reason of the War with
the Huguenots, was so far off. The Duke of Nevers, Governor of Champagne, by
all sorts of fair means and promises endeavors to stop him; and he, to lay
truth, baring those licenses, which to an Army that had no other livelihood but
rapine he was necessitated to permit, he restrained (...)y as much as he could.
Fear therefore entered into the Province of Flanders, toward whom it now
appeared the march was directed, and the Infanta with no less solicitude
endeavors to keep him afar off, sending as far as to the Pont a Mouson the
Duke of Bornoville, who with large offers was to persuade him to divert some
whither else, or to inroul himself under the Spanish Colors. Certainly it was
wonderful to consider, that an Army, new raised and mercenary, without the
Authority of Princes, and without the Protection of Dominion, driven out of
Germany after having overrun it, and in a great measure laid it waste, should
now be the Scourge of Lorrain, the Fear of France, the Terror of Flanders, be
paid by many, entreated by all, and every where most earnestly desired.

But whilst this fury of War in so many places either laid waste or threatened,
discord slides into its bowels, Halverstadt upon great discontents separating,
who being solicited by the Duke of Bouillon, inclined to assist the Huguenots.
Little wanted but that the common Soldiers, according to the animosity of the
Chiefs, at variance also amongst themselves, had not fallen to kill one
another, and with intestine Arms expiated the offense and the excesses till now
committed. But at last foreseeing in their disunion their destruction, and
considering that the flatteries and propositions of Nevers, by gaining time,
had served so to arm the Frontier, as to be able to make a strong resistance;
the Commanders and the Troops reconciled amongst themselves, and leaving as in
trust, under the faith of the Governor of the place, the Cannon in the Suburbs
of Mouson, burning many Carriages, to set a greater number of men on Horseback,
he continues his march with haste. And it was now necessary for him to hasten
it, because Cordua, solicited not only by the Infanta, but also by the French,
was come to Ivoy in Lutzemburg to cross him in his way, but with a strength
inferior, not exceeding ten thousand Foot and five thousand Horse; so that at
the first Encounter of Mansfelts Horse, who confidently ravaged the Country, he
received a little blow. But a while after, reinforced by the Colonel Verdugo,
whom Spinola, without abandoning the Siege of Bergopzoom sent to his relief
(the Armies now being near an equal strength) they straightened one another
victuals and march in such sort, that they could not now say nay to the battle.
So that at Fleury in the Province of Henault they presentred themselves to it.

Mansfelt calling the Chiefs and principal Commanders of the Army to him, to
encourage them says. If out of our Country and from quiet, Glory and Reward
have brought us hither through so many Countries, amidst infinite dangers, the
occasion presents here in this field an abundant harvest. We the Restorers of
the Liberty of Europe; we the Defiers of great Princes; we the Contemners of
sufferings and of dangers, follow through every Climate the Star of Military
Fortune. Hitherto I have by wisdom and force conducted you in safety through
the hatred of the greatest Potentates, the snares of so many Treaties, and from
betwixt the jaws of so many Armies. The rest I now commit to your own Valor.
Cordua here waits upon us, a General in so many Encounters in Germany
outwitted by us; and an Army more than once in the Palatinate beaten by us,
overcome, and chased. And now laden with the spoils of that unhappy Country, it
seems they have reserved them for us; for they shall be ours, if we will show
our skill in fight, and have a mind to overcome. But why do I speak of the
spoils of an Army or a Country, when the most rich and plentiful Provinces of
Europe shall remain your prey? All those that obey the King of Spain stand here
exposed; we shall rest our weariness in more abundant Quarters; with present
glory we shall console the memory of dangers past, we shall enrich poverty it
self with the plenty and contributions of most large and fruitful Countries.
The Hollanders will then keep their word as to our reward, and the Spaniards
remain our prey and spoil. My self your General in name, am in sufferings your
Companion, and in fight your fellow Soldier; I shall not spare my self in this
Encounter; my heart, my tongue, my hand, shall labor by concert. Other part of
the Victory I pretend not for my self but reputation and well deserving; for I
aspire to nothing but that death it self which into its bosom gathers the
oblivion of all, should leave me upon my Sepulcher a Record of Glory. I should
do wrong to your Courage, if over and above vast recompenses, I should
particularize to you the necessity of fighting. You perceive very well that we
are environed on all sides in the heart of the Enemies Country. Whether can we
have a secure retreat, or where a safe refuge? without Country, without money,
in this Army alone and the strength of your Arms we have Kingdoms and
Treasures. As we are now armed, we are the Scourge of Princes, and the Terror
of Europe; if overcome, we shall be named with infamy, proscribed by the
Austrians, and cursed by all. In sum, there being no Sanctuary betwixt Victory
and Death, we must either be beaten, or get the Victory.

While he was thus speaking, Cordua on the other part failed not, riding round
his Army, to put some in mind of the Honor of the Nation, others of the
defense of their own Country, and all of the duty to Religion, and the Kings
Service. But now the Cannon henceforward silenced words. Cordua had disposed
seven in three places. Mansfelt had but two, and therefore it behoved him with
a speedy march to hasten to the shock; but at the same instant he commanded
them to move, he found that in mercenary Armies and composed of Volunteers,
many pretended to be equal, if not superior, to their Chief. All had not the
same motives to fight, nor the same interest to overcome. Part therefore of the
Horse mutining stood still instead of going to the Charge, demanding Pay. The
Counts entreaties or reasons, nor that calling some by their names he put
others in mind of their notable actions, and showed to all, that in the
necessity of fighting were placed vast rewards, and in Victory their pay and
rest, prevailed not, but that they stood immovable Spectators of the Battle.
Nor could he now refuse it, but with an Army weakened in number and spirit, he
resolved to enter into it with so great valor and such prudence, that greater
courage or better conduct could not be desired from himself. In the left Wing
Halverstadt maintained the fight with his Horse so long till his Arm being
broken with a Bullet, which was afterward cut off, he was obliged to yield to
the pain and the Enemy. In the right one the Dukes of Weimar and the Count of
Ortemberg were killed. The Cavalry then which remained faithful, wanting their
Chiefs, quit the field, leaving the Foot, which for the most part was cut to
pieces on the place. And Cordua, although he had the Cannon and Baggage of the
Count, with the name of a Victory, received a great blow, nor could he so
suddenly repair himself as to follow him; whereupon Mansfelt gathering up the
remainder, which were not a few, and the Mutineers joining again with him, who
at last saw themselves in the same danger, marches through Brabant with seven
thousand Horse. Count Henry Vanden Bergh, who was to have stopped his passage,
returning too late from Frizland, where he amused the Hollanders with a
diversion; by this means the Count had free liberty to join himself with the
Prince of Orange, and attempt the relief of Berghopzoom. Spinola, ever since
the month of July, had besieged the place, and by reason of the importance of
it, Forces not unequal were employed both in the Siege and in the Relief. It is
situate on the right side of a Chanel of the Scheld, where beneath Antwerp it
divides it self into several branches, and terminates, or rather confounds the
Confines of Holland, Zeland, and Brabant. Nature there scarce leaves the Land
to be distinguished from the Sea: At one time it is covered with the Sea, and
at another it remains dry. Heaps of Sand discover themselves in some places,
and Gulphs of hidden Moors deepen in others; and the Channels being many, and
the Sea-walls every where continued, it looks as if the Waters traveled by
Land, and the Fields sailed by Sea. The Zoom, a small River, made famous from
the place, rises and runs on that side, and being received in an artificial
Chanel in a straight and short course, is carried into the Scheld. The place is
of an irregular form and unsafe; of it self little, but enlarged with many
Outworks, and that with so many advantages of situation, and such industries
of invention, that perhaps for the well fortifying of another place, Nature and
Art have not made a strength greater. Not far distant Forts, like so many
Islands, do in all places appear, either where the Channels run, or where the
Country is overflowed, or the passage is open for Supplies and the Commerce
with neighbor places.

Spinola in this one place had many to conquer; and therefore the
Circumvallation was ordered with great Art. The chief Quarters were distributed
where there was a height betwixt low and marish places, the rest was environed
with a continual Trench fortified with Forts and Redoubts. The approaches were
carried on where the soil permitted, and the standing waters in some places
served equally as a defense of the security of the Camp. About certain
Half-moons and other Outworks, there were incessant fightings and assaults,
often taken and re-taken with great slaughter. All inventions might be said to
conspire against the life of man: Cannon was not sufficient, but Treacheries
were hidden under ground with Mines and Fire. Some were met with by the
besieged, others had no effect, many carried men and earth into the air, and so
resolute was the defense and the attacque, that the Garrison, being strong and
numerous, defended the Posts, recovered them when lost, formed new ones, and
assaulted those of the Spaniards with so much force and boldness, that it could
not sometimes be distinguished who was the aggressor and who the aggressed.
Spinola could not totally shut up the way of relief, because the Sea, Rivers,
and Channels kept it open, and they were kept by the Hollanders by a multitude
of Forts; and sometimes they laid the Country under water, and then let it run
off again in such sort, that the Spaniards frequently suffered shipwreck in
their Posts, sometimes they were seen besieged by an Inundation, and at others,
buried in the mud. Nevertheless enduring all inconveniences with great
resolution, and overcoming dangers with force, Spinola would at last, if a
general succor had not arrived, taken the place; but by the coming of
Mansfelt, Orange, increased in strength, reputation, and courage, encamps at
Gertrudemberg, and making a show to attempt its Relief by Land, sent it happily
by Sea with so great a number of men, that the Garrison amounting to ten
thousand Soldiers, he threatened by a double assault to drive the Spaniards by
force out of their Camp. Spinola finding himself with an Army in a great
measure sick, the rest wearied out, and some so much suspected by him, that he
feared a Mutiny in his Quarters, and intelligence with the Enemy, thought best
to retire.

In this interim, Mansfelt being absent, all the lower Palatinate was forced to
submit, and the Town of Haghenau, with the Cities of Spire, Germersheim, and
other places, easily yielded to Leopold, Amidst such multitudes of men slain,
it served for a kind of breathing and security to Christendom, that the Enemies
of it, with equal fury and examples not usual, were busied amongst themselves.
The Turks have nothing of moderation; either they adore their Princes as Gods,
or kill them like Tyrants. Osman, a very young man, was Emperor of that vast
State, who by unhappy success in the War of Poland, frustrate of that Glory,
which he had fancied to himself, was much unsatisfied with the Janissaries, to
whom alone he imputed the fault of his ill Fortune, for having showed
themselves as cowardly in the field as fierce and insolent in the Court. After
a Peace concluded upon Terms little honorable, he published that he would make
a Voyage to Mecha,, under a show of zeal to Religion, but believed by many
mingled with a youthful weariness of remaining so very long and idle at
Constantinople. Others judged, that he concealed a deeper design to remove the
Janissaries from the Court, bring them into Asia, and there amidst a greater
force of the Spahies their Envyers, disarm and disband them, and form a new
Militia. The Baggage was shipping in the Galleys; Tents and store of Treasure
were carried along to serve in the Voyage, and honor the Sepulcher of that
Impostor with vast Presents, when the Janissaries one to another began to
discourse of the fatigue and hardships to which, in so long a Pilgrimage, they
were going to be exposed, and of the conveniences they left behind, the further
they went, and the more divided they were, the more exposed to the hatred and
cruelty of the King, more apprehended than any other hazard. Upon this from
whispering in their Quarters, they fell quickly into a tumult; and a few
beginning, but all following, they came into the place of the Hippodromo to the
number of thirty thousand persons; from thence one part runs to the House of
the Coza (who was the Kings Schoolmaster, and thought to be the Promoter of
the Voyage,) but finding him not, exposed it to pillage; the rest hastened to
the Seraglio with loud cries, requiring the heads of the Visir, of the Cheslar,
and of the Coza. They within wanted force, and had they had it, counsel. The
principal persons, who with authority and friendliness might have opposed the
enraged multitude, were the very object of their hatred, and were demanded that
they might tear them to pieces. Nor did the Kings Proclamation to retract the
^^^^ge prevail any thing; for Tumults not ceasing commonly (...) those
satisfactions which serve for a pretext, it had been far (...) disbanding that
people, if a great Rain interpreted by the su(...) Rabble for a sinister
Predicton, had not separated them. The night probably might have allayed that
heat, if some of those of the Law, venerated with a blind ignorance by the
Vulgar, had not stirred up the Soldiers anew, declaring Osman fallen from the
Empire, for that by sacrilegious actions he had violated the Alcoran.

The Janissaries then casting off all respect toward their Prince, flinging
stones at their Aga, who put them in mind of their Oath and Fidelity, denying
Cussain Bassa, who to quiet them, offered three hundred thousand Zerchins,
forcing the Seraglio, though during that night, extraordinarily guarded, kill
at the first entry certain Eunuchs with Chislar Aga their Chief, and sought
after Mustapha, Uncle to Osman, who formerly had served a short space rather
for a mockery than the Head of that Empire: he that would not, or could not
show where he was, they presently as in punishment of silence or ignorance cut
off their heads. Getting down at last by signs into to a Cellar under ground,
they found him by order of his Nephew there, in a manner buried and little less
than dead; for they had kept him two days already without meat; so that to the
cries of making him Emperor, he answered, desiring at least a few drops of
water as the price of the Empire. But he was scarce settled in the Throne but he
showed himself equally thirsty of Osmans blood. He had basely hid himself; but
being found when it was very late, and committed to the custody of the Bustangi
Bassa, he was afterward conducted to the house of the Aga of the Janissaries,
where Cussain Bassa only was. In many anger yielded to compassion, considering
that young Prince, King by birth, made Suppliant to Fortune, and he improving
that compassion with his interest, offered to the Janissaries fifty Zecchins a
head. Some now relented, and the Chiefs consulted about the means to preserve
him and re-establish him in the Throne, when the furious multitude taking him
out of their hands, presented him to Mustapha in the Seraglio. Osman with tears
begs his life of his Uncle, putting him in mind of gratitude for having,
contrary to the custom of the Ottoman Emperors, perserved him for the Empire.
But the Barbarians making Destiny guilty and Author of their villainies,
Mustapha excuses himself, saying, that he knew he had oftentimes decreed his
death, but that God would not permit it. Left then in prey to the Janissaries,
and conducted to the seven Towers, amidst the concourse and execrations of the
people, who having, during his Reign, endured all kinds of calamity, Hunger,
Pestilence, and War, detested him as the fatal occasion of their evils, his
Head was cut off. Delivert grand Visir, in this interim fled; but taken at
Scutari, and brought back to Constantinople, he was killed, with his blood and
a few others of the chief Ministers, and the pillaging of some house, the
Tumult ceasing. Nevertheless Mustapha, destinated to frequent passages from a
Prison to a Throne, remains not long upon the Stage; Amurath, Brother of Osman,
being very young, was assumed to the Crown. He sends to Venice Mustapha Chiaus
with wonted respects of friendship and peace, and the Republic corresponded,
as usual, by sending Simeon Contarini, Cavalier and Procurator, Ambassador
Extraordinary to his Court.

ANNO M.DC.XXIII.
Bohemia being not alone, but the Imperial Crown, the object and reward of the
War which inflamed Germany, the Austrians rejoiced so much the more in the
Victories they had gotten, by how much with the spoils of the Palatine, having
taken away a Vote from the Protestant, the Empire seemed to be confirmed in
their Family and the Catholic Party. The Pope with motives of Religion
pressed, that the Electorate might be disposed of, and recommended Bavaria, not
only a Kinsman in blood to the proscribed Palatine, but worthily deserving it
for his piety; promising also great assistances, if it should be necessary to
maintain the disposal and decree by Arms. Nor was Ferdinand against it, but
rather found himself engaged in his word and interest for Maximilian; and he by
the almost entire possession of both the Palatinates, by his own Forces and
those of the Catholic Ligue, made himself so much considered and almost
feared, that it was not easy to dispose of it to another. The Emperor was
very earnest to get out of his hands by this change the Upper Austria, which
Bavaria held engaged for thirteen millions of Florins, which in subduing the
Rebels he affirmed to have spent; but great difficulties crossed his desires.

The Protestants were enraged, and in particular Saxony, vexed besides at the
Reformation of Religion, which was practiced in Bohemia; many had compassion of
the calamities of the Palatine and the innocence of his Children, and not a few
pretended to be sharers in his ruin. But the most considerable opposition rose
from the Spaniards, who irritated, that Bavaria had by Arms possessed himself
of a part of the Lower Palatinate, openly opposed Ferdinands intentions, and
that with a pretext, that it was not fit so publicly to offend the King of
England; and with reasons besides, that it was not convenient to set him up so
high, who might one day dispute the Empire with the Austrians; but that
resolving to maintain the Investiture by Arms, it was better to come to
extremities, and bestowing it upon some of their own Kindred, to advance the
greatness of the Family with an Electoral Vote. But the Emperor aiming to
recover his own, and to amuse those of both Religions in the Empire, sends to
Saxe the Archduke Carlo, his Brother, to persuade and appease him, and into
Spain, some Religious persons to represent motives by which he was induced and
in a manner forced to resolve.

There happened at this time the sudden Voyage of Charles Prince of England to
the Court of Spain, which put into admiration all Europe, doubtful which was
greatest, the artifice on the one side in soliciting it, or the happiness on
the other in performing it. In Madrid, Digby resided Ambassador for King
James, so much enamoured with such a Negotiation, that proposing to himself
great rewards, according to his desires and proper interest, he continually
represented facility and safety. The project consisted on the one side of
promises to restore the Palatine into his Country and Vote, and on the other,
of a connivence, or rather assistance to oppress the United Provinces of
Holland. There resided then in London for the Catholic King the Count of
Gondomar, who with a stupendous acuteness of wit so confounded pleasant things
with serious, that it was not easy to be discerned when he spoke of business,
and when he rallied. He had marvellously possessed the mind of the King, and
the inclination of the Prince, and so insinuating himself into the hopes and
inclination of both with mysterious speeches and facetious discourses, he
persuades him in earnest to resolve, that Charles himself incognito should
surprise them at Madrid to conclude the Marriage, and bring back the Bride to
London. The Prince then parting in great silence, passes disguised by Post
through France, accompanied by few others, but the Duke of Buckingham, Director
of the whole Affair, and who with an unusual example enjoyed no less favor
from the King in being than from the Prince his Successor. Not many resolutions
happily are to be found which made a noise equal to this. Of a Prince that was
foreseeing to a wonder, who was over-shadowed with jealousy; the people made
it their discourse, and the English more than any murmured at it; the only Son
of the King, the Heir of the Kingdom, hazard himself in such a long Voyage,
carry himself as an Hostage, rather than a Spouse; to a Court of contrary
Maxims of Religion and State humbly to supplicate for a Wife. Most men would
not be persuaded but the business was concluded; so that many discourses were
made of secret Alliances, and the Protestants feared it, nay some of the
Catholics themselves no less suspiciously apprehended it, Bavaria in
particular doubting lest the Country and Dignity, in favor of the Marriage,
should be restored to Frederick; and France was jealous, lest if Great Brittany
should adhere to the Austrians, their Power in Europe would be without a
balance. In England the Heretics were afraid, lest the King, inclined to
change Religion, to effect it with greater security had a mind to support
himself by the Forces and Countenance of great Princes, and the Catholics
rejoiced, hoping by such a Marriage for Liberty of Conscience and security for
their lives. In Ratisbone, where the Diet was assembled, the Spanish
Ambassador pretended, that without disposing of the Electorate, the Emperor
should at least stay to see the issue of this Voyage, and of so great an
Emergency.

But those of the Popes party and the Bavarians with unusual and incessant
instances pressed him to declare himself, and end the business. Notwithstanding
then that the major part of the Empire were of opinion, that the Authority did
not belong to the Emperor alone in a matter of so great importance to deprive
an Elector, and at his own pleasure to make choice of another, Ferdinand
calling the Clergy apart and some others of the principal Ministers, declared
to them his resolution, not asking counsel; but showing, That so important a
Dignity, which participated in the conservation of the Empire, could not be so
vacant. That Frederick by Rebellion and so many other offenses had made himself
unworthy of it. That Bavaria, who was of the same House Palatine, for his piety
and services done to the Empire did as much deserve it. That the reasons of the
Pretenders, among which was the Duke of Neoburg of the same stock, could not at
present, they being far off, be discussed; and therefore he referred them to
another Diet. That in the mean time, by the Authority exercised by his
Predecessors in like cases, he did invest Maximilian with the Electoral
Dignity. Some applauded and approved; others silently adhered by force, the
Protestants in vain pondering to resent it; in regard the power of Ferdinand
and the felicity of the Catholic Arms curbed the wills of the factious, and no
less abated the thoughts of the disobedient. Bavaria had no sooner obtained his
purpose, but begins to consider of the means to preserve the Dignity, as
differing from those Arts by which he had gotten it; and being always mindful
of the jealousy and opposition of the Spaniards, seeks new strengthnings
against their envy and force. He sent into France frequent and secret
Messengers to support himself by that Crown, and to show himself partial to
their advantages and interests; because he believed, that to a Party emulating
the Austrians it would be a Complement; that he should remain in possession of
the places taken upon the Rhine, to hinder the Spaniards from inwarding
themselves further into the Empire. Whereupon, not separating himself in the
union of Forces from Ferdinand, he was at work with new Treaties, and forming
stronger friendships. It was just about this time, not without the Austrians
jealousy, discovered, that he had sent to London certain Religious persons, of
which sort he willingly made use for less observation and charge, in disguised
habits, with many Propositions to King James, that he would unite himself to
that Party of the Catholics in Germany, of which Maximilian himself was Head,
to the end certainly to oppose himself against the designs and authority of the
Spaniards. But those practices had no effect, because in the conclusion of them
Maximilian gave it to be understood, that he would not part with the
Electorate; but being without Children, and almost out of hope to have any, he
offered the possession of it after his death to the eldest of those of the
Palatine, provided he were brought up in his Court, and in the Catholic Faith,
with a promise to obtain for him one of the Emperors Daughters to Wife. All
these Propositions were by the English and Frederick rejected; because, besides
the change of Religion, they contained but uncertain and remote hopes.

From these foreign occurrences, reflections fell back again to the affairs of
Italy, where was contending on all sides with tricks of wit to arrive at their
pretended advantages. The League projected in France at the latter end of the
year past, was in the beginning of this present concluded without much
difficulty, the interest of the Contractors concurring, it may be said, of
themselves, because the Venetians thought not themseleves strong enough to
restore the Affairs of the Grisons without help of the Crown of France; and
that knew an Union necessary with the Venetians, who alone by their nearness
could furnish to any undertaking Victuals, other Necessaries, and Cannon. The
Duke Carlo was then desired to be of the Party, both for his courage and
reputation, and by reason of the situation of his Countries; besides the
advantage of keeping him out of the other Party, well knowing that he would not
have been able idly to look upon a War so near him without adhering to one
side, and making his profit by it. It was then agreed, That the League should
last two years, and what more need should require for procuring a restitution
of places taken in the Valteline and Grisons; proposing to themselves, to form
the body of an Army of between thirty and forty thousand Foot, and six thousand
Horse, and they divided by an even proportion; a third to every one of the
Princes united, but of those, assigning betwixt fifteen and eighteen thousand
of them to France; ten or twelve thousand to the Republic; and eight thousand
to Savoy, each to raise them as soon as might be, and send them to their own
Frontiers. The Cannon were to be furnished by those that were nearest at a
common charge, according to the rating of the Forces.

It was further concerted, To procure Mansfelt to make a diversion of the
Austrians, giving him three hundred thousand Crowns yearly, the half to be paid
by France, two thirds of the rest by the Republic, and what remained by Savoy.
In case of Invasion, the others were to send half their men to the assisstance
of the assailed, to which the Treaty obliged; and if the Confederates should
only show a willingness to Peace, and remain only defensive, they referred to
another Treaty the consideration of dividing the Conquests, when, forced to
Hostility, they should happen to make any.

The Switzers were invited to enter into this League; but the Catholics,
prepossessed in a particular Diet, by the endeavors of the Nuntio and
Ambassador of Spain, raised so many difficulties in the general one of all the
body of the Helvetians, that, although some understood that their interest was
highly concerned in it, nevertheless in their accustomed delays they let the
Proposition fall. The Treaty was no sooner concluded, but Duke Carlo, well
acquainted with the liberality of the Republic, earnestly solicited them by
the Marquess of Lantz, sent to them Ambassador Extraordinary, to supply him
with the means to raise and maintain the Soldiers, which the League laid upon
them. But the Venetians considering that the burden was divided by an equal
balance, according to each ones ability, and that, by reason of their nearness
to the Valteline, they were to bear the hazard and greatest burden of the War,
and besides, by reason of the long Frontier with the Austrians, were obliged to
a more careful defense, did not hearken to the instances of the Duke, who
seemed more concerned in Conquests and advantages than in dangers.

As to Mansfelt, from France was sent into Holland (where the Count then was)
Monsieur de Montero, and from the Duke Monsieur di Bos, Christopher Suriano
supplying for the Republic, who resided with the States, inviting him to make
War in the French Country, supposed the fittest place to cut off communication
of succors betwixt Italy and Flanders, and also to be near Rhetia, as an Army
of reserve, if any ill accident should happen. And for this purpose they
advance some months pay to him. The Count, who by such art subsisted in credit,
showing a readiness to march, not without the Spaniards apprehending, that to
this League might adhere other Princes, made jealous or provoked by them, and
particularly the Italians, the most disgusted, although the most patient. They
therefore apply with greater earnest to protect their interest with the Banner
of Religion, employing all art chiefly to gain the Pope, under whose Skirt they
did not only hope to preserve the Valteline from War, and induce the
Confederates to reason, but settling themselves in the present advantages, by
this means obtain yet greater.

To interest then Gregory in this cause, they offer to deposite the Forts of
the Valteline in his hands, magnifying their intentions to quiet, and
considering, That postposing their own conveniences and the possession, so
much the more just, by how much it proceeded from invitation and a voluntary
resignation of the people, it appeared, that not the desire of dominion, not
the ambition of the Country, nor the designs to oppress Italy, but the sole
consideration of Religion had induced them to protect it. That they resigned it
to the common Father of Princes, to the Guardian of Religion it self, to the
end, that the jealousies of the Catholics being quieted, the fierceness of the
Heretics restrained, he might prescribe rules to holy Worship, and to Italy
convenient security, whilst the King would not depend but upon his Arbitrament,
and with wonted zeal to his judgment, and the good of the Church, employ the
power of all his Dominions, where no other but the true Religion reigned.

In Rome the opinions and counsels upon an offer of such importance were
wavering; for some, penetrating into the Mysteries of Policy, did not approve,
that either the power of the Church, or the Authority of the Pope should be so
far engaged, that the professed Neutrality and Mediation should run a hazard.
They well knew, that if the trust were accepted, Peace was not to be hoped for;
because, if betwixt the Crowns there should happen any agreement of restoring
all things to their former estate, no man could see with what decency the
Valteline could pass through the hand of the Pope back to the Heretics, its
first Masters; it being not fit that he should subscribe with the Protestants
to reciprocal limitations, cautions, and conditions. On the other side, if with
the fast band of Religion, he should be willing to continue in the possession,
how could he ever hope for the consent of the Confederates, who pretended to
right themselves by Arms. Will they (said they) be terrified with an empty name
and Authority without force, and at the sight of the Popes Standard, which upon
the first Invasion must implore assistance from Feria, and under the shadow of
the power of the Spaniards repair themselves of their losses and wrong? Will
Gregory then in the utmost of his life cut off Peace betwixt his Children,
making himself a Party, and leave to his Successor a lamentable Inheritance of
War and Troubles. And take it for granted, that the Confederates would suffer
it, the Protestants yet were not like to endure it; but at the name alone of
the Ensigns of the Church would come down in Troops to oppose them. That
Helvetia was near; the Princes of the Empire not yet suppressed; Mansfelt had
his Arms in his hands; all greedy, and longing to overrun Italy, and mischief
the most sacred Seat of Religion and the Apostolate.

The offices of the Confederates joined their assistance to these
apprehensions, and in particular the Venetians, who, sending Girolamo Soranzo
Cavalier, Ambassador Extraordinary to Rome, dissuaded the Pope from lending
his Name and Authority to the Interests of Spain. But he, environed by his
Nephews, and they gained by Spain with Benefices, Pensions, and the Marriage of
the Princess of Venosa, Vassal of the Monarchy, believed that the Princes made
such a noise only to fright him, and that at the appearing of his Colors all
their Arms out of veneration would fall out of their hands, there remaining to
him, as an ornament to his Name and a Crown upon his Sepulcher, the glorious
Memorial of Peace preserved, and Religion protected. The trust then was
accepted by him, upon condition, that a Treaty of Agreement betwixt the two
Kings should be pursued, and when without the Spaniards being in fault, it
should not be concluded, that the Forts should then be restored to them again.
This being treated in Rome, Feria persuades the Grisons, under pretext of
moderating the Articles heretofore concluded, to send to him new Ambassadors,
to bind so much the faster the knots of servitude and dependence. Leopold
raises at Steich a very good Fort, and there was published an Investiture of
the Emperor, which granted to the House of Trivultia, according to a certain
pretension they had, the Valley of Musoccho, The French showed themselves much
moved, that before a Resolution taken upon the Deposition, Gregory had not
expected the sense of that Crown upon it. But in the counsel opinions were
divided according to affections, some voting to break off all Treaty, and with
a sudden march of Troops hinder the Popes meddling, and the execution of the
Trust it self. Others were of opinion, that the Deposition should be approved
with certain limitations and reserves, and those counsels taking place which
squared with the favor; for Pisieux was Author of them, in whose inclinations,
both in Rome and Spain, were grounded their greatest hopes, it passed so.

It was then by the French declared, That the Deposition should remain until
the end of July (it was now the month of May) within which time, the Forts
being demolished, and all restraints upon the Grisons and Armies removed which
did oppress them, affairs should be restored to their former state, which not
being performed, the League should supplicate the Pope to join himself to their
Arms, thereby to obtain the effect. Before such opinions were represented to
the Pope, the Spaniards, getting notice of them, proceeded to hasten the
Deposition with so much precipitation, that notwithstanding the indisposition
into which Gregory was at that time desperately fallen, the Cardinal Lodovisio
orders, that the Duke de Fiano, the Popes own Brother, with fifteen hundred
Foot, and five hundred Horse should march toward Milan. He being a person of
most sottish parts, with the assistance nevertheless of some of better
abilities, served only to make surer the engagement, and to conciliate some
respect to those Troops. But being arrived in the Valley, he found that the
people fearing to fall under another Dominion than that of Spain, to the number
of two thousand, took Arms and resolved to oppose him; but all obstacles being
removed by the authority of the Governor of Milan, he enters into the Forts,
Feria himself furnishing Ammunition and Victuals, and keeping besides with his
own Garrisons those of Chiavena, Riva, and Bormio; Fiano nevertheless returns
presently to Rome, leaving in the Valley for the command of the Troops Niccolo,
one of the Marquesses of Bagni, and at Milan Monsieur Scappi to reside with the
Governor. In the mean time, at Rome the Ambassador Sillery, preventing those
Orders which the Ministers of Venice and Savoy expected, performs himself alone
the Commissions of the Court to the Pope, changing them, instructed (as was
believed) by Pisieux, by approving the Deposition without limitation of time,
and without the requiring of those things which the Collegiates were to demand;
but by adding only an entreaty for the speedy demolishing the Forts and
restitution, with those conditions for Religion which Gregory should prescribe.

Before the Pope could answer hereupon, God, upon the 8. of July, calls for him
for the deposition of his life, after having held rather than exercised a
little more than two years the name and authority of the Apostolate. A Pope
that in matters of Religion left a fame of much zeal, employed with great
applause in Wars of Germany, and spread abroad by the Congregation by him
founded, for propagating Faith amongst the Barbarians. On the other side, as to
business, he was taxed to have been of a mean spirit, and totally subject to
the will of his Nephews, amongst which the Cardinal directed affairs with such
an absolute power, that in the short time of his Uncles Pontificate procuring
vast riches to his house, he minded little else but the heaping up wealth and
honors. The state of Affairs and of Italy solicitously required the Election
of a new Pope; nevertheless amidst so many affections and interests of Princes,
and by reason of the forms, with secret scrutinies prescribed by Gregory in his
Bull, it was doubted it would be long a doing.

But upon the 6. of August the Election, where opinions and minds least
inclined, fell upon Maffeo, Cardinal Barberino, by Country a Florentine, of the
age of fifty and six years, to the wonder of the Electors themselves, who were
amazed to have deceived their own hopes by promoting a person, who for his
complexion and vigor might outlive the greater part of them. He takes the
name of Urban the Eighth with the applause of the World, by reason of the high
conceit of his Learning and Ability.

And now in Venice to Anthonio Priuli Duke deceased, laden with years and
deserts was sustituted Franceso Contarini Cavalier Procurator, signal for many
public Employments, and for having undergone Embassies in almost all the
Courts of Europe with such integrity and innocence, that nothing could be
condemned in his actions, or accused in his manners. One of the first cares in
his Principality was to send to Rome the four elected Ambassadors, according
to custom, to venerate the High Priest, and they were Francesco Erizzo
Cavalier, Procurator, Renieri Zeno, Girolamo Soranzo both Cavaliers, and
Girolamo Cornaro, who were so much the more inflamed as Sillery proceeded with
luke-warmness.

The Pope, to say truth, detested the engagement into which his Predecessor had
put the Arms and Authority of the Church; complaining of the unseasonable
charge, but found no way to get out, Lodovisio having strongly tied the knot
both of the business and decency; that although Urban, by reason of employments
had in that Court, was thought inclined to France, and in a manner partial, it
was nevertheless fit to be serviceable in name to the aims and designs of
Spain. But however time run on to the prejudice of those affairs, no man in
these beginnings durst irritate or provoke the Pope; so that the Grisons
groaned under the burden, Leopold continued in possession, and Feria, bating
the appearance, enjoyed the conveniences and advantages which he had by the
Valteline proposed.

Nor did the diversion of Mansfelt come to any thing; for although he had
received from the Confederates their money, yet believing to make War in
Germany with more profit to himself, and being stirred up by the King of
Denmark and the Protestants of the Lower Saxony was marched into the County of
Oldenburg, and having extorted great Contributions there, leaving Garrisons in
several places, had entered into Westphalia and the Bishopric of Munster. On
another side Halberstat, separate in Forces, but with the same ends, and with
the same supplies from the Bishopric of Osnabrug, threatened to advance into
the Palatinate with thirty thousand men, most new raised, ill furnished with
warlike Provisions, and with but a few Cannon. Tilly, inferior in number, but
better provided, prevailing in Valor and military Discipline, marches speedily
toward him, taking his passage through the Country of Hassia, mortifying the
Landgrave, who had had the stoutness to deny it him with oppressions and
contributions, and indeed terrifying with his fame the whole Protestant Union.
He overtakes him in the Bishopric of Munster, and doubtful whether he should
go forwards toward the Palatinate, or bend toward Holland, provokes him to
battle, he avoiding it with that disadvantage which he always has who retires
and gives way. Coming at last close up to him at Bursteinfurt, a place of no
note, whilst he was marching toward Statlo through a winding way, interrupted
with certain small Rivers, which forming in several places dams and ditches,
gave him the opportunity to make a stand; then facing about, and leaving a
strong defense there, assure both the Rear and this March. But the Catholics
pressed so hard upon him, that overcoming all obstacles, and the ressistance
which was made them at the River Aa, they came at last at Statlo upon the River
Berchel the 6. of August to a general Battle, in which being defeated, leaving
six thousand dead upon the place, besides four thousand which rendered
themselves Prisoners, and the rest being dispersed, eighty Colors, Cannon,
Baggage, and the glory of the Victory were the prey of the Conquerours.
Halberstat then with two Companies of Horse flies into Holland, giving Tilly
liberty to re take many places in Westphalia, in which he and Mansfelt had
their Garrisons. Tilly hereupon meditates on a great design to make himself
Master of Embden, and from thence through Frizland to pass into the bowels of
the United Provinces of Holland, so to retribute to the advantage of the
Spaniards that powerful assistance they had given Ferdinand; but the Hollanders
furnished the place with all sorts of provisions, sending thither men and a
Squadron of Ships of War, soliciting also Mansfelt for its relief, and
consenting six thousand men to Haverstadt to repair his Army. For these reasons
Tilly, seeing the enterprise difficult, and of a longer continuance than the
approaching season of the Winter did permit, returns to take Quarters in Hassia.

Nor had Mansfelt better luck; for Cordua, having in Westphalia reduced many
Garrisons of places, partly possessed by him, and partly protected by the
Hollanders, with great facility every other place, except Lipstat, which made
some defense, yielded. At last the Count of Anhalt and Colonel Erwits took
Mansfelt in the Bishopric of Munster, at such a disadvantage of situation and
numbers, that he was wholly defeated, Heaven making War for the Imperialists
with such partiality of favors, that they publicly boasted, That the justice
of their cause was decided by the felicity of their successes.

The Imperialists also persuaded Bethlem Gabor to be quiet; for he proposing to
himself either to make a short War or Peace, having obtained the Turks consent
by the means of the Count de la Tour, who went to the Port for that purpose,
had invaded Hungary and Moravia. But it being divulged, that Tilly having the
fame of so many Victories his forerunners, was coming to their relief, he
retired into his own Country, and applies himself to new agreements. He had
also in this year sent Stephano Attuani, his Minister of most trust, to Venice,
to demand a League and assistance, but without effect; because the Senate
purposed to be attentive observers of, but not be entangled in foreign
occurrences so far distant from them.


But was so much the more watchful upon the Valteline, experiencing now from
the usurpation of the passages there, the mischiefs foreseen, whilst for
recruiting their Army, and increasing their strength, in order to the
fulfilling of the League, and guard themselves against the jealousies, which
molested them on all sides, they had no means to bring any Soldiers but by Sea
with much length of time and charge. The Pope, to gain time, proposed diverse
expedients, and above all expressed, that without re-imbursement of the charges
he would not part with the trust; but the Confederates offering that with all
readiness, provided he would put the Valley into their hands, to be rendered
when the Forts were razed, and Religion restored to the first Owner, he
remained fearful to offend Spain, and proposed, that of the Valley should be
formed a sovereign body to be united either to the Catholic Cantons of
Helvetia, or as a fourth League to the three of the Grisons.

But the Confederates, proposing to themselves the end of restoring things to
their former state, judged they should be wanting to the protection promised to
the Grisons, and nevertheless feared, lest the Valteline, not being able to
subsist of it self, as a body apart, should uphold it self by the Spaniards, by
which means taking away the cover of the name, they should still enjoy
predominancy over their minds, the convenience and liberty of the passage to
the exclusion of all others. Nor could this chief interest be longer concealed;
because, it being at last proposed in the name of the Pope, that passage
through the Valley should remain free for the Soldiery of the King of Spain,
it gave the Confederates occasion to conclude thereupon, that the subtle
pretext of Religion being now removed, the Interest seemed discovered to tend
to the subjecting no less of Italy than of Germany, by the uniting of
Countries, and opening a door to overrun the one and the other at their
pleasure. The Pope nevertheless persisted in what had been proposed, moderating
the particular of passage, by confining it to the Valteline, excluding the
Country of the Grisons and Chiavena; and that, to take away jealousy from
Italy, it should be understood only of passage from the Milanese for Germany
and Flanders, and not from them back thither, and insisted upon it with so much
urgency, that taking upon him the part of an Arbitrator, he pretended to a
power to decree it, by virtue of the consent the Princes had given, that he
should prescribe needful securities for the Catholic Religion, affirming
withal, that to bridle the Protestants and Hollanders, a sudden march of
Spanish Troops was made necessary for the defense of the Low Countries and
relief of the Empire; but the others considered that a door once opened to the
Spaniards, limits and ways could no more be prescribed, and that under the
pretext of passage, the Milanese being made a perpetual place of Arms,
jealousies, troubles, and apprehensions would be eternized in Italy.
Nevertheless the Ambassador Sillery, with the assistance of Gheffier, who was
at that time at Rome, although he could not but know France more prejudiced
than any others, both by the blow which its Confederates would feel within and
without Italy, and the breach which would be made into that most ancient League
with the Grisons, by virtue whereof the absolute disposition of the Passes was
ascribed to them, readily consents to it, to the so much dissatisfaction of the
other Princes united, that attributing all to Pisieux, from whose Judgment and
Pen, by reason of the favor and his charge the business depended, they
resolved to discover the Plot to the King himself, giving him to understand the
alterations with which they had proceeded at Rome, from what had been concerted
at Paris, setting at naught the Princes who were their friends, neglecting the
Interests of the Crown it self, and having by a most destructive consent
conducted the business to that very end which the Spanish Ministers directed.

Concerning Pisieux, besides the hatred and envy, which are the wonted
followers of favor, a common opinion was current, that he was not more
powerful in the Kings favor, than venal in his Ministry, making use of his
Authority rather for profit than honor. Being therefore not at all acceptable
besides to the great men of the Kingdom, it proved no hard matter for the
Ministers of the Princes, and in particular Giovanni Pesari, Ambassador of the
Venetians, by their Offices and wonted Arts to help forward the secret
Intrigues of Court, which discovering themselves of a sudden, his Fortune split
in a moment, the King intimating to him, that he and the Chancellor his Father
should presently leave the Court.

The Marquess de la Vieuville, Superintendant of the Finances, took quickly
possession of the favor, and in the little time he subsisted, by the Marriage
with England, and other means, laid the foundations of those contrivances,
perfected afterward by his Successor with great felicity. But the affections
of the King toward Favorites having hitherto proved but short and unhappy, he
continued but a few months. Some ascribed his fall to covetousness, by which he
provoked the hatred of the great ones, accustomed to satisfy their private
interests out of the public Treasury. Others judged, that one ingratitude
being commonly the punishment of another, as he had lent his hand to the
expulsion of Pisieux, the Raiser of his Fortune, so the Cardinal Richelieu,
introduced by him into business, quickly excluded him.

This Cardinal is the person called elsewhere the Bishop of Lusson, and there
is no doubt, that, as for the most part in the choice of great Ministers the
judgment of the Princes agree with those of their Subjects, though soon after
they differ in the maintaining of them, he was not ordained for that place from
applause or common consent, but was brought into it chiefly by the savor of
the Queen Mother, with whom he had been long exercised in all sorts of
observance. The King surely had no inclinations to him, either for having in
former Negotiations discovered the sagacity of his nature, or because there is
a certain natural secret aversion to those, who with an ascendant of wit
exceed. Sure it is, that the Cardinal possessed rather the power of the favor
than the favor it self, nevertheless, he had the great Art how to fix the
mutable and suspicious Genius of the King, and the inconstant nature of the
people, governing as with a supreme Dictatorship the one and the other even to
his death.

But as to the Affairs of Italy, by the disgrace of Pisieux, the Minister being
changed, there was a change also at Rome in the proceeding of the Treaty, and
Sillery being recalled, all that was disavowed, which he had negotiated and
consented to. Monsieur de Bethune, a Minister formerly well known in Italy,
being come to Rome in his place, assures the Pope, that all that which his
Predecessor had approved, concerning the Passes, was wholly against the Kings
m^nd; and in the name of the Confederates expressing to the holy See
unalterable duty, and ready consent to that which might secure Religion in the
Valley, as to the rest refuses any expedient, which did not deliver the Grisons
from the present oppression, restore them to their Country and Sovereignty, and
did not exclude the Spaniards from the Passes. They published this change of
Ministers to be a shift; but the Pope, who had made them deliver to him Riva
also and Chiavena, endeavored to gain time, perceiving, that to which soever
of the Parties he should give the possession of the Forts, it would serve but
for a pretext to kindle a most dangerous War, which flaming out betwixt the two
Crowns, by Auxiliary Forces, would quickly extend it self throughout all Europe.

Nor did the Spaniards now fail, as they had succeeded in the gaining of the
Cardinal Lodovisio with Rewards and Marriages, to try every way to ensnare the
Barberins also, giving hopes to Vrbans Nephews of the Princess Stigliana, who
being an Inheritrix of vast Territories in the Kingdom of Naples, brought also
in Dowry the Sovereignty of the strong Fortress of Sabioneda. Some also
suggested to the Pope and to his House hopes, that amidst the jealousies and
dissensions of the Princes, he might have the hap to get himself glory, by
uniting the Valley to the Church, or obtain advantages by investing his Kindred
in it. But the one and the other equally displeased the Confederates; because
no less suspicious was the temporal greatness of the Popes, who, protected by
the Cloak of Religion, cannot make War themselves without danger, nor overcome
without blame, then the inclination of the Nephews doubtful, it being not
possible for him that possesses the Valley, but to depend upon the protection
and assistance of the Governor of Milan. Nothing then remained but the closing
in a War.

France, before engaging out of the Kingdom, strengthens it self with two great
and important Treaties. The first with the Provinces of Holland, to whom were
promised three millions and two hundred thousand Livres Tournois to be paid in
three years, upon condition not to make Peace or Truce with Spain without their
knowledge; and if it should so fall out, that France it self should have need
of assistance, they were to retribute it either by restoring the half of the
foresaid sum, or by furnishing Ships in proportion. The other was the Marriage
of Henrietta, Sister of King Lewis, with Charles Prince of Wales, from which
was derived a report, that the English would break into a War with Spain, and
the Palatine be restored into his Country by Arms.

Charles, to say truth, from his Voyage into Spain had brought back discontent,
hatred, and desire of revenge against that Crown; for though he were received
at Madrid with all possible honors, he nevertheless penetrated the intention
not to restore his Country to Frederick, nor conclude the Marriage for which
the King, the Princess her self, Olivares and all the Kingdoms had in their
hearts a particular aversion. Being for some months amused with several
proportions, and a difficulty which they feigned came to them from the Court of
Rome, though to remove it, he was induced to write himself to the Pope, and
tempted at last, if he would have a Wife, to change his Religion, he parted in
great haste, returning to London by Sea. It is not possible to express, what
disdain vexed the heart of that young Prince, and King James with no less
vehemence published his revenge, having a mind in his old age to adorn his
Sepulcher with those resentments, which in the course of his Reign, having been
blunted by idleness, seemed to have blemished the glory of his life. For this
purpose he calls a Parliament, in which Buckingham having justified, with a
zeal to common good, and a desire of Peace, the Kings intentions concerning the
Marriage with Spain; and rendered an account of the Princes Voyage, it was
resolved, that the Kings Son-in-law should be restored into his Country by
Arms, and that the Son should marry with a Princess of the Blood Royal of
France. But it being usual in England, that Parliaments have an equal suspicion
of their Kings, when they are armed, as Kings have of Parliaments, when they
are united, it was presently desolved; many jealousies being spread abroad,
which were believed fomented, at least, if not raised by the Ambassador of
Spain, as if the Parliament, adhering to the youthful age of Charles, and with
applause flattering that Generosity, which he showed to revenge himself, would
condemn the cooler proceedings and past actions of the King, in whose life time
they were disposing the spoils and Funerals of his Authority and Command. But
withal the means were not ripened, nor the contributions consented, which might
raise and keep on foot an Army. So that as the Marriage with Henrietta was
easily concluded, with a dispense from the Pope, and many Articles of favor to
the consciences of the Catholics, so the moving of Arms quickly vanished.

It is notwithstanding true, that Mansfelt, beaten in Germany, and in Holland
not willingly suffered by Orange, through emulation of military glory and the
applause of the people, was called into England by the King, where being
received with great honor, making him his General for the recovery of the
Palatinate, he ordains him an Army of ten thousand Foot and three thousand
Horse, with six pieces of Cannon, if France would concur with a Force
proportionable. Sending him with this Proposition to King Lewis, who professed
himself disgusted with the Count, because he had taken the Title of the Kings
General without his knowledge; and therefore, when he went to London, had
forbid him coming into France, he obtains to be admitted to treat with his
Ministers, denying him his own presence. He was supplied with some money by the
French with promises of more, though in effect they had little fervency in the
interest of the Palatine. But for Italy, having secured all behind him by the
friendship of the English, and the flank by the War of Flanders, they applied
themselves with more warmth to the Affairs of the Valteline.

The Venetians employed all care with the Princes of Italy to unite them in the
common Interest. But succeeded no further, but to induce the Dukes of Savoy and
Mantua to compose betwixt themselves, (excluding the Mediation of the Spanish
Ministers) the differences so long in question, upon terms, that for the
pretended Dowry of Bianca, Ferdinand should disburse to Carlo three hundred
thousand Crowns, a third whereof within the space of four years Contant, and
the rest with the Dowry of Margaret; Movables and Jewels should be satisfied
in so much Land in Monserrat near to Piedmont, to be set out by the Duke of
Mantua, valuing the Rent at two per Cent. For a greater confirmation of the
agreement, there was a promise of reciprocal Marriages, of Mary Princess of
Mantua with Filibert Son of Carlo, and of one of the Infanta's of Savoy with
him that should be Heir of the Dominions of the States of the House of
Gonzagha. This notwithstanding was not to be executed but within the space of
eight years, neither was there other difference in the Dowries of two hundred
thousand Crowns for each, but that Carlo was to pay in ready money, and to
receive in Lands. When therefore the Prince Vincenzo of Mantua should succeed,
as he hoped, in dissolving, under pretense of sterility, a certain Bond, and,
as he pretended, invalid Marriage, formerly contracted out of an amorous
passion with the Widow Isabella, Princess of Bozzolo, the Infanta was to be
his; but that not following, or Ferdinand having no Child Male, the other was
yet to be accomplished with Filibert. In order to this agreement, Carlo and
Mary yield the pretensions on Monserrat to Ferdinand, to his Brother and to
their Children, and this was to take place, though by death or other
disturbance, the foresaid Marriages should not succeed. In sum, the consent of
the Emperor, as Sovereign of the States, was to be asked, and out of respect
communication given to both the Crowns. Such were the conditions concluded on
and subscribed, by which the ancient dissentions of both Houses were hoped to
have been quieted; but to the delusion of humane wisdom, that which was
believed an Antidote, was soon converted into the venomous seed of greater
evils.

Amongst various accidents, the first was the death of Filibert; for although
Carlo, sending his Secretary Pater to Mantua, offered to substitute Maurice his
other Son to the Marriage, nevertheless the business fatally succeeded not,
Heaven disposing new Thunderclaps for Italy and the House of Gonzagha. The
minds then of the Confederates, being by such Negotiations forced for the
present from several cares, applying themselves in earnest to the Valteline and
to Arms, caused the delivery of the Forts to be demanded of the Pope, that
according to the League they might be demolished, and the Valley restored to
the Grisons, or else that the Spaniards should within three months execute the
Treaty of Madrid; but the Pope himself opposing the first Proposition, and not
being able to bring the Spaniards to the other, it was replied unto him, That
the Confederates found themselves necessitated for their own safety, not giving
place to other expedients, to apply to more effectual remedies. King Lewis had
sent into Helvetia the Marquess de Coevre, committing to him the charge of the
Treaty and direction of the War. He and Girolamo Cavazza, Resident for the
Republic in Zurich, notwithstanding the opposition of the Popes and Spanish
Ministers, by effectual offices, and to take away all pretexts, persuaded the
Catholic Cantons to perform the caution required in the Treaty of Madrid, and
the Protestants to take Arms, and permit Levies of men, provisions of Victuals,
and other necessaries. They warily afterward took upon them underhand to
animate the Grisons, encourage the oppressed, raise up the commons, recall the
banished and fugitives out of the Country, to the end they might join with the
Arms of the Confederates to shake off their yoke, and drive away the Enemy.
Feria, stirred with great apprehensions upon the arrival of Coevre at
Soluturno, orders Recruits, and to keep the people of Rhetia quiet, threatens
them with grievous mischiefs, Leopold also protesting no less chastisements,
notwithstanding that he had stipulated another agreement with them, in which,
upon the disbursement of some thousands of Florins, he promised to take the
Garrisons out of Majanfelt and Coira.

The Princes of the League being now resolved to take Arms, agreed to make the
War under the name of the Switzers and Grisons, levying three thousand men of
each of the two Nations, reinforcing them afterward with twelve hundred Foot,
and four hundred Horse of the French, and with another body of the Venetian
Troops, of which the gross and those of Carlo were to keep upon the Borders of
the Milanese, so long as the Royal Troops should lie encamped in the Province
of Brescia; but the Confederates continued to proceed toward the same end,
with designs and means differing; for France, abhorring an open breach with
Spain, pretended not to manage the War, but by Auxiliary Forces, and without
engaging his own Troops so far off, with little charge and less noise, at the
cost of the other Confederates, especially the Venetians arrive at his purpose.
The Venetians not aspiring, the affairs of the Grisons being restored, so to
ought, but to confirm the Peace, desired that the enterprise might have carried
reputation and vigor with it, so to have obtained the one and the other with
equal honor and dispatch. And Carlo concurred rather in name than with his
Forces, busying his thoughts in nothing but to bring the Crowns to an open
breach in Italy; for being situated in the middle, as in a manner Guardian and
Arbiter of the War or Peace, whatever the event should happen to be, he hoped
to make his profit, and serve himself of the Arms of others, principally of the
French, for his own advantage. He represented to the King and to the Senate how
prejudicial it would be to engage, and as it were bury Armies in a Country, as
Rhetia was, barren and straight, how burdensome to maintain Troops idle upon
their own Frontiers. He remonstrated to what charge the Confederates exposed
themselves, and amidst what difficulties they would be straightned, if they
aspired no higher than relieving the Valteline and defending themselves. Was it
possibly to be believed, that the Spaniards would sit down with one blow, or
that they would be frighted with the name of this Alliance? Their intention was
nothing so, and being not inferior in art and force, knew how to make use of
them according to the change of times, never neglecting occasions, or losing
advantages. When could they have greater hopes to atchieve great designs; since
the Princes of Italy, loosned from so many vexatious respects, have at last had
the courage to take hands with Strangers, and in conjunction with them, make
plain the way to their relief? The Duke laid great weight upon this Union, and
the reflections were not of less moment; for, if when the World adored Spain in
the height of its prosperity and greatness, he with his own Forces and the gold
of the Republic had been able to resist, what might they not promise
themselves at present from the powerful assistances of the Kingdom of France,
whilst England, Holland, the Kingdoms of the North, and the Protestants
conspired in the same designs? He showed how Europe was divided, and that the
Party, which bore Arms against the House of Austria, was much stronger than
that which was subjected to their power; for he designed, that on the one side
Mansfelt should make a diversion in Burgundy, Hungary on the other should be
invaded by the Transilvanian, the War should be continued in the Provinces of
Flanders; the King of Denmark, with the Princes of the Lower Saxony, should
make War in the Empire, and the Seas and Coasts of Spain be infested by the
English Fleet. Whence he concluded, that they were to remain always in fear, or
at once make themselves to be feared, the opportunity was now offered by a
great War to free themselves from greater dangers, and seizing speedily the
Passes of the Valteline, and excluding succors, invade powerfully the Monarchy
of Spain in the Milanese, which is its Center, for the Conquests whereof he
generously offered his Forces, his Countries, and his own person, preferring
Glory and Liberty before idleness and the greatest dangers.

The Venetians happily might not have been averse from such counsels, although
they knew the attempt laborious and difficult, (from the disgusts which now for
a long time had rendered the neighborhood of the Spanish Armies so troublesome
and grievous) if the French had been sincerely willing to employ their utmost
power; but they, keeping to their aim not to break openly with Spain, gave it
sufficiently to be understood, that by engaging their friends more than
themselves, they desired to have them Dependants rather than Confederates. The
Duke then, who was wont to have several designs in a readiness, to the end that
amidst many attempts, Fortune might favor some one, knowing France, as much
impatient of quiet, as irresolute to the War, projected with subtle reaches of
interest and advantage, that the Crown would at least undertake the Conquest of
Genoua. He had observed from a long time with a covetous eye that City grown
rich by their long Peace, the Country open, the Citizens at discord; and his
avarice was fomented by Claudio Marini, a Genouese, but Ledger Ambassador with
him for the Crown of France, who, ill satisfied with his own Country, fought
amidst the ruins of it, either to exalt his name, or bury the ungrateful
Fortune of his native Country. He offered Intelligences, and served as an
instrument to corrupt several, in particular has own Kindred; whereupon, by the
heat of his inclinations, the Duke earnestly pressed King Lewis, that if he
would not spread his Colors against the Milanese, he would at least lend them
him to employ them against the Genouese. This he looked at to be a meet
diversion in favor of Rhetia, which was sought elsewhere in vain; whilst by
this Conquest, Milan being disarmed of its Forces, and the Monarchy of money,
the Mines would hardly supply, nor the Indies satisfy contingencies and other
vast expenses, if the Genouese, with equal care and covetousness, did not
provide Treasures for the Gulf of Wars. They squeez out the wealth of others
to pour it forth into Spain, who, with the money of all, makes War to all. What
was there to be expected from that Government where private interest setting
public liberty to sale, that of others is prejudiced. Their Ports were open to
the Spanish Fleets, their Galleys augmented the Kings Squadrons, Passage was
free, Quarters secure, their friendship was by obligation, their wills
obedient, the chief ones were ready, and private men, no less either to serve
in person in their Armies, or maintain them with their Riches.

The Genouese then was to be invaded, not only as the door, but as part of the
Domination of the Spaniards in Italy, by the taking whereof the Milanese is
encompassed, Succors are cut off, Correspondence, Commerce, Navigation, and
Aids are all broken. That that River was a Line, which to force it had no
greater difficulty, but to attempt it; a short march would bring the Army under
the Walls of the City, great in circuit, strong by situation, but by the
barrenness of the Country, may be said besieged. The Mountains themselves serve
for a Circumvallation of Intrenchment; the Valleys and Passages were shut up in
a manner by themselves. The Fleet of France might with ease keep out succors.
In Commonwealths with the Metropolis all is conquered; because the seat of
liberty and Empire being overthrown, the Union is lost of which the Government
is formed. There wanted not even within the Walls friendships and
correspondencies with those Citizens, who have more than once attempted to sell
their liberty with their Country. Let France call to mind the Dominion it once
had over that State, awaken its Rights, extend its Frontiers into the Land and
Sea; replant the Flower-de-luces in Italy, and greatning it self with so
glorious a Conquest, satiate his Armies with the spoils of the richest Emporium
of Europe. All this was suggested by the Duke, and to him by ambition and
interest, although he endeavored to hide it with the cause of Zuccarello,
elsewhere mentioned to be a little and ignoble Fief of the Empire in the
Mountains, but esteemed by the Genouese, important; because it lies in their
bowels, by that fatality which Italy has always been subject to, that things
in themselves but small, being esteemed great by their Princes, have frequently
opened the way to Strangers to usurp the greatest part of it. It was anciently
the possession of the Family of Carretta, and the Genouese had formerly
attempted to get a right to it. They in particular bought of Scipio, one of the
Marquesses, a certain annual Rent, with a condition of preference, in case the
Fief it self should one day come to be sold. But it happened that the same
Scipio, to prevent an Imperial Sentence which he feared in punishment for a
murder he had committed, sold it to the Savoyards. The Emperor nevertheless,
not enduring a fraud so manifest, calls the business to himself, and commits
the care of it to the Genouese, who aspired to it. At last being sold in these
late times by Confiscation, it was not doubted but the gold and favor of the
Genouese contributed much to it, and perhaps the consideration of not enlarging
the Duke in that Quarter, whence he might have been able to infest them, and
greaten himself. All this was published by the Duke with a great train of
protests and reasons, to which he added other disgusts, seeing himself hated by
the Government of Genoua and the people, and his name and reputation on all
occasions vilified. Nevertheless the common opinion seemed to be, that he
rather sought an occasion for War, rather than he had cause for it. But in
France, although the Crown, besides an universal inclination of the more
powerful to oppress the weak, had no other cause of enmity with the Genouese
but the discrepancy of interests and affections, the thoughts of Carlo were
commended, and his propositions embraced, if for no other, yet at least to give
exercise and vent to the minds now inflamed amidst these Preludiums to War.

But to the end all the League might concur therein, the Proposals were carried
to the Venetians with a differing success; for although the French and
Savoyards had made themselves believe, that mindful of ancient emulations, they
would easily have assented; yet those animosities, (as good as cancelled by
time and the long Peace) being in the Senate, put in balance with the motives
of equity and common interest, Giovanna Basadonna, in opposition to some who
did consent to it, spoke to this purpose. Ought we then to revenge the
provocations and jealousies of the Austrians upon a State that is innocent? Oh
how pernicious shall the example be to all, if the opportunity of a situation
and the Wealth of a State shall be a sufficient argument to raise a War. It is
true, that the Genouese are bound up to Spain, but the fear and necessity into
which we have a mind to precipitate them, is not the means to loosen them from
those Chains. If they lend their Ports at present and consent passage, they
will then think it necessary to accept Garrison. If private men contribute
money, we shall constrain the public to receive the Law. Does the League on
the one side pretend with applause to drive the Spaniards out of the Valteline,
exclude the Austrians out of Rhetia, redeem the Grisons, and restore them to
their liberty and dominion; and on the other, shall it with injustice attempt
to oppress Genoua, to extinguish a Republic, and change perhaps the name but
not the subjection of Italy? But what do I say to Conquests? We shall see that
instead of moderating the Command of the Spaniards too too burdensome to that
afficted Country, it will without dispute increase with a new and greater
dependancy under the specious title of defense. Who knows but that the Genouese
may one day mind again their fortune, and that Italy, coming to change its
aspect, may not restore luster to their Government? But let us not lose the
hope for ever, if to the bonds of gold, by which some are bound at present, we
shall join those of Iron into which the danger drives them with misery to all.
The proposed Conquest is not so easy as by the French and Savoyards we hear
described. The Territory of Genoua is made strong by situation, and defended by
Nature. The City by its greatness and population is able to maintain it self;
the Sea being open, will furnish succors; the Milanese being near, will
contribute assistance. And what will become of Carlo, if he should find himself
environed on all sides by the Spaniards and Genouese, and perhaps left as a
prey to dangers by the French from their natural inconstancy? It is no short
nor easy work to over-turn a Government radicated by time, nourished by good
Laws, and strengthened by the thoughts, or at least the imagination of a
peaceable liberty. The people will resist the change of Government, and falling
under the Domination of a Prince they hate. The Citizens will be obstinate in
defending themselves; and although the employments of the Spaniards in Rhetia,
or elsewhere, should interrupt or retard the succors, a State that is rich
has, when put to it, Garrison and Relief within it self. With what hopes will
our Republic participate in this design? Will it peradventure aspire to so
difficult and remote Conquests, or will it only for another profit bear a part
in the charges and in the dangers? The perpetuity of our Government is
maintained by immutable Maxims and Institutions. The free and honorable quiet
of not provoking, nor being easily provoked, has always been the vital Element
of our Dominion. We have always joined our Arms to the better side, and never
offended any but those that went about to injure us. Who sees not but Carlo, in
the greatness of his mind, has the presumption to force the nature of things
decaying, and forgetting the years he reckons will be sooner abandoned by them
than his high thoughts will forsake him? Who knows not the succors of the
French to be uncertain, the Genius of the Nation easily to embrace designs, and
then with the same inconstancy abandon them, and with short interims seek
always in Peace War, and in War Peace? Experience in the present affairs shows
it: the League for so long a time not considered; transgressing so often in the
Treaty, forgetting as it were the Princes united with them, and now the final
concerts scarce settled, the Armies ready to march, either diverting them with
difficult designs, or confounding them with new Proposals. The diversion is
with much wisdom concluded to be out of Italy, to the end to keep Armies far
off, because Strangers have never come near this Country but to bring all sorts
of calamity into it, and to carry away the spoils. It is not our interest
certainly to draw the body of the Austrian Forces into the very center of Italy
within the sight of our Confines. But if the desire of glory or the itch of War
incite to just and great enterprises, let the Milanese be the Lists, let it
carry our Ensigns against that State which is that that troubles us, provokes
and torments us. The Conquest there may may be great and common; and if it be
impossible to take Genoua so long as that State subsists, why is not the first
blow given at the root? Italy will find its liberty there, the Princes their
quiet; the Confederates profit and glory; and who doubts but the common yoke
once shaken off, the Genouese also will withdraw themselves from it for ever.

The Senate fully concurred in this opinion, declaring that they would have no
hand in the business of Zuccarello, as a thing out of the design of the League,
far from common interest, and contrary to the good of Italy. But to impress
upon France the reasons of this their dissent, and withal divert the mind of
the King, they appoint Girolamo Priuli Cavalier, Ambassador Extraordinary to
him, who notwithstanding was obliged to stop at Turin, by reason of the death
of Lorenzo Parula, Ambassador in Ordinary with that Duke, and because the
Constable Desdiguieres being come down into Piedmont with a great many men and
a greater noise, the Court of Carlo became the seat of so weighty a business.
There met then in Susa the Duke with his Sons, and the Constable with the
Mareshal de Crequi his Son-in-law and the President Buglion, both with
Characters of Ambassadors Extraordinary from the Crown for the present
occurrences, and Priuli chanced to be there. He contested highly, that their
Arms might be employed in any other place, except the Genouese, and if they
would resolve upon an open War, gave consent that they might be managed against
the Milanese.

But the French persisted in the Council to make a War, without breaking Peace
with Spain; and Carlo, frustrate of his vast hopes, could not be paid with any
reason; but, moved against the resistance of the Republic, began to give place
in his heart to those disgusts, which carried him afterward to greater
transgressions. Nevertheless, not willing for the present, the Armies being in
action in the Grisons, to alienate themselves from the Republic by an open
separation of their counsels from their aims, taking pretext from the
Winter-season, they make a show to refer the resolution and employment of their
Arms to another time. But in effect, the concert was secretly concluded betwixt
the Crown and the Duke to invade the year following the Genouese, of which the
East side of the River remaining to Savoy, that of the West accrued to France
with the City it self of Genoua. About this there passed some dispute, each
desiring, for the importance and wealth, to annex it to his Dominion; but Carlo
at last gave way, such being the greediness he had of that enterprise, which,
though the augmenting the power of France, and letting himself be environed in
a manner on all sides, was not his interest; nevertheless calculating always
his designs above his hopes, he fancied to himself to remain at last Arbiter of
Italy, out of a belief, that the French would either quickly be weary of their
Conquests, or at least would soon neglect to preserve them. To remove him from
such thoughts, the Spanish Ministers propounded large offers, to bestow the
Archbishopric of Toledo, of great Revenue, upon the Cardinal his Son, and
other advantages, with some satisfaction also in the business of Zuccarello.
But he hopes for all. Feria attentive upon the motions in the Grisons, and the
designs of the Duke, had raised a gallant Army in the Milanese, and the
Republic encompassed by so many Troops of that State, and by no less
jealousies toward Tirol and Friuli, strengthened it self more and more.
Amongst many military Commanders which put themselves into their Service, the
chief was Henry de la Tour, the famous stirrer up of the Rebellion of Bohemia.
They increased also their Forces by Sea, arming in Dalmatia Galleys
extraordinary; and it fitly happened, that thirteen Pinnaces of Barbary being
advanced into the Chanel of Cattaro, with the connivence of the Turkish
Commanders in Castle novo, assaulting Perasto by night and plundering it, had
given pretext to twenty three Galleys of Spain in the pursuit of them to
advance to Ragusa; whereupon, to repulse the one and the other, Anthonio Pisani
Proveditor of the Fleet, assembling it in all haste came into those waters. But
the Spaniards retiring, and the Pirates flying with the same celerity, these
did some little hurt as they passed to the Islands of Teacchi and of Zant,
withdrawing themselves from the deserved chastisement, which with a more signal
revenge was suspended till another time. During this interim, four Frigates of
the Pirates of St. Maura, falling into the hands of the said Proveditor, paid
the penalty of their Rapine and Piracy.


THE Negotiation of Piedmont suspended, actions of Arms begin in the Grisons,
and against the Valteline toward the end of the year, the Confederates making
choice of that season, which, though in the sharpness of situation might render
proceedings difficult, was yet very advantageous to keep what should be gotten.
The banished, with the encouragement of the Regiment of Salice, one of their
own Country, came down at the same time from several parts, and by the
knowledge of the situations, over-powering the Posts kept by the Soldiers of
Leopold, in a very little time and with no great contest possess themselves of
the Steich, the Bridge of the Rhine, Majanfelt, the Sluse of Partentz, and
Flex; excluding succors out of Germany. It is not to be believed, how upon the
sudden, glaring forth of liberty, the people were refreshed, who had scarce
known what it was, till they saw it oppressed. Applauding therefore the League
as their Redeemer, those of the ten Directorships took courage, shaking off the
yoke of Leopold. The Regiment of Monsieur de Harcourt advances now into Rhetia,
and the Levy of Switzers and Grisons according to agreement was made. The
Ambassador le Coevre commanded these Troops with the assistance for the
Venetians of Luigi Valaresso Knight, who returning from his Embassy of
England, had order to remain there with him. They both went to Coira to
encourage and animate that Government, from thence to Poschiavo to prepare for
the Invasion of the Valteline. Feria, that he might preserve it, cared little
for Leopolds losses in Rhetia, but howsoever left the defense of the Valley to
Bagni to engage the Pope so much the more to maintain it, and induce him to
unite at last with Spain. Bagni found himself exercised with other thoughts;
for on the one side he knew not how with a very small force to resist the flood
he saw coming upon him, and on the other, calling Feria to assist, derogated to
the neutrality desired by the Pope, and hastened a War betwixt the two Crowns.
He endeavored to help himself by art, threatening the Confederates to deliver
the Forts to the Governor of Milan, if they should attempt them by force. But
they, having now their Troops in readiness, could no longer, nor were inclined
to it, remain amidst the Rocks of Rhetia without losing their Army by the
rigor of the Winter and the want of Victuals. With six thousand Foot and three
hundred Horse they enter by the way of Poschiavo, where the Valley being
narrowest, opens a short passage to receive from the State of the Republic
Victuals, Assistance, and Cannon.

The Pontificians abandon presently the weaker places, to be able to make
better resistance in the stronger. Whereupon the Confederates become Masters of
that of Piantamala, whence without stopping they pass on to Tirano. Bagni was
fitly there with the Cavalier Robustelli, one of the chief Contrivers of the
late Revolutions, and two hundred and fifty Soldiers, besides some of the
Valteline not very fit to bear Arms. Nevertheless he made a show to be willing
to defend himself more with the name and veneration of the Ensigns of the
Church than with the Garrison; but the Townsmen not trusting to so weak
Forces, and fearing death and pillage from the fury of the Soldiers, went out
through a hole in the Wall while the Governor kept the Gates shut, to
capitulate the delivery, which was accepted upon condition, not to put a
Garrison of Grisons, but of French into it. Bagni being retired with his
Soldiers into the Castle, imploring succors of Feria, and demanding of Coevre
a suspension of Arms for some days, desired to protract time, in hope that,
wanting Cannon for battery, and other provisions, the season and situation
might defend him. But all conditions that might hinder their progress being
refused by the Confederates, that, which the one believed impossible, succeeded
easily to the others; for six Cannons arrived in the Camp, with a number of
Pioneers and every thing else that was necessary, sent by Anthonio Barbaro,
General for the Venetians, who caused them to pass through the Snow and over
the Cliffs: for those of the Valteline had on that side toward Auriga cut off
the way; but all yielding to fatigue and industry, they were quickly seen
placed by the force of men's Arms upon high and almost inaccessible places,
whence battering the Castle, they obliged it after a few shot to render, and
Bagni to go out with conditions, granted in veneration of the Pope by the
Confederates, with all sort of military Decorum. A thousand Foot with some
Horse from Feria were then on their march for a relief; but understanding the
Surrender stopped at Sondria, and the Governor not admitting them into the
Castle, and they not thinking themselves safe in the Town, went out of the
Valley. Nevertheless in Riva and Chiavena Garrisons were brought in by the
Spaniards, and they fortified themselves there with great expedition whilst the
Confederates advanced seasonably to Sondrio. The Town upon their first
appearance rendered upon the same conditions, which those of Tirano had
obtained, but with different fortune: the Castle, which would expect the
Cannon, was taken by assault; but life given to those few (all the Garrison not
exceeding one hundred and fifty) which out-stood the first fury, and the
Ensign, in token of respect, sent back to Bagni. Morbegno, which is as the
Metropolis of all the Valley, not being willing to expect force, sends
Ambassadors, and was received into the protection of the League, and by its
example every other place yields, the Arms of the Confederates remaining in a
few days in possession of all the Valteline. The Army now was somewhat
diminished, by reason of the dispersion into Garrisons, and those casualties
which War carries with it: whereupon it was resolved to levy at a common charge
two other Regiments; but that being not to be done in a moment, the Venetians,
at the effectual instances of the French Ministers, sent thither two thousand
Foot and four Companies of Horse of their own Soldiers.

The Austrians thereupon inveigh bitterly against them, calling them the
Authors of this expedition and success, whilst without Victuals and other
Provisions, which they furnished in great abundance, the Army could not have
entered nor subsisted in the Valley. They discoursed publicly, that to divert
that of the Valteline, the Austrians should bring the War into their Country;
and in this while to vent their distaste every where, the Count Chesniler,
Ferdinands Ambassador, denies in Spain to Leonardo Moro, who with the same
Character resided there for the Republic, the same tittle with which his
Predecessors and he himself had till now treated him. Whereupon being in the
Antichamber of the King, where none are admitted but Kings Ambassadors, there
arose betwixt them a great stir, which was well-nigh appeased by the mutual
civility of saluting one another without the officiousness of speaking.

The Pope made no less complaint, exclaiming in great wrath that his Soldiers
and Colors were not respected; notwithstanding that the Confederates had made
appear to him their long patience, the prejudices suffered, the Treaties
unexecuted, the Expedients rejected; but if Urban reckoned himself offended by
the Confederates, the Spaniards showed themselves not at all satisfied with
him, it seeming to them, that with an overmuch coldness, venting himself only
in words, he would endure the injury offered to his Ensigns. But he more and
more detesting the counsels of his Precedessors, either believed the Forces of
the Church not able to oppose the Confederates, or held the Union with the
Spaniards suspect, upon whose will, they breaking with the other party, he
should be forced to depend.

ANNO M.DC.XXV.
If the Valteline served for a Theater to Italy, the eyes nevertheless of
Europe were turned upon the Provinces of Flanders, where were acted important
designs of numerous Armies and excellent Captains upon places strong and of the
greatest reputation. Spinola aspiring to nothing more than to repair by some
eminent Enterprise the honor of that Army, and the reputation of that Fame,
which in the retreat from Bergeopzoom he thought somewhat blemished, choosing
Breda for the undertaking, had in the month of August in the year past,
straightly besieged it with an Army of thirty thousand men. Threatening in
several places, he had at first held the Prince of Orange in suspense where the
blow would fall; and Count Henry de Berg, with a separate body of Spanish
Troops, made a diversion toward the Rhine, and another number of Soldiers
made themselves troublesome longst the Maze. Whereupon Maurice, not knowing
where particularly to guard himself, had a vigilant eye over all, and having
well provided the places of importance, kept his Army in a condition to hasten
thither where succors should be required. But when he saw Spinola entrench
himself before Breda, a concernment of public and private interest, by the
importance of the place, and for being the Patrimony of the House of Orange, he
hastes thither in all diligence, and incamps thereabouts, sending relief by
Boats, which got happily in before Spinola could close his Line with Forts, and
shut up the River with Bridges.

Breda is situate in the extremity of Brabant, not far from the Sea, and but of
a reasonable distance from Antwerp. Since the Hollanders had the good fortune
to take it by surprise, they kept it with great care, both for the importance
of the situation, and the excellency of Art, which had endeavored by all sorts
of inventions to render it strong. It being in the midst betwixt Bergeopzoom
and Gertrudemberg, forms a Line little less than straight, by which,
maintaining a part of Brabant in obedience to the United Provinces, is a
defense also to Zeland and Holland. It is in a Plain, of a form unequal, but
environed and covered with so many Outworks, that Art has not been wanting to
invention, nor invention to necessity. The Merch runs through it, a small
River, but navigable; a little without the Town, losing its name, it discharges
it self into several Channels, where it enters into the Sea, or rather falls
into the Scheld.

Spinola foresaw the difficulties of attacquing it by force, and from the
vigorous defense, the incessant Sallies, the number of the Garrison, and the
resolution of the Governor, who was Justinus de Nassau, natural Brother to
Prince Maurice, comprehended the damage he might receive. Environing therefore
his Camp with a strong Circumvallation of Trenches and Forts, resolves to take
it by famine, which destroys all defense and devours Armies. Maurice had not
above ten thousand men, but with them, by changing Quarters, he cut off
Passages, disturbed the Country, and laid wait for Convoys; nor did he want
resolution and courage to have attempted a general relief by attacquing the
Line, if the States, judging them too strong, and well fortified, had not
dissented not to expose, with a number so unequal, the common defense to a
hazardous event, and almost certain loss. It was then resolved to apply
themselves to the same Arts, which the Enemy practiced, by endeavoring to
overcome famine with famine, and, by hindering Victuals from the Camp, to
reduce Spinola to the fortune of the besieged. But he, with the prudence of an
excellent Captain, foreseeing the necessity, had also provided for it by a
flying body, causing the Convoys to be so strongly conducted, that the
Hollanders either durst not attacque them, or attempting it could not break
them. It happened, that for the securing of one, the Garrison of the Castle of
Antwerp was much weakened.

Maurice, whom Fortune seldom reproached for neglecting of occasions, attempts
to surprise it, and having chosen a dark night, with Bridges made for that
purpose passes the Ditch, though very broad, and raising the Ladders, which at
the head of them were so fastened, that with Ropes they were easily set up, he
was now upon the Rampart, when one of the Ladders, falling back upon its
bridge, made such a noise, that the Sentinels heeding it, and they with some
shot advertizing the Guards, the Alarm was given in the Castle. The Hollanders
taking fright, retired, leaving some of their Engines behind; and now Force not
being sufficient, nor Art succeeding, the hope of preserving the place was
reduced to succors, which with great earnestness the States solicited from
the Crowns of England and France.

Which last, besides the money promised in their Treaty, would not meddle
further in that cause, having obtained their purpose to keep a great part of
the Spanish Power engaged in that Country. It maintained over and above the War
in Italy, nor were unquietnesses wanting within the Kingdom, whilst Soubize,
either foreseeing from far the Siege of Rochel, or moved to it by those that
desired to divert the Crown from foreign occurrences, had endeavored to
possess himself of some of the Ships Royal in the Port of Blavet; and although
the design succeeded not, nevertheless, to the Kings great resentment, he
possessed the Islands near to Rochel, and infested the Sea with Piracy, and the
Land with disbarkings. To oppose and suppress Rohan, who, in Languedoc and
other parts, was contriving Commotions, the Kings Fleet assembles under Command
of the Duke of Monmorency, and Soldiers were sent into several places to no
small disturbance of the Wars in Italy and the necessities of Flanders.

But England had its Forces at liberty and minds inflamed; for James, in the
month of March of this year, being dead, it looked as if the spirit of quiet
would have extinguished with him, whilst his Successor Charles, as vigorous in
his age as in the desire of Glory and hatred against the Spaniards, was
believed that with his Fathers Crown he would have assumed differing thoughts.
He ingages himself presently to a great arming by Sea, with which he publishes
to attempt upon Spain it self, the Head and Seat of its great Power, and at the
same time raises an Army to put under Mansfelts Command for the restoring the
outlawed Palatine into his Countries; for which purpose making a League with
the King of Denmark, he disburses money to him, to the end, that making War
with the same design in the Empire, he should not make Peace with Ferdinand
without the Kings knowledge, and the restoring the Palatine.

But Breda, that had been many months besieged, could not expect concerts so
remote. King Charles therefore, to preserve it, applies means more ready, it
serving also his ends to keep the Spanish Forces employed in the Low Countries,
lest, sending them into the Empire, they might hinder the principal design,
which was the restoring of Frederick. Hoping then that France would concur in
the same intention, he resolves, that Mansfelt, with a good number of English
Foot, should pass the Sea, and landing at Calais, should first join Halverstat
with two thousand Horse, and afterward altogether the Prince of Orange to
relieve the Town. But betwixt England and France it was found, that after the
Marriage, the interest of State, or rather the passion of Favorites, converted
the bonds of affection into causes of hatred. Europe in those times reckoned
amidst its unhappy destiny, that the Government of it depended upon three young
Kings yet in the flower of their age, Princes of great power, desirous of
glory, and in interest contrary, but in this alone by Genius agreeing, that
they committed the burden of their affairs to the will of their Ministers: for
with an equal independency France was governed by Richelieu, and Spain by
Olivares, and Great Britany, by Buckingham, confounding affections with
interest, as well public as private. Betwixt the Cardinal and Buckingham open
animosities discovered themselves, for causes so much the more unadvised, as
they were more hard to be known.

Buckingham being in France to carry back Charles his Bride, it seemed, that in
the free conversations of that Court, he had taken the boldness to discover
something of his inclination to the Queen, whilst the Cardinal was inflamed
with the same passions, or rather feigned to be so, with aversion in her, who
with virtue equal to the nobleness of blood, equally despised the vanity of the
one, and abhorred the artifices of the other. Whereupon the Factions, arising
amongst the Ladies of the Court, were not so secret, but that the King was
obliged to make a noise, and banish some: But the contention betwixt the two
Favorites was for power, and Richelieu, by reason of the favor of the King in
his own Kingdom, prevailing in Authority, procured to Buckingham many
mortifications and disgusts. The other was no sooner arrived at London with the
Bride, but to make show of a power not inferior, by ill using her, thought to
revenge himself. The Catholic Religion served for a pretext, whilst the Family
brought out of France, according to the Contract of Marriage, practiced it:
whence distasts brake forth to such a degree, that the minds of the Spouses
being alienated, and affections betwixt the Crowns themselves disturbed, it
looked, as if discord had been the Bride-maid at that Wedding.

All this passed to the prejudice of the Interests of the Palatine and of
Holland. For Mansfelt, at the instant that he had embarked the English Army,
France denying him the Port of Calais, and entry into the Kingdom, was forced
to land in Holland, after having negotiated several days betwixt the two Kings.
But the Soldiers remaining on board, the Ships wasted time, and almost
themselves, and in their passage weather-beaten by a great storm, troubled with
rains, and many inconveniences, they arrived so diminished and languishing,
that the succors was found to be less than was needful, and fame had made
them. Nevertheless at the noise of their landing, the Spanish Ministers being
moved, and Spinola resolved not to stir from the place now reduced to
extremity, assembled in an instant, with the pomp of their great power, another
Army of thirty thousand Foot, and eight thousand Horse of the Trained-bands of
the Country, intermixed with some old Soldiers drawn out of Garrisons, with
which, and the succors together of six thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse
sent thither from Tilly, they resolved to keep the field, stop up the ways,
hinder the relief or the diversion, which Orange or Mansfelt might attempt. But
all this was more than needed; for the Hollanders and Mansfelt not finding
themselves strong enough to attempt any thing of moment, it was of necessity to
give way, and let the place be taken.

Another sudden accident which retarded and discomposed any further attempt by
the States, was the death of Prince Maurice of Orange, a person of the highest
Renown, who, after his Father, being, while yet a Youth, opposed in the Command
of those Armies to Alexander Farnese, Prince of Parma, the most excellent
Captain of Europe, became in the Arts both of offending and defense with equal
valor and wisdom the most famous Commander of his Age. Frederick Henry, his
Brother, succeeds into all his Charges, a Prince, who, in his skill in military
affairs, has held an eminent place, and perhaps superior to his Brother, if
the quality of his undertakings be considered, but certainly inferior in
merit; because he had to do in the prosperous times of the Commonwealth, and
when its Fortune was in its prime. But whatever the effect was, the change was
certainly prejudicial in that Conjuncture, wherein Breda after more than nine
months Siege languishing, and no succors appearing, was the 9. of June rendered
upon honorable conditions. During which time many and various were the
successes of the War in Italy and the Negotiations of Peace.

The Valteline was wholly reduced by the Arms of the League, except the two
Appendixes of Bormio and Chiavena, to which, in the beginning of the year, the
Confederates applied themselves. Toward which the Signor della Land advances
first, and Coevre and Valaresso follow, possessing the Fort of Chioppina which
was abandoned, and the Town it self of Bormio. But Giovanni Baptista Canti of
Ascoli, who commanded there for the Pope, being retired into the Fort, knowing
that for want of water he could not make it subsist, renders it upon the sight
and some shot of the Cannon. There marched out three hundred and forty
Soldiers, obliged by oath not to bear Arms for the space of six months against
the Confederates, and some of the Valesians were put into Garrison there under
Command of the same della Land, who had contributed much to the enterprise.
The Spaniards in Chiavena, retiring into the Castle with some of the Popes
Soldiers, abandoned the Town to the Signor de Harcourt, in hopes, by the
sharpness of the season and situation, to hold it out for some time; but,
contrary to their expectation, seeing two pieces of Cannon appear, brought over
the Mountain, called Bernine, with infinite labor, they also rendered. Together
with this prosperity of Arms, went equally on the facility of the Treaty in the
Grisons; for the Commonalty being called together in Coira, the Agents of the
Austrians being dispersed or frighted, the Treaties of Lindo and of Milan were
abolished, and the ancient Alliances with France and the Switzers restored to
its first splendor. The Pope, endeavoring by all means to stop proceedings by
Arms, had sent into France Bernardino Nari Knight, that together with Monsignor
Spada, Nuntio in Ordinary, they might make in that Court effectual complaints
for the Invasion of the Valteline, contrary to the respect due to his Colors,
require the restitution of the Forts, and in conclusion, finding it not easy
to be obtained, open the way to a Treaty. Upon bringing to remembrance things
past, France failed not to justify the War, and withal to countermine those
advantages, which Spain, to captivate the Popes mind, offered to his Relations,
proposed the Marriage of Mademoiselle de Rieux, who carried with her one of the
richest Dowries in France, with one of his Nephews, together with all the force
of that Crown; by means whereof, the Fief of Vrbino, by reason of the great age
of that Duke, being ready to revolve to the Church, he might invest one of them
with it, and maintain him in the possession. By reason of the youth of the said
Nephews, the burden of the affairs lay at that time upon the Cardinal
Magalotti, their very near Kinsman, to whom both Crowns directed their
propositions and invitations, not without offers of great advantages also to
himself. There was no doubt but that the Barberins inclined rather to those of
Spain, and particularly to the Marriage with Stigliana, as believed more
contributing to their Fortune, whilst for the State of Vrbin so many Bulls and
Censures of Predecessors lay in the way, which prohibit to alienate Fiefs
devolved to the Church, and which they apprehended, when Urban went about to
use force, would bring upon them the envy of many, and the implacable hatred of
those that should succeed into the Romish See. The Pope made some Levies,
letting it be divulged, that he would raise to the number of ten thousand men;
four thousand under the name of Taddeo his Nephew, and the rest under the
Command of Frederick, Duke Savelli, and one of the Princes of Palestrina, which
was then of the House Colonna. He sent besides some Soldiers to Ferrara,
obliging thereby the Venetians to keep a small body in Polesene. By this means
he was persuaded to prunk up the management of the Treaty and his Mediation,
for which he made choice of his own Nephew Francesco, Cardinal Barberino,
declaring him Legate a Latere, though of unripe years, yet with the assistance
of notable and experienced Prelates. Neither was it sufficient to divert him,
that the business was yet crude, and the Treaty undigested, and the having it
prognosticated to him by many, that the success would be unequal to the Dignity
of his Nephew and his own desires; because the passion, the Cardinal had,
prevailed to show himself in the most conspicuous Courts of Europe, and employ
himself in affairs of so great importance.

To prepare the way for it, Urban insinuates to the Confederates a suspension
of Arms; but they refused it, by experience of the prejudices in former delays,
and by the prosperity they had in the War, there remaining no more to conquer
but la Riva, a Post believed of no consideration, but became famous; because
being unadvisedly lest for the last enterprise, it was the first that put a
stop to going forward. The Adda, where it rises making a Mere, closes with some
moorish grounds to the entrance into the Lago de Como, in such sort, that it
separates from it another little one, and of very narrow circuit, which is
called by the name of Chiavena. As the Valley terminates at the first, (and at
the right side of the River, within the Jurisdiction of Milan, stands the Fort
Fuentes in a situation something elevated) so to this other, the County of
Chiavena faces it self with a Plain, where runs the Mera. Over against it
extends it self the Territory of Como, and Mountains with steep cliffs raise
themselves on all sides. To join the County to the Valley, the way of the
Mountains being too steep, a Street is continued longst the Lake, cut out of
the Rock, which is called Corbeio. This begun at the Riva, which taking name
from the same use for which it serves, is no other but a cover upon the brink
of the water, for the convenience of Passengers, and safety of Merchandise
which pass by that place. There is upon a height some marks rather than the
form of a small Castle; and there are besides betwixt the Valteline and the
Riva certain Villages, as Campo and Nova, and some other that lie higher, which
would never have been taken notice of, if in this engagement betwixt so
powerful Princes, in such a narrow corner, every Rock had not served for an
attacque, and every span of ground for an occasion of War. Into this Post of
Riva, kept by fifteen Soldiers of the Popes and a Commander, the Governor of
Milan, amusing them with shows, and in a manner forcing of them, were
introduced the Spaniards, and into the adjacent Villages, to the number of four
thousand, with two Companies of Horse, under the Command of the Count Giovanni
Serbellone; and enlarging it with many Intrenchments, kept it as a pledge of
their hopes to recover what was lost. Nor indeed could any be fitter for their
purpose; because keeping a Foot in the County of Chiavena, and being defended
by force and the situation, it had ready assistance from behind them by the way
of the Lake, commanded by a great number of armed Barks. The Confederates,
though late, attempt to drive the Enemy thence, and making the way of the Rock
passable again, which the Spaniards had demolished, assault and possess the
Town of Vico, lying above that of Campo. But here was the dispute greater,
there lodging 800 Soldiers in it, who, making use of a certain Wall instead of
an Intrenchment, had the Assaillants point blank exposed to their Musket Shot.
Two thousand five hundred Foot, with some Horse, were appointed for the
attacque, the Army standing in Arms within a little distance. After the first
Salvo, with loss on both sides, the Confederate-Troops advanced in such sort,
that the Albanois, nimbly getting over the Wall, obliged the Spaniards to
abandon that defense, and also retire out of the place. But in their March
toward Riva, meeting with a thousand Foot which came to their relief, taking
courage again, they returned altogether, and that so opportunely, that
re-entring unawares into the place, whilst those of the Confederates, either
weary or dispersed, minded nothing less than the return of an Enemy, obliged
them to quit it, and betake themselves to flight, and could not be stopped by
those Troops left more behind them. The Spaniards nevertheless, not to separate
themselves into so many parts in the night, quit it, and the Confederates
without further contest possessed and fortified it. Captain Ruinelli, sent by
night with four hundred Foot to take in Montagnuola, so situate as to command
Riva, and greatly to infest it, found it prevented by great Guards of the
Spaniards, and fortified with many Works. To cut off relief from Riva, without
which it was judged difficult to straighten it and take it, the Confederates
applied themselves to several Expedients. Shipwrights were sent from Venice to
build Barks upon the Lake it self, to dispute the possession of it with the
Enemy. It was resolved also to place a Fort upon the Canal which separated the
two Lakes; but le Coevre made scruple to execute it, finding the place to
belong to Milan, within whose Confines he had no authority to make War.
Harcourt also, who on the other side of the Mera had taken in Archetto, a Post
upon the Lake, thought fit to leave it, because Riva, being reinforced with
three thousand Germans commanded by Papenheim, gave cause to apprehend for
Chiavena, out of which Coevre had taken the two Regiments of Salice and Berna,
to strengthen the Posts of the entrance into the Valteline. Codera, a small
place, but which facilitated Commerce with Chiavena and relief, the
Confederates took with a Pettard. But the Spaniards, sufficiently strengthened,
extended their Quarters and Trenches to Nova and Colico, threatening to enter
again into the Valley, whiles the Army of the Confederates was weakened; and
although three thousand Grisons more were levying, yet that Nation thinking of
nothing but enjoying their present condition, they were long in raising, and as
men that were new, could not serve for much. The Regiment of Normandy,
consisting of sixteen hundred men, came now out of France, and the Republic
sent two thousand Foot and two hundred Horse into the Valley. And now without
question the power of the Crown of Spain appeared, in that, besides naval
Forces and potent Armies elsewhere employed, Feria had in the Milanese forty
thousand Foot and four thousand Horse. The Dukes of Parma, Modena, and Vrbin,
had sent their Regiments, and the Catholic Switzers of Helvetia,
notwithstanding all endeavors of the Confederates against it, had consented a
Levy of seven thousand of their Nation, and free passage to all those, who from
beyond the Mountains should flock to the Service of the Milanois. Great numbers
of Soldiers besides were levied in several places, and principally in the
Provinces of Austria near to the Venetians, to touch them the more to the quick
with jealousy. They nevertheless, though in great streights and perplexity, by
reason the burden of the War of the Valteline was greatest upon them, and of
the difficulty which they met with, France being elsewhere distracted, and the
State environed with suspicions, threatenings, and Arms, would not recede from
the Union with King Lewis, although, amidst these extremities and hostile
appearances, allured by Spain by the sending of Christofero Benevento de
Benavides, Ambassador to Venice, and of Ferdinand Duke of Mantua, who, moved
unto by the Spaniards, came expressly to that City, they were invited with full
advantages and offers, if they would adhere to the Austrian Party.

Fortune had now beyond dispute conducted the Emperor to such an height of
reputation and glory, that what with fear, and what with Armies quartered in
most of the Provinces of the Empire, he kept under, or in quiet, as well those
that envied him as his Enemies. The King of Denmark only with the assistance of
money, which England contributed to him, and a certain sum which France with
greater caution gave him, showed his resentment, taking upon him the Title of
General of the Lower Saxony, which that Circle, to the Emperors great
displeasure, conferred upon him. The King notwithstanding proceeded with some
sort of respect, and first sending Ambassadors to Ferdinand, demanded the
pardon and restitution of Frederick. But the Emperor, making answer to the
business with an Army, sent Tilly into those parts to bridle him, and to give
countenance, as he passed, to the Election of a Catholic into the Bishopric
of Osnabrug, which also succeeded, notwithstanding that the disagreement of the
Chapter had given great hopes to the Protestants to obtain it. That Army
advances thence to the Weser to hinder passage, and prepossesses the Banks on
that side, expecting till Albert of Wallestain, under whom Ferdinand had raised
almost in a moment a new Army of twenty thousand men, should come and join with
him. But he, as he passed by, having beaten the Duke of Luneburg, who at
certain narrow passages had endeavored to stop him, carried his Army with
great success into the Bishoprics of Halberstat, Magdeburg, and Hall,
heretofore possessed by the Protestants. In the heat of this, Tilly also, who
had besieged Sighenburg in vain, gave battle near Hanover to a great body of
the Protestants, and obtained a signal Victory, there remaining dead of them
upon the place the Duke of Saxony, the Count of Altemberg, and Obentraut, who
served to the King of Denmark for General of the Horse. Ferdinand, elevated by
so great prosperities, aspired to great things, and having caused his eldest
Son Ferdinand Ernest to be proclaimed King in Hungary, reformed Religion in his
Hereditary Countries without the least contest, being become formidable to all,
and in particular dreadful by reason of vicinity to the Venetians, to whom, as
an addition of apprehensions, was joined the Peace, confirmed by the Emperor
by the means of the Bassa of Buda for ten years more with the Ottoman Port;
which, although at the suggestion of Gabor, the chief Ministers made a show at
Constantinople that they would not approve it, because the old Treaty,
concluded at a time when that Empire was involved in the Wars of Asia,
contained things prejudicial and unbecoming; nevertheless being accustomed in
the weightiest businesses, cheapning gain rather than glory, to raise
difficulties, that they may be overcome by interest, they quickly ratified it.

At the same time, but with Fortune differing, John Baptista Montalbano, and a
Priest being sent to Constantinople by the Vice-King of Naples, they proposed a
Truce to be concluded betwixt the Spaniards and the Turks, obliging themselves
to restrain the Piracies of the Cossacks in the Black Sea, promoted in great
part, for the easing of the King of Poland, with the money of Spain, and to
interpose themselves for a Peace betwixt the Port and the Persians. But the
Caimecan, who at that time had the direction of affairs, knowing how odious
such a Proposition would be to the very Subjects of that Empire, rejected it,
discharging those that had proposed it. The design by this Treaty, to make the
Republic jealous, and raise a diffidence betwixt them and the Port, had not
probably the last place in the Spaniards intentions. But the Turks, on the
other side plunged into the War of Persia, thought it not fit for them to
alienate it by unseasonable suspicions. They therefore caused the Bassa of Buda
to send a Sangiacco to Venice, who, under color to communicate the Peace
confirmed in Hungary, offered in token of Friendship twenty thousand men, which
the Bassa of Buda with their Commanders at their charge would cause to be
conducted to the Confines, where being entertained, should yield their due
obedience to whom the Venetians should appoint. But even gifts themselves being
from Barbarians treacherous, the Republic receiving the offer as a Complement,
did not accept it, making use only of some rules, by which the Turkish
Ministers on the Confines might give way to the levy of some Albanese. They
there and in other ultramarine Provinces made numerous Levies, but the greatest
beyond the Mountains, by the facility which the passages of Rhetia and the
possession of the Valteline yielded. Their Army amounted to more than twenty
thousand Foot and three thousand Horse, all of stranger Nations, which for the
most part, by supplying the Garrisons with the Country Militia, might be drawn
out into the field. Therefore wearied with jealousies, and preferring revenge
before suspicion, they desired by some great enterprise to make advantage of
this defense, and put an end to their vexations and the War.

Reviving then in France their instances and endeavors, they represented, that
by making War in the Milanese, mischiefs might be prevented, much to the common
quiet and glory of the Confederates, considering, That by one sole blow the
Grisons would be established for ever, the Valteline secured, Italy delivered,
the jealousies, expenses, molestations of so many years taken away. The honor
of the King, the Decorum of the French Nation did not consist in oppressing the
image of liberty, which was yet remaining amongst the Genouese, but in
confirming it to Italy, by abating the Rival power, and doing himself reason on
a State, upon which he has a pretense, and which more than once, by the united
Forces of the Republic, has been possessed by his generous Ancestors. To what
else will amount the undertaking of Genoua, but to superadd reproaches upon
mischiefs? whilst the Spaniards secure in the Milanese, means will be left
there to send Forces into the Valteline, by treading yet harder on the neck of
the Genouese, to make the yoke more heavy to Italy, and to make their own
advantage of their money, of their Soldiers and Fleets.

But nothing was of force to divert the French and Savoyards from what they had
concerted, although dissembling it, they attempted to engage the Venetians
alone to break with Spain; for by promoting a diversion in the Milanese, they
hoped that their Forces being employed there, they would not remain so strong
and so at liberty as to be forward to go to the assistance of the Genouese.
Whereupon Carlo and the French Ministers in Turin feigning to adhere to the
judgment of the Republic, dealt with it to invade the Milanese, faithfully
promising, that upon advice of the breach, the Duke himself with his, and
Desdiguieres with the Forces of the Crown, would give countenance and
assistance. But diving into the subtilty of the artifice, the Senate, with an
equal wariness deluding their intentions, offers to enter into the Milanese so
soon as the Confederates should let him know, that their Armies were passed
beyond the Borders. But whilst the Confederates amongst themselves contended
about opinions and cunning, the season for the motion of Armies drawing on, the
Treaty of Susa could no longer be concealed, and at last Buglione in Turin
communicates it to Priuli, with great hopes, that the Genouese being quickly
subdued by Force and Intelligence, there would be a fit time to invade the
Milanese with greater advantages. The Senate refuses again to approve the
design, and to the end to take no part in it, no not so much as in appearance
or name, they order the said Priuli not to enter into the Genouese with the
Duke, but to stay upon the Borders. In the midst of so difficult affairs
Francesco Contarini Duke, who with many and signal virtues had sustained the
Principality, though but for a very short time, yields to the burden of his
years and cares, and Giovanni Cornaro, Procurator of St. Marco, succeeds him,
arriving at the highest dignity of the Country without having made any suit for
it, and considerable not so much for his riches and the splendor of his noble
Family, as for his own goodness, under the guidance whereof with an
unchangeable constancy, not intermitting the exercises of piety in his civil
cares, he had led a life amidst virtues worthy of Heaven, and functions due to
his Country. But in Piedmont, from the place of Arms, which was in Asti, the
Army in the month of March moves: it consisted of thirty thousand men, the
greatest part French got together by the hopes of a rich and a most certain
booty.

Desdiguieres in his decrepit age carried himself as became him with great
vivacity of spirit under the shadow of his ancient Fame. The Duke pufft with
vanity, appeared in the Army with a self-conceited confidence, rejoicing to see
himself once upon the way to great and secure Conquests, and with the supposed
increase of his States, now meditated to adorn his gray hair with Kingly Titles
and Crowns. Where for a little space they passed through the Milanese,
Desdiguieres commands strictly no hurt in any kind to be done; but in
Monferrat, St. Damiano, Nizza della Paglia, and Aqui, were forced to open their
gates, leaving in the last a strong Garrison for the guard of the Magazin of
War which was fixed there.

The Duke of Mantua complained greatly, that the Army had not only taken their
passage, but possessed that place, and feared the wonted imaginations of Carlo,
and expected no less instances from the Governor of Milan, doubting lest his
State should in conclusion become the place of Engagement, or at least serve
for Quarters to the Armies of both the Crowns. But the French excusing the
necessity of the passage, and promising, when the expedition was at an end, to
restore all, marched forward.

The Genouese, not accustomed for a long time to the accidents and troubles of
War, and losing courage upon so potent an attacque, made show of a very weak
resistance. The Country was open, the City had but weak Walls, and though about
some places they raised Trenches, they were nevertheless weak and ill guarded;
their Soldiers for the most Peasants, who, used to idleness, were ignorant of
discipline, impatient of labor, and fearful in dangers. They implored
assistance from the Pope and from the Spanish Ministers; but the one applied
nothing but encouragements and counsels, and the other interposed delays;
because, fearing for the Milanese, they had a mind to observe the bent of the
intentions and the march of the Army, and aimed to let them be straightened with
greater necessities, whilst not having elsewhere to expect relief, they would
be obliged not only to pour forth their gold to make the Spaniards move, but to
subject themselves to whatsoever hard condition that Crown should prescribe to
them. Wherefore, dejected in spirit by the difficulty of Councils and the
unhappiness of successes, they resolve, abandoning the Country, to undertake
the defense of Genoua alone, and ordered, that the Artillery, Ammunition, and
Garrisons should presently be withdrawn from Scavona and other places; but soon
after, being admonished from a better light of wisdom, particularly from the
counsels of Giovanni Girolamo Doria, who showed, that there could not be a
worse counsel than willingly to yield what they doubted they might lose by
force, countermanding the first Orders, they generously apply to their own
defense, by maintaining Scavona and there rest.

The French now made themselves to be felt, being gotten into the Streights of
the Mountains by two ways on that side, where the Territory of Genoua is most
enlarged toward Tortona. Novi renders it self to Desdiguieres, the Syndick
meeting him with the keys. The Duke having taken the Castle of Ovada with
little resistance, and by the way routed five Companies of Neapolitans, which
were sent from Tortona in relief of one of those Posts, advanced to
Rossiglione, which is one of those passages, and of the two ways (the other
being at Gavi) which lead to Genoua and the Sea, and found it abandoned by 2000
Foot of the Country, which left in prey to the Enemy the provisions and money,
which was to serve for their nourishment and pay. The Town of Campo yielded in
like manner; whereupon the Duke, proud with the felicity of such successes,
solicited the French to hasten their march to draw near to Genoua, which as
yet little better than unprovided, and greatly disturbed by these sinister
accidents, seemed exposed to the prey, offering the benefit of the
Intelligences and of so long a March; but the concerts, with some of the
Citizens, were just at that very instant discovered by the Government, getting
knowledge, that some had designed to open the Gates to the French, and the Duke
reckoning amongst them one of the House of Marini, a Kinsman to the Ambassador
at Turin. Whereupon the greatest hopes of the Confederates being cut off, and
nothing remaining but the force of Arms, they were perplexed in their designs
and march; and on the other side the Genouese took courage, certain Galleys
arriving at that time from Spain with a great deal of money, and from Sicily
and Naples Soldiers to relieve them. The Governor of Milan also sends thither
under the Command of Lodovico Guasco four thousand Italian Foot, for which they
had disburfed three hundred thousand Crowns, and obtained Thomaso Caracciolo to
command the Arms of the Republic, governed till now by Chiefs not very
vigorous.

Upon such re-inforcements there increased in the minds of the Genouese cares
also equal to their security, for fear, lest having repulsed their Enemies, and
they gone further off, they should at last remain subject to their Auxiliaries.
They therefore lodged the Spanish Soldiers, either in the places most exposed
to be attacqued, or the outmost parts of the City, not without complaint of the
Count of Castioneda, who resided in Genoua Ambassador for the Catholic King,
and reproached to the Council the unseasonableness of Jealousies in the midst
of so many dangers: But new and unhappy events soon brought things to
extremity. The Duke having taken Sassuolo, not far from Savona, directed his
march to join Desdiguieres, when he found the strength of the Enemies Forces
assembled in Ottaggio, which consisted of five or six thousand Foot, commanded
by considerable Chiefs, as Caracciolo, Guasco, Cataneo, Batteville, with some
of the Nobless of Genoua, and many others joined together in that great place,
in design to keep Gavi from the attempts of the Confederates. But going forth
in a good number to keep the Savoyards at a distance with Skirmishes, it so
fell out, that they pursuing them, and the Duke arriving thereupon in person,
they were defeated, and Caracciolo in the flight being taken Prisoner, the
Conquerours mingling with them, became Masters of the Trenches and the place.
The others retreated into the Castle; but unprovided of Ammunition and all
manner of defense, abounding in nothing but number, were forced to render
themselves, all the Chiefs, Colors, and Arms falling into the Dukes hands,
with a very rich spoil.

Carlo going out upon the Mountains, and having from thence in his view the
Prospect of the River, the deliciousness of the situation, and the Wealth of
the City, stirred up in him that avarice which had provoked him to the
undertaking. Although this blow had greatly troubled men's minds in Genoua, yet
there was not the least wavering there; whereupon the Duke was forced to
retire, and, in conjunction with the French, apply himself unwillingly to the
taking in of Gavi. He had counseled Desdiguieres, that, letting that Rock lie,
which being unmovable could not disturb their progress, he would, during the
warmth of the Victory, bring his Army directly to the Gates of Genoua. But the
Constable not consenting, was firm in the opinion, not to leave a place behind
him, which having in it no small Garrison, might in those streights of
Mountains stop up the ways for Victuals. The Duke had no remedy but to give
way, though that resolution highly increased that discontent, which was already
secretly creeping upon him; observing that Desdiguieres introduced into the
places taken Garrisons of the French Nation only; arguing clearly from thence,
that arrogating to himself the direction of the War, he assumed, with the
disposing of the Conquests, the Arbitrament of the Peace also. Nevertheless he
refused all Propositions and advantages, which, to disjoyn him from France,
came underhand, largely offered to him by the Spaniards, and refuses the
suspension of Arms, which Cardinal Barberin Legate, touching at Genoua in his
way to the Court of France, caused Monsignor Giovanni Baptista Panfilio to
propose to him.

The Genouese doubtful concerning Gavi, whether it were not best to resist with
the hazard of the Garrison in maintaining that Post, had referred the
resolution to the Governor of Milan; because not being able to receive
succors but from thence alone, it depended upon him to quit or keep it. He was
not willing as yet openly to engage himself with the Army, and therefore
commands Captain Meazzi, who was Governor, that for preservation of the
Garrison, consisting of about three thousand men, he should endeavor warily to
withdraw himself by night. But Meazza being gone out, and finding the passages
toward the Milanese beset by the Enemy, and in the confusion of the darkness
not knowing whither to go, returns again into the place, and the day following
renders it, contrary to the intentions, signified to his Masters to have held
it out longer. The Castle suddenly run the same hazard, the Constable having,
as was publicly given out, found a more easy way to batter it with gold, than
bringing the Cannon before it would have been; for being situated upon a Rock,
it was out of all battery and attaque. The expedition of the enterprise would
have satisfied the Dukes impatient desires, if Desdiguieres had been willing to
second them by going forward; but amidst these Rocks, seeming that he had his
courage in a manner petrified, he laid his excuse upon the want of Victuals and
the disbanding of his men. The Duke from earnest pressing of him passes into
fury, and from fury into suspicions and accusations, laying to his charge, that
he had been caught by Genouese money; because the glory of so great a man being
notoriously defiled with avarice, there was cause to doubt, that by interest no
less than age his warlike spirits had been blunted.

The Genouese, to foment such an opinion, failed not, sometimes by public
dispatches to Desdiguieres, then by secret Propositions to the other Ministers,
and sometimes also by advertisements, though false, to the Duke himself, to
nourish distrusts and his disagreements with the French Ministers. Nevertheless
they found themselves greatly perplexed within; for to move Feria in so fair an
opportunity, neither invitations, entreaties, nor the disbursement of pay
prevailed any thing; whereupon they go on to protests, declaring, that if he
abandoned them, they would submit themselves to the protection of France. Nor
failed they, to the end to give credit to that opinion, to send certain
Propositions to Desdiguieres, which it was believed had a great power to retard
and restrain him. But in Genoua the name of the Duke was so abhorred by all
sorts of people, that every other calamity was thought less, than to fall under
his Government. On the other side, men's minds not being accustomed to the War,
many being distracted by their private affections and considerations, others
afflicted from the desolation, which the Country together with their goods and
fortunes suffered, the advantages and offers of both the Crowns made them
wavering; and whilst against France was objected the fresh hatred of so many
evils, and the interest of many private persons closed with Spain; after long
debates in the most secret of their counsels, the resolution not to subject
themselves entirely to Spain was carried but by three Votes only. They admitted
notwithstanding Spanish Soldiers into their places and into Genoua it self;
and Feria at last leaving a good part of his Army toward the Valteline and the
Venetian Confines, advances with eight thousand Foot and three thousand Horse
to Alessandria. From thence Gonsales Oliveira, with a Body of that Nation,
marches forward to Nizza de la Paglia to cut off Victuals from all parts. And
now, to say truth, the Confederates about Gavi were brought to streights, no
succors coming from France, and the assistance hoped for from the Sea failing;
for notwithstanding that Carlo endeavored by most effectual offices to
persuade the King of England to send his powerful Fleet into the Mediterranean,
he could not effect it, the King proposing to himself more plausible and
profitable designs against Spain. That of France, though the motion of it was
one of the conditions agreed on, yet could as little be disposed to it, whilst
the Ships were kept in the West Sea to repulse the annoyances of Soubize, and
the Duke of Guise Admiral, was in Provence with a few Ships, unproportionable
to what was needful, and incapable to undertake any thing but a booty of one
hundred and eighty thousand Rials, as it was wafted from Spain to Genoua. That
caused more noise than profit; for in requital, all the effects of the French
in Spain, and, in revenge, those of the Spaniards in France were seized.

The Genouese pretended to make themselves satisfaction by a vengeance more
conspicuous; three of their Galleys taking the Admiral-Ship of the Savoyards at
the Islands of St. Honorat, possessing also by four or five thousand men, they
sent thither, Oneglia, almost without dispute. Carlo ill bearing the insults of
the Enemy, and the loss of his own hopes, though the Conquest of Genoua proved
difficult, had a mind at least to attempt the possessing the West part of the
River, which in the division belonged to him. Separating then his own from the
French Forces, he sends one part with Felix, his natural Son, to take in
Savignone, a Fief of the Empire, distant but a few miles from Genoua; and the
rest, which consisted in six thousand Foot and four hundred Horse, he commits
to the Prince Victorio, who with one Cariere of good Fortune made himself
Master of all that tract; for having after a short resistance forced la Pieve,
where were made Prisoners Giovanni Girolamo Doria, with some Officers of note;
Albenga, Porto, Mauritio, Ventimiglia, and Zuccarello yielded almost of their
own accord; Oneglia was recovered, and almost all that remained of that River
gained. The people there wanted rather goods and blood than the Soldiers
greediness and arrogance; cruelty and avarice, as it were to strives,
exercising themselves, so that the Country not fruitful, nor large, but
delicious and opulent, was in a short space set on broach and stripped. This
prosperity lasted little; for the Genouese being reinforced, and Feria drawing
near, Desdiguieres was in a manner shut up in Gavi, with eight thousand men
only, which disbanded also by Troops, not without the secret consent and some
sort of license from the Constable and Crequi, who in the want they were in of
Victuals, published it better to withdraw them from the calamity of hunger,
though the Duke upbraided them, that they did it to convert the pay to their
own use. It was therefore necessary to call back the Prince, and resolve to
retire into Piedmont, leaving in Gavi nineteen pieces of the Dukes Cannon, for
want of draught to carry them away, whilst the Inhabitants of Pocevera, a bold
people, that dwell in a Valley near Genoua, entering into the Quarter where they
were kept, making prey of a great many, by cutting their Ham-strings, made the
rest unserviceable.

The retreat out of the Country of Genoua was done with some appearance of
military daring; for the Duke marching in the Vanguard, when he passed in view
of the Spaniards, challenged them to a Battle, and when the Constable was come
up, some Horse of Feria fell into the Rear, obliging the rest to make a stand.
But after a short Skirmish, with no unequal loss, the one retired to his Camp,
and the others kept on their march. The Duke, though weakened in Forces, pressed
by all means to invade the Milanese, to the end to engage France in an open
breach, but the Constable would not consent to it. Nevertheless, to feed his
disturbed mind, and divert him from more desperate counsels, gives way that
Chrequi with the Prince Vittorio should go to attempt Savona; but they scarce
were arrived there, but the Governor of Milan, put upon it by the Genouese,
and moved by their money, the Spanish Army having for a good while been
maintained by the pay of that Republic, after a short contest made himself
Master of Aqui, though well fortified and provided; whereupon the Magazin
failing to furnish provisions, and the door being shut against succors, the
Confederates were obliged to return into Piedmont. By which means it became
easy for the Genouese to regain in a few days all they had lost; for the
Marquess of St. Croce arriving with five and twenty Galleys and five Gallions
of the Squadrons of Spain, and four thousand Foot, with their pay, raised in
the Kings Dominions, they sent them with the assistance of two Commissioners to
recover the River. It seemed, that every thing strove which should yield first.
The Savoyards in some places were forced with little ado; from some they
retired, and the Inhabitants beat them out of others; few endured the sight of
the Cannon, and scarce any a shot. Some men by a subterranean passage, and the
favor of the people, were happily let into Novi. Gavi was by Batteville
attempted with six thousand men, and recovered with the same Fate to which it
yielded when lost; for the Governors of the Town and Castle, which were Father
and Son, after having basely rendered the place, were accused in Provence of
corruption, and the latter having his head cut off, the other, now dead, was
with infamy taken out of the earth and burnt. The Artillery left there by the
Duke fell into the hands of the Genouese. Feria lay now encamped at Croce
Bianca, threatening Asti, whither Desdiguieres, enfeebled with his age, and much
more weakened in his Fame, Reputation, and Forces, being somewhat indisposed,
together with Buglione, was retired. But Feria marches presently away, making
it be believed, that he designed some more sensible blow within the bowels of
Piedmont; whilst Santacroce also, to whom were joined the Squadrons of the Pope
and Grand Duke, took Oneglia, Marro, and all that Tract, whence he passed into
Piedmont it self, which flanked with it. Nor did Carlo now receive out of
France re-inforcements necessary, whilst the Troops of that Crown in Italy did
not exceed two thousand Foot, and six hundred Horse.

The French Ministers then were vehemently earnest with the Venetians, and the
Duke used his effectual entreaties, that to divert the destruction of Piedmont,
they would resolve to invade the Milanese. But they ascribing the sinister
events to worse counsels, would not make them good by exposing themselves alone
to dangers and prejudice, and the rather because they saw succors far off.
Desdiguieres ready to repass the Mountains, and the power and honor of the
Crown of France declined in Italy; nevertheless remaining constant in their
friendship, they offered the greatest readiness in the Spring to second with
their Arms the generous designs of the King in whatsoever the League obliged to.

Feria making choice of the enterprise on Verrua, which at first might have
been exploited with a few Troops, ingages his most choice Army about it, to the
great ease of the mind and solicitude of the French and Carlo. And indeed the
situation being so deep in Piedmont, the Spaniards supposing it an enterprise
of a few days, hoped to be able from thence to torment the Duke in his bowels
with their Winter quarters. It Is a little place on the right side of the Po,
stands on a Hillock, with a weak Castle on the top of it, and a weaker Town on
the descent, at that time little less than not regarded and unprovided. But
Feria with Gonsales di Cordua, who, come out of Flanders, assisted in the
government of the Army, what with preparatives and delays, which the motion of
a great Army requires, gave time to Prince Thomas and to Chrequi, dis-engaged
from the care of defending Asti, not only to follow him, and flank upon him,
but to send the Marquess of St. Rairan with a thousand men to strengthen those
three hundred which alone were in it before. It seemed to some, that the
Spanish Chiefs were excellently well skilled in the Orders of the War, but did
not well adjust them to the present business; for to march with an Army in a
body, secure its Quarters, and entrench it self first before the attacque of a
place, was conceived wise counsel against places of strength; but for Verrua it
was judged exceeding the quality of the enterprise, and unseasonable by reason
of the Winters approaching. War, to say truth, is like a mixture of contrary
Elements, wisdom is very often confounded with fortune, and, according as the
occasion requires, caution and boldness have each its time.

All gave the Duke means to provide for it better, and to be vigilant for its
relief, which at first he in a manner resolved to neglect. He made his place of
Arms in Crescentino, which stands opposite to it on the Po, and laying over a
Bridge, fortifies himself upon the banks of the River. The Spaniards Force was
by this means rendered vain; for succors, at the Dukes pleasure, entered into
the place with flying Colors, the Guards were changed, Drums beating,
Soldiers were relieved, the weak and hurt withdrawn; and if Feria battered it
on the one side, Carlo on the other repaired it. There was notable service for
many days at a Ravelline, which was at the bottom of the Town, defended from
the upper part by certain Trenches and Cuttings, which ascended in most parts
above the steep of the Hill, the one giving countenance and defense to the
other. There, for the conquest of so small a piece of earth, the blood of many
was without consideration sported away in infinite Factions, it being
contentiously attacqued, and defended with most manifest proofs of valor.
Destroyed at last rather than gained, the Spaniards endeavored by little and
little to advance, creeping as it were upwards; but with slow and always
disputed progress, whilst with a pace more swift, the season, sickness, and
death bringing the Army to nothing, overcame the constancy of the Governor of
Milan. The Duke insulted upon it with so much the greater boldness, as by his
pressing instances, notwithstanding the Winter, the Marquess Vignoles with
about four thousand Soldiers were coming out of France. Whereupon the
besiegers themselves seemed in a manner besieged; for the waters and the mire
encompassed their un-inhabited Quarters, in which there was great doubt to be
over-powred by the boldness of the Enemy, and the Chiefs of the Army were just
in consultation to yield the Punctilio to Fortune, when Carlo and Chrequi
giving on upon the same Quarters, and possessing certain Posts, obliged Feria
to rise by night and to retreat a la sourdine. The difficulty of the ways
hindered the Duke to pursue him, and the opposition of the French Chiefs
diverted him from going into the Milanese. So that Feria, with the small
relics of his great Army, was able to get to Pontestura at the same time that
Santacroce, having left Piedmont, was returning to imbark. These events, in
which the two Crowns had gained rather the satisfaction to have protected their
friends, than reaped the honor of noble enterprises, must not interrupt the
relation of Actions in the Valteline, where the Army of the Confederates, being
come to Riva, as to the boundary of their progress, had remained for some
months idle, although by the succors, they had received, they consisted of
eight thousand Foot and five hundred Horse in the field, besides Garrisons and
a Body of men which was with Harcourt at Chiavena.

Nevertheless the other Party, though inferior in number, because Serbellione
being gone, the Governor of Milan had recommended those Posts to Papenhaim
alone with five thousand five hundred Foot and four hundred Horse, had the
advantage of the strength of the situation, and the facility of relief; nor
could that be hindered by four Barks, which being built in those parts, were
armed with Soldiers of the Republic, because the Spaniards being superior in
number, and their Cannon from the Posts thereabouts beating upon them, did not
give them leave so much as to put off from the shore. Besides the proceedings
were much retarded by the emulation betwixt Coevre and Monsieur de Vobcour,
Mareshal de Camp, grown to such a height, that he, envying the glory and
authority of the Marquess, contradicted always the counsels, or diverted the
executions.

Thus remained the Confederates amidst the difficulty of the Enterprise and the
tediousness of Consults, to the great discontent of the Venetians; many
imputing also to the Marquess, as it was usual, that he was too much in love
with the continuance of the command and the management of the War and Money:
Resolving at last to attempt Nova, which having at first been abandoned by the
Spaniards, and neglected by the Confederates, was now with many Trenches joined
unto Riva; but the Chiefs of the French deferring the execution for a month,
the Spaniards had time not only to be pre-advertised, but to repair the ruins
of Codera, and plant Batteries in flank at San Fedele and at Francesca, keeping
themselves in a readiness to withstand the attacque. Nevertheless it was
attempted, Vobcour with the French in the march having the Vanguard, the
stranger Militia of the Republic under Melander, and the Italians commanded by
Count Niccolo Gualdo, followed. Vobcour at a little River makes a stand, to lay
over a Bridge; but Papenhaim drawing many Squadrons into Arms on the other side
disputes it with him, and the Skirmish grew so hot, that if night had not
separated, both Armies would have been engaged in a general fight. The
Confederates finding the opposition strong, and the batteries annoying, under
shot whereof the Troops being obliged to pass, with a loss greater than they on
the other side received, retired, having two hundred hurt, and almost as many
killed, amongst which Marc Anthonio Gualdo, Nephew to the Count Nicholas, was
of greatest name. It was imputed to Vobcour, first to have made a halt
unseasonably, and next to have engaged in a fight without staying for the
gross; and because from the delays and ill successes pretexts and accusations
were never wanting betwixt him and the Marquess, he was recalled to Court. In
the hot months of Summer, both Armies, by the unwholesomness where they lay
being infected with sickness, languished, being daily weakened by death and
run-aways; so that there was a secret cessation of Arms.

The Venetians notwithstanding not at all trusting in such a calm, brought into
the Valteline fifteen hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse more, there being now
few others besides their Troops there. Valaresso, fallen sick, they ordered
Luigi Giorgio to succeed, and to Barbaro General at Land, Francesco Erizzo
Cavalier and Procurator. Leopold from the side of Tirol threatened the Valley of
Partentz; but levying at the common charge of the League two thousands of the
Peasants of those parts to keep the passages, the danger presently vanished.
Papenhaim, at last reinforced with men, and not at all less by the slow
proceedings of the Confederates, passed over the Mountain with three thousand
Foot, and his Horse at the same time by way of the Lake disbarking in the mouth
of the Valley, enters into the little Campagnia called the Back. Melander with
Soldiers of the Republic, had the guard of it; but finding himself not strong
enough, and having required and not received succors from Coevre, who
uncertain whither the Enemies march would tend, would not separate his Forces,
he retires in good order, first burning the Ammunition, leaving notwithstanding
seven little Pieces and four empty Barks in the power of the Germans. Giorgio,
to a Redoubt which guarded the highway, and had been gallantly, at the first
assault, defended by the Albanian Foot, would have sent succors, but Coevre
thought it not fit that the Army should be engaged for so small a matter; but
rather retired to the Bridge of Ganda, abandoning the Country and several
places upon the Mountain, together with the Towns of Trahona, Cepsono, San
Giovanni, and others even to Morbegno.

The Germans entered into all; but the Venetians not well suffering the
indignity of this success, and apprehending the danger of all the rest, sent
into the Valteline with all speed the Duke of Candales, (Son of the Duke of
Espernon, lately come into the Service of the Republic) with his Regiment of
French, and an hundred Horse, at the arrival whereof Giorgio taking courage,
and after many difficulties, drawing the Marquess to his opinion, they drew out
into the Plain, and having sent Melander by the way of the Mountain, attacqued
the Posts. Papenhaim, not to let himself be taken in the middle betwixt them,
lightly skirmishing abandons them, retiring out of the Valley. The Rock of
Corbeio did now divide the Confines and the Armies; and the Winter no less than
the weakness of their Forces put a stop to their proceedings, though the
Regiment of Fecquieres, as a seasonable relief, was arrived out of France.

During this season, improper for the management of Arms, the Confederates
apply themselves to confirm what they had got, placing two Forts, one in the
Center of the Valley at Tirano, and another near to the entrance at Trahona;
the first garrisoned by the French, and the second by the Venetians. Nor was
there the least doubt of the continuance of the War the year following; because
the Negotiation of Peace by the Cardinal Barberin in the Court of France was
come to nothing, he, by reason of his Purple, his Ministry, and nearness to the
Pope, having had an exquisite reception, but found the business as much
intricate and difficult. His offices consisted in complaints for the Invasion,
in demands for the consignment of the Forts, in scruples of restoring the
Valley to the Grisons, in propositions to withdraw it from their Dominion, as
the only means to secure Religion and the Consciences of the people.

But the Cardinal Richelieu, the Mareshal of Schomberg, and the Secretary of
State Herbault, deputed by the King to confer with the Legate, insisted, That
the Treaty of Madrid should be executed, adding, that Chiavena by the French,
and la Riva by the Spaniards should by way of respect, be delivered to the
Pope, to be presently demolished, and afterward the other Forts successively,
the demolishing of the one always preceding the delivery of another. That in
this condition they should afterward be restored to the Grisons, with a
Covenant express, that the Catholic Worship alone should be there practiced,
the Magistrates and Inhabitants of a contrary belief excepted.

The Legate showing himself not contented herewith, proposed at least a general
suspension of Arms in Italy, but was rejected by the French, the Ambassadors
of Venice and Savoy mainly opposing it; who believed, that the Confederates,
intricated in the vain hopes of Peace, would employ themselves more slackly to
the provision for War; and so would be of no other use but to confirm the
Spaniards In their predominancy, to enfeeble the French, and to consume the
Italians betwixt Jealousies and Charges. The Legate then seeing his longer stay
unprofitable to the Treaty, and prejudicial to good Manners, departs without
expecting the issue of an Assembly of some chief persons which Richelieu
called, because he foresaw that the aim of the Favorite being but to interest
the most accredited of the Kingdom in his own judgment; their opinions, as it
happened, would not be differing from his counsels.

The Kingdom enjoyed now within a certain appearing quiet, since Soubize being
driven out of the Island, and his Ships dispersed, certain Articles were agreed
with the Huguenots, which Rochel also at last received under the caution of the
King of England, that they should be observed by France, and it looked as if
the King were now to employ himself more powerfully to the Affairs of the
Valteline; to promote which, the Venetians had sent besides to that Court
Simeon Contarini Cavalier Procurator as Ambassador Extraordinary.

But the Pope ill digesting, after the disparaging his Troops, the repulse also
in the Treaty, declared, that in the Spring to come he would return into the
Valley with six thousand Foot and five hundred Horse under the Command of
Torquato Conti. To give ground and reputation to this undertaking, he
solicited Leopoldus, who by devotion of the holy year was then at Rome, to
invade it on his side. He sends to Milan the Prior Aldobrandino, who concerted,
that the Governor was to provide Victuals, furnish necessaries and Cannon, and
supply also a number of Soldiers which should waste in the occasions of War,
at the charge of the King, though under the Popes own Colors.

The Confederates, stricken with this so sudden resolution, showed themselves
greatly moved, that Urban, renouncing to the intentions of a professed
Neutrality, would make himself a Party in this War, in which, amidst so many
considerations, the most holy one of Religion served henceforth but for a
shadow. The Cardinal Magalotti therefore having communicated to their Ministers
in Rome, that the noise of those Arms tended against the Grisons only, they let
him know, That the interest of that people being indistinct from the common
concern of the League, as much as the Princes venerated the sacred name of the
High Priest, so much they were resolved not to abandon the Cause of their
Friends, and the universal good of Italy.

Surely whoever considered the appearance only and noise of this undertaking,
divulged by the Pope, would easily be persuaded, that his mind being overcome
with the hopes of the Marriage of Stigliana with his Nephew, and the private
interests of the Family, he had given himself up in prey to the will of the
Austrians, and would draw stronger arguments from his having destined the
Cardinal Barberine immediately upon his return to Rome Legate into Spain, under
the title to hold at the Sacred Font a Daughter born about that time to the
King; but he ruminating in his mind upon more absconded ends, governed himself
by motives more secret: for having discovered the secret Negotiations, which
passed betwixt the two Crowns, and knowing that the Peace betwixt them was near
being concluded, to the deluding of the rest, he had a mind by this ostentation
of vigor and Arms to uphold to the World the reputation and opinion, which he
thought prejudiced by the suffering of so great an affront. Nevertheless in
affairs of a like nature, the cause being not to be dived into before the
effects, every one believed, that by interessing the Name and Authority of the
Pope, the War would be exasperated. Preparations were made on all sides, of
Arms and of minds, and the French feigning to be equally pressed, demanded by
Monsieur de Bassompiere a great Levy of Switzers, and that passage might be
denied to those of the Austrians.

To find out some composure betwixt those of the Valteline and the Grisons,
which might serve to maintain the defense with minds united, or facilitate the
Peace, Coevre and Giorgio assembled their Deputies in Sondrio, but without
fruit, the one not resolving to lose their Sovereignty and the profits, and the
other fancying to themselves, that pardon was more to be suspected than
revenge. Seeds of greater calamities sprung now up in all parts; for as much as
that in Germany also the Victories of Ferdinand served rather to exasperate
than terminate the War, whilst his prosperity rendered his power as much
burdensome to his Neighbors as hazardous to the Empire. For this purpose a
Meeting was held at the Hague, to which coming the Ministers of France,
England, Denmark, Sweden, Gabor, and of other Princes of the North, they made
the World believe, that they aimed not so much at the moderation of the
greatness of the Austrians as totally to suppress it. Nevertheless, according
to the destiny attending such an Assembly, every one amidst the common interest
driving his own peculiar designs, it was discovered, that the French did not
intend to charge themselves with ought else, but to give the Hollanders the
Subsidy stipulated, that they would refuse the Truce offered by the Spaniards
with other large Conditions.

The Kings of Sweden and Denmark desired to make a War, and demanded great sums
of money to maintain it; and the Transilvanian, not regarding the Conditions
lately made with the Emperor, offered to break anew, provided he might have a
vigorous assistance. In such sort that every one demanding considerable
assistances, and none being willing to give them to another, the Meeting
separates like one of those great Engines which split when they are ready for
motion; taking pretext, that some, especially the Transilvanian, had not
sufficient powers: whereupon the Meeting was put off to the year following, to
the end that by a better concert the League might then be finished.

No body had showed himself more earnest in this business than the King of
England, as both younger and more provoked; whereupon dispatching his Favorite
Buckingham and the Earl of Holland for his Ambassadors to the Hague, impatient
of longer delay, he concludes with the United Provinces a Treaty of offense and
defense for fifteen years, by means whereof he pretended to restore the
Palatine Frederick into his Patrimony, concerting a diversion by Sea on the
Coast of Spain, and to send an Army by Land at a common charge. But of this,
for want of money, which could not be raised without the odious calling of a
Parliament, the design vanished; and of the other, Fortune frustrated the
effect, although the Fleet consisted of more than ninety Ships, a Squadron of
Holland being therein comprehended, so well furnished with Soldiers, and all
other necessaries, that if in the inconstancy of the waves, reason or force
might have commanded any attempt whatsoever, seemed likely to succeed. But
carrying Fredericks Colors for a show, sailing longst the Coast of Spain, and
casting Anchor in the Baye of Cadiz, in design to take that Port, and to
pillage the rich Fleet, which was expected from America, they land at Puntal,
to cut off succors from the Town, and shut up certain Galleys and Gallions in
the Port; which would have easily succeeded, if they had not spent a great deal
of time to no purpose in fortifying themselves. Spain, that was wont rather to
provoke her Enemies afar off, than to see them before her face, and in her
bosom, was in disorder, and the King would have gone in person to oppose them,
if Olivares had not diverted him, considering the remedy too late, and
unbecoming the grandeur and gravity of that Nation. Ferdinand Giron, who
commanded in that Quarter, with a stupendous stoutness transported in a few
Galleys from the Terra firma, and in sight of the Enemy, Ammunition and
Soldiers, with which the Garrison was strengthened; they so molested the
English with Sallies, that, judging the gaining of it would be long and
difficult, they re-imbarked, applying themselves to what they could light on at
Sea. Many Barks were dispatched from the Coast of Spain to meet the Fleet, to
the end, that changing their course, and keeping aloof from the Cape of St.
Vincent, where the English waited for them, they might put in at the Corogne.
One of them falling seasonably into their hands, saved the rest; for taking it
for granted, that the Fleet would make for this Port, they sailed thither,
whilst in the mean time having had no advice, it arrived happily at Cadiz. And
now the English Weather-beaten, and sickness increasing, returned into their
own Country, not without mutual dissatisfaction with the Hollander, the one
imputing to the other the ill success of the Expedition.

But greater were the jars and jealousies, which, after the Conference in
Holland, increased more and more betwixt England and France; for the one
attributed to the other the loss of Breda, by denying passage to Mansfelt, and
upbraided him with the ruin of the Palatine, and the other interests in
Germany, whilst designing in his own Kingdom the destruction of the Huguenots,
he desired the lessening of the Protestants every where. Nor did France want
complaints reciprocal, for the many reprisals happened at Sea, the retreat of
Soubize to London, the assistances promised before the Peace to the Rochellois,
and the caution given to that Peace, as though England intended to make a Party
with its Subjects, besides the unhandsom intreatment of the Queen and her
Family, contrary to the Conditions of Marriage.

The Austrians hoping for great advantages from such disagreements, the common
friends to both interposed themselves to put a stop to them or remove them, and
particularly the Venetians, who charged Marco Anthonio Corraro and Angelo
Contarini Cavalieri, Ambassadors Extraordinary, Charles his Succession with
express and most effectual offices for that purpose, which nevertheless had no
effect, the minds of the Favorites being much more exasperated than the
interest of the Crowns discordant.

ANNO M.DC.XXVI.
In the beginning of this year, Torquato Conti with the Popes Army, being
entered into the Milanese, put men's minds greatly to a stand betwixt the report,
which he published to invade the Valley jointly with Papenhaim, and the
slowness of his march, as if he desired retardments and expected accidents,
which might divert him from doing of it. The Venetians with a body of their
Army coasted upon him longst the Borders, resolving, according to his motion,
to advance into the Valteline and defend it. But before any undertaking and
engagement of Arms, arrives the news, that as to the Affairs of the Valteline,
France, and Spain had betwixt themselves concluded a Peace; a report so
surprising, that it is not to be said, how much it universally struck men's
minds; in regard, that though the name of Peace was very pleasing, yet the
secret management of it, and the almost shame with which the makers of it
themselves divulged the conclusion, and endeavored to suppress the Articles,
gave cause for due considerations. Nor was the business so secretly carried
betwixt the two Kings, but that the Princes Confederate with France had a scent
of it. But the appearances of War, the refuse given to the Popes mediation, and
the firm assurances of the principal Ministers of that Crown had made them
confident of the contrary. From the time the Cardinal Legate was at the Court
of France, it was discovered, that the Marquess de Mirabel, Ambassador of
Spain, had insinuated, that it belonged to the greatness and authority of the
Crowns to convert the mediation of others to their own arbitrament, and by
agreeing betwixt themselves to impose the Law to others.

Olivares afterward in Spain dealt with Fargis, the French Ambassador, to the
same purpose, with such instance, that to sound the bottom, Monsieur de
Rambogliet, under pretext to congratulate the delivery of the Queen, was sent
from Paris to Madrid. From discourse they passed quickly to the Treaty, and
from the Treaty to the conclusion. During the Negotiation frequent Courriers
ran to and fro, and as it was no easy matter to discover the precise
conditions, (the knowledge so much as of a Treaty being kept from every body
but the two Favorites, and very few of their Confidents) so it was manifest,
that some great matter was in Treaty, and the secrecy made it the more
suspicious. The Ambassadors of the Republic and of the Prince of Piedmont,
who were in the Court of France to solicit the re-inforcement of their
Armies, concealed not their Jealousies; because, besides the obligation, to
which the League did bind, not to treat or conclude a part, expedience required
that they should be Parties to the Treaty, who had a common interest in the
charge and hazard of the War. But some believing, though falsely, the loss of
reputation and faith less than that of private interest, it was so far, that
the chief Ministers had communicated the project or the conditions which were
negotiated in Spain, that rather with constant asseverations and oaths they
denied, that there was a Treaty. At last that secret being slippery, which
though the tongue concealed the face declared, the Confederates found
themselves to be deluded, and complained bitterly of it. Schomberg in
conclusion confessed the Treaty, affirming then, that some Propositions were
come from Olivares, but so unworthy, that being scorned and rejected by France,
they had not deserved communication to the Princes their Friends: That the
Ambassador Fargis had since transgressed in signing certain Articles
prejudicial and contrary to the designs of the Confederates; but that the King
was not only resolved to disavow them, but to recall Fargis, and severely to
punish him.

All this aimed only to temper the taste of the Venetians and Savoyards,
imbittered to extremity, to digest by little and little a business so
displeasing; for the truth was, the Articles by direction and approbation of
both the Crowns had been sealed in Barcellona, where the Catholic King was,
though they appeared to have been underwritten some days before in Monzone; and
therefore the Cardinal Barberins landing just at that time in Barcellona was
believed in some measure to cover the dis-respect which accrued to his own
reputation and the dignity of the Pope, by not giving way nor place to his
Mediation. The Treaty, which was called of Monzone, contained many Articles, in
the beginning whereof the Worship alone of the Catholic Religion being
established in the Valley and in the two Counties adjacent, it seemed that
other Affairs were to be restored to the state in which they were found to be
in the beginning of the year 1617. with abolition of all Treaties and every
other thing which had been made, or had happened since that time. But this came
to be destroyed rather than restrained by other conditions; for taking away all
substance of Sovereignty from the Grisons, free Election of Judges and
Magistrates was yielded to those of the Valteline; the three Leagues were
prohibited in a manner to oppose themselves, nay were so straightly obliged to
the confirmation, that they remained deprived also of this apparent right, if
they should but prolong or deny it. In recompense a certain yearly Pension was
assigned, which the people of the Valley were to pay the Grisons, the sum to be
limited by Deputies of both sides, and this and every other Prerogative should
be forfeited, besides the resentment of both the Crowns by Arms, if the three
Leagues should not content themselves with thus much, and should in any manner
disquiet the Valley, or pretend to impose Garrisons there. The care over the
exercise of Religion was committed to the Pope, who in case of innovation,
advertising the two Kings of it, was to solicit the remedy from them; the
Forts in like manner were to be delivered into his hands, to demolish those
which had been built from the year 1620. forwards. It was imposed upon the
Grisons to lay down Arms, and the Crowns were presently to suspend their
Auxiliaries in the difference of Duke Carlo with the Genouese, offering
themselves to interpose, that both Parties might perform it, and that cause be
made an end of. They reserve to themselves at last the interpretation, in case
of any difficulty in the present Treaty, which by other private Articles was
yet made worse; for the Grisons and those of the Valteline not agreeing about
the Pension, or the Duke of Savoy not according with the Genouese about the
business of Zuccarello, the Crowns assumed the decision to themselves: In sum,
capitulating all rather like Arbitrators than as Princes of contrary Parties
and different Interests.

Many believed, that the two Kings and their chief Ministers being with so much
secrecy thus agreed, had their aim to divide the care, or rather the Dominion
of the World, prescribing Laws to inferiors, and promising themselves
reciprocal assistances to oppress their Envyers and Enemies, subdue the
Protestants and Heretics, divide England, and share Europe betwixt them. But
others considered, that the interests of France and Spain being incompatible,
what between the emulation and the power, no other effect in this Conjuncture
could happen but that which is seen in bodies, which, possessed by two spirits,
are strangely tossed up and down; and from thence did foretell, that the present
friendship would quickly break out into greater contests and a more sharp War.
In effect, the Treaty was penned in terms very differing from those which
lodged in the heart of their Authors, such a Union so extemporary taking its
measures at that time only from occasion and interest. The two Ministers had no
other aim but to deceive each other.

Richelieu sacrificed all considerations whatsoever to appease a furious storm,
which, with danger to involve the Kingdom in a Civil War, was rising against
his Authority. He had besides a great desire to subdue Rochel, and humble the
Huguenots, and no less passion drove him to vent his revenge against England
and Buckingham. On the other side Olivares thought, that by amusing France,
either in Intestine discord, or Foreign hopes, and the designs of great profit,
he should without opposition arrive at the height of all advantages in Italy,
Germany, and Flanders, thinking by great attempts to legitimate that Title of
Great, which in the beginning of his Power he had caused the King to assume.
Nevertheless, upon the first divulging of a Peace so unexpected, men could not
so soon penetrate into the designs of it; but in the confusion of the causes
and discourses all stood amazed, and many afraid. The Venetians showed
themselves greatly affected with it, and stood at gaze with so much the more
wonder, because that the very self same day, but a little before the news came,
Monsieur d' Aligre, the French Ambassador, had been in the Senate to give them
assurance, that without the knowledge and consent of its Confederates the Crown
would not so much as hearken to Propositions, much less conclude the Treaty.
Many doubts hereupon were tossed to and fro in men's minds; but that which
clearly appeared, was the omission, not only of the consent of the
Confederates, but of their interest and security, which was not perceived so
much as mentioned; the Grisons, besides all this, remained prejudged, and
indeed oppressed, contrary to that protection, which with so much reason the
League had undertaken of them, and those of the Valteline saw themselves by the
liberty they had gotten, necessarily bound up to Spain, which, bating the name,
would certainly enjoy the disposition of the Valley and the passages.

The Duke of Savoy raged not a little, whilst besides the public Interests
trodden under foot, he complained, that his own proper Concerns were exposed,
if not abandoned. In this grievous resentment, recalling his Son from Paris,
upon his old disgusts he heaps up new complaints, bewailing himself, that the
friendship and assistance of the French had served for nothing but to traverse
his designs and greatness, calling to his remembrance, how before Asti, when he
had Inoiosa and his Army at an advantage, and in a manner consumed, the
Ministers of that Crown by protests and threatenings had extorted his consent to
a Peace, and added over and above of a fresh date, that by Desdiguieres and
Crequi he had several times been forbidden rather than persuaded not to invade
the Milanese, at a time when upon Feria's retreat he had hopes with great ease
to have made great progress. Amidst dissatisfaction therefore and disdain he
meditated on resentment and revenge.

But at Venice the Senate balanced with great deliberation the conjunctures
and the times, and some hesitating to approve the Peace, Girolamo Trevisano,
one of the gravest Senators, spoke to this purpose: It has seldom happened,
that in friendships with the more powerful, the happiness of success is
answerable to the hopes in the beginning. In the Treaties which unite us to
France, we cannot deny but that the thought of increasing the strength of our
Arms and the necessity to add security to our affairs did induce us to it. It
is now certain, that in the present Treaties the Ministers of that Crown have
neglected the interest of the Republic, sailed in their faith and truth,
forgotten their friends, violated their own honor, and that which is common to
all, the League. But it is true also, that to us remains the glory to have
opposed our selves against Princes the most powerful, to have by force and
counsels maintained our Neighbors, performed the parts of punctuality and of
friendship, nay ex abundanti born almost alone the burden of the War. Let the
blame then of the Treaties fall upon them that have negotiated and concluded
them. Certainly the friendships with the French are fatal to the Republic, and
great good and great evils have our Ancestors experienced from them. But she
has always, in whatsoever Fortune, held her constancy for her Dowry, and
having truth for her guide, has been delivered with safety and applause even
from shipwreck it self. And now setting aside anger and fear, it concerns us to
consider what is our part to do and to debate, whether the negligence of the
French in their own advantages should be preferred before the institution of
this Senate, the fatality of the times present, the importance of our own and
the universal Interest. The French Ministers in the Treaty of Monzone have
omitted the naming their Confederates; but shall we then reject the Treaty it
self, and, if that do not include us, why shall we exclude our selves also from
the affection of one of the greatest Kings, and while we are afraid to be
exposed to the Arms of Spain, renounce wholly to the protection of the
friendship of the French? Fortune is now become the portion of the Austrians;
Reputation and Power are their Ministers; Prosperity and Victory fight under
their Ensigns. Most powerful Countries and Armies as strong encompass us on all
sides, and though jealousies may for a time be stifled, they will never be
reconciled. Whither shall we run in our dangers? To whom shall we trust our
suspicions? The Pope pretends to be offended; it is at least true, that he is
displeased with us. Amongst the Princes of Italy, Carlo excepted, (who runs the
common risque with us, but for the most part has thoughts and designs apart)
to whom can we trust our selves, or our security, or the public liberty? The
friendship then of the French Crown is necessary for us, though perhaps
dangerous. It behooves us therefore to dissemble much; for all our safety is
placed in an Equilibrium, which their power alone is able to give to Spain. Nor
let the report disturb us, which gives out, as if these two potent Crowns had
united themselves to the oppression of all else. Heaven has prescribed limits
to Empires, as also to the Elements, and if the diverse and contrary qualities
of these by contending for mastery one over the other, preserves the order and
duration of the World, it is not to be feared, that interests as discrepant
being radically ingrafted in France and Spain, they can ever conspire to
destroy the Constitution of Europe. The hearts of Politicians have Caverns and
secret retiring places, into which there is no penetrating but by the wary
guide of their ends and advantages: that errs not nor deceives; and from thence
I could easily engage to you, that the present Peace is a false shadow, which
seems formed from a light yet more false, from some concern of a great
Minister, which disorders the public ones of that Kingdom and the universal
ones of the World. But it will surely vanish, while the cooperating of France
for the advantages and greatness of Spain is a force against Nature, which will
languish and quickly fall, when that short violence that moves it shall be at
an end. We see the Kingdom already in a confusion, the Court divided, the
favor tottering; but this tempest will soon vanish, it being the custom of the
French Climate not long to suffer turbulent weather, or be pleased with fair.
To us who are accustomed by prudence and constancy to weary out adversity it
self, it belongs to remain steadfast; with dexterity to oppose the present; to
divert dangers; wait for better Conjunctures; and above all, not to assure our
selves of our new Enemies, nor despair of our ancient friendships.

By such conceptions, those reasons being rooted up out of men's minds, which
before had been imbued with the contrary, the Peace was approved by the
Venetians, both by necessity and prudence. At the same time nevertheless, they
persuaded the Duke Carlo to remain firm in the Maxims of the common Interest,
and they always fortified themselves with greater Forces, till that, amidst the
confusions and obscurity of objects, the bent of Affairs might be better
discerned. The French understood the reasonable sense of their Confederates,
and withal feared to lose by this example the imagination and hopes of new
friendships. They dispatched therefore in extraordinary Embassage to Venice
Monsieur de Chasteauneuf, and to Turin Monsieur de Buglion, to the end, that
excusing things past by the necessity of domestic interests, they should give
assurance, that Italy should not be abandoned to the will of the Spaniards;
should promise assistance in case of invasion or attacque to both the
Confederates, and to heal the present wounds, should propose to the Republic
to procure for them of the Grisons the liberty of the passages, and entertain
the Duke with the hopes of Kingly Titles and other vain advantages.

But the Venetians listened with little credit to such projects; for France
having with the conclusion of the Articles lost the Authority and Keys, which
he formerly had in Rhetia, it was no more in his power to shut or open the
Passes to his friends. And therefore France had nothing else to allege in
excuse, but the domestic disturbances which threatened to subvert that Kingdom.
The Nation nevertheless in general were enraged at the indignity of the Treaty,
and those that designed the ruin of Richelieu, failed not to publish the
reproofs, accusing him, that betraying friends, he had sold the glory and
advantages of the Crown to Strangers, and that with the worse consequences;
because it yielding to the Spaniards in the largeness of Territories and the
sagacity of Negotiation, there was no way to even the scales but by
friendships. But now, said they, who will any more rely upon France, if the
observance of Treaties shall not depend upon the integrity of the Princes, or
the eternal Maxims of the State, but upon the venal arbitrage and fickle
interests of some Favorite Minister? Was it not enough then, to have offended
the King of England, ruined Mansfelt, cast off the Protestants of the Empire,
lost Breda, and with it in a manner Holland, if Italy were not abandoned, the
Valteline and Rhetia oppressed, and the best and ancient Friends of France were
not discontented? Is it to be thought, that the friendship of Spain is to be
preferred before a base and unworthy Peace, a friendship always full of
jealousy and trouble, and now so much the more to be lamented, as it by the
Treaty makes such breaches into reputation and interest, as by no length of
time can be repaired by Arms? Let the Cardinal then rejoice in his secret
Negotiations, so long as there shall remain no more famous Monuments of his
Authority and Name, than to have razed the two strongest Pillars of the
Kingdom, Faith and Friendship.

But the Cardinal, deaf to reproaches and the gainsayings of all, maintained
the Treaty, and solicited the execution of it. It is necessary to know what
were the more internal motives of the Kingdom to so important an emergency, and
what were the successes that followed. France, to say truth, was at the point
of being in a combustion; for division was no more restrained to Religion and
its Partisans, but had invaded the Court it self, the Cardinal having the
chiefest part in it. There is no Nation that more hates and suffers Favorites
than the French. In civil dissensions they serve some for a pretext, and others
for a shelter. War and Peace depend upon their will; the Factions are either
destroyed or promoted. Kings make use of them sometimes for a shadow, and
oftentimes also for a help. The Cardinal Richelieu above all others has taught
the rule to govern himself in such manner, that making his own and the Royal
Interest one, and incorporating the Favor with the Authority of the Sovereign,
the one, though there was a difference, could not be distinguished from the
other, nor could that be offended but the other was wounded.

The sterility which seemed to be in the Marriage of King Lewis, helped forward
this boisterous storm, and there was thereby confounded together, as is usual
in the Court of France, jealousies, interests, passions, and loves also. It was
expedient therefore to marry Gaston, then Duke of Anjou, and afterward of
Orleans, the only Brother of the King, and by his Marriage the hopes of the
Succession and the fortune of the Kingdom being espoused, the minds and eyes of
the Court and Nation were turned toward him. He, as young in years, and
inconstant by nature, suffered his affections to be governed by the Mareshal
d'Ornano, who Governor of his Childhood, and now Director of his Youth, by
complying with him in the luxurious desires of that lascivious Age, had so much
power with him, that sometimes setting him against the Favorites, sometimes
making merchandise of his inclinations to his own advantage, with various
Fortune passing through a Prison, rose afterward to be Mareshal of France,
with considerable power and no less riches. Amongst the Propositions of
Marriage, the most secret counsel excluded that with strangers, that the Duke
might not provoke unnecessarily men's minds to bold attempts, and unseasonable
hopes to get and possess the Crown by the trust and reliance upon Foreign
Forces.

The Queen Mother promoted that alone with the Heir of the House of Monpensier,
which, to the splendor of the Blood Royal, added a considerable portion of
Goods, Jurisdictions, and also of Sovereignty with the Principality of Dombes.
The Faction of the Guises abbetted her in it; because the Mother of this young
Princess, by a second Marriage, was passed into that Family, and the Cardinal
de Richelieu concurred in it, thinking to retribute to the Queen the gratitude
of that favor, which he acknowledged from her Authority and Protection. Others
desired to give him the Daughter of Conde; and Ornano, who was said beyond
measure enamoured on the beauty of the Princess, her Mother, promoted it, and
moved the will and inclinations of the Duke to it. But the Web was woven with
yet greater Intrigues; for many with the discord of the Royal Family desired to
introduce an alteration in Affairs, for as much as the favor of the King, and
the authority of the Government falling upon Richelieu alone, others were
unsatisfied at it, and aspired to their own advantages by jostling out the
chief Minister, and changing the Government.

Conde, made wary by past experiences, taking himself off from his pretensions
in favor of his Daughter, which in the concurrence of so many interests he saw
served but for a state or pretext, the malcontents betook themselves to
Engines more powerful, making, to oppose the Queen Mother, the Queen Regent
through impressions of jealousy believe, that the Marriage with Monpensier
succeeding to be fruitful, she should be neglected, and in case of Widowhood,
be necessitated with shame and scorn to subject her self to one of her own
Vassals. They let it fall to her, that breaking the Treaty of Marriage with
Monpensier, she should promote that with her own Sister the Infanta of Spain,
to conjoyn France to that Crown with a double obligation, and establish for her
self in all events stronger defense and more pleasing supports.

To introduce such thoughts into the Queens mind, the abhorrency which she had
of the Cardinal Richelieu prevailed much, which was fomented by the Duchess of
Chevereufe, her Confident, who with many artifices had the power of her will,
and besides augmented her party; for the Grand Prior of Vendosm being her
Gallant, was by her persuaded to own it, and to bring the Duke his Brother
into it; Brothers both, though base born, of King Lewis. With such supports
they went on to greater designs, deliberating to offer to the Huguenots Gaston
for their Head, suborning Governors of Provinces and places, not without
whispering, that Gaston himself, after having killed the Cardinal with his own
hand, and retiring himself from Court with the applause of a great party,
should not only have constrained the King to pardon him, but disposed, as he
thought fit, of the Marriage, of the Government, and of the Crown. Nothing
passed without Richelieu's knowledge; for Monsieur de Chalais, Master of the
Wardrobe to the King, a great Confident of Chevereuses, discovering of her the
secrets of the business, reported them to the King with so terrible a prospect,
as if, the Conspiracy being against his own Person, the design was to shut him
up in a Convent, exalt his Brother to the Throne, and make him marry the Queen;
so that Lewis, suspicious by nature, and distrustful to extremity, might have
been persuaded to believe things yet more absurd. Nature had afforded to few
the Magic, I may call it, of the tongue so powerful as to Richelieu; for, with
a quick and nervous eloquence, enriched with ready replies, and strengthened
oftentimes at his pleasure with tears, oaths, and passions moving affections,
he overcame men's minds, and governed above all the will of King Lewis, who full
of fear, referred himself to his wisdom and conduct, to the end, that he might
conjure down so many false appearances. The beginning was made by the
imprisonment of Ornano done at Fontainbleau, whither the Court was removed
expressly to avoid those uproars and confusions, which are but too easily raised
at Paris. The King there talking to him of the Marriage of his Brother with
Monpensier, and he showing himself not inclined to it, he was presently after
arrested by the Guards, to the astonishment of all the rest of his party, and
that so much the more as it was quickly followed by his death, ascribed by some
to the indispositions of his old age, and by others attributed to poison. The
Cardinal ordered it so, that at the time of the arrest he was far off, to the
end it might be believed, though he directed every thing, that the King had
done it upon his own will; nay he desired leave to retire himself, and withdraw
his life from the hatred and snares of so potent enemies; but the King and his
Mother were so far from consenting to it, that, though he with express
instances covetously desired the contrary, they permitted him to arm himself
against those, that envied him, with Guards; which serving at first for a
defense, became quickly an apprehension and jealousy to the power it self of
the Sovereign. By the imprisonment and death of Ornano, the design of the
Factionaries seemed in a good measure broken, but was not totally destroyed,
those of most power being far off; they of Vendosm particularly, who having the
Government of Britany, by their great dependencies gave great jealousies. The
Court set forward that way, but moved slowly, to give time for the Cardinals
Arts, who deluding the Grand Prior with his own very desires and designs, and
giving him hopes of the Admiralship of the Sea, which he with great longing
pretended, persuades him to come to Blois, where the King was, and to bring his
Brother with him; but were no sooner arrived, but they saw themselves made
Prisoners. The Court then with so much the more haste goes to Nantes,
preventing the uproar of the Province. Others upon this would not at all trust
themselves.

The Count of Soissons, who aspired to the Marriage of Monpensier, and, to
obtain it, was entered into the party of the malcontents, left the Kingdom,
and made a Voyage into Italy. Chevereuse, commanded to remain at a house in the
Country, making an escape, gets into Lorrain, and with a spirit, (above the
custom of the Sex) greedy of novelties, passes afterward to other Courts,
carrying every where in her mind the fire of War against France, and that of
the loves of great Princes in her rare beauty. Chalais alone remained unwarily
taken in the net, which he had laid for others; for either trusting in the good
turn he had done, more than mindful of the offense committed, thinking his
service not well recompensed, conceived too vast hopes; or that, repenting to
have said too much, he would discover no more, was by sentence of Judges, as
guilty of the Conspiracy it self, beheaded in Nantes. Where at last the
Marriage with Monpensier was performed; for the Kings Brother, having no body
near him that might suggest the contrary, married her, and immediately
entangled in loves and the first pleasures of Marriage, was careless of the
ruin of all his Confidents.

These were then the confusions of Court, amidst which the Treaty of Monzone
being concluded, if they took not wholly away the blame, they at least served
to make some sort of excuse; but the Duke of Savoy not admitting of any,
despising the flatteries of Bouillon, was so greatly offended, that swearing an
implacable hatred and the most open resentments against the Cardinal, by the
means of Alexander the Abbot of Scaglia, his most sharp-sighted Minister, he
closes with the malcontents of the Kingdom, offers them all encouragement and
forces, and particularly to Gaston assistance and retreat, if, as he effectual
persuaded him, he would revenge himself of the Cardinal.

But at Court the seeds of discord being extinguished, he turns his practices
to the Huguenots and to England, sending Scaglia to London, to the end that
promoting a fierce War against France, he might either gain upon that Kingdom
those Conquests, which he complained he had been elsewhere traversed in by
those Ministers, or at least molest and punish him that had dared to abandon
and set at naught a Prince in friendship with him. The rupture indeed betwixt
France and England advanced apace, the disagreements betwixt the King and Queen
in London continuing, notwithstanding that the Mareshal of Bassompiere, gone
thither Ambassador Extraordinary, settled certain Articles concerning the
Queens Family, which in matters of Religion served for a pretext to distasts;
but not reconciling the interests and passions of the two Favorites, Richelieu
disavowed him, and Buckingham as studiously crossed him. At the instigation of
the Duke of Savoy, who by his own anger sharpened that of others, the Domestics
of the Queen were sent back to Paris.

There followed hereupon many reciprocal reprisals at Sea, and King Charles,
taking the Huguenots and Rochel into his protection, complained of the
inobservancy of Treaties, and of the inconvenience, the Fort Lewis was to that
Town. Upon these pretexts, Buckingham taking the quality of Ambassador, had a
mind to pass into France to procure redress; but the true motive of his Journey
being ascribed to loves contracted in that Court, Richelieu persuades the King
to refuse him entrance into the Kingdom. The rage hereupon of the other was
inflamed to extremity, and swearing that since he was forbidden to enter in a
peaceable manner into France, he would make his passage with an Army, he
applies himself to an open breach. The Kings intentions being carried by
Monsieur Montaigue to the Huguenots and the Duke of Savoy, it was resolved
betwixt them, that the King, as Protector of the last Peace with the Huguenots,
should, to repair the pretended infractions, send thirty thousand men against
France, divided into three Armies; whereof the first was to take in the Islands
next to Xaintonge to strengthen Rochel; the second, to land in the Garonne near
Bourdeaux; and the third, keeping Normandy and Britany in apprehension,
distract the Forces, and, shutting up the entrances into the Rivers, hinder the
Commerce.

The Duke of Savoy was at the same time to invade Provence and Dauphine,
promising also to send five hundred Horse to Rohan, who offered to raise the
greatest part of Languedoc with the Huguenots, and with four thousand Foot and
a good number of Horse to join with the English in Guyenne. And to the end the
Kingdom might be invaded on all parts, Carlo Duke of Lorrain, moved thereto by
Chevereuse and Scaglia, who went to attend him for that purpose, was to enter
into it from his side with powerful Forces. The Venetians and the States of
Holland were also invited by the English and by Savoy, the one by the interests
of Religion, and the other in revenge of the Treaty of Monzone, and for fear of
the Union betwixt France and Spain; but both these Republics, apprehending
more than from the Treaty of Monzone, the evils from the discord betwixt
England and France, who coming to a War left every where a field open to the
advantages and arbitrament of the Austrians, endeavored by an effectual
mediation to reconcile them.

In this interim the Treaty was executing in the Valteline, though the Grisons,
greatly stirred with prejudice, appealed, sending an express Embassy into
France. Nor was it to any purpose, that Monsieur de Chasteauneuf, to appease
them came from Venice to Coira, and from thence into Helvetia: for the three
Leagues, and amongst the Switzers the Protestant Cantons would never give their
consent. Nevertheless, not regarding their complaints, it was agreed to render
the Forts, and withdraw the Armies.

The Venetians, by reason of the nearness, were troubled that the Forts should
be demolished, and the Pope refusing to charge himself with such a trouble and
expense, Fargis at the Court of Spain had consented to new prejudices,
capitulating that they should by the Pope be delivered to those of the
Valteline or the Spaniards themselves to demolish them. But that being
disapproved by France and the Republic; it was at last agreed in Rome, between
Monsieur Bethune and the Count d'Ognate, Ambassadors of the Crowns, That those
old Forts, out of which the Ensigns of the Church had gone forth, should be
restored to Torquato Conti, who should enter into them with three thousand men;
that he afterward should go out of them when the Spanish Ministers should
deliver him a Writing, that they were satisfied of the former deposition: That
at the same time the Confederates should withdraw their Forces out of the new
Forts, and they to be all at a time demolished by the Peasants so soon as Pope
Urbans Colors should enter into the first. Some retardments deferred the
delivery until the beginning of the year to come; for Coevre had a mind before
he retired, that the Pension of those of the Valteline to the Grisons should be
adjusted. But Gonsales de Cordua (who, upon the removal of Feria, as little
inclined to execute the Peace, commanded in the Milanese) denying that he had
power concerning this, it was in France adjudged by the King with the consent
of the Ambassador of Spain at twenty five thousand Crowns a year. Carlo also,
pressed by Bouillon, had made a suspension of Arms with the Genouese, rather to
revenge himself of France, than out of complacency to it; for being entered into
the design to invade with great hopes that Kingdom, he did not unwillingly
dis-engage himself on that side. In this manner was Italy set at quiet, but
knew it self big with new storms and more fierce tempests. The Venetians
accommodating themselves to the time, and reforming their Militia, kept a
strong body of the most veteran and tried ones. In this year amongst the
domestic Affairs, Frederico Cornaro, Bishop of Bergamo, being promoted to the
Cardinalat, in that order in which amongst the other Crowns the Popes are wont
to honor the Republic, there arose a doubt, whether, he being Son of the Doge
the Law had place, which forbid them to receive Ecclesiastical Benefices; and
it was declared by the Senate, that a dignity of that quality was not
comprehended under the common name of Benefices. On the contrary, to Carlo
Quirini, Bishop elect of Sebenico, was denied the possession, because the
Council of Ten, having received knowledge, that he had gotten it by means not
lawful for Citizens of the Republic, and by the favor of the Ministers of
other Princes, banished him with the severest penalties, and the Church was
given by the Pope to another.

During the Truce, howsoever short, caused by the Arms and evils of Italy, a
new War arises in Germany, or rather the old was increased, by the practices of
Christian the Fourth, King of Denmark, contrived with the Protestants. That
Kingdom is not great in Territory, nor puissant in Forces, but considerable for
its situation by Land and by Sea, and by reason of the support, which through
its nearness it gave to the Princes of the Lower Saxony, who, as has been
said, had chosen him for General of the Circle, and he, together with the
charge, assuming high thoughts, hoped to manage the War to his own advantage,
by the forces and money of others; believing, that not only the Princes of the
Empire, but Strangers also, emulous of the Austrians, would assist him, some
from the motive of Religion, others from interest of State. He aims therefore
to extend his Borders, and that principally by putting his Sons into the
Bishoprics, which lying betwixt the Elb and Weser, had for some time been
possessed by the Protestants. The designs being not yet ripe, nor the succors
ready, which the King hoped for from France, England, and Holland, Tilli, not
to give him time to strengthen himself, comes so close up to him, that, not to
give way, he was forced unseasonably to break. A Truce nevertheless for three
months having, at the instances of the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, been
concluded before, certain Propositions of Peace were debated; but not agreeing
about the point of Religion, and what should be the limits, which the Peace of
the Empire, called Pax religiosa, prescribed, the Negotiation was broken off.
The Armies then coming to move, the King calling to him Halverstat and
Mansfelt, together with the Princes of the Lower Saxony, who chose rather to
lose themselves amidst hopes and attempts, than abandon themselves to despair
and fear, the Army was found to consist of sixty thousand men. Vlrich
Frederick, Duke of Brunswick, refusing to join with the others, as partial to
the Emperor, was by the King deposed, and putting Halverstadt into his place,
planted in that Country, very convenient for it by reason of its situation, the
seat of the War. But the Army, which united, seemed capable to overcome all
obstacles and to march into the Empire, being divided into several parts was
quickly ruined every where. The King sends Halverstadt into the Catholic
Bishoprics of Osnabrug, Heildesheim, and Minden, which were able to furnish
victuals and money in abundance, and Mansfelt toward the Elb, to drive
Wallestain out of the Country of Magdeburg, who possessed it with his Quarters,
and afterward to advance forwards into Silesia to encourage the malcontents
and Gabor, who offered once more to break the Peace in Hungary. Himself takes
his Quarters near the Weser to amuse Tilli, more feared than all the rest. But
Halverstadt, against whom Bavaria had sent the Count of Anhalt with the Army of
the Catholic League, was quickly recalled to join the King, and oppose Tilli
with more powerful Forces; but he falling sick, ends his days, being scarce
thirty years old, leaving that fruit of Glory not yet ripe, which by disturbing
the Empire he had proposed to himself, and also a great document, how uncertain
and short life proves for remote and too vast designs. Mansfelt finding that
Walestain held at Desseau a Bridge over the Elb with some Fortifications,
attempting it, played upon them for some days with his Cannon; but being
maintained and defended by Aldringer with the succors the Count de Slich
brought him, Wallestain had time to come with the gross, and taking away the
Enemies sight with a blind of linen-cloth, passes a part of his Army, and
charges with so good success the Troops of the Count, that the Horse taking
flight, left the Foot for the most part cut to pieces, with the loss of six
Cannons and forty Colors. But Mansfelt, more ready in recruiting Troops, than
fortunate in preserving them, appeared again quickly with fifteen thousand men,
the Administrator of Magdeburg having given him some re-inforcement, and more
covertly the Elector of Brandenburg, who having married one of his Sisters to
Gabor, gave great jealousy to the Imperialists. Joining at last with John
Earnest, Duke of Weimar, his numbers being increased by many that were banished
out of Bohemia and Moravia, by unusual ways and a very nimble march he enters
into Silesia, giving such heart to the malcontents for Religion, that the
Peasants of the Upper Austria, though far off, rising in great numbers besieged
Lintz, and great commotions appeared in the other Hereditary Provinces.

Ferdinand was in great perplexity at these risings in Arms, besides the
jealousies he had of Gabor and also of the Turks. Wallestain sending presently*
into Silesia three thousand Horse under Colonel Beckman, stays himself some
days to secure himself of Magdeburg and of the Elector of Brandenburg, who
being frighted, did not only give Contributions and Quarters, but acknowledged
Bavaria for Elector, as Saxony at the persuasion of the Archbishop of Mentz had
done before him. Tilli his Victory a while after ruined at a blow and subdued
all the Protestants. He had with great good-luck, though with shedding of
blood, taken in Minden and Gottinghen, and afterward besieged Northeim, places
near the Weser, to rid those parts of the Danes, and engage them to an
encounter. The King, to relieve the place, comes near to it, and obliges the
Imperialists to rise; but losing the advantage to fight them in the retreat,
and at a time, when Tilli being sick was far off, it happened, that he not only
had time to recover his health, but with various and uncertain marches deluded
the King, and wearied him out. At last, in the Duchy of Brunswick the Armies
met at Luther, a Village amidst certain Mountains, which by its name gave
forebodings of hopes to the Protestants, but by the event proved unhappy to
them.

Tilli offered them battle, and the King with great resolution refused it not.
That at last came to pass, which is seldom observed, that Fortune changed
during the fight, and that Victory crowned them, who in the beginning seemed
abandoned, as overcome. At the first Charge, it is not to be said, what the
force and fierceness of the Protestants was. The Guards, which consisted of
four Regiments, being at one side made to run, they possessed the Cannon, and
by that example almost all the rest of the Catholics gave way. But, as the
more veteran Soldiers are not wont to take fright at the first stroke, but in
confusion and the greatest disorder to put themselves again in order, many
turning their faces of their own accord, others rallied by their Officers, were
brought back to the fight, and some meeting in their flight with impassable
Bogs, taking courage from necessity, repulsed in such sort the Enemy, somewhat
disordered in the pursuit, that they took from them all their advantage. The
dispute was very fierce, fighting with an unwonted obstinacy for several hours,
man to man, their Swords in their hands, with such noise from their Arms and
cries, that the Sky roared for a good way round about. At last the Cavalry of
the right Wing of the Protestants fell foul upon their own Foot, with such
disorder, as gave the Victory to the Imperialists, to the great slaughter of
the conquered. The King changed Horses thrice, and as often re-conducted his
Troops to the Charge, kept them from running away, animated the faint-hearted,
was in every place where either danger terrified, or hopes gave courage, acting
with his voice and endeavors, directive to his own, visible to his Enemies,
and of example to all. Nor did Tilli not perform the part of a great Captain,
with so much the more applause, as to have got the day, after he was little
less than overcome; so that Chance, which in Battles usurps so great a share,
could not in this, by the Victory, upbraid the one with its favors, or by the
loss blemish the praise of the other. At the price of such a days work, not
only the remainder of the conquered, who straightened in Luther, rendered at
discretion; but Northeim and all the Countries of Luneburg and Brunswick with
many other Cities and places yielded; consequences, prosperous to Ferdinand,
spreading themselves into every part of the Empire. Nor could it fall out at a
time more unseasonable for the King of Denmark; for that England and France,
ready to break betwixt themselves, denied him the assistance he hoped for. The
States of Holland only, who apprehended Tilli his old design of getting into
Frizland by the way of Embden, sent him some succors of men, being able to do
it with so much the greater convenience, as that in this year, besides the
taking of Oldensel, which was of no great moment, they had stood either
attentive on the Affairs of the Empire, or only employed themselves to hinder
the cutting off a Chanel, which the Spaniards attempted in vain to unite, the
Maze with the Rhine.

The King himself within a while took new vigor from six thousand Foot and a
thousand Horse, sent him by the Administrator of Hall, and from Recruits of his
own Subjects; whereupon marching out of the Country of Holstein, whither he was
retired for refuge, he was able to take Hoye, though himself hurt there with a
Musket Shot, and his Son by a double stroke much more dangerously. Taking his
Quarters afterward in the Bishopric of Bremen, Tilli also divided his
throughout the Lower Saxony, for a bridle and punishment of those refractory
Provinces. But the defeat at Luther had given its counter-blow in every other
part. To reduce the Upper Austria, whose stirring carried great danger with it,
Ferdinand had invited Bavaria to signalize himself by the recovery of that
Province once more to God and the Austrians. But he, wont above all men in all
Negotiations to join together two things so contrary as are Religion and
Interest, offers to do it at his own charge, provided nevertheless for his
re-imbursement, that the Country as a fresh pledge might remain in his hand.

Ferdinand doubtful, if another Country should be offered him, of recovering
this, and recompensing him, was contented that he should only lend him some
Soldiers, with which joining some Horse under the Command of Papenhaim, the
Peasants were forced to remove from Lintz, and having their Quarters afterward
beaten up at Entz, were at last wholly subdued with much blood and a mighty
slaughter. In Silesia, Mansfelt had lost the opportunity of going forward by a
Truce interposed by Gabor, that he might join with him; so that the
Imperialists had him shut in betwixt two Rivers: but when they thought to keep
him so enclosed, he gets loose from them by stealth, and advances into the
Mountains of Hungary, where at last Gabors Brother joins him with three
thousand Horse, and a little after a great Body of Turks, with which he might
have had the better of the Enemy, by reason of the number of his Forces and the
inclination of the people, if the fame of the Victory of Luther had not been to
Wallestain in place of a great supply: For Gabor applying himself to new
projects of Peace, separates from Mansfelt, and by his example the Turks
retire; so that the Count, environed in the Mountains by the Imperialists,
without victuals, without money, and with Troops almost disbanded and consumed,
leaving order to the small relics of his Army, that they should endeavor to
join with the Transilvanian, slips away almost alone, and by a desperate
counsel getting into the Turkish Dominions, proposes new Unions and Treaties to
the Ottoman Ministers, and takes his way toward Dalmatia, so to get to Venice,
and from thence pass to those Princes which had formerly assisted him. But
being come to Vracoviz, an obscure place in Bosnia, near to the Confines of the
Venetians, wearied with cares and wants he dies, ordering his Corpse to be
buried in the Territories belonging to the Republic.

And so Ernest, Count of Mansfelt, having sought for a glorious death amongst
so many famous occasions, was ignobly surprised by it there where he least
expected, to the end it might be said, that Fortune had defrauded him both in
his birth and death. A man otherwise that without envy may be called Famous,
and be celebrated without blame for great, Austrians. He was alone overcome in
Battle, but by his felicity of getting up again no less renowned than the
Conquerours. Superior in Negotiations to the greatest Wits. Bold in
encountering dangers, and highly subtle in winding himself out of them; a Lover
of disorders and novelties; enduring hunger, watchings, and excess; eloquent,
wise, and vigilant; prodigal of his own, covetous of another; lived amidst
great hopes and designs, and dyed without Lordships and without Treasure.

The Marquess of Dourlach thought by his example to be able to attempt Alsatia,
having raised some Troops in Basil, by encouragement of the Protestant
Switzers, and some little money with which France and England secretly
furnished him, but not with an equal success; for the greatness of the
Austrians, so firmly rooted with so many Victories, being no more to be moved
with little shocks, the Marquess no sooner began to put himself in order, but
an Army of Ferdinands arriving in those parts ruined the design, intimidated
the Switzers, and obliged those of Basil to discharge him. He therefore passes
into Denmark, but had first sent to Venice the Colonel Niccolas Boet, to
communicate his intentions to the Republic, and desired assistance, at a time
that the King of Denmark also, by Joachim Cratz, and the effectual
interposition of the Ambassadors of England and Holland, demanded money for
the maintaining of five or six Regiments. The Senate having fully deduced the
obligation, which the Republic had to the common Cause, by what had been done
in the course of many years in Italy, showed their sense in the importunity
without engaging themselves further.

ANNO M.DC.XXVII.
Ferdinand now feared by many, and respected by all, kept under the Empire with
an armed hand, keeping his Armies dispersed in the Countries of the Electors
and Princes, that, where any held up his head, they were ready to suppress and
chastise them. Nor seemed the design longer concealed to reduce Christian
Religion and the Authority of the Austrians to an Union in Germany. The
discourse now was to make the Empire successive, Walestain in particular not
dissembling his thoughts so to moderate the power of the Electors, that like
Grandees of Spain, according to his own expression, they might serve for
ornament, but not to give jealousy. He and Tilli disposed with an absolute
Authority of all Undertakings, Garrisons, Quarters, and Contributions, but with
a hand so severe and heavy, that oppressing the Countries of the Protestants,
and not much respecting those of the Catholics, they drained them every where,
by an unheard of license of the Soldiery, of their money and blood. The people
groaned and the Princes stormed no less, having been accustomed to determine
with a certain sort of liberty the most important affairs in their Diet, and
not to have Contributions imposed on them but by common consent and an equal
distribution. In this sad and servile prospect of things scarce any was found
that durst show his dislike.

Only the King of Denmark, though overcome, did his best to resist, and, to
represent the necessities to others, and by the quality of the person to give
weight to the business, sends Christian William of Brandenburg, administrator
of Magdemburg and of Halverstadt, to several Courts imploring assistance. In
France the designs and Arms of the Crown being turned another way, he obtained
nothing. In Holland he had better fortune, those Provinces being in a manner
without War, in regard the Spaniards continued to apply themselves only to the
Affairs of the Empire, out of a firm belief, that the Protestants there once
subdued, the Hollanders would not be afterward but an Appendix to the Victory.
And for this cause also Spinola, finding himself without employment, was gone
to Madrid, his Reputation and Glory after the taking of Breda seeming among the
Spaniards to be turned into jealousy and envy. The Hollanders then sending to
the King of Denmark a body of men, with them were garrisoned some places on the
Weser; offering two thousand more to keep the Sound, which is the Straight
defended by two Citadels, where betwixt the Island of Zeland and the Province
of Schonen Ships pass into the Baltic Sea. The King taking all things in good
part, only refused this, out of a doubt, lest the Hollanders once entered into
that place so commodious and important, would afterward not easily be got out
of it.

Christian went also to Venice, and found the Senate scarce out of the troubles
of the Valteline, involved anew in suspicions, and attentive upon the dangers,
which by the succession of Mantua seemed imminent; so that he obtained nothing
but the discharge of the old Count of la Tour from the Service of the
Republic, who went thence to the Service of Denmark. Bethlehem Gabor was also
tempted by the Prince himself; but he, after Mansfelts departure and the
disbanding of his Troops upon it, having made a new Treaty of Peace with
Ferdinand could not break it, though he wanted not will for it, because he had
not the help and the consent of the Turks, who terrified with the prosperity of
Ferdinand, and intricated with disadvantage in the War of Persia, thought it
best to preserve the Peace, and, to confirm it, to send an Ambassador to
Vienna. And now the King of Denmark taking the Duke of Mechelburg into his
protection, and putting himself anew into the field with ten thousand Horse and
twenty four thousand Foot, besieged Blechede upon the Elb. But Tilli, who had
for his forerunner the fame of so many happy successes, scorning an Encounter
with the Marquess of Dourlach, who endeavored to amuse him, arriving for its
relief at the time that the place being taken, the Castle, more from the valor
of the Commander than the force of the Garrison, yet held out, obliges him to
retire in so much confusion and disorder, that he left behind him his Cannon
and much of his military Provisions. The King thinking himself not secure in
Butzenberg whither he retired, because the Croats by beating Parties and
intercepting Victuals molested him, retires with his weakened Army deeper into
the Duchy of Mechelburg. From thence he sollicites the Anseatick Towns (so
called from a certain Company anciently erected for Trade) and in particular
the chiefest, which are Hambourg and Lubeck, to join themselves to the common
Interest, whilst the Arms of the Austrians facing them by Sea, and guarding it
with armed Ships, they lost their Liberty and Commerce. But the evil being so
far advanced, with fear of worse, hindered the remedy of the present danger;
whereupon the Cities not only denied the King assistance, but being intimidated
and admonished by the Imperial Generals to furnish their Armies with Victuals,
and give them passage, to grant them Ships, and discharge out of Hambourg the
Ministers of England and Holland, they obeyed in all save in the contributing
of Ships.

Tilli takes in Lawemburg, which gives name to a Duchy, and Wallestain coming
out of Silesia, after having recovered with little opposition all that which
Mansfelt formerly held there, entered into the Territories of Brandenburg with
Forces so powerful, that he obliges anew the Elector to receive the Law, to
contribute Victuals and Money, to recall his Subjects from the Kings Service,
and to admit Imperial Garrisons in Francford on the Oder and other places, nay
in Berlin, the City of his Residence. The same yoke did the Lower Saxony
receive from Tilli, his Garrisons being brought into Wolfembutie and other
places of the greatest strength. There remained no more but to pursue the King,
who leaving Dourlach in Mechelburg, was retired into his own Kingdom.

Wallestain, who from henceforward shall be called the Duke of Fridlandt, (for
Ferdinand acknowledged his notable services with the recompense of that Title)
coming into Mechelburg, puts the Marquess to retreat, and expulsing those most
ancient Dukes possesses it, exacting from Wismar and Rostoch, Cities Imperial,
vast sums for the maintenance of the Army. The States of Denmark despairing
now to resist so much prosperity and so full a tide of the Catholic Arms,
pressed the King to conclude a Peace, though upon hard terms, and he by means
of the Duke of Holstein demanded it, but the two Generals imposed upon him
conditions so grievous, as differred not at all from servitude. They pretended,
that laying down the Title of General of the Lower Saxony he should disband his
Army, restore all he had taken in the Empire, should leave the Bishoprics into
which he had thrust his Sons, should deliver up Gluchstadt upon the Elb, should
pay the charges and losses, renounce all Treaties against the Empire or the
House of Austria, make no Innovations in the Sundt, and in sum, give caution
for the observance of all things agreed. The King not assenting to such
conditions, saw Holstein invaded by two puissant Armies. Where that Peninsula
is narrowest, Tilli enters with one on the left side, and Wallestein with the
other on the right. To the first Benneburg, and to the latter Steimberg were
rendered without much difficulty, the King not defending himself but by retiring
deeper into the Country, and burning the Country he abandoned, the Peasants
over and above cutting the Dikes, and leaving themselves in prey to the waters
to save their houses and goods from their Enemies.

But Tilli, to oppose the Hollanders which had sent considerable Forces into
the Territory of Bremen, yielded the enterprise upon Denmark to Wallestein, who
quickly taking the places of greatest importance, made himself Master before
the end of Winter, not only of Holstein, but of the Countries of Sleswich,
Jutland, and Ditmars, notwithstanding the strength of the situations and the
inconvenience of the Ice and Climate. Dourlach withdrawn into a little Island
near to the Continent, was by the Count de Slich, who had first defeated
certain Companies, and gained eighteen pieces of Ordnance, so closely besieged,
that having no Barks to save his Troops, was himself hardly able to get away
alone in a small Boat, leaving the Soldiers to shift for themselves, who took
Service under the Imperial Colors. The King having a Navy of sixty Ships,
guarded the Islands, and scoured the Coasts, and although eight of them fell
into the hands of the Imperialists, he was nevertheless Master at Sea.

The Austrians by entering with a naval Army into the Baltic, projected a great
design to pierce into the bowels of the Kingdom of Denmark, and at the same
time to bridle Swede, subject the free Cities, and to seize upon the Trade and
Commerce of the North, to the exclusion of all else, and in particular the
Hollanders, who besides great riches draw from thence Corn to feed their
people, and Wood for the Fabric of their great Ships. All those that were
concerned were much alarmed, and the Anseatick Towns were more especially
disturbed at it, who taking courage from the extremity of the danger, did not
only deny Ferdinand their own Ships, but diverted the providing them elsewhere.
The Spaniards notwithstanding talked of sending a Squadron of their Ships to
join with some gotten of the City of Dantzich with the will and consent of the
King of Poland, who enamoured with such a pleasing thought, in hope that the
King of Swede would be obliged to retire for the defense of his own Country,
breaks the Treaty of Peace, which he had almost concluded with him. But the
Ships of Dantzick not being sufficient for the necessity, and those of Spain
not appearing, the design was rather published than performed.

In this interim another Stratagem no whit less was put in practice by force of
Arms; Ferdinand promoting, under the pretext of Reliligion, the Grandeur of his
House and Sons. Settling upon his Eldest the Hereditary Crowns and the
Succession of the Patrimonial Lands, he provided Leopold William the Second
with Ecclesiastical Benefices of a large Dominion; for the Archduke Leopold of
Insbruck being married with Claudia de Medici, Widow of Ferdinand, Duke of
Vrbin, had resigned to his Nephew, though very young, the Bishoprics of
Strasburg and of Possa, with other rich Benefices of the Church, and now having
overcome the reluctance of the Chanoines by frights or promises, the Emperor
had got him chosen Bishop of Halverstat, a Principality rich in Revenue, and
important for its situation, in the Center of many Towns of the Protestants,
and which enjoyed by them, and particularly by the House of Saxony for a long
time, had for Coadjutor at that time one of the Sons of the King of Denmark.
The Abbey also of Hirschsfelt, which is a Principality of the Empire, usurped
long ago by the Landgraves of Hessen, was conferred upon him by the Pope, and
he was to recover it with Arms. The same was thought on for Magdeburg and
Bremen, by which was formed for largeness, dignity, and riches a vast State in
the heart of Germany, which extended the Power and Authority of the Austrians,
and which at last passing from hand to hand, would be perpetuated in their
House.

The Princes of the Empire were sufficiently jealous of it, and in particular
the Elector of Bavaria, who by secret Envoyes solicited the Kings of France
and England to reflect upon the oppression of the liberty of Germany.
Nevertheless he could not separate himself from Ferdinand, because the Interest
of the Palatinate did closely unite him, of which, by the reconciliation with
Frederick, the Austrians might, upon all occasions, be able to deprive him. And
just at this time was held an Assembly in Colmar, wherein, by the interposing
of the Dukes of Lorrain and Wirtemberg, some terms of adjustment were debated,
Frederick being contented not to have the Country and Vote restored but to his
Sons after the death of Maximilian; but not assenting that the Catholic
Religion, introduced by Bavaria, should be continued there, the Negotiation was
broken off. That which made more noise, though it came to nothing, was a
Conference of the Electors, who, moved at the universal oppression of the
Empire, by the excess of Contributions, the licentiousness of the Soldiery,
and the arbitrary Power of the Generals, met at Milhausen in Thuringia, some in
Person, and some by their Deputies, to confer of the means to preserve Peace,
and to remedy the present evils. The Count of Stralendorff assisted there for
the Emperor, whither the King of Denmark and Frederick being willing to send
their Ministers, they were not admitted. In the diversity of Interests, which
some had, and the fear, that all were in, of the Forces of Ferdinand, several
things were projected; but no one concluded. Saxony, who could not consent to
deprive himself of so great riches, opposed those that would have the
Church Lands restored. And he that desired to bridle the Authority of
Ferdinand, was dissuaded by the apprehension of his powerful Armies; whereupon
he perceiving the thoughts of some, and particularly of Bavaria, to restrain by
a Decree of the Diet that absolute Power which he assumed in the Affairs of the
Empire, sending numerous Troops into Swevia and Francony, curbs the Catholic
League and the Elector himself in such sort, that there was not any that had
the boldness to express or maintain his own sense. Thus the Power of the
Emperor runs on uncontrouled, all things succeeding to him with such
prosperity, that Fortune seemed espoused to his desires. But she playing the
Adulteress, at last made her self quickly to be known, then chiefly to lie in
wait to deceive when she is most kind; for in the bosom of so great felicity,
from the jealousies and suspicions of others was begotten the worm which
corrupted it with unhappy and calamitous accidents.

At the abovementioned Diet of the Electors was there for the Crown of France,
Monsieur de Marscheville, who visiting many Princes of Germany, and penetrating
into the secretest of their troubled minds and disgusts, had exhorted some to
patience till better times, stirring up others to oppose themselves against the
vast designs of the Austrians, by Treaties, if not by Arms; and beginning a
Negotiation with the Elector of Trier, to bring him under the protection of
France, had in many sowed seeds of various hopes and thoughts; for Richelieu
foreseeing to what height the power of the Austrians would mount, if no
resistance were opposed, endeavored to dispose things so, that being at
liberty from domestic affairs, he might apply himself in time to foreign
interests. For that present, the Concert greatly diverted him, wherein appeared
so many Princes engaged against that Crown, and he had discovered it by the
Imprisonment of Monsieur Montaigu as he was going into Lorrain; from whence the
Managements and Treaties were not only made known to him, but he discovered the
promises which the Austrians had made to the Duke of Lorrain, to assist them
with the Forces of the Empire, together with the design which the Duke of Savoy
had to surprise Tholoun, and the Intelligences which Rohan held in Mompellier.
Many of these designs with wit and prevention became frustrate; but the English
Fleet which alarmed all the maritime Provinces, could not be resisted but with
an equal strength. The Fleet it self, though considerable for number and
quality, yet arrived not at the Puissance designed in the first agreement,
being not strong enough to be divided into three parts, nor with proportionable
Forces assault France with a triple Invasion. For this cause the Dukes of
Lorrain and Savoy kept their motion in suspense, to see what issue the first
landing would produce.

The French had disposed their defense longst the Seacoast with a powerful
Army under the Command of the Duke of Angoulesme; but whilst they guarded
Xaintonge and the adjacent Country from disbarkings, the Islands remained
exposed. These are very near to Rochel, and by consequence considerable for
situation; he that has them being able to command the Sea, and to disturb the
opposite Provinces. Buckingham that commanded the English Fleet, boasting to
make his way armed, and by force; where he had been denied a peaceable entry,
chose them opportunely for his aims, encouraged by Soubize, who accompanied
him, and hoped by his credit and artifice to make Rochel and all the body of
the Huguenots declare in his favor. But the Cardinal had lost no time to send
some of his Confidents into the Town, and to gain some of the chief, who
sometimes with popular discourses among the Vulgar, and at others in their
Assemblies interposing difficulties in their Councils, either opposed
themselves to their debates, retarded their resolutions, or corrupted the
execution of them: for in all Quarters of the Huguenots he had many that
depended on him, who preferring peace and profit before the dangers
accompanying their belief, by contradicting diverted the common Councils, or
eluded their effect by the divulging of them.

Thus was Rochel wavering for a time; and Buckingham in that interim, not to be
idle, lands upon the Isle of Re. Some imputed to him an error in the choice of
his design, for that the Isle of Oleron was less provided; but he chose that
which was most important, there being a Citadel there, which as not finished,
it was believed could not resist, and that taken, gave him means to secure
himself in that Post, and maintain himself there. And therefore perhaps he
deserved greater blame for not executing that with vigor which he had resolved
not without reason. At one side of the Island lay by the Seaside the Citadel
of St. Martin, of a narrow circuit, with four Bastions not yet perfected,
without any Outworks, ill provided within with Victuals, and with a small
Garrison, the virtue only of Monsieur de Thoiras, no less prudent than valiant,
supplying all other defects. At the point, which looked toward the Land, lay
the little Fort of La Pree, which served for no other use but as a door to let
succors into the Island.

Buckingham lands there under the favor of the Cannon of the Fleet, which
obliged Thoiras to give way to it. But neglecting the Fort, which he might have
taken almost without dispute, nor hastening to the attacque of the Citadel, he
employed many days to fortify himself on the shore, though no man was there to
disturb him. He was at last aware that every moment was lost which advanced not
toward the place; for when he came near to St. Martin's, he found the Garrison
had raised a Half Moon, the Mills entrenched, and the Fountain, which lay
without the Fort, covered with several defenses. He neglected besides to take
care of the Haven, believing it was sufficient, to hinder relief, to have
ordered the Ships to lie about it. He afterward raised three Batteries against
it, but weak and far off, gave some assaults, but without effect; whereupon
resolves to gain that by hunger, which by force he could not do. The Garrison,
to say truth, was in want, and Thoiras by frequent messages, sent by Water,
gave Angoulesme knowledge of his necessities, but in the mean time deluded the
English General with feigned Treaties; for sending frequently offers of
Surrender, and still causing difficulties to arise in the conditions, obtained
by means of those messages knowledge of the State of the Enemy, and together
with the hopes of an accord, slackned the force and heat of the Siege. Barks
were frequently sent by the French with some refreshment, some whereof got safe
in, and others fell into the hands of the English.

But the general succors was much retarded, because King Lewis come out of
Paris to be present in so urgent a necessity, falling dangerously sick at
Villeroy, obliged not only the Cardinal to stay there, but by the distraction
of so unexpected an accident to retard the Provisions. The King being at last
recovered, and with the Cardinal come into Xaintonge, resolves to make a great
attempt, committing the care of the first step to Monsieur de Canaples, who
with small Boats passed happily to the Fort of la Pree, and running forth
certain Trenches to cover a greater number of men, made way for the Mareshal of
Schomberg to arrive with eight thousand Soldiers.

Buckingham, seeing that from the Citadel and from the Fort he might be
assaulted from two sides, thought it fit to retire, but performed it with so
great confusion, that being attacqued by the French, he lost a great many Men,
Cannons, and Colors. Some Prisoners were sent by King Lewis to London as a
Present to his Sister, rather for a reproach than a bounty: But Buckingham
being arrived home with his Ships torn and but few of his Soldiers, found the
peoples hatred and the blame not less than had been his vanity and the
expectation of the World; while the Lorrainois and Savoyards stood observing
the event of things, and from the infelicity of the success were admonished to
more moderate counsels. The Duke of Rohan alone, after the landing of the
English, found himself engaged in Languedoc, where having taken the field, he
had caused some places to revolt, but being suppressed by a small body of an
Army, all Engines were applied to besiege and maintain Rochel. That place at
last at the instigation of Soubize and his Mother, who for that purpose entered
into it, a Woman of a high spirit and of great authority, declaring it self in
favor of the English, had furnished their Fleet with much Victuals, depriving
it self by that unhappy counsel of the means to overcome hunger, the only force
that could conquer it. It was boasted to be the Metropolis of Rebellion, the
old Nest of Heresy, the Refuge of Malcontents, and the Forge of the most
pernicious Councils. And, to say truth, as being the Head of a Republic within
the Kingdom, with adherence to Strangers, with divided Interest, and their own
Force, it always disputed or ingelosied the Authority of the Monarch. The Kings
respected it as impregnable, by reason of its situation, and invincible by
Arms, the difficulty of the enterprise being authorized by the experience of
several attempts in vain. On the Land side being environed with Salt Pits and
Marshes, lofty Bastions and strong Works were its defense. Toward the Ocean,
the Sea being narrowed, a large Bay opens it self within, which afterward
having its passage even to within the Walls, makes a Haven immured and secure
from the attempts of Enemies, or violence of the Winds. Much Shipping belonged
to it, for number of the Vessels, and skill of the Mariners considerable, and
in the Town, as many people, so many Soldiers; for every one, even the weaker
Sex, being brought up in an aversion to obedience, were obliged to take Arms
for their own defense. If the Huguenots looked at it as the fixed residence of
their refuge, Strangers considered it as the bridle of that most potent
Kingdom. Nor were some of the Subjects themselves ill pleased that there should
be ready a shelter to withdraw themselves in some cases out of the Kings power,
and resist the favor of the Ministers. Sure it was, that some even in the
Kings Council believing it impossible, drove on the undertaking, with hopes, in
the ill success, to see the power of the Cardinal who promoted it, prejudiced
and perhaps ruined. But he, in the vastness of his mind, greedily embracing
designs of importance, orders the place to be blocked up; and afterward
environed with a large Circumvallation of strong Trenches. But it could not be
reduced by Famine, without taking away the Sea from it; and to do that, it was
of necessity to overcome the Ocean, and find a resistance to its great weight
and force. Pompeo Targone, an Italian Engineer, more famous for inventions than
happy in their effects, spent a great deal of time in vain, wearying himself
there with several Experiments.

At last the Cardinal, in imitation of the Ancients, who with unwearied labor,
shut up Havens, and joined Islands to the Continent, resolved without sparing
of charge, since his own glory and the Fortune of the Kingdom now tempted him
to it, to lay the foundation of a defense or Dike against the Sea, where that
Arm thereof was narrow, and secure from the interruption and Cannon of the
Town, by flinging into it stones of a vast bigness, and in an infinite number.
Upon these, from each side of the Continent, were advanced Walls; in the middle
there remained a gap for the Tide or impetuous ebbing and flowing of those
waters, which from the sides Forts and Cannon defended; without, was the Fleet
of great Ships; and within others, that were sunk narrowed the passage with
some Steccadoes, and with the Guard of a good number of other Vessels disposed
into several parts. The besieged beheld the beginning of this work with
derision and scorn, making of it their pastime, as suggested from the Genius of
the Cardinal, who loving to undertake actions of Fame, would quickly perceive,
that the wit of man has not the same strength to execute great things, as it
has capacity to design them; for the Sea, wont at certain times, when raised
by great tempests, to bring in mountains of waters, and afterward falling
again as it were with a Precipice to discover the bottom, made it believed a
rash attempt to contend with Nature, by fighting with the violence of so
powerful an Element. Nevertheless, the work going on with infinite labor, it
was easier for them to contemplate the wonder, than break it by force.

Princes had their attention fixed upon this great Undertaking, with various
aims and thoughts; Buckingham, touched with the provocations of revenge and
honor, made ready another powerful Fleet to repair the unhappiness of his
attempts with better success; but the others, which were in concert with him,
though greatly inclined to it, yet durst not perform the promised succors. The
Hollanders, although the ruin of them was in question that were joined to them
by the likeness of Religion, yet obliged to France, and in necessity of their
assistance, contributed secret wishes for the prosperity of their common
Religion, but were bound by virtue of Treaties to send certain Ships for the
Service of that Crown. Spain alone rejoiced at the Engagement of these Forces,
whilst in place of being able to have contested the contrivances they framed to
themselves, they consumed their Armies and blood amongst themselves.

Olivares therefore careful to prolong it, put on a more strict confidence with
Richelieu, nourished by Letters, by Embassies, and also by greater appearances:
For that, to frighten the contrary Party, and to make a show of putting in
execution the secret Concerts and tacit Alliances contracted betwixt the two
Crowns, Frederick di Toledo parts about the end of the year out of the Ports of
Spain with a good number of Gallions, and in the sight of Rochel joins with the
French Fleet; but being but slenderly victualled and manned, returned quickly
into his own Country.

On the other side, the Princes of Italy foreseeing, by the succession of the
States of Mantua, a storm at hand, and an imminent need of stranger succors,
deplored, that King Lewis in person with the flower of his Forces was employed
so far from them, and particularly the Venetians, stirring him up to
reflections on the common Interest, solicited by most effectual endeavors,
performed by Giorgio Giorgio and Luigi Contarini, their Ambassadors in France
and at London, both the Kings to a Peace, and to sacrifice to the advantage of
the Republic some relaxation from the fervency of their hatred and anger.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE.
WOuld to God, that, as often as there is occasion to name the Interest of
Princes and the Ambition of their Ministers, Justice, humane Reason, and Divine
Law might go along with them. But the World being tossed to and fro by those
two Furies, which with equal provocations, though for the most part different
issues, do not leave great Princes contented, nor the lesser ones in quiet, it
is no wonder, if from thence proceed events lamentable, and such cruel
calamities. While some are flattered with hopes; and others thrust on by fear;
all are at last in a continual disturbance from emulations, jealousies,
hatreds, and the greediness of Dominion. And for this cause quiet cannot last
long, nor the tranquillity of Peace be enjoyed, especially in Italy, which
being subject to many, some very powerful, others more weak, remains by
consequence more exposed to various passions, and experiences most commonly
greater commotions; whence Wars, like waves of the Sea, always fluctuating,
either by the motion of the winds, or the remainder of past storms, rise up one
after another. So the Arms taken up for the Affairs of the Valteline, were
scarce laid down but there appeared new jealousies, by reason of the succession
of Mantua, and a War brake forth, both sad and memorable for the quality of the
motives and the variety of successes.

Many Princes took part in it, and upon it followed plagues and universal
calamities, which in the flood of mischiefs and blood have in a manner changed
the face of Europe, ruining the powerful, and raising up Princes little less
than unknown. The House of Gonzagha, which reigned in Mantua, was now
considered, without issue Male, and without hopes of having any, as it were a
dead Carcass of Fortune, neither could Ferdinand and Vincenzo leave after them
other than the young Princess Mary their Niece, who as a Woman excluded from
the Investiture of the Duchy of Mantua, had some reason, though doubtful, to
pretend to that of Monferrat. In her Marriage therefore seeming lodged the
pledge of Peace, or the seeds of great contention, many believed it expedient
to marry her to Charles Duke of Rhetel, Son of Charles Duke of Nevers, the
nearest and lawful Heir. This branch transplanted into a foreign soil, sprang
nevertheless from the same root, coming from Lodowick Gonzagha, Son of
Frederick, the first Duke of Mantua, who not contented with his lot, that by
reason of his age his other Brothers should be preferred before him in the
succession to his Fathers Estates, sought in France, and by Marriage met with a
better Fortune; whence his Heirs enjoyed with plentiful Revenues three large
Dukedoms, of Nevers, of Rhetel, and of Maine. But for that this House was in a
manner naturalized in France, the Spaniards, who, as soon as Mary was born, had
endeavored to get her into their power, expressly to divert the danger of such
a Succession, abhorred him above all, to the end not to introduce the French
into the heart of Italy, and into two Countries which have the Milanese in the
middle. They therefore promoted the pretensions of Ferrant, Prince of
Guastalla, a branch also of the House of Gonzagha, but who derived his Pedigree
further off, coming from the second Son of Francesco, Marquess of Mantua,
Father of Frederick the first Duke. But as much as they favored him in the
Imperial Court with benefits, and every where else with declarations, so much
was France the more earnest to strengthen the Rights of Nevers. Whereupon at
the time Monsieur de Chasteauneuf went from Venice, as he passed by Mantua, he
had insinuated the Marriage of Mary with Rhetel, and the Venetians concurring
in the same opinion, put the Duke in mind of establishing the Succession in his
life time, and with it the Peace of Italy. But Ferdinand apprehending troubles,
or hoping for a longer life, or considering his Brother Vincenzo, who by secret
love engaged in the Marriage of Isabella di Buzzolo, and now satiated with
those passions, and by reason of her sterility sought to be separated from her,
deferred so long, that death in the end of the year past seized him. Vincenzo
was his Successor, who by sending to Venice, as Ambassador Extraordinary, the
Marquess Paulo Emilio Gonzagha, gave knowledge of it to the Senate, confiding
to them his thoughts to break his Marriage and espouse the Niece: But though he
were young enough in years, yet the constitution of his body being spent and
decaying, and the right of the Sacrament justly prevailing with the Pope before
the politic reasons, the Venetians solicited him to prevent so remote and
uncertain hopes by the Marriage of his Niece to Rhetel. He delaying to resolve,
let the danger approach nearer, every one now concluding that that Line of the
Dukes would in a short time fail without Issue, who wholly given over to lusts
and luxury, were looked at as punished with sterility by God for their
fraudulent Marriages, Adulteries, and Lewdness, with which they had stained
their name, and defiled their lives.

Amongst all, none watched on this business with a more attentive eye than
Carlo Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, who by the death of Vincenzo thought to revive
his pretended Rights on Monferrat, and to color it with the Marriage of Mary
to his Son Maurice. In order to this, he protested to the Duke of Mantua
against the disposing of their common Niece without his consent; and joined
practices with the Court of Spain and the Governor of Milan, to obtain it by
force, if Treaties should not suffice. Nor had he any difficulty to possess
Olivares, who usually calculated designs and successes by his own opinion and
hopes, with the behovefulness of excluding Nevers, and keeping the French far
off from Italy, and withal of the opportunity to take Casale and a good part of
Monferrat, he for his part showing himself contented only with Trin, and a
portion of the open Country. Though in truth reason did not consent, yet the
conjuncture sharpened the persuasions of the Duke, and invited the Spaniards to
the undertaking; for France being engaged before Rochel, the English in War,
the Protestants every where beaten, and the Hollanders, by reason of the
affairs of Germany, distracted by great apprehensions, they could not well
discern who could be capable to disturb them. They well knew that Italy would
be in a commotion; but with what Forces? As for the Pope, although he loved not
their greatness, they were not deceived in believing, that he would proceed
with great wariness, and far from engaging in Arms. The Venetians, not wont to
declare themselves so easily, would be apt rather by complaints and endeavors
to stir up others than move War alone. The Grand Duke under the Government of a
Mother of the Austrian blood, did not as yet discern his own interest; and to
the rest of the Princes, together with Forces hearts were wanting. On the
contrary, the Power of Spain saw it self at the height of prosperity, with
store of Treasure and puissant Armies, and by its Councils and Money, directing
with an absolute Arbitrament the Interests and Forces of the Emperor, disposed
with no less Authority, as well of Germany, as of Spain and its other vast
Kingdoms.

Certainly it was not advantageous for Carlo to greaten the Spaniards upon his
own Borders; but being accustomed to aim only at the enlargement of his
Territories, he proposed to make use of them to make some conquest; and turn
himself afterward to the friendship of the French to preserve it, and by
engaging the two Crowns in discord and Wars, sell his adherence at a dearer
rate, as necessary (however unfaithful) to one and the other.

Nevers had no support, besides the protection of France, but the justice of
his cause, which he saw much considered by all, and in particular by the Pope
and the Venetians; but right prevailing little without force, he attempted by
all sorts of humiliation and promises of submission and dependence to pacify
the Austrians, but all in vain; because interest lying thwart, and looking at
him born in France, and brought up there, with Goods, Countries, and
Governments, they could never be persuaded, that he would sincerely separate
himself from that Crown.

King Lewis declared himself, that he would maintain him in his Right with all
his Forces and with his own Person, if it were necessary to go into Italy; but
finding himself engaged with the Huguenots and the English, such a report
served only for an appearance, and the King, well knowing it, made trial of the
way of a Treaty, having sent Monsieur de Saint Simon to the Duke of Mantua, to
the end he might dispose him to strengthen the Rights of Nevers by the Marriage
formerly proposed. The Ambassador found the Duke still deluded with the hopes
he should live long; so that he obtained nothing else but the gaining of the
Marquess Striggio, upon whose counsels Vincenzo mostly relied, to promote the
cause and advantages of Nevers, when the occasion should be presented. He
returns then into France; but the designs of the Savoyards discovering
themselves to advance, in proportion as the dissolution of the Marriage was
scrupled at Rome, and the indispositions of the Duke increased in Mantua, he
was sent back to Carlo Emanuel to offer him Revenues and Lands in Monferrat, in
exchange of his pretensions, and withal to demonstrate to him; How much it was
better for him rather to preserve Peace in Italy, than give nourishment to the
Potency of Spain, against which he having in other times made his breast a
defense, he ought not to obscure the Glory of it by new Maxims, foreign to his
own advantage and his ancient practices. But the Duke so much the more high and
lofty, as he was smoothed and sought to, not thinking the advantages proposed
equal to his hopes, pretended a great Party of the Monferrat, not only on the
score of his old Rights, but as a kind of revenge, that Ferdinand had not
performed the agreement, some few years before concluded, and turning the state
of affairs and times to his own advantage, considered, that Spain remaining
resolute to hinder, that a Prince protected by, or rather subject to France,
should have Sovereignty in Italy, it was best for him to make use of his own
connivence and force for the possessing of Monferrat, rather than leave it in
prey to the more powerful. Whilst he had his thoughts bent upon this in Turin,
greater inducements fell out in Mantua, where the Duke, by the craziness he had
contracted, fallen very sick, gave occasion for many treacheries and designs.
Caesar, Son of the Prince of Guastalla, was then in Milan to promote the
interest of his Family, or rather to have his Name made use of by the
Spaniards, who, laying hold of any pretext, armed powerfully, and ordered many
contrivances and preparations to prevent the attempts, which Nevers might make;
and, sending four thousand Foot and one thousand Horse to the Confines of
Mantua, under the Count de Guerrara, waited only till the Duke should expire,
to enter and take possession of it. But Vincenzo, Striggio, had in great
secrecy called to him Rhetel, that he might marry the Princess, and be in the
City at the time of his death, the better to secure to himself the Succession
and Principality; and he with a seasonable diligence being arrived there
unlooked for, dissipated a great storm before it brake forth; for many of the
chief persons being averse to the very name of the French, abhorred to have
Nivers their Sovereign, and entertained Treaties and Intelligences, to raise as
soon as the Duke should be dead and before, some commotion in favor of
Guastalla and of Spain; for which purpose Francesco Rota Sergeant Major, had
been corrupted, and many Arms were gathered together in the house of Frederick
Gonzagha.

But, so soon as Rhetel was arrived, the Duke immediately made him Lieutenant
General, and the better to corroborate his Right, by a solemn Testament
declares him Heir. To perfect the Marriage, nothing was wanting, but the
Dispensation of the Pope, by reason of the Kindred. St. Simon was come to
Mantua to solicit it, and the Count of Serbellone was dispatched from Milan
by his endeavors and protestations to hinder it, and from the Duke of Savoy
the Bishop of Mondovi; but they came too late: For the dispense from Rome
seasonably arriving at the instant that the night after Christmas Day the Duke
dyed, the Marriage was consummated that very hour, the Corpse of Vincenzo being
yet warm, who, it was given out, had by his last words ordained it. The day
following the Bridegroom, together with mourning, assumes the Title of Prince
of Mantua, and having in his power the Garrison and the Citadel called Porto,
requires from the people the Oath of Fidelity in the Name of his Father.
Guastalla publishes a Patent of the Emperors Commissary, secretly afterward
obtained by the favor of the Spanish Ministers, in which Ferdinand enjoins to
him to take possession in the Emperors Name of the Country of Mantua, till the
right should be declared, without innovating any thing, requiring Cordua, that
now governed Milan, to maintain the Decree by force, if need required. He had
thoughts of going himself to Mantua; but seeing the passage stopped by the
anticipations of Rhetel, he sends the Count Mandelli to Casale to cooperate in
practices, which Cordua had set on foot there, and to alienate the minds of
that people from acknowledging the new Prince. But all in vain, because the
name of Nevers, by the endeavors chiefly of Trajano Viscardi, great
Chancellor, was by those of Casale and the Monferrins with universal applause
cried up.

ANNO M.DC.XXVIII.
The Interests of Princes being now discovered, and the secrets unveiled,
Reason or Justice were no longer debated in the Cause of Mantua, but
calculations made of force, opportunity, and advantage; so that it was like a
fluctuant Sea, from which proceeded, and whither tended the affections of
Princes, as they were more or less inclined to the one or other Party. At
Venice they were all agreed to maintain the liberty of Italy and their own
safety, which was understood to be in danger, by the oppression of a neighbor
State, but they were as much differing about the means; some with offices alone
desiring to divert the dangers, others by open declarations not declining to
oppose the designs of the Austrians. There wanted not inclinations to enter
into Alliance with France; but others calling to mind the late proceedings of
that Crown in the Affairs of the Valteline, and esteeming the assistance of
Strangers little less disadvantagious to this Country, than the injuries of
War, preferred a League with the Pope and other Princes of Italy, with whom
forming a middle Party, they believed it easy to protect the Justice of Nevers
by Negotiation, and defend themselves on all occasions against violence. This
opinion was represented by the Senate to Urban, who no whit perplexed, was
wavering amidst diverse considerations, not desiring to be engaged against the
power and rage of the Austrians, nor seeing willingly the power of the
Spaniards to be increased in Italy, or the Authority and Name of the Emperor,
greatly suspicious to the Popes, to be awakned. He not only approved the
remonstrance of the Venetians; but in a manner promoted it, frequently
complaining to their Ambassador of the iniquity of the times, in which from a
cause most unjust the ambition of Princes was going to subvert the repose of
Italy, scarce yet settled. He offered his interposition with powerful offices;
but added, What can be promised from reason without Arms, in dealing with him
who places Reason and Justice in nothing but Arms? The excess of power in
Princes makes little account of the Popes prayers, and their Mediation is
reduced almost to nothing else but to adorn the Frontispice of Treaties with
their name. It is meet, since offices do no good, to apply to other remedies
more powerful: To improve the thought of uniting the Princes of Italy in their
own and the common Interest. But besides his own Forces and those of the
Republic, of whom was there any account to be made? The Duke of Savoy
renouncing the ancient Glory of maintaining the Liberty of Italy, unmindful of
his age, and of a Grave at hand, contrives new Stratagems. The Government of
Tuscany was inclined to the advantages of the Austrians. In the others power
was wanting or will. The Senate therefore was seriously to consider, if the
Forces alone of the Church and theirs would be a sufficient defense against the
approaching evils, and to maintain the Cause of Mantua, threatened, and, may be
said, oppressed by the prosperity of the Emperor and the Potency of Spain.
That he was ready with counsels and action to run the common Fate of Italy, but
that it was also a common Interest to lean to the more powerful for the
upholding of themselves and friends. That he thought application to France was
necessary, whose friendship, though by its inconstancy it seemed dangerous, by
its power made it self seasonable. That he was disposed with his intentions,
offices, and endeavors to second the resolutions of that Crown and the
Commonwealth.

The aims of Urban were not in truth conformable to his expressions. He desired
to maintain Nevers in the succession of Mantua; but abhorred to engage himself
so far, as to be obliged to come to a Declaration or taking up of Arms. He
encouraged the Venetians, to the end he might enjoy their support in whatsoever
should happen, and flattered the French with hopes of adhering to their Party;
for if he had the luck to bring him into Italy in favor of Nevers, he doubted
not but things would proceed with such a balance, that he might reserve to
himself the glory of the mediation, and the merit of making the Peace. Frequent
advertisements were then sent from Venice and from Rome to King Lewis of the
State of Italy, disquieted by great apprehensions, and threatened by greater
dangers, soliciting him to employ Authority, Negotiation, and Force for the
saving of the Country and the Princes his Friends.

France in effect, was greatly sensible, and the principal Ministers confessed
the Reputation and Honor of the Crown ruined, if it failed to assist Nevers.
But the Engagement before Rochel was equally important; whereupon they turn
their counsels anew to prevail upon the mind of the Duke of Savoy, because he,
it seemed, was the Arbiter of the Peace or of the War; whilst, if it could be
brought about to separate him from the Spaniards, their taking Arms would be
diverted, or at least weakened.

The center therefore of the business lay in Turin; the Venetians on the one
side assaulting him with reasons and persuasions, and the French on the other
tempting him with promises and advantages. St. Simon, besides the ceading of so
much Land in Monferrat as should amount to twelve thousand Crowns of yearly
Revenue, proposes to him secret and great hopes, that France with a more
powerful assistance should join in promoting his undertakings against the
Genouese, the differences with whom, assumed by the Crowns with the title of an
authoritave mediation, remained yet undecided. But the Duke, mindful of former
accidents, relinquished not, for the uncertainty of things to come, the designs
of present advantages. Clogging the Treaty therefore by the demand of Trin, a
place of most important situation, because it was opposite to Casal, and
drawing it into length, he no less precipitated the resolutions and getting
into Arms. Upon the news of the death of Duke Vincenzo, and what had happened
in Mantua, the Bishop of Mondovi, and Serbellone were returned back to relate
it to the Duke and to Cordua, who agreeing in their aims, aggravated also with
uniform dissatisfactions; That the young Princess, Niece of the Catholic King,
and also of the Duke, was, without their knowledge, forced rather, upon the
dead body of the deceased Duke, amidst sobs and tears, than married by her own
free consent.

Then Cordua charges Rhetel with the contempt of having intruded himself into a
State in contest, contrary to the Commissions and Patents of the Emperor,
Sovereign and Judge of the Parties, to whom being required to refer the
cognizance of the cause and the penalty of the boldness, he refused the
Letters, which he had written to him concerning the Title assumed of Prince of
Mantua. The eyes of all men were, to say truth, turned toward Ferdinand, some
sheltering themselves under his Authority, and others considering his Power.
Amongst the first, were the Princes of Guastalla, whose interest served not but
for a bounded prospect, and stalking Horse for the Arms of Spain; and Margaret,
Duchess of Lorrain, who, as eldest Sister of the last Dukes deceased,
pretended, that the Males of the other Branch being excluded, the Succession
belonged to her; but her Rights being very little considered, they could amount
to no more but to usher in those of Leonora the Empress, her younger Sister.
Whilst the decision was like to proceed with great length of time, the new Duke
of Mantua and the Princes that adhered to him, apprehended the Emperors
Forces, jealously observing an Army of sixteen thousand men, under a Count of
Mansfelt, in Suaben, kept on foot there under pretext of bridling the motions
of the Marquess of Dourlach and the Protestants; but in effect, as a body of
reserve for the Affairs of Italy, at the disposition of the Crown of Spain, the
which, not only by benefits and pensions, held dependent on it the Emperors
chief Ministers, but upbraided to himself the holding the Imperial Dignity as
but the fruit of their counsels and assistance.

Since therefore Ferdinand was obliged to depend on another will, the pressing
instances of the Popes Ministers and the Venetians availed little, who
persuaded him not to interest himself but with his Authority in favor of the
cause, which should appear most just, and to prefer Negotiation before a
Rupture. Nevertheless, to cover the designs, which were resolved on long
before, the Imperialists made show of an outward inclination to quiet, and to
amuse the Commonwealth, who appeared to be more alarmed than any body else;
the Count of Verdenberg, Chancellor of the Hereditary Provinces, entertained
Pietro Vico, their Resident, with frequent discourses of breaking into a War
with the Turk, now Germany being reunited did almost all acknowledge the
Religion of Christ and the Laws of the Emperor; stirring up the Republic to
be willing by a close union to participate of the Victories and Triumphs, which
were destined from Heaven for the Piety and Greatness of Ferdinand.

The Senate, from such generous conceptions, fitly drew stronger motives to
exhort to Peace, and remove Jealousies from Italy, to the end, that with a
cheerful heart and open Arms, Christendom might once deliver it self from the
unworthy shackles of the Ottoman Barbarism. But pretense and dissembling could
no longer have place; for Signor Agnelli, Bishop of Mantua, sent Ambassador
Extraordinary by the Duke, so soon as by secret ways he was come into Italy,
being arrived at Vienna to demand the Investiture, and offer his duty and
obedience to the Emperor, was not received, his abode at Court as a Prelate
and private person being hardly obtained. St. Simon at Turin leaves the Court,
having discovered, that the Duke, too closely joined with the Spaniards, minded
no more whatsoever proposition was made him. At his parting, he intimates to
certain French that were yet in the Dukes pay, to leave it, and put themselves
into Casal, which proved a seasonable succors, and helped much to maintain
that place, exposed as the price and prey of the ensuing War.

Carlo Emanuel had contented himself to leave it in the division to the
Spaniards, together with Pontestura, Nizza, Aqui, and all that Tract, which
toward the Sea was near to the Plains; retaining for himself Trino, Alba, St.
Damiano, with the parcel more commodious and contiguous to his States, on
condition nevertheless, that, as he (to take away jealousy) should not
fortify his new conquests, so the Spaniards should reduce Casal to that
weakness wherein it was in ancient times. Nor had the Contractors made any
difficulty to promise the promotion of one another advantages, because each
hoped that new accidents would afterward disoblige them from the observance of
the conditions; whereupon, although in Milan the Marquess of Montenegro,
amongst others, dissented from it, and prognosticated with great wisdom, (as it
quickly fell out) that the mischiefs of so difficult and jealous a conquest
would be more certain than the advantages; Gonzales nevertheless, greedy of
renown and glory, and desirous above all to confirm himself in the Government
of Milan, as a necessary Minister and confided in, colors the enterprise to
the Council of Spain as so easy and certain, that he had the hap to get their
consent. He principally grounded himself upon the Intelligence which he held
within Casal, and assured himself to be made Master of it before the design or
motion toward it should be discovered; whence carried away with the Fame of
the Action, and not minding the French Succors, he boasted, that in that place
Mantua would be taken also, nay all Italy, while no man would be able to
withdraw himself from the yoke, if the Duke of Savoy, led to it chiefly by his
Arts, whilst he framed it for others, laid it upon himself. Olivares, who
making light of the consequences of hazards to come, was wont to embrace
greedily the occasions of present profit, speeding the ratification of the
Treaty into Italy, and causing a hundred thousand Crowns to be disbursed to the
Duke to quicken the action, inflames him with Letters full of flatteries and
Encomiums, to do himself once reason by Arms, and revenge himself generously of
the wrongs, which he pretended to have been at several times done him by the
House of Gonzagha. The Governor had not in readiness above twelve thousand Foot
and three thousand Horse, and of these one body lodged toward Como, to have an
eye upon the passages of the Switzers and Grisons, and he sent another with the
Marquess of Montenegro into the Cremonese, not only to restrain the suspected
resolutions of the Venetians, but to oppose the Duke himself, who increasing
his Forces by certain money drawn from his Goods in France, had, by the
applause of his Name and the Novelty of the War, raised about ten thousand
Soldiers; 4000 whereof were in Monferrat and at Casal, and the rest he kept
about himself at Mantua. Cordua therefore could not have advanced in the
attempt of Monferrat but with weak Forces, if those of the Genouese had not
strengthened him, who, after having stipulated, in contemplation of the Spanish
Ministers, a Truce for six months with the Duke of Savoy, not being able yet to
rescue themselves from the dependence on that Crown, nor renounce the memory of
fresh benefits, although they had a due apprehension of the War at hand, sent
to the Governor of Milan a good body of their Soldiers, who, when they were
come into the Territory of Alexandria, put up immediately the Spanish Colors.
To facilitate the enterprise for him, he made Edicts his forerunners, full of
bitter threatenings against whomsoever should resist, and of large promises to
those, who without expecting Force would render themselves.

On the other side, doubtful, lest the Troops sent to the Confines of the
Venetians should serve rather to provoke than check them, he sent to the Senate
to amuse them, till Casal should be taken, Paulus Rho, who declared, The
intention of the King to be only to take possession of those Countries, which
were fallen to the judgment of the Emperor, and in his Name to keep them till
the Rights of the Pretenders being known, they might be restored to their
lawful Lord. He ascribed to the goodness of the King himself, and to the
prudence of his Ministers in Italy, that foreseeing disturbances imminent, they
interposed authority with zeal to keep it from Tumults. He then by a large
circumference of words let them understand, that the alone suspicion, lest the
French, under the name of Nevers, should nestle themselves upon the Borders of
the Milanese, had moved the Governor to this prevention and attacque. By the
Senate, who knew his ends, was gravely answered, That the dissatisfaction of
the Republic could not at all be concealed, whilst the Peace of Italy was
ready to be split, which they taking to heart above any other motive, could not
but be fervent in the desires, and insist earnestly on the remonstrances of
Peace, believing that in that did consist the Glory of the King himself, the
happiness of his States, and the moderation of his Ministers. But amidst the
motions and furies of Arms, thrust by the Governor into the field, all reasons
and offices were to no purpose.

The Venetians therefore were put upon difficult counsels, and the Senate being
assembled to debate the matter, Simeon Contarini, Knight and Procurator, spoke
thus: With the straights of the present time God join the constancy of the
Republic and the wisdom of them that govern it. These are not the first
difficulties with which the Country has been exercised, but observing the
memorable Acts of our Ancestors, we ought to confess, that if Nature give the
Snake an instinct to find the straightness of stones, where leaving his old
skin, he re-acquires youthful vigor, God imparts to men prudence, which amidst
the most disastrous and difficult Encounters sharpens it self, and subduing
adverse Fortune, gets the Victory at last, and perpetuates the felicity of
Countries. But it is not needful, O Fathers, that we here go out of the path
beaten by the wise Counsels of those that have transmitted to us for an
Inheritance together with liberty this Empire. I would say, that the most
violent resolutions and the most headlong courses are not the Arts of our
Fathers, or the Maxims of our Government. Time holding prudence by the hand,
has lead us often out of the darkest Labyrinths, and the Republic preserving
Veneration to its Councils, respect to its Arms, and Treasures and Forces for
opportunities, has maintained it self in safety, assisted its friends, and
preserved Italy. Now I deny not but that the present attempts of the Spanish
Armies, and the threatenings of future designs envenom to the quick the health
of this unhappy Country, and confound men's minds and our own very interests.
But let us examine carefully the remedy before we apply it, and reflecting upon
the violence of the evil, let us balance the strength of the medicine. Until
this strong Torrent overflow, it is sufficient to stand within the Banks, and
be contented that the course bend another way, and carry the Tide thither; for
if the violence of men be opposed to the Justice of God, as it comes not to be
endured by the Constitution of the World, so it must needs be short, and within
a little while, where it was exalted in pride, it will be seen humbled and
brought low. Great is that Power of the Austrians, which without obstacle runs
swelling, as may be said, over the flourishing field of liberty and the dignity
of so many oppressed Princes. But he that will oppose himself with protests,
threatenings, and Arms, let him show me also a force equal to that which ought
to be suppressed. My meaning is, that resolutions should be suspended, that the
tendency of affairs should be observed, that under the shadow of moderation and
prudence this storm of ill Fortune should be let pass. The ruins, caused by a
Thunderbolt, are for the most part repaired with little trouble, but to the
violence of its flames what humane force is there that can resist? I confess
it, I am much afraid of the issue of the present Affairs; but yet I despair
not. I see Cordua, I see the Duke of Savoy united to invade the Monferrat, to
swallow that Country, and take Casale; I feel the weight of the Chains of the
Servitude of Italy; I fear the Counterblow of Mantua in our own very Bowels.
But who knows? Some Politic Counsels, which invite with a fair Prospective,
are not ordinarily practiced without difficulty, and end not but with
misfortune. The Enterprise on Casal will not perhaps be so easy, as it is
supposed. Carlo Emanuel is not so tenacious in his Alliances, but that he may
be altered; the Forces of the Governor of Milan are not so powerful as to be
able to oppress Italy in a moment. Where are those Ensigns, those Armies so
much feared of the Emperors? It seems to me, that there is great hopes that
they are not so easily to descend into Italy; because those vast Provinces of
Germany, kept under by Ferdinand with a foot of Iron, will quickly lift up
their head, being rather oppressed than overcome. We ought also to believe,
that France will quickly be dis-ingaged from the Seacoast. Will then that
warlike Nation, that magnanimous King, and that prudent Minister possibly
suffer a Prince to be excluded from his Inheritance and from his Patrimony, for
no other fault but being born under the Climate of France; and if they should
set at naught Justice, Honor, and Interest, ought the Republic always to take
upon it self alone the burden of being the Defender, not only of just Causes,
but of the weaker sides? On the other side, if, as reason requires, the French
shall resolve to take part in it, what avails it to torment our selves with
unseasonable afflictions, and dishearten our selves with sad Divinations,
whilst the Affairs now under debate will counsel the Senate to resolve
themselves for the occasion, and to preserve their strength and Treasure for
the accidents of time. Will the Republic otherwise be possibly able to contend
alone with the vast Power of the House of Austria? and with the dreaded Force
of the Empire? Foreseeing then ruin, shall we forestall destruction, and in
the vain support of the Duke of Mantua sink down our selves, even before the
danger and season comes, over and above the losses of the Public and our own?
Much, as to former successes, is Italy indebted to us, and I think it needful
to speak it, our present weakness is but a remainder of the excess of former
Forces. Behold when we were persuaded, that with so much treasure and so many
benefits we had unseparably bound the Duke of Savoy to our friendship, we see
him, united to the Crown of Spain, turn himself against the good of Italy.
Behold our Engagements in the Valteline, where with money and blood we have
maintained the common Interest and the honor of the Confederates, degenerated
into most prejudicial agreements betwixt the Crowns. That benefit is too dear,
which, together with ingratitude, produces damage. Wherefore taught from past
experiences, my judgment is, that placing our safeguard in Prudence rather than
in Fortune, we should maintain the defense of our selves with powerful Forces;
but I approve not of Declarations, Engagements, and Wars, to the end we may not
heedlesly expose to hazard the Government with the liberty of the Country.

Great was the attention to this discourse, but it was interrupted by Dominico
Molino with a contrary sense to this purpose: Neither desires nor hopes can
divert our dangers, against which were fear a sufficient defense, I should
believe our affairs secure, because I confess, that I am afraid. I am not alone
encumbered with the tempestuous apprehensions of the present state of things;
but in the interests and dangers of the Duke of Mantua, Italy both fears and
trembles. It is true, that the treacherous lethargy which oppresses him, takes
away from some Princes the sense of the common evils, and that others in an
apparent Delirium extravagate from that path of their own and universal
interest, which they have walked in with glory. But behold, let us see also in
this Republic, where at last is lodged the heart of the safety of Italy, the
vital spirits of liberty and honor beat. Let us hearken to the language of the
Pope, who abhors the immoderate machinations of Spain, who invites the French,
and sollicites to get Companions. Things then are not deplorable to that
degree, that we should despair of a remedy, if we shall be willing to apply it
in the beginning; but if the disease shall go on, fomented by our negligence,
such will be the increase of it, that the recovery will be made more difficult
than can be repented of. There are, O Fathers, in cases of importance, three
Springs, whence all disasters plentifully flow, which point by point in the
contrary opinion I have thoroughly noted; false security, careless delay, and a
covetous fear of charge. Let us consider the Duke of Mantua as a new Prince, a
Stranger (as may be said) to the Customs and to the Language, encompassed with
Subjects unknown, with a Militia that must be entreated, oppressed with
necessity, staggering under the weight of a State shaken by the Arms of so
powerful Enemies, that who sees him not ready to fall? Let us suppose Casal
almost without other Garrison than the Inhabitants; deprived of all succor,
assailed by the forces and skill of the Governor of Milan, and by the designs
and contrivements of Savoy, so that who expects it not almost as soon rendered
as attempted? Now in this condition let us weigh our own dangers, and in the
consideration of them more than of the necessities of the Duke, let us resolve,
if we can satisfy our own minds to deny him speedy succors. It may possibly
be believed, that Casal may hold out, that Savoy may revolt, that the Germans
may stay their march, and that the French may pass the Alps? But if such hopes
do but flatter us, of what then shall we be afraid to declare our selves in
favor of the Duke? O Fathers, these are Hobgoblins, and, give me leave to say
so, false Visions, represented from weakness and the fear accompanying too wary
Counsels. From the Precepts of our Ancestors, and the Examples of all Princes,
may sufficiently be learnt, that by assisting the weak ones, Power is either
preserved or increased. The Republic has always had this belief, that the
fruit of their quiet, and I will say of their parsimony was in a manner due to
their friends. Those Treasures have been well spent, those Cares happy, and
Counsels wise, which in former times have preserved this Country in safety, the
Princes in their dignity, and our selves in our liberty. Let us not blush here
to speak it. Our assistances have been given out to usury, with the manifold
gain of our own tranquillity and glory. All the good which with vain flatteries
and uncertain hopes is proposed to us from Chance, we may reap from our own
generous and wise deliberations; for the Duke, not abandoned of assistance,
will take courage and strength; his Subjects will get vigor; Casal being
succored, will defend it self, and by holding out, will divert blows far from
Mantua, and keep dangers remote from our Confines. France in this interim
dis-ingaged from Rochel, will join to make a seasonable Counterpoise; but if
standing negligently idle, we shall behold the destruction of our Neighbors,
what may we expect but to be abandoned by all, even in their own ruin? If to
the French be objected the Rampires of the Alps, which way shall we open them a
passage, if, when we shall have passed the Mountains, Casal being lost, they
shall find the door shut? That Prince is reduced to a too lamentable condition,
that expects savor for himself alone from him that is an Enemy to all. Can we
possibly hope to find in the Austrians moderation and respect toward us? I,
for my part, prefer security before hopes; because we live in times in which
Ambition bears rule, the Conjuncture is a pretext, Interest is the Idol of
Princes and the Cornerstone of States. I cannot frame to my self reasons more
strong, nor justice more apparent, how to indemnifie and save the
Commonwealth, than that which appears on the side of the Duke of Mantua; and
if he be invaded, I fear the example; and if he be overcome, I apprehend, lest
Fortune should justify the lust of Dominion. The will and a fit Conjuncture to
break is enough for Princes to find abundant matter for occasions and pretexts.
Let us at least resolve upon that, which necessity, then which no eloquence is
more powerful or more compendious, persuades us; because having once with a
generous constancy blunted the edge of the pride of Strangers in Italy, Glory
and Peace will for a long time reside amongst us. But let us be mindful here,
Fathers, that while we are consulting, Casal is losing, and that if we delay to
take our resolution here, safety it self will not be able to succor it.

Amidst these contrary opinions, the minds of the Senators were wavering,
because, besides the weight of the reasons of both the Parties, a certain
discreet and experienced prudence produced great credit to the Author of the
first, and the conceit of a great sufficiency in Politic matters did no less
for the second. At last, as it often happens, that in extremes equally
difficult, middle counsels prevail, a third opinion was followed, which
consisted in arming and strongly fortifying themselves in all kinds, to
solicit France to maintain the Cause of the Duke, and when France should
engage it self, and send an Army on this side the Mountains, to join to it that
of the Republic for the defense of Mantua, which could no more without
difficulty receive succors from elsewhere. The Senate also were willing,
particularly in Spain, to repeat their most effectual offices for Peace, not
because they hoped, the Armies being so far advanced, to divert them, but at
least to justify the resolutions to which they saw themselves constrained.
And, to say truth, their remonstrances were rather made known to, than
considered by the Conde Duke; whereupon, all being reduced to extremes,
solicitations were turned again toward France.

But above that affair there arose great divisions in the Kings Council, in
which, according to the nature of the Nation, opinions degenerating into
Factions, and in them passions and interests ingrafting themselves, both
Ministers and business were confounded. The Queen Mother had by nature a
certain propension to the Spaniards, and nourished a great aversion against
Nevers, ever since, during her Regency, he joined himself several times to the
malcontents. But now there were added causes more urgent; for the Duke of
Orleans (for so we will henceforward call the Kings Brother) his first Wife
being dead, earnestly desired to take in second Marriage Mary, the Daughter of
the same Nevers, a Princess of exquisite Beauties; on the other side, the
Mother abhorring to see the Daughter of her Enemy, her Daughter-in-law,
preferred Anna de Medici, Sister of Ferdinand, great Duke of Tuscany, or
Nichola de Loraine, Daughter of Henry, both allied to her in blood. And because
she doubted, that the Cardinal inclined to Gonzagha, she began from this
suspicion to convert her favor into hatred, and their discord had so many
things to nourish it, as will hereafter render her passions as much more
famous, as her life and death equally unhappy. She began then to inveigh
against Richelieu, that, to play the Merchant at his pleasure with the Royal
Authority, he became prodigal of the Kings health, keeping him, as having him
in a manner a Prisoner far from his Wife and Mother, amongst Armies and the
Marshes of Rochel, exposed to dangers and in an unwholesom Air. She, besides
this, dissented openly to have any thing to do with the Affairs of Italy,
toward which she discovered the Cardinal inclined, and aggravated, that he for
his vain passions having stirred up a War with the English, now to satiate his
revenge, would break also with Savoy and with Spain, persecuting every where
the Princesses of the Royal Family, and exposing the Kingdom in prey to the
sword and fire, to the end that he alone with his Friends and Kindred might
triumph over the public Calamities, and advance his ambition and avarice upon
the common Ruin. By effectual Letters she disswades the King from him, and
publicly exclaims against him in Paris, seconded by many with whispers and
discourses in the Court and in the Country; for hatred and envy advanced as
much against Richelieu as his own merit increased, and the favor of the King
appeared more and more partial to him. The Cardinal Berule and Monsieur de
Marilliac were the chief that in the Council sided with her opinions; and to
dishearten the Ministers of the Pope and of the Republic, who with frequent
endeavors moved the King to serious reflections and seasonable resolutions,
they divulged freely, and gave the Ministers themselves openly to understand,
that France by Religion and Interest being strictly obliged to its own
occasions, could not be diverted elsewhere, nor attend to what happened beyond
the Mountains. But Richelieu, who with a profound judgment fathomed aims and
designs, as well domestic as foreign, entertaining them with better hopes; to
repair that opinion, which after the Peace of Monzon he knew cooled in his old
friends and the Princes of Italy, comforted them with ample promises, that the
King would not be wanting in protection and assistance to the House of Mantua,
and exhorted principally the Venetians, so much interessed and so nearly
joined, to support the Duke with powerful Aids, till, the Engagement before
Rochel being at an end, and the differences with England in some measure
composed, the Crown might turn all its Authority and Forces toward Italy.

The Senate wisely weighing past events, and the dangers imminent remained
constant in the settled Maxims, not to declare themselves but conjoyntly with
the Crown of France; and therefore solicited with earnest prayers the happy
success of the enterprise of Rochel, and with urgent mediation promoted the
Peace with England, which seemed much facilitated by various accidents; for
another Fleet being sailed out of those parts, formidable for number and
quality of Ships, manned with choice Soldiers, and furnished with all sorts of
Provisions, having scarce showed it self to the besieged, and attempted the
relief in vain, was returned to the Coast of England, and Buckingham, the
Incendiary of the discord, stabbed with a Knife in his Chamber by one Felton
for private causes, was dead.

In the mean time Cordua finding no resistance in the field, advances toward
Casale, hoping, according to the concerts agreed with Spadino de Novara,
Sergeant Major in the Town, that a Port should presently have been delivered to
him. But the Marquess of Canossa, a Veronese, Governor of Monferrat, and
Rivara a Monferrin, who commanded the Citadel, discovering the Plot, as it was
almost ready to be put in execution, gave out Orders presently for the defense,
by preventing the Treachery and resisting the Force. Spadino saving himself
from punishment by flight, meets the Governor of Milan with the Army near to
Casale, who, though touched to the quick, that his best and speedy hope was
vanished, nevertheless putting it to a venture, and engaging his honor upon
the relations of the Traitor, that the Garrison, though consisting of about
four thousand Foot and four hundred Horse, yet all for the most part of the
Country, and having want of many things, would, together with the Inhabitants,
be little inclined to suffer for a Prince, they knew not, ruin and
extremities, resolves to undertake the Siege. To flatter the Citizens, he made
as if he would respite the Country round about, keeping for some days the
Militia in such Discipline, that it almost looked as if he would rather
preserve than force the place. And the effect, though contrary to his intent,
proved to be so; for the provisions, spared by the Spaniards in the Country,
were in the interim brought into the Town. At the first appearance of the
Enemy, the Garrison made a round Sally; but, being easily beat back, Cordua
orders Trenches to be opened, and Batteries to be raised, but with as many
failings and errors as they made steps in the attempt.

Casale is situate upon the right side of the Po, where a little Hillock begins
to decline and enlarge it self into a Plain, in which the Town is placed, being
of a large circuit, but of an irregular enclosure, inhabited by many noble
Families and a numerous well-accommodated Commonalty. A Castle with Walls and
Towers served formerly for its defense; but the old Duke Vincenzo placed there
for state and defense a Citadel of a great compass, with six well ordered
Bastions, which with two ranks of Walls were joined to the City. Against one of
these directly toward the Po, which at that time had its course a little
distant, but afterward, changing its Chanel, came nearer to the Wall, Gonzales
directs his attacques and batteries but weak and slow; so that the besieged
were able to cover with Half-moons and Batteries the Wall, the Mills, and the
Flank of the Town, the most exposed on that side. He could not, by reason he
had so few men, begirt the place, and for the same defect deferred for diverse
days to take in the Castles on the Hill, by means whereof Provisions in
abundance were frequently brought into the Town, and even when he went about
it, Frederico Enriquez, sent with a few Soldiers to make his way into
Rossignano by a Petard, being partly deceived by his Spies, who brought him
thither when it was broad day light, and partly repulsed by the cragginess of
the situation, for it stood upon a Rock, received there a great blow. The
Savoyards proceeded with greater success. The Duke was no sooner in the field
but he possessed in a breath Alba, St. Damiano, with all that which belonged to
him by the Treaty; and although Trino resisted some days, yet upon the loss of
a Half Moon it was forced to surrender. Being thus dis-ingaged, it gave great
jealousy to the Governor of Milan, lest having obtained his own design, he
should neglect, or rather hinder the success of the Spaniards. And knowing him
fixed in this, that short Wars, frequent Treaties, and continual change of
Parties was that which pleased him, he was greatly feared lest he should join
with the French, fomenting that doubt by various events; for the Duke, contrary
to the agreement, fortified Trino with all diligence, having taken Moncalvo,
though it were not of his division, kept it for himself, and Pontestura, which
he had possessed in the sight almost of the Spanish Camp, though he delivered
it to them, yet it was after delays so full of pride and contempt, that it
savoured rather of reproach and injury than of confidence and assistance.

But above all, the things which happened afterward at Genoua troubled him.
That Government discovered, that Julio Cesare Vachero, a man of the Commonalty,
with other wicked Villains of his condition, had designed to kill the principal
men, and change the form of Government, hoping in the confusions, the Authority
of the Laws being captivated, and good men exposed to violence, they might with
impunity enjoy great spoils. From him, who was imprisoned, and other his
Accomplices, who having retired themselves into the Milanese were by the
Governor sent back to Genoua, it came to be known that the Conspiracy passed
in concert with the Duke, who without dissembling the matter, avowed that he
had consented to the Treason, before the Truce was made, to be executed when it
should be ended; and showed himself so thoroughly moved at the danger his
Partisans were in, that he protested to the Genouese to revenge the punishments
of those that were guilty upon certain of their Nobles, which he had Prisoners
since the last War; and with no less industry induced the Governor to send to
Genoua Alvara di Lusara with no less threatenings than instances for the pardon
and liberty of those malicious Knaves. The Government moved at the atrocity of
the offense and the anger for such a demand, resenting it to the quick, that
they must be forced in complacence to their Enemy, or at another will to let
Rebellion go unpunished, having in a middle way betwixt Slavery and Justice
condemned some to punishment, let for that time the business fall into silence.
But the Duke not being satisfied, although he used no cruelty against the
Genouese Prisoners, showed himself wroth both against the Republic and against
the Governor of Milan, who apprehending not to get Casale, and to expose the
Milanese to irreparable hazards, whenever the Duke should bend toward
France, endeavored by all sort of satisfaction and pliantness to pacify him.
And for that cause denied to deliver to the Genouese others of the
Conspirators, and gave security to some in the Milanese, making show of so
great rancour and disgusts against that Republic, that the state of things
being represented at the Court of Spain, there also, to keep the Duke to his
first designs and hopes, Propositions were treated of, to assault the State of
Genoua with united Forces, divide it, and leave Carlo as large a part as he
should have a mind to. This, although it was against the true intentions of him
that offered it, nevertheless coming to be known by the Genouese, stirred up
jealousy in their minds, and a hatred so furious, in particular, when the
Count de Monterey passing from Spain as Ambassador toward Rome, stayed some
time in Genoua, making a show of a certain kind of Superiority, and as if he
would take upon him to reform the Government, that the wonted partiality
toward that Monarchy began to be cooled, and the veneration of it soon after
declining in Italy, they went on to such resolutions and decrees as did greatly
raise the Splendour and Decorum of that Commonwealth.

But in Monferrat, through the difficulty of the enterprise the fast of the
Governor of Milan being abated, it looked as if hopes appeared of some
adjustment, the Emperor giving the Ministers of the Pope and of the Venetians
to understand, That his intention was not to meddle in the Cause of Mantua
otherwise than by Negotiation, whilst the Governor of Milan having put himself
into action without his knowledge and consent, he found himself dis-ingaged
from assisting his intentions with Arms. But within a while the Authority of
the Spanish Ministers prevailing above the others Reasons, the Army of Suevia
was observed to draw near to Helvetia, to the great jealousy of the Cantons,
who thereupon assembled frequent Diets; and it was understood, that Count John
of Nassau was sent by the Emperor with Title of Commissioner, to take
possession of Mantua and Monferrat with all the appurtenances, assigning only
to the Duke a meet Pension to maintain him and some Lodgings in the Palace.
This was interpreted as a certain Herald for War; because the Duke not being
able to do other than dissent and oppose it, the engagement of the Name and
Authority of the Emperor drew necessarily after it the motion of Arms.

And now Montenegro overrunning the Country of Mantua, had attempted, though
in vain, Caneto, and put a Garrison into Castiglione to molest the Duke and
threaten the Republic. And the Duke sends his Troops by a generous and hasty
Inrode to plunder in the Cremonese; but afterward by better counsel, knowing
it a vain thing to provoke with an appearance whom he could not suppress with
force, recals them, and causes the Booty to be restored. He was now put to
difficult and afflicting Councils; the Catholic Army was at his doors; the
Imperial were near at hand, and succors far off. Whereupon dispatching
Giovanni Francesco Gonzagha, his Ambassador Extraordinary, to Venice, he
instantly desires counsel and assistance. The Senate encouraged him to resist
with constancy all his troubles, and to comfort himself with hopes of better.
They pleaded his Cause in every Court with reasons, and did him all the service
they could, and till under the countenance of France they might declare
themselves, permitted all advantages to his Country, giving him passage for
Men, Arms, and Victuals at a time that a great dearth, foretelling calamities
to come, universally afflicted Italy; but the Duke found himself molested with
new and always greater cares: For Nassau being now arrived, requires him to
deliver the Citadels of Casale and Mantua, that he might put Imperial Garrisons
into them, and keep them together with the rest, according to his Commission;
neither availed it, that Carlo endeavored with answers of submission and
obedience to excuse himself, offering also in token of greater respect to admit
the Emperors Garrison into some place of lesser moment; whereupon the
Commissary, excluding every thing, and denying the term of twelve days, which
the Duke desired to advise with himself, obliges him to publish his Appeal to
the Emperor, when he should be better informed, and, if all passages were
stopped there, to the Electors of the Empire. With this Nassau returns to
Milan, sending from thence to Mantua frequent intimations and protests,
sometimes avoided by the respect the Duke showed, and then again pressed upon
his Declaration to defend himself.

The Imperial Ban was nevertheless deferred by Ferdinand at the entreaty of his
Wife, and by the offices of the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who, but a Youth, having
visited the Pope, and received noble entertainment at Venice, was gone to the
Emperors Court. And it was indeed easier for the Duke to defend himself by
Negotiation, than to maintain longer his Soldiers; for there having till now
been maintained in the Territory of Mantua six thousand five hundred Foot and
thirteen hundred Horse, pay at last failing, the Strangers disbanded, and those
of the Country returned to their houses. He then by the means of Ottaviano
Vivaldini desires money of the Venetians to keep his Troops on foot, and
earnestly implores, that to his, they would join five thousand Foot and five
hundred Horse of their own, offering himself with that strength to march to
Casale, and having secured that place, and in it preserved Mantua also, to end
the War with glory and expedition. Monsieur d'Avo and Monsieur de Guron, the
one Ambassador for France at Venice, and the other sent expressly into Italy
for these Concerns, promised the entire assistance of the Crown, nay the person
of the King himself, when the Siege of Rochel should be ended, and demonstrated
withal, that if they in this interim, for want of assistance, should let the
Dukes Affairs perish, and Casal were lost, all attempts and succors afterward
would be rendered vain.

But the Senate apprehending the old aim of the French Ministers to engage the
Republic in an open breach with Spain, to avoid that of their Crown, referred
all resolution to the arrival of the Kings Colors into Italy, to which they
continued their promises to join themselves. The Pope also concurred in the
same opinion, to animate the French not to abandon Italy, and, in this interim
sending to the Emperor and both the Kings Nuntio's Extraordinary to endeavor
a Treaty of Peace, armed and fortified his Frontiers, planting in view of the
Modenese, not without the complaints and jealousies of that Duke, a good Fort
which was called by his Name Urban. The hopes of Italy being then referred to
the issue of the one affair of Rochel, which seemed now near an end, it plainly
appeared, that as much as the Austrians had been advantaged by that Engagement,
so much the less were they to rejoice at the taking of it. And the French began
already highly to complain of the novelties and turbulencies raised in Italy;
and, to support the Duke of Mantua till they could send him greater Forces,
they permitted him Levies and Supplies, giving him connivence and
encouragement; whereupon in his name and with money drawn from his Estate in
that Kingdom were raised under the Marquess of Vxelles twelve thousand Foot and
two thousand Horse with six pieces of Cannon, to be transported from this side
the Mountains to his assistance, seconded by some Troops of the Kings,
commanded by the Mareshal of Crequi, Governor of Dauphine.

This Expedition, amplified also more than was necessary, according to the
prompt disposition of the Nation, wont to believe that done which seemed near
to be executed, made them believe in France the Duke ready succored; and in
Italy with great expectation fear was confounded with hope: for at the report,
that that Army was drawing near, Gonzales embarked his Cannon, and kept all
ready to raise the Siege from Casale; but at the same time, to divert the storm
from him, uses all sorts of submissions and promises to the Duke of Savoy; and
now Carlo believed himself arrived at that Post, which he had long proposed to
make himself Arbiter of the War and Peace of Italy: For the French also
demanded passage of him with greater flatteries and ample offers of all sorts
of advantages, the Liberty and Wealth of the Genouese being the price, which to
strives was offered him by both the Crowns. But mindful of the offenses done to
Richelieu, and now fearful of his revenge, taking time to answer, the better to
fortify himself after having garrisoned his places, and obtained four thousand
Foot of the Governor of Milan, refuses it. The French notwithstanding resolve
by the way of Castle Delphino to attempt it; but the Duke being moved with his
Army into the Valley of St. Pieter, and having caused the Prince Vittorio to
advance, encountering the Vantguard in the Straights of those Mountains, beats
them and drives them back. All the Army then of Vxelles retreats, and being
come into Dauphine, quickly disbands; for a coolness ordinarily following the
French fury, Victuals were wanting, and the money, both managed with
covetousness and wasted with negligence, sufficed not to supply it. In the
beginning also of this Action, the Venetians being requested to permit passage
to certain Cavalry of the Duke of Mantua's, that crossing the Milanese, they
might move forward to join the French, refused it, because in the difficulty to
execute it, they could not discern ought but the wonted intentions to draw them
unseasonably to Declarations and Engagements. But the straights of that Prince
being now brought to that pass, that he could no longer maintain his Court and
Family, much less keep up his Army, they being requested in his Name by the
Marquess of Pomar with expressions of pity rather than assistance, disbursed to
him twenty thousand Ducats, and before the end of the year they supplied him
with other and greater sums for the maintaining of his Garrisons also. Carlo
Emanuel having repulsed the French, triumphed greatly, and the Governor of
Milan was much more encouraged, who believing already the gain of Casal secure,
jealous lest the Duke should yet take in some part of Monferrat, which belonged
to the King, sends to Nizza with four thousand Foot the Count John Serbellone,
who took it in fifteen days, after having so frighted the Inhabitants with the
springing of a Mine, that they forced the Count of Agremont, a French man, who
defended it with twenty four of his Nation and some Monferrins, to capitulate
and leave it. Of this distraction of Forces, which retarded the Siege, those
within Casale made use to great advantage, reaping the harvest, and bringing it
into the Town, where was come in Monsieur de Guron, to animate in the Name of
King Lewis the Inhabitants and Garrison.

The Nuntio's, sent from the Pope, being come to the Camp, projected in the
midst of these actions a suspension of Arms for fifteen days, in which space
the Infanta Marguerita entering into Casale, some Proposition of agreement might
be concerted. But the Governor jealous of some artifice of the Savoyards, to
prolong his conquest by pretending, that together with his, there should be put
into it a Garrison of the Emperors, dissolves the Treaty. And the Grand Duke
being returned from the Imperial Court had speech in Maderno, a place of
pleasure upon the Lago di Garda, with the Prince of Mantua, and proposed to him
a change of those States, since that the Monferrat, exposed to the greedy
desires of the most powerful, occasioned so great disagreements; but the
Spaniards not willing to offer an equivalent, that discourse came to nothing.
The Negotiation then yielding to force, Gonzales, strengthened with new Troops,
straightens Casale, taking away at last the entry of Victuals and Succors by
the possessing of Ponzone, Rossignano, St. Giorgio, and other Posts on the
Hill. The place nevertheless defended it self with brave and frequent Sallies,
in one of which Monsieur de Bevron, a French man, being come in as a Voluntier,
and having given proof of singular courage, was killed, and in another the
Sergeant Major Luzzago, a Brescian, seeing amongst the Enemy the Traitor
Spadino, engaged himself so far to take off his head, that he there lost his
life. The Marquess Rivara observing, relief would be difficult and tedious, and
fearing that the consumption of the Victuals in the Town would at last bring it
to extremity, got store into the Citadel, to maintain himself the longer there,
exhorting the Inhabitants to stint Victuals; as they did with great proof of
their constancy and fidelity. Nor did the besiegers experience little less
necessity; for Italy, overflowed this year by the Rivers, had given such a
slender harvest of Corn, that Famine was an affliction every where, and
especially in the Milanese, whence that which could be taken serving for
nourishment, though very scanty, to the Army, the people in the City of Milan
perished. In Provence the French had restrained the liberty of transport.

The Duke of Mantua shut up the passage of the Po; and the Venetians, who also
suffered very much, were careful that no grain should pass into the Milanese.
So that the people being famished, brake out into a kind of Tumult, which
constrained the Governor to go thither and quiet it, and must have raised the
Siege, if in that instant, from Sicily and elsewhere some Vessels arriving in
the River of Genoua, there had not been a supply seasonable to the necessity.
In the Imperial Court, to divert the Imperial Ban and the vigorous
consequences, which it uses to carry with it, it was proposed by the Bishop of
Mantua, that in token of the Emperors Authority, to content Guastalla, some
place of the Mantuan should be delivered to him, and a suspension of Arms be in
the mean time in Monferrat, to treat some Accord with the Savoyards. But the
Spanish Ministers accepting of no Propositions, persuaded Ferdinand to new
intimations, carried to Mantua by Doctor Foppis, a Counselor of the Court,
that the Duke, within the space of a month was to yield obedience to the
Commissary. He always, to gain time and commiseration, sends the Prince his
Eldest Son to Vienna, to show his Duty to Ferdinand, and to offer also, upon
the obtaining the Investiture of Mantua, to deposite Casal and the Monferrat
into the hand of some Prince of confidence, to be kept in the Name and by a
Garrison of the Emperors for a certain time, within which the cause should be
decided; provided notwithstanding that the Spaniards and Savoyards should do
the same in what they possessed. The Prince instead of being well received,
which the Spanish Ambassador opposed even to protests, was scarce privately
admitted; but although he carried back little advantage by the Journey, the
Duke nevertheless got himself great applause by it, showing, that having on his
side omitted nothing of his bounden duty toward the Emperor, on the other
side was discovered the desire and intention of the others; for it was
answered, That Casal being in the Emperors Name put into the Custody of the
Germans, which served under the Ensigns of Spain, the Emperors will was, that
the Governor should keep what he possessed on the account of the pretensions
of Guastalla; and that the Savoyards should keep what they held, in
consideration of their own Rights, till an Agreement or Sentence should be
declared, and then there should be a suspension in the Mantuan. From which was
plainly discovered the design to put the Spaniards in possession of Casal, and
deprive the Duke of Mantua of Monferrat; whereupon the Prince, denying to have
power concerning that, departs; though the Empress had first given him counsel
to lay the whole Concern at the Emperors foot, and receive Law from that
Authority which he had no power to resist. Yet to give time to the French, that
they might apply themselves to the Affairs of Italy, the Duke not wholly
breaking off the Negotiation, shows himself inclined to some kind of Exchange;
and a Meeting in Piacenza to adjust it was negotiated by the Nuntio Scappi; but
Cordua dissents from it, alleging to have no power but to reduce Carlo to
acknowledge respect due to the Emperor: at the same time notwithstanding
secretly proposes to him great advantages, if he would deliver Casal to himself.

The Duke, to let it be known, that the actions of the Governor had had no
other thing in aim but the zeal for the Emperors Authority, sends to the
besieged some Ensigns with Eagles in them, that being set up in the Castle,
Citadel, and the City, they might procure respect to the Emperors Colors; but
the Governor getting notice of it, suffered them not to go in. Amidst these
Negotiations, Casal holding out, though there being daily gained on the Duke of
Mantua's side, if not advantages, at least hopes, arrives the news, which was
so much longed for in Italy, that Rochel was at last taken.

The King of England, to maintain it, had not failed to use his utmost force,
though, Buckingham being dead, much of that heat was quenched which inflamed
the War; for having sent a third Float under the Earl of Denby to its
assistance, it made a new attempt to bring it in, but the French Ships making a
brave opposition, the Dike was maintained against all attempts. The Sea
afterward swelling with a great tempest, dispersed and disordered the English
Ships, and and on the other side had such respect to the Dike, as if it had
conspired to the overthrow of the one and the glory of the other; the Tides,
which in the month of July and about the Equinox were wont to be more than
ordinarily violent and forcible, passed that year so calmly, that they did no
hurt. Denby perceiving that he could not compass his purpose, making a Truce
for a few days, to the end to retire with greater security, goes his way, and
the Rochelois having spent their Victuals, and the uncleanest things now
failing to satisfy hunger, seeing all hope of succors and safety vanished,
rendered themselves at discretion upon the 29. of October. The place, to say
truth, suffered during the Siege all that which by humane patience could be
endured, or which in any former times may have been suggested by despair. The
streets covered with dead Carcasses, made a show rather of a Churchyard of
bones unburied than of a City of living men; and those few that were found
alive, either languished like men or almost like Skeletons, seemed no less to
represent the Funerals of that proud City, than to signalize the Triumph of the
Conquerours. The King causing it for two days to be cleansed of the dead and
sick, made his solemn Entry the first of November, restoring the Divine
Worship, and giving life and liberty to all, except the Mother and Sister of
Rohan, who by persuasions and example having prolonged the Surrender, he
commanded to be kept in Arrest, not so much for punishment as to have the means
to bring the Duke more easily to obedience. He dis-infranchised the City,
demolished the Walls, except on the side toward the Sea, leaving Rochel little
else remarkable, but the memory of a strong place, and the renown of a
memorable Siege.

True it is, that it was much contested in the Kings Council, whether Rochel,
thus reduced, ought not to be kept with a strong Garrison, as a bridle to the
Huguenots and the repulsing of Strangers, and the Cardinal did not disapprove
it, as he aspired to take the direction and government of it; but discovering
that the King, with whom he did not yet enjoy that absolute power, which length
of time and happiness of success afterward gave him, had secretly promised it
to Monsieur de Thoiras, he chose rather to see the place razed to the ground
than in the hands of another. Whereupon from the labouriousness of the Siege
recollecting the danger, which from the Commanders themselves, if they should
revolt from the King, might happen of falling into the former evils, and
showing, that Brouage, which but a few Leagues off upon the Sea, he had caused
to be fortified for security of the Salt Pits, did plentifully supply the
benefits pretended, he easily brought to pass, that the pulling down the Walls
was reputed the most remarkable Trophy and greatest advantage of this Conquest.
By this most happy issue of the enterprise, which had been believed by few, and
was envied by many, the counsels of the Cardinal got more credit and esteem,
and the King publicly attributing the merit of it to him, heaped honors upon
him, to such a degree, that his Fortune, as a sign from Heaven, was venerated
as the destiny of the French, with predictions of greater Dignities, and was
looked at by Italy as the Pole of their own hopes.

The season far advanced, furnished therefore those of the Queen-mothers
Faction, with pretexts considerable to reprove the thought of succouring Casal,
and in particular the Kings going into Italy. The discourses in the Council
were; That the Army was wearied out, and the Soldiers in disorder from the
sufferings in so long a Siege; That an unreasonable Voyage was now proposed, to
traverse the whole Kingdom, and to pass over the narrow and steep passages of
the Alps, subject to Treacheries, and disputed by the Enemies Forces; That
Winter was coming on; and how an Army could march, and the Cannon pass through
the Snow and over the Ice? The nature of those craggie situations had at other
times been overcome by Art, but now by the rigor of the season Art it self was
overcome by Nature. The Forts, Arms, and Strengths of the Savoyards were to be
considered, who, if with a handful of men, they repulsed Uxelles in the Summer,
how will they not shut the passage at present when all things contribute to
their advantage? The Countries near to Italy were found to be infected with the
plague. In Italy it self the people perish for want of bread. To what purpose
then expose to hazard the Army that conquered Rochel, or rather the remainder
of them that beat the English, not only to military Factions, but to Plague and
Famine? That Soldiers who had overcome the Sea, repulsed the Enemy, and
chastised the Rebels, deserved other rewards, than to be carried beyond the
Mountains to a Grave as the scraps of glory, and no less of obedience. That it
was uncertain, whether Casal could endure the length of such a March, and if it
should yield to necessity whilst the Alps were forcing, and the Army was
getting into Italy, what way remained there more open for going forward, than
that of a dishonorable return? That it was therefore judged the most
warrantable counsel, since the season necessitated the delay, to except the
issue of things, sound the minds of the Princes, and after resolve upon the way
either of Treaty or Arms.

To these considerations were added the complaints and tears of both the
Queens; for Lewis having a feeling of some little indisposition, they
exclaimed, that Richelieu, not content to have kept the King in the Marshes of
Rochel and the unwholesom Air of the Sea, would now expose him to the colds and
inconveniences of the sharpness of the Alps. Many were of opinion, that before
engaging the Forces elsewhere, it was fit to conclude a Peace with England,
knowing also, that Rohan had an Army in Languedoc and some Towns, and that the
Duke of Savoy, to encourage him, offered to enter into Dauphine, and
assistances were promised from the Spaniards; and to adjust them in the Name of
Rohan himself, Monsieur de Clausel going with the Abbot de Scaglia to Madrid,
had made an agreement with Olivares, that money being furnished him by that
Crown, he, together with his Party, should continue the War in France. And
therefore Richelieu having often experienced, that in the attempt of great
things Fortune made them succeed above expectation greater, insinuated to the
King the just motive to show the Spaniards his resentment of former injuries
and the offenses of a later date, by justly revenging himself for the
assistance they had promised to the Huguenots, by maintaining the just cause of
a Prince in his own Kingdom, and by redeeming Italy from present oppressions,
and thereby satisfying the persuasions of the Pope and the instances of the
Venetians. His considerations were, That the difficulties which opposed the
succors, were the Mountains, the Season, and the Enemy; but that nothing was
invincible to the courage of the Nation, nothing impossible to the power, to
the greatness, and felicity of a King so pious. That when he had once set foot
in Italy, the affections and partialities of several Princes would be stirred
up, and those who under the yoke, for present fear, bemoan silently their
condition, would be the first that with greediness would breathe liberty again
and shake off the Chains: That the Forces of Carlo Emanuel were weak to make
resistance in so many situations and parts as there are passages, leading to
the Mountains; and if the Spaniards would join to make opposition at the foot
of the Alps, they would be forced to rise from before Casal. So that Fame and
Glory being the forerunners, the Victory would be without hazard, without
blood, and without contest: But that nothing could be achieved without the
Royal Presence, by reason of the Genius of the Nation, which, though it
undertakes with heat, yet quickly grows cool, when the eye of the King does not
quicken and inflame it: That it drew along with it the Guards, a People inured
to War, and faithful, it attracted the flourishing and valiant Gentry,
preserved Obedience and Discipline, made difficulties and wants be born,
dangers be overcome, battles won, and impossibility it self conquered, where
the Person of the King distinguished courage from baseness, and as a Companion
in sufferings and hazards, crowned true virtue with praise and reward. That the
Peace with England was in great forwardness, nor could the Huguenots be better
bridled, but by drawing the Army near to Italy, that is to say, toward
Languedoc, where is their greatest strength, and toward those Provinces upon
which the Spaniards and Savoyards together have their present designs. In sum,
so many conveniences and advantages concurred with it, as now forced a
necessity to second the counsels of reason.

The King assented fully to the enterprise, and to attempt it in person; for
having now tasted the glory of good success, he aspired to greater Triumphs,
and had naturally a great aversion to the Spaniards, and a greater desire to
keep them under. But the Cardinal not believing affairs yet in such a
condition, as to be able to come advantagiously to an open breach with them,
inclined nevertheless to the resolution of going into Italy, provoked by a
violent desire to revenge himself of Carlo Emanuel, and by interest to remove
the King from Paris, the proper Seat for the Intrigues of the Court, and
particularly of the Queens and their Faction, which could not be better
extinguished or weakened, but by keeping the King from thence, and amidst the
exercises of War have him under his sole eye and hand. To notify the action,
Monsieur de la Salodie, as a forerunner, was dispatched into Italy, to incite
the Princes to declare and unite themselves, now the King was come near to the
Alps with a puissant Army. Being arrived at Venice, he found in the Senate the
readiness he had always offered; extolling therefore the Generosity of the King
and the Prudence of his chief Minister, with an applause equal to the desire
with which they had solicited it, they wish a happy passage of the Alps, which
being, they assure they will concur in the common designs, with the third part
of those Forces which the King should judge necessary for the Action. The Duke
of Savoy employed several Arts to divert this agreement, suggesting by the most
secret means to France, that the Republic aimed at nothing but to engage it,
and afterward leave it alone in War with the Austrians: And to the Venetians,
that they should remember what had passed in the Valteline, and the old design
of the French to bring them to a Rupture with Spain, without caring to second
it.

But all attempts proving vain, Cordua was greatly perplexed: For if those of
Casal, taking courage from the hopes of succors near hand, showed more than
ever an obstinate resistance, his weakened Army did not admit of a joint
opposition with the Savoyards at the Alps, and to continue the Siege also.
Besides this, he knew and considered the present state of things; the Milanese
exposed, the Subjects discontented, the Places unprovided, Victuals scarce,
Provisions consumed, and Money wanting; for just in this year the Holland Fleet
under the Command of Peter Hein Admiral, advancing with a noble boldness into
the American Seas, had near the Island of Cuba taken the Fleet composed of
twenty Ships, which transported into Spain the Treasures drawn from those rich
Kingdoms. Whereupon, after a Meeting in Pavia with Nassau and Monterey, he had
dispatched Courriers in great diligence to Madrid for Orders and Supplies, and
to Vienna for assistance and re-inforcement.

From Spain nothing could arrive but slowly, and therefore his greatest hopes
were placed in Germany, where the power and good success of Ferdinand greatly
increasing daily, there remained nothing for him to desire more of Fortune. In
this year Tilly had taken in Verden and Stade; nor was there found ought else
which could resist, except some certain Islands secured by the Sea, or some few
Towns, which having Ports, kept a way open for succors. Whereupon Ferdinand
taking courage to attempt higher matters, inclines to make a restitution of
Ecclesiastical Goods, and particularly to get for the Archduke his Son the
Archbishopric of Magdeburg, which had been conferred on Augustus, second Son
of the Elector of Saxe. But Ferdinand upholding his purpose with force,
pretended, that the Cannons themselves being fallen from their power, as having
run themselves into the delict of Treason by adhering to the Enemy, their Votes
were illegitimate, and therefore the Election void.

Frizland was designed to have passed into the Islands of Denmark, if that
Winter the freezing of the Sea, as is usual, had afforded him a passage, or if
Ships could have been provided for him, which, though he assumed the Title of
General of the Sea, he had not been able to get, nor by any means to procure;
and that in Lubeck the Count of Swartzenburg for the Emperor, and Gabriel le
Roy for the Spaniards, labored all they could to persuade those maritime Towns
to have furnished them. But he, desirous at least to possess himself of Ports,
exercised the patience of the Duke of Pomerania with all sort of offenses, to
the end to bring him to some desperate resolution, which might give him a
pretext to deprive him of his Country. But that not succeeding, he besieges
Rostock and Wismar, Anseatick and Imperial Towns, with very considerable
Havens, and having taken them without much ado, passing also into the Island of
Rughen, prepares to straighten Stralsond.

The King of Denmark, to divert him, had possessed the Island of Vsdom and the
City of Wolgast in Pomerania. But Fridlandt, hasting thither with his wonted
good Fortune, gave the King such a defeat, as forced him to re-imbark and leave
the City it self as a prey to him. During this absence of his, those of
Stralsond making a Sally upon a Fort placed over against their Town, took and
demolished it; wherewith provoked, he begirts it with a more straight Siege, in
such sort that being almost reduced to extremity, they capitulated, by means of
the Duke of Pomerania, to render it, when Fridlandt, secure of the event, goes
his way to take possession of the Dukedom of Mechelburg, which, the Emperor
having deprived those Princes for having taken part with Denmark, had given
him, leaving the care to the Duke of Pomerania himself to receive the
Surrender, and put a Garrison into it.

But the King of Sweden, who with happy success made War in Livonia and Prussia
with the Polaccks, understanding the extremity, in which for want of powder the
City was, doubting, lest having taken the Ports of the Baltic, the
Imperialists might not only subdue Denmark, but render themselves terrible to
himself and his Dominions, sends an abundant Relief into it, with promise of
greater assistance; whereupon the Inhabitants taking courage, breaking the
Capitulation, persisted in their defense, which so much enraged Walstain, that,
if it were his custom to make War with great cruelty, he now protested to make
use of his Victory with all the excess of it. But in the brightness of so many
prosperities, from Stralsond arises that little Cloud, which far out at Sea is
wont, when it scarce appears, to burst out suddenly into dreadful storms. But
the World, that discerns not things to come, adored the Fortune of Ferdinand as
perpetual, and Italy in particular balanced the hopes of the French succors
with the fears of an Inundation of the Germans.

Besides these important cares, the Venetians not neglecting the Affairs of the
Sea, infested by many Pirates, had armed two great Gallions under the Command
of Giovanni Paulo Gradenigo, which in Company of two Galliasses, whereof
Anthonio Cappello, called Terzo, was Captain, arrived at Alessandretta. There
rode there at Anchor five French Ships, when as many English Pirates, coming in
on a sudden, set upon them with assured hopes to make them their prey. The
Venetians, not being able in view of their own Colors to suffer the insult,
taking into protection the French, who were the weaker, after a hard Encounter
made the English to be gone. The Turks were pleased with the defense of the
Port, and the French with the safety of their Ships; the complaints which the
English made, being with reason quickly stilled. In Venice happened, afterward
some distraction of minds for private interests, which, because unusual,
deserve to be taken notice of. They drew their original from disgusts betwixt
two Patrician Families, to wit, that of Cornaro, of Giovanni that was Duke, and
that of Zeno di Renieri Cavalier. This last, a man of a haughty spirit, had in
several occasions inveighed against the other, and being one of the three Heads
of the Council of Ten, had made use of the Authority of that Tribunal, to
rebuke the Duke himself for suffering his Sons to run out into diverse and
dissolute liberties. At which Giorgio, on whom, it seemed, these reproaches
reflected, falling into great fury, without his Fathers knowledge, a Prince of
singular piety and highest moderation, not far from the public Palace sets
upon Zeno, when by night coming out of the Council of Ten he was come down the
Stairs, and attempts with blows of Hatchets, followed by other Murderers, to
kill him. Wounded in several parts, he was nevertheless preserved alive; but
the dignity of the Public, the Council, esteemed in the Commonwealth sacred,
and the liberty it self of the Government remained violated.

Cornaro by a quick Sentence was banished by the Council of Ten with capital
and grievous penalties, the Character of his Gentility was cancelled, and in
the place of the offense a Memorial in Marble erected in execration of the
Fact. Whereupon Justice being rather satisfied than men's minds quieted, Zeno
being recovered, continued to inveigh often in public Harangues against all
the Family, and many adhering to the one and to the other, either for affection
or kindred, it was evident, that men's minds grew imbittered in the discourses
of Assemblies and the Walks of the Marketplace. Passing then from private
affections to public affairs also, a desire waxed big in many, that to the
Authority of the Council of Ten, which is one of the supremest in the
Republic, there might be some seasonable regulation made; whereupon in the
Election of persons, whereof it is composed, wont to be renewed in the month of
August, almost all those who were proposed in the great Council met with
exclusion. The most experienced Citizens apprehended danger from novelty,
always prejudicial, when under the pretext of reformation change makes a
forcible entry; the worst of Moths, which if not killed at first, quickly
destroys and corrodes the best ordered Governments. Nevertheless, it being
necessary to give equal contentment to the major part, by the great Council
were elected Niccolo Contarini, Anthonio da Ponte, Pietro Bondumieri, Baptista
Nani, and Zacharia Sagredo as Reformers, to the end, that concerning the
Authority of the Councils, and principally of that of Ten, they should within a
little time propound the Rules judged needful or convenient. There followed
with full Votes for the Election of Secretaries, for the granting of safe
Conducts, and doing other things of no great moment, several Consultations,
amongst which the chief was the abolition of the Authority, which by the
ancient Laws were given it, to revoke the Decrees of the great Council it self,
where, as is usual in things most important, they were not bound up to
particular Conditions and the strictness of Votes. There was also proposed by
the Reformers the Confirmation of the Authority which belonged to the Council
of Ten, with the enumeration of many cases, and with the power to be the sole
Judge of the Patricians in criminal Causes active and passive, with a choice
nevertheless to commit to other Magistrates those which were of lesser moment.
The contest hereupon was very sore, because it was the very thing wherein many
desired an alteration, it appearing too strange, that even in the most trivial
cases, the Nobles alone should be subject to the most severe Judicature, where
the way of proceeding is by Inquisition, with secrecy and a certain rigor
which they call the Custom. But our wise Ancestors knowing, that the chief bond
of Aristocracy is the chastity and moderation of that part which governs, have
been willing to put a bridle upon it, because from betwixt Rule and License
there would be too short a distance, if the Authority of the Laws and the
severity of Judgments did not interpose.

The first day it was proposed, no Decree passed in the Great Council, but the
Votes and Inclinations fully tended to reject it. Being taken into debate,
another day it was sharply spoken against by Renieri Zeno Cavalier, and
defended by Niccolo Contarini; but Francesco Contarini, Head of the Council of
the Quaranta Criminali, replying for the opposite Party with an eloquent
discourse, so moved the minds of the major part, that many not keeping silence,
prevented the Votes with their cries, when Baptista Nani beginning to speak,
making silence by the authority of what he was going to say, and by his gray
hairs and the gravity of his behavior giving credit to his reasons and
discourse, thus spoke; It is no new thing to me, that he is more applauded and
acceptable, who speaks to the liking of others, than for the public Good: But
liberty in Councils, truth in judging, and courage in difficulties shall never
abandon me. The itch of insatiable Ambition disquiets me not; the common hope
of Honors disturbs me not; nor am I moved with the desire of applause.
Constant in the adversity of my Country, I fear nothing; moderate in its
prosperity, I gain nothing. I look up to no other Pole, nor have other scope
than that which has been prescribed by our Ancestors, always venerable from
the duration of the Country. We are all strictly bound to this duty, to
transmit unviolable and unextinguished that light of Glory and Liberty, which
our Fathers have so many Ages ago consigned to us. I know, that man has no
office savouring more of Divinity than that of governing others; but it is a
thing of great difficulty, and if such be the government over inferiors, how
much more hard will it be to command over equals? But this is our glory, that
Majesty and Obedience take their turns; that we are equally capable to govern
and to be governed, that to the ambitious dignity of Command is associated the
virtuous moderation of a private life and the most easy yoke of the Laws. So
that our Republic is ordered like the Heaven, in which the Citizens, in
resemblance to the Stars, have, by office in the universal felicity, influence
and light, but with various Situations, diverse Aspects, and different Motions,
enjoying sometimes a fullness of light, lending it often to others, and then
themselves suffering an Eclipse. Ought we then to accuse the Divine Providence,
because it has not distributed to all the same offices and stations? Shall we
then also in our Country where Ten make a supreme Council, which by annual
change give place to the merits of others, stir our selves up to envy and
anger, because we all cannot be capable of it at once? I dread to think, that
there is any that detests the rigor of Justice, the severity of the Laws, and
the Authority of the Council of Ten. Let us in this case then suppose our
selves guilty from our selves, and to offend without punishment; will we quite
abolish Justice and Government it self? Let us, I pray, turn these invectives
against the offenses, let us abhor the Delinquents, let us make Decrees against
faults, and on the contrary, let us venerate that Ray of Divinity, which,
though it strike the wicked with Thunder, is a guide to the innocent. I account
the antiquity of such a Council always venerable, and the Ages by which its
Authority has been established; a Council chosen by our selves, composed of
our selves, is the Maintainer of the Laws, the Protection of Liberty, and the
Bridle of Subjects. But what shall become of us and our Posterity, if wanting
the sacred refuge of our defense, we shall think to offend without punishment,
and be audaciously despised? What protects the Dignity of Persons and of
Families, the security of quiet and civil living, the liberty it self of the
Government, but the Council of Ten alone, which sharply punishing offenses,
restrains with their Name and Authority the thoughts also of attempting them.
We by weakening it and exposing it to contempt, think by it to diminish
punishment, and by it provoke injuries. Do any perhaps, under the pretext of
regulating abuses, go about to abase the Power of the Government? A sad design,
which betrays to himself and his posterity the hopes of those rewards, which
the Country with considerable dignity largely imparts. Let such go out from
amongst us, let them not be esteemed worthy to be Sons of so great a
Commonwealth, and he that would withdraw himself from the Laws and from
punishments, contriving rather to make himself a Criminal, than aspiring to be
a Judge, like a Monster of Vice, let him be separated from us and cut off. In
our Republic this is the just equality not to do and not to suffer wrongs.
Away with such conceits, that those in Power ought to have a greater liberty,
and that punishments on Delinquents can be either too heavy, or judgments too
severe. This is the bond of our quiet and the quiet of our Subjects. Some Law
givers have omitted to mention punishments for certain outrageous faults,
believing that they could never happen in a well ordered Government. Our
Ancestors on the other side have been willing even in small matters to assign a
more severe judgment, to the end that not so much as the least offenses should
give encouragement of coming near to discompose the good order and integrity of
the Commonwealth. Happy the Country, most happy the People, and the Government
to be admired, which has for its Foundation Law, and for its Crown Liberty;
where those of the better sort excel in example, where he finds more restraint
that enjoys greater authority. Fathers, in point of Renown we have no cause to
envy any of the ancient States or modern Soveraignties. In the largeness of our
Dominion, we have wherewithal to content the moderation of our minds. In the
duration of liberty we surpass any Commonwealth whatsoever. But the
deliberation of this day is to overcome our selves; therein we give comfort to
our Subjects, example to Strangers, and occasion for a good Report. Let the
Venetian Nobility, all in a body, in the most majestical and authoritative of
their Assemblies unanimously determine, that if Empire and liberty at one and
the same birth be acknowledged from God, they willingly consecrate themselves
to Justice, and will govern the people with such moderation and sweetness, that
for the prevention of offenses, they make choice for their Court of Justice, of
the gravest, for Laws, the severest, and for punishments, the heaviest. Upon
these or like words, delivered with gravity, and received with great attention,
opinions and minds were so changed, that many blushing that they had thought
otherwise, the Decree with a great number of Votes was willingly embraced, and
two days after followed the Election of Persons proposed, for the new Council
of Ten, amongst which with great applause Nani was received, and what had
passed was registered in the public Records with an honorable memory of his
Name.

ANNO M.DC.XXIX.
Italy expecting succors from the Alps, and by succors safety, Lewis arrives
there with thirty thousand men, having left his Mother Regent at Paris. But
before the King moved, Luigi Contarini, the Ambassador of Venice, had gotten a
promise from the King of England, that he would not interrupt the enterprise;
and a while after the Peace was concluded, which, by the death of Buckingham
the private passions of Favourities being extinguished, consisted in few
Articles; To renew the ancient Treaties, restore Commerce, silence reciprocally
pretensions about Reprisals, prevent them for the future, and perform the
Conditions of the Marriage, if any difficulty should intervene amicably to
agree it. Each King reserved himself the liberty to assist his Allies without
breach of the Peace. The Copies of the Treaty, till the Ratification, were
deposited in the hands of the Ministers of the Republic, who by the Mediation
had gotten great reputation, especially Contarini, who within a while passed to
the Embassy in Ordinary of France. The King then freed from that distraction
marches toward Italy, having first sent to Mantua Monsieur de Landel, to carry
the News of it to the Duke, at a time very seasonable, when the Governor of
Milan assaulted him with secret promises, and Nassau pinched hard upon him,
who, being gone against Mantua, and requiring a positive declaration of
obedience or resistance, while the Duke, fenced with general conceptions,
denounced to him War and Force. To the noise hereof, the effects afterward
following, the Emperor orders, to please the Spaniards greatly troubled at the
march of the French, that his Army should descend into Italy. The Duke hereupon
in trouble betwixt the hopes of succors and the fear of dangers, equally near,
sending Pomar again to Venice, sollicites, together with the French Ministers,
the Republic to declare it self and assist him with a body of their men, that,
while the King forced the Alps, and the Duke of Guise with the Fleet would
endeavor landing, so to send succors to Casal, they might pass into, or
attacque the Milanese from this other side, for the assistance of one another
either by diversion or conjunction of Forces. It appearing to the Senate, that
the strength of the Army by Sea did not answer the fame of it, and many
difficulties discovering themselves, which might be met with at the Alps, the
Council thought it more wise to stay till the King should be in Piedmont. But
to the end the Duke might be able to maintain his Troops, they furnish him with
seventy thousand Ducats, and, to have all in readiness to second the Kings
undertaking, order General Erizzo to dispose of the Army into such Quarters,
that it might be quickly drawn together to give countenance to the Duke, and
jealousy to the Milanese, when the occasion should require it. Nine thousand
Foot and a thousand Horse being thus distributed on the Frontiers, gave great
jealousy to the Governor, who, to send a body to that side, so weakened
himself in the Camp, that he was scarce able to supply wherewith to keep his
Posts and Guards in the Trenches.

The Duke of Mantua kept together five thousand Soldiers in pay, but with
great difficulty, by reason of the continual want wherein he was of money; so
that, to please them with some advantage, and entertain them with booty, he
sent them into the Cremonese against Casal Maggiore, a Town rich and great,
kept by eight hundred men of the Country, who frighted at the approach of the
Mantuans, left it them in prey, scarce saving the Cannon by Water. It was
thereupon exposed to Pillage, and afterward abandoned. Sabioneda, as has been
said elsewhere, was possessed by a Princess of the House of Stigliana, who not
believing it secure from the Forces of the Borderers, had trusted it to the
Duke of Parma, who kept it with a great Garrison and exceeding much care, as a
pledge recommended to his trust by all Italy. The Spaniard had several times in
this Conjuncture desired of him to permit the entrance of a body of their men,
to trouble the Duke of Mantua and the Neighbors. But finding no forwardness in
the Duke, they applied themselves to Craft, causing Nassau to enter into it,
admitted by the Marquess of St. Vitale, the Governor, out of respect to the
Imperial Name of the Emperor; and at the same time they persuaded the Prince
Buzzolo, who had great pretensions upon the place, to draw near to it, giving
him hopes that the Gates, by means of the Imperial Commissary, should be opened
to him. But the Governor perceiving the design, the Prince found the defense
in such sort ordered, that without other attempt he retires, and Nassau thought
it best to be gone. It was moreover believed, that the advertisement to the
Duke of Parma of the design of Buzzolo came from the Spaniards themselves, to
induce him with the apprehensions of so many dangers to call them to a part of
the custody and defense of it. But he rather strengthens it, and Buzzolo,
having recourse to the Venetians, that they might give him means to attempt the
surprise of it, was dissuaded by them, both by the difficulty which would arise
in exploiting of it, and by the unseasonableness to draw stirs into those parts.

King Lewis, to facilitate his passage of the Mountains, made a new attempt to
overcome the mind of Carlo Emanuel, offering to add to twelve, other thirty
thousand Crowns of yearly Rent for his pretensions of Monferrat, and inviting
him to the enterprise of Genoua with the flatteries of greater advantages.
Whereupon the Duke taking a measure of the Genius of the Cardinal, whom from
the desire of revenge he judged to be brought in so cold a season toward
Italy, thought it too dangerous to draw under the title of Friendship so brave
an Army into the bowels of Piedmont, with the presence of the King and of a
Minister maliciously affected. He had his confidence in the season of the
Winter, in the nature of the Situations, in his own Forces, in the Succors of
Spain, and in the Motions of the Huguenots; whence he doubted not of Courage to
promote the good, and Art to extricate himself out of all Fortune. He was
become crafty above any other in selling himself at a dear rate at a time of
need, and was wont always, even to his Friends, to make show of necessity; but
at this very time, to keep all right, he received from the Governor all that
he devised to ask. He resolved to send him three thousand Soldiers, which was
the most he could do, not having been willing to weaken his Forces on the
Confines of the Venetians, or be diverted from strengthening the maritime
Garrisons for fear of the Army by Sea, though it appeared not, because the
Soldiers appointed for it were called to greaten that by Land. So that he
remained before Casal with only two thousand Soldiers in pay, and four
thousand of the Country; whereupon he sollicites the Princes obliged to send
their Proportions for the defense of the Milanese, but they all excused
themselves, it seeming that in some, at the appearing of the French Army, the
ancient respect to Spain vanished together with the present fear. On the other
side the French pressed, that the Princes of Italy would now be assisting to
their own safety, by joining themselves to their Crown.

But the Pope perceiving the intention to oppose the Austrians, now he saw the
French Colors on the Border of Italy, refused to depart from Neutrality, and
had appointed for Legate a Latere the Cardinal Anthonio, his Nephew, for the
negotiating of a Peace. The Venetians judging, that the coming of the King did
not sufficiently remedy the necessity, by reason of the coming down of the
Germans, and that Mantua was so begirt, that it could not receive succors from
France, consented to under-write a League with France and with the Duke of
Mantua, which being to last for seven years for the removing of present
dangers, and establishing Peace, obliged the Confederates to succor one
another reciprocally in case of Invasion; The King with twenty thousand Foot
and a thousand Horse, the Republic with twelve thousand of the one and a
thousand and two hundred of the other, and the Duke with five thousand of the
first and five hundred of the last. In proportion to the Forces the Conquests
were to be divided, if from the defensive they should be forced to attacque.
Jealousies were not wanting, even when it was ready to be signed: For the
Voyage of Monsieur de Botru, a Confident of the Cardinals, to the Court of
Spain, under a pretext to propose Expedients for the Affairs of Italy, but in
truth to discover the intentions of Olivares and the Treaties which he had with
the Huguenots, kept the Venetians a while in suspense; but the suspicions
quickly vanishing, they sent Girolamo Soranzo Cavalier, Procurator, Ambassador
Extraordinary, that he might congratulate the Kings Arrival in Italy, move him
to advance, and assure him of their constant adhering to the Interests of that
Crown. Being forced to take a long way about, (for that the passages were
almost all shut) the Secretary Girolamo Cavazza went before by the way of
Genoua and of the Sea, though in passing near Monaco he was by a Brigantine of
that Prince arrested Prisoner, and in the Town brought to the Marquess of
Castagneda, Spanish Ambassador in Genoua, who was accidentally there; but
being known for a Minister of the Republic, and no Dispatches found, which he
had torn and flung into the Sea, he was released. The King being come to Orso,
an inconsiderable Village at the foot of the Alps, filled Italy with the Name
and Glory of his Arms. But the Pass thereabout was stopped by the Savoyards
with three Barricadoes; and three Redoubts together with the Fort of Gelasse,
placed on a Rock, battered the way. A little further, where the Valley opens it
self, which points out to Strangers the broadest way to descend into Italy,
stands Susa, fortified with a good Citadel, and a little forwards, those steep
Mountains declining into Hillocks, lies Avigliana, as the Guard of the adjacent
Plain, and which at that time was provided with a numerous Garrison. The three
thousand men of the Spaniards, commanded by Marco Anthonio Belloni, Piemontese,
had the Guard of the places most advanced and exposed. The Duke had not been
able to stop the French Army, though he sent to the King the Prince Vittorio,
who as a Kinsman might carry him the testimonies of a greater confidence; for
the King referring all to the Cardinal, and he, showing an insuperable
constancy in not admitting any proffer, which carried not a secure Warranty of
faithful dealing, frustrated all attempts and endeavors. Treaty then being at
an end, the French, (the King present) attacque the Barricadoes with that force
of theirs which has no resistance, and possessed them with the Forts and
Redoubts, lodging all at once in Susa, and investing the Citadel. The Duke
greatly perplexed at this blow, dispatches again his Son with more ample powers
and secret instructions to conclude upon any Terms. The French had not a mind,
altogether free from the cares of the Kingdom, nor had at this time other aim
but to mortify the Duke and preserve Casal.

Whereupon Richelieu having in part obtained his purpose, concluded in Susa
with the Prince; That for the Kings Troops, in their going to Casal and return
thence, Victuals and Quarters should be furnished by the Duke; that at the
Charge of France, but with Corn of Piedmont, the Town should be provided by the
Duke himself; that in Hostage the Citadel of Susa and the Fort of Galasse
should be delivered, to be kept by a Garrison of Switzers; and if afterward
Cordua should voluntarily raise the Siege, the King consented, that Nizza
should by Switzers, in the Name of the Emperor, be kept for a month, after
which time it should be delivered to the Duke of Mantua, although he were not
yet invested by Ferdinand. Certain weeks were assigned the Spaniards to ratify
the Treaty, and not accepting it, the Duke promised to join his Troops to the
Kings, to invade the Milanese, in retribution whereof, and upon the account of
his pretensions, there were to be given him, together with Trino, a Revenue of
fifteen thousand Crowns in Monferrat.

The Duke approves every thing, and to ratify the Treaty with pledges of
greater confidence, comes to Susa much satisfied, to preserve for the present
his Country from an Inundation, and perhaps also to hinder the Spaniards from
taking Casal, with assured hopes, that such accidents must quickly happen,
which would not only prove favorable to him to retain what he possessed, but
to recover Susa, and carry on his advantages yet further. The Cardinal on the
other side rejoiced, he had obliged Cordua to rise at the Name and Reputation
only of the French Arms, succouring without any hazard and engagement the place
besieged. It appearing besides to him, as if he had flattered the vanity and
inconstancy of the Duke, his further thoughts were to make use of these Forces
and of the Conjuncture to give the Huguenots the last shake, before that from
the Spaniards or elsewhere they could receive assistance. In effect, the two
Contractors had no other aim but to gain time, little intending to perform the
things promised. But Italy not understanding so soon what was before them, the
unlooked for News of the Agreement of Susa brought great amazement.

The Venetians were now ready to invade the Milanese; for having understood,
the King had forced the passage of the Mountains, they had at the solicitation
of the French Ministers ordered their General to join the Duke of Mantua, to
attempt diversions and such enterprises, as they according to the occasion
should find fit. Erizzo then having spoken with the Duke in Villa Franca, and
knowing it impossible to pass to Casal through the Milanese, with a Journey of
more than a hundred miles, amidst so many Towns and with so many Rivers
between, resolves, leaving Candales with a body of men about Crema to alarm the
Spanish Confines, to join the Duke in Ostiano, and from thence to invade the
Cremonese with eight thousand and five hundred Foot and fifteen hundred Horse
of the Republics, and with five thousand five hundred Foot and twelve hundred
Horse of the Dukes. The Army just marching was obliged to halt, by the advice
which was come to Milan of the Treaty of Susa. It was believed, that the
Spaniards themselves had underhand contrived it to be brought to Pietro
Anthonio Marioni Resident for the Republic, expressly to divert Invasion on
that side, which by reason of the small Forces which they had there was an
exceeding trouble to them. But concerning the Treaty, the Venetians remained
discontented to extremity, not so much because Monsieur d'Avo, to persuade them
to the march, had assured them of the contrary, as because Casal seemed not
preserved but for a short time; whence foreseeing, that when the King should be
retired, and the Army diminished, the attempts would be reassumed by the
Spaniards, and the evil being prolonged rather than cured, time was given to
the Germans to come into Italy.

The Duke of Mantua complained also, that under the favor of an Army so
powerful, instead of the Succors he hoped for, he was to receive the greatest
damage, whilst Trin and a great part of Monferrat was given to Savoy. The
French alleged the preservation of Casal as meritorious, and the necessity of
not retarding the Succors as an excuse, understanding the place was reduced to
such extremity, that the Army would not have been able to arrive in time, if
they must have been forced to make their way with the Sword. In effect,
Gonzales drew off from the Siege so soon as he heard of the Treaty, and with
the Troops first advanced to Frassinetto retired afterward into Alexandria,
raging openly, that a certain prey had been taken out of his hand by the Duke
of Savoy; but rejoiced in his heart, that if the Capitulation of Susa saved
Casal, it preserved also the Milanese, at that time exposed by the weakness of
Forces, if it had been invaded, to a most certain ruin. Casal was presently
provided with fifteen thousand Sacks of Corn, brought in by the French, and by
others furnished by the Duke of Mantua, to whom the Venetians gave for that
purpose thirty thousand Ducats, besides another sum, to keep his Soldiers in
order with some small pay. Into the Town were put a good number of French under
Monsieur de Thoiras, Marshall de Camp, taking their passage through Piedmont,
and some were brought into Aqui and Nizza, whence the Spaniards were gone out.
The displeasure at their being brought in, more than the shame for the retreat,
vexed extremely Gonzales, the French arriving happily there, whence with so
much noise of Councils and Arms the Spaniards had endeavored to keep them far
off, and his jealousy was so much the more increased, when he understood, that
Father Joseph, a Capucin, most confident with the Cardinal, was going to Mantua
to propose amidst many pretexts to the Duke, that, to spare care and troubles,
he would yield Monferrat to the Crown, which should give him a Sovereignty in
exchange near to the Estate he possessed in the Kingdom.

Carlo from these dealings had occasion to know, that the succors of great
Princes are seldom done without respect to their own advantage, and
understanding at what the French aimed, he thought it good counsel, if he could
possibly bring it to pass, to dis-ingage himself as soon as he could, by
assenting to the Treaty of Susa, as well from the assistance of the one, as the
Hostility of the other Crown. Dexterously therefore rejecting the Propositions
of the Capucin, he sends the Marquess Striggio to give the King thanks for his
succors, and together with ample powers to execute the Treaty. But although
there was a Meeting upon it of Deputies in Buzzolino, a Town near to Susa, and
that the Mantuans offered to the Savoyards the choice of Lordships divided into
four Ranks; yet Carlo Emanuel, who thought of any thing but observing the
accord, first by several excuses, and after by the supervening of new
accidents, frustrates the business. The Ambassador Soranzo being arrived at
Susa, and finding the Agreement concluded, though he could not divert the
prejudices which were apprehended by the Republic, endeavored at last, that
the execution might be warily provided for, by deferring the departure of the
King and the Army till Ratifications should arrive from Spain. His
considerations to the King and Cardinal were; That Peace was not well grounded
upon words alone and promises, in an Age, in which fraud passes for expedience,
and infidelity is reckoned amongst advantages; but that security consisted in
fulfilling and effectuating Agreements. That fear of that unconquered Army had
extorted from the Duke of Savoy a Consent. Fame, the forerunner of the Glory
of so generous a Monarch, had forced the Governor of Milan from Casal. But
that agreements dictated from necessity, as by an unjust and violent Minister,
have always been observed to be of short continuance. If that troublesome and
inconstant spirit of the Duke be thought to be sufficiently fixed, it were but
reason to loosen the bond of Force. If the will of Gonzales be thought changed,
or the Maxims of the Councils of Spain moderated, he for his part consented
that the thought of Arms should be laid aside. But if in the one, from the
provocation of the affront, an ambitious heart be discovered, and in the other,
vexed to the purpose with shame, a haughty mind, and in both the gnawing desire
of Ambition and Empire be invited from difficulty; a false security would
delude the mind of so great a King, and scorn the counsel of his wise Minister.
That Glory was a Plant, which endured load and weight upon it self; but if
abandoned to the offenses of time, and the injuries of men, naked and torn,
though at first adored, within a while it would be despised. That from the Alps
the prosperous name of the Crown of France resounded through Italy; but if so
soon as arrived it disappears, its friends would within a while seek for
protection (...) two Archbishopricks, twelve Bishoprics, and a great number of
Abbeys and rich Monasteries, to the so great commotion of the Heretics, that
Saxe with all his Party highly complained of it, and denied that such Authority
was due to the Emperor alone without a Diet and the consent of the States of
the Empire. But flattered with a crafty promise, that the restitution should
not be pressed but in a judiciary and civil way, he within a while perceives
that the Generals of the Armies were deputed for the execution of it, who
confounding the doubtful with the certain, filled the Empire with alteration,
and the Princes with losses and complaints. The contrivance seemed of moment,
because the best Pieces and the Churches which had Principalities annexed, were
to be incorporated into the Sons and Family; the rest, to promote the
Reformation of Religion, were with vast riches to be given by the Emperor to
the Jesuits now exalted, and believed the Authors of this Decree, which,
considering the condition of the times, even to the most zealous seemed
unseasonable.

Designs stopping not here, he sends General Arnhein into Prussia with an Army
in favor of the Polacks, not so much in a thankful retribution of the succors
in the greatest pressure of his necessities, obtained from King Sigismond, as
to keep the King of Swede entangled in those parts. But the effect was very
differing from the counsel; for the Polacks, having a natural distrust of
Strangers, and in particular detesting the Germans, so soon as under the warmth
of this assistance they began to breathe with some prosperity, obliged their
King to make a Truce for six years. Whereupon Gustavus began to ruminate in his
vast mind upon vast thoughts, and provoked, or desirous to prevent the injuries
he feared, lent his ear to many invitations, which in the name of Princes
discontented and enviers of the Austrians were brought to him; and to lay the
grounds of some Intelligences and Agreement, he sent secretly to diverse Princes
Wolmar Count of Faremsback. But in Holland, England, and France, he found as
then rather a hearing than reflecting upon this Proposition of moving Arms
against Ferdinand, whilst the late Wars in Poland, with the felicity of
successes, had rather gotten the King the reputation of wise and valiant, than
renown to the Kingdom, believed by all no less poor than remote, and by
consequence too weak to grapple with the Fortune and Power of the Austrians,
now grown to a full age and well rooted.

Nevertheless Richelieu, who despised naught that was profitable and great,
resolves to send secretly Ministers to sound better the Genius and Power of the
King and the disposition of the Princes of the Empire. Faremsback, being by
by-ways got into Italy, and come to Mantua about the time of the Arrival of the
Germans, observed the Dukes great fear, and offered him diversion in Germany,
when with ready money he should give motion and means to the good disposition
of his King, richer in Courage and Iron than in Strength and Gold. At last
discovering the Duke in a condition rather to receive than give assistance, he
passes to Venice with Letters Credential; but demands nothing but the
convenience of a Galley to go into Dalmatia, his way lying to Buda, and from
thence into Transylvania to Ragotzi, succeeded to Gabor deceased, to settle a
friendship, and also to concert on that side more sensible and more than any
other important moving of Arms against Ferdinand. Such was the beginning,
little regarded by some, and derided by others, of that boisterous storm, which
was seen soon after to over-turn Germany in its greatest prosperity.

Ferdinands cares were now divided betwixt Italy and Holland, to retribute to
the Spaniards the Treasure so liberally spent, the Succors given, and the
Advantages procured him by so many Forces through the whole occurrences of the
Empire. The States of the United Provinces with a powerful Army of twenty four
thousand Foot and five thousand Horse held Boisleduc besieged, a Town which
with its Territory forms a principal part of Brabant; and which being formerly
attempted, but by its moorish situation defended, had frustrated both Art and
Force. Orange having now disposed his Quarters within a large Circumvallation,
and strengthened it with Works to be wondered at, enclosed it so strongly, that
having shut out all sorts of succors, and where the Earth permitted advancing
his approaches, rendered all other attempts useless to the Spaniards but that of
a diversion. And to this they applied themselves but late, Competition being
risen amongst the Commanders; because the Commission of Generalissimo being by
the King conferred on Count Henry of Berg, native of the Provinces of Flanders,
the Strangers, and particularly the Spaniards, accustomed to command, refused
to obey him. The dispute at last adjusted, they resolved to carry their Army
through Frise into Holland to oblige Orange not only to raise the Siege, but to
give the States such a blow, that putting the Country into disorder and
confusion, Tumults might be raised and some important Conquests also made.
Wesel then upon the Rhine being appointed for the place of Arms, Berg arrives
there with thirty thousand Foot, seventy Companies of Horse, and forty pieces
of Cannon, and after having scattered jealousies in several places and feigned
diverse attacques, passes that River on a sudden, and surprising a Pass upon the
Isel, esteemed the strongest defense in those parts, advancing into the Velaw,
whence without much contest the way opened it self to Amsterdam.

At the same time, according to resolutions agreed on at Vienna, the Count
Montecuculi with ten thousand Imperialists arrives, Count John of Nassaw with
eight thousand more being not far off, sent on purpose, that with the applause
of the Family and name he might divide the people, and put Oranges party into
confusion. Amersfort was rendered with little ado to Berg; Hem fell into the
hands of Montecuculi, the Croats in particular with the terror of their Fame
and Fortune pillaging to the Walls of Vtrecht, filling every thing with fear
and slaughter. The Spaniards then apply themselves to the Siege of Hattem,
placed in a situation, which, besides that it cut off correspondence with some
Provinces and places of importance, was of mavelous use for the Armies
wintering in the Velaw, which is the heart of the Country. The place was not
over strong, nor the Garrison sufficient to defend it; yet it held out for
certain days. The belief in Holland was, that for so many losses there was no
safety but in Orange, who was thereupon solicited by the Council of State to
abandon Boisleduc, and come to the assistance of the Country in that extremity
of dangers. He, either holding, as the Spaniards believed, secret
Correspondence with Berg, or desirous to reap the fruit and glory of Boisleduc,
now reduced to extremity, sends Count Ernest Casimir with some Troops, that,
animating and assembling the Militia of the Country, he should entertain and in
the best manner he could for some days oppose the Enemy.

But chance now brought a speedy and more secure redress to the affairs of
those Provinces. The Governor of Emrick, a Hollander, knowing that the
Garrison in Wesel was weakened, and that in the Wall, for the heightning of a
Bastion there was a place enclosed only with Palisadoes, attempts to surprise
it there, and luckily carries it, being favored by some of the Inhabitants,
most averse by reason of Religion to the Spaniards. Berg and Montecuculi
greatly astonished at this unexpected blow, seeing the way of their retreat and
the passage for their Victuals cut off by the Hollanders, not to lose their
Armies and remain buried in the dirt and ditches of that low Country, thought
best, abandoning Amersford and the Siege of Hattem to withdraw themselves
speedily and with safety into their own Provinces. Only Nassau remained in
those parts to see what occasion would bring forth: But Boisleduc in this
interim being rendered to Orange, he was also constrained to be gone.

The Spaniards, by reason of their applications wholly intent upon Italy, where
they hoped for great advantages, did not resent losses elsewhere, but instead
of revenging themselves, made a new offer to the United Provinces of a Truce,
which by some, now weary of the War, being hearkened to with applause, was at
last by the major part rejected, after long contestations, upon the persuasions
of the Ministers of Venice and France, who by their diligent cooperation
diverted them from it, doubting, lest to that great diversion a stop coming to
be put, the full tide of their Armies might overflow Italy. And they had just
occasion for it, because notwithstanding their engagements elsewhere, they saw
draw near to their Confines a brave Army of Ferdinands: Who sent Letters before
to the Cantons of Helvetia, by which he demanded passage for his Armies through
their Country, and besides that for the accommodation and security of his
Ensigns he might be permitted to keep the passages with his own Soldiers.

The Imperialists by such a motion aimed rather to amuse the Grisons and their
Confederates, to the end to take them unprovided, than to obtain what they
demanded of the Cantons; nor did their aim deceive them: for whilst with wonted
slowness the Switzers assemble themselves in Baden, and that the minds of all,
with the endeavors of the Princes interessed, were with great trouble turned
that way; the form of denying the Pass, and the means to oppose it being under
consideration in the Diet, the Imperial Troops joining at Meminghen in Swabe,
advanced with great expedition to Constans, and receiving a months pay at
Vberling, marched on to surprise the Steich, the strongest Pass of Rhetia. Nor
was it difficult to possess it, being unprovided, and through the whole Country
in the place of defense confusion and fear prevailing, Majanfelt in the very
brunt ran the same Fortune with Coira, where Monsieur de Memin, the French
Ambassador, who was then there, was taken and kept Prisoner. The Count John de
Merode led this party of men as a Vanguard consisting of ten thousand Foot and
fifteen hundred Horse. At this violence offered to Rhetia, Italy justly
trembled, seeing yet greater dangers imminent. The Ambassador of Spain and the
Resident of the Emperor, to provoke them to greater suspicions, or to make
trial of them in this Conjuncture of their great apprehensions, communicated to
the Venetians the march of these Troops as intended only to maintain the Rights
of the Empire in Italy, to which the Catholic King also, so nearly joined in
blood and interest to Ferdinand, could not deny him his assistance. And
therefore invited the Republic to second the design, and adhere to their
party, approved by the occasion and by Heaven, because in their friendship they
would find quiet and advantage.

The Senate always accustomed in the greatest hazards to show themselves more
resolute and constant, in short and grave words complying with their duty,
applied themselves to their own defense, making Levies and providing the chief
Cities and places with Money, Victuals, and every other thing necessary. It was
given out, that the War would fall to be in Friuli, though every body believed,
that Mantua was to receive the first blow; in regard that that State, as a
Peninsula, being interwoven within that of the Republic, its danger concerned
it equally with their own. Wherefore after having dispatched Marco Anthonio
Businello, Secretary, to reside in Mantua, they sent the Duke a great sum of
Money, Ammunition, and Cannon, with Matroses and Engeniers, that he might make
provision of Corn, and be before hand with his Fortifications. In France
pressing instances were made for diversions and succors. But the King, though
for the insult upon the Grisons and the arrest of his Ambassador he showed
himself grievously offended; nevertheless instead of coming back to Susa,
returns to Paris, Richelieu with the Court following him. This retreat, which
afflicted Italy and struck the Venetians with great dislike, had not so much
its impulse from the Kings apprehension, who saw many of the Gentry dye and
sick in the Camp, as from the Plots which were working against Richelieu by the
Queens in Paris, and from the retreat of the Duke of Orleans in disgust, that
the Queen Mother fearing, lest he should with violence take away the Princess
Mary to marry her, had caused her to be kept in a manner Prisoner in the Bois
de Vincennes. The King indeed had caused her to be set at liberty, but with
order to his Brother, betwixt themselves, not to marry her without the Mothers
consent; whereupon against the Cardinal, believed the Author of this
contrivance, was equally stirred the hatred of the Queen and of the Duke. The
one therefore sets her self to work his destruction, whilst the other, retired
into Lorrain and well received by the Duke, being greedy to involve France in a
civil Combustion, published a Manifest, in which concealing the causes of the
amorous flames, those of hatred against the Cardinal were sufficiently vented,
arraigning the form of the present Government.

The burden then of the War of Italy rested upon the Venetians, and France
persuaded them to undergo it without fear, with promises of greater assistance,
when invaded in their own Dominion; it seeming, that the Mantuan, whither the
Arms of that Crown could not reach, was in all respects to rest upon the care
of the Republic. Monsieur de Razilier was nevertheless dispatched by the King
to Crequi, with orders that he should press Savoy to the execution of the
Accord; and thence passing to Mantua, should encourage that Duke, and solicit
the Venetians to take into their possession the passages of the Valteline, to
stop the Germans way; but difficulties too great opposed themselves, the
Imperialists having now Rhetia in their power, and being able by other ways to
go into the Milanese; whence the French saw it necessary to change design and
resist by more powerful means the prejudices feared from that side. Whereupon a
Council being held at Paris, where was present the Ambassador Soranzo, who
consenting that the Republic should come in for a third part, it was agreed,
that at a common Charge four thousand Switzers should be levied, to which
joining four thousand French Foot and five hundred Horse, the recovery of the
Passes by force should be attempted. The counsel was seasonable to hinder the
Spaniards from Succors in future, and to keep the Imperialists distracted or
engaged amidst those Mountains, if to the warmth of the resolution there had
followed an effect of suitable expedition. But whilst the Mareshal de
Bassompiere was designed for the command of these men and the direction of the
enterprise, and that he knowing the Cardinal ill affected toward him, feared,
lest in the heat of the business he should abandon him and ruin him, and
whilst that Coevre was substituted into his place, (who for the future shall be
called the Mareshal d'Etre) and whom the Switzers and Grisons, mindful of
things happened formerly in the Valteline, openly opposed; the opportunity and
the season vanished: so that when Bassompiere, accepting at last the Charge,
went amongst the Cantons, he effected nothing but the Levy of a Body of that
Nation to reinforce the Kings Army which returned into Italy; Richelieu
excusing to Soranzo the mutation of Councils by the change of times, because
the plague infested Rhetia, the Snow shut up the passages, and above all the
Switzers on several considerations refused to carry their Arms in open
Hostility against the Colors of Ferdinand.

Carlo Emanuel, that had stirred up the Emperor to send his Armies into Italy,
and with specious offers had presented himself for his Captain General,
solicited the French to render to him the Town of Susa, alleging that by the
retiring of Cordua, the Corn brought into Casal, and the giving passage to
their Troops to garrison it, he had on his side fulfilled the Accord. But he at
the same time fortifying Avigliana, and more and more closing in confidence
with the Austrians, gave clear arguments of an irreconciled and hostile mind;
whereupon Richelieu lets him know, that the Crown would keep that Pass of the
Alps, till the Emperor should restore those of Rhetia to the Grisons.
Ferdinand on the other side, renewing the respect of that people by giving
liberty to the Ambassador Memin, quits not the possession of the Passes, nor
gives the Investiture to the Duke of Mantua, though in order to the Treaty of
Susa, King Lewis, by the means of Monsieur de Sabran, instantly required it;
but rather refuses every thing until the Crown of France should engage it self
in Italy, and take part in that cause, the decision whereof belonged to his
Authority.

The Spaniards also, alleging the introducing of the French into Monferrat,
refused to ratify the said Treaty of Susa; but to justify the delay, or
rather to try men's minds, and keep the Armies in suspense, dispatch to Paris
the Secretary Navazza with the President Monfalcon, Ambassador of Savoy, to
offer, that France withdrawing the Garrisons out of Monferrat and Piedmont,
they on their side would forbear troubling of Nevers, and remove jealousies
from the other Confederates of that Crown. By this it was perceived, that they
had no other aim but to exclude all defense from Italy, that so the Imperial
Troops, entering thereupon and changing name or pretext, it might relapse under
scourges and plagues yet more cruel. Advertisements of it came already from all
parts, and the signs of it seemed clear; for that other nine thousand Foot and
fifteen hundred Imperial Horse were near their arrival, and other Troops
followed them under Count Rambald Colalto, a Vassal of the Republic, and
honored with the Character of a Patrician; but being bred in the Wars of
Germany from his younger years, and enriched with an Estate and Honors served
Ferdinand in this Expedition in the Charge of Commander in chief. But the
Emperor desiring that terror might make plain the way for his Army, to divert
by fear the Prin^es from declaring in favor of the Duke of Mantua, had
answered as the Popes Ministers, who persuaded him to send Commissioners to try
the way of an amicable agreement, that Fridland with the suit of fifty thousand
Soldiers should be his Commissioner, whose name as much as it was famous by
his Fortune, so much was it rendered terrible by his cruelty.

But although in the straightness and amidst the wants of Rhetia, the German
Troops could not long subsist, nevertheless being supplied with Money and
Victuals by the Governor of Milan, it was requisite to stay there for some
days; for, although the march was undertaken at the instigation of the
Spaniards, yet the Seat of the Monarchy and of the Councils being far remote,
and the Genius of that Nation slow, Correspondencies on their side could not be
speeded in a readiness suitable to the resolutions. Spinola especially was
expected in Italy, destined thither with great reputation and vast hopes, that
he would correct Cordua's errors, and restore the Luster of Arms; but the
scantness of pay being not sufficient for the greatness of the preparations, he
prolonged his imbarking for some months. In this interim thirty Gallions, come
out of the Ocean, were his forerunners to scour the Mediterranean, and to
oppose the attempts of the French Fleet, which, as said, was by way of the Sea
to bring men and succors into Italy; and a report was added, that they were
already advanced into the Adriatic: whereupon the Venetians, accustomed to
consider all where there was question of much, gave command that the Fleet
should he strengthened with ten Galleys of Dalmatia and Candia to be presently
armed, and greater preparations were put into an order, if there should be
occasion. At Land, watchful with the greatest diligence, they ordered the
assembling of ten thousand Soldiers, their Subjects, and agreed for numerous
Levies of French, which were to pass out of Provence by Sea, under the Duke of
Candale, the Chevalier de la Valletta, and the Duke of Rohan, who, to quiet the
Jealousies of the Court of France, was come to Venice; and they sent to Mantua,
discovering as danger approached the faith of that people to be wavering, four
thousand men for the preservation of the place, and three hundred Albanese to
arm a Galliot and some Barks in the Lake, disbursing money, that the Duke under
his own Colors might levy four thousand men more. But Spinola, dis-embarking
at last in Genoua with many Soldiers and with seven hundred Cases of Pieces of
Eight, came to Milan, and brought the money into the Castle with Pomp, with
money and fame recruiting the Army in a moment. And now the Germans, who,
Colalto being joined, amounted to thirty thousand Foot and five thousand Horse,
marched, and being arrived in the Milanese, extended their Quarters, longst the
Rivers Adda and Oglio, to the Confines of the Venetians. On this side of the
said Rivers coasted upon them Marco Justiniano Proveditor Extraordinary in the
Bergamasco, with Colonel Milander and a Squadron volant of betwixt three and
four thousand choice men, to repress any insult, which the insolence of that
Army might make; but miserably afflicting the Towns of the Milanese, they
contained themselves toward those of the Venetians in great discipline.
Continuing afterward their march toward Mantua, amidst the confusions, which
the fury of Arms brought with it, Treachery was also discovered; whereupon in
Viadana was arrested a French Officer, who by means of the Prince of Guastalla
plotted to deliver that place to the Governor of Milan; and in Mantua was made
public a Conspiracy framed against the life of the Prince. It happened at this
very time, that the Duke of Main, Son of Carlo, in his passage to Casal, was at
Pergola on the Borders of the Piacentino taken Prisoner by the Marquess
Malespina, with the loss of certain Jewels and some money; but delivering him
to a Company of Horse to guard him to Milan, the Duke made his escape and got
safely into Casal. Amidst so great disturbances, Spinola secretly exhorts the
Duke of Mantua to humble himself, by lodging of Soldiers, depositing his
States, and referring himself without exception to the clemency of Ferdinand
and the piety of Philip. Julio Mazarino, who, as substituted to Panciroli, the
Popes Nuntio, begins now to appear in business, as a thin Vapor that became
afterward the brightest Star of Europe, carried to the Duke himself a project
in the name of Spinola for a Cessation of Arms. But that being not to be
practiced without depositing of places and giving Quarters to Troops; and
Colalto denying that he had a power to conclude a Truce, the Duke, showing
himself resolute in the most perilous courses, declares, that being under the
protection of the Crown of France, it behoved him to communicate to that Court
every Proposition of Accord.

The mischiefs of the War being now not to be restrained longer, and the Siege
of Mantua seeming to be near, the Republic resolves to maintain it with all
their power; for which purpose the General Erizzo, after having spoken with the
Duke, incamps the Army, which consisted of about eighteen thousand Foot and
Horse in Valezzo, a place which covering Verona and Peschiera, was made
commodious for its own defense, and convenient to send succors to Mantua.
Colalto publishing an Edict in Milan, by which in the name of the Emperor he
commanded the people to withdraw their obedience from the Duke, requires of the
Prince of Bozzolo the delivery of Ostiano, and at the same time, without
expecting an answer, caused the Count de Soragna to surprise it. Casting a
Bridge there over the Oglio, and fortifying the Banks on each side with a
Garrison of fifteen hundred men, the Army halts there for some days, either by
reason of the Rains which fell in the Autumn, or the Fever, which having
seized Colalto obliged him to stay in Cremona. The Army at last marching again,
the first places of the Mantuan, that suffered, (which may be called rather
desolation than spoil) were Vogezzo, Cigognera, and Volongo. Thence four
thousand men took their Post at Isola, and fifteen Companies at Piadene.
Viadana, a great place, was presently invested, and the Town being not able to
resist, la Rocca also, a very weak one, after some shot of Cannon was yielded.
The Duke had not placed his hopes in their defense; but thinking by cutting the
Banks to have drowned the Germans in the Po, the blow succeeded not; for that
Balduino del Monte, to whom the care was committed, had executed the order out
of time. By another body of the Imperialists was possessed Caneto, abandoned at
their first appearance, because it was a place not to be kept, by Angelo
Corraro, a noble Venetian, who, banished out of his Country, had taken Service
under the Duke. There being no Town capable to resist, nor Army which could
dispute their progress in the field, the Germans ravaged over all, desolating
and burning every thing with so much slaughter, that sacred things being
violated by the military impiety, and this using yet more cruelty against the
profane, with unheard of arrogance of burnings, killings, and rapines, that
unhappy Country, heretofore amongst the pleasantest of Italy, was left for a
long time a hideous field, where posterity shall for a great while behold the
most outrageous marks of barbarism. Nor did the Confines of the Republic escape
wholly free, after the Imperialists had possessed in the Mantuan the Towns of
Ostia and Pontemolino; but there being disposed into several places
Horse-Guards of Cappelletti, by them and the Peasants the Germans were often
repulsed and sometimes beaten. Some hoped, that the Seraglio might amuse the
Army for some days. This is an enclosure a few miles out of Mantua, made up
partly by moorish grounds, and partly by certain Works of Earth of a great
circuit and difficult to be kept; nevertheless some were of opinion that it
should be defended, because Winter being near, and the Enemy suffering by many
inconveniences and great disbandings, the gain of certain days was reckoned
for no little advantage. The Duke doubting with reason, lest in so great a
compass, it being not possible to keep it every where, the Germans should break
in upon some one part, and cut off the way of retreat for his men into Mantua,
abandons it. The force then of the attacque and the care of the defense was to
be reduced to about the City alone.

Mantua is by nature of a very strong situation; the River which at its source
is called Sarga, issuing out of the famous Lake di Garda, takes the name of the
Mincio, and passing through the midst of Peschiera, a little below enters into
the Borders of Mantua. There where the City is placed it flows into a Lake,
formed by Art in those times that the principal Cities of Italy, torn by
intestine discords, groaned under the Tyranny of particular Lords. So that
Mantua is environed with waters in the midst of many moorish grounds. Certain
Bridges join it to the Continent; the two longest do end, the one al Porto,
which is a Citadel with regular Bastions, the other at the Suburbs of St.
Giorgio, composed of many houses, but of little defense. Near to this Bridge
lies the Castle, joined to the City by an ancient Building, and part of the
most ample Palace of the Dukes. Where it came nearest to the Terra firma, three
other little Bridges called della Pradella, di Pusterla, and del The, served to
as many Ports, with a certain little Island between, kept for the pleasure of
the Prince. The place therefore was not thought easy to be won, the Artillery
being not able to batter the Walls but from far; the approaches being not to be
joined to the Wall; nor the largeness of the Lake suffering so straight a
Circumvallation, but there would remain many ways open for Succors. The
circumference it self of the Walls had been very much fortified with new Works,
and the Dukes Soldiers being almost mouldered to nothing, the Garrison was
increased by the Venetians, besides the four thousand Foot formerly sent, with
one thousand Foot more and five hundred Horse. The City was now believed in a
condition able to consume the Enemy, and give time for Succors, which was
alone expected from France. Great doubt only arose from the courage of the
Inhabitants inclining to the Austrians; because under the Government of a great
Prince, some imagining they should have peace, and others fancying to
themselves advantages, all abhorring the present evils and imminent calamities,
detested their new Master, as who seemed the occasion of them. As to other
places of the Country, it was agreed, by the means of Giovanni Martiningo,
Superintendent of the Artillery, sent by Erizzo to Mantua to view the
Fortifications, that the Duke with his men should keep Governolo, where the
Water-sluces served to overflow the moorish grounds of the Lake, and that by
the Garrison of the Republic should be defended Castle Giufre and Goito
together, which standing on the Banks of the Mincio, betwixt Mantua and
Peschiera, might be greatly useful to help in Succors. But Governolo,
abandoned with weak resistance by the Mantuans, fell into the Germans power, as
also Gazuolo, whence some few Venetians withdrew, who neither for the place nor
for the number were able to defend it. Amidst the flames of the Mantuan were
heard also the tears and cries of the Monserrins; for Spinola sending Philip
his Son to Valenza, had commanded Ferrante Guevara with four thousand Foot and
five hundred Horse to possess that part of the Monferrat, which is called the
Lower. The gross of the Spanish Army entrenched it self at St. Salvador and
other Posts about Casal, in which Thoiras, having abandoned all places else
except Rossignano and Pontestura, was with three thousand and five hundred
Foot. Spinola therefore had not yet a mind to engage himself in the Siege of
the place, but only environ it at large and incommodate it, not so much because
the Winter season was coming on, as to keep the Army free, to oppose the
French, if they should return anew into Italy, and that the Germans in the mean
time might make themselves Masters of Mantua: Which place taken, Casal was
after to be attacqued by the Spaniards, and the Imperial Army to be in a
readiness to hinder Succors.

These designs were made known in France, together with the progress of their
Arms to the prejudice of the Duke of Mantua and the danger of the Venetians,
who incessantly put the King and Cardinal in mind of the Word, Faith, Interest,
and Honor of the Crown, with those incitements that might provoke the warlike
Nation, the magnanimous King, and his most generous Minister. But nothing was
obtained but hopes and promises, Richelieu protesting, that neither Italy nor
the Republic should receive the least prejudice; and so the motion of the
French was retarded till toward the end of the year, either by the agitations
of Court not yet fully quieted, or because, believing it difficult in the
concourse of so many Forces in Italy to maintain, with a felicity of success
equal to the expectation of the World, the Grandeur and Glory of that Crown,
they had a mind that the storm should vent it self, and, the Armies of the
Austrians consuming themselves in the mean time, to come upon them afterward
with fresh Troops of greater strength, to give Law more easily to their
consumed Enemies and wearied Friends. At last, mischiefs drawing to extremity,
it was resolved at Paris, that the Cardinal with Title of Generalissimo should
move toward Italy, and that, to draw to Court during his absence Orleans, who
showed an abhorrency to him, the King should go near to receive him on the
Confines of Lorrain, and should, to content him with something of appearance,
put under his Command a small body of an Army in Champaigne for the defense of
the Frontiers. The Cardinal goes out of Paris with great applause, carrying in
his hand the Authority of the King and the Forces of the Kingdom, but not with
a mind free from many cares, which his long absence from Court gave him, and
the Orders, as precise as deep, of the Queen Mother, which charged him, upon
severe protestations of disgrace, not to break openly with Spain. Whilst he was
ordering his march in France, Mantua suffered bitterly in the Siege.

The Germans, to say truth, declined quickly in their strength, because,
besides the evils of the season and the Climate, being accustomed in the wide
Provinces of Germany, where instead of pay they have recourse to military
license, they were in want, in the narrowness of the Mantuan, wasted already by
Sword and Fire, not only of prey, but also of food. So that many died, some
languished with sickness, and others sought their escape by running away.
Neverless the Army drawing near the City, threatened the Bourgh of St. Giorgio,
believing it as weak to resist as convenient to lodge in. The Prince de Buzzolo
going into Mantua, endeavored to persuade the Duke, from dangers and accidents
something disturbed and in disorder, to deliver it up, to show some kind of
respect to the Emperors Colors, to give occasion for a Treaty, and to stop the
proceedings of the Army, which being weakened and in want of many things, had no
pretense but to preserve the Emperors honor with some seeming appearance.
Durant, a Colonel of the Venetians, opposed that counsel, offering to maintain
the Burg with his men, and for some days weary and hold the Enemy play, gaining
by that vigor those advantages, which could hardly be hoped for from a showing
of weakness. But the Duke, too warily preferring the deceitful before the
reasonable, sends to the Marquess Frederick Gonzagha to deliver it to
Aldringher, who in the place of Colalto, yet indisposed, had the Command of the
Army. The Germans ascribing all to necessity, and not to respect, were so far
from consenting to a suspension of Arms, hoped for by the Duke, that they
rather required to put a Garrison into the Citadel of Mantua, and to have the
keeping of a Gate. They then put by the hopes of obtaining it, because the Duke
incensed showed himself resolute to hold out and defend himself, planted
several Batteries in the Burg, and particularly in the Churchyard, which
stands there in a situation something eminent. Against the Cereso they raised
others to gain that Post, by which they opened an entry into the Island of the
The, and might better than elsewhere approach to the Walls of the City. But
finding stout resistance, and being several times with great loss repulsed,
they betook themselves to Art, making a Truce with the Garrison for three hours
only, during which, digging secretly a covered way, they surprised the Post,
the Soldiers that kept it, upon such an unlooked for assault, taking the
flight, leaving their Ammunition and Arms behind them. Durant, by reason of the
importance of the place, not being able to suffer the loss and mischief by it,
a while after making a Sally, drives them out of it with great bravery,
fortifying himself there in such sort, as rendered all the Enemies attempts
afterward without effect.

On the other side, the Germans under the favor of their Batteries were
advanced even to the middle of the Bridge of St. Giorgio, when being assaulted
by a strong and numerous Sally, they gave way leaving their Arms and Gabions in
the power of the Duke. The Citadel of Porto with its Cannon made their approach
to it difficult; when they, craftily sending a Trumpet to that side, whilst he
went softly on, and the Garrison intermitted shooting to expect what Message he
should bring, they planted one Gabion, and, under covert of that, ranging
others with what haste they could, covered themselves by flinging up earth.
Those within were quit with them in another place, driving the Enemy out of an
Inn they had fortified, which gave them great annoyance. But if attacques were
successful, hunger in the Camp advanced, the Venetians having stopped all
passages for bringing Victuals to them, and Corn, for want of which all Italy
miserably suffered. The Army having wanted bread for some days, were ready to
withdraw, when Corn being abundantly supplied out of the Popes Dominions by a
Contract made with the Costaguti Merchants in Ferrara, under the name whereof
it was said, that the Popes Kindred by buying and selling made great profit.
The Venetians were offended at it, complaining and concealing it not, that for
the price of that Corn was sold the liberty and safety of Italy. No want of
Victuals was as yet in Mantua, because the Republic had plentifully provided
it for a year but of the Soldiery in so many occasions many were lost, and the
Ammunition consumed; whereupon it being needful to think of relief, a thousand
Foot were sent by Erizzo, with much Ammunition, convoyed by three thousand
other Foot and four hundred Horse, which without any ill rencounter coming to
the Lake of Mantua, and, by error in the adjustment, not finding Boats ready
there to carry them into the Town, were forced to retire. Nevertheless a little
while after, Intelligence being better settled with the Duke, they got safe in,
to the unspeakable joy of the besieged. Pietro Quirini Proveditor of the
Cavalry of Croats and Albanese, and Colonel Milander, returning from the
Convoy, meeting with seven hundred German Horse carrying away some Booty, beat
them, chasing them in such sort, that leaving, their prey, they had no thoughts
but to save themselves. Aldringher made aware by this succor, of what
importance the place of Goito was, goes thither with three thousand Foot and
twelve hundred Horse; and was no sooner arrived but gave an assault upon it,
but was bravely repulsed by the Garrison. Bringing afterward Cannon and with a
few shot making a breach in the Wall, not supported by a Rampart, the Governor
taking fright renders it against the will of the Soldiers of the Greek Nation,
who were of the opinion to maintain it, and therefore so soon as he came into
Mantua he was publicly punished with infamy; whereupon a great entrance
remaining shut for the relieving of Mantua, the Venetians endeavored to keep
open at least that of Castle Giufre, whence Erizzo let in three Companies of
Relief, and committed the Guard and Command of the Post to Colonel Lunge, a
French man. And the Imperialists knowing now the importance of it, had their
aim upon it; but by reason of the time of the year, and not to divide their
Troops into too many parts, sparing force for the present, betook themselves to
Art, causing Giovanni Giacomo Pancirolo, the Popes Nuntio, to tempt the Duke
with wonted flatteries to deliver it to Colalto, that from redoubled
testimonies of obedience to the Emperors Colors being satisfied, he might at
last incline to some Accord, or at least to a suspension of Arms. The Duke,
rendered more wary from what had happened at St. Giorgio, rejecting so
pernicious Propositions, placed his safety now more in Defense than Treaty. He
molested the Enemy with frequent Sallies, keeping him busied and distracted in
several parts, and one night particularly surprised la Vergiliana, where the
Germans, that were not killed or Prisoners, were drowned in the water by the
breaking of a Bridge, by which they thought to make a running escape: Assents
nevertheless at the endeavors of the Nuntio, that there should be a suspension
of Arms for a month, but to no purpose; because Colalto pretended to have
liberty in that interim to fortify himself in his Posts, that no Victuals
should be carried into Mantua but from Countries far off, and that Carlo should
sign Duke of Nevers, refusing the Expedient, which, something to facilitate the
business, he offered, to sign by the name of Carlo, or of Carlo the Duke,
without expressing of what. Hostility then continuing, the Venetian General
considering of a new supply, sends under Count Bartolomo Soardo, Bergamasco,
other five hundred Soldiers with Powder and Match, that were for the most part
Greeks that were come out of Goito, the Nation desiring it, that by the proof
of hazard the Surrender might be confirmed not to have happened by their
default. They all got safe in, convoyed near to Goito by a Body of Horse which
halted there to beat back whatsoever coming forth should disturb their way.
With this Relief the besieged taking new courage, multiplied more and more
their Sallies, and in one from the Cereso gave the Enemy a notable blow. The
Germans now began to find that there was no hope either to famish the place or
take it; but the thoughts of retiring vexed them not less, whilst the Dukes
Sallies and the difficulty of the miry ways made it impossible to bring off the
Cannon in safety. Applying themselves therefore to Artifice, they caused
Mazarine to propose to the Duke a short suspension of Arms. He first rejects it
in respect to the French Army, upon the way for his Relief, resolving not to
make a step without the Kings knowledge. At last, overcome by Mazarine with the
urgency and power of his words, he consents to abstain ten days from Sallies.
It was enough for the Germans to free themselves and withdraw the Cannon,
leaving nevertheless for haste in their Quarters certain Morter-pieces with
some Ammunition. The Venetians would have wished, that Army might rather have
consumed it self in the sufferings and factions about Mantua, than opportunity
been given them to retire into more commodious Quarters, and were of opinion,
that such Treaties served rather to retard than hasten the French Succors; nor
did the Duke of Savoy fail to make use of it, sending immediately, to hinder
Richelieu, the advice into France, that a suspension of Arms being settled,
there was great hopes of an adjustment. But the Cardinal, knowing the deceit
and what was aimed at, continues his March.

The Germans, though at a distance from Mantua, kept it nevertheless blocked
with several Posts, placing the principal Quarters in several Fiefs of the
Empire which are thereabouts, as Nuvolara, Corregio, and others, and taking it
by force where Quarter was denied, as happened in the County of Mirandola, with
a great blow to that little Country. The Duke of Modena freed himself by
disbursing money, and receiving Colalto, yet indisposed, in Reggio, with his
Guards. In Castiglione and in Solferino, by encouragement of the Venetians,
who, in case of Force, promised their assistance, they were kept out by the
Mothers of those Princes yet under Tutelage; and in Solferino, under the name
of their own Fathers, the Princess, Donna Marcella Malaspina of Verona, brought
some Soldiers of the Republic. The Duke, to enlarge himself and to open
Commerce with the Camp at Valezzo, recovers Curtartone and Montanara, and
presenting the Cannon before Marmirolo, forced the Germans to leave it, though
those of Goito attempted to bring succors into it, but were beat back by two
thousand Foot and a thousand Horse of the Venetians, which under Prince Luigi
d' Este countenanced the design.

In this manner ends this calamitous year; for with the entrance of the Germans
into Italy was introduced all sort of miseries, and especially the plague,
which, notwithstanding the cold season, spread it self not only in their
Quarters, but in the Mantuan, the Milanese, and the Valteline, with so much
increase and mortality, that the wrath of God clearly seemed with the most
cruel chastisements set to punish the luxuries and dissoluteness of Italy.
About the end of this year dies in Venice Giovanni Cornaro Duke, laden with age
and troubles no less for public than private concerns, disgust being raised
betwixt the Pope and the Republic, by occasion of the Cardinal his Son, Bishop
of Vincenza, who, promoted by Urban to the Bishopric of Padua, of a much more
plentiful Revenue, was by the Laws of the Republic, elsewhere mentioned,
therein opposed. For which cause the Senate denied him possession of the
Temporalities; the Pope insisting that it should not be disposed of to any body
else. The Cardinal himself supplicates him, but Urban excused himself with
having hastily proposed it in the Consistory. Cornaro would have had the new
Church renounced, but they being no less willing at Rome to admit of such an
Expedient, the dispute lasted, till, after the Dukes death, Giovanni Tiepolo,
Patriarch of Venice dying, the Senate (the Jus Patronatus being in the
Republic) nominates the Cardinal to that Dignity, which was also approved by
the Pope, who afterward assigns the Bishopric of Padua to Marc Anthonio
Cornaro, Primicerio of St. Mark, and the Cardinals own Brother. Yet this was
not the sole difference which they had with the Court of Rome; for the Venetian
Galleys, to preserve the Dominion of the Sea, had arrested some Ships of
Ragusa, which trafficking at Ancona, passed by the Adriatic without paying the
recognition usually exacted from all sorts of Vessels. Urban complained of it
by reason of the prejudice that would thence result to the Port of Ancona; but
the Senate did not release them, till upon the coming of Bernardo Giorgi,
Ambassador from those of Ragusa to Venice, to demand them of grace, they were
contented to deliver them upon payment of the contribution which was due. But
because in fulfilling of the Contract made by the Costaguti with the Germans,
the Corn was carried by the Sacca di Goro to Ferrara, the Senate sent armed
Barks and Galleys thither, which stopped certain Boats, and seconding it with
great complaints, made by their Ambassador Angelo Contarini Cavalier,
represented to the Pope, how prejudicial it was, that having revolted from the
first invitations to France, and the Republic, to be assistant to the Cause of
Mantua and the public Counsels, he should feed, to the hurt of others, that
Army, whereof but a while ago himself was so much afraid of their neighborhood
and force.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE.
ANNO M.DC.XXX.
NIcolo Contarini being assumed in the beginning of this year to the
Principality of Venice, the care of the Senate was busied about the defense of
Mantua, whose preservation being to be ascribed to the Merit of the Republic,
obliged for the future to a most vigilant minding of it. In order thereunto
they brought into it a new Relief of Men and Provisions in abundance, repaired
the Fortifications, paying the Garrison with their own money, and maintaining
also the Dukes Court. Marmirolo, and Castiglione (called the Mantuan) were
guarded by their Soldiers, the Duke having abandoned Curtartone and Montanara,
not to distract his Forces into so many places. Frequent and bloody occasions
happened with the German Garrisons of Castelluzo, Gazzulo, Borgoforte,,
Governolo, and Goito, with various Fortune. The Country was full of terror and
slaughter. The Campagnia was made desolate, the Churches were pillaged, and the
People were killed. The Inhabitants of some Towns taking Arms from despair,
drove out the Enemies Garrisons; but not having a Force to defend themselves
equal to their impatience, paid miserably the penalty with fire and blood; in
particular la Volta, a great place, suffered a chastisement so barbarous and
cruel, that no sort of cruelty was there omitted.

The Mareshal d'Estre was Richelieu his forerunner in Italy, appointed by the
King to reside in Mantua in quality of Ambassador Extraordinary. He being
arrived at Venice, and followed a while after by Monsieur de Sabran, a
Gentleman that was sent, passed together with D'Avaux Ambassador in Ordinary,
most effectual offices with the Senate; that they would send their Army into
the Milanese, magnifying with such efficacy the Generosity of the King, the
Prudence of the Cardinal, the Felicity of their Colors, the Strength of their
Army, that Conquests seemed secure, and Spoils certain. Their considerations
were; That the Germans were weakened by what they had suffered, and were almost
consumed by the plague; Spinola's Army diminished, and the Duke of Savoy
constrained to submit to the Kings will, or necessitated, if he should resist,
to draw the Army of the Austrians into the bosom of his Country, though
Auxiliaries, yet little less than Enemies. So that the Commonwealths danger
was every way diminished, and the Enemy removed far off. When could that Chain
ever be broken, which has already held Italy so many years in subjection, if a
resolution were not taken to shake it off, now that Wills, Forces, and a
Conjuncture conspired for it? Let the Senate therefore happily resolve to be
stirring with their Army; for that there remained no greater enemy to be
overcome than the slowness of resolutions and hesitations of Councils. Let them
bestow this unheard of benefit upon Italy, and procure glory to themselves,
which carried with it quiet and increase, because the King liberally bestowing
on his Confederates the Conquests, contented himself with his own Greatness and
with the glorious Title of the Deliverer of Italy. The French were as much
fixed in the resolution not to break with the Spaniards, as they effectually
desired the Republic should do it. But the Republic, although it knew the
present danger to be so great, that it was fit not to regard future hazards,
persisted in their first counsels; offered to invade so soon as the Kings Army,
having passed the Alps, should assault the King of Spains Country on the other
side; alleged in excuse the consideration of being over-powred by the Germans,
and the necessity of not esloignating the Army from Mantua. The Cardinal found
himself engaged with the general expectation of the World, to make good with
actions and counsels that great reputation, which Fame had cast upon his
person; so that he diligently pursues his march, overcoming the difficulty of
the season and the artifices of the Enemy, who by several propositions
attempted to amuse him. At Ambrun he gave Audience to the Nuntio Pancirolo, and
in the presence of the Ambassador Soranzo gave him a Project, which contained
the departure of the Germans out of Italy, the restitution of what they had
taken, the Investiture to Carlo, and the liberty of the Grisons. But the
Austrian Ministers, affirming to have no power to treat concerning the Grisons,
insisted, that the French Garrisons should be removed out of Casal and out of
Monserrat.

Peace then amidst such contrary propositions being despaired of, the Cardinal,
by means of Monsieur Servient, turns his instances toward the Duke of Savoy to
give passage to the Army, furnish it with Victuals, and join his Troops to the
Royal Colors. He, to spend time, alleged sometimes excuses, then made
difficulty about the way the Army was to take, and the means to provide it; at
last he desired that the enterprise of Genoua might be resolved on, and that
invading conjoyntly the Milanese, Arms might not be laid down before it was
wholly conquered. Nothing pressed the Cardinal more than to mortify the Duke.
Declaring therefore friendship with the Genouese, and publishing the carrying
of Arms into Italy, to no other end but to advance and establish an honorable
and secure Peace, firmly denies him that which he had formerly offered him; nay
seeming doubtful, lest Carlo with scanty Victuals, inconvenient Quarters, and
other tricks, might go about to destroy and consume that Army, he demands that
Avigliana should be demolished, it being neither seemly to march under the view
and Cannon of that place, nor safe to leave it behind. At last it was agreed
after long contests, that the new Works being dismantled, three hundred
Soldiers should be put into the old Fortress; but it was quickly discovered,
that the one Party retaining disdain sought for pretexts, and the other
meditating on revenge, was framing Treacheries. The French beginning their
march, beheld not only the Fortifications still on foot, but the place guarded
by the Duke in person with three thousand Horse and fifteen thousand Foot, the
Militia of the Country, hastily assembled for a show. The Cardinal was not
ignorant of it; but showing himself at the sight thereof bitterly enraged, was
yet more moved when he saw the Duke with the gross of his Army flank his march
on the other side of the Dora.

Some of the French Chiefs, provoked by their natural promptness, advised, that
passing that little River, they should attacque the Squadrons of the Savoyards,
who had nothing of Soldiers but the appearance. But Richelieu, who had other
things in design, stopped at Casalette, complaining, that he found not the
Provisions ready, and judging the intention of Carlo to be to make the French
Army perish with hunger, and give time to the Austrians to come to his
assistance. The Duke comes thither to him, partly excusing whatever was wanting
by the universal scarcity, and partly accusing the hasty motion of the Army.
But in this Conference nothing passing but mutual complaints, they separated
with perfect hatred and greater suspicions. Amidst these eager contests the
Ambassador Soranzo goes to Turin to mediate, sent by the Cardinal to exhort
the Duke to facilitate the passage and enter into the League, offering him in
the Name of the King, to inveigle him, the entertainment of six thousand Foot
and four hundred Horse, of those Troops, which for the Invasion of the Milanese
he was bound to join to the Army of the Confederates. The design of the
Cardinal perhaps was, to send the Ambassador further from him, that by his
importunate counsels, knowing that the Venetians would not like the engaging of
the French Forces in Piedmont, he might not attempt to disturb the designs he
intended; for Soranzo remaining yet in Turin, the Cardinal the 18. of March in
the night suddenly recalling some Troops which were advanced, and repassing the
Dora, sends two thousand Horse to Rivali, a House of Pleasure in the Country,
to surprise the Duke, and make him with his Son Vittorio Prisoners.

Carlo kept himself there, to make show, as was his custom, of an unconcerned
mind and generous heart, in delights and divertisements amongst the greatest
cares and in the midst of danger it self. But getting notice of it by a
Confident he had in the French Camp, which was suspected to be the Duke de
Momorancy, he could hardly get safe with his Son into Turin; where presently
shutting the Gates, manning the Walls, imprisoning some French, which were come
in to see the Citadel, and causing others, which served the Princess, to be put
in custody, the defense was in a moment ordered, out of a belief, that the
Cardinal would without delay invest the place. If the Duke, for this attempt of
taking him Prisoner, flamed out publicly into rage, Richelieu was vexed at
heart, that the design had failed him, and presently betaking himself to his
wonted Arts, dispatches Monsieur Servient to Turin to speak with the Prince and
the Ambassador Soranzo. The Duke hindering him of access to the one and to the
other, and to Soranzo himself, detesting the craft and cunning of the Cardinal,
refuses, (giving him liberty to be gone) to hearken further to any overtures.
And entering into suspicion, that he might have had a hand in this contrivance,
or vexed that the Arms and endeavors of the Republic opposed his ends, he
discharges also the ordinary Ambassador Francesco Cornaro, who had order from
the Senate to pass in that quality to the Court of Spain.

The Cardinal employing with equal dexterity the subtilties of Treaty and the
Stratagems of War, makes as if he would attacque Turin, to draw defense and
forces to the Metropolis. He afterward bends toward Pignerol, causing it to
be invested by Crequi with six thousand Foot and a thousand Horse, and the day
after environs it with the whole Army. The Town is twelve miles distant from
Turin, situate upon a height, where the Alps terminating, or rather
intermitting, certain Valleys fall in, which worthily give it the name of a
large and easy entrance into Italy. It being not strong, and one part of the
Garrison being gone to the assistance of Turin, the Town held out but one day.
Count Urban di Schalenge, the Governor, was retired into the Citadel, which is
in the highest part of it. But seeing himself but with a few men, and environed
by a potent Army, nay with an Enemy, that under the shelter of the Town at
their first arrival fastened themselves to a Bulwark, renders it the 30. of
March, which was Easter Day. All the adjacent places, Valleys, and certain
Forts thereabouts, newly built by the Savoyards, followed without dispute,
Richelieu triumphing at it, who presently orders, to enclose the Town with
Royal Fortifications, as from that time designing it for the foundation of more
vast designs. The Duke disturbed both for the loss and the insult, but unable
to revenge himself, had in his mind most vexing and violen^ thoughts; for
having from his younger years proposed to himself great Undertakings and
Victories, with increase of State and Glory and now reduced to an unhappy old
age, saw his Maxims ill grounded, and hopes defeated. He had in his bosom an
Enemy implacable and a Conqueror, nor saw other refuge but a recourse to the
assistance of the Austrians, though they would prove little less oppressive and
burdensome, well understanding, that if the French Army had made passage into
one Town, necessity obliged to set others wide open to the Germans and
Spaniards. Whereupon, after wavering a while between various counsels, making
his Country the Theater of War, despairing to pacify the French, he resolves
to cast himself into the arms of the Austrians. The Abbot de Scaglia was sent
to the Governor of Milan, who rejoiced more at the engagement of the French
than he was troubled at the Dukes losses. Nevertheless, that he might not be
precipitated into a misbecoming accord, he sends two Regiments of Foot to his
relief, and together with the Count Colalto goes to Carmagnola to confer with
the Duke: where he requiring more vigorous assistance, Spinola refusing, in
regard of his own designs, to dismember his Army, it was resolved to succor
him with a Body of the Germans, seven thousand more being now arrived in Italy.
These then coming into Piedmont, with the savage custom to exercise public
Robbery and the cruellest of Spoils, left it doubtful, whether they contributed
to the defense or the desolation of the Duke^ Countries.

Spinola now believing to have opposed a defense sufficient against the French,
because the Army of the Savoyards amounted to twenty thousand Foot and six
thousand Horse, and together with a Body of the German, under the title of
Auxiliaries, to have chained up the Dukes inconstancy, resolves to attacque
Casal, and what with hunger and force to take it. Philip Spinola, his Son, with
four thousand Foot possesses Pontestura, twelve hundred French, after a short
defense, marching out, on condition not to go into Casal, but to pass by way of
the Sea into Provence. Rossignano was by the French Garrison abandoned, Thoiras
judging it better to reduce the vigor of the defense to within that place.
Casal was afterward, in the month of May, environed with the whole Army,
notwithstanding that the Ministers of the Pope wearied themselves with many
endeavors to have diverted the thought of it, and that the Cardinal Anthonio,
Legate, went to Alexandria, thence to Turin, and to the French Camp: But in
several Conferences with the Duke, with Richelieu, with the Imperial Ministers,
and those of both the Crowns, finding jealousies exceeding, and hatreds not to
be dealt with, he thought it best to return to Rome, leaving Pancirolo with
Mazarine in Piedmont to prosecute a Treaty. The War then continues at the costs
and losses of the Savoyards; for besides the Valleys about Pignerol, the
Cardinal easily possessed himself also of the Marquisate of Salusses. The King
on the other side, having received his Brother into favor, and being come into
Savoy, had in four days taken Chambery, which is the Metropolis, and every
place else, except Momilian, strong both by situation and Art. But leaving the
Marquess di Vignoles to block it, went himself into the Tarantasia, where
forcing the opposition of Prince Thomas, and passing the Mountain St. Bernardo,
he lays the passage open every way. Upon this new irruption of the French,
Spinola began truly to be in disorder; but unwilling to quit the Siege, was
contented to lessen his Forces, by sending to the Duke five Companies of Horse
and six thousand German Foot, newly come to the Service of the Crown.

The Cardinal, by reason of the diminution of his Army, concluding no further
progress would be made worthy of his presence, and by the force of his favor
longing to be with the King, goes to him, leaving the Army about Pignerol,
which quickly wasted by several accidents, particularly the plague, which
notwithstanding the Austrians and Savoyards remained at Poncalieri immovable,
though weakened. For the same cause the further proceedings of the King were
slackned; for through apprehensions of the plague being persuaded to return to
Lions, though a few days after he came again to the Army into the Valley of
Moriene, nevertheless falling into a Fever, he was carried back to Lions,
where, contrary to his liking, both the Queens being arrived, under pretext to
withdraw him from the hazards to which Richelieu exposed him, they tried all
means to slacken, to the prejudice of the Duke of Mantua, the progress of the
Army, and to fling the Cardinal out of his Ministry and Favor.

The Confidents of Queen Mother went to work with Art, and the Marquess of
Mirabel, Ambassador of Spain, with abundance of gold gained in a manner openly
a Party in Court, in which the Regent her self had the chiefest place. Amidst
these gusts of War and Court, Mazarine brought projects for Peace, all the
secret workings of the Austrians consisting in excluding the French out of
Italy. The Cardinal, in truth, held the Conquest of Pignerol for his dearly
beloved; nevertheless, pressed by the Queen Mother, with earnest motives or
rather precise commands, lets himself, to faciliate Peace, be persuaded to
restore it; declaring to the Mediators, that other things being adjusted, the
Peace should not remain interrupted for the cause of Pignerol.

But the Savoyards, not able to put off the distrust of the French Army, nor
Spinola the hopes of conquering Casal, the Treaty for this time also falls to
the ground. In the Mantuan, the pillaging of the Campagnia, the burning of
places, the rencounters of the Soldiery passed with indifferent successes. The
worst was, that the plague from the Quarters of the Germans getting into the
City, devoured every thing: So that as many Soldiers as were brought in by the
Venetians, into whose Country that evil was now creeping, they served but to
fill up Sepulchers; nevertheless succors were not neglected, so much the more
necessary as that a worse enemy, which was the alienation of the people from
the Duke and the inclination of the Nobility toward the Emperor, began to
take great strength within. Some there were so much the more perfidious, as by
how much the more secret, who feigning confidence, sometimes amused the Duke
with false advertisements, then terrified him with vain fears, rendering him in
counsels and resolutions always wavering and uncertain. Amongst the worst
fruits thereof, it happened, that being deceived by feigned advertisements, he
sent five hundred Foot of those of the Republic to Rodigo, an open Village, to
surprise a great Convoy of Victuals, which he believed was to pass toward
Goito, and hastily requires Zacharia Sagredo, who by the indisposition of
Erizzo was succeeded into the Generalat of the Venetians, that on his side he
would second him with a body of his men.

The Prince d'Este with two thousand Foot and four hundred Horse goes as far as
Goito, but finding no Intelligence from the Duke, nor advice of the Convoy,
returned. Matthias Galasso, who stood watching the opportunity to give this
blow as in ambush, with four thousand Foot and eight hundred Horse advances to
invest Rodigo, constraining the Soldiers to render themselves, and making them
all Prisoners; though with life liberty was also promised by the conditions.
Things then thus fluctuating in the Mantuan and in Piedmont, the Republic
solicited the French, that for encouragement of the Duke no less than for the
defense of the City and the ruling of the people, they would send a good body
of men by Sea, offering to convoy them with their Naval and Landforces, and to
bring them in safety into Mantua.

But the Cardinal referring to them the care of that defense, exhorted them
also to resolve with an effort of their Arms to drive the Germans from those
Posts, which incommodated the City, since Colalto with the greatest strength of
the Imperial Troops were now busied in Piedmont. He caused this instance to be
made with great fervency and with power; and it being therefore necessary to
deliberate about it in the Senate, Pietro Foscarini, Savio of the Council,
persuading to comply with it, spoke thus; If the resolutions of Princes were
inflexible, and that States were governed by everlasting Decrees, our discourse
and the bringing reasons in the present case would be in vain; because rather
than seek them by the light of prudence, which God kindles in men's minds, they
would be found in the Memorials where Rules and Precepts are registered. But
Empires are not governed by Principles; they are rather regulated by their
Interests, which taking a Prospective from times and occasion, represent
various Events with variety of Counsels. I deny not, but that hitherto the
opinion, to cooperate for the common Liberty by auxiliary Arms, not to provoke
the Austrians, to expect the French Succors to come nearer to us, has been
commended by the event; because the Dutch being harassed and wasted, Mantua
maintained by seasonable Succors, time given to King Lewis to come to the
Alps, the Republic has deserved the just Title of the Defender and Protector
of the Liberty of Italy. But it will be a too obstinate prudence to continue
always in the same thoughts, and that wind will at last blow contrary, which
hitherto has conducted us favorably. The Rules of the Sea and of the Port are
not the same. To enter into it, and enjoy a calm, it is necessary to change the
order. Your constancy, O Fathers, has merited much in showing your selves the
alone Maintainers of the Italian Generosity, in opposing and resisting the most
powerful Princes, in assisting the Rights of the Duke of Mantua, upholding the
Justice of his Cause, defending that City with your own money, with your own
Garrisons, and I Will say more, with your own dangers. But this is the nature of
Glory, that every little Cloud which is opposite to it defiles and eclipses it.
I must needs say, much has been done, but something yet is wanting; for though
Mantua be preserved from the Siege, it is not therefore freed from present
damages and future dangers. So long as it remains begirt with the Enemies
Posts, and that their Quarters remain about it, that Succors are disputed,
that according to the success of every Convoy its subsistence is hazarded, that
Plots and Intelligences are carrying on; I am afraid of open dangers, and much
more of secret Treacheries. Who knows but that this very night while we sleep,
and that a certain false security makes way for it, and flatters us with the
just applause of great deserts for having maintained Mantua till now, it may
not be surprised, and within the Walls thereof our own safety exposed to
hazard? What will avail the blood spilt, the Treasures spent, the dangers run,
if we be overcome by our own counsels and reserves? It is now become a
necessity to remove the Enemy, to dislodge him, send him packing, and revenge,
with the sacrilegious blood of those Soldiers, both Heaven and Earth equally
violated and offended. It is mavelous to consider the Senate a little while
ago so courageous, as to have made head against a numerous Army, come out of
Germany, laden with Triumphs, animated with Fury, and ushered in by Fame, and
that now, too wary, they have respect to the miserable relics of a few
Garrisons, which remain as the shadows of the Fortune they have run, having
outlived sufferings, plague, and penury. Let us herein, O Fathers, fix a
resolution, that by the superiority of our Forces we shall beat them with
safety, drive them away with glory, and shall then enjoy with quiet the fruit
of past labors. What danger may we peradventure meet with? Are not these few
Germans the miserable rests of that veteran Army, which we have forced to
remove further of Mantua? Are they not the very same, that having every where
lain in wait for our succors, have never been able to hinder them, much less
durst attacque them? Are not those which ought to be assaulted in their Posts,
the very same who oftentimes come and look upon our Convoys? And if we make no
doubt at all times to expose the choicest of our Forces to convoy our Succors,
why should we fear, when a greater reward is in question, to put Fortune once
to the trial? Let us suppose at worst Mantua lost, as certainly it will be, if
we suffer it to be exposed to continual contingencies, can we believe our
modesty will be respected by him, that has ambition for his Guide, and the
desire of Dominion for his Limits? Will the Austrians, do you think, make less
of our past offenses than of our present injuries? I cannot see any difference
betwixt fighting with them from the Walls of Mantua, and assaulting them in
their own Trenches. Let us not, I pray, trust Princes that have power, and are
offended. We deceive our selves too much to believe the Austrians either
satisfied with our past actions, or pacified with our present respect. But if
we ought not to repent our selves of what we have done, why should we abstain
from new attempts, so much the more just, as they have no further aim, but to
deprive them of the means of offending us? May we perhaps apprehend that an
Inundation of Germans will come upon us to revenge the blood of the first? But
who warrants us, that they come not expressly upon us to blot out the shame for
the ill success of their undertaking? Will they think of passing into Italy,
that shall perceive no footsteps of their Companions but Graves and
Sepulchers? But how much more shall we be exposed to their injuries, when in
our bowels, which the Mantuan may be said to be, they will keep footing in
their Posts, and perhaps in the City, which must with the expense of time and
blood be endeavored to be regained? But let other Troops come; who sees not
but Piedmont will give them employment; that the Duke of Savoy calls for them,
that the plague consumes them, that weariness and sufferings, so soon as
arrived, disbands them? The Invasions of the French Army does at present take
up their cares and their forces; and we also, when all is done, to a great King
and Friend, that has twice at our instance caused his most powerful Armies to
pass the Alps upon the Ice, nay has passed them himself in person, owe this
gratitude to second his attacques with our Arms; otherwise I fear that the
French Succors will quickly grow tired, when they perceive, they are made use
of for a pretext and shadow to our sloth. I know that great deliberations are
subject to uncertainty, that of War especially, which is the most peculiar
Tribute of Fortune. But in things difficult, where by reason of danger counsel
is not hearkened to, some steps must be left to Chance; for though through
unthought of accidents the success should not fully justify the prudence and
necessity of the resolution, it will at least absolve us from the blame and
reproaches of a superfluous reservedness.

Many men's minds were carried away with this opinion; but others contradicting
it, Giovanni Nani, Savio of the Council, spoke for them to this purpose; In the
Decrees of the Country I presage most happy events. But in the strange
Revolutions of times, I cannot promise them other than what the condition of
things permit, very full of anxiety, and uncertain. Sometimes hopes stirs us,
and then again fear disturbs us. But prudence ought to be the sacred Anchor
which should keep us constant and firm amidst the uncertainties of this
afflicted Country. Great is the felicity of this Republic, which till now has
not known how to desire greater prudence in its Decrees, nor wish for better
Fortune. Generosity has gone hand in hand with the moderation of Counsels, and
if therein Courage has not been wanting, success has not defrauded Courage.
Mantua is preserved to its lawful Prince; Italy is defended from more heavy
Chains; our Confines and our Interests remain untouched, if not by threats and
dangers, at least from Invasions. What avails it to provoke Fortune further, or
attempt longer to make our selves famous. Some Germans remain for the custody
of certain Posts; but if they be such as we think we may overcome with a
discourse only, wherefore should we be so much afraid of them, why shall we
suffer our selves to run into desperate Counsels? I expressly call those
Counsels such, to which necessity persuades us not; those that not remedying
present evils, hasten future calamities. Shall we attacque the Germans in their
Posts, fortified, guarded, and provided? They will yield to us perhaps in
number, but will have advantage from courage and necessity, because they have
no refuge but to despair and their Arms. There is no reason to despise them, a
people made Soldiers by years, fierce by sufferings, used to fight, wont to
overcome, who, if they have blunted their fierceness against the Walls of
Mantua, will in the field, where the German Nation uses to be invincible,
repair with honor the losses they have suffered both of prey and glory. I have
a regard for the Dutch even in their Quarters, and am also afraid to overcome
them, lest fighting and possessing those Posts, and mingling our selves with
the conquered, we should meet with a more cruel Enemy. The plague will infect
our Army, and with the Army will in the conclusion infect and waste the
Country. Let us call to mind, what cares, what time, what money the raising of
this Army has cost us, and upon those reflections let us consider, if they
ought to be exposed to unprofitable hazards, or be preserved for more necessary
Encounters. Let us, I pray, suffer our Enemies to consume themselves in wants
and sickness, and let it not be thought our interest to procure their ruin
with the danger of our own destruction. Heaven, made the Minister of our
revenge, with the scourges of Nature punishes their wickedness. On the one side
I confess I value the Enemies, and on the other I fear the casual accidents of
War. I know not what we may therein possibly meet with. This I know for
certain, that Fortune uses to delude the most adjusted counsels, and can
overturn in a moment glory gotten, and the hope of better success. In that Army
which lies encamped at Valezzo is placed our defense and the relief of Mantua.
It is therefore needful to preserve it and keep it as the utmost bound of our
own and the common safety. Let us take a right measure of the State, Times, and
Forces. Can we possibly hope, with one Victory, or rather with one advantage,
to terminate the War? It will rise again more powerful and more cruel when we
turn our selves again to provoke it. May not the Germans perhaps come back out
of Piedmont, and the Spaniards send a part of their Army, which upon our moving
may reinforce their Posts, or invade our Confines? Does peradventure Germany,
which is a Workhouse so abounding with Warriers, want Soldiers and Armies, or
will it be ignorant of the way to lead an Army to repair upon us their losses
and affronts? We see at present a great number of fresh Troops descending the
Mountains. We already hear, that Wallestain offers himself to overwhelm Italy
with Armies, and to come himself in person with his wonted Ministers, Outrage
and Cruelty. In Corinthia and Stiria we hear the Drums beat from our Confines,
and we see our selves every where environed with Armies and with threatenings,
and shall we think to overcome the Austrians by driving them out of some
Quarter? For my part I believe, that they have hitherto born respect to our
Affairs and Confines out of equity and necessity, which in our resolutions our
Enemies themselves cannot deny. But if we shall assault or provoke them with
offensive Arms, there is great appearance, that we stir up against us the
resentments of two great Princes with strokes more dangerous. I speak not of
the French Succors, because being engaged in Piedmont, there is no means to
enjoy them nearer. Overturning then our Maxims, our Counsels, and all our
Advantages, shall we declare our selves at present, and alone make War with the
Austrians? In a deliberation so weighty, let us fully weigh the present with
future dangers, and if Liberty be our Kingdom, let us put our selves in mind,
that moderation and peace have always been its most faithful Guardians.

After some wavering in opinions, every one, as to the things spoken, having in
his judgment motives for the one or other Party, the most generous counsels
prevailed over the more wary, and in complacence to the French Ministers, it
was referred to Sagredo, the General, to prepare for the march, and undertake
those attempts to dislodge the Germans, which by concert with the Duke of
Mantua and the Mareshal d'Estre, should be judged fit. The said Mareshal was
come into Mantua in quality of Ambassador Extraordinary from the Crown of
France, and General of its Forces, to show the protection which the King would
take of those Interests, and had found the Duke much troubled and perplexed;
because he being naturally inclined to discourse rather, and undertake great
matters, than with constancy to perfect them, finding himself pierced to the
quick with tormenting cares, seemed weighed down under the burden of his new
Principality. He wanted not secret allurements from his Enemies, nor perverse
counsels from feigned Servants; being as much encompassed with Treacheries as
abandoned by sound discernings. All this displeasing him, which was working for
his safety, he would not consent to what was concerted, and hastened, to others
prejudice, his own ruin. In a Conference betwixt the Mareshal and Sagredo, an
attempt upon Goito being resolved on to be executed by the Army of the
Republic, which was encamped at Valezzo, it was agreed, that part of the
Garrison of Mantua, making a Sally, should alarm the rest of the Posts. But
notwithstanding that they were the Republics own men, and that they offered to
augment them with five hundred other Foot and three hundred Horse, Carlo,
alleging that he remained with the City ill provided, dissents so openly from
it, that they were forced to change the resolution, and the two Generals to
meet anew. During this suspense, Michael Priuli, Proveditor in the Veronese,
drives the Germans out of Ponte Molino and out of Ostia. In this Town, which,
by reason it was well inhabited and situated upon the Po, is of some moment,
the people had formerly made an attempt to rid themselves of the Garrison, but
in vain; because retiring into the Citadel, and Succors arriving from the
neighboring places, they were able to recover it again, though, to the
encouragement of the Inhabitants, some Soldiers came to them from the State of
the Venetians. Priuli now coming before it, better provided, brought to pass,
that the Germans abandoned it, without making any defense. At Volta also
Quirini, Proveditor of the Cavalry, takes Post, and leaves there for the
defense of it Cosimo, one of the Marquesses del Monte. But the Enterprise on
Goito, which consisted much in expedition, unhappily came to nothing, by reason
of the delays. For the Germans having gotten notice of the design, recalled
with great speed out of Piedmont a good body of men, and Gallas entered into
Goito with twenty Colors of Foot, intending to fortify it. Nevertheless
d'Estre and Sagredo judged, that taking Post at Rivalta, Mantua would be
covered, and the taking of Goito made easy. No less by this attempt could the
Dukes mind be overcome. Whereupon they were forced every day to change designs;
and yet they were retarded, because Monsieur de Sciabant, who carried the Word
betwixt the two Generals, falling into an ambush, happened to be Prisoner with
the Dutch; so that they suspecting, that he might have discovered the designs,
it was needful to change them, giving always more time to the Germans to
strengthen themselves,

The resolution was at last fixed, that the Army of the Republic should pass
from Valezzo to Marmirolo, and to Castiglione Mantuano, Towns already
garrisoned, but which now seemed fit to lodge the whole body, to the end to
take counsel afterward from the occasion, if Goito might be attacqued, or some
other Quarter of the Germans be assaulted, at least to divide and incommodate
them. To prepare the way for the design, la Valetta with three thousand Foot
and some Horse advances to Villa bona and Merengo, being convoyed with a
greater strength of men by Candale and Quirini, who were immediately to return
to Valezzo so soon as they should see him within those Posts to have begin to
fling up earth. A little while after Gallas comes with great vigor to attacque
him, and although at the first assault he was bravely repulsed, nevertheless
causing five Cannons to advance, he began so to demolish those unperfected
Trenches, that the Soldiers, remaining without shelter, fell by whole Files in
the field. Being constrained to yield to the fury of the Aggressors, which
entered every where, Valletta being hurt, remaining with some other Officers
Prisoner, the others were dispersed, every one seeking his escape. Some passing
through the thickest of the Enemies Squadrons got into Mantua, others returned
to Valezzo, and they with greater hurt than the Enemy could have done; because
either from fear or excuse aggravating the dangers, they filled the Camp with
confusion and fear. In effect, the Quarter of Valezzo being of a great circuit,
and defended with a weak Intrenchment, resented enough this blow, both by
reason of the number of Soldiers lost or dispersed, and also by reason of many
others, which were separated into several Posts, and were not easy matter to
be recalled; for that Gallas, seconding the presence of so favorable Fortune,
forming in a trice with other men, which joined to him, a body of eight
thousand Foot and fifteen hundred Horse, and marching thitherwards, gave no
opportunity for Provisions, and scarce for Councils. A Council being hastily
called, it was, by opinion of Candales and the other Chiefs of the Army,
resolved to preserve the Army, since it was not believed the Post could be
defended. With the best order then that the case and time permitted, the Cannon
was withdrawn in safety, the Ammunition fired, and the Militia ordered to march
to Verona and Peschiera to divide the defense of the Country. The major part,
by reason of the nearness, taking toward Peschiera, Gallas, who had hoped to
subdue at one blow the Quarter of the best Troops of the Republic, seeing the
design failed, letting Valezzo lie, pursues them with great speed, and several
Skirmishes passing for several hours, the contest particularly grew hot at
Castle Novo, to the greater loss of the Venetians, of whom some valiantly
fighting fell, and others betook themselves basely to flight, leaving some
Colors in the hands of the Enemy.

The Fame, in truth; was greater than the effect of the Austrians Victory, few
being on the Venetians side killed, but the number of the disbanded great; some
of which, and in particular the Cuirassiers, who abandoning the troth of their
Oath, for prey infested with many Robberies the Country, which they were
obliged to defend. Gallas not willing to engage himself further under the Walls
of Peschiera, possesses without resistance Valezzo, abandoned by Cornelio
Vimes, who had the custody of the Castle, and judging it a Post capable to
endamage the Republic, and to hinder Mantua of Relief, environs it with a
Fortification not so large. This so unhappy success happened on the 30. of May.
Fame quickly divulges it, spreading in several places fear, and with fear the
dangers of worse accidents; because not only the Germans pillaged the
Campagnia, doing much mischief, but there were discourses of more cruel
threatenings of attacques in Friuli and Lombardy, where two thousand Foot with
some Companies of Horse made a show of invading the Confines of Bergamo and
Crema, and a Body of Germans, which were coming through the Valteline, making a
halt in Troana, it seemed as if, passing the Mountains, they would come to
their assistance. Gallas might either have come to Peschiera, or have advanced
to Verona. But Conquerours can seldom undertake all that Fortune counsels, and
of the conquered the danger is wont always to be greater than the loss. Men's
minds at Venice were truly disturbed at the arrival of the news; but the
constancy of the Government, and the fidelity of the people not at all
wavering, it was made known, that, to second prosperity, belonged only to
private persons, but that it was the property of Princes to grapple with the
greatest of misfortunes.

The first care the Senate took, was, to console the Duke of Mantua, promising
him vigorous assistances, lest, dejected by sinister accidents, he might
abandon himself to more desperate courses. They writ afterward to the
Magistracy of the City, animating the people amidst so great a trial. Neither
were ready supplies wanting, every place striving to exceed other in the offers
of money and men; Brescia above all making it self famous by the offer, that
twenty thousand men of that Territory should take Arms for their own defense,
and all other occurrences. Erizzo was ordered to succeed Sagredo in the place
of Proveditor General for the War; two thousand Foot, come by Sea out of
France, served for a seasonable Reinforcement to the Garrisons, with other two
thousand of the Country Militia of Padua and Treviso. Commissions were given
out for great Levies in Dalmatia and other ultramarine Countries; the Fleet
also was assembled and strengthened. The Duke of Rohan, received into service
with a great salary, and with the obligation to levy, as there should be
occasion, ten thousand men, was sent to be assistant to the General. With these
provisions the Town being presently secured from all attacques, nothing
remained but to restrain the Germans plundering of the Country. For that
purpose were drawn into a Body at fit places Soldiers in pay, together with
Peasants, and Marco Giustiniano, Proveditor beyond the Mincio, taking the field
with four thousand Soldiers encamped at Lonato, greatly encouraging the
people; so that the Dutch in several Encounters and in many places being
repulsed and beaten, leaving Garrison in Valezzo, returned at last into the
Mantuan.

The Republic having an eye on that side on what might be needful, orders
Erizzo, that by some way or other, and at any hazard, he should cast into
Mantua a thousand Foot with a hundred Horse and some money. But it being
necessary to concert with the Duke the way of their getting in, he, with
various pretexts, to the great difficulty interposed yet greater, in such sort,
that Estre had a vexatious life of it, seeing him by the suggestions of some,
that held a constant Correspondence with the Imperialists, disposed to some
agreement, and to receive a Garrison in Porto. The French and Venetian
Ministers represented lively to him; That by separating his particular from the
general Treaty, he deprived himself of the Warranty, which the Authority of
France alone was able to afford him, and the Union of the League, for the
assurance of that which should be promised him; and that recourse to Friends
being for ever excluded by ingratitude, and having once received the yoke of
Garrisons, it would be no more in his power to regulate the numbers nor the
burdens.

The Duke at last, after having some days wavered amidst various counsels,
consents to receive the new Succors. There happened a great dispute about the
difficulty of the way, and about the plague, spread through all the Country of
Lombardy, with so great terror and mortality, that counsels were very often
confounded in the execution. Howesover Marco Giustiniano advances with his men
to attempt it, and having made some German Troops to remove from Castiglione
delle Stivere, who attempted to invest that place, possessed himself of Caneto;
but the Castle making resistance, and many men coming suddenly to its succors,
he retired. It not succeeding to put in men in a Body, it was hazarded to get
them in by Parties. Some from the Confines of the Veronese entered; other two
hundred and fifty conducted by Captain Carlincane, being attacqued by the way,
were dispersed, yet not in such sort, but that some few arrived safely with a
small portion of money, which in gold they carried on their backs. From the
side of Brescia, Giustiniano sent the Cavalier Gori, a Florentine, with two
hundred and fifty Foot more, who, defeating upon the way some of the Dutch
Guards, arrived happily there.

But humane provisions being of no force against the determinations of Heaven,
although the Chevalier de la Valetta, with his Lieutenant and with Sciabant
escaped out of Prison from Goito, related, that the Germans prepared Ladders,
Bridges, and Petards, which probably were to be used in the surprisal of
Mantua; nevertheless, the City negligently guarded, or rather treacherously
sold, felt the night after, the 18. of July, its cruel destiny. The Germans
coming near without noise, in the stillness of the night, to the Lake at the
Post called de la Palata, set down there certain small Boats brought upon
Wagons; a Guard of Venetian Barks armed, that was near, taking no notice of
it, because it was commanded by him that betrayed the place, that they should
not stir that night, though they should hear a noise, because Succors was to
be brought in. So that a small number passing at first without disturbance, and
they afterward being increased, by the Boats passing to and again, they with a
Petard flung down the Gate of the Castle, where the Duke with a Guard only of
his own Soldiers was and Etre lodged. Upon the first Alarm, Durant, who had
his Quarter near to the Gulf of St. Giorgio, would have gone out to fall upon
the Germans at the place where they embarked; but finding the Keys hidden, and
the Ammunition carried away, was deprived also of the means to cause either
Cannon or Muskets to be discharged from the Walls upon the Assailants.
Whereupon, all in fury, he ingages with Francesco Orsino, one of the Dukes of
Lamentana, who with the first relief of men was by the Republic sent into
Mantua and in the Siege, and afterward had given proof of great courage, to
charge the Enemy, which entered by the Castle and by the Gate of St. Giorgio,
beaten down with a Petard; for that a Court of Guard, which on the middle of
the Bridge might have hindered the passage, deceived by the Traitors, with the
same order, formerly given the Boats, had given leave to the Enemy to come near
to it. But Orsino was killed at the first Encounter, and Durant, hurt in the
face, was with fourteen other Officers made Prisoners. Whereupon the Chiefs
failing, all was pestered with confusion, as it happens in the actions of
night, where Valor, not taken notice of, fights without reward, and Cowardice,
not reproved for want of Witnesses, is covered. The Post only of Predella,
assaulted by the Dutch, for a present distraction of the Forces, was by the
Venetians defended; but they also quickly advertized by the cries and clamor,
that the Enemy, become Master of the City, was at their backs, were forced to
yield; some, seeking safety in the waters of the Lake, were drowned there, the
rest, that were more in number, were cut to pieces. Thus the Garrison was
destroyed, those that were in Arms being first killed in the fight, and those
afterward that were without Arms; except some few, who preferring life and
prey before honor and fidelity, joining with the Enemy, took part in the
spoil. The Duke with the Prince and Mareshal d'Estre, at the first entry of the
Soldiers into the Castle, retired hastily into Porto; the Princess Mary,
having saved her self at first with her little Children into a Monastery, and
being respected there by reason of her Sex and Relation to the Empress, desired
also to be brought. Not one of the Inhabitants stirred for defense, some rather
applauding the Imperialists, and hanging out of their houses with lights the
Imperial Eagles, thought to preserve themselves, but had the experience what
the insolence of a victorious and cruel Army could do; for the Soldiers making
no distinction, and the Chiefs not regarding that inclination, which that
unhappy people had nourished toward the Colors and Name of the Austrians,
nothing either profane or sacred escaped free from impiety, lust, and cruelty.
The pillaging lasted for three days, but will remain infamous to all Ages; for
there was seen a direful representation of all sorts of calamity, with all the
excesses which Cruelty and License suggested to Conquerours. The City, for many
years increased in idleness, and nuzled up in pleasures, became the Spectacle
of deplorable misery; Boys and Virgins were ravished, Churches robbed, Houses
pillaged, Fire and Sword every where, heaps of dead bodies and Arms appearing
at every step, with torrents of blood and tears.

The Dukes had, in a long Peace, made a collection of precious things, with so
much pomp, that Treasures having been profusely expended for ostentation, it
seemed now, that luxury served for nothing but the Funerals of Fortune. The
Palace was given to plunder, and so many Rarities and so much Wealth were every
where found, that the value of the prey exceeds the memory of all other spoils
whatever. Nevertheless the enjoyment was but short; for God, the righteous
Survivor of all, quickly vanquishes the Vanquishers with contagious sickness
and untimely deaths. And it was generally published, that the Emperor himself,
justly moved at those execrable things, which were there committed, detested
not only the occasion but the effects of a success so tragical, and that
Eleonora the Empress deplored with tears the cruel destruction of the Country,
and the calamity of her Fathers house; many presaging that the Fortune of the
Austrians would suffer shipwreck in the blood of Mantua.

The Duke, retired, as has been said, into Porto with much confusion, was
scarce got in, but he saw, as the full accomplishment of the Treason, fire put
to the Ammunition; so that there was a necessity to agree the day following to
the delivery on conditions, that the Garrison of the Republic should depart in
freedom. He and the Son, the Daughter-in-law, the little Nephews, and Estre,
convoyed by two Companies of German Horse, went into the Country of Ferrara to
remain at Melara, where the Duke was supplied by the Republic with money to
maintain him. A Prince doubly unhappy, because to the bitterness of Fortune,
which drove him from his Country, was added the censure of the World, which
attributed to him some part of the blame, though in effect he could not be
accused of ought, but that, seeing the people full of infidelity, he had his
mind always perplexed with great fears, which begat in him in all business
irresolutions, distrusts, and slackness.

Nor was Fame wanting to tax many of the Dukes Subjects, and some of the Family
of Gonzagha, and in particular the Marquess Giovanni Francesco as guilty of
betraying Mantua, and Carlo endeavored to sift them out; but at first in the
confusion of things and his want of power, afterward restored to his Country
by the Peace he dissembled it, and like a new Prince, it behoved him to secure
men's minds by showing confidence in all, and receiving equally the guilty with
the innocent. To Marc Anthonio Businello, Resident for the Republic, liberty
was given by the Capitulation with the Duke to go out of Porto, if he should be
found there; the Accord having been so hasty, that it was not known who was
there, or who not. But he had with the first been pillaged in the City by the
Germans, and kept Prisoner till the Emperor, reflecting on the exemption of
his Character, orders he should be released. Durant and the other Officers of
War got not their liberty but with great ransom.

The Venetians at this blow of the taking of Mantua greatly disturbed,
deplored, not without reason, so many cares, so much gold unprofitably
inployed, so much blood unhappily spilt, and so many people miserably consumed;
because having at several times brought into Mantua and other Posts fourteen
thousand of their Soldiers, they were reckoned to have all perished, either by
the Enemy, sufferings, or diseases. They were moreover in doubt, lest the
Soldiers, which were in the Valteline, should make a show on that side to
attacque them, so to divert a part of their Forces beyond the Mountains, that
those which lodged in the Mantuan might strike them in the bowels with greater
force. Howsoever accommodating themselves to Fortune and Time, they not at all
dismayed, order the defense of their Frontiers, abandoning as of no use Castle
Giufre and the other places of the Mantuan, the Fortifications being first
demolished, and the Cannon withdrawn. The Germans contented with so important a
Conquest, applied themselves only to the affairs of Piedmont, whence if they
had the luck to drive the French, and lock them out of Italy, they well
understood that the rest would fall to their arbitrament and be their prey.

The Republic thereupon had liberty to apply themselves to provide with less
disorder against the plague, that more cruel enemy which devoured every thing
without distinction, sweeping away the Soldiers, the People, and the Chiefs,
there being dead amongst others Giorgio Badoaro, Commissary in Campo, and Marc
Anthonio Morosini, Cavalier Proveditor in the Bergamasco. Not omitting care for
the State were sent Proveditors over health Giorgio Pisani into the Territory
of Padua, and Luigi Valaresso Cavalier, into that of Verona; whilst in Venice
also the disease broken out in great violence, after it had for some time gone
creeping slowly on, required vigilance and an infinite charge. Certainly better
Rules or more punctual Orders could not be given, the public charity and piety
of private men contending with a rare example: So that the Government going on
in its immutable order, the functions of the accustomed Migistrates of the
Republic were never omitted. The oldest Senators did not remember to have at
any time seen the Country molested in so many parts; for no small storm arose
also from the Sea, and there was not one of them that caused not trouble and
required not constancy.

Mary, the Sister of the King of Spain, betrothed to Ferdinand King of Hungary,
Son of the Emperor, with a numerous Squadron of Galleys and a Pomp worthy of
so great Princes, being arrived at Naples, purposed to pass to Trieste with the
same Spanish Army, augmented with the accustomed Squadrons of the Italian
Princess because the way by Land through Genoua and Milan was interdicted by
the plague. That, by reason of violating the Dominion of the Sea, could not be
suffered by the Republic, who offered all, or part of its Fleet, to serve for
her transport; but the Spaniards refused it, alleging a fear, though a false
one, that the Venetian Ships were infected with the plague. The Ambassador of
Spain believing that the Senate, diverted by so many cares, might possibly
condescend to this prejudice, communicates to it the passage of the Queen with
the Army of the Crown, desiring, that if it should happen to touch in the Ports
of the Republic, it might receive good entertainment. But in answer found with
weighty reasons an open denial, whereat the Ministers of Spain showing distaste,
threatened to pass without their consent.

The Senate thereupon ordered Anthonio Pisani, General of the Islands, that
assembling and augmenting the Fleet with the Galleys of Dalmatia and Candia,
and with ten Ships armed for this occasion, he should oppose their entry into
the Gulf, and fight with whomsoever with armed Ships would dare to attempt it.
At the same time they make the Queen a new offer to conduct her with their own
Galleys, and caused Giovanni Pesari Cavalier, to declare at Rome, and Marco
Anthonio Padavino Resident at Naples, that if the Spaniards would prefer the
force of Arms before the Civility of their offer, the Queen would be obliged to
pass through the Cannon and a Battle to her Wedding. The Ministers had not the
boldness to hazard her in such an Encounter; whereupon suspending the Voyage
till new Orders from the Courts, the Republic was afterward desired in an
honorable way to lend their Fleet and the passage. She then, which was about
the end of the year, arriving by the way of Abruzzo at Ancona, Anthonio Pisani
receives her with thirteen nimble Galleys, and lands her at Trieste, with such
treatment and magnificence, that in the straightness of the Ships was seen
abundantly contained all that which every Element furnishes for the use of
Luxury and the honor of Greatness. For which the Republic in the Name of the
Emperor and Catholic King received thanks.

Spinola had pressed the Siege of Casal, now brought to straights; for
Provisions beginning to fail, and the Garrison diminished, being reduced to
only two thousand Foot and three hundred Horse, no hope remained but in the
Succors of the French, excepted by the Inhabitants, who although weary of so
long vexations, retained nevertheless a constant fidelity toward their Prince.
Ferdinand, Duke de Maine, encouraged the defense with his presence, but the
command, the fatigue, and the vigilance rested upon Monsieur de Thoiras with
great equality of Valor and Renown of two so great Captains; for if Spinola
had a confidence, that at his name alone as to a fatal Conqueror of strong
places, Casal should yield the glory gotten at the Isle of The, did no less
stir up the other to confirm it with most vigorous proofs. Spinola toward the
Citadel had strengthened his approaches, which in the circumference of the Camp
were four, divided to the Spanish, German, Neapolitan, and Lombard Nations, and
beyond the Po caused to drive away the French, with the slaughter of many, out
of a Fort upon a certain Island which defended the Mills.

Thoiras, not amazed at any thing, bringing into the Citadel for its better
defense some French Companies, tormented the besiegers with frequent Sallies,
and in one particularly upon the Lombards, killing the Count Soragna with many
Soldiers, drives him out of certain Redoubts, flinging down the Works. The
Enterprise not advancing with the speed supposed, the Duke of Savoy was highly
offended with Spinola, because, neglecting to succor him with all his Forces
in his great dangers, in hopes to profit by his calamities, he had engaged
himself before Casal. Wherefore the dispatching the Abbot de Scaglia to Madrid
to accuse him and complain, was a motive to persuade him to send him more
powerful assistance, by which the Siege slackning, gave time to the French to
send new Forces into Italy, under the Mareshal de la Force and Schomberg, and
the Duke of Momorancy. He with his Troops, which exceeded not three thousand
men, passing toward Pignarol to join with the others, was near Avigliana
attacqued by the Prince Vittorio with five thousand Foot and one thousand Horse
in a narrow passage, where the gross being passed beyond it, the Duke was left
with only six hundred Foot and two hundred Horse. But the resistance of the
French and the Valor of the Duke was such, that he not only passed, but routed
the Savoyards, taking Prisoner Pagano Doria, who commanded the Spanish Cavalry.
The Prince saving himself with few, Schomberg arrives thereupon to besiege
Avigliana, which was rendered after a Siege but of eight days, Colalto having
refused to send succors to the Castle.

On the other side, la Force had reduced into his power Saluzzo, making the
Garrison Prisoners; Villa Franca and Poncalieri yielded to the Conqueror, and
the best of the Austrian Forces, being entrenched at the Bridge of Carignano to
hinder the passage over the Po, received a great blow; for being assaulted by
the French, and losing a Half Moon, they abandoned the Post with great loss and
no less confusion. Nevertheless the French pressed not forward, destroyed
amidst the advantages of War by a most cruel plague. Piedmont now really served
for a miserable spectacle, being made the Stage of all sort of Cruelty,
destroyed by the Enemies through hatred, and by Friends in derision.

Amidst so many and so grievous accidents, the Duke Carlo Emanuel burdened with
sixty and nine years, but much more pierced to the heart by infinite
afflictions and the mocqueries of Fortune, toward the end of July being
surprised by an Apoplexy, dies in Savigliano. Death surely took him in the
greatest straight of his affairs, and he just at that time had his thoughts
busied in more violent designs. But cancelled the memory of them in the fire,
burning a little before he expired many Papers, which contained, as was
divulged, to the prejudice of the Milanese, Intelligences and Agreements with
Wallestain, (who was to come for the Emperor into Italy;) so much the more
easily believed, by how much the Duke was against the Spaniards, for their
scanty and longsom succors the more implacably provoked; and Wallestain above
measure disgusted with the Emperor, because, resolving to take from him the
absolute Command of the Armies, he had a mind to send him into Italy, as into a
specious Banishment; but amidst so great chastisements, God spared Italy from
so great slaughter.

Carlo Emanuel was without question a great Prince, brought up in the
experience of the one and the other Fortune; magnanimous, persevering, and
valiant in War; virtues which might be said defiled by ambition, lust, and
prodigality, if his very defects, dressed up by his lively Art, had not passed
almost for things approved and commended. He directed his actions immoveably to
his own interest alone, and measuring by the same steps profit and glory,
discovered himself highly inconstant in his friendships, more than liberal of
his own, greedy of what was another, always poor, never wanting; with the
money of his friends he out-stood so many Wars, together with the Wealth of his
Subjects, oppressed with most grievous Impositions. Nevertheless, exercising
Command in his Country and Authority in his House, and among Strangers keeping
up his honor, he was by all reverenced and esteemed. In Wars seeking
advantages, or in Peace sowing the seeds of other Wars, his designs wanting
success rather than industry, as the Architect of so many confusions he dyed,
buried amidst his own ruins. With his death the face of affairs was changed;
for Vittorio, though of a profound, yet of a more composed, ambition, assuming
the Government inclined to Peace; and not having with Richelieu causes of so
great diffidence, but rather as the Kings Kinsman showing himself prone toward
France, would not close with the Spaniards, nor totally separate from them.
Declaring himself therefore to adhere to that side which would most facilitate
Peace, he exhorted the Popes Ministers to urge new Propositions; whereupon
Mazarine had the luck in September to conclude a Truce, which though blamed, by
reason of the conditions, by every one, was nevertheless by necessity observed
by all. It was to last till the end of October following, within which time,
delivering to the Spaniards the City and Castle of Casal, they were to furnish
Victuals for the Citadel, and afterward to have it, if within the prescribed
time no succors should arrive. Some imputed in this Treaty to the French, that
by rendering the Town they yielded a point of so much honor, and left means to
the Enemy to hinder the succors. Others accused the Spaniards, that hunger
having reduced all to extremity, they would be contented only with a part, and
would for several weeks furnish Victuals to the Enemy. But by contrary motives
these justified themselves with a suspicion, that succors were at hand; and
those by a doubt, they were not in a condition to bring it, so soon.

That which truly induced the Spaniards, was the fear that Vittorio would
adhere to France; for that without expecting their consent, he greedily
embraced before any other the Truce. Howsoever, Spinola was for it in Madrid
reprehended with great censure; which being added to the frequent reproofs,
suffered by the occasion of the Savoyards, and to the limited Powers, which
through Jealousy of a certain Correspondence of his, which he officiously held
with Richelieu, were come upon him from Spain, seeing his Command restrained,
and his Honor wounded, he was afflicted in such sort, that falling ill with a
Delirium of mind and failing of strength, retiring himself into Castel-novo di
Scrivia, he departs this life within a few days. A Captain, saving in these
latter days of his, always fortunate, but without exception always prudent.
Being advanced in years, from a Merchant coming to the command of great Actions
and Armies, before he had passed an Apprentiship in Arms, he gained in counsel,
in understanding, and in the executions of things committed to him, such
reputation, that nothing else has blemished the splendor of his name but the
envy of Strangers, whom, though accustomed to justify ingratitude by
suspicions, he, an Italian, for the desire alone of glory served.

Spinola dead, the Marquess of Santa Croix takes the Command, and keeping his
Troops within Casal, waited for the time prefixed to receive the possession of
the Citadel, and the French strengthening themselves by the benefit of the
Truce, prepared to relieve it. In this doubtful state of things, a Peace being
concluded in Germany, the news of it arrives unexpected in Italy. Ferdinand,
for the Interests of the Empire and of his House, held a Diet in Ratisbone,
where the Electors being assembled, and taking courage from their Union, in
their declared Judgments detested the War of Italy as unseasonable and unjust,
together with many complaints, that the Emperor, at the instance of Strangers,
without the knowledge and consent of the principal Members of the Empire, had
undertaken it. They exhorted to Peace, and offered to mediate; whereupon the
French, to interest themselves, and take the business out of the absolute
Arbitrament of the Emperor and the Spanish Ministers, sent thither Monsieur de
Leon, assisted by Father Joseph, a Capucin, with whom Richelieu not only
communicated the confidence, but it seemed had in a manner imparted capacity
for it. These had in charge to make overtures of Peace, but much more to search
into the state of things, foment the opposition of the Electors against the
Creation of a King of the Romans, and with other Princes of the Empire to
settle, according to the occasion, those agreements which a while after brake
forth. King Lewis had now secretly treated with Sweden to invade the Empire,
promising them a sum of money; the Venetians also coming in for their share,
when it should be time to be stirring to divert the War out of Italy. Yet they
by invitation from the Emperors Ministers, insinuated to Pietro Vico, their
Resident with Ferdinand, to send a Minister to the Diet, not without hope to
separate them by that means from the friendship of the French, dispatched
thither Sebastian Veniero, Procurator of St. Mark, as their Ambassador
Extraordinary; but with charge not to separate from the Confederates, both in
managing and concluding any Treaties. But before the Ambassador could arrive,
the Peace upon the 13. of October was agreed upon in some short Conferences
betwixt the French and Anthonio, Abbot of Crembs Munster, Otho Baron of Nostiz,
and Herman Count de Questemberg.

The Articles at length were reduced; To promise mutually not to invade one
another Countries, nor give assistance to Rebels or Enemies. As to Mantua, the
pretensions of the House of Lorrain, for some kind of decency, were referred to
the Emperor or to an amicable Agreement. To the Prince of Guastalla were
assigned Lands of the Territory of Mantua to the Revenue of six thousand
Crowns, to the end he should renounce his pretensions to Carlo and his Line
masculine. To the Duke of Savoy were set apart in Monferrat eighteen thousand
Crowns of annual, old, and stable Revenue, Trino being therein comprehended. To
the Duke Carlo, who should petition for it, was by the Imperialists promised
the Investiture of both the Dukedoms within six weeks, and within a while after
to withdraw their Troops, except out of Mantua and Caneto. That the Spaniards
should quit Monferrat and Casal, and retire out of Piedmont. The French in like
manner going out of the Citadel of Casal, obliged themselves to repass the
Alps, and to restore what they possessed in Savoy, except Pignerol, Susa,
Avigliana, and Briquerasco. In Casal the Duke had the liberty lest to keep such
a Garrison as his Predecessors had been accustomed to do, without jealousy to
the Neighbors, that notwithstanding being to have its effect, which might by
peradventure be ere this concerted in Italy for the demolishing of the Citadel.
The Investiture being dispatched, and Carlo put in possession, the places which
were in the hands of the Imperialists and French, were bona fide to be
restored, and last of all, the Forts in Rhetia newly built, were by Ferdinand
to be razed, the Country to remain in the same liberty it formerly enjoyed. For
the execution of all this, Hostages were to be given, and to be put into the
custody of the Pope or the Grand Duke, or some Prince of the Empire. The Duke
of Lorrain was comprehended in this Treaty, and also the Venetians, they, upon
restoring what they had taken, not to be troubled for any thing done in this
present War; they also were to give their promise not to give any offense, and
to reduce their Army to a condition of not giving jealousy to their
Neighbors; provided nevertheless, that before the signing hereof no other
Agreement had been concluded in Italy to their exclusion.

This was the Compendium of the Treaty of Ratisbone, which instead of being
received with blessings and applauses, met with the dislike of many, and the
blame of all. The Duke of Mantua complained, that he in effect was obliged to
pay the Charge of the War, and that his Countries were mangled and dismembered.
It seemed to the Venetians, that though their Interests were secured, yet their
constant friendship to the Crown of France in the form of the expressions was
but ill appayed. Above all, the Spaniards, accustomed to pre-eminence, were
enraged, to be (as little more than accessories) constrained to a Peace, the
determination whereof they saw divided betwixt Ferdinand and the French. But at
this time as well the Princes Contractors, as their Ministers, had not looked
at ought but their own interests, and to provide in some measure for their
present occasions, for the Emperor now felt himself touched to the quick with
the Swedes Army, and France feared some imminent change within it self. The
King had in the end of September by a great sickness at Lions run the hazard of
death; whereupon the Cardinal seeing, by the aversion of the two Queens and of
Orleans, a furious storm coming upon him, thought to compose Affairs abroad,
hoping that if the King recovered, that he should not want means to overturn
all that which had been agreed. He had not for all that abandoned the care of
the War of Italy; for the Army under the Mareshals de la Force and Schiomberg,
augmented to the number of six and twenty thousand Foot and three thousand
Horse, with Victuals for fifteen days, near the expiration of the Truce marched
to bring succors into the Citadel of Casal. Vittorio was not displeased that
it should succeed, believing that with the falling of that place into the hands
of the Spaniard, the Peace might be made more difficult, and Colaeltoes
judgment and Commission were differing, the Emperor desiring, that he might
make use of those Troops against the Swedes, that by all means the Peace should
be made. Both therefore gave way that the French Army crossing the Po, should
pass securely through Piedmont, although the Duke afar off with some Horse
marched on its side.

But the French pursuing their march without dispute, there arrives a Currier
from Ratisbone, which by the advice of the Peace put the Mareshals into great
perplexity, whether by advancing they should break the accord, or rather
halting lose the Army for hunger in the bowels of the Enemies Country. They
resolved at last to go on for the securing the Citadel, for which the Peace of
Ratisbone had not sufficiently provided, hoping with their appearance to bring
the Spaniards to some more reasonable agreement. Nor did that thought deceive
them; for Saint croix in a fright sends Mazarine to meet them, offering to
receive the Articles of Ratisbone, and besides furnish Victuals to the Citadel
for the six weeks, within which Carlo was to receive investiture. The French
perceiving the fright the Marquess was in, hoping by pressing of him to draw
him to better conditions, pretended that he with his Army should retire out of
the Town, the Castle, and all Monferrat. So that marching resolutely forwards
they presented themselves before Casal, where the Spanish Army stood within
their infranchment, and Colalto was come thither also, who, to poise things
equally, had formerly denied the Marquess assistance, but now would not suffer
that the French should totally prevail. They on the other side of the Gattola,
a very small stream, put themselves in Battle, and with Troops well in order,
after having repulsed certain Polish Cavalry which came forth to discover,
marched a round pace to assault the Trenches.

But Mazarine taking advantage from the consternation of the Spanish Chiefs,
and magnifying the Forces and gallantry of enemy Troops, persuaded them to
consent hastily to the condition of going out of the Town. Lo then he coming
out of the Trenches, and with his hat and his hand making a sign to the Troops
to make a stand, being brought to the Mareshals, concludes the Agreement upon
the Field, in which the Armies were in a moment seen to pass from fighting to
peaceable meetings, and from animosities to civilities. The Conditions were,
That the Spaniards going immediately out of Casal and the Monferrat, the Posts
should be consigned in token of honor to the Emperor, to one of his
Commissioners, who for that purpose should remain in Casal with his Family
only, but in ought else but carrying the name was not to meddle. He afterward,
the term prefixed for the investiture being expired, was to depart, and the
French Garrisons likewise were then presently to go out of the Citadel, and
those of the Country to go in.

The accord was no sooner concluded, but Thoiras comes forth honored already
by the King with the Title of Mareshal of France, and was received with the
acclamations of all the Army. Nor did the Spaniards delay to go out of it,
Casal remaining betwixt the two Armies, after having defloured the glory of two
great Captains equally desired by him that saved it and by him that lost it.
Hereupon grew some delays in the execution of the Treaty, because the French
scarce gone twenty miles, cast into it fifteen hundred Foot and five hundred
Horse, upon pretense that the Inhabitants were not sufficient to defend it,
whilst the Spaniards lodging near might attempt to retake it. But Saint Croix
highly offended repossesses Fontestura and some other Posts, blocking the
place, which was quickly like to fall into its first languishing, because the
universal scarcity of the Country had not afforded means to furnish it but
scantily with Victuals.

Mazarine was hereupon obliged, though by the conceit that in his Negotiations
he had advantaged the French, he was become distrusted by the Austrians, to
take the business in hand again, and at the end of five and twenty days he had
the success to concert anew the reciprocal abandoning of the Posts. But after
this retreat the Spaniards remaining armed on the Frontiers of Milan, the
French Chiefs, who had made a halt, prone to suspicions, or pretexts, send
thither five hundred Switzers as of a Nation free and indifferent. They being
of those that bore arms in their Army, Santa Croix taking it for a relapse and
breach of the Treaty, advances with Gallus, who, Colalto being gone and dead in
Coira, commanded the German Troops in Italy, to take again the Posts. The
Pope's Ministers being gone, the Ambassador Soranzo, who in his return home was
come with the French Army as far as Casal, undertook the mediation, by which
the going forth of the Switzers being consented, the Armies at last on both
sides went further off. There remained in the place the Duke of Main with the
Commissary of Ferdinand, and the Garrison of the Monserrins, to which in
Carlo's poverty France supplied. The Peace then of Ratisbone was in this manner
executed in the Monserrat, notwithstanding that at the same time France blamed
it; for as much as the King being recovered and returned to Paris, it was so
far, that the contrivances framed by Queen Mother had any force against the
Cardinal, that he rather found himself no less by his cunning Arts, than by his
so glorious Undertakings, advanced to a greater height in the favor of King
Lewis. The favors of Princes resembling a dangerous Voyage at Sea, that either
brings Shipwreck or Wealth, Richelieu having escaped the rocks and snares,
became exalted with Praises, Honors, and Riches. The Queen being made so much
the more impatient, broke forth at last into an open pressing of the King, that
he would put him out of the Government and Court. But by such Arts she
confirmed him in place of ruining him, because Lewis, jealous of his own
Authority and affections, feigning as then, if not to satisfy her, at least
not to neglect her, retiring himself afterward for some days under pretense of
hunting to Versailles, caused Marigliac, her Keeper of the Seal, to be arrested
Prisoner, together with his Brother in Italy, as they that suggested to the
Queen such animosities and counsels; whereupon the Cardinal, secured by greater
favor, continues the direction of Affairs and the pursuit of his great
Designs. The causes then ceasing, for which he had secretly enjoined the
Capucin to conclude at Ratisbone upon any conditions, he feigns to be greatly
offended with him and Monsieur de Lion, that they had consented to a Treaty, in
which transgressing the bounds of the Affairs of Italy, there was mention made
of those of the Empire and of Lorrain, the Venetians being ambiguously
comprehended, and the Liberty and Restitution of the Grisons not sufficiently
provided for. The doubt particularly vexed him, lest upon the noise of such a
Treaty and the obligation not to assist Enemies and Rebels, the Swedes should
be discouraged, together with those Princes of the Empire, to whom France had
made large promises of assistance. He was afraid also, lest the Hollanders
should grow jealous, with whom he had lately renewed the League with an
obligation of great succors, and their reciprocal promise, that they should
not for seven years listen to a Truce; not because the Treaty of Ratisbone did
in truth interest those Provinces, but in doubt, lest by frequent relapses into
agreements, without due consideration had of their Confederates, France should
be discredited amongst its Friends. It was added, that if the Hollanders
themselves, startled at the Peace newly concluded betwixt England and Spain,
with opening of Commerce, and renewing the old Treaties, which for some years
hitherwards seemed rather interrupted in name than by Arms, should suspect they
should be also abandoned by France, it would be no strange thing, that they
should at last embrace the Propositions of a Truce, incessantly offered by the
Spaniards. For this cause the Cardinal with diligent dispatches of Courriers
assures all the Friends of the Crown, that the Treaty concluded without the
Kings order, and contrary to the good liking of his Confederates, was
disavowed, pretending to have it qualified and mended.

The French Ministers foreseeing what might happen, remained, under pretext to
wait for the Kings Orders, in Ratisbone; and the Emperor returning to Vienna,
was followed by Veniero, the Ministers there employing many instances, that the
Republic would sign, separate from the French, and cut off those demurs cast
in by them. But the Senate refused to advance a step but by concert with that
Crown, although, by reason of the charges and calamities, especially of the
Pest, weary rather with the War than contented with the Treaty, it desired it
might be quickly executed for the quieting of Italy, having now by many
experiences learnt, how unequal and dangerous friendships are betwixt States
and Princes of a differing constitution; whilst the one proceeding with a
constant order in their Maxims and aims, the other either by intestine
alterations, or the change of Ministers, oftentimes by passion, and always by
the interests of Favorites, are obliged either to go out of their way or stand
still. But the business was carried on with many delays and difficulties;
notwithstanding which, Ferdinand, pressed by his own necessities, recals the
Troops out of Italy, leaving then under Gallas some few, which took Quarters in
the Mantuan, and particularly in Solferino and Castiglione, which had been free
till now. The Affairs of the Empire began now to take a quite other plight than
they had hitherto had, experiencing by a sudden and strange mutation, that in
the immoderate desires to greaten Empires, the troubles to lose them are most
commonly nearest; such being the destiny of those States, which are increased
amidst many cares, that they easily shake with their augmented Conquests, and
at last shaking, perish either by intestine Divisions or foreign Assaults.
Under its own weight, to the dread of the Princes of the Empire and the
universal suspicions of Europe, the Monarchy of the Austrians began now to sink.

The beginning appeared at Ratisbone, whence they hoped to draw more greatness;
the Electors being assembled there by Ferdinand, with pretext to apply remedy
to the grievances of the Empire, but indeed to place upon the head of Ferdinand
his Son, adorned already with the Crowns of Hungary and Bohemia, that also of
the Romans. The Emperor was blamed by some, that he having the Empire
subjected and in possession with an hundred and thirty thousand Soldiers, he
should call to them the Electors, who separated, trembled, but united, knowing
not their own strength, but their Authority and the wants of Ferdinand, might
resolve into great and strange resolutions. The Protestants were much against
the Election, Saxony especially full of wrath for the Edict concerning
Ecclesiastical Goods.

Bavaria above all, though he acknowledged his Electoral Vote from Ferdinand,
having, as the most powerful, so the greater apprehensions, declared his
Judgment more freely, provoked by great dislikes against Wallestain and against
the Austrians, strengthened by an underhand League made with the French. Making
himself then the Head and Author of the common complaints of the Empire, he was
the first that denied to proceed to the Election of a King of the Romans, the
Diet having not been called for that purpose, and then expressed himself; That
it was not becoming the Electoral College to resolve so great a business,
environed by Arms and armed men. That the Empire groaned under the cruel
slavery of Wallestain, who confounded all, amidst the frighting of the Princes,
and the afflicting of the People. For what served so many Armies, when the
Empire was in peace, but for so many Ministers of Cruelty to that most savage
Chief? That he, severe in execution, rigid in command, and covetous in
exactions, consumed the blood of the Germans, and extorted the Gold of the
Provinces. That the Emperor ought at last to give a cessation to the
grievances of the Country in general, and in his piety, by a separation as it
were more strong than that of the fire, to distinguish at length in that metal,
so unjustly drawn out of the bowels of his Vassals, and so unprofitably spent,
the tears and blood of so many Innocents. That it was fit to divulge with
detestation, that to the People of Germany, otherwise endowed with a most
entire fidelity, the sufferance of the Emperor was now become more odious than
the cruelty of the Minister: That the sighs and neglected groans of so many
oppressed would at last make the Empire shake; because being ascended to
Heaven, though deemed light vapors, they are converted into the heaviest
chastisements of Lightnings and Tempests. Such a heavy scourge therefore ought
now to be removed, Arms to be laid down, the Command to be taken away from
Wallestain, and then with quiet minds and free Votes proceed to the Election of
a King of the Romans. Thus did he publicly express himself, and was seconded
by others; but in private gave great and assured hopes, that, giving
satisfaction, they would all agree in the Election of Ferdinand. And now taking
the Ecclesiastics into the Council, he made it be believed, that Wallestain
being dispossessed, and their advice asked to whom the chief Command of those
Troops, which were to remain on foot, should be given, that they should
insinuate and propose the King of Hungary. By such allurements the Emperor was
persuaded to disband fifteen thousand Horse at a blow, and the rest afterward
by pieces, retaining but few in pay, besides those which were in Italy, and a
Body, which under the command of Torquato Conti was kept in the Provinces
toward the Baltique Sea.

Wallestein, not being able to bear this, did his utmost to demonstrate to the
Emperor the prejudice, which he saw would result from it; whilst Germany,
brought under by Arms, could not but by the terror of the same be kept in
obedience. He presaged revolutions of great importance, the alienations of
Princes and States, because, by reason of division in Religion many being
offended, and all disgusted, if the yoke of Iron were removed, that of
obedience would easily be shaken off. He was wont to say, that it was
impossible for the Emperor to entertain ten thousand Soldiers, but very easy
to maintain a hundred thousand; because the great Provinces of Germany
abounding not only with store of people, but they also a warlike Nation, with
small Armies might dispute not only passages, but Victuals and Quarters,
whereas those of greater power, making themselves way, overcame every thing,
and what with fear and what with force, by getting themselves reputation and
exacting Contributions, might feed themselves, and withal gain honor and
respect to the Prince. His counsel was, that showing rigor and a Whip,
Ratisbone should be environed from far with a part of the Army, and with the
rest the Countries of the most reluctant threatened, and particularly of
Bavaria, to bring him to the Election by force.

But the Emperor, either persuaded that he should peaceably attain to his
purpose, or not believing to be able without greater confusions, so highly to
violate the Constitutions of the Empire, preferred the mild before the more
violent counsels. But it troubled not his thoughts a little, how to take away
the command from Fridtland, which he exercised with an absolute power, and with
so much the more applause of the Soldiery, as it was with hatred to the
people. Wherefore he deputes, to persuade him, the Counts of Verdemberg and
Questemberg his intimate friends, who were received at Memminghen, and
forbidden at first to speak of business; but, after having entertained them
with diverse divertisements, he hearkened to them with a mind free from trouble,
and ascribing all to his Enemies, amongst which, besides Bavaria, he reckoned
the Spaniards and Jesuits, foretold the evil event which would arise from it,
declaring with biting taunts and jestings, more than with reasons, his
obedience to the Decree, but not his approbation of the Council. And refusing
every of those satisfactions which the Emperor largely offered him, except the
exemption from rendering account of his past administration, he lays down his
Command, and retires to his own estate, leaving it doubtful, whether he
appeared greater in the exercise than in the quitting of it. But the Electors
having obtained their design, showed themselves so much the more averse to
elect a King of the Romans, as they thought themselves less capable to be
constrained to it. Now did they consent to confer on the King of Hungary the
direction of the Forces; but the Ecclesiastics, being required by Ferdinand to
give their opinion, proposed Bavaria for the Generalat, to the Emperors great
apprehension, lest that Elector aspired, by adding this command to the other
which he already had of the Catholic League, to make himself Arbiter of the
Empire, and in a condition to give Law to the Austrians. Nevertheless
dissembling his displeasure, and rather feigning to applaud the proposition, he
proposes such conditions to Maximilian for the exercise of the Charge, that he
dissenting from them was the cause, that amidst the difficulties and delays the
project vanished.

In this state of things and minds, Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, invited
(as has been said) by some, and desired by others, enters into Germany,
sending certain Letters as his forerunners to Ratisbone, in which he complains
that the Emperor should have prohibited him Levies in the Empire, given
assistance to the Polacks, intercepted his Dispatches, taken his Ships upon the
Sea, hindered his Kingdoms of their Commerce, Baltic to prejudice and offend
him, and in conclusion, that his Ambassadors at the meeting at Lubeck, where
was treated the Peace with Denmark, had not been admitted. The Emperor had
given little heed to such complaints, and to the Letters themselves the Diet
answered but slowly, in general terms and scanty Titles. Whereupon assuming the
specious pretexts of Religion and Liberty, to protect the Protestants of the
Empire, and deliver the oppressed from the domination of the Austrians, he
advances toward Pomerania, dis-imbarquing in the Island of Rughen, where
driving the imperial Garrison out of a Fort, he fixes the seat of the War; the
other Islands, which are a little separate from the Continent, yield themselves
to him without dispute. This breaking forth of a sudden, greatly moved the
minds of the Imperialists; but it being quickly known, that the King had not
then more than six thousand Soldiers, so slender a beginning and such a little
spark was despised, till many of the Troops, disbanded by Ferdinand, joining
themselves to him, which being accustomed to the license of Armies, could not
live without such an occupation, he was seen with a very powerful Army, leaving
a Garrison in Stralsond, to pass into Pomerania.

Bolislao, Duke of that Province, formerly oppressed and molested by Fridtland,
refuses the Emperors Garrisons, pretending that he would defend himself. But
concluding a League with the Swedes, receiving their Troops into some of his
Towns, and giving contribution, declares himself under the protection of
Gustavus. The King now having a secure retreat, advances into Mechelburg to
remove the Ministers and Garrisons of Wallestein, and by restoring the ancient
owners, to procure applause to the cause of Religion and the public liberty,
which he pretended to rescue. To these proceedings opposed themselves the Duke
Savelli and Torquato Conti with weak Forces, and uncertain counsels, because
environed by the Protestants, they had every thing suspect, while Tilli, whom
the Emperor had been constrained to make with limited powers Generalissimo of
his Forces, assembled his Army in the Country of Mansfeldt. But now, together
with hopes, minds every where raising themselves; amongst the first, the
Citizens of Magdenburg brought in again Christian Administrator of that
Bishopric, formerly (as guilty of Treason) excluded by Ferdinand and
proscribed.

ANNO MDCXXXI.
From such disturbances in Germany was Italy now again obliged to acknowledge
her quiet, though for some months it was tossed to and fro without Peace, and
without War, whilst all parties seeking advantages by Treaties, and the Armies
being wearied and consumed, the War was made with treating, and the treating
with Arms. The Plague depopulated whole Provinces, and in the Milanese
particularly (the wickedness of man adding Thunderbolts to the wrath of Heaven)
there was found a colluvies of people shuffled together of Italians and
Spaniards, who inventing new fashions of death, endeavored, by an artificial
Plague, to extinguish, as much as in them lay, mankind. The poison of their
deadly and abominable mixtures killed by the touch only, and was not to be
avoided, whilst the treachery was found hidden every where, by the drops of
this so cruel liquor, being sprinkled through the Churches and the Streets. The
names of these men deserve nothing but oblivion, the most just punishment of
actions famous for wickedness. Though the imagination of the people, moved by
fear, fancied many things; yet the misdeed was discovered and punished, there
remaining yet in Milan the Inscriptions and Memorials of the Houses pulled
down, where these Monsters had their meetings. But in the State of the
Venetians, and in the City, the malignant influence exceeded the remedies, till
the Senate vowing a magnificent Temple, under the protection of our Lady of
health, sending a rich Lamp of Gold to Loretto, and resolving to solicit with
the Pope the canonization of the blessed Lorenzo Justiniani, Patrician and
Patriarch of the City, besides public and private Prayers, with Alms and
Fastings, God being pacified, the scourge ceased. Whereupon toward the end of
the year, the City was with great solemnity published free from Contagion, but
the skars remained for a long time, there having perished in Venice sixty
thousand persons, and in the State of the Republic more than five hundred
thousand. As to the Treaties, Ferdinand accepting the offer of the French, that
the Peace should be executed only for the affairs of Italy, the Spaniards
opposed it, irritated by their not so happy successes; and in particular,
Olivares, far distant from the dangers and difficulties, was vexed, that his
designs had not taken effect. He sends Feria Governor to Milan, with new
instructions to disturb rather than promote the Peace; and into Germany sends
the Regent Villani, that he might slacken in Ferdinand that speed with which he
drove on the Peace in Italy; offering against the Swede vast assistances, if
putting Mantua into the Spaniards hands, he would leave to them the care of the
War on this side the Mountains. But the Emperor reflecting on the issue of
past Councils, and seeing the fire of the Swedish Arms blazing throughout
Germany with most devouring Flames, sent Gallas power to conclude and execute
the Peace in Italy. The meeting was held in Chievasco, a Town of Piedmont,
whither with the mediation of the Popes Ministers, and the Duke Vittorio being
present, Gallas came, together with the Mareshal Thoiras, and Monsieur de
Servient deputed from France, to whom Trajano Viscardi in the name of the Duke
of Mantua had yielded the Plenipotence.

For the Republic Girolamo Cavazza; their Secretary, assisted, and for the
Spaniards the Count della Rocca, their Ambassador in Piedmont, who took a
greater share in the understanding than management of Treaties. These public
Negotiations were facilitated by some very private concerts betwixt the French
and Savoyards, till the conclusion whereof, Servien, though in appearance for
something else, had retarded his appearing at Chievasco. And the promoter and
mediator, not without the secret consent of the Pope, was Julio Mazarini, who
for his happiness in past Negotiations gaining credit, and giving greater
hopes, having by various arts reduced Pancirollo to the alone name and
appearance of the ministry, had with great applause, and with so much more
confidence with Richelieu, assumed the reality of the most important Affairs.
He in secret conferences declares to the Duke Vittorio, That vain was that hope
with which he was possessed, to recover by the Peace, what the Crown of France
possessed of his. That the Cardinal, ambitious of glory, would what ever came
of it, retain in Italy a memorial of his great and famous actions. And who was
there, that could hinder that design of his, if Ferdinand, having great
troubles upon him, had no thought but of his own defense? That the Spaniards,
low in reputation and Forces, minding only their own advantages, had neither
the power or the will to repair the losses of Piedmont. The Italians
unanimously foresaw the power for the future divided betwixt the two Crowns,
not to suffer the arbitrament and jealousies of one of them alone. He himself
might now from past dangers sufficiently comprehend, what was the price of his
Peace, and Principality. That he was to compare the relinquishing of one Town
with the most certain conquest of Savoy, Tarentasia, Moriena, Avigliana, Suza,
Saluzzo, Bricherasco, with so many Valleys, Forts, and other places, as rend
Piedmont into bits, and besiege the Metropolis it self. And when did he think
to drive away the French by force, who by their nearness are able to overrun
the Country, and by their courage and power swallow the rest? Could he
peradventure expect succors from the Spaniards, who, under the title of
protection, would usurp others of his places? He had no way then, but to
sacrifice to the unsatiable desire, the Cardinal had of glory, one little part,
as Pignerol might be said to be; because the rest being restored, there would
not one day want opportunities to recover that also, it being an easier matter
to weary the French by giving way to the keeping of their Conquests, than by
resisting. But there were offered at present considerable advantages, whilst
the division of Monferrat being to depend upon the arbitrament of the Ministers
of that Crown, there might be given to him, together with Trino, so ample a
share, that the worth of Pignerol might be sufficiently recompensed; That that
was the very thing which his Father had for many years, and amidst so many
troubles, sought for. Nor could the Duke of Mantua complain; because, if the
Crown, at the price of its own Conquests, cause his capital City to be
restored, having preserved Casal by its treasure and blood, what lesser
gratitude can be returned to so magnanimous a King, than by paying the price of
that passage, which for his own safety and assistance he desires may be kept
for future accidents? Vittorio was to weigh the present conjunctures, and his
own interests; because if he should not consent to yield Pignerol, France
remained not only in possession of that place, but of most ample Conquests made
in Savoy and Piedmont. That France was now the Arbiter of Peace or War: Its
power and authority extended into Casal. For Mantua, it was not so much taken
care of, being far from its Confines, and balanced by great Conquests, with
which it could liberally both compensate the losses of him that had depended on
him, and overcome the advantages of the Spaniards.

The Duke was wavering amidst his troubled thoughts; for on the one side the
desire of Peace allured him, and the hopes to recover by Treaty that, which by
other means he was not able to get again from the French; on the other, he well
understood, that giving up the custody of the Alps and passages into Italy, his
friendship would no more be valued by the Crowns. At last yielding to the
necessity, and to the time, he consents to part with Pignerol, and the Valleys,
which are serviceable for passage into Italy, with so much circumspection and
silence, that the effect appeared certain Months before any thing tending
toward it was known. The Ministers after this Treaty being all come to
Chievasco, the agreement for the execution of the Peace of Italy was upon the
sixth of April without much ado concluded: for, the longest and most difficult
point being the liquidation of the Lands of Monferrat, which were to be given
to Vittorio, the French gave way to all advantage of the Savoyards, Gallas not
dissenting, who desired to make a speedy conclusion, and, the Mantuans not
opposing, being desirous to restore the Duke into the most important of his
Countries. For the fifteen thousand Crowns then of yearly Revenue, which was
given to Savoy, they assign, besides Trin and Alba, eighty other Villages of
the best: That Duke taking upon himself the Dowry of Margherita, and, for the
overplus of Revenue, which might arise, promising to deposite in Lions Jewels
or money. The investiture of this part of Monferrat, the Emperor was to give
to Savoy; the nomination to the Abbey of Lucadio was left to Mantua, and the
Savoyards obliged themselves to permit a yearly draught of ten thousand Sacks
of Grain to Casal, which without the help of the most fertile part of Monferrat
might easily fall into want. As to the restitution of places possessed, little
else was added to the Treaty of Ratisbone, but that in Susa and Avigliana there
should remain Garrisons of those Cantons of Helvetia which were confederate
with France and Savoy, with condition to deliver them again to France, in case
that on the day prefixed the German Troops should not be retired out of Rhetia.
The Venetians were comprehended in amplissima forma, and the Spaniards obliged
themselves to ratify the Treaty, and to withdraw their Army into the Milanese,
without offering offense, or giving jealousies to those Princes which had had
no part in the present War.

The Treaty was no sooner concluded, but the Germans silently abandoning
Valezzo, retired out of the State of the Republic, notwithstanding that a
little before a certain casual accident had in some sort exasperated men's
minds; whilst a party of Polish Horse, which had served under the Austrians,
passing through the way called the Steccato, heretofore mentioned, betwixt the
Confines of Bergamo and Crema were assaulted by the Venetian Guards, who
killing and taking some, made prey of their goods and money. But upon the
complaint of the Governor of Milan and Aldringher, they were released, and the
Booty restored. More vehement were the complaints of Feria for the things
concluded in Chierasco, in such sort, that denying to approve them, and to have
powers for the execution of them, he ordered provisions, sought pretexts,
crossed the march of the Germans out of Italy, and invited Ottavio Piccolomini
to remain in his pay with three Regiments of that Nation, and lastly fomenting
the disgust of the Duke of Mantua at the unreasonable dividing of the
Monferrat, promised him, if he would adhere to the Austrians, not only to
restore him in the Mantuan, but to re-establish him in every one of those
places, which the French so prodigally alienated from his States; but Carlo
deeming it too dangerous to pass from hatred of so fresh a date to friendships
so suspicious, contenting himself with complaints and protests in secret,
believed, that it was not for him to disturb the execution of things agreed.

The French observing the workings of Feria, stop their march from going out of
Italy; whereupon the Popes Ministers were obliged to interpose anew, and
because the point, which most galled the Spaniards, consisted in the stay of
the Switzers in Susa and in Avigliana, it was on the 19. of June agreed, That
either all the Restitutions should be made to Savoy, Mantua, and the Grisons,
upon one and the same day, viz. the 20. of August, or that upon the same day
should be quitted by the Imperialists the Forts of Rhetia and Bricherasco by
the French. Upon the 26. should be released to Savoy, Susa and Avigliana, and
to Mantua, Porto and Caneto. Then the first of September the City it self of
Mantua should be rendered to its Duke, and Pignarol delivered to Vittorio.

This last way as the most secure was chosen, and Hostages were added; and
because the Pope, to whom they were to be delivered, would not interest himself
in that which concerned the Grisons, it was concluded, That for Bricherasco,
Thoiras should be given to the Duke of Savoy, and for the Forts of Rhetia,
Gallas to the Duke of Mantua. It was besides determined, that by Feria six
thousand Foot and one thousand Horse should be sent away out of Italy, and the
Milanese be afterward disarmed, except but of ordinary Garrisons.

The restitutions at their times gradually executed, gave great satisfaction
and no less hope, that Italy might at last breathe after so many calamities;
and the Pope wrote to the Republic a Brief with worthy expressions, exalting
their deservings, both in maintaining the War, and promoting the Peace. In the
mean time while the restitutions were in doing, Monsieur de Razzilier, arriving
in the Name of King Lewis at Venice, did not only communicate the Accord
concluded, but insisted with great earnest, that the Republic would assist the
Duke of Mantua with means to re-enter into his Country, representing his
present condition to want counsel, protection, and assistance: That he returned
from Banishment and Poverty to a Principality, but brought nothing with him but
his Person, his Children, and his Name, without Soldiers, without Credit, and
without Money. The City of Mantua was miserably reduced into the form of a
Skeleton, the Towns into Deserts, and the whole Territory into great
affliction. Was it any ways possible to raise Garrisons and Revenues out of
Ashes and Sepulchers? It was therefore necessary to garrison those Walls, for
the preservation and rescue whereof, so much gold, so much labor, and so much
blood had been spent. France being far off, had in Mantua no other interest but
that of affection and care. The keeping of it therefore belonged to the
Republic as a Neighbor. That she was to be careful not to believe too much in
the Peace, because those are the most certain blows which throw themselves upon
us under the Cloak of confidence. That the danger of the War had been perhaps
less than that which ought to be feared at present from Treacheries. The
Spaniards being no longer able to oppress the liberty of Italy by force, would
now be attempting it by Art. And if Mantua should by some deceitful trick be
taken, what else would it be but to wound Italy again in the scar scarce
healed, to make it incurable and more painful? The King charged himself with
Casal, nay with the universal care of Italy; promising, on any danger of that
Country, any attempts of its Enemies, any notice from the Confederates, to
descend again the Alps with puissant Forces. He that was the Author of the
Peace would be the Guardian of it; entreated the Republic to cooperate with
him in so generous intentions, and if she had been his Companion in the War,
she would have the satisfaction besides with him to maintain the Peace.

The Venetians, after so long disturbances, infinitely desirous of quiet, were
in a doubt, lest upon new emergencies and the news of introducing Garrison, the
Spaniards taking Jealousy might disturb the Peace. They were besides
persuaded, that the Duke drawing some relief from his Estate in France, might
supply his present necessity, with which they hoped at last that the Councils
of Spain being moderated by events, Italy was to enjoy a long and secure
tranquillity. For this cause they excuse themselves from lending the Duke new
assistance, nevertheless promising, if other disturbances should arise, to
concur with the vigilance and readiness usual in their ancient Customs,
together with the Crown, for the relief of him and the common Liberty of Italy.
But the Dukes necessities not at all yielding to these considerations, nor the
Kings instances slackning; but the Mareshal Thoiras being sent Ambassador
Extraordinary, to give weight to the business by the quality of a person so
famous, he repeats with great urgency, that the Republic, having even in his
utmost calamity assisted Carlo with a careful liberality, would also complete
the kindness by giving him means to enjoy his present better Fortune. The
Senate resolved for that time only to disband upon the Borders certain Foot,
that the Duke taking them into pay, might be accommodated with them; but in
conclusion, Feria not disbanding, and it being discovered, that by the means of
the Commander Collredo, he persuaded the Duke, rejecting the French and
Venetian Garrisons, to admit into Mantua those of Spain with offers of vast
recompenses, and there happening in Goito, just at the time it was to be
restored to the State, the death of the Eldest Prince, without leaving other
Issue than a Son in Swadling-clouts and one Daughter, the Venetians determined
to prevent every troublesome accident,, to send to the Duke, under the Command
of Francesco Martinengo, a thousand Foot and two Companies of Horse with
Ammunition, and all that was else needful. Jealousies afterward increasing
more and more, they brought in four hundred other Soldiers, Monsieur de
Tavanes assisting by the Duke to give him the better appearance and reputation
by the protection of that Crown. Nor were the suspicions ill grounded; for
Feria having not succeeded to bring the Duke by Treaty to his ends, attempted
more secret contrivances, and had sent to Mantua the Infanta Margaret, under
pretext to console the Widdowhood of the young Princess, her Daughter, but in
effect to sow Discord, suggest Marriages, form Parties, that by dividing the
House and the Government, a way miht be opened to some disorder.

Moreover, the Duke of Main being dead in Casal, in the so tender age of the
little Prince, new jealousies, designs, and hopes were perceived to arise for
the Succession. But Feria, by more compelling apprehensions, was forced to lead
his thoughts elsewhere; for when he thought the French gone out of Italy, he
discovered a Garrison in Pignarol, and the Colors of that Crown displayed. All
followed in order to the fore-related Treaties, for pledge whereof was the
Cardinal of Savoy gone to Paris under the show of fulfilling them. But the
French making show of a suspicion, that the Governor had no intention
sincerely to observe the agreement, complained that he did not disarm, and that
he kept some Germans of Schomberg in his pay, notwithstanding that it was
alleged by the Spaniards, that that Regiment in particular belonged to the
Crown, under whose Colors it had long before born Arms, and that in the
process of the past Negotiations, having made mention of it to the Popes
Ministers, they had obtained of the French in express terms, that that was not
understood to be comprehended amongst those Troops which were to go out of
Italy. But they, who sought for excuses and pretexts, showing themselves not at
all satisfied, feigned to demand, for the keeping of a secure passage open for
their return into Italy, a place of the Duke Vittorio. And he dissembling what
had been agreed, in a mocquery to Feria, communicates to him the request, and
at the same time, though it obliged him to deny it, demands of him assistance;
but in such a number, and within a time so short, that he could not be able to
give it him. The Governor defending himself partly with great complaints, and
partly with various and ambiguous answers, the Duke taking pretext from the
delays and denial, publishes, that he had consented to yield to pressing
instances, and deliver Pignarol for six months to the French.

But a little while after a new Treaty was divulged, in which it appeared, that
that Town with the Valleys adjacent was sold to the Crown in perpetuity, and
that the price of it was that money, (which amounted to five hundred thousand
Crowns) which Vittorio, for the satisfying of Mantua, being to deposite in
Lions, the King now charging himself with that debt, took it upon himself.
Whether the French Garrison really, at the executing of the Treaty, did go out
of Pignarol, and afterward went in again, after that the Savoyards for the
freeing of the Hostages gave assurance, that the place was delivered; or
whether a part did not remain in the Cellars or in subterranean places hidden,
was then much and doubtfully talked of; but time has at last discovered, that
the French not trusting the quitting of the place entirely, one part only went
out, and another remained secretly within, and the Count de la Rocca, the
Spanish Ambassador at Turin, who would have gone thither to see the effectual
delivery, was diverted by Mazarine by the fear of the Plague, making him
believe, that it raged much and mortally in that place. This action moved on a
sudden the minds of all Europe, and chiefly in Italy, many at so great a
novelty standing amazed, others in suspense, others contented, according to
affections and interests; because those who for want of power had till now kept
in their hatred against Spain, breathed again desires and hopes of alterations
and changes. On the other side, he that in the present state of things found
himself at quiet, equally fearing a yoke and assistance, presaged new and more
lasting calamities, if it should remain in the power of the unquiet and
headlong Genius of the French Nation, unseasonably to disturb Italy; but
others that desired to see it in an equal state of liberty and security, highly
rejoicing, that that Crown also was come in for a share, persuaded themselves,
that what with reputation, and what with the terror of the name, it was like
to preserve her peaceable.

Richelieu had reason above any other to rejoice, the Arbitrament of Peace and
War being now put into his hand, and having manifestly revenged himself of
Olivares, who, if with clandestine blows, sowing factions and discords in the
Kingdom and in the Royal Family he had endeavored to ruin him, he on the
other side, by signal advantages in Negotiations, and upholding himself by
Arms, had discredited and confounded him. In these two was lodged the Destiny
of Europe, now openly become Rivals in ambition, envy, strife, and hatred, to
such a degree, that the World could no longer bear them either at odds or
agreeing without great destruction. The Spaniards seemed highly moved, seeing
the Duke of Mantua to their shame established in his Countries, and both by
inclination and gratitude adhering to France, he of Savoy constrained to depend
upon the same Crown, and the French with Reputation and Forces fixed in Italy,
to give jealousy and dispute the predominancy till now by them enjoyed. And
for this cause they made their complaints in all Courts, amplifying in words,
that Richelieu had deluded public Faith, Conditions were broken, and the Peace
disturbed. But complaints being vain in an Age wherein Interest gives the Law,
Feria, beyond measure in disorder for that, having formerly by possessing the
Valteline with so much labor endeavored to shut up every passage into Italy
from Strangers, the Gate of the Alps was now in his Government set wide open by
the French, armed with great diligence, and from Naples and the other Kingdoms
drew men and money; and to the end to discover affections in so great a
confusion of things, he presses the Princes of Italy for their obliged
assistance, as if the Invasion of the Milanese were near at hand.

Richelieu nevertheless had not as yet brought things to that pass at Court,
nor ripened his designs abroad so as to be able openly to break with Spain; but
laying hold of advantages, his aims were to make himself Master of Avenues and
places of consequence. Piedmond by this means open to the Arms of the French,
he contrives to exclude succors by the way of the Grisons to the Milanese out
of Germany. But it being difficult without the joining or at least the making
use of the Frontier of the Venetians to maintain an Army in that Country, he
sounds them to join to three thousand of the Kings two thousand of their
Soldiers, proposing Rohan General over all, under the title of preserving
those Posts and the Liberty of the Country; but chiefly to prevent the designs
of Feria, lest to be quit with him for Pignarol, he might elsewhere and
particularly in Rhetia direct his craft.

The Senate intent upon Peace, and doubtful lest the spite betwixt the Crowns
should proceed so far as to be the cause of a new War, did not only refuse to
cooperate there, but in all the Courts made it their business by effectual
offices to remove what was obscure, and assure the Peace. Howsoever Rohan,
without expecting leave from Venice, departs, and going into Helvetia among the
Protestant Cantons, where, by reason of conformity of Religion he was in great
esteem, he applies himself to dispose things for the future designs, whilst in
the Grisons, Monsieur de la Land raising with money from France three thousand
Soldiers of that Country, fortifies the Steich, and guardes other Passes.
Feria, to oppose him, sends into Rhetia Casati, advances Troops to Como and the
Confines of the Valteline, soliciting the Archduke of Insbruck to possess in
the County of Bormio the Post of Saint Maria to keep the Communication with
the Milanese open, and inciting the Emperor to be sensible of so great an
emergency. But Leopold admonishing the three Leagues to abstain from
unseasonable novelties, would not by proceeding further procure himself
disturbance; and Ferdinand, in the declination of his own Interests, takes
little notice of the Affairs of Italy, contented to please the Spaniards, and
redeem for a time the prejudices to form secretly a Decree, by which he
declares the Investiture null, granted to Duke Carlo, in case of transgression
in the Peace of Ratisbone. As to the rest, exhorts the Spaniards to sufferance,
and to assist with all their Forces the common Cause, which in Germany was
running a hazard. Feria for this, and also understanding the important defeat,
which near Leipzich the Swedes gave the Emperor, was obliged to suspend his
motion, and to defer the resentments to more proper Conjunctures and time.

About the beginning of the year there had been published in the Swedish Camp
at Berwald the League betwixt France and Gustavus for the defense of their
common Friends, security of the Commerce of the Baltic Sea, and restoring of
Liberty in Germany and the Grisons. These were obliged to proceed in their
enterprise with thirty thousand Foot and six thousand Horse, and that, to
disburse to them four hundred thousand Ricks Dollers by the year. They had
conditioned, that in the places which should be taken, Religion should remain
as the Peace appoints, which they call the Religious Peace in the Empire, and
where the Catholic was, the Worship should remain free. The Swede during the
Winter made sufficient progress, for that the Soldiers, by reason of the
natural coldness of the Clime, equally strong in body and mind, made light of
hardships; so that in a short time were taken in, not without some dispute,
Griffenhaghen, Gartz, Damin, and other places, amongst which was
New-brandenburg, re-taken a while after by Tilly, with the Imprisonment of
Colonel Kniphausen, that kept it, and an infinite slaughter of the Garrison and
Inhabitants. But the King at Franckfort upon the Oder, a Town of greater
moment, was even with them; for forcing it by assault, he permitted that the
whole Garrison should be cut to pieces. The Towns of Colberg and Landtsperg
intimidated with this success, yielded to him on conditions, whilst Tilly in
this interim was engaged in the Siege of Magdenburg. The Protestants held at
this time a Diet in Leipzich, and published under the warmth of the Swedish
Protection those conceptions, which the Emperors power had for a long time
suppressed; nay they appeared the more irritated, for that in Swabe the Troops
of Ferdinand in their return out of Italy, had, as they passed, to some of that
Religion done very great mischief. The Emperor had also denied them to recall
the Edict concerning the restitution of the Goods of the Church; whereupon they
resolved to arm themselves, and to join with the Swedes, imploring of the King
speedy and vigorous succors for Magdenburg. Gustavus denied it not; but being
first desirous to assure himself of the Electors of Brandenburg and Saxony,
while they were negotiating about the delivery of the places and union of
Forces, Magdenburg was taken by assault, destroyed by the Sword, and desolated
by Fire, with such a slaughter, as was made a terror to the Protestants, and a
horror to the Catholics, to the great reproach of Tilli, who seemed, as is
usual to those that are accustomed to good Fortune, to grow cruel in seeing
himself abandoned to a contrariety. At last after reciprocal and various
successes of no great moment, whilst Saxe armed, Tilli, to assure himself of
his ends, demands of him an Union, Passages, and Quarters, and the Elector not
complying with him, he enters into Misnia to fright him, and having taken some
Towns, attacques Leipzich that refused to receive his Garrison. The City being
of a large circuit and weak Walls, after two days yields. But Saxe thus
provoked, joins presently the Swedes with his Army of twelve thousand men.

Gustavus judged, that to maintain credit and his conquests, it behoved him to
pursue some new designs, and, without giving the Enemy time to unite and
augment his Forces, to join Battle with him under the favor of his Reputation
and Fortune. Nor could, the Armies being too near, Tilli refuse it; for to
retire would put him upon disadvantage and dishonor, and the King following
him, would have disordered him, and beaten him without hazard. The Armies then
faced one another near Leipzich, equal in valor and number, commanded by two
Chiefs, that in actions of War had little inequality, save in the dignity. The
Armies ranged themselves into a very long Line upon a situation almost plain, a
little rising ground interposing.

Among the Imperialists Tilli commanded in the middle, Firstemburg on the
right, and Papenheim on the left hand. Of the Swedes the King took the right
Wing, and Saxe with his men had the care of the left. In the Rear of the one
and the other stood some Troops of reserve. Tilli, with the skill of an
experienced Captain, had chosen the advantage of the Sun and Wind; but the King
with an Art not at all-inferior, partly by protracting the time of the Battle,
and partly by wrying his order, as he charged the Enemy, got it in a great
measure to himself. With a soft pace then and in great order, upon the 7. day
of September the Troops advance to the Battle, the Cannon on both sides by
incessant shooting doing considerable hurt, but most to the Swedes, who
nevertheless immovable, kept their order, waiting for the sign to give on. The
King at last gave the command to charge, and it was no sooner given but the
Troops on both sides were seen to be mingled and disordered. The lives of so
many warlike men were now placed upon the points of their Swords, courage was
increased by blows, the wounded appeared in heaps, and the dead bodies were
piled up a great height in the Field. In the heat of the Fight, the Chiefs
themselves were engaged in the Battle, equalizing fortune and dangers. The
Victory, it seemed, was uncertain, when after about an hours doubtful conflict
the right Wing of the Austrians broke and dispersed the Saxons left. But the
King, after many Charges, pierced into and disordered the left of Papenheim, in
such sort, that finding no more resistance, he had the liberty (causing the
Troops of reserve to march) to go himself with fury to the assistance of the
Saxons, and charge the Imperialists with so much heat, that they quit the
Field. And now there was no longer fighting, but slaughter and running away,
till night coming on, the Conquerors then first ceased to pursue, and the
conquered to fly. Tilli with many wounds, but very few Soldiers retires into
Hall. The report was, that the number of the dead amounted to fifteen thousand;
the rest were dispersed, leaving to the Swedes the Field and the glory, with
the Cannon and the Baggage.

After so signal a Victory Germany was divided as it were for a prey, betwixt
the King and Saxony. The Saxe chose Bohemia with the Provinces adjacent,
leaving the rest to the King. It was no ill grounded opinion, that if the Army
in a Body had advanced directly toward the patrimonial Countries of the
Austrians, it would have found no resistance; for that confusion and fear
subverting Councils, the speed of the Enemy would not have given time for
redress or defense. But Leipzich being recovered, while the Elector takes in
Eyra and Prague with almost all the Kingdom of Bohemia, the King bends toward
Upper Germany, and traveling rather than fighting, with a carreer of
prosperity, possesses himself of Franconia, and of the Lower Palatinate, with
the Countries of the Elector of Mentz, and so many other places along the
Rhyne, and elsewhere, that it almost appeared, that Fame had used less speed in
publishing the success, than the King in subduing the Countries. He now sends
to Venice Lewis Christophoro Ratshio, Cavalier, his Ambassador extraordinary,
to communicate his advantages and designs, tending to the relief of the
oppressed, to the liberty of Germany, and the humbling of the Austrians;
whereupon having it in his power to advance the peace and security of Italy, he
demanded money and assistance.

The Senate honoring in officious terms the prosperity of that Prince,
condescended not to ought else, but to call to memory the much which the
Republic had contributed to the liberty and honor of Italy; over which not
without care and charge it was no less vigilant at present. The discourses of
the felicity of these Armies, passing to this side of the Mountains, troubled
with no small fears the minds of many, and in particular of the Court of Rome;
who very unwillingly saw a King supported by great Forces, and so great fortune
draw near to Italy, where perhaps he might find no fewer invitations than
pretexts.

Apprehensions were increased from Nature and from Chance; for the Mount
Vesuvius, which with its burnings had, it seems, formerly presaged either the
inundations of people or the grievous calamities of Italy, cast up flames with
such violence and astonishment, that the City of Naples was afraid either to be
swallowed in the Earthquake, or to be buried in the ashes. The shaking
overturned houses, stopped the course of Rivers, repulsed the Sea, tossed and
opened the Mountains: In sum, there were evaporated by contrary and hideous
effects Waters, Flames, and Ashes, by which some neighboring places did not
only remain covered, but it was doubted, lest, the respiration of the air being
taken away, that whole people might be suffocated. But Heaven being appeased by
public penitencies, the groans of an innumerable multitude being every where
heard, such a wind arose from the contrary quarter, as carried them to fall
beyond the Sea as far as Cataro, and other places of Albania and Dalmatia. The
sulphurous aliment being at last consumed in the bowels of the earth, the fire
extinguished.

But Germany, amidst the fears of Italy, experiencing with strange vicissitudes
more sensible mischiefs; the prosperity of the Emperor, which a little while
ago threatened the Heretics, could not now serve the Catholics for a support
or countenance, because from the highest mountain of divine judgments was let
loose that stone which makes the strongest of Empires to totter. The Elector of
Trier, seeing him of Mentz driven out of his Country, took occasion to publish
the protection which France had secretly some years before consented to him,
when he, offended with the Emperor for not having adjudged the Abbey of St.
Maximine, which he pretended was annexed to that Crown, and now opening the
Gates to his Forces puts Hermestain into their hands. Bavaria, who forced to
play fast and loose, without separating himself from the Austrians, but no less
to hazard himself with them, had likewise made a late Treaty with the French,
in which they promising him the conservation of the Electoral Vote in his
Family, both the King and Duke obliged themselves mutually to defend those
Countries, which they then possessed, with a certain number of Horse and Foot.
By this alliance Richelieu obtained the separation of Bavaria as head of the
Catholic League from giving assistance to Lorrain; because that Duke, after
the Conspiracies with the English, despairing of ever reconciling himself to
that Minister, had not only given himself to the protection of the Austrians;
but during the War of Italy had persuaded the Emperor to fortify Moyenvich, a
place of consequence upon the Frontier of Mets, and of the jurisdiction of that
Bishopric, and afterward to deliver the place to him, to the end that with it
he might cover his own Country, and withal upon occasion give passage for the
invading of France. He had afterward received Orleans in his Country; and now
though the protection which he expected from the Emperor appeared weakened,
nevertheless provoking the King with offenses, and the Cardinal with disgusts,
drew unseasonable troubles into his bosom. The said Duke of Orleans, by the
suggestion of the Queen Mother and of his Sister in Law, no less than of his
Favorites, taking the plausible pretext of ill Government, of a sudden retires
from Court. The King now comprehending, that both by domestic and foreign
encouragements his Brother went about to obtain the Kingdom in present rather
than hope any longer for it, follows him toward Orleans with so much speed,
that the Duke not willing to be taken by force, nor to trust to any accord,
departs toward Burgundy, where with the Duke of Bellegard, Governor of that
Province, he had already contrived intelligences and agreements. The King
coming thither also and the Cardinal, constrained him to pass into the Franche
Conte, and from thence to take refuge in Lorrain.

Lewis, well to secure himself first in the Kingdom, reforms the Court of the
Queen his Wife, discarding the persons suspected, and forbidding the Ambassador
of Spain to visit her in private. Afterward brings his Mother to Compiegne,
and of a sudden parting thence, leaves her there, kept under the care of the
Mareshal d' Estre. His will after was, that she should be removed to Molins, a
Town not strong, and in the heart of the Kingdom, giving her as a token of
honor the Government of the Bourbonois; but the Queen interposing delays by
the pretext of her weakness, insinuated to the Governor of la Chapelle, that
giving her entrance, she should resign again the place to him; and in this
confidence, whilst the Cardinal privy to all, to facilitate her flight
dexterously causes the Guards to be slackened, she secretly departs. But coming
to la Chapelle finds it in Arms against her, there being entered into it the
Marquess de Vardes, Father of the Governor, sent thither seasonably by the
Cardinal himself; whereupon entrance being denied her, she was forced to pass
into the Province of Henault, and thence to be conveyed to Brussels, where
being received with great tenderness by the Infanta Isabella, she spreads
throughout the whole world the complaints of her condition; that, being driven
out of that happy Kingdom, where she had heretofore commanded, she was now in
her old age put to seek for entertainment, and perhaps a Grave, amongst
strangers. The Spaniards hoped from these domestic broils in France great
advantages, having the Mother of the King in their hand, and the Brother in the
house of a Prince their friend. Nevertheless they could not with Forces
proportionable to so great a design promote the disturbances of the Kingdom,
being engaged in Germany, and beaten in Flanders by the Hollanders, whilst by
the Scheld they were attempting a surprise in Zealand. They saw Orleans also
not well provided with Forces, nor with the intelligencies they expected: for
those, who, as it was said, were to take Arms and kindle the War in the
Kingdom, being prevented by the vigilance and authority of the Cardinal, had
been able to effect nothing, but provide for their safety by running away. The
Duke of Lorrain, who had in his hand the pledge of the Successor of the Crown,
thought himself secure; yet to bind him faster, persuades him to marry Margaret
his Sister, a Princess of great virtue and rare beauty. On the advice whereof,
Lewis was inflamed with extreme anger, and Richelieu taking hold of the
occasion to revenge himself, persuades him to cause the Mareshal de la Force to
invest Moyenvich, which the Imperialists being not able to relieve, nor the
Duke of Lorrain daring without their help to attempt, it was within a few days
rendered.

The French Army would then have proceeded farther, if Carlo, in person
humbling himself to the King, had not made this agreement; To renounce all
intelligence and junction prejudicial to France; to cause the Rebels and
enemies to the King to go out of his Country, denying them entrance for the
future, and to join to the Kings Army four thousand Foot and two thousand
Horse, with which entering into Germany the third part of the Conquests should
be the Dukes. For warranty he delivers for three years the Town of Marsall to
the French; the King promising not to make Peace without comprehending him in
it. This Agreement concluded the last day of the year, men truly judged, that
on the Dukes side it would be no longer lived, than the necessity which
dictated it at present. The King, to make it appear, that the more Richelieu
was attacqued by envy and hatred, the more he embraced him in his favor,
created him Duke and Peer of France. So that by those applauses, with which,
over and above the rejoycings of those of his own party, fame exalted him, he
vindicated himself from certain invectives, which spread abroad in print by
unknown Pens, came to be published by the discontented, and especially by those
in the Low Countries. In Venice also, at the requisition of the Ambassador d'
Avan, he was by the great Council received into the Order of the Patricians
with unanimous Votes.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE. THE NINTH BOOK.
WE shall now describe some peaceable years of the Republic, rendered more
joyous from the memory of past calamities, and the hideousness of dangers
undergone, out of which, amidst Fire and Sword, she was with safety and glory
rescued, after the assistance of Heaven by the constancy and counsels of the
Citizens, rather than by her own strength or the assistances of Strangers. With
these better times began the Principality of Francesco Erizzo, assumed to be
Duke, after the death of Nicholo Contarini, with great applause, for having
through the course of many years assisted the Country with counsel, and jointly
defended it by Arms. And because he held the Generalship of the Terra firma,
there was put into that Charge, as his Successor, Luigi Giorgio, at that time
Proveditor in the Army. But States being like the Sea where it fluctuates,
though there be no storm, there arose at this time several diversities in
opinion and unkindnesses with the Pope, which, though they molested not Italy
with Arms, distracted nevertheless men's minds with troublesome business.

Urban, after the death of Francesco Maria della Rovere, the last Duke of
Vrbin, had united to the Church that most noble Fief. And because during the
life of the Duke, who was now grown very old, he kept a Prelate in that
Country, which assisted in all affairs, he had after his death so little
trouble to possess himself of it, that Taddeo Barberino, Prince of Palestrina,
entering into it with Soldiers to take quietly possession of it, it looked as
if the old Dominion was rather continued than another new one introduced. The
Pope under the pretext of the Commotions of Italy was already in Arms,
expecting this accident, to the end that if in so great a confusion of affairs
any body should go about to disturb him, he might be able to maintain his right
with a puissant Force. But the Princes rather offered him to strives their
assistance, and exhorted him to invest his Nephews with it, some believing to
oblige him, others, by dismembring that State, desiring that the Church should
not so much increase its temporal Dominion. The Pope having regard to the
severe Bulls of his Predecessors, and apprehending to leave to his House a
Patrimony of unquietness and trouble, rather than a peaceable Dominion, made
show to think his Kinsmen more worthy of the Principality by refusing it, than
by retaining it. He only confers, as the Spoils of so noble a Conquest, upon
his Nephew Taddeo the Government of Rome, a long time enjoyed by the Family of
Rovere. This dignity retains a certain ancient and venerable memory of the
Praetor Praetorii, in the times of the Caesar's of so much esteem and authority;
though at present there remained nothing of it but the dress and the name. From
hence brake forth a great distaste with the Princes, because the Prefect or
Governor pretending precedence of Ambassadors, who in the most solemn
Functions assisting at the Popes Chair of State, representing the members of
all Christendom united to their head, did all dissent from it. The Barberins
attempted to gain the Emperor; because from his example other great Princes
would certainly depend, and they omitted not any means, offering him great
succors and powerful assistances. But in vain; for the Emperor, resolving not
to depart from what was fit, and complaining that Merchandise for private
respects was made of his necessity, pulled upon him by maintaining of a cause
in which Religion had the chief part, orders his Ambassador to abstain from
the Churches, and the other Ministers of the Crown followed him, considering
the Pope in his own house, and in the cause of his Kindred, Uncle, and Party no
less than a Prince. From this common distaste of the Princes rose afterward a
particular one of the Venetians; for Giovanni Pesari, Cavalier Ambassador of
the Republic, meeting casually in a street with the Prefect, who stopping his
Coach, and the other not observing it, by reason of the obscurity, it being now
late, though he civilly caused an excuse to be made for it, yet the Prefect
taking offense at it, meets him another time on purpose, having corrupted the
Ambassadors Coachman, who feigning that his Hat was fallen off, staid the
Horses, and run his way. Pesary was no sooner got home to his house, but the
Coachmans flight was backed by some armed men, to rescue him from the
punishment he deserved.

The Court of Rome always talking, and always greedy of occasions for it,
measuring things by appearances and shadows, judges such Formalities to be of
no less account than bloody Battles and important Conquests use to be esteemed
elsewhere. Venetian to do him right. The Senate, knowing that by the support of
the Uncle the party of the Barberins would be too strong in Rome, order Pesary,
that, for a public resentment, he should immediately leave the City, without
taking leave of the Pope or his Nephews, and at Venice they suspend giving
audience to the Nuntio. With this another disgust was interwoven, upon occasion
that Urban, at a time which was judged very unseasonable, while Christendom was
in a flame, and Italy destroyed betwixt War and Plague, had in the year past by
his Bull decreed to the Cardinals, the Ecclesiastical Electors, and the great
Master of Malta, the Title of Eminence, forbidding them to receive any other,
except from Kings. The Republic notwithstanding continued to write in the
style accustomed; but some of the Cardinals taking occasion from the affliction
which they saw it would be to the Pope and his Kindred, refused the Letters, to
the great resentment of the Senate. There were added sharp contests betwixt
those of Loreo, subjects to the Venetians, and those of Arriano, which belong
to those of Ferrara, where the Cardinal Palotta, the Legate, disturbing the
undoubted Confines of the Venetians, by imprisonings and other mischiefs,
showed an intention to attempt greater novelties, by erecting new highways,
making the Po useless, and changing the course of the Waters.

Nor were the Venetians wanting, by equal mischiefs, to repair themselves; but
Luca Pesaro, Captain of the Gulf, entering into the Sacca di Goro with certain
Galleys and armed Barques, stopped the Ships, which with Victuals and
Merchandise, contrary to the Decrees of the Republic, passed by Sea toward
Ferrara. He destroyed also in the River the works newly made to divert its
course; whereupon spirits imbittering, it looked as if things would have
proceeded further; because Troops increasing on both sides, the Ecclesiastics
on their Confines raised a Fort called delle Bocchette, and the Venetians
opposed another calling it della Donzella.

ANNO MDCXXXII.
To the end this first heat of Arms might not proceed to greater engagements,
the French Ministers interposed, proposing a suspension of offenses, and that
the Soldiers should be withdrawn from those Borders, where just at that time
the Agreement was ready to be concluded, it happened, that in an occasion some of
those of the Popes were killed, and thirty three taken Prisoners, with hurt on
the Venetians side. But the Pope and the Republic giving their promise to King
Lewis, not to offend one another by Arms, and to remove the soldiery, there
remained a larger field for Treaty, by which some of the difficulties were
quieted; for as much as the Pope, affirming to Monsieur de Brassac, the French
Ambassador, that concerning what had happened at Rome to Pesari, he had not till
now had notice of it, much less that his Nephew had been concerned in rescuing
the Coachman out of his house, expressed himself particularly discontented at
it, and caused them to be punished with Banishment that were guilty of the
offense. Declares over and above to the Cardinals, that the Republic was, as
it had always been, conumerated with the rest of the Kings comprehended in the
exception of the Title of Eminence, and commanded them to receive the Letters
in the wonted form. The Senate resting satisfied, admitted the Nuntio to
Audience, and sent Luigi Contarini Cavalier for ordinary Ambassador to the
Pope. But the differences about the Borders, as being of an ancienter date, met
with greater difficulties, though to end them it was resolved to send
Commissioners on the place; whereupon from the Pope were appointed Ottavio
Corsini, President of Romagna, and Fabio Chigi, Vice-Legat of Ferrara, and from
the Republic Baptista Nani and Luigi Mocenigo.

But the meeting was no sooner complete, but the business was intricated in the
doubt, what the ancient Confines were, which by both parties had been
interrupted by reciprocal acts of possession. The Ecclesiastics came
afterward to lay claim to certain new-grown Lands (Alluvioni) which may in a
manner be called the Excrescencies of the Po, where with several Streams
impetuously pouring forth, it breaks the Waters of the Sea, and then meeting
with a greater force, slackning its course, leaves sand and forms certain
moorish places, which sometimes lying bare, sometimes covered with the salt
water, vary according to the course of the Stream, and the blowing of the
winds, their situation, extent, and prospect. The contest seemed of no value,
but the parties judged it of great importance, especially the Venetians;
because it carried along with it the Rights and Jurisdiction of the Sea, the
which although the Ecclesiastics confessed belonged to the Republic, their
Commissioners nevertheless contended for those new parts of the Waters,
pretending that they were extended beyond their Borders. On the other side the
Venetians dissented to treat about it, as not comprehended in their present
Commission, nor in that of 1613. when the same business of the Confines was in
debate; but without effect. So that the Commissioners themselves not agreeing,
no not so much as upon the grounds of their business, Nani falling sick was
forced to retire, and Corsini follows him, returning to his Government. Chigi
and Mocenigo remained there idle for a time. The business at last was brought
into Venice by the Mediation of the French Ministers, and the Treaty continued
part of the year following, the Venetians declaring themselves always ready to
accept those conditions, which with the Jurisdiction of the Sea, of the Mouths
of the Rivers, and of the Sacca di Goro, preserved the ancient Covenants with
those of Ferrara, and the power to divert the prejudices of Ports and Channels,
which are the veins and heart of the Capital City.

These differences were of small moment in respect of the Rupture which now
fatally drew near betwixt France and Spain. King Lewis kept an Army betwixt the
Moselle and the Rhine to bridle the Duke of Lorrain, that he should not deviate
from the late agreements, as also to extend his Authority in Germany, and
invite the Catholics to shelter themselves under his protection. The
Archbishop of Trier served to others for an example; but the Chapter of that
Church, not approving his resolutions, brought a Spanish Garrison into the
City. Whereupon the Mareshal d'Estre besieges it, and in a short time taking
it, the Elector was confirmed there with a French Garrison.

Coblents also, kept by the Spaniards, and taken by the Swedes, was delivered
to France, as appertaining to the said Elector. It was notwithstanding
discovered, that the French now either envied the prosperity of his Arms, or
feared the neighborhood of the King Gustavus; the Mareshal de Brezze being
thereupon sent Ambassador, Neutralities were proposed for the Catholic Ligue
and for Bavaria. But without effect; because the Swede pretending that he
should wholly separate himself from Ferdinand, and for security should deliver
over some places to him, besides the restitution of the Palatinate, and of all
that which the Catholic Arms had from the year 1618. possessed, Bavaria
assents not to it, and drew the Elector of Collen his Brother into the same
resolution: whereupon the King, leaving some Chiefs to make progress in
Francony and Westphalia, advances against Bavaria with the greatest power of
his Forces. Having taken Donawert, he easily passes the Danube, drawing near to
the Lech, upon the brink whereof Tilli had ordered his defense. But Gustavus,
under the favor of many Cannon, passed it with great slaughter of the
Catholics, amongst which Tilli was killed, and Aldringer hurt. The Swedes
found, upon what to vent their cruelty by Fire and Sword, and to satiate their
covetousness with Booty in so flourishing and populous a Country.

Munichen, the Residence of the Dukes, and some other places, yielded with
little opposition. Ingolstat resisted; but the King being received in Ausburg
with incredible applauses of those Protestants, fears began to increase in
Italy, amorously looked at so near hand by the King, as that, which as much as
it renders its people with its opulence contented, so much by its wealth,
pleasures, and situation allures Strangers. The Governor of Milan in
particular doubtful, lest the King by sending men to Rohan should attempt the
Valteline, sends Soldiers to the Confines.

Ferdinand fearing, lest the Swedes through Bavaria should attacque his
Patrimonial Provinces in Flanque, resolves, to great mischiefs to apply a
desperate remedy, and knowing, that together with money faith failing, and with
faith credit, Armies were not to be set on foot without gold and the reputation
of a great Captain, he recalls Wallestain, who had in an equal measure gained
Glory and Wealth, and undergone, no less with applause among the Soldiery than
with skill, the Generalship of Armies, and agrees to all the conditions he
could devise to pretend to. They consisted in an absolute power, with which He
should order War and Peace, having the Command of all the Armies which were in
the Empire, belonging either to the Emperor, the Spaniards or the Catholic
League; that the King of Hungary should not go into Bohemia, nor to the Army;
that he should dispose of charges, punishments, and rewards; of quarters,
contributions, and of Conquests; without the recovery of the Dukedom of
Mechelburg he should not make Peace, and in recompense of his merit and
charges, some one of the hereditary Provinces should be assigned to him.

In sum, the Empire was divided betwixt Ferdinand and Wallestein, but with this
difference, that the General, without expecting commands, had power to do every
thing, and the Emperor could only command that which the other was not pleased
to do. Wherefore from that very time it was judged, that neither the one would
be contented to remain a private man, nor the other as a Prince would be long
able to suffer him. He applying himself in Moravia to raise an Army, easily
completed it, Soldiers flocking from all parts to his reputation and pay.

Nor did Saxony give him the least disturbance, intent only upon Conquests in
Bohemia and Silesia; and perhaps desirous also, that some stop might be put to
the boundless progresses of the King Gustavus. The Emperor demanded of the
Catholic Princes speedy assistance, for that purpose sending into Italy the
Baron de Rabata, and, taking it for a common cause of Religion, in which it
belonged to the Pope by his example to exceed all others, sends to him the
Cardinal Pasman Ambassador extraordinary. Urban was very unwilling to be thus
pressed, because such instances were not to be disjoined from reproofs and
protests; wherefore avoiding to admit such an Ambassador, he alleged, that a
Cardinal, honored with the Purple and a holy Character, could not be employed
in the service of secular Princes. Pasman, a man of profound learning and most
discreet in all his actions, replying, that the interest of Religion obliged
every one, and in particular the Ecclesiastics, to take care of it, and
procure its defense; declares, that if the dignity or habit hindered him from
the exercise of that Ministry, he renounced and laid down every thing, being
ready also to speak in his shirt, so the imminent necessities of the Church
Catholic might be provided for.

At last Urban, seeing that the excluding the instances would be more
complained of, than the not hearing of them, admitted him, and heard succors
demanded, with a powerful eloquence, as of a Pope and of a Father, in the
dangers of Religion, and the urgent necessities of his Sons. His first answers
were made up of excuses, that his Treasury was empty, and that he wanted power,
which chiefly arose from the German Armies having in these last years
unseasonably disturbed Italy, and obliged the Church it self, together with
offensive jealousies, to excessive charges. Whereupon, offending men's minds
rather than satisfying the demands, the Austrian Ministers resolved to assemble
the Cardinals subjects, and the friends they had in Court, to compel the Pope
with shame, and pressing of him yet more home. For which purpose Cardinal
Borgia in the Consistory with others, who had a mind to show inclination to the
Austrians, admonished the Pope, and presented to him a protest in writing,
laying in a manner to his charge, that he neglected in so important a necessity
the duty of his Pastoral Office. Urban, to justify himself to the Catholic
world, publishes instead of a Croisada, which had been required of him, a
Jubilee, by which he invites Christendom with public prayers to pacify the
divine wrath of God, and laying a certain imposition upon Ecclesiastical Goods
in Italy, raises some money for the supply of the Emperors necessities. But of
those Cardinals, who had been so bold to present the protest, he tormented some
with his long and great displeasure, forced others to retire out of Rome, as
Borgia for one, by a rigorous Bull which obliged Bishops to their residence.

As for Rabata, he brought nothing back from the Princes but excuses, and the
Duke of Mantua in particular showed him the horrid spectacle of his wounds yet
bleeding. He desired succors of the Venetians, and offered an alliance,
producing certain Articles, which he affirmed would be assented to by the
Spaniards and the Elector of Bavaria, for the defense of the Catholic Religion
in the dangers of the Empire. It was generally believed, that not so much the
hopes to obtain succors, as the desire to make France jealous, suggested the
design; it being observed, that at the same time there arrived, in the name of
the Governor of Milan at Venice, the Senator Picinardi to attest the just
intention of the Catholic King for Peace, the desire for that purpose to unite
himself with the Princes of Italy in a strict alliance, and in particular that
the Republic would contribute counsel, example, and endeavors. He concealed
not the jealousies, that the Governor had for the bringing in of nine hundred
French with Thoiras into Casal, and presaged troubles and stirs about it. The
Senate answered to all with officious expressions of a neutrality, which it had
resolved to observe, declaring its earnest endeavors applied to Peace, and,
considering the State of Italy scarce recovered out of its great evils,
exhorted, that employing that zeal which all have to quiet, the appearances and
jealousies of relapsing into troubles might be removed. The like endeavors
were used with France, which seemed equally pressing, offering alliances and
Treaties. But the Senate, holding their interest and Arms engaged for the
security of Mantua, refused in effect every thing that might hasten new
troubles in Italy, which though quiet, yet under fear, apprehended stranger and
greater accidents. Nor amongst the least was reckoned the suspicion, that the
Spaniards designed the surprise of Mantua, to oppose it to Pignerol and Casal,
where the Duke, overcome by the persuasions of the French Ministers, and of the
jealousies, which they represented to him to be of imminent danger, had (as
has been before said) admitted their Garrison. It was commonly spoken, that
the Spaniards were to intrude themselves into Sabioneda, by marrying the
Princess of Stigliana to Giovanni Carolo, Brother of the Great Duke, and upon
the report thereof, the Marquess de Fomar offered himself to attempt the
surprise, and to deliver the place to the Prince of Buzzolo, to whom he said it
did belong, if France and the Republic would send their assistance.

The Venetians did not believe, that it was fit to promote those mischiefs,
which they feared but too near, if the Duke of Mantua dying, and the young
Princess coming to marry, that State should be exposed to new contingencies,
and the rights of the Family be divided. For that purpose there was solicited
in Rome a dispensation of marriage betwixt the Duke and his Daughter-in-Law,
but the Pope denied it, it seeming an unfit thing, that on the Hearse of the
Son should be made the Nuptial Bed of the Father. To all this, to augment
suspicions, was added the great preparations the Spaniards made in Italy,
particularly in the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, where money was provided,
men were raised, Ships were making ready, with other provisions, showing
thoughts of War and designs of some undertaking. But at last every thing being
imbarqued, six thousand Foot and one thousand Horse were seen to pass into
Spain, to foment the commotions of France.

Orleans, dismissed out of Lorrain by virtue of the Agreement, repairs to his
Mother at Brussels, giving hopes to the Spaniards to raise in the Kingdom a
great party in his favor, to which there was no doubt but the Foreigners would
join. In France there still continued against Richelieu hatred, and envy, the
wonted shadow of great favors, and was more and more increased, as provoked
from the punishment which was inflicted on the Mareshal of Marriliac, who,
generally esteemed, if not innocent, at least guilty but of very small faults,
was beheaded by the sentence of the Judges, who, it was conceived, looked more
at the severe mind of the Cardinal, that implacably hated him, than at the
offense. The Duke of Monmorenci, besides this, ill satisfied that he had not
the recompenses which he pretended due to his merit, offered Orleans the
Province of Languedoc, whereof he was Governor; and others were not wanting,
for many causes and various aims, to be ready to increase the Faction. The
Spaniards promised to send an Army beyond the Pyrenean, to second Monmorenci,
and give Orleans the command of another in the Low Countries.

Richelieu on this side eluded the designs, both by threatening those Provinces
to come upon their backs with the Army, which lay about Triers, and by inducing
the Hollanders by the strength of money to go powerfully into the Field. The
King now, whilst Pont a Mouson was with little opposition rendered to his Army
in Germany, takes in Bar le Duc, and S. Michael, and drawing near to Nancy,
obliges Carlo, who with many excuses turned himself every way, to make it
believed that his Kinsman was come into his house without his consent, to make
him be gone, and confirming by a new Treaty the conditions of the first, to
yield to the Crown in propriety the County of Clermont, and to deliver the
Towns of Astene and Jamets for some years in Hostage. Orleans, uncertain what
to undertake, had not above two thousand Horse, part of his own Followers, and
part of the Spanish Troops; but having cast himself without Forces
proportionable to the design into an engagement of such weight, to put things
as far as they could go, enters in Burgundy, in hope to give a beginning to a
general Revolt in the Kingdom. The Cardinal, exalted by the equal successes of
Fame and Fortune, promoting it by wit and artifice, had so disposed of things,
that not a man durst open his Gates to the Duke; whereupon straigthned one
Flank by Schomberg, and followed in the Rear by the Mareshal de la Force, he
was forced to cast himself into Languedock, though the agreements with certain
Governors of places had not as yet been perfected, and that the arrival of the
Ships, expected out of Italy with Soldiers, being retarded, the Spaniards were
not in a readiness to appear in the field. Nevertheless Orleans was received by
Monmorancy, and by many of the Province, which united in a Body acknowledged
him Lieutenant General for the King against the present Government. But the
Marquess de Fossez, Governor of Monpellier, refuses to deliver that place to
him, and some were driven out of Narbone, who contrived to bring in the
Spaniards. Discord afterward, either sowed by the Art of Richelieu, or rising
from the nature of such Unions, where the chief commands precariously, brake
the neck of that Party; for many desiring the command, and in particular
Monmorancy, D'Elbeuf, and Puilaurens (Orleans his Favorite) were so disgusted,
that, to content them, there was a necessity to divide the Army into several
Bodies.

The King, assigning the command of the Armies for the keeping of the Frontiers
to the Prince of Conde, and to the Count of Soissons, who being of the Blood
Royal willingly embraced, by the downfall of Orleans, the promotion of their
hopes to the Crown, hastens toward those parts, but the storm quickly
vanished; for la Force dispersed some men that were getting into a body, and
several designs which were forming in several parts, and Schomberg near to
Chastelnodari, meeting Orleans, joined with Monmorancy, ballancing with the
advantage of a narrow passage the Forces, which he had less, charges him with
so much boldness and so good fortune, that at the first encounter, there being
slain the Count de Moret, Son, but not legitimate, of Henry IV, de Rieux, and
de la Feuillade, the rest was all dispersed. Monmorancy being hurt, was taken
Prisoner, and Orleans saved himself by flight. This blow adding to the defeat
discredit, the Gentry and the chief Cities yielded who could soonest, the King
and Cardinal being come so near as to receive the Surrender of some, and withal
punish the disobedience of others.

Orleans demanded peace and pardon upon conditions, that seemed to exceed the
fortune of one conquered: for he pretended the liberty of Monmorancy, the
abolition of all faults for his Followers, the restitution of the places of
Lorrain, the return of Queen mother, and for himself a place of security; but
he was determinately given to understand, That only by his own reputation and
the Kings clemency his fault could be covered; for the crimes of others, he
ought not to blemish himself with them; the King being resolved that
henceforward Rebellion should not be rewarded, and that his Subjects should not
find benefit or security but in duty and obedience. Reduced therefore to be
without followers and without places, he was forced to receive any conditions,
Richelieu aiming so to discredit him, that, he abandoning those that had taken
part with him, no man hereafter might dare to follow him, or trust to depend
upon him. He was no sooner retired to Champagne (his Country House) but he
heard, that Monmorancy with a severe but necessary example, by Sentence of the
Parliament of Toulouse, had lost his head. A death without doubt unworthy those
famous actions, with which he had adorned the years, as yet but young, of his
life; but which, he having so often in fight courageously encountered at the
head of so many dangers, was with equal undauntedness undergone by him, amidst
the unhappiness of the misdemeanors and the ignominy of the Sentence. Orleans
greatly moved, published, that Monsieur de Bouillon, in the Treaty made with
him, had secretly promised his indemnity, and therefore complaining to have
been deceived, makes an escape once more into Lorrain. The Cardinal, after a
short indisposition restored to health, and having discarded the Guarde-sceau
Chasteauneuf, for having had the boldness by secret Engines to aspire to the
Ministry, proves no less happy in sowing civil discord betwixt his Enemies
abroad, than he had been in rooting them out of the Kingdom.

Count Henry Van de Berg had the Command in Flanders of the Spanish Army,
notwithstanding the envy, emulation, and suspicions of those Ministers, who
laid to his charge the holding intelligence with Orange, to whom he was nearly
allied, and who, when they passed the Issel, was backward in oppressing the
United Provinces to extend the Prosperity and Domination of the King. Vexed
therefore with many disgusts, and observed with a jealous eye, he at last
endures it no longer, retiring on a sudden into Holland, and thence passing to
Liege, from thence inviting the people to shake off the yoke, and redeem their
liberty, in imitation of the Helvetians by driving away the Strangers. Having
with secret encouragement from France got together some Troops, he removes to
Aken, in hope to form a third party; but seeing no body come to him, was
forced, not without some discredit, to put himself under the protection of the
States. The Spaniards hereupon appeared to be much distracted, and full of
cares, fearing lest the Nobility should be of the same mind, and the
disposition of the people wavering; whereupon, to entertain them with an
appearing satisfaction, they assemble at Brussels the States of the Provinces;
a thing, which as prejudicious and of danger, had been disused for a very long
time. Nor did it now prove of advantage, because some, admitted to the liberty
of delivering their opinions, and to make demands, thought to moderate at
least, if not shake off, the Dominion of Spain, and they sent Deputies to the
Hague to treat of an Agreement; but the States insisted, that before entering
into the business they should drive the Spaniards out of the Country, which not
being in their power, being oppressed with Armies, and bridled by Citadels,
served nevertheless to disunite them, and make the Spaniards so jealous, that
not being willing to use the people longer to such discourses, Command came
from Madrid, that the Assembly should be dissolved. Whereupon many, knowing
that they were rendered suspect for having truly declared their Judgments, left
the Country with better success than those, who trusting too far, were, though
after some years, severely punished.

The Hollanders taking advantage of these discords, invited by the Swedes by a
solemn Embassage, and induced by France with a considerable sum of money, after
having taken Venlo and Ruremond, attacqued Maestricht, a place of great
strength. The Marquess of Santa Croce, General of the Spanish Army, knowing
himself not able alone to relieve it, with Presents and Entreaties invites
Papenhaim, who thereupon abandoning the Elector of Colen, who suffered much
from the Swedes, comes with the Imperial Troops to join with him, and with
incredible boldness attacques the Hollaners Camp. But Santa Croce remaining an
immovable Spectator of the success, the Germans found the Lines so strong and
well raised, and provided with so many Cannon, that with much loss they were
forced to retire. The place then, after a Siege of almost three months finding
it self, having lost all the Outworks straightned by the approaches, with open
Breaches, and the Ramparts blown up with Mines, capitulates with honorable
conditions the Surrender; the Garrison, reduced to fifteen hundred men,
marching out in sight of the Spanish and German Armies. Upon this conquest,
being an action of great reputation, they got the Towns of Orsoy and Limburg
with other places thereabouts, which extended the contributions very far. Nor
had at this time the Count of Soissons with a considerable Army given a little
Jealousy on the side of France, so that the Spaniards found themselves obliged
to oppose to him a body not inferior under Carlo Colonna. Thus the Crowns,
being not yet broken out into War, exercised openly the hatred of their
Ministers, who employed their wits with equal cunning, but different fortune;
for as to the Cardinal, the felicity of success did frequently outrun his
desires and go beyond his designs, whereas on the other side the Conde Duke
could not conceive a thought, but it was enough to render the effect abortive
and unhappy.

But the death of King Gustavus looked as if it might make a change in affairs
every where. He with the progress he made in Bavaria, had designed to fall into
Austria, in hope, that in that, which is called the Upper, the Peasants ill
affected to the present State, would have risen, and the minds as well as the
forces would have been raised of the Protestants, who concealing themselves, or
making an open profession together, made no small Party in that Country. He
therefore had first made a course into Suevia, and all rendering at his
appearance, Vlm, Meminghen, and other places fell easily into his power. In the
mean time Wallestain in Moravia quietly compleats his Army, and left Gallas
with a small body in Bohemia to attend upon Saxony. But understanding that some
of the Protestants, assembled in Torgan, had resolved to join with that
Elector, he moves with his whole Army, and coming to Prague recovers the City
without much dispute. From thence he had a mind to give Saxony a Blow, numbering
the losses of Bavaria amongst his contentments. Nevertheless, called back by
the clamours of the Duke Maximilian, and his entreaties, rather than the
Emperors commands, he leaves Gallas with a new re-inforcement to oppose
Arnheim, General of the Saxons, and with a slow march takes his way toward
Bavaria, leaving in his passage through the Upper Palatinate so many marks of
military license, and his own hatred against the Duke, that it looked as if he
went rather to ruin him, than carry him relief. Afterward, near Nuremberg, a
City, as is known, amongst the free ones to be one of the greatest, but also
the most tenacious amongst those of the Protestants, he intrenches himself. The
King could not suffer the ruin of it, without loosing that credit which he had
with that party; whereupon he made haste to draw near to it, and encamping
about it, was in place of a Garrison to the City, which supplied necessaries
and conveniences to the Army. This our Age, and perhaps scarce any past, had
not seen assembled together so powerful Forces, reckoned in both Armies about
eighty thousand Soldiers, besides followers and useless people, which amounted
to an incredible sum. Victuals neverthetheless were plenty, and discipline
flourished by the vigilance and skill of the Chiefs, who had art and valor not
unsuitable to their strength. Each pretended to overcome his Enemy, either by
tempting him with inconveniences, or provoking him with boldness.

But Wallestein placed his hopes more in prolonging the War, than precipitating
his Councils, and the King, placing all in reputation and fortune, desired to
come to an engagement. After having offered Battle to no purpose, he assaults
the Enemies quarters, and at the first fury the Bavarians, who were quartered
thereabout, giving way, he hoped to have mastered the Trenches; and in effect
broke into them, but finding greater resistance from the high and difficult
situation, it gave time to Fridtland to come to the relief, and to repulse him.
Three thousand of the Swedes were killed upon the place, and it being the first
encounter, wherein whether it was fancy or fortune that deceived Gustavus, it
is not to be said how afflicted he was at it, and how much that title of
Invincible, which common opinion had attributed to him, remained prejudiced.
Inflamed by a generous impatience for so long and unsuccessful stay, leaving in
the City a numerous Garrison, he marching toward Francony, sending Banier into
Bavaria, to keep the Duke from the Imperialists, and dispute with him the
re-conquests of his Countries, because, whilst the Armies had been employed
about Nuremberg, the Elector Maximilian with the assistance of the people had
recovered most of what he had lost, and making advantage of others dangers had
brought a Garrison into the Imperial City of Ratisbone. Wallestein follows the
Kings Army, who directing his march toward Wittemberg, thought by drawing the
Imperialists after him, to consume and weary them, to overcome them afterward
more easily, when he should meet with a fit place, and an occasion seasonable
to give Battle. But Wallestein considering, that for the approaching Winter he
lost these better quarters, the further he went from those convenient
Provinces, ceasing to follow, goes into Misnia, taking Leipzick and every other
place of any moment. He had a mind in Saxony to attacque Dresden, the residence
of the Elector, not so much to divert him from making progress in Silesia, as
to chastise him by taking quarters in his Country. Thence in the Spring he
designed to go into Mechelburg, to recover that Province, causing Papenhaim to
be his forerunner, who in the mean time in the Lower Saxony attempted important
Conquests. The King persuaded by the prayers and dangers of the Elector, or
rather by his protests, that if he abandoned him he would incline to Peace,
joining Bannier sets forwards to his succors; whereupon Fridtland recalling
Papenhaim, thought to possess Naumburg to stop his way; but prevented by the
King, resolves to protract time, and sends back Papenhaim to relieve Colen, by
another body of the Swedes besieged. Nor was the King much inclined to a
Battle; but seeing the Imperialists weakened, follows them to Lutzen, a small
Town not far from Leipzick. There Fridtlandt doubting to be constrained, with
great disadvantage, to some encounter, recals in all haste Papenhaim, who
willingly keeping himself in a command apart, was engaged in the Siege of Hall.
But the King hastened the Battle so much, that Papenhaim hardly arrived in time
with those of his Troops which were in the greatest readiness.

The sixteenth of November was the day, on which with the blood of sixty
thousand Soldiers, that in both Armies boldly exposed their lives, it seemed
that the fortune and glory both of the King and of the Austrians was to be
decided. The Troops were the day before marshalled into their distinct orders;
the Imperialists composed of great Battalions of Foot, with the Horse that
defended the flanks; the Swedes in two very long Lines, mingled with Foot and
Horse. Each had great store of Cannon in the front, nor could there on either
side be seen better order, or greater daring: Nevertheless the Fight was
deferred, the King seeming irresolute and troubled; but expressed himself, that
for reputation it was fit to fight, doubting nevertheless that Heaven would
punish him, by letting many, that worshipped him as a God, see that he was
indeed but Man. Each kept their order all the night, and Wallestein took a
great advantage by lining with Musketeers certain ditches just before his
Enemy. So that about these, at the first peep of day, was he hottest of the
Fight, and the Swedes prospered in the gaining of them, though hindered by a
thick mist discerned not in the Fight either their danger or advantages. Six
Cannons being taken, they turned them against the Imperialists, doing great
slaughter with them. They nevertheless getting into order again, repulsed
beyond the ditches the Enemy, who left four of the Cannon nailed and carried
away two. The left Wing of the Imperialists, where was the Polish and Croatian
Horse, used more to Incursions than set Battles, being charged by the Kings
left, easily gave way, and would have disordered other Squadrons, if Papenhaim,
bringing them again to fight, had not stopped the Enemy, till struk with a
Cannon bullet he dyed, with that commendation of valor and courage, which with
the testimony of many scars appeared imprinted upon his face. The King, that
thought it the honor and duty of a great Captain, not to overcome only with
the blood of others, but having ordered his Troops, and given directions for
the Battle, to hazard himself no less than a common Soldier, was there killed
also, leaving it uncertain, whether in truth he overcame or dyed first. Some
will have it, that in the beginning of the Battle, passing from division to
division, accompanied but with few, he fell into a Company of the Enemies
Horse, by reason of the Mist not discovered, and that while unknown with his
Sword in his hand he defended himself, and by a shot of a Carabine being flung
out of the Saddle, and by one foot in the Stirrup, by the Horse dragged away,
he was afterward by another shot slain. Others, that having in the left Wing
beaten the Imperialists, and now certain of the Victory, he was hasting
elsewhere; but by a Company of Horse, which advanced to charge, was flung to
the ground, and as an ordinary man trampled upon, and amongst others stripped.
There wanted not some who reported, (and this is the most rational account of
them who were in the Battle,) that the King, whilst at the head of the Regiment
of Colonel Verde of Finlanders, seconded by two others of Swedes, charged a
great Body of eight hundred Cuirassiers, commanded by Ottavio Piccolomini, was
shot with a Pistol in the Arm: for his Cuirasse, by reason of some old hurts,
incommoding him, he wore no Arms in the Battle; but not to discourage the
Soldiers, concealing the hurt, and though willing to redouble the charge, yet
constrained by pain, had resolved to retire with a few, when at the instant he
was with a Carabine shot in the Back by a Soldier, who was killed in the same
occasion. Piccolomini returning then to the charge, passed over him yet alive,
and left him under a heap of dead bodies ignobly covered. It was never known,
who could boast of such a blow, either because in Battles chance bears so great
a sway, that confounding the Fate of the King with that of the Soldiers, they
are not distinguished after death but by Glory or Oblivion, or because in this
Fortune had withal a mind to show her self favorable, that no mean person may
vaunt himself to have killed so great a King, and withal so noble a Soldier.
The Swedes continuing the fight, ended the Victory before they knew of his
death. So that the Soldiers accustomed to fight under the eye of him from whom
they expected reward and commendation, believing he was fighting with them, and
would overcome, disordered not their Ranks, nor grew cool in their accustomed
courage. Bernard Duke of Weimar alone knowing the Kings Horse, that ran loose
and was bloody, being aware of what was happened, but enraged with the grief,
not to give time to the Soldiers to take notice of it, charged with such a
force, that the Imperial Army was constrained to give way. The Horse of both
Wings were now fled, Piccolomini alone remained the last with his Regiment, and
with proofs of wonderful valor, after four Horses killed under him, had five
wounds upon him, which Wallestain with a generous Present of twenty thousand
Crowns cured and acknowledged. And the Swedes would now have environed the
Enemies Foot on all sides, when the Mist, which arose toward the evening,
hindered them, and the darkness of the night after ten hours separated this
cruel fight. Ten with the title of Generals were killed in both the Armies.
Wallestain was rather threatened than hurt with the shot of a Musket, which
favorably passed betwixt the seat and the buttock, though at the blow, not
without a mark of excessive fear, he let the bridle fall out of his hand, and
his Horse ran away with him. The Imperialists by night retired toward
Leipzich, leaving their Cannon in the field; because in the confusion of the
Battle the Draught-horses were run away. But in the Triumph of the Swedes the
General was wanting; which filling the Army, that infinitely loved him, with
sorrow and lamentation, some deplored the flower of his age, others the vigor
of his mind, and all together the quality of a great Prince and no less
Soldier. He was found amongst the dead bodies mangled with wounds, bruised
with the trampling of Horses, stripped totally, that not so much as his shirt
remained as a Trophy of so many Conquests and so great an Empire. A King
certainly, saving the error of his Religion, endowed with those qualities
which have rendered the Conquerours of the World famous. Possessing in an equal
degree courage and prudence, and if in conquering he seemed fierce and violent,
he was as wise and circumspect in preserving. His virtues being solid and all
of a piece, it could not be discerned, to which in his knowledge of the
Military or Civil Affairs the prize was to be given. Yet all his life having
been in a continual exercise of Arms, it seemed, that he himself gave it the
preference. And indeed Fortune in these so far favored him, that having fought
many Battles, and always conquered, in this very instant of death he dyed
victorious after death, and a long course of prosperity has crowned in such
sort his Sepulcher, that his very ashes may be called Triumphant.

This was the issue of the Battle of Lutzen, both Parties judged fatal, the one
having lost the field, and the other their King; but if these got the Victory,
the others saved themselves. Wallestain staying but a few moments at Leipzich,
retires afterward into Bohemia, and the Swedes conducting the Body to
Weissenfelt, solemnized his Funeral with Revenge and Arms. Leipzich was rendered
to Saxony; to Weimar, Chemnits; to Kniphausen, Pleiffenberg; and Zuiccan to
Horn; and to the Rhingrave, after the defeat of the Imperial Cavalry in Alsace,
Rheinfelt, Colmar, Haghenau, and other places. Frederick Prince Palatine, under
the countenance of this, the Swedes, Fortune, regains Frankendale, but taking
the death of Gustavus to heart, Baudissen having taken Andernach, troubled the
Elector of Colen and the Dukedom of Berg. In this year also were in mourning,
through unhappy Fate, almost all the Royal Families of Europe; for in Spain,
whilst King Philip kept his Court in Catalogna, dies Charles, his Brother, in
the flower of his Age, a Prince of a haughty mind, and impatient of being idle
to such a degree, that being designed, to temper with more quiet employments
the heat of his nature, to the Government of Portugal, while the Infant
Cardinal, his other Brother, was going to that of Flanders, he raging with
anger, within a while dies, either from the weariness of his condition or by
disorders, having in a manner dissolved his mind in idleness, and wasted his
natural strength in pleasures. Fame nevertheless accused the Conde Duke, as if
fearing the opposition of his hot spirit against his Authority, he should have
procured his death by poison: But it is not becoming, without more certain
proofs, to give credit to so heinous a wickedness. In Germany, Leopold Archduke
of Inspruch, weary of the blows of Fortune, prejudicial to his House and
Country, dies, leaving little Sons under the Tutelage of Claudia de Medici his
Wife. In Poland King Sigismond departs this life, and in the Diet of the
Kingdom was substituted Vladislaus his Eldest Son. The Republic, to
congratulate his coming to the Crown, made choice of Giovanni Pisari Cavalier
for Ambassador Extraordinary, who afterward appointed elsewhere, leaves
Giorgio Giorgio Cavalier to perform it, and it was answered in the Name of the
King by the Duke of Ossolinschi, after he had been to present obedience to the
Pope.

ANNO M.DC.XXXIII.
By the death of Gustavus all the World believed, notwithstanding the
posthumous Victory and the advantages of Arms, that as great and weighty
bodies, when they fall, are split into small pieces, so Fortune would be shaken
and such a breach made into that Power, that the Armies should disband, Princes
disunite, Conquests be lost, and after a short flash there would remain of this
great Thunderstroke no more but the memory and the ashes. But quite contrary;
for after having settled in Swede the Succession of the Crown in Christina, the
only Daughter of the King deceased, and placed the Tutelage of her that was not
above seven years old, in the hands of the principal Ministers, the Chiefs of
the Army, calling a Council in Germany, resolved to continue the War so much
the more earnestly, by how much they hoped, that Honor and Booty will in
future accrue to their advantage. To Axel Oxenstern, great Chancellor, a man of
a notable Talent, they yielded the direction of the ordinary Counsels, and to
Weimar they committed the chief management of the Armies, not without
distasting the Elector of Saxony, who by reason of his dignity thought it due
to him. So the War under diverse Chiefs and with several Armies, was presently
spread into many Provinces, to the so much ruin of places and people, that if
it ordinarily be nourished with cruelty and blood; at present it seemed that
the alone desolating of Germany was the aim of the Armies. Amongst infinite
successes, which changing felicity and fortune happened in several places, it
shall suffice to make choice of the most signal, that serve most for the
reflection of Princes and the alteration of States. Whilst the Swedish Chiefs
were dividing designs and charges, Fridtland not only goes far from Leipzich,
but out of the Countries of the Elector of Saxony, though with the fright of
his Arms he might easily have persuaded him to an agreement; and leaving but a
few Troops in Bohemia, goes into Silesia under pretext to oppose the Saxons,
who indeed made less disturbance there than elsewhere.

The Austrians, joyful for the death of the King Gustavus, stormed nevertheless
against their own General, accusing him, that neglecting so great a conjuncture
to end the War with advantage, he had not made use of the arts proper to a
Conqueror, nor his wonted ones of a great Captain. Wherefore the confidence,
Ferdinand had in him, did henceforward degenerate into suspicion, that he was
pleased with War and the Command; whereupon to satiate his ambition, or rather
to found his intention, a great sum of money in the name of the Spaniards was
offered him, that by his reputation and conduct an Army being raised, he would
send it against the States of Holland, for the Conquest of Friesland, of which
with the title of King they willingly gave him the propriety. He by rejecting
the offer increased the jealousy, and much more by entering into a project of
agreement with Arnheim, General of the Saxons, justly offensive to the
Emperor, though Fridland with wonted craft let him know that he had no other
end but to delude and amuse the Enemy. But Arnheim having taken his march
toward Leutmerits, to attacque Gallas, he makes a show to follow him, but on a
sudden falls near Stenan upon a body of men commanded by the old Count de la
Tour and the Colonel Tubald, and surprises them in such sort, that wanting
means and time to defend themselves, the Soldiers rendered themselves upon the
shameful conditions to deliver up the Cannon and Colors, to inroll themselves
amongst the Imperial Troops, and to leave their Commanders Prisoners until the
other places of Silesia should be rendered to Ferdinand. But the Governors
refusing to obey the orders of Tubald and la Tour, Fridland nevertheless
increasing as it were with his military attempts, the suspicions, which were
had of his intentions, gave to the one together with many Officers liberty, and
promoted the escape of the other. He afterward recovers Lignits, Glogau, and
Francford on the Oder, and would have passed on further, aspiring to the
recovery of Mechelburg, without considering those greater mischiefs which the
Emperor suffered elsewhere, if new and greater accidents had not recalled him.

After the death of the King Gustavus, France saw the Affairs of the Empire
constituted in a state which was more pleasing to them, the prosperity of those
Arms declining, which at first gave them great jealousy, and all the party of
the Protestants reduced to a necessity to receive with its assistances the law
and motion of its interests. Therefore renewing in Hailbrun for other ten
years, with the Chiefs of the Swedes Army, the Treaty, which France had with
the King deceased, and enlarging it with other Princes of that faction, it
obliges them to hold him for a common Enemy that should dare to separate
himself, or conclude a Peace without the consent of all. Supplying then the
Confederates with money, the King of France begins also to dispose of those
Forces. Whereupon to divert the United Provinces from the wonted Treaties about
a Truce with Spain, he brings to pass, that the Colonel Melander, who served
the Landgrave of Hesse, should be sent with a good number of Troops to join
Orange, who so reinforced might take Rhinberg, and keep the Armies of Spain so
distracted, that the French under the title of protection might have success in
making themselves Masters of all the Country of Trier without resistance.

In Westphalia then the Duke George of Luneburg, and William Landgrave of Hesse
in their progress against the Elector of Colen, and other Catholics of that
quarter, defeated the Count John Merode, who with an Army of thirteen thousand
men, raised with Spanish money, defended that circle, and intended to attempt
the relief of Hamelen; but being put to flight by the Protestants, left them in
prey not only almost all his Soldiers, with Cannon and Baggage, but the place
it self, and many others thereabouts.

Weimar in this interim employs himself in Francony, and Horn with Bannier
opposed themselves to the Elector of Bavaria, who with his own Forces alone
upholding in those parts the Affairs of the Catholics was after the taking of
Raim passed into Swevia, and there taken Meminghen and Kempen. The Swedes
effectually strengthened at Donawert to the number of seven thousand Horse and
eight and twenty thousand Foot, did most terrible mischiefs in his Country,
possessing themselves of Munichen, and the Bishopric of Aichstadt; but by
Aldringher, who came speedily to his assistance, were constrained to retire out
of it. The Austrians were not a whit less troubled by the Rhingrafe in Alsatia,
and for the defense of it, had stirred up with great promises Charles Duke of
Lorrain, who equally ready to take Arms and to lay them down, had, in order to
the executing of the Treaty with France, delivered to the King some Troops, but
in such sort that they immediately disbanding, and re-assembled anew under the
name of the Emperor, with others, which he feigned to license, forming an
indifferent Army, they took in Haghenau, Colmar, and other places, which being
presently put into his hand served for the price of his engagement, and a spur
to his declaration in favor of the Emperor. He hoped to quell the Swedish
Force by Arms, and to preserve himself from the invasion of the French, by the
revolutions which Orleans promised to raise up in that Kingdom. But on the one
side his design was betrayed by fortune, and on the other success answered not
his hopes; for in the first place the Swedes being come to recover Haguenau,
whilst Charles attempted to relieve it, he was entirely defeated by them;
whereupon Lorrain, no less than alsatia, remaining a prey to the Enemy, the
Rhingrave with many incursions did miserably afflict him. Lewis then taking
upon himself the revenge of the common injury, possesses without dispute the
Dukedom of Bar, after an arrest of Parliament, which declared it devolved to
the Crown; for that Charles had not done his Homage for it, and St. Michael,
Pont a Mousson, Chaunes, Luneville, and other places of less importance being
rendered, he comes near with his Army to Nancy.

Duke Charles, having brought the War into his own Country, without means to
maintain it, endeavors to pacify the King with several propositions of
submission and agreement. But Richelieu admitted not for caution of his faith
other pledge, than the depositing of Nancy the Metropolis of the Country, the
residence of the Duke, and a very strong place. The Duke seeing that by
nourishing distrusts he had put all things into a confusion, renounces on a
sudden to the Cardinal Nicola Francisco, his Brother, with the Title, the
Country, to the end that being new as to offenses, he might better mitigate the
resentments. Richelieu, despising the shift, and calling the contrivance
fraudulent, refuses any propositions from the new Duke, though having laid down
his Purple sought in marriage Mad. Combalet, the Cardinals beloved Niece;
offered instead of Nancy to deposit la Motha, and to cause to pass into France
Margaret, whose marriage with Orleans King Lewis pretended was null, as
contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, which prohibit those in succession to the
Crown to marry without the Kings consent. But these very propositions were by
Richelieu turned into distrusts and accusations; for that Margaret, while these
things were in agitation, going out of Nancy disguised, and deceiving the
French Guards, which environed the place on all sides, made her escape by
flight, and came to her Husband at Brussels; after having wandered in the woods,
and narrowly avoided the risque of falling into the hands of some Swedish
parties of Soldiers; whence Richelieu ascribing all to the fallacious faith of
the Lorrainese, and scorning the alliance offered, constrains him at last to
promise; To separate himself from stranger friendships, and not to meddle in
the Affairs of Germany, to join close with France, and deliver Nancy in Hostage
till time and their actions should mitigate jealousies, and that the marriage
with Orleans were broken.

In the place aforesaid consisted the security of the conditions no less than
the fortune of the Duke. Therefore the Governor by secret Orders, which he had
from them, denis the French Garrison entry, and on the other side the King
threatens all sorts of rigor and force; so that within a few days the same
Treaty was confirmed with the addition only, that both the Dukes had liberty to
keep their Residence in Nancy; a condition which tended reciprocally to
deceit, for by keeping a foot there, the Lorrainese hoped to maintain
themselves the strongest, and the French proposed to keep them little less than
Prisoners. As force is always accustomed to get the better of wit, so Duke
Charles, finding no longer protection in his own Country, nor from Strangers
expecting succors, was forced to submit; for being come to the French Camp,
under a show of confidence, as that which was the last remedy, to humble
himself to the King, he perceived that under the appearance of honor he was
under the custody of Guards, and was thereupon obliged to give precise orders
to the Governor of Nancy, that he should receive Monsieur de Brasac with a
French Garrison; so that having by this means obtained his liberty, he thought
good to leave Lorrain, and the King leaving there the Mareshal de la Tour with
a great Army, to favor the Siege of Brisach, undertaken by the Rhingrave,
extends as far as the Rhine his quarters and advantages, having obtained of one
of the Dukes of Wirtemberg to put a great Garrison into the Town of Monpeliard.

All this vexed the Austrians, and particularly the Spaniards; because if the
French should remain in the possession of Lorrain, and Brisach were lost, they
saw the passage hindered of succors for Flanders, which they were wont to draw
out of Italy by that way. They resolved, that Ferdinand, Cardinal Infanta,
should pass to Milan, to be conveyed from them to his Government of Flanders,
solicited by a double care, both out of necessity to oppose to the proceedings
of Fridtland in Germany another Chief of consideration and power, and to
provide for the Affairs of the Low Countries, which by the death of the Infanta
Isabella fallen under the direction of the Marquess d' Aitona were tottering,
both from the unquiet humors of the people, who were ill satisfied, and the
vast designs of neighboring Potentates. The Cardinals Voyage could not be
performed without great preparations, which consumed time and money, nor
without some apprehensions of the Princes of Italy, who saw the Provinces
filled with Soldiers and Provisions, and the minds of the Ministers big with
bitter disgusts and troubled thoughts; the Conde Duke venting frequent
aggravating expressions, that Peace could never be enjoyed, if Italy were not
restored to its former Constitution. And to say truth, there appeared no more
that face of Authority and Rule, which the Ministers of that Monarchy were wont
to enjoy, because besides the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua, the one by the Bridle
of Pignarol, and the other by the custody of Casal and of the Monferrat, being
made dependants on the Crown of France, almost all were wavering, and some for
their profit made merchandise of their inclinations, put at present in balance
betwixt the one and others Crown.

Nay the Pope himself, though he refused the Duke of Crequi, sent by King Lewis
in the usual Ambassy of obedience, to enter into that League which he proposed
to him, yet he gave manifest signs of the ancient partiality toward that
Crown; so that the Cardinal Antonio, his Nephew, had thereupon and with large
pensions accepted the protection of that Kingdom; and although Urban opposed it
with the loudest appearances, the Spaniards nevertheless believing rather a
secret consent, feared from it pernicious designs. They therefore dispatched to
Rome the Bishop of Cordoua and Giovanni Chiaumazzero in quality of
Commissoners, to require reformation of some abuses of the Dateria, which
tended to the oppression of the Kingdom of Spain; but in effect, to oppose
themselves to the Negotiations of France, and if they could effect nothing
else, to avenge the disgusts with disgusts: whence it was thought fit, that
they should have secret instructions to demand a Council, and straighten the
Pope with threatenings and offensive demands. Sure it is, that Urban denying to
receive them with the Title of Commissioners, which it seems signifies a
certain Jurisdiction and Authority, wearied with difficulties and delays in
such sort the business, and cooled also the Bishop with the hopes of a greater
Dignity, that the King being aware of it, recalled him, and conferred upon the
other the Title of Ambassador, whilst with time the heat of Spirits being
mitigated, and by the contrariety of successes the Spaniards bowing themselves
more and more to sufferance, the business vanished of it self.

The French Ministers ceased not to imprint in the Princes of Italy jealous
thoughts, and to exhort them to join together to drive, under the protection of
their Crown, the Spaniards out of Italy. They on the other side proposed to all
great advantages, offering by means of the Regent Villani to the Grand Duke
great Pensions, and to the Duke of Modena to deliver him Corregio, a little
Sovereign State, which, being by the Emperor confiscate from its ancient
Princes for the imputation of false Money, the Spaniards had in Pawn, to the
end to make Merchandise of it with the bordering Princes. To Parma they offered
the Generalship of the Sea and a Vice-Regency, provided he would, in exchange
and as a pledge of confidence, permit a Levy of six thousand Foot to be
serviceable to the Cardinal Infant in his Voyage into Flanders. That Dukedom
was possessed by Edwardo Farnese, young in years, and of a spirit more elevated
perhaps than the narrowness of his Country and Fortune could bear. He by a
certain lively Genius inclined naturally to the French, and they encouraging it
with frequent sending of Ministers, brought him at last to their Party. Taking
Jealousy therefore at the preparatives for the Cardinal Infant, and at the
Marriage of Stigliana with the Duke of Medina las Torres Vice-King of Naples,
as though he would call in question again Sabioneda, armed, and under that
pretext receives under his own Colors Soldiers which were sent to him out of
France. The Venetians above all were more earnestly pressed, so that
Razzillier, after having visited in the Name of King Lewis the other Princes,
came to encourage them not only to continue in the custody of Mantua, but to
exhort them to pay at least half the Garrison in Sabioneda, and to take part in
the Affairs of the Grisons, and in the Designs concerning the Valteline.

The Republic constant in the desire, that together with Peace the present
State of Italy might be preserved, condescended no further, but better to
provide Mantua with Soldiers and Cannon, quickening diligence in proportion to
the unquietness and suspicions which increased in the Dukes Family; because it
appeared, that the Princess, by the persuasions of Margaret her Mother, had
raised her mind to the hopes of marrying her self with the Cardinal Infant,
who was expected in Italy, and taking the opportunity, when the Duke was one
day for recreation out of the City, she presents a Writing to the Council,
declaring every act and consent null, to which in the time of her Minority she
had adhered for her own Interest. A Novelty which greatly troubled the Duke;
because that Writing being received and subscribed, not without the approbation
of his Ministers, he with reason feared, lest the minds of the people being
divided, and the Rights of the Succession confounded anew, the State and the
Nephew should come to be subjected to more bitter calamities. This being known
in France, and discovered that the Council to the Princess was come from Milan,
it was ordered by King Lewis with a peremptory Decree, but necessary, that the
Infanta should depart as she did; for retiring to Castle Gualtier in the
Milanese, and thence to Milan, the Plots with her absence vanishing, she
afterward sails toward Spain. At last in the month of May the Cardinal
Infant arrives in Italy, and having spoken with the Duke of Savoy in Nizza he
comes to Milan, where he received the Embassies of Princes for the
congratulating of his arrival, and was pleased above all with that of the
Venetians, performed with great splendor by Bertuccio Valiero, and
corresponding with the Expedition to Venice of the Count Carlo Borromei his
Ambassador.

About this time the Duke Vittorio Amadeo of Savoy, to rank himself equal in
his behavior to the Infanta, and not to condescend to the Rules lately
introduced amongst the Cardinals, takes the Title of King of Cyprus, the World
little approving, that, he after having given up with Pignerol the honor,
which the care of keeping the entrance of Italy gave him, should deck himself
with the Title of that Kingdom, which lies under the barbarous slavery of the
Ottomans; and to the great displeasure of the Venetians, who had lawfully
enjoyed it for many years, and who complaining of it in all Courts of Europe,
declared themselves disobliged from any sort of correspondence with the
Savoyards. The first business, in which the Cardinal Infant employed himself,
was in deciding the Controversies betwixt the Genouese and the Duke of Savoy,
which, formerly referred to the Arbitrage of the King of Spain, were now by him
judged on these Conditions; That things taken should be reciprocally restored;
that Zuccarello should remain to the Genouese, but with paying in four Terms to
the Duke one hundred and sixty thousand Crowns of Gold; that Estates should be
restored to the first Owners; that those that had served the one or the other
Party should be pardoned, and especially ten of the Conspirators, prohibited
nevertheless that they come not within the Confines of the Republic.

The parties concerned not herewith content, power was sent by the King to the
Cardinal Infant to determine the difference, and he declares, That the Galley,
by the Genouese formerly taken, should be restored to the Savoyards, as it was
found at present; that the Crown to be disbursed for Zuccarello was understood
to be of the Coin of Spain, and that besides ten, to be named by the King,
should not be comprehended in the pardon any other of the Participants in the
Conspiracy, or that were accused of any other offense.

The affairs of the Empire called him to thoughts of a greater consequence;
for, to the end to stop every passage, by which he might go into Germany or
Flanders, besides the Siege of Brisach; Horn, to please the French, taking his
passage through Helvetia without asking the Cantons leave, came to about
Constance; whereupon the assistance of the Spanish Army was solicited, from
the dangers of those places, the clamours of the Lorrainers, and much more from
the Jealousies which Fridtland gave, by amusing himself in Provinces far
distant, careless of the losses and damage of Bavaria, Alsace, and Lorrain,
which touched the Austrians to the quick. They then deliberate to form the body
of an Army independent from him, the Emperor being at last by the urgency of
the Spaniards brought to consent to it, after having been in doubt for a good
while, whether was best to let him alone and dissemble his suspicions, or
provoke him by showing distrust; but the Infant not able to stir with honor
or safety, it was resolved, that the Duke of Feria with ten thousand Foot and
fifteen hundred Horse should be his forerunner to open the passage, and
without longer delay succor those Towns.

By the way of the Valteline and Bormio he enters into Tirol, Rohan from Rhetia
not caring to trouble him, being rather glad that the Milanese should be
weakened of Forces, by reason of the designs which were under consideration. At
the report of this march Horn and the Rhingrave withdrew their Troops further
distant from Constance and Brisach; so that Feria joining without opposition
with Aldringher, might have been able to execute what they designed, if they
had not been disturbed by the loss of Ratisbone, which by Weymar, after he had
passed the Danube, and taken Neoburg with other places, as may be said, at
unawares, was with furious Batteries in a few days taken: a blow, which by
reason of the situation and the importance of the place, applauded by his
Party, afflicted in a high measure the Austrians, because with it losing
Straubing also and Decendorf, they were afraid of Passau, a City tripartite,
where the Rivers Eno and Iltz falling into the Danube, form as it were a
threefold part, of Bavaria, Bohemia, and Austria. Nor did Weimar neglect the
thought of the enterprise, but finding it provided, and the Winter advancing,
to preserve his Troops distributes them into Quarters about Ratisbone;
whereupon the designs of the Catholics were in great disorder: for Aldringher
was obliged to go back to defend Bavaria, and Feria was constrained to remain
there, dividing his Army with great inconvenience into scattered Quarters in
Suevia, where many Soldiers perished by sickness and other sufferings, and
himself left his life also.

The Venetians observing Italy to be in security for the present, carefully but
quietly watched upon the event of things, and keeping for decency and defense a
strong body of an Army, Rome, and the increase of more bitter distasts. They
kept in Ancona, as is usual in places upon the Sea, a Consul, and he was
Michael Oberti of Bergamo, of a Family that for a long time had executed that
Office, a Subject of the Republic, though for many years an Inhabitant of
Ancona. He coming to be suspected by the Governor, as if by the direction of
his Letters the Galleys of the Republic, in maintenance of the right of the
Sea, should have intercepted certain Ships of the Raguseans, which were sailing
for that Port, vexed with various persecutions, was constrained to go to Venice
to inform the Senate with it; but was no sooner gone, but the Governor caused
his house to be searched together with his Household Stuff and Writings, and
among them were those of his Ministry.

Whilst the Republic complained of it, and the French Ministers interposed and
got no satisfaction, the Governor publishes against the Consul a most severe
Proclamation, laying to his charge, that he had unladen, in the suspected time
of the plague, Merchandise out of a Bark which came from Venice; but there
appeared in the Sentence more of pretext than of his fault, because he
justified himself to have done it by permission of the Magistrates. This
increased the resentment of the Republic, and gave occasion to the French to
renew with more earnest their Mediation, by which it was agreed, that recalling
the Proclamation, Oberti should be admitted, the Senate showing themselves,
when that was done, not averse from recalling him, and appointing some other
for the place. But as this agreement was ready to be executed, Michael dying,
his Brother was substituted, who going to Ancona to take possession of the
place, was by the Governor first put in Prison, and then again released with
severe threatenings, and obligations to return no more thither. The French
complained highly of it, because they had given their word to the Republic,
that the Election should be of such a person as the Republic should best like
of; but the Senate judging it little secure, and less honorable to continue
the Treaty, suspended more speech of it, interdicting Audience nevertheless to
the Nuntio Vitelli, and forbidding their Ambassador Contarini to see the Pope.
The Negotiation also was interrupted, which the Duke of Crequi, come in the
Name of King Lewis to Venice, managed with Baptista Nani and Girolamo Soranzo,
Cavalier and Procurator, deputed by the Senate to adjust the differences about
Confines betwixt Loreo and Arriano.

ANNO MDCXXXIV.
The Republic was strongly pressed by the said Duke, that in concert with the
Crown of France a new War might be moved in Italy; but although his instances
were a while after earnestly seconded by Monsieur de Salodie sent by the King
with the same projects of Union and War, the Senate nevertheless resolving not
to depart from the Neutrality they had fixed in, answers to the invitations by
exhorting to Peace, which being the greatest blessing from Heaven, ought rather
to be promoted than disturbed by the prosperity, the Crown enjoyed. Not only
the French but the Spaniards also used with the other Princes such earnest
endeavors, requiring positive declarations, without admitting neutrality, that
some grew justly jealous, that the Crowns sought no less pretexts for a War,
than to make parties for it. At which the Grand Duke more moved than the rest,
sends the Archbishop of Pisa to the Court of Rome, to propose a League betwixt
the Italian Princes of common defense, to balance the power of Strangers, and
oppose the exorbitancy of it. But at this time, as always, affections
contending with interests, many governing themselves by separate Councils, and
believing an union with Strangers more compatible than with domestics, the
proposition vanished in its beginning, through the difficulty to introduce it.
The Genouese at this time, embittered by reason of past accidents against the
Spanish Ministers, and more exasperated at present by the decision made by the
King and the Infanta of their controversies with the Duke of Savoy, gave ear to
the insinuations of Monsieur de Novailles, who, in his passage to Rome, offered
them the Forces, and assistance of the Crown of France; so that after having
for so many years been serviceable to the sole advantages of the Spaniards,
they would bring themselves to a fitting neutrality; whereupon that Republic
making use of the conjuncture, enters into a correspondence with France, and
with many Decrees revived the luster of its liberty, and vigor of its
Government.

The Spaniards received this novelty not without a sharp resentment; but, being
more and more intent upon the contingencies of the Empire, dissemble all,
making it their business only to take away all jealousies from the Italians,
both by reason of the Infanta's stay and the warlike preparations, without
notwithstanding to neglect the advantages which the conjuncture afforded: for
they took hold of the occasion, to persuade Prince Thomas to depart on a sudden
out of Piedmont, and go to the command of the Army in Flanders, sending for
Hostages his Wife and Children into Spain. Some believed, that Thomas, and
Maurice the Cardinal, who having renounced to the protection of France in Rome,
had assumed that of the Emperor, held an understanding with the Duke their
Brother, thereby to divide betwixt them, by artifice, the affections and good
will of both the parties. But, in truth, the two Princes, from the weak
constitution of the Duke foreseeing his death to be near, considered afar of
the succession of the Country, and those designs which afterward in their time
brake forth, and seeing their Sister-in-Law, by the bonds of interest and blood
tied to France, cast themselves betimes into the arms and protection of the
Austrians. Whereat the Duke, being exceedingly moved, sequestered their
revenues, and suspends their assignments. The French, for all that putting no
entire confidence in him, shorten the Bridle, increasing in Pignarol and
Monferrat Troops and Garrisons. The Infanta at last, after having concluded a
League with the Catholic Cantons of Helvetia for the life of the King and the
Prince his Successor, obliging them to assist in the defense of the Franche
County, moves, in the Month of June, through the Valtelline and Tirol toward
Germany, accompanied by the Marquess of Leganes, with six thousand Foot and
fifteen hundred Horse.

It has been formerly said, what were the aims of Wallestein to amuse himself
in Provinces remote, whilst the more important were in danger; but now upon the
loss of Ratisbone, Austria was threatened also, and the Duke of Bavaria highly
protested, that if he were not succored, he would agree with the Swedes upon
any conditions, and would open them the passage into the bowels of the
Emperors patrimonial Lands. Whereupon Ferdinand with most effectual orders
summons him again to come speedily to the assistance of his necessity, and to
his commands added importunities and entreaties, that he would employ his Army
against those of his Enemies, which were the most dangerous and powerful. He
with the height of malice, considering that the Spanish Forces were come into
the Empire, and knowing the aims of that Crown, tending to thrust him down,
moving the Army as if he would answer the summons, quarters it in Bohemia, and
distributing several Regiments of his friends into Austria, it looked as if he
would keep Vienna blocked, and the Emperor himself Prisoner. This gave vent to
universal complaints; because, besides public mischiefs, the principal
Ministers were sensible of private losses, the Soldiers lodging upon their
estates with all sorts of liberty and undistinguished license. All then showing
zeal equal to the urgent necessity, under pretext of the common cause
demonstrated the common dangers, and calling to mind the conduct of the
General, inveighed particularly against the Articles by him formerly projected
with Arnheim, among which it had been discovered, that there was discourse of
ridding Germany of the Spaniards, of the banishment of the Jesuits, of the
restitution of the Palatinate, and of the force with which the Emperor might
be induced to accept so destructive a Peace in the Empire. Nor was it
concealed, that Wallestain openly aspired to the usurpation of the Crown of
Bohemia, that there was a conspiracy against the life of the Emperor and his
Sons, held correspondence with the Swedes and Saxons, and had set on foot
secret Treaties with the Cardinal Richelieu, at the time that Monsieur de
Fequieres treated in the Empire with the Protestants. Every one precipitating
their judgments, and declaring their sense upon the actions of Wallestein, and
the punishments he deserved, Ferdinand alone remained greatly perplexed;
because, if the jealousies of the present Affairs oftentimes moved him, he was
almost at the same time pacified with the memory of his past services. The
shame to punish a man so well deserving, with the prejudice to suffer his
insolency, put him to a stand, and above all he considered the danger, which (
Wallestein perceiving to be suspected) resulted no less from his rage than from
his faults. Wherefore inclining to that course which was most gentle, he caused
cautiously to be insinuated to him the laying down of the Command and of Arms,
to give once more place to envy, and signalize his obedience. He despising
promises, and not regarding threatenings, looked at himself in the affection of
the Soldiery and the Officers secure, having, while he had been General,
accustomed the Army both to license and obedience, and to receive from his hand
rewards and punishments. In the Court it self, nay among the Council, he wanted
not friends, kept so with profuse gifts of money and booty, which he extorted
with unjust rapine; so that trusting in his Forces and his adherents,
assembling the Chiefs of the Army, he informs them, that he was required to lay
down the Generalship thereof: He numbers up the fatigues, the enterprises, the
Victories under the direction of his Command; the years and the sufferings of
their making War together; he accuses the envy of his old Enemies; not sparing
the Emperor himself and his Counselors, as those, who to defraud the Chief of
Glory, the Officers of reward, and the Soldiers of pay, seek with calumnies
pretexts to oppress him. He puts them in mind of the care he had always had of
his faithful Fellow Soldiers, the Booties, the Quarters, the Contributions,
the Countries, and the Spoils divided and subdivided amongst them. He at last
requires of them help and counsel, for that he now weary of cares, and much
more of treacheries, would be glad to apply himself to quiet, and leave
impartial posterity to be Judge of Merit and Glory betwixt him and his Enemies.
There was no doubt, but that with clamours, more than discourse or reasons, he
was not persuaded, and in a manner forced not to quit. Into the meetings of
good Fellows and into the Quarters this discourse was quickly spread. All, to
strives, extolling his praises, That he was a true valuer of labors and of
dangers, the Father and Defender of Soldiers; to whom should they have
recourse for the future, and of whom demand acknowledgments of services and
pay, if they would suffer the appointment of new Chiefs over the Army, to bury
in silence and abolish with oblivion the services they had done? He was then by
an universal consent animated not to abandon the Army; some out of pure
affection and military transport, others more craftily by his destruction to
promote their own Fortunes. With a Writing then, signed by all, they oblige
themselves not to disagree, and to the defense of their General, till he,
recompensed in the charges he had been at, the Soldiers also should be
satisfied in their pay. After such an extravagance there was no place left for
sufferance.

The Count d'Ognate, Ambassador of Spain, who for a long time was contriving
the ruin of Wallestain, demanding on a sudden Audience of the Emperor, few
being by, and those of the most trusted Ministers, lays before them the state
of things, the boldness of Wallestain, his Intelligences, his Plots, and
Designs. Commends the moderation with which Ferdinand, as an excellent Prince,
had been willing to proceed; That it was indeed fit to dissemble some secret
faults in great Ministers, interpret favorably those that were doubtful, and
in a manner bear with those that were manifest, so long as there was no breach
of fidelity, the Soul of great Employments and the Basis of States. That the
arrogance, insolence, cruelty it self, and avarice of Wallestain had been
longer suffered. The Empire was now betrayed; Bohemia usurped; Austria invaded;
Vienna besieged; the Emperor a Prisoner, and his Sons under a show of Guard
and Quarters. What would one expect more? an occasion, or a necessity? this
cannot be greater, that not to be wished more fit. Wallestain was feared by
many, and abhorred by all; with insolence and pride he had provoked the hatred
of potent Enemies, and the envy of his very Friends. The Emperor was quickly
to draw forth his Authority and Justice before the Swedes could lend a hand to
the Rebel; that he should find respect among the people, obedienee among the
Soldiers, and the applause and benedictions of all. The wound is in truth
painful, but because it has its center in the bowels, the more you will
suppress it, the more it will increase. That which hitherto has been done in
the Army, may be rather called a Transport than a Revolt. The Militia has by
traitorous promises been blinded, and by false suggestions deluded. The Chiefs
have given their consent, terrified by the violencies of the General. That with
one stroke of a Sword the knot might be united, and it was better with the
death of one alone to terminate, or rather prevent, a Civil War, than with
Jealousies provoke it. That there was no time to be lost, in that which cannot
be commended till it be done. This said; the Consult was short, fear and fury
confusedly seconding one another, and Ognate with aggravations cutting off
discourse.

It was then resolved to make trial of the Soldiers fidelity; for Gallas and
Piccolomini, and some others of the Commanders had secretly offered the
Emperor their endeavors, asserting, that many for fear alone having consented
to sign the Writing, and participate of the fault, were ready to revolt as soon
as they should see a head. A Commission then was dispatched to Gallas, by which
all those were commanded to obey him, that would show their fidelity to the
Emperor, and separate themselves from Wallestain, now in open Rebellion. Upon
the publishing of this resolution, he perceived how slippery is the trust to
Fortune, which turns her head from those, from whom the Prince withdraws his
favor. Seldom, to say truth, has that Power been seen to subsist, which
having grown up under the shadow of Sovereign Authority, goes about to separate
it self from it. At the Name of Ferdinand the Regiments fell into commotion,
the Officers and Chiefs withdrew, the sound in a moment separating themselves
from the infected. Being then left with a few, not thinking himself secure in
Pilsen, where he now was, he leaves the Government of it to one of his
Confidents, and takes his way toward Egra, beleft to be a fit place, as being
the door of the Kingdom, by which he might either let into Bohemia Stranger
Armies, or save himself into the neighboring Provinces. He had sought to
Weimar to come speedily to his assistance, offering to deliver him places; but
whilst the Duke in so weighty a matter was considering the advantages and the
hazards, and that, not to hazard all his Forces, he sent Birchenfelt with one
part into the Palatinate to give him countenance, and Duke Francesco Albert of
Saxe to Egra to discover the designs, the Scene was changed, and the occasion
vanished.

Wallestain did believe, that those that stuck to him, bound by the bonds of
gratitude and obligation, would run all sorts of Fortune with him; but there
wanted not some that followed him for the opportunity to vent, by betraying
him, secret hatred and designed revenge, and for the hope to get from the
Emperor great rewards. He had with him the Irish Regiment of Colonel Walter
Butler, John Gordon of the same Nation, Tersica his Kinsman, the Count Lesly
Scotch-man, Captain of his Guards, L'Illo, and other as well Officers as
Soldiers, believed to be most in confidence with him. Some of these began
among themselves to consider, and then discourse with their Friends, That in
Battles the danger was common to all, but the Reward and Glory was to a few;
that an occasion was here offered to gain a rich Prize with Renown worthily
memorable; that the Victory depended upon their own wills and hands. To what
purpose follow an unfortunate Rebel abhorred of all, that would sell their
Blood, their Honor, together with their Faith, and Towns to Strangers? One
sole blow kills the Sacrifice, expiates the fault, pacifies the Prince; nay
obliges him to retribute wealth and favors to those that with their obedience
preserve Kingdoms.

This was enough to animate them, for every one was already persuaded of his
own Interest; whereupon Lesly, Butler, and Gordon promising fidelity to one
another, drew in some others, and inviting L'Illo and Tersica to Supper in
their Lodging, growing hot in discourse among their Cups, feigning a Wrangle,
confounding Wine with Blood, and violating Hospitality, kill them. Thence not
to give time to divulge it, hasting to Wallestains Chamber, and forcing the
door, whilst he awakened would have looked out of a Window to call for help,
and reproached the Conspirators, they with many blows killed him with a
Halbard. Then leaving him dead upon the ground, they went out of the Castle to
inform the Soldiery with what was done, and flatter them with great promises.
Nor found they any great trouble to do it; for the Chiefs being dead, not one
durst show resentment. The day following, keeping the Gates shut, that the
death might not be published, they went out of the City, under the pretense of
honor and conduct to meet the Duke Francesco Albert, who came in the name of
Weimar to settle some agreements, and arresting him Prisoner, carried him to
Vienna, where they found great commendations and bountiful rewards.

Such was the unhappy destiny of Albert of Wallestain, Duke of Fridtland, who
had formerly subdued the Empire by Arms, and frighted Europe with his name. He
exalted the Nobleness of his Birth by his Military Virtue, which from the
lowest degrees lifted him up to a great Fortune, so much the more honorable,
as carried to it by his own Merit, he ascended not upon the ruin of others.
Amidst many faults of ambition, cruelty, and violence, with which he afflicted
his very friends, his enemies commended his prudence, his wariness, and his
discipline. It seemed, that he was always above Fortune and accidents, or
rather, that foreseeing and mastering every thing in his mind, he prevented
difficulties and cross adventures. He was accustomed to overcome, and if at any
time he seemed to have the worst, the World, in the belief of his felicity, was
persuaded that he had no mind to overcome. Some condemned a certain rashness in
his actions that rendered him precipitate; nevertheless being always guided by
hidden motives, it was easily discerned, that leaving little to chance, he
rewarded not without judgment, nor punished without distinction. Whatsoever the
cause was, if he lived with Glory, he dyed with scorn. Nevertheless opinions
upon his case were diversely contested, some believing him a Traitor before
adjudged; others, that he cast himself into the Precipice after he saw himself
lost.

Whereupon various were the Judgments, the one by the infamy of his present
actions cancelling the Glory of those past, and the others by attributing his
disgrace to the Fortune of great Employments, easily suffering his death, whose
life they hated before. But in Vienna, in regard of his Kindred and Friends,
which were in the Court, quickly suppressing the discourse of the causes and of
the fact, and punishing some of the Conspirators, it was resolved, that the
King of Hungary should go into the field, to cheer up the Army with his
presence, contain the Soldiers in their duty, and hinder competition amongst
the Chiefs. This could not be done so suddenly, that the Swedes made not great
advantage of the past alterations; for that in Alsace the Rhingrave, routing
near Tarn the Imperialists, took amongst more considerable conquests Ensheim,
Friburg, and Rinfelden. In Swabe were yielded to Horn, Meminghem and Chempem.
The Elector of Saxony having besieged Budweis, and first burnt it with Bombes
before he took it, passed to Gorlitz, which he found abandoned. Retiring then
into his own Country, leaves to Arnheim the Command of the Army; and he,
offering the Imperialists Battle near Lignitz, after a long and doubtful fight
defeats them with the death of three thousand of their men, the gaining of many
Colors and nine pieces of Cannon, possessing Stenau, Glogau, and other places
of importance, at the same time that Banier took Francfort on the Oder, and
Crossen.

The King of Hungary coming forth at last with powerful Forces, and the Army
encouraged with his presence, joins the Bavarians, who had recovered Strubingh,
and begirts Ratisbone with a Siege, battering it with a hundred piece of
Cannon. Weimar draws near to it, disturbing the Royal Camp, which had not its
Circumvallation yet finished; but for want of Victuals he was forced to a
farther distance. Nevertheless being concerned to preserve that conquest, he
had a mind, joining Horn, to make another attempt; but withheld by impediments,
especially in the Siege of Lantzhut, (where Aldringher was killed, attempting
to put succors into it) when he came near to Ratisbone, found it lost. Horn
then goes into Suevia, and Weimar weakened, not being strong enough to face the
King, le^t Donawert and other places fall into his hand.

The King of Hungary desired much to join with the Infanta, and to prepare the
way, advances to attacque Nortlinghen, which holding out longer than the
Imperialists had supposed, gave time to the Spanish Army with the Infanta to
arrive as a seasonable supply, and to the Duke of Weimar to rejoyn Horn to
attempt its relief. These two young Princes communicating to one another the
desire of Glory no less than the Counsels of Arms, would not abandon the Siege;
whereupon Weimar, not able to endure that it should be lost in his presence,
resolves upon a Battle, hoping with the Swedish Arms to recompense at once with
Victory, that which since some time the Imperial, under the happy Conduct of
the King, had taken from them. He then assaults the Enemies Camp with an
impression so resolute, that at the first brunt he forces the Trenches,
possesses the Cannon, and took a Half Moon, putting the Austrians every where
to flight. But the Officers coming in, nay the King himself and the Cardinal
calling to the Fugitives, the fright being over, and all the Army taking
courage, the Spanish Troops in particular giving mavelous proofs of boldness,
the Swedes were repulsed. The Artillery, levelled from a higher situation, made
a great slaughter among them, because by the site of the field, being to climb
over little Hills, they were forced to fight, exposed to the shot, with the
disadvantage of the place, no less than with the Enemies. They also for not
having taken a particular view when they had possessed the first
Fortifications, disordered one another, some in going forward mistaking the
way, others in fighting, exceeding the order which had been given them. The
worst accident was, that the fire casually taking in some Barrels of Powder
upon the Half Moon, fright was added to disorder; for the Soldiers, doubting
lest a Mine had been sprung, ran headlong away, so that the Spaniards not only
recovered the Post, but took courage to follow them.

Weimar and Horn employed all their diligence to put their Troops again into
good order, or at least to retire with less disadvantage, but all in vain;
because separated from one another, with Troops every where in disorder, they
neither had communication together, nor did the Soldiers any longer obey their
commands. The Austrians, under the favor of a Wood putting themselves betwixt
them, hindered them of a possibility to reunite. Whereupon the Cavalry being
pursued by the Croats, turning at last their backs, in full Career abandoned
the Foot, which was almost all killed upon the place. The number of the dead
was more than ten thousand, and about six thousand were taken Prisoners.
Amongst these was Horn, Weimar being saved for a better Destiny. The Austrians
lost two thousand in the first heat of the fight, the rest had no other labor
but to pursue the Fugitives, and to kill and strip the conquered. This signal
Victory was rendered more apparent by the consequences; for Heilbrun, Wurtzburg,
Augsburg, with many other places, yielded of their own accord, and others were
abandoned by the Swedish Garrisons. The Duke of Brunswick and the Landgrave,
that employed themselves for their own advantages in Westphalia, showed
inclinations to Peace, and Saxony hearkened also to Propositions of Agreement;
nor was it doubted, that if the Spanish Commanders had been tempted with money,
but they would have abandoned Germany and the Fortune of their declining Party.
But the Austrians settling their rest upon hopes, whilst the Infanta, called
away by the urgency of Flanders, separates from the King, and the King
satisfied with Glory, makes haste to return to the Court to enjoy the applauses
of it. Richelieu, who from the prosperity of the Swedes had gotten for the
Crown of France great advantages, and proposed to himself not a whit the less
from their disgrace, sends the Mareshal de la Force to the Rhine with a very
puissant Army, boasting assistance to his Friends, and showing force to his
Enemies.

Oxestern, who residing in Francfort had the direction with his Council of that
Party, and Weimar, that gathered up the relics of the late misfortune, knew
not whither else to turn themselves but to France, which in retribution of
succors drew out of their hands the strong place of Philipsburg, which situate
on the right banck of the Rhine belonged to the Elector of Trier as Bishop of
Spires, and in the beginning of the year had been possessed by the Swedes. This
wounded the Austrians to the quick, seeing the French Colors not only advance
to the Rhine, but pass it also, besides confirming themselves more and more in
the conquest of Lorrain; for that the new Duke, having laid down his Cardinals
Hat, and taken to Wife Claudia, Sister-in-law of Carlo, gave occasion to
Richelieu to conceive or feign jealousies, and to require in pledge for
security La Motha, the only place that remained at his dispose. The Duke now
saw, that his faults and the suspicions of France would last as long as any
part of the Country rested in his power. Therefore denying the place, goes to
Luneville, a House of Pleasure in the Country. But encompassed immediately with
Guards, he was required to return to Nancy, under pretense of greater security.
It was not in his power to refuse it; but quickly perceiving himself to he kept
a Prisoner there, he contrives, deceiving the Guards, to free himself from the
slavery, and with his Wife going out by a little Gate in the habit of
Gardiners, got to Besanzon, and thence to Florence to be far distant from
places suspected by France. The Cardinal, not to be wearied in pursuing
advantages and anger, caused la Motha to be besieged, which, the Governor
being in an occasion killed, was rendered.

The Lorrainers in this manner brought low, Orleans remained at Brussels, but
deprived of a great support, and little satisfied with the Spaniards; because
having signed certain Covenants, he promised in them, Not to make any accord
with his Brother without their knowledge and consent, and obliged himself to
remain in their party, and herein to employ his Credit and Arms; the Spaniards
on the other side being to furnish money wherewith to raise and maintain an
Army, with which he might be able to attacque France, and conquer places,
whilst they with another body of an Army should give jealousy to the
Frontiers. But the Marquess d'Aitona having not been able to make good these
agreements, by reason of greater distractions, and principally by the
threatenings of the French from the side of Trier, Orleans through weariness and
inconstancy, and above all persuaded by Puilaurens his Favorite, agrees with
the King his Brother. Puilaurens had been gained by Richelieu; so that as he,
in compliance with his own loves to the Princess of Falsburg, another Sister of
Carlo's, had already driven on Orleans to the Marriage with Margaret, so now
weary of those inclinations, and baited by the Cardinal with promises of great
recompense, and the Marriage with his own Niece, persuades him to leave his
Mother and Wife at Brussels, and to return by stealth into the Kingdom. But
Puilaurens was not long ere he felt the punishment of his overmuch credulity;
for being allured by the Marriage, and at that very time new offenses being
produced, and he condemned to lose his life, his death dissolved it. The
Spaniards remained by the escape of Orleans frustrated of their hopes, and the
surprise of the Islands of Eres in Provenze was deferred, contrived by them to
be executed, under Imperial Colors, upon pretense of succors and diversion
for Lorrain. For five and twenty Galleys, seven great Ships, with Soldiers and
all other Provisions, being come from Naples into Sicily to join with other
eight Galleys, and to take on Board Soldiers, found things there in so little
readiness, that they were forced to put it off till the next year. From such
provisions and so great designs was easily to be comprehended, that some great
motion to War was near. And therefore the Venetians failed not to attempt by
their endeavors, effectually employed by Luigi Contarini in France, and
Giovanni Giustiniani in Spain, to pacify their minds, and moderate
animosities; but the evil being at the point of breaking forth, was rather
provoked, so that all diligence became fruitless, and reasons were heard, but
not considered, both the Crowns endeavoring rather by allurements and promises
to bring the Republic into their opinions, and change the Mediation into an
adhering either to the one or other side.


ANNO MDCXXXV.
THE slaughters and calamities, which dishonouring Christendom, and destroying
Europe, have made famous the rancour of two great Ministers, will give
posterity just occasion, to number this rather amongst the most doleful than a
renowned year, in which France and Spain came to an open breach, and gave a
beginning to a long War, with memorable accidents and bloody successes,
intermingled with fallacious Treaties, vicissitudes of Arms, insurrections of
people, and the mockeries of Fortune. It was already discovered, that the
emulation betwixt Richelieu and Olivares could no longer remain concealed;
neither wanted there on either side occasions or pretexts: for the Fleet in
Italy, the Armies in Spain, the Treaties with Orleans, the stirring up the
discontented, abundantly discovered what engine was preparing by the Spaniards;
and on the other side, the possession of Lorrain, the progresses in Germany,
the Treaties with the Swedes, and the Subsidies to Holland, pointed out what
designs the French were contriving. The Cardinal sent the Count of Botru to
Madrid, and the Conde Duke, Benavides to Paris, but rather to espy the state
of things than to beget confidence; having rather mutually brought back,
instead of fair words and kind usage, provocations and stinging incentives, it
is not credible to what a height rage was inflamed, and minds irritated, made
sensible through ambition, and resolute in revenge, the better to confirm
authority amidst Arms, and uphold favor and glory.

Richelieu was happy, who in these preludiums of War experienced in every
Treaty the more lucky destiny, to conclude with the United Provinces of the Low
Countries the League offensive and defensive, which so much awakened in the
World discourses, expectation, and fame, and stirred up in the Austrians so
many apprehensions and fears; for by the Articles of the same, The Provinces in
obedience to the King of Spain were to be assaulted by the Confederates, with
Forces united of fifty thousand Foot and ten thousand Horse, after that by a
public Manifest they should be invited, and for three months their answer
expected, to shake off the Yoke, and to unite themselves with others in one
common body of liberty, saving to every one their privileges, and in
particular their Religion: but when that time was past, they designed them a
pray to their Arms, and the Conquests were to be divided; Lutzemburg, Namur,
Henault, Artois, and the Territory of Cambray were to be yielded to France,
with a part of Flanders on this side, of a line which was to be drawn from
Blankenburg betwixt Bridges and Dam, taking in Ruplemond; the rest was to
belong to the States of Holland, with a promise to leave the Catholic Religion
every where in the state they found it. It was agreed, not to make Peace or
Truce but by common consent, and not to admit of any terms till the Spaniards
were first totally driven out of the Low Countries. They proposed to attacque
Towns in an alternative order, one of the repartition to France, and then
another of those assigned to Holland, but leaving the choice to the will of the
Generals. A Fleet at Sea was over and above this agreed upon, and the French
were to declare War to the Emperor, and every body else, that upon this
account should molest the States. All this tended to give a great stroke, if in
the management of the War the interests of the Confederates had met with a
parity, as in the Treaty their minds were equally disposed and their wills
agreeing.

The Spaniards coming to the knowledge hereof, to the Pope and in all Courts
laid load upon the French with bitter invectives, as if they would expose
Religion in pray to the Heretics, and that, not contented to see it through
the countenance of their assistance depressed in Germany, they went about to
extirpate it also in those Provinces, where, under the Government of their
Monarchy, the true Worship was retained. But all that availing little, placing
their confidence in Arms, rather than complaints, they determine upon
prevention, by shutting that door, by which the French, assaulting the
backside of the Provinces, intended to bring their Army to join with that of
Holland. The Count of Embden, then sent by the Cardinal Infanta to attempt the
gaining of the Citadel of Triers, succeeded in the surprise of it by night,
through the negligence, with which Arnoud, the French Governor, kept it; the
Garrison in the exploit being cut to pieces, and the Elector remaining
Prisoner; for that, hindered by the Gout, he was not able to make his escape. He
was sent to Vienna, to give account to the Emperor of his putting himself
under the protection of the French, and to have introduced into his Towns
stranger Garrisons, contrary to the constitutions of the Empire. At the same
time, Fortune applauding beginnings, Colonel Bamberg, who, after a long Siege,
had rendered Phillipsburg to the Swedes, by whom it was afterward delivered
over to France, by the favor of the Ice passing the ditch, happily surprised
that very strong place.

At two so great and unexpected blows the French were greatly moved, but withal
believing the occasion favorable to publish the War against the Spaniards
formerly resolved on, they sent to the Infanta to require with the restitution
of the Country, the liberty of the Elector. But he referring the answer to the
Emperor, as professing to have only obeyed his orders, a Herald was sent by
King Lewis to Brussels to denounce, in the ancient forms, War, and almost at
the same time moved, in the Month of May, his Troops. The French Army, by the
Mareshals of Chastiglion and Breze, were rendesvouz'd near Mezieres, and as it
is usual in the first beginnings, especially when a War is undertaken through
animosity and revenge, all things did superabound, so that the number of the
Army exceeded the Agreement, and the warlike provisions seemed to be greater
than was needful. For France, being at the height of reputation and power,
reckoned at that time to have under its Colors, in several parts, one hundred
and thirty thousand Foot and fifteen thousand Horse, with an infinite number of
Artillery, and abundance of all other provisions. The French then marching
toward Maestricht with above thirty thousand fighting men and forty pieces of
Cannons, Prince Thomas, with weak Forces near to Avesnes, attempts to dispute
the passage, and was with much slaughter beaten, so that going on without
resistance, they joined Orange, who waited for them with twenty thousand Foot
and six thousand Horse, and fourscore pieces of Artillery. The Army appeared
formidable for number and valor, and the world already supposed the felicity
of the enterprise, equal to the Force. But Victuals for so great a multitude
being quickly wanting, the Army began to devour it self through want, and to be
consumed with sickness and suffering.

Brabant was invaded, and Tirlemont, a great Town but weak, taken by force,
experienced, with cruelty in the slaughter and plunder, the first fury of
Military license. The Spaniards were encamped with their gross near to Lovain,
to cover that City, which is of a great circuit, but weak, and, together with
the City, the Country near to it. The Confederates, to draw them to a Battle,
made show to advance toward Brussels, not without hope, but that in the
universal consternation, they might have the luck to take it. But Orange,
retarding the march, gave time to the Spaniards to draw nearer to it. The
Confederates then commanded their march toward Lovain, and on a sudden besiege
it with great violence, but the defense was no less vigorous, maintained by the
Baron of Grobbendonk the Governor, with the assistance of a good number of
Scholars of that famous University, who strengthened the Garrison. The
fierceness of the assailants being hereby abated, the Army began to waste; for
the Hollanders, supplying their Army punctually with whatsoever they had need
of, kept Victuals from the French, who, though by force and courage they were
able to overcome any danger, found that hunger and necessity was an enemy
invincible. Many dyed, and the rest disbanding, were in great numbers killed by
the Peasants; so that the Forces being weakened, and Victuals wanting, the
Generals were forced to raise the Siege, and give leave to those that were
alive, every one to provide for his safety and escape. The Commanders, and the
Relics of the Army, were reduced to imbark in Holland, scoffed at by the
people, and scorned, that of so many men, which aspired to so great Conquests,
so small a remainder appeared, and they in disorder, fugitives, and in so faint
a condition.

There is no doubt, but as the United Provinces, in making of the League,
consented to any conditions, which might oblige the French to an open breach
with Spain; so having obtained their purpose abhorred no one thing more, than
to have them, instead of friends, neighbors. To the common concerns of the
Provinces was added the private resentments of the Prince of Orange; for that
Richelieu, amidst flatteries and confidences, had some years before endeavored
to surprise in France the Town of Orange it self; but the blow not succeeding,
he quickly silenced the fact and noise of it. But the other dissembling with
equal artifice, reserved himself for an opportunity to be even with him, and
now he enjoyed this, that if by taking most important Towns from the Spaniards,
he had gained by Arms the glory of valor and courage, in overreaching
Richelieu now in wit, the world attributed to him the renown of great policy
and prudence. Yet the Cardinal, having, by reason of the War undertaken, need
of the adherence of the Hollanders, and friendship of the Prince of Orange, to
apply himself to the greater, neglected lesser revenges. This acting against
Flanders, with the noise and appearance of better success than was met with,
had displeased the King of England, who willingly could not suffer the
greatning of the Crown of France in those parts. Putting therefore, on that
occasion, a Fleet to Sea, observed the issue of things, and the Emperor,
considering of what importance those Provinces were to the common interest of
Germany, sends six thousand Foot and four thousand Horse with Piccolominy to
the assistance of the Infant.

The French Army was no sooner dispersed, but the fear, which at first troubled
the Subjects of Spain, pierced interchangeably into the heart of the
Hollanders. For the Count of Embden, by order of the Infant, surprised
Schinche Schans, which lies in a situation above any other important, where the
Rhine, divided into two Branches, keeps on the right hand its name, and on the
left assumes that of Waaghe; so that the Fort, commanding the Navigation and
the Dikes, can overflow the Country; gives an entrance into the Bottowe, and,
on the one side cutting off the Towns and Provinces which are beyond the River,
opens on the other passage into the bowels of Holland. Orange comes immediately
to enclose it with a strong Siege, drawing abundance of Works longst the side
of the River. So great a flame of War betwixt two so powerful Kings could not
be contained only within those Provinces; but spreading it self every where,
broke forth also in Italy, taking its beginning in the Grisons, where Monsieur
de la Land, for the custody of the Passes, for some time past kept three
Regiments of that Nation and some French; and now having sent a l'improvisto,
by the Mountain of Spluga, six Companies, possesses without opposition
Chiavanna, Riva, il Sasso Corbeio, and those other places longst the Lake
heretofore named; then Rohan following by the way of Poschiavo with five
thousand Foot and four hundred Horse gets Morbegno, and every other place
remaining in possession of all the Valteline and the Counties adjacent. The
Cardinal Albornoz, who after the Infanta's departure governed Milan, by
profession averse to Arms, was upon this emergency beyond measure confused.
Sends nevertheless Troops toward Lago di Como, but expected his chief succors
and diversions from Germany, and no one thing could happen more disturbing to
the Austrians, than to see the passages shut, and communication interrupted.

The French knew, that though the surprise happened to be easy, yet it was
impossible to keep what they had gotten without the assistance of the
Venetians. The Ministers therefore of King Lewis, bringing to remembrance the
pressures and agreements for the redemption formerly of those Passes,
demonstrated the present Conjuncture, exhorting the Republic to take Arms, and
participate of the Conquests. But those of Spain extolling those generous
Titles attributed to the Republic it self, of the Shield and Defense of
Liberty, and the Peace of Italy, endeavored to stir it up against the French,
as the unseasonable incendiary of so great a discord. The Senate in the present
constitution of things, seeming to have nothing to hope nor fear from
Strangers, resolved to keep themselves in neutrality, enjoying Peace at least
in their own Country, though their endeavors had not been sufficient to divert
the War elsewhere. They permitted the French to draw Victuals out of the
neighboring places, and the passage of Corn which they fetched out of Albania,
and besides for some Cannon bought out of Ships in Venice; and consented to the
Spaniards the transport, from Trieste to the Kingdom of Naples, of German
Soldiers in Barks one by one, and without Arms; which a little before having
been demanded in the Name of Lodowick Prince of Venosa, who desired to make the
Levy, had been denied. As to other things, fortifying the passages and their
own Confines with a good number of Soldiers, and by sending Luigi Giorgio
General in Terra firma, and Sebastian Veniero into Valcamonica, and Michael
Priuli Proveditor into the Veronese, they stood observing what would happen.

Surely the French might have reaped great advantages, if while the minds of
the Spanish Ministers were wavering, by reason of the surprise of the Valteline
and the weak condition they then were in, the Milanese by the way of Piedmont
had been attacqued by them. But whilst they lingered, the better to settle
agreements with other Princes of Italy firm, which ordinarily favors the
weaker side, gave the Spaniards opportunity to make Levies in Helvetia, call
assistance from Naples and Sicily, and receive those from the Grand Duke,
wherewith for the Investiture of Vienna he is obliged to aid the Milanese
whenever attacqued. Monsieur de Bellievre, sent from King Lewis, Ambassador
Extraordinary, into Italy, coming to Turin, obliged Vittorio to declare
himself, to join Forces, and enter into the League.

If the Savoyards, heretofore considerable by reason of situation, were wont,
by the credit they had with both sides, to invite to the War sometimes the one,
and sometimes the other Crown, it seemed at present, that they could do no
other but second the French, being on the one side environed with Pignerol, and
on the other with Monferrat. The Duke grew more and more jealous from the pass
it self, that necessity forced him to remain united with that Crown; for if by
the French the Milanese should be conquered, he knew himself at their mercy,
rather lost than exposed. Nevertheless being a friend in peace, it behoved him
to make himself also a Companion in War, not without some hope, that joining
Arms, and participating in Councils, he might arrive at his ends, and direct
them to his advantage. So adhering to the French in Name, and in Maxims to the
Spaniards, he became in conclusion troublesome to these, and of little advantage
to the others. The Duke d'Alviti was sent by Albornoz to Turin, to divert him
from signing the League, but in vain; for though many believed, that he passed
with him concerts less public, but more effectual, yet after some delays he
closed with the French. Bellievre then goes to the Duke of Parma, who in the
heat of his years and passions, greedy of Glory and War, had already so far
advanced a Treaty with the French, that little of trouble remained to the
Ambassador fully to conclude it, to the so much greater resentment of the
Spaniards, as they knew they had unseasonably provoked rather than frighted him
with scorns and threatenings to promote to the Government of the Country
Alexander his elder Brother, who, as dumb, judged by the Kindred incapable of
the Succession, was kept in the Citadel of Piacenza, not without jealousy by
the Duke; and although every body condemned Edward, that undertaking War with
the more powerful, he exercised rather the warmth of his courage, than the
prudence and vigor of his ability; nevertheless the Ministers of Spain
conceived strong apprehensions, lest the Milanese should be assaulted in flank,
succors from Naples be hindered, and French introduced into Piacenza, and
perhaps also into Sabioneda. The Duke of Modena set himself to sale to both the
Crowns; so acceptable and regarded did the desire of prevailing ^n their Rivals
render at present to those great Princes, those, who at other times they were
wont to despise.

At last, after having amused France and Bellievre, who went to gain him, with
long hopes he agrees with Spain, signing with Francesco de Mello a Treaty to
adhere to that Crowns party, and send the Prince Rinaldo his Brother with three
thousand Foot into the Milanese, Correggio. Then the French Minister turns
himself toward Mantua, with so much the greater instance, as the Community of
Nation and the late benefits seemed to constrain, if not persuade, the Duke.
Nevertheless he resisted as much as he could, and resorting for counsel to the
Venetians, the resolution was referred to his own choice and wisdom. Whereupon
he signs the League, but could contribute naught to it but the name, the
Republic not supplying wherewithal to execute it; doubtful notwithstanding,
that from such provocations the Spaniards being angry, might be more forward to
make some attempt upon Mantua, re-inforces more and more that Garrison. The
Treaty with the adhering Dukes contained, An Union for three years and the
promise of the King, besides ten thousand men to be kept in the Valteline to
maintain in Italy twelve thousand Foot more and fifteen hundred Horse. To Savoy
were assigned six thousand Foot and twelve hundred Horse; to Parma five hundred
of these, and four thousand of those; to Mantua three hundred of the one, and
three thousand of the other. It was agreed, not to make Peace without the
restitution of that, which by the Spaniards might be taken from the
Confederates. As to conquests which might happen, the division was deferred,
till the enterprise on the Milanese should be at an end: leaving every one of
the united Princes uncertain what was to be the reward of their undertaking,
and not out of fear, lest in the conclusion the more powerful should keep to
himself the arbitrament and possession.

The French Ministers, after they had discovered the fixed resolution of the
Venetians to stand neutral, had deferred as the last attempt, to press the
Republic, and get her to come into the League, believing that more than from
reason would be powerful to persuade it, not so much the example of the other
Princes united, as the interest and the conceit, that in the taking of Milan it
behoved them also to have a share in it, to greaten it self, and enjoy the
spoils. And therefore they invited them, not as others with uncertain hopes,
but with express propositions to give them in the Valteline Tirano, consent to
them passage into, and a League with the Grisons, and in the Milanese the
Comasco, la Giara d' Adda, with whatever more she would choose. As the Armies
were ready to move, Bellievre arrives at Venice, and being brought into the
Assembly together with Monsieur de la Thuillerie, Ambassador in Ordinary, thus
spoke; If I should come to this renowned Commonwealth to desire in the name of
the most Christian King assistance, rather than to offer advantages, his
affection and friendship would seem to savor more of interest than of
sincerity. But the King my Master, the best amongst his Ancestors, has
contented himself, by the assistance of Divine goodness and justice to subdue
his Rebels; afterward to revenge himself of his enemies, and having brought
them into a condition of being overcome and beaten, calls now his Allies and
Friends to take part not of the danger, but of the rewards, not of the charges
and labors, but of the prey and conquest. France, by Gods grace, under the
protection of a most just King, and the care of a provident and vigilant
Minister, is in that degree of happiness and power, that if in other times it
was not to be overcome but by it self, being now united at peace, obedient, and
armed is rendered superior to it self. And now I shall tell you, that nothing
is wanting to its felicity, but that which the Kings goodness will have
wanting, and that is the communicating his good things to his friends; the
dividing felicity it self with his Confederates. The Arms of France, heretofore
implored by the Princes of Italy, desired by your selves, always ready for
succors of the causes most just, fatally also in past Ages the Restorers of
Italy, are now offered to you, not to redeem, (for we already number that
Ornament amongst our Conquests) but to secure the perpetual quiet, liberty, and
dignity of Italy, which has hitherto cost you so many cares, and our selves so
much blood. I openly declare it to be the chief point of my instructions and of
your counsels, that the King renounces the very thought of retaining any thing
in Italy. Let the Spoils, Dominions, and Provinces be yours, ours shall he the
labors, the charges, and the dangers, let the Glory be sufficient to the
French Nation, to know how to overcome their Enemies, and so give Victories to
their Friends. Your Republic, beloved by the King, as Coetancan with his
Monarchy, the first begotten of his Confederates, the first fruits of his
affection in Italy; what greater pledge can you receive of the Royal
inclination, than to be entreated to gather the fruits of our labors, to
increase your Empire, and extend your Confines upon the ruin of his implacable
and ancient Enemies? Let us, I pray, measure, and not without astonishment, the
disparity of the Maxims and Genius of the two Nations, whereof one by
affection, the other by necessity offers you friendship. Who knows not the
Spaniards, a people covetous of their own, and greedy of what is another, who
by ambition undertakes, and by avarice and nature holds fast? We on the other
side, prodigal of our selves, if in War we observe justice, in conquering we
exercise moderation. How many provocations have we suffered before we declared
our selves Enemies to Spain, the Prejudices, the Treacheries, dissembled to an
excess of patience, had rendered the Austrians so bold, that to oppress our
Friends, and insult upon our selves, was turned into a Maxim of their
haughtiness, as the interest of the French sufferance. You, O Fathers, your
selves are Witnesses, how often you have stirred us up to just resentments, and
I will speak it without shame, because France appeared then alienated from it
self, reproved us with reason of negligence. But now my King, who can with his
power measure his Generosity, with what motive has he begun the present War,
but to render Justice to his Friends, unjustly violated by the Spanish Arms?
Though he has been willing frequently to dissemble the offenses done to
himself, he has not been able to suffer the injuries done to his Confederates:
And who will doubt, that the War will not be carried on in future by the same
Arts with which it begins, and if the deceitful surprise of an Elector
protected, be by my King revenged with so great preparations and so great
charges, what shall not his Friends be, who shall adhere to him, to be defended
by his Royal constancy, and made partakers of his Victories and Triumphs?
Certainly, if I consider the present proposition, it is needless that I seek
other examples to render the Magnanimity of the French Kings, and in particular
of Lewis Illustrious. Does he invite you to be his Companions in the enterprise
of the Milanese? but he gives to you and the other Confederates the conquest of
it, and of the other Territories of Italy, to which the Rights of our Kings are
so clear and so just. Those that in the gaining and losing of them cost us so
much blood, are your conquests. Believe me, Fathers, that if we expect Heaven
should prescribe us Councils, it cannot suggest it to us with clearer words,
than by showing us the Conjuncture, and supplying with Forces for it. But why
do I speak of Forces? It suffices that the Republic contribute herein to it
its name. If, Fathers, this be sufficient, it is almost no other but this alone
that I sue for; because Italy, weary of Wars, of Jealousies, and Discords,
which for so long time her constant enemies have scattered there, being now
assisted and united, is willing at one blow alone to cast off the yoke, and if
your Senate have so many times generously solicited, that your example might
be followed, nothing now is required from you but approbation and consent. I
dissemble it not; almost all the Princes of Italy are already either open
Enemies to Spain, or secret Friends to France; and expect nothing else to
declare themselves but the credit of your prudence. In your hands then rests
the Force, the Counsel, and the Destiny of Italy. I call not to your memories
the ancient Mischiefs, recent Jealousies, and perpetual Suspicions. It suffices
to say, that the Domination of Spain, dreadful to all, fears all; that it hates
those it fears, and that it is equally insatiable in hatreds, as it is
excessive in revenges. And now what else more can be said, but that it is
rather preserved by the patience of others than its own power. The Austrians
invaded, and every where divided, have rather a proof of the weight than the
force of their boundless power, and can no longer govern the vast bulk of their
Greatness. The Milanese in particular, where they have placed the seat of the
War and of their strength also, which for so many years has vexed Italy, who
can repair it? Unprovided of Forces, confounded in the Government, assailed
from so many parts, beyond all succors, and if you will, possibility of
escape. I know the Spanish Ministers will not fail to allure you; but believe
me, that their flatteries are not for naught. They proceed from the guiltiness
of their present weakness; from the remorse of past injuries. So the Serpent
benumbed in Winter, has its venom dulled, but not extinguished; when the rays
of the Sun touch it again in the Spring, it turns and winds it self, and at
last breathes forth death. And what will the Spaniards do else, if propitious
Fortune should breath again, but vent the revenges, the resentments, and the
offenses, which during adversity they keep concealed in the heart? Do not
believe, that pretended injuries are forgotten, nor that oblivion or moderation
can be in minds accustomed to insolence and sole arbitrament. My King will
think to have done enough, and to have satisfied what is due to Glory and
Himself, whilst this will serve Him and Italy for the last trial whether she do
know and be willing patiently to suffer servitude.

The French Ambassadors were no sooner gone from their Audience, but the Count
de la Rocoa in a contrary sense discoursed to this purpose. I speak to a
Prince, who upon just grounds has always exercised hostilities and embraced
War. That is enough to persuade me, that the most pious institutions of your
generous Ancestors living in you, it may be superfluous, that I here exhort you
to that, which by a common concert, grave prudence, and a religious conscience
persuades you to. I see the French Ministers wandering through Italy, I perceive
they are in this City; but, if elsewhere they meet with equally to their
desires, ambition, the avarice of Princes, nay and ingratitude it self for
benefits conferred upon many by my King, they will find here prudence, justice,
and moderation united. Let it be the glory of your Republic to make War for
Peace, and, having found it, to preserve it; as it will be the eternal blame of
the Crown of France, to disturb and confound it. It cannot be denied, but that
the genius of that Nation resembles the violence of fire, which, if it reaches
not to something else, burns and consumes it self. What, I pray, provokes to
this present War? The Affairs possibly of Trier, a thing rather alleged than
true; as though, whilst the Peace was treating in Ratisbone, the Treaties with
the King of Sweden would not have been assented to, and when the execution was
concerted in Chievasco, and that the Austrians, with the just says of Princes,
rendered Countries, Towns, and Posts, the French had not designed surprises,
treacheries, and injuries. God, the Judge of Kings, and who, called upon in
just witness of Agreements, is a severe revenger of deceit, does now condemn
and punish them. Religion, and the piety of the Austrians, triumphs in Germany.
In Flanders the Heavens, the Elements, Nature it self fight for us. We see
Armies overcome without fighting, we hear of places taken without a Siege. What
else can be expected in Italy, where the cause is so much the more unjust, as
the pretexts are farther fetched? To what tend the offers and propositions of
the Ministers of France, but to render this happy Country a deplorable Theater
of eternal War? This, O Fathers, is the thing they would be at; to overcome you
with your own very blood, and with a fallacious friendship, that by subduing
all, they might see you all Enemies amongst your selves. I will not argue the
point, whether, as they imagine it, it be so easy to drive the Spanish potency
out of Italy. It being founded upon lawful titles, confirmed by time, use, and
its own strength, is like a great Oak which stands firm upon its own weight and
strength; the winds may shake and toss it to and fro, but they spend their
breath in the contest before that is weary of resisting, and if it do fall, it
crushes at the same time whoever attempts to violate the roots. But let us
examine their specious propositions, of advantages, Conquests, and Spoils,
which I would rather see authorized by examples, than amplified with partial
discourses. Which way soever I turn my self, either to the noble acts of old,
or the memorials of later times, I find nothing but sad accidents of Princes
oppressed, of places taken, and Provinces usurped; and, if what has happened in
Lorrain, Trier, and Germany suit not fitly as foreign to Italy, enquire of
Savoy, and satisfy your selves out of your own Annals, that the French being
Neighbors must either be Masters or Enemies. Will you then, O Fathers, give
your assistance to them, who in the War having license for their end, and
ambition for their motive, will turn against you those Forces, to which your
power and friendship shall have given vigor and success? I know very well what
they have given others to understand; that perhaps, which they go about to make
you believe, that they will make the Conquests, and leave you the advantages of
the Victories. But if they take the rise of the War from the breach of faith,
do you believe, that Victory, which uses to make all men insolent, will
metamorphise them into Religion and Modesty? If they think the Italian Princes
unable to manage a War without their aid and assistance, it must be their
Armies then that must besiege places, and garrison them when taken, and having
once (God preserve Italy from that unhappy destiny) excluded my King, who shall
be the Judge, who shall decide causes, who regulate the Confines, and who
require again what is deposited? I will not vainly boast what the power of
Spain has contributed to the honor, security, and quiet of Italy. As to us,
your Confines have always remained unviolable; within our own have we confined
our thoughts and Armies, sollicitous only for our own, and the common Peace. My
King has always been desirous to confederate Empire with reason, and establish
his greatness in tranquillity. But the present commotions, which every where
shake Europe, do confound divine Worship, propagate Heresy, oppress Countries,
and serve for an argument and proof what will be the progress, if such be the
first steps of the French Armies. I know, that the artifices of our Enemies
have in times past scattered jealousies, introduced disgusts, depainted
shadows, and every thing being suspected which remained a secret, have caused
disadvantages and discords; but the end has been the judge of the intentions,
and the work. Great Princes have great wrong done them, when they want the true
knowledge of their Counsels, believe all upon same, and suspect every thing. Of
that I shall say no more; because it is now, at last, time that we lay aside
suspicions, wrath, and enmities, which have hitherto so often reciprocally
deceived us. I cannot give this great and wise Republic a more safe pledge of
the Kings friendship, than offering it an union with him, and suing for the
bond of your alliance. If in your protection consists the Peace of Italy,
obligation persuades you, custom exhorts you and interest it self constrains
you. My King will believe his opposition more fortunate, if he shall have for
his companions those, whom he refuses not for the Judges of his intentions, and
the Vmpires of the Peace.

Though, from such endeavors, men's minds for some days were variously moved,
yet being communicated to the Senate, the consent was unanimous, not to change
counsel, but to adjust according to Neutrality the answers, with equal esteem
to the invitations of both the Kings, equally affectionated and prized, and
with exhortations to Peace, for the procuring whereof, in the partiality of so
many others, who divided Europe almost equally, the indifference of the
Republic was judged necessary, if not serviceable. With these resolutions the
Spaniards were more contented, than the French appayed, to whom it appeared, as
if, amidst domestic cares, the Republic had laid aside the foreign, and that
it was not against having the Spaniards in Italy, so it were in a condition
compatible with the liberty of that Country.

Before Bellievre departed from Venice, foreseeing that the Republic would be
more and more averse from entering into the League, by reason of the harsh usage
of the Duke of Savoy, he besought them to admit of some moderations; but the
Senate made no reply to his instances. The Confederates then in Piedmont,
taking the Field in the month of August, the Duke Vittorio, being Generalissimo
of the League, and Crequi commanding the French Army, pass the Sesia,
possessing with a great effort the Fort della Villata, and the tracings of
certain old Trenches. At the same time the Duke of Parma, sending to the other
side of the Po four Companies of Horse with Musketeers behind them, caused
Codagno to be pillaged, to vent private revenge against the House of Trivultia,
to whom the Town belongs. Upon these invasions, and for fear of greater
disasters, the people of the Millanese being in confusion, fled in Troops, for
refuge, into the Country of the Venetians, with such of their goods, as time
and convenience permitted, or that the value moved them to carry away.

To say truth, had the Republic made an attaque from its own frontier, it
looked as if there would have been no remedy or refuge. So that their
moderation was extolled by many, and the Catholic King himself to Giovanni
Giustiani their Ambassador confessed: That he acknowledged the preservation of
the Milanese from the generosity of the Senate, which ran the same course
unrequired, preserving friendship with them in their dangers, whose hatred they
had not formerly, in their greatest power, feared, nor tolerated their
jealousies.

Crequi, after several consultations, laying Siege to Valenza, thought, by the
gaining of it, a door would be opened into the Milanese for the enjoying the
conveniences of a good part of the Country beyond the Po; Duke Edward would be
animated, and Vittorio no less, to cooperate and join Forces. He supposed the
attacque would be short and quickly dispatched, notwithstanding that the
Spaniards had brought some renfort into it. But he quickly perceived, that
Francisco del Cardina making a brave defense, there was need of a stronger Army
to take it. The Duke of Parma, with four thousand Foot and a thousand Horse,
passing through the Tortonese, with so much the more fast, for having beaten
by the way some Spanish Troops that attempted to hinder him, had joined with
him. He of Savoy, who at first had not approved of the engagement, lingered for
many days. At last, sending the Marquess Villa before with some part of his
Troops, himself arrives with the rest, which in all made a body of betwixt five
and six thousand Soldiers. During this interim, Crequi, having not been able,
for want of men, to perfect the circumvallation of the place, the Spaniards had
enjoyed all conveniences to bring succors into it. But with the arrival of
the Savoyards, being environed on both sides the River, the taking it seemed
secure, if the emulation and contention betwixt the Confederates had not
weakened their Force and Counsels. Whereupon, the taking of the outworks going
faintly on, Antonio Sotello and the Marquess di Calada took courage to fall
into the quarters of Parma, with so great success, that, though repulsed, they
did him most remarkable mischief, there being killed, amongst others, Ricciardo
Avogardo, a Brescian of a very noble Family, General of Edwards Horse. Upon
this, Carlo Colonna also, who, till the arrival of Leganes out of Flanders,
commanded the Spanish Army, putting on resolution incamps himself in the
Lommelina, in a quarter near to the place besieged, committing to the Marquess
of Torrecuse the defense of certain Posts advanced. The French, with the Duke
of Mantua, passed to the other side of the Po, into the Savoyards quarters, to
attempt to dislodge him; but whilst Torrecuso, seconded by Colonna, amused the
Enemy, five hundred Soldiers carrying certain provisions, going out of
Alessandria, entered into Valenza on the other side, through the quarters ill
guarded by the Parmesians and French. Which Crequi understanding, fearing lest
the besieged with this re-inforcement might fall into his own quarter, returns
thither. And Colonna, now seeing the attempt of a general succor seasonable,
drew forth his Troops along the sides of the Po, and recovers a Fort at the
entry into del Ponte, first possessed by the Savoyards. From thence he thrusts
into Valence what was needful; Vittorio looking on without opposition, and
Crequi, with a battery afar off, in vain endeavoring to hinder it.

This relief taking away from the Confederates the hopes of mastering the
place, obliges them, after fifty days Siege, to rise and retire. Every one of
the Chiefs desirous not to be held the Author or cause of this ill success,
carried away with them their passions and excuses. Crequi highly taxes the
faith of the Savoyards, as if that Duke, not caring to see a good issue of the
Siege, had retarded Victuals, weakly assaulted the Posts of Torrecuse, and at
last connived at the entrance of the succors. On the other side Vittorio
imputes to Crequi want of activity and negligence, not only in the first motion
of the Army, but in not hindering the entrance of the first succors,
complaining, that the French Army, much weaker than the agreement, and than was
necessary, had no other aim by engaging themselves but to engage their friends.

The Duke of Parma was universally blamed for his heat and inexperience, in
being joined with a few Forces, and with uncertain and remote succors against
so powerful a King. The Pope, as Sovereign of those States, had by the means of
the Vice-Legate of Bologna admonished him to desist; but Edward not regarding
the friendly office, and Urban not pressing it further, the appearance served
rather to satisfy the complaints of the Ministers of Spain, who accused the
Pope of negligence, than effectually to promote Peace. The Duke, accompanied
with few, goes to the Court at Paris, to inform it how things had passed, and
to render to King Lewis and the Cardinal, in sign of his constant adherance, a
clear testimony of submission and respect. Vittorio, to cancel past suspicions,
together with Crequi, takes in the Milanese, Candia, and Sartirana, weak Towns;
plants afterward at Breme a Fort in a most convenient situation, under the
favor whereof, not only the Frontiers, but the very bowels of the Milanese
might be greatly infested. Thence gives way that the Marquess Villa getting the
good will of the relics of the Troops of Parma, now in the Piacentino,
together with some French, should take up their Winter Quarters there, when
they had first overcome the opposition of some other Spanish Troops in the
Tortonese.

It seemed to many, that the successes of the Campagnia had not been answerable
to the designs and honor of the Confederates, and less to their Forces and the
expectation of the World. But the conquest of the Valteline recompensing in a
great measure the scanty progress in the Milanese, kept still the Austrians in
trouble for Germany; whereupon the Emperor giving knowledge of it to the
Venetians by his Letters, sends Troops to drive out the French. It seeming
difficult to force those passages, a report was raised, That by the Mountain
Tonale, or by the State of the Republic, they might secretly attempt passage.
Rohan craftily augments the suspicion, offering to come with all his Forces to
their assistance, when the Confines should be violated. But the fact gave
quickly the lie to the report; for Fernamont, under the name of the Widow
Regent of Insbruck, having raised four thousand Foot and four hundred Horse,
goes down to Bormio, and almost without opposition possesses the whole Country.
Thence, strengthened with more men, he designed to enter into the Valley so
soon as he should see Serbellone ready on the other side to attempt the same.
The Spaniards retarding the execution of the concert, the Germans retire into
the Valley of Levin, where they found some molestation by the French.

At last, Serbellone being also in readiness, Fernamont marches toward Tirano,
where being encountered by Rohan at the Bridge of Mazzo over the Adda, he was
beaten, and many slain. If the Bridge had been broken in time, almost all the
Germans had been cut to pieces. The glory and advantage notwithstanding on the
French side was great; for that inferior in number, through the valor of the
Duke, the knowledge of the situations, and some ambushes, he prevailed upon the
Enemy. Whilst they were fighting on this side, Serbellone comes to Sondrio with
three thousand Foot, four hundred Horse, and certain pieces of Cannon. Rohan
without other refreshment but that which the satisfaction of the Victory
brought, turns that way, sending some Soldiers by the Mountains, which
seasonably in the time of the Battle might fall upon the Spaniards in the Rear
and in the Flanks. But the Fame of the success with the Germans, making more
haste than his march, persuades Serbellone to retire, under the favor of the
Fort Fuentes. Then the French passing again the Valley, went to Bormio, and
there the Marquess de Montosier courageously assaulting the Town, the Garrison
seeking to escape by flight, were defeated by the Guards, placed on the
passages. But the Marquess wounded on the head with a stone, and in the side
with Musket Shot, ended his life there, with the reputation of a gallant
person. The Fort also of Santa Maria was found abandoned, and the French
demolished it, intrenching every where the ways, to make the entrance difficult
to the Enemy.

Nevertheless the Germans, somewhat come to themselves again, remaining with
their gross not above eight miles distant, sent again, to recover their credit,
ten Companies of Dragoons and three Regiments of Foot, who taking Quarters
thereabouts, upon frequent occasions, gave lusty Alarms to Rohan, who was
employed in building a Fort at Tirano, where formerly the Venetians and French
had placed one; whence the Germans, comprehending how difficult it would prove
to send into the Milanese the succors intended by the more direct way,
resolved to hasten away some Soldiers by the Bridge of Rapsvil, and through
the Country of the Catholic Cantons. The gross, which amounted to six thousand
Foot and eight hundred Horse, lodging in the Valley of Frael, was designing to
fall upon Rohan's Camp, which was diminished with sickness and Runaways; but
the Duke taking courage and counsel from necessity and danger, though exceeding
much inferior in Forces, faces at unawares the Germans upon certain Hillocks,
and Monsieur de Canisii threatening to assault them from an eminent situation in
the Rear, they took so great a fright, that they retired in disorder under the
favor of a Fort not far off.

Serbellone, that knew nothing of what was happened on the other side, advanced
as far as Morbegno with seven thousand Foot, seven Companies of Horse, and five
Cannons, intrenching himself amidst certain enclosures of Walls, which are
frequent thereabout. But it was not long, ere Rohan, leaving Monsieur de la
Land, arrives unlooked for toward Bormio, but with his men so weary with so
much traveling to and fro, that it was hazardous to expose them to a fight.
But not being willing to give the Enemy time to be informed of the weakness of
his, nor to his to examine the strength of the Enemy, advances courageously to
attacque them. At the beginning the French Horse were staggering, nay began to
run, when the Duke reproaching some, and giving courage to others, puts himself
at the head of them, charging with such fury, that the Troops of Serbellone,
after a short resistance, quitted the field. The number of the dead exceeded
not six hundred, nor were the Prisoners many; because the greater part saved
themselves betimes. Amongst these was found the Count de Valenza, with other
Officers, and amongst the dead the Count de San Secondo, who commanded the
Horse. Of the hurt, the chiefest was Serbellone. The Spaniards being gone, the
Germans also, thinking themselves not sufficiently safe in the Valley of Frael,
removed further off, leaving Rohan the Glory and quiet possession of the
Valteline for the rest of the Winter. Nevertheless he wanted not enemies from
within, and they more troublesome; for no succors coming out of France, he
found himself greatly weakened, and underwent necessity and many wants, so much
the greater, for that the Plague gotten out of Tirol into the Valteline, the
Venetians had forbidden Commerce; so that the passage of Victuals, if not
hindered, was at least rendered difficult by reason of the usual cautions.

War being kindled in so many parts, the curiosity and expectation of the World
did in a manner weary it self in observing the successes, the reflection upon
one emergency coming frequently to be interrupted by another more remarkable.
The Fleet of Spain, now put to Sea, recompensing with its strength the delays
of the year past, consisted of thirty five Galleys, many great Ships, and other
lesser Vessels, with seven thousand Soldiers, commanded by the Duke of
Ferandina and the Marquess of Santa Croce. Being under sail, it no sooner came
near to the Coast of Provence, but being forced back by a furious storm, it
took harbor at Capo Corso, after having lost seven Galleys, and the rest been
much shattered, whereof many, to save themselves, flung into the Sea Artillery,
Horses, and other Provisions. Some of the Ships ran over to Porto Longone to
repair themselves, but all required much time. Nevertheless, put into order
again, and at last arriving at the Islands of Eres, which are called St.
Honorat and St. Margaret, it happily succeeded in the taking of them, and for
the preservation of them presently raised certain Forts there. The enterprise
was judged to be of great importance; because the Islands being near to the
Continent, lie equally commodious to molest France and the County of Nizza. At
Paris therefore they showed great resentment for it; but for the present giving
the best order for Sea-affairs, time did permit, Richelieu resolves to defer
the remedy, because a storm from Germany pressed him more, if by re-inforcing
the Swedes, he had not effected the hindering of it.

The Peace concluded by the Elector of Saxe with the Emperor, in consequence
of the Victory obtained by the Austrians at Nordinghen, gave occasion for great
apprehensions, because the Elector had capitulated, not only for himself, but
like an Arbitrator for all the Protestants: That Religion and Ecclesiastical
Goods should remain in the same state, in which they were found to be in the
year 1627; and those, for the restoration whereof the Edict of Ferdinand was
published, were to be enjoyed by the Protestants for forty years more. To
Augustus his Son should be left the Archbishopric of Magdenburg, and to the
Archduke Leopold, Halverstadt, with an universal Amnesty, which should only
exclude the causes of the Palatinate and Bohemia. To Bavaria should be
continued the Electoral Vote and the Country, and if they would be comprehended
in the Peace, the Dukedom of Mechelburg, Wolfenbutel, and Haumburg, should be
restored to their first Owners; and to Brandenburg the Investiture of Pomerania
should be granted. The place of Philipsburg was to remain in the hand of the
Emperor; and the Strangers, or those of the Germans, that would not acquiesce
in this Treaty, were to be prosecuted with united Forces as common Enemies; for
which end in many Articles were concerted the conjunction of Armies, the
Command of them, Contributions, and Quarters.

Although the Protestants universally complained, that Saxe, adjusting his own
affairs, and re-assuming his old inclination to the Austrians, arrogated to
himself the disposing of the affairs of the Empire; nevertheless he, accusing
the necessity of things and times, which permitted not wonted forms, drew by
his example the Elector of Brandenburg, the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg,
with many of the free Cities, and especially Vlm, Francfort upon Maine, and
Nuremberg, to accept the Peace. After this, sending his Army against the
Swedes, he offers Bannier, who commanded them, a million and two hundred
thousand Dollers, if without expecting Force, he would be gone out of Germany;
but he, interposing excuses and delays, found himself pursued and shut up in
Pomerania. Baudissen, that commanded the Electors Army, besieges Damitz in that
Province, to dislodge the Swedes out of the strongest places; but as he was
opposing the succors, which Banier attempted to bring into it, was in a manner
wholly defeated, and being beaten a second time in his Retreat at Chintz, was
forced to leave Pomerania, and the places which he had before taken. On the
other side, the Imperialists passing the Rhine with a great Party under Jean de
Werth, made an Incursion into the Borders of France, while in the mean time,
Carlo, Duke of Lorrain, to whom they had assigned the body of an Army,
possessed many places in Alsace, and Gallas with considerable Conquests along
the Rhine and in the Palatinate, recovered Frankendale, Gustaveburg, Spire,
Worms, and other places. Heidelberg had not run a differing Fortune, if, while
the Castle resisted, Gallas had not thought progress elsewhere more profitable.
Mentz was preserved, because France, seeing so great a storm at hand, sent to
join with Weimar an entire Army under the Cardinal de la Valette, who putting
on Arms above his Purple, appeared among the Armies and the Lutherans. Binghen
was rendered to him, for that Gallas, to invite him to advance, feigned to
retire, and afterward on a sudden with a numerous body of Horse pursued him in
such sort, that he was hardly able to save himself with so long a march as
obliged him to leave nine of his Cannon in the hand of his Enemies. Such a
Retreat differed not much from a Rout; so many were of the men lost by the way
through weariness and the want of Victuals.

Richelieu was afflicted at these accidents, and because Author of the War, he
was himself esteemed in a manner guilty of the success. Nevertheless setting
Art and his Wits more strongly to work, and binding himself more closely to the
Swedes, he persuades Oxenstern to come to confer with him at Compeigne. Where,
contrary to that which commonly results from such Conferences, both confessed
the interview had reciprocally increased confidence, and added weight unto
Fame. Having like inclinations, parts, and interests, they easily agree upon
the continuance of the War, of which having the same ends, they had also the
same causes. They therefore agree upon a Treaty to confirm the old, binding
themselves by new obligations, Not to make a separate Peace, and to make use of
all their Force not to render any thing of that whereof they were now in
possession.

The Duke of Weimar was sometimes wavering, great advantages being offered him
by the Austrians; but France confirmed him, disbursing to him a great sum of
money for the maintaining an Army of twelve thousand Foot, six thousand Horse,
and Artillery suitable, which he was to employ in their Service. Alsace was
left to him in prey, and Haghenau by France it self, which was possessed of it,
was delivered to him, with a special promise not to make Peace but by a common
agreement, and without which that Province should remain to the Duke. With this
balance of Arms France hindered, that the Swedes should not be beaten out of
the field, though already overcome, nor the Austrians enjoy the advantages of
Conquerours. But if by the foresaid accords the means were settled for War,
those of Peace remained much more difficult. To propose and manage it, it may
truly be said, that there appeared no party in Christendom undefiled with
Faction, but the Pope and the Venetians; and therefore the parties turned their
eyes and minds toward them, soliciting them, both with open endeavors and
private entreaties, to undertake the Mediation of so dangerous a Discord.

The Pope, who for the affairs of Lorrain had the years past sent Giulio
Mazzarini, his Nuntio Extraordinary, to Paris, by his means in that Court, and
by his ordinary Ministers in the others, exhorted all with his powerful
entreaties to Peace; and the Republic, by its offices and equal instances
pressed it, extending them also to the Princes of different Religion, whether
those of Urban could not come, and particularly to the Provinces of Holland. To
Oxenstern, who sent to Venice the Count Galeazzo Gualdo, Prior of Vicenza, to
communicate the straights in which the party was, and to desire assistance, the
Senate gravely offered remonstances of the same nature. Giovanni Craft,
Counselor of the Court, passing at this time in the Name of the Emperor to
the Princes of Italy, enemies to Spain, to persuade them to Peace, exhorted
also the Republic to cooperate in so great a good, and had for answer precise
expressions of the desire she had of Peace, and the employment, which with all
her power she contributed to the Mediation.

Ferdinand truly desired Peace in proportion as it closed with his interest;
for, affairs being in a better condition, he hoped to make, without
disadvantage, and to transmit to his Son the Succession more quiet and secure.
And for that cause he was not against the suspension of Arms, which the Pope
proposed betwixt France and the Austrians; but the Favorites of France and
Spain, having reduced their private grudges into public contests, reciprocally
believed the Treaty not sincere, and the Peace not secure. Nevertheless at the
request and example of Urban, who publishes the Cardinal Ginetti his Legate a
Latere, Plenipotentiaries were named by the Princes to treat of an Accord, and
by so much the more willingly by Richelieu, as that, seeing the French
themselves apt to blame the unprosperous events of their Arms, he thereby
obtains a suspension of the peoples censure, by impressing upon them the hopes
of Treaties for a Peace. But while the Venetians studied to reconcile the
common discords of Christendom, their own differences with the Pope increased.
The business concerning the Consul of Ancona, rightly understood by the French
Ministers, was at last composed, and Oberti thereupon admitted to the Charge,
and a while after leave was granted him by the Senate to withdraw himself for a
time out of the City.

After this, Meetings being renewed, the Negotiation about the Confines was
taken in hand again, the French Ambassador Monsieur de la Thuillerie treating
about it in Venice, with the two formerly deputed, Nani and Soranzo, proposing
to draw a Line, which, always terminating upon the Land, left no other
difficulty but to adjust, that the Channels of the Po, changing their course,
and passing the Line, if that of the Donzella should pass to the other, it
should be understood to belong to the Dominion Ecclesiastic, and contrariwise,
that of the Goro coming to this side, it should belong to the Venetians. But
the Popes Ministers, after having in the course of the Negotiation several
times changed their minds in the closing with the foresaid Proposition,
pretended, that Portoviro should remain on their side. This is but the
remaining sign of a narrow Chanel, or rather a moorish Ditch; but because it
bore a good deal within the Line, and was a place of the unquestionable
Jurisdiction of the Venetians, they would not join their consent to the liking
of the French, who showed themselves, by reason of the novelty of the
pretension, offended with the Pontificians. But this and all other Negotiation
was broken off with Rome, by a more important occasion happening toward the
end of this year; for the Ambassador Luigi Contarini was scarce gone out of
the City, having had leave of the Senate to go to certain Baths in Tuscany, and
thence home, leaving, till a Successor should arrive, Francesco Maria Rossi,
his Secretary, at the Court, but there appeared in the Royal Hall (this is the
Nobles Room in the Vatican, where the Ambassages of Kings, which are termed of
Obedience, are received by the Pope) an alteration of the Elogium, which
commemorated the Merit gained by the Republic in the defense of Pope Alexander
the Third against Frededrick Barbarossa the Emperor, almost five Ages agone
happily subdued by Arms, and constrained to a Peace.

Rome it self was amazed at such a novelty, because the Inscriptions, by which
were explained the Pictures in the Hall of the most memorable actions of
Christendom, had been made choice of in the time of Pope Pius the Fourth, by a
Consultation of Cardinals and other Learned persons, and that in particular had
been extracted by Alexander out of the most ancient proofs, the consent of
Authors, Inscriptions, Pictures, Marbles, and out of authentic and infinite
Memorials, and though in these late times called into doubt by Cardinal
Baronius, yet the credit of the History remained, and out of it redounded
praise to the Republic, and to the Church renown. Now the Pope, changing the
Elogium, altered the matter of Fact, Venetians, and was silent in all that
which advanced their deserving and the benefit imparted to the Church. Upon the
advice hereof, which came to Venice, men's minds were unspeakably moved, and the
thing was not only weighed in the Consults of the Senators, and gravely
reflected on; but in common discourses many of the Citizens authorized
themselves to aggravate, that the Pope, after having given so many other
arguments of disaffection to the Republic, had at last resolved to vent his
anger against Marble-stones, and disquiet the ashes in the Sepulchers,
abolishing out of the World, as much as he was able, the Memorials, and
cancelling the Glory of their Ancestors.

Some complained, that Urban should deny to acknowledge that Merit of the
Republic, to which his Predecessors had not disdained to confess themselves
obliged. Others, that in the doubtful state of Religion, in so many parts
oppressed, in the discords of Christendom, and the general corruption of
Manners, he should apply himself to dispute reputation with the dead. All
confessed, that the Republic could no more send Ambassadors to venerate, as
is the custom, in that Hall the Vicars of Christ, so long as their most
Illustrious Memorials should remain suspended, if not condemned. But the Senate
presently commanded Rossi, that he should come away without taking leave of the
Pope or of the Court; and the College, that they should deny Audience to the
Nuntio, and communicating to Princes the real resentment of what had happened,
declare, that no other course or expedient could ever satisfy it, but the
entire restitution of the ancient Elogium.

ANNO MDCXXXVI.
In the beginning of this year happened in Venice a thing, almost not to be
spoken of, if it had not been tossed up and down variously in discourses, more
perhaps than it deserved. The long habit of the Patricians, by custom of
immemorial time, retains the reverence and gravity of the ancient Togati; and
in Magistrates of Eminency was distinguished, as to Authority and Respect, by
the color and largeness, whereupon such a Garment was called Ducale, or more
vulgarly with Large Sleeves. Those that came out of the Charge of Counselors,
or of the Savii of the Council, which among those, belonging to the City and
Policy, have the chiefest ranks, and who in Ambassages to Kings had done
Service to the Country, bringing back the degree of Knighthood, continued to
use the same form of Garment, but black, during their lives. When this custom
had its beginning, is not known, or whether there was a Law for it, obliterated
by time, or that time had given it the authority of a Law. The number now
seemed somewhat enlarged, whilst a certain virtuous desire to render themselves
distinguished from the common, provoked many to solicit the chief Employments
of the City, and to merit them, animated to undertake those abroad, that were
more difficult and burdensome. Some began with whispers, afterward with more
open discourses in Companies and the idle Marketplace, to blame the custom and
the distinction not authorized by a Law, nay rather to accuse it, as an
ambitious invention of those, who not being able through the wise Institutions
of the Republic to continue in the Magistracy, had yet a mind for ostentation
to bear the Badges of it. They said, That in these Garments was not manifested
that moderation of a private life, in which the interchangeable course of
command regulates the equality of the Citizens. Whence was that Law, which in
the Republic, if liberty exempts from the command of Strangers, moderates and
restrains the pride and avarice of private men? Can possibly Honors be wanting
to Citizens, or can Citizens be wanting for Honors, where, in the quality of
Birth, they all enjoy the ornament of liberty united to the dignity of command?
Their service being as a debt, which is lent to the Country, ought to pass
without reward, and if the employments be short, to the end that the exercise
of them may be modest, why should a perpetual distinction be desired? That in
the moderate minds of the Citizens were more firmly grounded the Ornaments of
Dignity, the Monuments of Glory, the Badges, and the Praises.

Others dissented from that opinion, believing that with the uniformity of
Garments was intended the taking away the degrees and difference, not only from
Persons, but from Merit, in such sort, that actions and persons should
undistinguishedly be confounded. Nevertheless by Anthony Veniero and Andrea
Morosini, Counselors, Giovanni Baptista Foscarini and Giovanni Cernovicchio,
Capi de Quaranta, was proposed to the great Council a Decree, that laying aside
the Ducals by those that wore them, and not continuing them for the future,
when out of Office, they should only be reserved to the Procurators of St.
Marco, the Eldest Son or Brother of the Dukes, and to the Great Chancellor, to
whom they were already permitted by the Laws. To Knights, in honor of the
degree, it was granted, that under the Vest should be worn Garments of red, and
the Welt of the Robe, with the Ornaments of the Girdle, gilt. Conformable to
the inclination of the major number it was embraced, though the Duke, and
Francesco Basadonna, Giovanni Pizani, Domenico Ruzzini, Counselors, together
with Francesco Barbarigo, Capo de Quaranta, proposed, that this very ancient
custom should not be abolished, but rather reformed, yielding that Vest in
future to him, that should have twice undergone the Charge of Counselor, or
four times that of Savio of the Council; reckoning also within that number
Embassies and Governments. Immediately with a notable Example of Punctuality
was seen the day following the Habits laid aside, some remaining, from age,
their gray hairs, and their merit, taken notice of by the people, much more
adorned and distinguished, than they were before by the Garment. A while after
an attempt was made by Girolamo Trivisano, Girolamo Pesaro, and Marino
Bragadino, Avogadori of the Commons, to suspend the resolution, to the end it
might be proposed anew with some kind of reformation; but it being confirmed,
no more was said of it, which signified, that in the debates of businesses the
Understanding is in the Citizens, the Father of diverse opinions; but, after
Decrees past, the Will is in all equally, the Mother of obedience.

Re-assuming now the discourse of the War betwixt the Crowns; Forces not
inferior to the hatreds were in preparation; nor had advantages served on the
one side to pacify them, or losses on the other to suppress them; but from
ancient experiences and new successes, the Forces seeming rather equally
poised, the emulation of minds was so much the more inflamed. In Italy the
Spaniards during the Winter were very strong, both by the arrival of new
succors, and because the passages for Germany and for Flanders being shut
before them, they were forced to entertain the Army in that Province. On the
other side the French, partly consumed before Valenza, and partly by natural
impatience disbanded, appeared to be greatly weakened. Nevertheless there wanted
not several Factions of War. The Marquess Villa lodged with the Troops which
served for Convoy to those of Duke Edward in the Piacentino, and had order to
made an Inroad into the Modonese, to revenge the adherence of that Duke, and
the sending of Soldiers to the Spaniards.

To have a pretext for it, he desires quarters might be given to a part of his
Troops, and that being denied him, he falls of a sudden into the Territory of
Modena with a thousand Foot and as many Horse, plundering Castelnuovo and other
places, and carrying away the Booty. The Duke, from the flames and flight of
the Peasants informed of the assault, was greatly surprised, because the
mischief was done him by the Troops of the Duke of Savoy, his Uncle, and he was
obliged to revenge himself upon him of Parma, his Neighbor, Kinsman, and till
now Confident. He and his Country were taken unprovided of men, and if he
invited the Spaniards, he knew the succors would cost him dear. Having
recourse to the Venetians, he found, that if amidst the discords of Strangers
they kept themselves neuter, they would much less take other part amongst the
Princes of Italy, than to persuade and solicit Peace; so that he was forced
to address himself to Leganes, the Governor of Milan; and he, readily
embracing the invitations, sends him two thousand Foot and eight hundred Horse
with his best Commanders, which were Vincenzo Gonzagha, the Baron de
Batteville, and the Count Arese. To these joining between three and four
thousand men tumultuarily got together of the Country-Militia, under the Prince
Luigi his Uncle, who by leave of the Venetians was come into that Country, he
sends them into that of Parma, whither Villa was withdrawn, who assaulting them
with great bravery in their march toward Parma, forced them to a Retreat,
Gonzagha and almost all the Spanish Officers being hurt. Nevertheless Rossena,
which is a little District beyond the River Lenza, belonging to Parma, remained
in the hands of the Modenese, in recompense of the damages, or rather for a
fair pretext for a Treaty. In effect, the Dukes, Edward and Francis, had little
inclination to break into War betwixt themselves and the Savoyards, letting
pass this resentment as in complacence to the French, cared not it should go
further; whereupon Monsieur Mellino, Bishop of Smola, being sent by the Pope to
solicit an adjustment, though for that time, in regard of the interests of
the Crowns who desired, to have their parts in it, he obtained it not; yet he
effected, that animosities should be laid aside, and hostilities tacitly
suspended. But the Territories of Parma were more severely afflicted; for that
to free the Modenese from harms, or rather to punish that Duke for the
hostility undiscreetly attempted, and to bring him also to a Peace by force;
Leganes sent between four and five thousand men, with Carlo della Gatta, into
the Piacentino, who possessed the Castle St. Giovanni, Rottofredo, and some
Villages, dispersing the Troops every where to plunder and burn the Country
with as much mischief as could be. At this very time Vincenzo Imperiale passing
the Mountains of the Genouese, takes Val Ditaro, as a Country to which the
Family of Doria pretended right.

Edward was still at Paris; so that upon so many Invasions, the Duchess his
Wife, who governed in his absence, being in disorder, fearing Gabioneda,
requests the Duke of Mantua to send a renfort thither, possibly believing, that
making use for that purpose of the Troops of the Venetians, they might interest
themselves in the maintenance of that place, which gave jealousy to so many.
But the Senate not consenting that they should elsewhere be disposed of but for
the Garrison of Mantua; Monsieur de la Tour, who for France remained with the
Duke in quality of General of his Troops, persuades him to send thither two
hundred Foot of his own, which were of the Garrison of Porto. But they were no
sooner brought into it, but they were sent back to Mantua, either because there
was no need of so slender succors, or because those of Parma conceived it
better in all events, that Sabioneda should depend upon themselves, without
bringing into it the Troops of a Neighbor, who pretended right to it, and had
interest for it.

The lamentable condition of the Country of Parma being come into France, the
Duke parts Post, loaded with hopes; but being come into Italy, found that he
had brought from Court more liberal promises than he could receive ready
succors. He passionately desired, with the French Troops and Savoyards
joining, to assault the Milanese, and, opening the way with his Sword, revenge
at once the damage done his Country. Crequi excuses himself upon several
pretexts, sometimes alleging the scanty number of men, and then showing an
unsuperable intrenchment, which, to dispute the passage, the Spaniards had
raised, and well fortified along the Scrivia. He promises nevertheless to
assist him by diversions; whereupon the Duke, to defend his own, was forced,
incognito and accompanied but with few, by the River of Genua and by Lunigiana,
to get into his own Country, where he was received by the people with great
applause.

Most effectual Orders were surely sent from France, not to let Edward be
brought to despair, or his Country be lost. The Duke of Rohan, to make a
diversion, was the first that advanced toward the Lago di Como, where, taking
la Toretta, which is near the Fort Fuentes, and afterward the Town of Golico,
made that Fort useless, to the great trouble of the Spanish Ministers, and
terror to the Country. But the Duke could not long remain there, having not
only want of means to advance and subsist, but doubting, lest, if he went too
far off, the Germans should come through Tirol into the Valteline, where the
people, though he had declared by a public Edict, that other Religion than the
Catholic should not be practiced, hated the Nation and the General, being many
ways vexed by the insolency of the Soldiery. So that contenting himself to
have plundered le Pievi and other Towns di Valsasna, he retires. He had demanded
of the Venetians passage, that through a Friends Country to rights and with
more speed he might go to the succors of Parma, not that in truth he did
believe he should obtain it, but that by the negative the Crown might better
justify it self to the Duke. The Spaniards also, to oppose him, asked the same
for the Germans which were to come out of Tirol into the Milanese. But the
Senate, to one and to other, refuse it, on the just pretext of the Plague,
which no less aflicted Tirol than the Valtelline.

Rohan being not yet retired, Crequi, to strengthen the diversion, enters into
the Milanese on the other side, having, besides some Troops come to him out of
France, persuaded the Duke Victorio to join Forces; so that the Army consisted
of ten or twelve thousand Foot, and betwixt two or three thousand Horse.
Vigevano was threatened, and being furnished but with a slender defense, the
taking of it was judged easy, to the so great terror of the whole Country,
that in the City of Milan fear at last was turned into tumult. Leganes was
therefore constrained to hasten thither with all his Forces, calling back those
which made spoil in the Piacentino, and leaving Sorbellone a few Troops, that
intrenching himself at Mus, he might make head the best he could against Rohan,
and, if need required, succor the Fort Fuentes by the Lago de Como: He then
encamps at Abbiagrasso to cover the innermost parts of the State, and keep off
hostility from that fruitful and delicious Country. The Territories of the Duke
of Parma by this means taking breath, the Marquess Villa had not much to do to
recover Castle St. Giovanni, and plundring some Villages of the Country of
Pavia to join without opposition the Army of the Confederates.

They, in the opportunity of undertaking many things, stood unresolved and in
suspense, what in particular was fit to be undertaken; nor did the Duke of
Savoy and Crequi agree. Whereupon quitting the thought of Vigevano, and
threatening in several parts, they engaged in none. At last with changing
quarters and running to and fro, having for some Weeks spoiled the Lomellina,
they advanced into the Novarese, and took Fontanetto a place of little note,
but shall for the future remain famous by the death of Thoiras, who playing the
Volunteer with Vittorio, shot with a Musket, dyed immediately on the place.
Thence they passed to Olleggio, in design to seize upon Arona, a Castle upon
the Lago majore, by the possession whereof passage was not only opened to rich
and well-peopled Valleys, which might serve for convenient Winter Quarters; but
was shut to Succors and Levies, which were to come out of Germany by that way
which alone remained open to the Spaniards. And in this also proceeding slowly,
the Counts Borromei, to whom the Fief belongs, had time to fortify it, and
with Garrisons to strengthen the narrow paths of those Mountains. But in truth,
a more notable occasion allured the French to hopes of better successes by
passing the Tesino, always believed a strong and almost invincible Rampart of
the Milanese. That River falling from the Alps, and passing through il Lago
maggiore, for a little space straightned by Rocks, runs impetuously amongst the
stones; thence falling into a Plain, waters a fruitful Campagnia, and bearing
Boats, serves commodiously for the use of that Country, so long, till with a
large Chanel and a pleasant Stream, it discharges it self into the Po. Where
the Plain begins, the Confederates seeing all defense abandoned, and far off,
casting over a Bridge of Boats, brought thither upon Carts, pass it. At
Tornavento, which is no other than a Country House, the Quarter was planted,
and certain Ditches cast up in ancient times, called Pan Perduto, served for
Trenches. They diverted immediately the Navillio, which is a Chanel, that for
the convenience of Commerce conveys part of the water of the Tesino to Milan,
to the so great confusion of that City, that imagining the Enemy at the Gates,
as if there had been neither time nor escape, many fled hastily with the best
of their Household Stuff toward the Country of the Venetians.

The Cardinal Trivulsio getting on Horseback, with his Credit and Authority,
which he had very great amongst the Citizens, running up and down the streets,
animated some, strengthened all, and distributing Arms to the Inhabitants,
appointed Guards, and gave out Orders, restrained the fright, and in a great
measure quieted the Tumult, which the Spanish Ministers, retiring themselves,
feared rather to irritate with their presence. The City raged against Leganes,
that with an Army so well appointed having not hindered that passage, carelessly
amused himself in beholding the dangers and the damage; but, as it happens in
such emergencies, fear reigned every where more than counsel: for if in Milan
they were astonished, the Confederates were also perplexed, whilst the number
of their men was not proportionable to the design of besieging that City, and
their chief purpose was vanished, which in truth was to join with Rohan, and
with united Forces to advance, either before Milan, or into the bowels of the
Country to carry fear into it, and bring back some notable Conquest; but Rohan
too soon, and Crequi too late being come into the Milanese, the one being not
able to subsist there, and the other not to make any progress, were the
occasion of more noise than hurt. Besides this, they wanted Victuals, and above
all, the inclination of the Savoyards did not conspire in the same ends.
Nevertheless Leganes was exercised with many thoughts. To go nearer with the
Army to Milan, he feared to carty famine and commotion thither; if he drew
nearer to the Confederates to hazard a Battle, he considered in the uncertain
issue the certain loss of the whole State.

At last after several days, perceiving by the Enemies not advancing, that
their thoughts were in disorder, and their Forces not so strong, persuaded
rather by universal reproaches than the opinion of his Counselors, he resolves
to rise from Abbiagrasso, and advance toward the Enemy, without other design
than to reap the advantage of the occasions. He found, that for convenience of
Forage the Savoyards were returned to the other side of the River; whence he
judged it seasonable to set upon the French on this side. Charging therefore a
part of their Cavalry, which was roving without the Camp, and obliging them to
retire, he afterward attacques the Trenches and Forts. The fight was obstinate
and irksom, in a long days work, and in the heat of June, to such a degree,
that after many hours both Armies being weary, the French could no longer
resist, nor the Spaniards prevail. In the heat of the Battle, it seemed as if
Leganes had had the better; but the Duke Vittorio, having repassed the Tesino,
brought Crequi succors so seasonably, that Fortune began to waver. But night
separated, and Leganes, not having a more convenient Quarter near, returns to
Abbiagrasso. Betwixt both the parties, about three thousand men were killed,
and of the Spaniards, Gerardo Gambacorta, General of the Neopolitan Horse, a
valiant and prudent Person. To determine who had the advantage in the fight,
whilst each ascribed it to himself, it was fit to observe the consequences; and
because in an Enemies Country it seems, that he that makes no progress is the
person worsted, the advantage was at last adjudged to the Spaniards, because
the French, though they staid some days in their Quarters, yet at last repassed
the Tesino. Their desires thereby were, in prosecution of the same end, to open
the way into the Valleys formerly mentioned, to possess Anghiera upon the Lago
maggiore, or Romagna near to the Sesia; but neither succeeding, they thereupon
retire, Crequi to Breme with a very few Forces, and Vittorio to Vercelli to
defend his own Country. Discord between them brake forth more and more; the
Duke upbraiding the French with the service of having saved them at Tornavento,
and Crequi ascribing to the Savoyards the having missed occasions and
successes. But if the Duke felt the dissatisfactions of the Confederates,
Piedmont resented the injuries of the Spaniards; for that Philippo di Silva,
General of the Horse, overrunning the Country, recovered Annone, possessed by
the Confederates when they first moved, and made himself Master of Gattinara,
carrying ruin and desolation where ever he came. He of Parma enjoying a short
suspension of mischiefs, assembling some of his own Troops, and some French
being come to him by the River of Genoua, attempts to recover Rottofredo; but
Martino d'Aragona coming upon him with a greater Party, he was constrained to
rise. And apprehending greater oppressions after the French should be dislodged
from the Milanese, he sends to Paris Count Fabio Scoti, the most trusted of his
Ministers, to the end that as Author of the counsel to adhere to that Crown, he
might also be the better instrument to obtain powerful succors.

But the affairs of that Kingdom were in so great turbulence, that there was
but faint hope to obtain assistance; for the Spaniards invaded Picardy, and
Gallas, with the Duke of Lorrain, spoiled the Dukedom of Burgundy and
Champaigne, the people miserably suffering the punishments of faults, which
were not their own. The French having renounced neutrality with the County of
Burgundy, under pretense that in Alsace that Province had afforded assistance
to the Imperialists and Lorrainers, the Prince of Conde had laid Siege to Dole;
but after having reduced it to great extremities, by losing much time with his
great slackness, he frustrated the enjoyment of so near a Conquest; for Lamboy
and Merci being come with powerful Forces to its Succors under the Emperors
Colors, whilst the Spanish Army played the Conquerours in Picardy, obliged the
King to recall him, and command him to raise the Siege. The Spaniards under
Prince Thomaso, and with the assistance of Piccolomini, sent by the Emperor
with a good number of men, had besieged la Chapelle, forcing the Governor, the
Baron de Beck, to give it up after eight days Battery. The Catelet followed the
example, but with less defense. They afterward attacque Corby to assure the
passage of the Somma, and whilst the Siege lasted, Jean de Werdt and
Piccolomini made a course as far as Pontoise with the Cavalry, burning and
plundering every where. The place being taken sooner by much than it ought to
have been, there was no other obstacle betwixt that and Paris.

But Armies, though victorious, have always greater suspicions and difficulties
than are conceived by the conquered. Therefore applying themselves to ransack
the Country, and to raise the cries of the people against the Author of the War
and the evils thereof, they put Richelieu into a great straight, but gave him
time to ward the blow. He in the beginning was in great trouble, and knowing
the City of Paris easy to be stirred, hard to be governed, oftentimes
suspicious to the King, and always troublesome to the Ministers, had thoughts of
carrying the King and Court to Orleans. But in Council being boldly in this
extremity reproached by others, that if he had brought the Kingdom into danger,
he ought not to leave it without remedy, taking heart, he applies himself to
the defense. From the hatred against him proceeded in great part the present
mischiefs; for of the Governors of the places taken it was believed, that some
of them had been corrupted before they were besieged, and that others had
hastened the Surrender to burden with ignominy and infelicity the Director of
the present Government. He therefore applies himself in his adversity to other
Arts, than those which are usually practiced in the prosperity of Fortune. He
takes away the Gabels, puts Arms into the peoples hands, gives the command of
Armies to the Princes of the blood; that their consideration and credit might
invite Soldiers, and keep them under the Colors, which, by reason of his
Government, were abhorred. Soissons was the first, who, having near to la Fera
augmented in haste the Army which he already commanded, attempted to oppose the
incursions of the Enemy; but they beating the Regiment of Piedmont, he was
forced to retire to Noijon to defend the Country, till Orleans should come into
the Field with greater Forces. Under the Mareshal de la Force, greatly beloved
of the Parisians, twenty thousand of them took Arms, to haste to prevent the
mischiefs, which Burgundy and Champaigne lay under.

Gallas, after by burning and pillaging he had given vent to the natural
cruelty of the Polonian Cavalry and the Croats, came with an Army of forty
thousand men to lodge at Fontaine Francoise, and, to fix his station there by
some considerable Conquest, endeavors to possess St. John de Losne; but
Richelieu calling Weimar and la Valetta out of Germany to succor the Kingdom,
sent the Count of Ranzau so seasonably into the place, that withstanding the
first attacques of the Imperialists, it gave time to the French to strengthen
themselves with so many Troops, that being equal to the Enemy, or rather more
considerable, by reason of the knowledge and advantage of the situation,
obliged him, without the hazard of a Battle, to retire, laden with pillage and
much more with blame; spoil alone seeming a recompense disproportionable to the
occasion, to fortune, and to so powerful an Army. Yet it is true, that Gallas
had just excuses, though not then discovered, having secret Commission from the
Emperor to hazard nothing, and not to engage the Army just at that time, when
at Ratisbone the election of a King of the Romans was ripening, to the end to
make use of the countenance and power of the Army for encouragement of the
business, if need required.

The Forces also in Picardy being wearied and weakened by running to and fro and
plundring, the Infanta was not able to make any further progress, distracted
also from the side of Holland; for that Orange, having after a long Siege
regained Schink Schans upon conditions, was in complacency to the French in the
Field, threatening certain Forts, which not far from Antwerp lie along the
Scheld.

Orleans therefore had the opportunity to recover Roye after ten days attacque,
and thence laying the Siege before Corby in a short time takes in the outworks.
The King was at Amiens to encourage the enterprise, and afterward came to the
Camp, to be present at the surrender, which the Spaniards could not hinder,
though they threatened Dourlans, because Soissons opposed them. Thus the fortune
of the Kingdom and the Cardinal breathed again, in as much as also on the other
side near the Pireneans, the Almirante of Castil having with a great Army
besieged Bayonne, the Count of Grammont, Governor of Bearn, had obliged him to
raise it. Domestic affairs notwithstanding grew somewhat turbulent, many in
Zaintonge and other Provinces rising against the Impositions: So that eighteen
thousand men were actually in Arms under the Marquess d'Isodun, Brother to
Charlois, whose head some years past Richelieu had caused to be cut off.
Nevertheless one part of these Mutineers was quickly quieted, and the other
suppressed.

The discontents of the Princes that had commanded the Armies had yet a worse
appearance; because the Campania was no sooner at an end, but they were aware,
that they had enjoyed employment not to advance them to command, but to keep
them quiet, and that Richelieu had only made use of them during the storm,
leaving to others the pains and the dangers, and reaping to himself the reward
and the credit. Orleans, who before he made an end of the Siege of Corby,
perceived that he served not in the Army but for a shadow, was gone to Blois,
but coming after the giving of it up to the Court, to congratulate with the
King, departs of a sudden without seeing him, together with Soissons, both
publishing to have certain advice, that a Prison was to be their recompense.

The Cardinal applies his Wits to reconcile in the first place the King to his
Brother, who was not gone further than Blois; nor was it difficult for him to
do it, under promise that the marriage with the Sister of Lorrain should be
approved. The Count then weakened by the separation from the other, received it
for a favor, that he might for four years abide at Sedan, where he appeared to
be. France now in this year, by new Treaties, closes more nearly with the
Swedes, concluding one in Wismar, wherein all the former being confirmed, the
War was distributed into the hereditary Provinces of the Austrians, Bohemia and
the Provinces adjacent being allotted to the Swedes, and to France those that
were nearest the Rhine. William Landgrave of Hessen came into this Treaty,
France agreeing to pay him a great Pension, and two hundred thousand Dollars
for the subsistence of his Army. Whereupon he made no small progress; for he
not only obliged the Catholic Army, which besieged Osnaburg, to withdraw, but
surprised Minden, and brought succors seasonably into Hanau, besieged by
Lamboy. Nevertheless, these balanced not the advantages of the Saxons, who
after a long Siege got Magdenburg, and afterward Verben; Banier, who saw
himself very much weakened, being obliged to go toward the Sea to receive a
powerful renfort that was sent him out of Swede.

The King of Hungary, leaving the command of the Army to Gallas, going to
Ratisbone, obtains at last the Crown of King of the Romans, promoted by the
reputation and glory gotten in the Wars, and the being adorned with all those
virtues which rendered him the most worthy Heir of the Piety and Crowns of his
Father. The Spaniards employing plentifully Gold and endeavors, the Electors
were induced to it from the common danger, lest the Emperor coming to dye,
amidst so many confusions and accidents, there should not remain liberty for a
new choice. Bavaria, at first averse, now, almost seventy years old, having
taken to Wife Maria Anna, the Emperors Daughter, Austrians. Some of the
greatest opposers were gained with money and presents; nor availed it ought,
that the French remonstrated the Empire was rendering it self successive in that
House, which, having a long time enjoyed it, hence-forward would pretend it by
right and custom; nor, that they offered the Forces of the Crowns confederate,
to maintain the liberty of their Votes; nor, that in the name of the Elector of
Trier they interposed their protest of Nullity: for the Election passed with
the full consent of the others, and general applause of the whole Empire.
Whereupon arose in the Treaties of Peace a lasting difficulty; whilst France,
by reason of the exclusion of the Elector of Trier from the Diet, would not
acknowledge the new King of the Romans but for King of Hungary. Neither were
other lets wanting, the confederate Crowns pretending (after the fears were
over in France, during which Richelieu had showed great propensity to Peace, to
becalm with the Treaty the fury of the Armies,) Pass-ports for the Hollanders
and the Protestants of the Empire their Confederates, and the Emperor and
Spaniards denying them to these, as to Vassals, and to the others as to Rebels,
and therefore incapable to appear in the assembly in quality of Sovereigns.

But, notwithstanding that difficult and tedious obstacles were foreseen, the
Pope dispatches to Colen, the City appointed for the conference, the Cardinal
Ginetti his Legate, who passing through the Territory of the Venetians, and
being received with meet honors, sent to the Republic a Letter from Urban,
which with much urgency persuaded it to cooperate in the mediation of the
Peace. The Senate, distinguishing its own disgusts from the common interests,
accepted it, and complied with it, making choice at the instances of the
Ministers of France and Spain of Giovanni Pesari, Cavalier, for Ambassador at
the meeting. In this year the memory of things past being now abolished by the
Peace, by time the Ministers of the Emperor and King of Spain began again with
those of the Republic the ancient correspondence, with the wonted parity of
usage; whereupon Giovanni Grimani was sent to Vienna Ambassador in ordinary,
and from the Emperor was sent to Venice Anthonio, Baron di Rabbata.

ANNO MDCXXXVII.
The distraction of the French, and their retreat out of the Milanese, had put
the Duke of Parma into very great straits: for Leganes sends an Army upon his
back under the command of the Cardinal Trivultio, who, besides public respect,
had particular motives of hatred against Edward. At the same time Martin
d'Arragon roved with the Cavalry betwixt Parma and Piacenza, and taking St.
Donnino, a City which enjoys the dignity of a Bishops See, wasted the Country
called Pallavicino; for it formerly had been confiscated from the Dukes of that
Family, and Gille de Haes in another part had gained Rivalta, though well
fortified by force. The body of the Army attacqued Puiglio upon the Lenza, and
finding resistance, would not stop there, but carried the seat of the War and
the force of their Arms to the Siege of Piacenza. The Duke shutting himself up
there, and providing the Citadel, had therein alone placed the hopes of
defense; but after some little contest in the very beginning of the Siege,
lost, together with certain Mills, the Island, which the Po formed over against
the City, and which, besides the offense it gave the Town it self by Batteries,
hindered the Navigation upon the River. The Duke now began to perceive, that he
had been more greedy to undertake a War than able to defend himself.
Nevertheless was not wanting to solicit for succors in several Courts. The
Pope, Sovereign of the Country, exceeded not mediation and Offices for Peace by
the means of Count Ambrogio Carpegna, who by very secret and private Commission
from the Barberins convoyed offers to Edward of secret Subsidies of Money,
provided he would yield to their House certain Towns belonging to the Dukedom
of Castro. The great Duke also sends to Piacenza Dominico Pandolfino, that he
might interpose in the adjustment, and by persuading the Duke to it by
necessity, positively denied him all assistance.

Nor would the Venetians alter their neutrality, judging, that whilst the Pope,
as Sovereign, the great Duke as Kinsman, the French and Savoyards as
Confederates, did not lend him their hand, there was no more effectual argument
for them not to outrun the others. And the Spaniards with many flatteries
assured them, that as the Incursions into the Dukes Countries were only
resentments of the damages done by him to the Milenese, so if the Fortune of
the War should make any conquest, it should either be restored or deposited, as
a generous testimony of that moderation, with which it was to be understood
their King exercised revenge against an inferior Prince. And in effect, they
straightened the place but slowly, rather to bring the Duke to an agreement,
than to take it, as well knowing into what disorder in that case, by reason of
the pretensions of the Church, they should put themselves, and what jealousies
would thereupon be raised in the minds of the Princes of Italy. The Duke also
falling very sick, inclined at last to an Accord, not seeing succors any where
in a readiness; for although the Fleet of France, now at Sea, appeared with
some number of Ships in the Mediterranean, making as if it would attempt to
disimbark, and thrust in succors to him; yet the Spanish with Forces equal
disputed it, and Leganes by Land had so fortified the passages, that it would
be difficult, and a work of time to force them. In the beginning then of the
year, excluding Carpegna from the Treaty, as little acceptable to the
Spaniards, by reason of his inclinations to Urban, and not more to the Duke, by
reason of the projects of the Barberins, the agreement was by Melo and
Pandolfino concluded, and almost at the same instant approved and executed by
both the parties; for desiring not to be discovered in the Negotiation, they
equally endeavored expedition and secrecy; the one, that the French, who had
their Garrison both in Parma and Piacenza, might not give them any disturbance;
and the other, because Sabioneda being by the Duke to be put into the power of
the Spaniards, they doubted lest the Duke of Mantua should take jealousy, and
in his regard the Venetians resent it. From the effect only and the execution
was argued the substance of the Conditions.

The Garrison of the French in Piacenza was sufficiently strong, and in a
condition, if it had been aware of the Treaty, to have crossed it, and to have
resisted, if they had attempted to turn them out by force. The Duke therefore,
obliged not only to make use of secrecy, but of care, calling together the
Soldiers, with Monsieur Paulo who commanded them, into a place apart, under
pretense of giving them a months pay, and there turning the Cannon against
them, excusing in a few words the necessity of the agreement, with courteous
expressions gave them their discharge. To those that were in Piacenza, passage
was permitted through the Milanese toward Piedmont; the others that were in
Parma, retired to Viadana in the Mantuan, and from thence through the State of
the Venetians passed by small parties into the Valteline. And now the Duke was
restored by the Spaniards into those Territories taken by them, and into Goods,
which at the beginning of the War he possessed in the Kingdom of Naples, and
had been confiscate. With the Duke of Modena misunderstandings ceased, Rossena
being rendered back to Edward. He on the other side gives up Sabioneda as the
price of the Peace and the Restitutions, withdrawing his Garrison out of it,
and receiving an hundred thousand Crowns of the Governor of Milan, under the
notion of repairing his expenses. Tiberio Brancaccio was hereupon observed to
enter into it with Neapolitan Foot, it being given out, to take away from the
envy of the fact, that by the Testament of the old Princess of Stigliana, who
at this time dyed, he was named Governor; whereupon he had levied those
Soldiers for the custody of it, till amidst many Pretenders the cause should
be decided by the Emperor.

Time quickly discovers the dissembling, it coming clearly to be known, that
the Revenue being left to Anna, a young Princess, as has been said, and she
married to the Duke of Medina de las Torres, Vice-King of Naples, the Governor
and the Garrison depended upon the Spaniards, who with the Art of patience and
opportunity came at last to the possession of that, a sole thought whereof had
formerly raised jealousies and stirs. Great was the sorrow, with which in
France they understood the agreement; Richelieu comprehending, that to retain
the old friends faithful, and to acquire new ones in Italy, no means could have
been more powerful, than vigorously to have maintained and protected him, that
with so much fervency had discovered himself to side with that Crown. But if
France with its distractions excused the abandoning of the Duke, he with his
necessity justified the agreement; so that admitting easily of his excuses, the
King assures him of his affection, and the Duke preserved in his heart his
inclinations entire to the French.

Nevertheless the reputation and interest of France had hereupon a great
downfall every where in Italy; whilst the Grisons also, perceiving that they
were rather oppressed than succored by Rohan, shoke off the yoke, obtaining of
the Spaniards those Conditions, which in the Treaty of Monzone they were to
have had of the French. Out of the supposition to be restored to the possession
of the Valteline, or rather by the promise made them by Rohan, they were
persuaded to receive the Bridle of the Forts, and to concur in the Enterprise
with Arms. The Duke then being pressed by the three Leagues to put the Valley
into their hands, now making excuses, and then proposing Treaties, to the end
to unite the minds of the people to their ancient Lords, affected delays. At
last he succeeded to adjust an agreement, in which they consented, the
Judicature remaining to those of the Valteline and the exercise of the sole
Catholic Religion being permitted in the Valley. Richelieu, who, by reason of
his designs upon Italy, desired to retain that purchase, interposed several
delays, and at last disapproves of some of the Articles. Whereupon the Grisons,
out of the desire to recover the Valley, passing to impatience, and from thence
into fury, plunge themselves into the utmost extremities; the Duke, who after
his Retreat out of the Milanese had layn a long time sick, not being able, by
reason of his indisposition, to employ himself in person for dispersing their
Assemblies, and Authority afar off serving for little, after having promised
the Grison-Militia, which mutined for want of pay, satisfaction within a time
prefixed, the money not coming, they remained so much the more provoked and in
disorder. The Commons thereupon meeting publicly in Flanks, sent Deputies to
Inspruch to demand assistance to drive away the French, and the Duke causing
himself to be carried to Coira to restrain and delude them with new
Propositions, found, how difficult it is, that a people should suffer it self
to be long deceived; for he saw himself environed with Guards, though at large,
yet in such sort, that it was not thought safe for him to return into the
Valteline, where Monsieur de Leques remained with eight thousand Soldiers.
This wary proceeding of his was greatly blamed in France; it seeming, that the
state of affairs required, that resolute and hazardous counsels should have
been preferred before those more prudent and cautious. There is no doubt but if
Rohan could have joined the Army in time, he might easily have suppressed that
multitude, which, though it blustered boldly in the Diets, would have been
found dejected and confused in the field. But time being given them, and with
it boldness, there was concluded in the Court of Inspruch by the Deputies of
the three Leagues, with Frederico Enriques, Ambassador of Spain, a Treaty in
which the Governor of Milan was obliged, To pay to the Grison Soldiery such
advances as they pretended from the French; to drive them out of the Valteline
with united Forces; restoring it to the three Leagues, with reserve of the
passages to the Spaniards, with a perpetual alliance betwixt the Milanese and
Rhetia, besides certain pensions to be paid by the King to the Commons and to
private persons, and the obligation to entertain in his service a body of
Soldiers of that Nation.

The Agreement was hardly made, but the Country, without expecting the
ratification, was seen in Arms, and the Grison Troops revolted against the
French Commanders; so that Rohan, the way toward the Valteline being stopped,
was forced to retire into the Fort of the Rhine, with eighth hundred men of
Zurich of the Regiment of Smith, and two hundred French. Into some of the
Passes that were abandoned the Grisons immediately entered; then, with six
Regiments of that Nation, completed with money from Spain, and with the
assistance of certain Troops sent from Gallas, they invest the Fort. Serbellone
advances to the Lago di Como, to keep Leques in distraction, who wanting orders
from the Duke, besieged in the Fort, was an idle Spectator of so important an
issue, for which being highly blamed by the Duke himself, who having in vain
demanded succors of those of Zurich, whilst all were well pleased that the
Grisons should recover their own, was forced for want of Victuals to capitulate
the surrender. The conditions were, That there should remain a Garrison of
Swisses in the Fort for six weeks, within which the French were to go out of
the Valteline and Rhetia, the Duke to be the Hostage.

The shortness of the time prefixed was sufficient to give advice of it into
France; but not expect the remedy. Nevertheless, the French offered the
restitution of all, provided the three Leagues would renounce the Treaty newly
concluded with Spain; but they, calling to mind the vanity of past promises,
would not at all alter it. Leques therefore was forced to go out of the Valley,
and Smith delivers the Fort, though tempted by the French to declare himself,
and keep it for the Crown, with a supposition suggested by Rohan, that Weimar
advancing into those parts, though the Fort should be rendered, would yet repair
again this insult. But Richelieu, entangled in more difficult matters, thought,
for the present revenge was not to be minded. Thus, after many years of cruel
Commotions, the Passes, so much desired, remained open to the Spaniards, and
the Valteline returns to the subjection of the Grisons, condemned for no other
cause to so many and so long miseries, but to serve for an inlet into Italy. It
was some time nevertheless before the Agreement was fully accomplished, because
some difficulties being risen betwixt the Ambassadors of the Grisons and the
Governor of Milan, the business was remitted into Spain, where at last after
two years it was determined, That the alone Catholic Religion should be
practiced in the Valley; that for the judicial proceedings there should be
chosen two persons, the one to be named by the Governor of Milan, and the
other by the Leagues themselves, to whom those might have recourse, that should
think themselves grieved by the sentences of the Grison Magistrates.

The loss of the Valteline was in some measure recompensed by the recovery of
the Islands of Eves; for, thirty seven Ships come out the Ocean into the
Mediterranean, and some Galleys, joined to them to distract the designs of the
Spaniards, fell upon the Island of Sardinia, taking Oristan. The Squadron of
Gianettino Doria hastes thither with some relief, and Leganes sends from Milan
Officers and Engineers. But the French not hoping for any progress in Sardinia,
nor willing in that unwholsom air to consume their Forces, set sail toward
Provence. Henry Count of Harcourt commanded the enterprise, one of a hot
spirit, full of courage, and nevertheless prudent. Against a Fort, which
guarded the place of landing, were the first batteries of the Ships directed
with so great fury, and in so great abundance, that in a short time the defense
by razing of the Parapet being ruined, and under the darkness of the smoke the
men landed, and an assault given, the Garrison was constrained to abandon it.
The Fort of Montereii (for the Spaniards had built many there) ran the same
fortune. The Royal, and that of Aragon held out with a better defense. This
maintained the Siege almost for a month, and then, a breach being made,
capitulated. The other, by a longer resistance, gave time to Michael Borgia to
come near with the Galleys for its succors. But not daring to engage with
Ships, turning head, leaves the Fort to be taken. The Governor, named Michael
Sardo, after a Siege, for several weeks sustained with bloody factions,
capitulates, that if in eight days there came not in succors of a thousand
Foot with Victuals for a month, to give up; as he did with about nine hundred
Soldiers. And now, without delay, the other Island of St. Honorat was invaded;
and there being but one sole Fort there, Giovanni Tamaio after a few days
renders it.

At Land, to recompense the successes of the foregoing Campagnia, the French
invaded with three Armies the Provinces of Flanders, aiming chiefly at the
taking of St. Omar; but found the Town so provided, and environed with so many
Forts, that they thought best not to attempt it. La Valetta and Candale, who,
being idle in the service of the Republic, had obtained for some time leave
from the Senate, with greater good luck took in Chateau Cambresis in Henault,
and having laid Siege before Landrecy, a small place but of great importance,
Meilleray arrives with powerful Forces to participate of the glory, so that it
was constrained to yield. The great Town of Maubeuge falls into the hand of
Candale, who permitted his Army to use all cruelty in the sacking of it. In
Lutzemburg, Danvilliers, a good Town, after some days of Siege, made its terms
with the Mareshal de Chatiglion; and upon the Frontiers of France la Valetta
recovers la Capelle.

Nor did the Arms of the Hollanders enjoy less felicity; for with the force of
Gold the negotiation of a Truce betwixt those Provinces and Spain, being anew
rescinded by the French, Orange, having first in vain attempted the surprise of
Hulst, and of the Fort of Phillipine, turns himself afterward upon Breda, with
so much force and expedition, that the Cardinal Infant, not being able to
succor it in time, nor dislodge the Enemy, applies himself to the taking in of
Venlo, and Ruremond, which, as weak places neglected by the Prince, fell easily
into his hands. But in the month of October, Breda treated its delivery, a
place, which Spinola being nine months in taking, and that with so much
commotion of Europe, and so great a consumption of treasure and men, came now
in nine weeks to be regained without the least disaster.

The truth is, fortune every where confounded the counsels of Olivares, who,
contrary to the opinion of some, that thought it not a course of advantage to
attract the Arms of a potent Enemy into that part where he that provokes is the
weakest, resolves to divert the flood out of the Low Countries, to draw the
French to the Confines of Spain. He formed an Army of those Troops formerly
destined for the strengthening of Orleans, and now calling from Naples new and
powerful reinforcements, and from Milan the Count Serbellone to command,
together with the Duke of Cardona, Viceroy in Catalogne, sends them in the
month of August into Languedoc to the Siege of Leucate, with hopes of a most
certain Conquest, by reason of the situation amidst Lakes and Fens, which by
possessing certain narrow Dikes easily excluded succors. Nor did the French
Fleet appear ready to supply it; and the place it self was so ill provided,
that, notwithstanding the notable constancy of Monsieur de Ravii in the defense
of it, it was ready every moment to be taken. But Schomberg, Duke d' Alvin, and
Governor of Languedoc, in so great a danger assembling the Gentry, and the
Militia of the Province, and of others that were near, with ten thousand Foot,
and not many above a thousand Horse, comes close to the Trenches, and, without
giving time to the Spaniards to take a considerate view of them, assaults them,
forcing them in a very narrow passage. By which entering in the evening, they
were forced, night coming upon them, to halt within the Enemies Camp. The
Spaniards surprised could not or had not the skill to oppose them; but rather,
considering that the day following it would be impossible to avoid a Battle,
silently under the favor of the night retire, leaving Leucate free, the Camp
empty, and forty piece of Cannon, with infinite Provisions in the power of the
French.

From so many fortunate successes some flattered themselves, that the Cardinal
having thus provided for his glory would more easily incline to Peace. It
appeared nevertheless, that he became no less amorous of new Conquests, than
Olivares was irritated at this his adversity. And for this cause, although in
both Courts a truce was proposed by the Ministers of the Pope and the
Venetians, and that the General of the Minims carried secretly from Paris to
Madrid projects betwixt the two favorites, yet nothing was concluded; because
in the Truce, the French would have their Confederates comprehended, and keep
what they had gotten, and both the one and the other was denied by the
Spaniards, not to treat with the Hollanders as equals, nor accustom their
Enemies to a peaceable enjoyment for so many years of the places possessed.

Hereupon arose quickly new difficulties, the French denying, as has been said
elsewhere, to acknowledge Ferdinand the Third for King of the Romans, and
successor into the Imperial Crown of his Father, who in the month of February
of this year, being the fifty ninth of his age, yields to the frail condition
of Mortality. This Prince had experienced such various accidents of things
prosperous and unfortunate, as may be equally observed, both for a testimony of
divine Providence, and an example of humane vicissitudes. From slender
beginnings and a very narrow condition, he rose to great hopes, and afterward
to greater power, amidst the oppositions and treacheries of Strangers, and of
Subjects; but they being brought under, and the other conquered, for the
overcoming also of jealousy and envy he wanted nothing but the moderation of
counsels. He had a trial therefore of the reflux of Fortune with such blows, as
made him see his Greatness panting under the Forces of a King almost unknown
and despised. But the death of Gustavus, ascribed to a blow from Heaven; the
Victory at Nortlinghen no less seasonable than great; and the Peace of Prague,
which contented the chief of the Protestants, confirmed to the Son all the
Dignity of the Father. It was looked at as a great miracle, nay rather a
singular protection from Heaven; that the Election of a King of the Romans
should succeed so opportunely, and that after so great agitations and so many
calamities the Patrimony untouched, together with an hundred and ten thousand
men in Arms should remain to the Successor.

It cannot be denied, but that to Ferdinand the Second may be assigned a most
deserved station amidst the best deserving Princes, who have received Splendor
and Renown from the Catholic Religion; for that with fervent zeal he
propagated it in the Hereditary Provinces, nay rather may be said to have
restored it by Example, by Laws, and by Arms. He was singular in piety,
constant in virtue, and inflexible in all Fortunes. Some laid to his charge a
too much yielding to the opinions of others, with a too violent heat in
execution; an undistinguished liberality in giving; and a too patient tolerance
of so many excesses, with which his Soldiery and Generals afflicted Germany
and Italy. But his virtues were his own; his faults were ascribed to Fortune
and the Times.

And now Ferdinand the Third taken into the Empire in the nine and twentieth
year of his Age, the Venetians, to congratulate him, sent Renieri Zeno,
Cavalier and Procurator, and Angelo Contarini Cavalier, by whom they solicited
the concession of Pass-ports to facilitate the agreement of a Meeting for
Peace, and the King of Poland also cooperating therein with his endeavors;
those for Swede and Holland were consented to by the new Emperor, but upon
condition, that they should not be delivered to the parties, till after France
should have dispatched his own, for his Ministers, with Titles and Quality of
Emperor. But the Meeting being still more and more prolonged, military
successes were in this year reciprocally balanced in Germany; for the Swedes
having pursued the Saxons, taken Erfordt in Thuringia, and advanced into
Francony, were by them joined with Gallas, forced back to the Frontiers of
Pomerania. There Banier, reinforced with Wranghel, makes head a new, obliging
the others, through want of Provisions and Pay, to retire back. After this
Hermestain, kept by the French, being rendered to Werdt, was deposited into the
hands of the Elector of Collen, till the cause of him of Triers, to whom that
place belonged, should be decided. Werdt after this draws near to Hanau, and
Weimar hastes with speed to its succors, wherein he was not able to succeed,
though he beat the Duke Carlo of Lorrain, who had attempted to hinder him in
his way.

The Duke therefore turns his march into the Franche Conte, attempting to
possess Besanzon, an Imperial City, but in vain; and thereupon goes into
Alsace, leaving Hanau to be taken by Werdt. He after the place gained follows
him, joined with the Duke of Savelli and other Chiefs, and seeing Weimar
engaged under Rhinfeldt, attacques him, obliging him with the loss of his
Cannon to rise. In this Encounter Rohan, who was with Duke Bernard, received
such a hurt, that he a while after dyed, leaving the Arms, he was wont to wear,
to the Republic of Venice, as a gift of affection and Monument of that Renown,
which enrolled him in the number of the most famous Captains of the World. The
Imperialists not contenting themselves with this success, by pursuing the
Victory lost it; whilst at Laufenburg, whither Weimar was gone, they attacqued
him, and he made appear of what importance is the Courage of an excellent
Captain; for, inferior in Reputation and Forces he encounters them, and fights
them with so great resolution, that he defeats them, putting almost all to the
Sword, possessing Cannon and Baggage, taking the Colors, and numbering amongst
the Prisoners of Quality Werdt himself, and Enchefurt. Rheinfeld, under which
Weimar returned, was the reward of the Victory, and after that Neoburg and
Friburg followed.

That nevertheless happened in the year following; but for the present in Italy
the War being transported out of the Country of Parma into the Monferrat,
Leganes feigned to himself great progress, finding himself strong eighteen
thousand Foot and five thousand Horse, with all sorts of other provisions. But
his hopes were not seconded by the event. In the Langhe, Martino d'Aragona took
in Ponzone to open the way of succors by Sea and the Communication with Final.
Gilles de Haes, intending to surprise Nizza della Paglia, arrived there so late
in the day, that he was easily discovered. And not thinking it honorable to
retreat, fortifies himself in a Convent, obliging Leganes, who by the weakness
of the place hoped for a short conquest of it, to repair thither with the whole
Army. Nor was he deceived; for after four days the Governor renders it, there
going forth four hundred Monferrins, two hundred forty French, and some Horse
Savoyards. Thence passing into the Territory of Asti, orders Philippo di Silva
to take in Algiano, which easily succeeded. With the Duke of Mantua, who
complained of the Invasion of Monferrat, and with the Venetians, who did not
willingly hear of his prejudice, the Governor of Milan justified himself,
alleging, that he was not bound to use respect, where he found Garrisons of
that Nation, which with molestations and jealousies afflicted the Frontiers of
the Milanese. But the progress of the Spanish Arms quickly terminated in this
period; for Crequi returned out of France, where he had been to justify his
past conduct, joining with six thousand Foot and two thousand Horse Savoyards,
attempted la Rocca d'Arasso, a little before taken by the Spaniards; but
Leganes coming near with all the Army, he was constrained to retire. This
Campagnia afterward ended with certain Incursions and some Encounters betwixt
Brem and Vercelli, which were of no small moment, where Villa beat Arragona
with the death of some Officers on the Spaniards side, and among them Spadino,
the known Promoter of the first Siege of Casal; and the same Chiefs not far
from Monbaldone putting it to a new trial, Aragona went away with the worst,
who hardly saving himself by flight, abandoned six Cannons and his Baggage.

After these the accidents of Nature promoted new and unthought of successes;
for Italy, greatly afflicted by the death of two of its Princes, opened the
bosom to new strokes. The Duke Vittorio in Vercelli upon the seventh of
October, in the one and fiftieth year of his Age, ended his days with various
judgments upon the nature of his sickness, there wanting not some, who imputed
it to poison, given by Crequi, either for private hatred, or the public
distrusts of the Crown; and they drew their argument from an invitation, where
were with the Duke the Count de Verrua, his most confident Minister, and the
Marquess Villa, the most faithful General of his Army, of which falling sick
together with the Duke, the first dyed, and the other hardly by the strength of
his complexion overcame the accidents. Others believed, that the powder of
Diamonds, given him some time before, had corroded his inward parts. But
besides that the French are abhorring such Arts, it ought not to seem strange,
that the Duke, macerated with many cares and tedious indispositions in the
decline of his age, should run the common Fate; so that in such cases of doubt
and concealment, it is more beseeming to give credit to Nature than authorize
falsehood. Let it be as it will; he left with three Daughters two Sons, both
very young, and to them War for an Inheritance, and for a Patrimony the hatred
of one of the Crowns, and the distrust of the other, without support of any
sincere friendship. Francesco Giacinto, the eldest, having scarce tasted the
benefit of life, but not of command, was after a few months snatched away by
death, leaving the Title to Carlo Emanuel his Brother.

Vittorio dead, the Tutelage and Regency were assumed by the Duchess
Christina, alleging the Will of her Husband expressed in his Testament, which
committed it to her alone. The Princes, Maurice the Cardinal, and Tomaso,
pretended to have a share in it, and pressed it so much the more as believing
the life of the little Duke doubtful, by reason of his tender age and weak
constitution, and because by the Laws of the Country Women being excluded, they
were encouraged to conceive great hopes, that the Succession might devolve to
them. For which cause the Cardinal, who resided at Rome, leaves the Court,
notwithstanding that the Pope, doubtful of what happened, endeavored to stop
him with offers of employments and advantages. He, come to the Borders of
Piedmont, and finding an Order there from the Duchess, that he should retire
further off, with a promise, if he did, of satisfaction and an Appennage,
things being not yet in a condition to use force, retired into the Genouese.

King Lewis, freed from those suspicions, in which the deep and wise Conduct of
the Duke Vittorio held him, was glad to see his Sister Regent, who, since she
could not adhere to her Brothers-in-law, nor put trust in them, remained
constrained to shelter her self under his protection. On the other side the
Spaniards, by reason of this dependence and conjunction of Blood, endeavored
to have her excluded, or at least that she might govern with an Authority so
limited and restrained, that she might not be able to bring prejudice to their
interests. Expecting therefore accidents from time, Leganes was not solicitous
to make advantage in that Conjuncture with Arms, save only that he took in the
Castle of Pomar in Monferrat, which he abandoned so soon as he saw Crequi
joined again with Villa. These two Chiefs were joined, notwithstanding their
disgusts, grown even to public distrust, from the time that Crequi, taking
occasion from the death of the Duke, had attempted to cast a Garrison of French
into Vercelli, and Villa had prevented him by bringing in a strong Renfort of
Savoyards. The other accident, which gave no less apprehension to Italy, was
the death of Carlo, Duke of Mantua, upon the 21. of September in the sixty and
one year of his age. He, whilst he lived privately, had had several thoughts
and designs of a great Prince; but having attained the Principality with great
hazard, governed himself amidst great troubles with the spirit and manners of a
private man.

The Succession fell to Carlo, Nephew of the Duke deceased, and Son of the
Prince Carlo, Duke of Rhetel, yet in Minority, and therefore recommended by
Testament and by a Codicil of the Grandfather to the protection of the French
and the Venetians, and to the Regency of the Mother, a Princess of a most
prudent understanding, who, altering nothing of the present state of things,
requires the Oath in the name of the Son, and sends to Venice the Senator
Paraleoni to obtain the continuance of the assistance and the direction of the
Senate. The Republic doubling, to the end to preserve that State, their
diligence, passed immediately effectual offices with the Emperor to divert all
thoughts of novelty, and in Spain used remonstrances, to the end the Infanta
Maria should have no thoughts of returning to Mantua to sow unseasonable
suspicions. Nor was it difficult to obtain it; for although the Spaniards were
not pleased at the assistance of Monsieur de la Tour, a French Commander in
Mantua; yet fancying to themselves greater advantages on the side of Piedmont,
Mantua. The Republic by this means remaining quiet and secure, reformed and
diminished the number of their Army, which was very considerable at Land, and
recalling the General Giorgio, left Michael Priuli with Title of Proveditor. It
applied it self besides, according to its Institutions, so much the more to the
Arts of Peace, by how much it was esteemed to excel in those of disburdening
the Treasury of those many debts contracted by the long expenses of the past
Wars; it being its ancient custom in times of Peace to recover strength, to the
end to use it more powerfully, where Fortune should present new occasion of
troubles. It had therefore laid up no contemptible treasure for important
accidents and extremities, taking rather money at Interest from private
persons, who as well Subjects as Strangers took for undoubted security, that of
the public Faith. Nor were they at all deceived; for it was resolved to take a
million of Gold out of the public Coffers, with which and other sums, which
were to be raised by the sale of certain Goods, was to be satisfied in the
first place that debt, for the annual Interest whereof was paid seven and six
per Cent, with choice nevertheless of the Creditors to continue it in the
Cantore, but with the profit of five per Cent only; whereupon the public
Charge decreasing, the overplus was employed to pay off the principal of the
debt it self.

ANNO MDCXXXVIII.
The Count of Monterey transporting himself from the Viceregency of Naples by
Sea into Spain, and passing by Genoua in the beginning of this present year,
the Ministers of Spain met at Pegli in a secret and grave Assembly concerning
the state of affairs and the direction of the future Campagnia, in which
occasion was opened to them of great advantages. They sent to Madrid their
opinions about invading Piedmont, and in that interim, whilst Orders and
Answers should come, resolved to drive the French out of Breme, that the
Frontiers being secured, the whole strength of the Milanese might with less
distraction make. War upon the Countries of the Savoyards. In the month then of
March was the Fort first invested, and afterward very suddenly environed with
the whole Army, and to take away succors from it, the Bank of the Po was so
fortified, that Crequi attempting to send in by Boat a relief of some
Soldiers, their passage was hindered. He not able to rest so satisfied, had a
mind to make a new trial, when, as he was viewing the situation for planting of
a Battery which might oblige the Spaniards to retreat, being taken with a
Cannon-bullet left his life upon that place, together with the opinion of a
Captain, that for so many years past had rather had a name in Italy than been
fortunate. Wanting then a head, almost all the French Soldiers, who were not
many, disbanded, and the Officers repassed the Alps; so that Leganes had now
liberty, almost without opposition, to continue the Siege. The Garrison without
hope of relief defended it self but weakly. Five Batteries were raised with
twenty pieces on them. A Scalade having been attempted in vain, approaches were
opened, and an Out-work, called Horn-work, being gained, could not be kept, the
besieged still recovering it.

The place at last being more pressed by the attacque of Carlo della Gatta
Neopolitan, than elsewhere, was rendered. The Garrison, which went out to the
number of eighteen hundred men, was conveyed to Casal, and there the Governor,
whose name was Mongaiard, had his head taken off. To him, who of mean birth was
raised by the favor of Crequi to so important a Government, was imputed, that
he had weakened the defense by appropriating to himself more pays, and hastened
the surrender to save the money he had gotten, so that he made good by his
punishment, that baseness seldom finds an escape, especially when too much
covetousness is that which procures it. To divert the new Regent from joining
her Forces to attempt the preservation of the place, and to make it believed,
that Piedmont was in no danger, Leganes had sent to Genoua the Abbot Vasques,
that with the Cavalier Ogliani, sent thither from the Duchess at the
suggestion of the Spaniards, the means might be discoursed of to compose the
differences with the Brothers-in-law and with the Crown of Spain. But it being
difficult in discourses to keep dissimulation long concealed, the Meeting was
quickly dissolved, the Savoyards perceiving that all tended to retard French
succors, and give time for the Orders from Spain. And they came at last very
positive, that the Armies should be employed in Piedmont; that the Princes
should be encouraged, calling back from Rome Maurice, who was returned thither,
and Thomaso from Flanders, to the end, that not only with military skill, but
with the authority of the name, and the affection of the Subjects, the
proceedings of the Crown might be facilitated. The Duchess found her self now
in very great straights, environed with suspicions and with treacheries, the
minds of the people alienated, and the succor scanty, which she hoped for from
France; for that Richelieu, to bring her to his will, chose to leave her in
danger. Leganes, by the taking of Breme, proud to have driven the Enemy out of
the Milanese, and by the Intelligence he had in it hoping certainly to get
himself into Casal, advances to Vercelli in the month of May.

The Duchess was now forced to cast her self into the arms of the French, by
concluding a Treaty that obliged her, To make War for two years with the
Spaniards and the Princes their adherents, joining three thousand Foot and
twelve hundred Horse to thirteen thousand five hundred men, which the King,
without pretending repayment of charges, but rather paying for his Quarters,
obliged himself to maintain in Italy. The King promised not to make Peace but
by common consent, and without the Investiture should be conferred on the Duke
by the Emperor in the same manner as his Father had obtained it.

Notwithstanding the limitation of time mentioned in the Treaty, it was yet
visible, that Savoy was in such sort engaged with France, that it had no means
to dis-intangle it self; Piedmont remaining a free and open field for the
French Armies, which should not only enjoy Quarters at discretion, but have
every place ready to open the Gates to them. Nor was the conjecture groundless;
for the Duchess not knowing in whom among her Subjects she might put
confidence, of a sudden under the show of giving a months pay, brought a good
number of French for her security into Turin; and levying a Regiment of that
Nation in her own Name to color the Juggle, committed to them the keeping of
the Citadel. A while after the Cardinal de la Vallette arrives in Italy to
command the Army; but not followed with Forces proportionable to what was
needful, nevertheless applies himself immediately to view and strengthen the
places, and coming into Casal, discovers the contrivance, which Leganes framed
there, whereof Ottavio Montiglio, with the consent of the Princess Dowager,
being the Author, who commanded there for the Duke of Mantua, by seizing upon
him the design to introduce the Spaniards was broken.

But of succouring Vercelli, the Cardinal found himself not in a condition to
hope for a happy event; because, besides the weakness of the French Forces, all
things in Piedmont were transacted between confusion and jealousies. In the
Town they endured great wants; for from the very beginning of the Siege they
were unprovided of many things, with a Garrison unequal to the largeness of the
circuit. The Marquess Dogliani, the Governor, with skill and courage supplied
some of them, by maintaining some Posts, and with frequent Sallies keeping the
Enemy at a distance. Nevertheless Leganes having perfected the Circumvallation,
which was extended into a great compass, in regard of the situation and of the
River Sesia, which formed certain Islands and Flats, prosecuted the Siege in
great earnest. The Cardinal, who assembled his Army with great difficulty, by
incessant rains retarded his march for some days. At last, the Duchess being
come to Crescentino, to encourage the undertaking, he presents himself before
the Line, but not having vigor to force it, Leganes amused him by skirmishing
with his Horse, not intermitting at all the Siege, but having pierced in
several parts into the Ditch, took two Half-moons by assault, and lodged his
men upon a Bastion. Dogliani for all this made an undaunted resistance, seeing
succors at hand, and Vallette in sight, that endeavored to bring it in,
traversing about, viewing Situations, and possessing Posts with greater
application than force. The Cardinal, having corrupted, as was said, a
Sentinel, sends into Vercelli through the middle of the Germans Quarter,
negligently kept, a thousand Foot. But they not suffering to slacken the Siege,
some Officers being exemplarily punished, that were found guilty of negligence,
Leganes redoubled his Force, closed up his Lines into a narrower compass,
hastened the Works, and the French for a diversion threatening the Fort of
Sandoval, he assembles another body of an Army, commanded by the Cardinal
Trivulsio, and composed of some Switzers and Foreign Soldiery to maintain it.
So that Vallette, not to be taken in the middle betwixt them was forced to
withdraw further off; but for the last attempt, in concert with the besieged he
endeavored to possess a certain Island of the Sesia, and that design not
succeeding, he had a mind in another place with a furious battery to
incommodate the Enemies Camp. But all in vain, for the Town having lost the
Outworks, and having breaches open, and mines ready, and the Enemies lodged
upon a Bastion, the Cardinal plundring Palestre retired, and Dogliani, in the
end of June, renders upon honorable conditions.

The French upon this success discouraged, and the Savoyards in disorder,
Leganes had opportunity and time for greater progress. But, applying himself
first to provide and repair Vercelli, afterward falling sick, leaves to
Francisco de Melo the command of the Army, which made no other Conquest but
Pomar, where they demolished the Castle. The Venetians, who, after the ill
seconded confidences with this House, observed the interests of Savoy, without
taking further care of it watched so much the more diligently upon the Affairs
of Mantua, where, it seemed, quiet began to be disturbed by the various
disgusts of the Princess at the French. She, presently assuming the Government,
let it be seen, that she would no longer depend alone upon that Crown; but
desired also the friendship of Spain, and, under the shadow and confidence of
the Empress Dowager her Aunt, rely upon the Emperor with greater security and
honor.

It seemed, that the French were now, both in Casal and in the Monferrat,
rather givers of the Law than protectors. Whereupon she sets on foot at Vienna
and in Milan secret practices, and to make her self absolute in the command,
confides to the Marquess Guerriero, that depended on her, the Government of
Porio, and commits the education of the Duke to the Count Scipio Arrigoni,
which charge the Marquess Cauriani had first supplied.

For these considerations, the French, touched with a vehement distrust, sent
to Mantua Monsieur de la Thuillerie, who resided Ambassador in Venice; though
the Senate did not believe it as yet seasonable to irritate any further with
troublesome instances the mistrustful mind of that young Princess, jealous above
measure of her authority. But, the French thinking to break all Treaty, by
showing they had discovered it, did but hasten it. La Thuillerie demanded, that
the new Ministers being removed, she would continue to make use of the old, and
most trusty to the Crown; and the Princess mingling reasons with excuses, under
pretext that she would inform the King about it, took time, suspending in the
interim for some days the Marquess Guerriero, for a show, from the Government;
and joining to Arrigoni the Count della Roschie Chamberlain to the Duke
deceased.

The French nevertheless were not content; for the Spanish Ministers, and at
Venice particularly the Ambassador della Rocca, assuming in a manner publicly
the protection of the Regents, pressed the Senate, that it would interpose to
remove those molestations and instances, which tended to exercise with the
Princess prepotency and command, rather than friendship or counsel. The said
Princess dispatching to Venice, as Ambossador extraordinary, to communicate the
succession of her Son, the Marquess Nicolo Gonzaga, strengthened those Offices;
nor was the Senate wanting, by the means of Angelo Corraro Cavalier, its
Ambassador at Paris, and by Luigi Molino, sent Ambassador extraordinary to
Mantua, to employ themselves by all means possible, to sweeten the disgusts,
and qualify embitterments. But the Bishop of Casal being sent from Mantua into
France, to inform the King how things stood, and at the same time the Marquess
Giovanni Sigismond Gonzaga to Vienna, to demand the investiture, there came to
the Princess the Count Frederick Attimis with a Secretary in the name of the
Empress her Aunt, under pretense to counsel; her and from Milan arriving Diego
Saiavedra under color of a complement, a secret Treaty was made betwixt them
and the Princess her self, which aimed at driving the French Garrison out of
Casal. And now the Ministers of that Crown having discovered it, but willing to
dissemble it, departed from Mantua; la Tuillerie, because Monsieur de Husse had
succeeded him in the Embassage of Venice, retiring himself to Padua for his
health, and la Tour for devotion taking a Voyage to Loretto. The Princess, glad
to have removed their assistance farther off, sends the Count Arrivabene, her
chief Secretary of State, to Venice, to let the Senate know, that for many
disgusts, which she pretended, she could no longer admit la Tour, but that her
self, having assumed the Generalat of the Army, had no need of another person
of that Nation to command it. She complained, that Montiglio had been beheaded
in Casal, by order of the French Ministers, and that it was believed at Paris,
that her self had not only knowledge, but was author of the contrived
betraying of the place. On the other side, Monsieur de la Tuillerie, being
returned to Mantua, solicited, that she would put the Marquess Guerriero from
the Government of Porto, to which he was restored, and also one della Valle,
believed a partaker of the intelligences discovered in Casal. The Princess,
professing her self ignorant of the Plot, rejected the instances, as contrary
to her liberty and the dignity of her Son. La Thuillerie acquiesced not; but
perceiving at last, that the Emperor had declared, that he would send a
Commissary of his to Mantua, if the Ambassador of France should abide any
longer there, he departs, leaving the Count Bonzi Florentine as Resident.

The Venetians, seeing that these troubles might break forth into worse
accidents, reinforced the Garrison of Mantua to the number of five thousand
men, and sent another party to the Confines, to be ready to be brought in, if
there should be need. About this time happened a notable encounter at Sea,
betwixt the Galleys of the two Crowns. Roderigo Velasco with fifteen of the
Spanish had dis-imbarqued Soldiers at Vado; and in his going thence was
overtaken over against Genua by Monsieur de Poncurle, who with an equal number
followed him. The Fight was bloody separating with a number in a manner equal
of hurt and dead, but with a different loss of Ships; for the French took five,
and the Spaniards three. But the success of the Armies either weak or
unfortunate, which happened elsewhere, had not the same issue; for the
Mareshals Chastillon and la Force being come before St. Omer, Prince Thomas
seizing on a situation fit to incamp his Army, brought succors twice into it;
and afterward forcing a Quarter, obliged them to retire: so that the Campagnia
ended in the Low Countries without other Conquest but of the weak Castle of
Renti, which was demolished, and of the Catelet, which being re-assieged by
Monsieur de Halier, was after the springing of two Mines recovered by assault,
and the Garrison of six hundred Spaniards cut to pieces.

The Hollanders, to second these enterprises, being by concert come into the
field, 5000 men under Count William of Nassau, directed their course toward
the Scheld to take in those Forts, which defending the Dikes preserve the
Country from Inundations, and surprised some of them, particularly that of
Callo; but being come to the other of Santa Maria, the Spanish Troops flocking
thither, they were defeated with the loss of many drowned in the low Lands, and
others taken Prisoners. The Prince of Orange, not daunted with this unhappy
success, attempts with the gross of his Army the Town of Gueldre; but the
Cardinal Infant coming to its succors, together with Lamboy, who brought to
him five thousand Imperialists, assaults the Quarters of Count Henry Casimir de
Nassau with so great success, that passing over certain Trenches not yet
perfected, he took him Prisoner, and put in such relief, as obliged the
Hollanders to rise and abandon some pieces of Cannon in the waters, which being
let in several ways by the besieged, overflowed the whole Country.

Nor was the Fortune of the French much better on the Frontiers of Spain,
whether, to carry the War into the Enemies own Country, the Cardinal had
resolved to bring an Army. The Prince of Conde having in Guyenne assembled a
body of twelve thousand men, comes to the Port of Passagge, where possessing
himself of certain Ships, which were there ready built, he burnt others which
were in building, laying Siege afterward to Fontarabie, a Frontier place, and
the Key of Navarre, placed, like a Peninsula, in a very strong situation, where
the Vidasso disburdening it self, opens a passage to receive the flowings of
the Sea. It is beyond belief, in what a commotion the Kingdoms of Spain were,
being not accustomed to be sensible of an Enemy at home, and under the guard of
opinion and pride to enjoy a peaceable calm. Whereupon the Nobility and
Soldiery flocking to strives from all parts, an Army was quickly formed under
the Admirant of Castille; which, consisting of puissant Forces, draws near to
the French Camp. The enterprise, by reason of weakness and the disunion of the
Chiefs, proceeded more slowly than was imagined, giving time to the Spanish
Army to present it self, which appearing at unawares, came before the Line to
give an assault. Conde knowing that on that side some Troops had the Guard of
the Trenches, the Chiefs whereof, and among them the Duke of Valette
especially, he had in suspicion of Intelligence with the Enemy, sent others to
reinforce those Posts; but the first being resolute not to give them place,
they turned their discontent and arms against one another, leaving almost
without contest the passage to the Spaniards. The Marquess de Torrecuso was the
first that attacqued the Line; but he of Mortara had the honor to get in
before him on the other side, seconded afterward by the whole Army, with so
little blood, that sixteen only were killed, and one hundred and fifty reckoned
to be hurt. On the French side all was confusion, flight, and fear, leaving to
the Conquerours the field full of Booty, Arms, and other Provisions.

The News was received in the Court of France, both for the loss and the
dishonor, with great trouble of mind, because it looked as if the fidelity and
prudence of the Chiefs had rather been wanting than Fortune or the Force of
Arms. Conde was sufficiently blamed for negligence, and that not disjoined from
the great greediness of gain, with which he had carried on the enterprise, and
he upbraided the Duke de la Vallette with infidelity and want of care to such a
degree, that he, to avoid the threatening anger of the Cardinal, retired himself
to London, and his Father, the Duke of Espernon, was obliged to betake himself
to a private life, abandoning his Government of Guyenne. So joyful a Victory
being applauded in Spain with great Festivals, the King rewards the Conde Duke
with extraordinary pre-eminences and advantages, as if the Fortune of the Army
had taken its life from his alone direction, not without the murmuring of
those, who having been exposed to dangers and the engagements in the field, saw
one alone in the idleness of the Court go away with the recompenses and the
glory. The War being scattered and spread into so many parts, the variety of
relations, which for the most part delights, interrupting at present too often
the series of discourses, make them in a manner seem tedious.

Weimar aspired in Germany to establish for himself a Sovereign State, and
although with money and assistance from France he managed the War, he
nevertheless directed it to his own advantages. After the Victory formerly
related, with the places taken, he possessed almost all Alsace, a Province of
the ancient Patrimony of the House of Austria, both by its situation and extent
held to be of great importance. He now sets forth to besiege Brisach, a place
very strong, with a Bridge over the Rhine, and by consequence convenient for
the Navigation of the River and for passage by Land, and driving the Siege to a
conclusion, forces it to render, having frustrated all diligence of the
Austrians to relieve it. This was the most renowned action which happened in
Germany; for in consequence of it, Oxenstern being passed into Sweden to
dispose and solicit the Senate for succors, landed in Pomerania with new
supplies for the Army, with which Banier being rendered more vigorous and bold,
possesses many places, which Gallas retiring abandoned.

Charles Lodowick, Son of the deceased Palatine, who was elect King of Bohemia,
with the assistance of the King of England and the favor of the Swedes, who
assigned to him for his place of Arms Minden and Osnabrug, had raised in
Westphalia ten thousand men, with which, joining with Melander, General for the
Hessens, he designed to attempt the recovery of the Palatinate or the Conquest
of some other Country, which might be equal to it; but being met, so soon as he
began to march, by the Count of Hatsfelt, General of that Circle, and for the
Catholic Electors, was in such sort defeated, that his Troops could never
reunite, and Osnabrug rendered it self to the Conquerours, who with very little
blood obtained a very notable Victory.

Amongst the Prisoners remained in the hands of the Imperialists Robert,
Brother to Charles Lodowick, who conducted to Lintz, obtained of the Emperor
to be exchanged with John Casimir, Brother of Vladislaus, King of Poland,
fallen into the hands of the French as he was passing by Sea out of Italy into
Spain. But France would not yield their consent; for pretending for cause of
the arrest, that the Prince went to bear Arms in favor of the Spaniards, and
remembering the mischiefs heretofore done by the Polach Cavalry under the
Emperors Colors, Richelieu thought it a very seasonable occasion, treating
with that Kingdom to make a friendship, and drawing profit from the accident,
hinder the Austrians of those conveniences, which they were wont to enjoy in
Poland, especially Levies. And therefore were of little avail for the liberty
of the Prince the offices of the Venetians, who being expressly desired by the
King Vladislaus, through the means of the Baron Biboni his Envoye
Extraordinary, to interpose themselves, had for that purpose made choice of
Angelo Contarini Cavalier for Ambassador Extraordinary to King Lodowick: But
getting knowledge of the inclination of the King and of the Minister, the
Mission was suspended; whereupon Vladislaus was obliged to dispatch thither an
Embassy express, by which he obtained the liberty of his Brother with a solemn
promise, that he would never more bear Arms against France; that the King and
the Kingdom should not pretend disgust by this arrest; that by Poland Levies
should not in future be permitted to the Enemies of France, nor Alliances made
with them to its prejudice. The business of the Peace languished this year as
formerly, notwithstanding the pressing of the Mediators to obtain the Pass
ports; because, besides the Fate of great businesses, to find the beginning
always full of trouble, delays and difficulties, were on all sides affected, to
gain time for designs and the hopes of their Arms.

But in the month of March was concluded in Hamburg betwixt Monsieur d' Avo for
France, and John Salvius for the Swedes, a Treaty with promise, Not to send
their Plenipotentiaries to any Meeting without Pass-ports first had for their
Ministers, and for those of their Confederates in the form required; that in
the Treaty they should proceed pari passu in the Interest of both the Crowns,
concluding or breaking conjoyntly; that in case of a long Truce, each should
remain in the possession of what they held, and a Peace coming to be concluded,
the one Crown should break for the others sake, if the conditions to any of
them were not by the contrary party punctually observed.

The accident, which was most taken notice of, and rendered this year memorable,
was the Birth in France of a Dolphin upon the 5. of September; who, after many
years of fruitless Wedlock, given from Heaven to King Lewis's piety, infinitely
rejoiced that Kingdom, and seemed to serve as an Augure of future felicity; for
the Arms managed hitherto with equality and a balance, brought Fortune
afterward to incline to the favor of France.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE. THE ELEVENTH BOOK.
AMurath the Fourth ruled at this time the Ottoman Empire, in the prime of his
age, and the height of ambition, nourished by warlike spirits, and a capacity
no less for Arms than Counsel. He had his mind fixed on the glory of his
Ancestors, ruminating on their Chronicles, and studying incessantly the Annals
and famous Actions especially of Soliman. The strength of his body, the
arrogance of his mind, the desire of Empire, and the greediness of wealth,
equal to that of blood, rendered him venerable to the Barbarians, amongst whom
Terror possesses the place of Virtue. He cast in his mind vast designs against
Christendom, and if at all times the concord of Christian Princes uses to be
the Guardian of the Barbarians faith, Amurath conceived he might violate it
without danger now, that he saw it torn into pieces, and weakened with
unquenchable hatreds. But, for the present leaving them involved in their
discords, he applied himself to shut the door, by which the Persians might
advance deep into several Provinces of the Ottoman Empire. They had possessed,
more by intelligence than force, Babylon, famous for its name, though it be but
a heap of the relics, and a shadow of its ancient stateliness, whilst the
Turks during the former years made an unsuccessful War with the Polacks.

Amurath had once before attempted it with a formidable Army, but after some
inconsiderable Conquest, unworthy of his presence, and of so great
preparations, the season, the want of victuals, and many other difficulties
fighting against him, he returned to Constantinople, rather irritated than
dissuaded by the infelicity of the enterprise. In this year he returns with
such a disposition of things, as showed the power of a mighty Prince, and the
wisdom of an excellent Captain; for to an Army, which was said to exceed three
hundred thousand men, not only Arms, Cannon, and Ammunition abounded, but
Victuals, and every other kind of provisions and things that might be needful,
with such order and method, that the multitude was not disordered in their
march, nor did the length of the way, or the extent of the vast deserts waste
the multitude. So great preparations at Land weakened the arming at Sea;
whereupon, to the end that that might not remain unguarded and exposed, he had
enjoined the Pirates of Barbary to come with their Galleys into the
Archipelago, to join with the Ottoman Squadrons. They were increased to such a
degree, that they were now at last able to command the Sea, rather than commit
spoil in it. For in the Mediterranean the Christian Fleets, by the War betwixt
the Crowns, by factions, and by other accidents being weakened, gave liberty to
those of Barbary to strengthen themselves daily with Booties and with Slaves.
They sent sixteen in obedience to the Turks, which, though they were called
Galliots, exceeded nevertheless in the greatness of bulk, number of oars and
men, the ordinary sort of Galleys. They were divided into two Squadrons
equally; those of Tunis were commanded by Sassader; the other of Algiers by Ali
Piccinino, a Renegado Christian, who, when they were all joined, commanded in
chief. They then set sail toward the Archipelago, but having an eye always on
the occasions of prey, and hearing that the Venetian Fleet was in Candia,
changing their course entered into the Adriatic, to make advantage of a sudden
course before they could be pursued and overtaken.

The common opinion was, that they designed the rich spoil of the Chapel of
Notre dame de Loretto, a place as good as open, defended only by Religion, and
the powerful arm of him, that by a wonderful miracle transported so rare a
pledge thither. Nevertheless, as they passed they bent toward Nicotra in
Puglia, and landing there plundered the Town and Country there about, carrying
away many Slaves, and amongst those some religious Women, whom they violently
espoused to their lust. Thence passing to the other side of the Gulf they came
to Cattaro, where one Vessel fell into their hands, and their design was, after
having plundered Lissa, or some other Island of the Venetians, to pass over
again toward la Marca, and there having pillaged Loretto, and all that should
have offered it self to their rapine, with the same expedition going out of the
Gulf, rescued themselves from punishment. Heaven first armed the winds and
afterward men against such wicked intentions; so that having stayed there some
days, and meeting with a desperate storm, they put into Valona, giving time to
the places most exposed to fortify themselves, and to the Venetian Fleet to
come up to them. It consisted of twenty eight Galleys, and two Galiasses, but
not all in a body, eight of the nimblest being divided into several Posts.

Marino Capello, or whether it were Anthony called Terzo, who as Proveditor
commanded it, understanding, that there were Corsaires in the Gulf, parting
from Candia with all speed, arrives at Corfu, while they were yet in the Port
of Vallona. This Town is subject to the Turks, and has a Haven capable to
receive a considerable Fleet with safety, by reason of the situation and a
Castle, which being raised on a Hill, commands it. Capello nevertheless
resolves to go thither; for the Treaties with the Turks permitted the Venetians
to pursue in all places, and chastise the Pirates, forbidding the Ottoman
Commanders to receive them, or show them any favor. He defies them, and plays
upon them with his Cannon; but that doing little hurt at a distance, and the
Forts by some shot declaring they would defend them, the Venetians withdrew;
yet coming to an Anchor not far off to keep them besieged, and fight them when
they should come out. This happened about the last of July, and on the third of
the following month the Pirates attempted an escape, coming out in the morning
with the advantage of the Sun, which shining full in face to the Venetians,
permitted them not to discern the number of the Enemies Forces nor their order.
However Capello weighing his Anchors, and encouraging his Captains, resolves to
attacque them, first playing on them with his Cannon, and afterward
endeavoring to board them; but the Corsaires seeing that resolution, changing
their course, took Sanctuary again under the Fort, which played upon the
Venetians in flank, and by a shot split a Mast, the pieces whereof brake the
Arm of Lorenzo Marcello, Captain of the Galliasses. Other hurt there was not
much, save that the Corsaires were put to repair in the Port five of their
Galleys very ill handled by shot. Capello was obliged to return to his first
Post, and they not daring to expose themselves again to flight, or to a more
close Encounter, in hope that the wonted accidents of the Sea would oblige the
Venetians to retire, were deceived by an unusual and long calm, which gave
opportunity for more than a month to keep them besieged. During this time the
Pirates did not only new-fit their Ships, but ordered their defense; for,
fearing lest the Slaves coming to mutiny, might carry away the Galleys, they
disbarked them, securing them in a Fort and within certain Trenches, by which
they were a protection to the Galleys, besides the countenance of the Fortress,
into which the Commanders, corrupted by presents, gave the Pirates not only
access, but permitted them the custody and command of it. The Chiefs of the
Venetian Fleet were in this interim in a difficult consultation; for the insult
done by these Barbary Pirates being not to be endured, their chastisement
seemed no less honorable than just, lest, if they should this time go
scot-free, and through impunity and strength increase their insolence, the
Dominion would be no more respected, the Sea secure, Navigation protected, and
the Islands and Provinces preserved; but all Christendom would quickly become
sensible of these assaults, and Piracy being turned into War, there would be a
necessity to subdue them as Enemies, that might at present be punished as
Pirates.

On the other side there appeared difficulties in the undertaking, above all
the respect to a Fort and Haven of the Ottomans, which though unjustly and
contrary to the Peace it protected them, yet the Pirates, rather seeking the
occasions than the causes of War, might possibly greedily embrace this
opportunity to execute their pernicious designs against Christendom. The
prudence of the Commanders fluctuating amidst these weighty considerations, was
from necessity induced to more resolute courses; for the Pirates having
advertized Bechir, Captain Bassa of the Sea, by express Messengers dispatched
by Land, of the danger in which they were, implored succors, remonstrating to
him, how much the honor of their common Master would be undervalued, and his
service injured, if they should be lost in a Haven and under a Fortress, which
bore the Ottoman Standard, and that that Squadron should be ruined, which
without charge to the Grand Signor served for a troublesome exercise to the
Christians, and a seasonable strengthening to the Turkish Fleet. Bechir upon
this advice and by such reasons instigated, moves with twenty two Galleys and
two great Hulks, besides some other Vessels, to come toward the Gulf, to
favor the coming forth of the Corsaires; upon knowledge whereof, Capello
putting speedily to a consult, what was fit to be done, it was resolved to
prevent being caught betwixt two Fleets, and forced either to a dishonorable
Retreat or to a disadvantagious Engagement, which at last with an unhappy
beginning might break forth into a War. There was no other way to fight and
overcome the Pirates but by entering into the Port, and that course the
Venetians pitched upon, doubtful nevertheless whether it were more expedient to
burn those Ships, or bring them away. But of that the resolution being put off
till they should see the success, the Fleet on the 7. of August in the morning
was ranged into a Half Moon, on the points whereof were placed the two
Galliasses to cover the lesser Galleys from the shot of the Fort, and so entered
courageously into the Haven, where the Corsaires, astonished at so great
boldness, and those thereupon who had the guard of the Ships, flying in
confusion to Land, they made their defense only with Cannon and Muskets from
the Fort and from the Trenches.

The Fort was not sparing of its Cannon; but the two Galliasses halling
themselves under the Wall, and with greater Pieces, some shot whereof fell
particularly into the Church to the great resentment of the Turks, restraining
its Battery, covered the Galleys in such sort, that they advanced under the
Bolsprits of the Enemy. There finding them empty, some Mariners of Perasto,
incensed at the remembrance of the spoils done to their Country not long before
by these very Pirates, leaping into the water, cut the Cables and the Chains,
which tying the Ships one to another, made them fast to the shore. So all the
sixteen being taken and towed away with incessant shooting on both sides, but
little shedding of blood on the Venetians side of persons of account, Giovanni
Minotto only, a Masters Mate, being hurt with a Musket, they carried them to
Corfu in great Triumph. There was found upon these Galleys Cannon, Arms, and
Provisions; over and above all, the Furniture belonging to the Ships themselves
and some booty which was presently divided. The Hulls of the Galleys, to the
end both the Corsaires and the Turks might lose the hopes of ever having them
again, were afterward all sunk for the making of the Mole at Corsu, except the
Admiral of Algier, which was sent to Venice to be kept in the Arsenal as a
Memorial, and another which was known to belong to a great Man of the Turks,
carried away formerly into Barbary by one Cicale a Fugitive. The gallantry of
the action was universally magnified, especially in the Kingdom of Naples and
by the Subjects of the Church, who acknowledged themselves preserved from cruel
mischiefs. The news coming to Venice by the Galley of Martin Molino, Master of
it, the Ministers, Residents of Princes, came to congratulate, and the Pope
sent an express Brief, commemorating the glorious enterprises of the Republic
for the maintenance of the Faith, and numbered this present action amongst the
most famous and advantageous to Christendom, offering his Forces, whatever
should happen upon it.

The Nuntio, as the occasion required, was admitted to present it at an
Audience, and the Senate corresponded in giving thanks. Greater signs of joy
were not publicly permitted in Venice, than to give God thanks by the
Sacrifice of a solemn Mass. Molino being rewarded with a Chain of Gold, Capello
honored with the dignity of a Counselor, and Marcello with that of Censor,
and a thankful commendation given to the rest; the Senate remained in suspense,
what resentments and resolutions the Ottoman Ministers were to show upon it.
Ordering therefore an exact Watch every where in the Islands and on the
Borders, they communicated to the Christian Princes the success, showing in
this occasion also to have practiced their ancient custom, to prefer honor and
common safety before dangers and their own interest.

At Constantinople men's minds seemed in truth variously affected; for upon the
first report of the Pirates being besieged in the Port, the Turks had made a
show to be somewhat sensible of it; but judging that the Sea would either open
a way for them to escape, or would hinder the Venetians longer stay there;
Musse Bassa, who in the Kings absence governed in quality of Caimecan, that is,
Lieutenant of the Grand Vizier, made himself ignorant of what had happened, not
so much out of a dexterity, as because Forces being far off, and the King
engaged against a powerful Enemy, he thought it not fit for him with complaints
and jealousies to provoke him thereby against others. But when the certainty
came of all that had happened, with the carrying away of the Galleys, artifice
being outdone by Nature and Barbarity, he brake out into excess of anger. The
whole fact coming afterward to be published, the principal Ministers and all
sorts of persons were moved at it, exasperating the violation of the Port, of
the Fortress, and of the Church, besides the carrying away of the Ships
appointed for the Grand Signors service.

There happened a while after a commotion amongst the Corsaires, some of which,
and in particular the Son of Piccinino in a mournful semblance and a pitiful
habit, as is the custom of that Nation, with tears and cries, filled with
lamentations the Divan and the principal houses of the great men, describing
the insult, deploring the loss of the Galleys, the dispersing of the Slaves,
and reckoning amongst the losses, the lost hopes by roving at Sea to plunder
and devour the Wealth of the Christians. The Ministers hereupon greatly moved,
arrogantly required of the Bailo the restitutions of the Ships; but he, (it was
that Luigi Contarini Cavalier, who had grown old in the experiences of almost
all the Courts of Europe) with as much calmness and constancy denied it, and
brought his reasons, interposing time to fury, and also with dexterity showing,
The right to punish him that dare come into another man's house to steal. He
alleged the Articles and Agreements, attributing the blame of the evil that
had happened to the Turkish Commanders, that had, contrary to the Peace, given
the Pirates protection, and therefore he rather demanded, that they might be
exemplarily punished as guilty, through an insatiable covetousness of prey, and
in contempt of the Orders of Amurath, to have gone out of their way, and
violated the Dominion of a Prince in friendship with the Ottoman Port.

In effect, minds being a little quieted, many within a while detested their
imprudence and temerity; nay at Algier, Ali Piccinino was condemned, as having
gone beyond his Commission, if he should fall into the power of that
Government, to lose his head. The Ambassadors of the other Christian Princes
presented a Writing of one and the same tenor to the Caimecan, inveighing
bitterly against these very Corsaires for the mischiefs received by every of
the Nations, which frequented the Ottoman Havens, though in perfect friendship
with the Port; whereupon approving as just the chastisement received, they
appeared to interest themselves in the maintaining what the Venetians had done.
It seemed thereupon, that the accident was communicated to the King with some
sort of moderation. But with so much the more bitterness did the Sultana-Mother
and the other Women of the Seraglio exclaim against it; for, either corrupted
with gifts by the Corsaires, or longing, that, to exercise their authority
nearer hand, and enjoy their wonted pleasures, he might quickly be restored to
the Seraglio, they all labored, that, abandoning the remote undertaking of
Persia, he would employ his Arms on this side against Christendom.

Amurath was at this time come to the Frontiers of Persia, where, Bairan the
Grand Vizier dying, a man of a moderate spirit and naturally averse from
complaints, he had substituted in his place Mehemet, Bassa of Diarbechir, one
more lofty and unquiet. He agreed better with the inclinations of the King,
rendered by his severities terrible to his Ministers and to all; for under the
show of Military Discipline he vented without distinction his cruelties for the
lightest offenses, executing sometimes with his own hands hideous punishments.
He particularly could not endure the smoke or smell of Tobacco so much used by
the Turks, and having forbid it, he punished with death him that durst use it.
Always entertaining himself either with suspicions or tortures, sometimes
incognito and by night he went into the Camp, and walked betwixt the Circles
and the Tents, observing what was said and done, and then on a sudden
punishing, with atrocity of torments, sometimes one sometimes another. Death,
with the blow of a Sword, from the hand of the common Hangman seemed to him too
gentle and merciful. He rather, to the barbarous manner of the Turks, of the
Gancio, the Palo, and Fleaing, often added new inventions of punishments.
However all this served him for respect with his own, and terror to his
Enemies.

There is no doubt, that had he not been so far engaged against the Persians,
what for the business of Vallona, and the instigation of the Sultaness, he
would have returned to Constantinople, and turned his Arms against the
Venetians. But being not so soon able to dis-intangle himself there, by an
express dispatch he commands, that for the present the Bailo should be put in
arrest; that the Corsaires should in some measure be recompensed with ten
Galleys of his own; that, to preserve the remainder of the Slaves, they should
be conveyed to Constantinople, to go forth in the Spring together with the
Ottoman Fleet: In his absence nothing else was to be altered, protesting with
severe threatenings upon the heads of the Ministers, whom he suspected of
venality, not to hearken to any proposition, that contained not the effectual
restitution of the Galleys carried away. So that, will and violence serving the
Turks for just and right, the Order did no sooner arrive, but the Caimecan
sending for the Bailo, showing a visible trouble to be the unjust Minister of a
most unjust command, intimates to him his imprisonment, keeping him all night
in the house of his Checaia.

Nor was it to any purpose, that the Bailo with great constancy did with his
great reasons mingle complaints, for the violence done to common right, and the
breach of faith; nor, that the other Ministers of Princes greatly offended, did
make effectual instances about it: For Mussa, confessing the proceeding unjust,
but excusing himself by the danger of his head, caused him to be brought into a
little house of Galata, keeping him there with Guards, and placed some at the
Bailo's ordinary place of Residence, but leaving the Family in liberty, and
permitting him visits of conversation and business. The Ships of the Nation
being at the same time stopped, were after a few days released, the Turks
having considered, that the interruption of Commerce and a reciprocal arrest
tended equally to their own damage. As to the Corsaires, the promise of ten
Galleys was not performed; for doubting, lest, if the Slaves were carried to
Constantinople, the King should make use of them for his own Galleys, they
avoided it with several pretexts, and had news of thirty Ships of Barbary in
the Archipelago come express to fetch them away, with design to winter in those
Seas, and offer in the Spring to join with the Turks against the Republic. But
they, perceiving the Corsaires already too powerful, and fearing lest they
should superfluously provoke in that conjuncture the Christian Nations, or
break off all Commerce with the Ottoman States, discharged them. The Ministers
of Constantinople, knowing that the Venetians had sunk the Galleys which were
taken, to avoid troublesome instances for restoring them, insolently required of
the Bailo, that as many of their own might be delivered to them, otherwise
threatening War.

The Senate, in order to it, by Heralds of War received the advice of the
arrest of the Bailo, together with the same demands; but constant not to
consent to any thing of prejudice or indignity, resolved rather to expose
themselves to any how unfortunate soever engagement. They communicated to the
Christian Princes the fury of Amurath, the arrest of the Bailo, the arrogant
demands of the Turks, and their own resolves, to the end that great and
universal dangers impending, they might equally dispose their Forces for
succors, and their minds for Peace; it seeming both reasonable and of
necessity, that against the common Enemy there should be an agreement even of
the greatest Enemies. The resentment was every where not inferior to the
approbation. Yet some offered only to mediate, and others excused themselves
upon the conjuncture.

The Spaniards, and the Grand Duke of Tuscany offered their Forces; but these
appearing to be weak, and those distracted, the Republic was given to
understand, that they could not for the present make any certain state, but of
their own strength. It being a safe counsel never to despise the fame and
threats of the Turks, the Senate for that cause was willing to govern it self
with such prudence, that, for their own security making advantage of the
absence of Amurath and of time, the evils by superfluous jealousies might not
be hastened, or that Prince diverted from his present engagements. Willing then
not to provoke him, nor leave him cause of offense, as provisions were not
omitted, so they were not greatly divulged or speeded. Command was given to the
Islands, and in Dalmatia, that all should be in a readiness for the occasions;
that in Candia sixteen Galleys should be effectually armed; that to the
Galliasses two should be added, the one commanded by Anthonio Pisari, who had
the command of them all; the other by Sebastian Veniero. In the Arsenal every
thing for a greater arming was disposed into an order, and the Maritime places
were provided with recruits of Foot and Horse. The custody of Cattaro was
committed to Giovanni Paulo Gradenigo, and to Marino Molino that of Novegradi,
as Proveditors extraordinary. Not omitting amidst the orders for defense, the
more secure way of Treaty, the Senate wrote Letters to Amurath, and to the
Grand Vizier, aggravating the assault and boldness of the Pirates, justifying
with expediency and the capitulations their chastisement, and professing a
sincere and constant will not to interrupt the ancient friendship with the
Ottoman Empire. But the undertaking in Asia, upon which the counsels and
resolutions of the Turks were chiefly to depend, proceeded with steps faster
than was supposed; for, Amurath appearing no sooner in the Confines of Persia,
but the Town of Revan, weakly guarded, was rendered to him.

At the same time, by instigation of the Turks, Osbeck a Tartar, and the Grand
Mogor took Arms against the Persians; from whence it became so much the more
easy for Amurath to incamp himself under the Walls of Babylon, a City on the
Banks of Tigris, of a most vast circuit, and fortified by the Persians with
three ditches and three enclosures of wall, but without that order and art,
which in this present Age renders places invincible, even of a much less
circumference. Emir Fatta was Governor, with a Garrison of little less than
thirty thousand Soldiers. Nevertheless, they sufficed not to hinder Amurath,
in November, from encamping there; and he having advertisement, that the King
of Persia with sixty thousand Horse was on his march to attempt the relief,
prevented him, sending a great number of his men to take possession of the
avenues and passages. On the other side overrunning the Country with many
parties, and with good Guards keeping the ways secure and open for his
Victuals, he diverted from his Camp that necessity which he feared much more
than the Enemy. Distributing afterward three attacques, with as many
Batteries, against the Town, he gave the command of one to the Grand Vizier;
assigns another to Mustafa; and committed the third to Deli Vssein.

The King had a mind with his own hand to give fire to the first Cannon, and
with a fierce stoutness assisted, and was present every where giving orders,
rewarding and punishing with a most exact vigilance. To these beginnings the
besieged making no opposition, but only with Cannon, endeavoring to hinder
their approaches and ruin their works; the Turks, covered with Trenches, were
able to advance to the first Ditch. And then the Persians made a sally, with
great numbers and much fury, penetrating into the very Trenches, where they cut
to pieces six thousand Janissaries, and would have done greater mischief, if
Amurath, hasted thither with the Chiefs, drawing with him the flower of the
Army, and the greater part of the Soldiers, had not with as much violence
repulsed them. It is the custom of the Turks in Sieges to overcome Art, and
conquer Nature with fatigue and industry; for prevailing in numbers and
strength of bodies they weary out the defenders with indefatigable pains, win
places with works and miraculous labors, and, if other means fail, they use to
make Bridges, fill up Ditches, and raise Engines with the very bodies of the
slain. In this Siege they undertook to fill up a very great Ditch, and effected
it after twenty three days of continual labor, and many oppositions of the
besieged; by the benefit whereof making a breach of fifty paces in the Wall,
they made way to make themselves Masters of the first enclosure. Two others
remained, probably of greater difficulty, so that it was of necessity, for
filling up another Ditch, to employ great endeavors; and raising a great Cat
with many Cannons on it, commanding the Wall, they attempted to dislodge the
defenders; but they opposed another not inferior in height, and with an equal
number of Cannon silenced the Battery of the Turks. They then, by ways made
under ground penetrating into the Ditch, made nothing of the opposition of
their Enemy, taking out of the way all that, which of earth or otherwise they
had brought to hinder them. But the Turks, not to be wearied out, with great
bodies of Palm Trees, with which the Country abounds, raised the Ditch equal to
the Earth.

And now Amurath, vexed that blood was spilt so slowly, resolves to give a
general assault, and with one fury alone force both the Ramparts. Making then
choice of the day, on which Christians celebrate the Nativity of our Lord, and
was the fortieth of the Siege, he orders the Town to be assaulted on both
sides. Himself in person had a mind to lead on the Troops, and was not easily
diverted from it by the chief Bassa's, promising solemnly to expose themselves,
and sacrifice their own lives, so he would spare himself. The Grand Vizier took
the charge of one side, and Mustafa of the other. The Vizier, having given
proof of all possible force in vain, was killed upon a heap of dead bodies. The
other seeing almost all his men dead about him, taking in his hand in a fury
one of the Royal Standards, climbs up the wall, and plants it there. The
Soldiers followed with great boldness, and killing some of the Persians, they
entered the City, meeting with no other difficulty to make themselves way in
several places; for the defenders, overcome in one, abandoned all. The Turks
pursuing entered also the third enclosure, with the cruelty which not only
Nature and the Victory suggested, but fury and blood also. In the City were
killed without distinction the armed and the unarmed, the Inhabitants as well
as the Soldiers, preserving only alive the Persian Governor, with a few
others, to satisfy the pride of Amurath, and adorn the Triumph. In the
Assault, which lasted a great while, the fight being obstinate and with much
valor, with Sable in hand thirty thousand Turks were slain, and more than ten
thousand hurt.

Amurath having his mind sweetened with the flatteries of glory, and so noble a
Conquest, suffered it to be carried away with an unwonted scene of clemency,
ordering that the slaughter should cease, and the Inhabitants be pardoned as to
life; when Mustafa, immediately taken, as the reward of his courage, into the
place of Grand Vizier, remonstrating to him how, much danger from commiseration
toward a people so numerous and an Enemy might be expected, whilst, when the
Army was retired, the Garrison might at some time or other be overpowered, he
gave way that twenty four thousand men more should be slain. Thus was Babylon
lost, losing withal that boast, which some gave it, never to have been taken by
assault. Amurath made his Entry over the bodies yet warm, of so many slain, and
amidst their blood, almost reeking, barbarously rejoicing to triumph over a
City formerly so famous and stately. The pillage lasted three days, and the
King commanded, that sixty thousand bodies should remain unburied, that a
Persian Ambassador, whom he expected, might be terrified at the horrible
spectacle of so great a slaughter. Thus pride induces barbarous Princes to show
their greatness by those means, through which,

ANNO MDCXXXIX.
In Constantinople, with all sorts of jollity for twenty days was the Victory
solemnized; after which it seemed not to be at all doubted, but that Amurath,
from so happy success elated in his mind and confidence, would think of adding
to his Persian Triumphs, those also which the disunion of Christendom promised
him. In this conjuncture of so great fast arrived to him the Letters of the
Venetians; to which, with an express Currier (the Turks call him Olaccho) he
answers; but not making the least mention of the arrest of the Bailo, if he
were a Conqueror of Asia, he no less threatened Europe. Whether through
ambition or scorn, he touched not a word of an adjustment. Diversity of
enterprises offered themselves continually to his thoughts; for, the incessant
Piracies of the Cossacks in the Black Sea provoked him against Poland, and the
discords of Germany allured him toward Hungary; besides an old design to
dispossess the Prince of Transylvania, and put another in his place of greater
confidence with him. Under pretext to communicate to the Emperor the Conquest
of Babylon, he sends to him Indan Aga Capigi Bassi, but in effect to spy the
state of those Affa^rs, and understand how they stood. Certain it is, that
which way soever he had turned that furious torrent, he would have overwhelmed
and carried every thing by force. In this interim he commands, Commerce should
be forbidden with the Territories of the Republic, and their Ships and
Merchandise to be sequestered, and that a good number of Galleys should be built
in the Black Sea, ordering all sorts of provision for a Naval Army, and in
particular a vast quantity of Bisquet. To all this was the Caimecan obliged to
furnish what was needful with uncessant diligence, and fearing the displeasure
of the King, having no ready money in the Treasury, he disbursed it of his own.

For the greater credit upon so great Naval preparations, Amurath nominates for
Captain Bassa his Favorite Salitar, believing with his name, which was most
acceptable to him, he should induce the Soldiery to follow him more willingly
at Sea. Nor could the War of Persia detain him any longer there; for that King
advancing, a little after the taking of Babylon, with forty thousand Horse, had
hoped to reap some of those advantages, which in new Conquests the negligence
of the Conquerours, either disbanded to plunder, or lead away with the
Festivals, or negligent in their Watch, is wont sometimes to offer. But
Amurath, watchful over all, sends against him ten thousand Janissaries with
forty thousand Horse, and there was like to have been a Battle, if the
excessive swelling of a River, which ran betwixt them, had not hindered the
Encounter. The Persian hereupon thought fit to retire, and, applying to the
thoughts of Peace, being, besides Foreign distractions, molested with seditions
at home, he sends an Ambassador to Amurath, who received him in Babylon with
that horrid Ceremony before mentioned. The answer to the Propositions of Peace
was not less haughty, declaring, that he would entirely desolate that Kingdom,
if he did not give up to him all that, which in other times had been possessed
by the Ottomans.

Nor did the Mogor speak of milder Conditions, demanding the Province of
Candahar, for which he made War. The Persian nevertheless, inferior in
strength, went on fencing in the Treaty for the gaining of time, which happened
fitly to his advantage; because Amurath was forced to draw further off those
Confines. God, who above all hates the pride of men, uses to punish it with the
self same instruments of their vanity. And that was seen in Babylon, where
those unburied Carcasses caused such a terrible plague, that the Air being
infected, men perished in infinite numbers. Amurath gone, and the Grand Vizier,
left on the Borders, and a great Garrison in the City, comes to Diarbechir to
pass into Europe. According to his motion the Venetians hastened also their
provisions and the care of their defense. About the end of the year past, the
Pope congratulating the Victory, had voluntarily sent the Republic the
continuation of the Tithes upon the Clergy, which was wont to be renewed every
nine years.

The Nuntio Vitelli was permitted to present this Brief in the College, and he
making us^ of the occasion, Insisted upon the zeal of Urban toward the common
Cause; extolled his resolutions to assist the Republic, if assaulted by the
Turks, and with all his care to procure peace amongst Christians. But the
Mediation being common to them both, there was a necessity that the Ministers
of both should confer together. But in what Method that might be adequate to
the necessity, could that be practiced, since the affections of the Princes
seemed so much disunited amongst themselves? That the Mediators would neglect
their duties, if themselves at discord and divided, did not persuade others to
Peace with authority and with examples. That the projects to be made use of in
the Courts ought to be ripened at Rome; there ought to be concerted the defense
and motions against the common Enemy. That the Pope desired hereupon the
counsels of the Republic, no less than the informations of the Turks
proceedings, to direct the resolutions of what ought to be done. Nor amidst so
many cares were to be omitted applications to Italy, reduced to the point of a
grand Crisis by the affairs of Piedmont, where the inward affections of that
Family made sport for Strangers. What remained now entire in Italy and faithful
to Christendom, if the Pope and the Republic at least should not conspire with
unanimity and counsel to preserve the one with Negotiations of Peace, and the
other with the junction of Arms? The Senate therefore was from the conjuncture
of the times, the universal necessity, and the desire of the Pope, invited to
send Ministers to him, to the end, that interests and opinions being made
common, the remedy of the present evils might be fully considered.

Upon these motives the Venetians resolved to send to Rome an Ambassador
Extraordinary with express charge, that keeping only to that which concerned
the Cause of the Turks and the Negotiating the Peace of Christendom, he should
abstain from whatsoever business, that might tend to the proper interests of
the Republic, which, in regard of those that were common, it was willing at
present to lay aside and suspend. Giovanni Nani, Procurator of St. Marco, was
made choice of, to the end that by that natural dexterity he had, and
consummated experience, gained in the most weighty employments of the
Republic, he might promote affairs of that great importance. He was received
by the Pope with joy and singular testimonies of honor; but Frederick,
Cardinal Cornaro, Patriarch of Venice, being his Forerunner, sent (as is the
obligation of Custom) in imitation of the Apostles, induces Urban to cancel the
Inscription placed by him under the Memorial of Pope Alexander the Third. But
to restore that which was anciently there, he would not, tacitly leaving it to
the consideration of his Successor, since he abolished that whereof himself had
been Author. The Senate, esteeming this, for so much as it was the first step,
necessary for the finishing of the work, omitted not to express it self, that
nothing else could content it but the renewing of the former Elogium. Upon this
overture of correspondence with Rome, the Senate assents also to dispatch the
Bulls for diverse Prelates, upon whom, during the past uncertainties,
Bishoprics and other Benefices of the Church had been conferred, and a certain
difficulty about the usual proposing of Bishoprics being moved in the
Consistory, because it was the desire of the Senate, that that Function should
be performed by the Cardinals Venetians, of which Cornaro alone was then in
Court, it was as an act of confidence agreed, that together with the National,
the Cardinals also of the Palace, Brother and Nephew of the Pope himself,
should do it.

But as to the affairs most important, the Ambassador demonstrated to Urban,
what the danger was which impended from the Turkish Arms. That Babylon was
taken, and therefore in Persia the War at an end, or Peace very near. It was
not to be doubted, but that to Amurath, puffed up and elated in his mind,
ambition and power would suggest new designs and bold attempts. The long
intestine discords of the Princes had these many years served for pastime to
the Barbarians, who carefully observe the conjunctures, by assaulting the
weakest to make way to invade the more powerful. War was scattered in Italy,
and in every other part; Christendom appeared all bathed in blood, nor were
other reports heard of, but those of deadly Battles and lamentable Sieges. Why
should so great slaughters be endured for unprofitable Conquests, nay for great
damages, if we will compare them to the progress which the common Enemy
promises himself? That Christendom can save it self from this present shipwreck
but by Peace alone. That it was Urbans duty to apply the prayers, and engage
the Authority of a common Father and a Prince, to pacify his Sons and unite
them against the Power of the Barbarians. That it was his office to calm the
World, appease the Kings, pacify the Princes, quiet disturbances, and compose
the people. The Republic would not spare pains and endeavors to second those
pious intentions and his most prudent judgment. She saw her self threatened by
the unjust rage of the Turks, but what was her Country but the outworks of
others? She maintained with a long Frontier the Guard of the Confines of Italy
and the violence of a furious Torrent. If she should yield to necessity, or
fall under force, what would become of the Kingdoms of Sicily and Naples, nay
the State of the Pope himself? This Country, the Guardian of Religion, the Seat
of Liberty and Honor cannot be invaded by the Turks in one part but it will be
oppressed all over. Their dreadful Arms are to be compared to that poison,
which by one sole touch creeps irresistably over the whole body. That the
Senate for a common benefit promises a constancy in maintaining the War equal
to the Generosity of provoking it. The proud pretensions of the Turks had for
their aim to extort from the Republic Ships and Galleys, to offend Christendom
with the very instruments of their own defense. In case of denial, War ensued;
of granting, the power and strength of the Enemy was increased, who not content
with the usurping of so many spoils, lies in wait for the last breath of
languishing Christendom. That the Republic had given an absolute denial to
their demands, yet knew their Forces unequal, and by consequence the danger
great: Nevertheless put their Arms in order, prepared for resistance, with a
firm hope, that that War being from God, and the cause undivided betwixt the
Church and the Republic, blessings from Heaven would abound, nor would warlike
assistances be wanting, in particular that of the Vicar of Christ.

The Pope heard all with grave reflections; discoursed of many things; and
although more difficult to resolve and put them in effect, nevertheless
affirmed, that urgency coming upon them, he would not suffer his endeavors and
forces to be wanting. For the present he permitted the Levy of three or four
thousand men in his Country, and to promote more vigorously the Mediation of
Peace betwixt the Princes, he sent Extraordinary Nuntio's to the Courts with
vehement entreaties and effectual considerations to bring them to some
Conditions of Peace, and, if that should be found too difficult and long, to a
Truce, or at least to a suspension of Arms by Sea, by transmitting their powers
to Rome, to the end, that under the eye and direction of the Pope the Treaty
might with as much care, as the necessity required, be brought to perfection.
The Ambassadors of the Republic cooperated in the same, the interposition of
Urban proving faint and not acceptable. For a pretext of particular diffidence
served the distaste, which was pretended by the Emperor, by France, and by
Spain; for there being named in the promotion of Cardinals by the Emperor the
Prince Rinaldo d'Este, and by one of the Crowns Giulio Mazarini, and by the
other the Abbot Peretti, the Pope denying to comply with the instances, and, to
cover the little inclination he had toward those persons, alleging that they
were not National, deferred the promotion, though there were many places vacant.

The Crowns herewith not at all content, insisted on the Nomination with so
much heat, that being at variance in all else, they agreed only in this, to
force the will of the Pope; and passing from entreaties to protests and
threatenings, gave out, they would forbid their Subjects to accept of that
Dignity, as often as the nominated should not be comprehended. The French in
particular pressed for Mazarine, who, besides what he had negotiated in
Piedmont, had in his extraordinary Nunciature of France so gained the favor of
Richelieu, and had declared himself so partial for that Crown, that, having
drawn the Cardinal Anthonio to the dependence upon it, he not only passed in
Rome for the most confident Minister of France, but being called to Paris, was
declared Plenipotentiary at the Meeting for Peace, not without the disgust and
murmuring of some of the Nation, that for the Purple and weightiest Employments
Strangers were preferred, as if Merit and Capacity were wanting in so many
persons of the Kingdom.

To exasperate minds the more, there happened afterward other lesser
accidents, which yet in the Court of Rome take the place of greater matters;
for the Master of the Horse of the Mareshal d'Estre, Ambassador of France,
being outlawed for having taken away out of the hands of the Sergeants a
Friend of his, was killed in the Country, while he was yet in his service, and
his head publicly exposed in Rome. Whereupon the Ambassador taking himself to
be slighted, intermitted going to Audiences, from whence came, that in France
also they were denied to Monsieur Scotti, Nuntio Extraordinary, with much
rigor and severity. This disgust was at last composed with the punishing some
Officers, and with the offices of respect and esteem, which the Cardinal
Barberin passed with the Ambassador in his own house, going thither to visit
his Wife. After this, upon the old diffidences with the Spaniards were sowed
new discontents; so that the Ambassador, Marquess di Castle Roderigo,
suspended in like manner the Audiences with Barberino, because, he being the
Cardinal Protector of the Religion of the Franciscans, had, by the Authority of
the Pope, assumed to the Generalat a Brother that had not the Royal
approbation; and the displeasure was so much the more increased, by how much
the same Ambassador, the night of the Nativity, caused in Rome fast by a
Church to be arrested the Prince of Sans, of the House of Dorefici, a
Neopolitan, accused to frame with the Ministers of France (not without the
knowledge of the Barberins) concerts against that Kingdom, and being sent to
the Vice-King had his head publicly cut off.

From all this the Negotiation of Peace grew cool, besides that through the
difficulty of the Pass-ports the meeting of the Assembly was prolonged; and as
for the general Truce, which was to be managed in the Court of Rome, the
French, though their Confederates of contrary Religion could not come thither,
showed themselves ready to send their powers; conscious nevertheless, that such
a proposition would be adhorred by the Spaniards, as afterward happened, King
Philip declaring himself, that he could not open his mind in confidence to
Urban, whilst one of the Cardinal Nephews showed himself so partial to France.
The Mission then of Extraordinary Nuntios, rendered unprofitable by the
difficulty, and little pleasing by reason of the disgusts, was of no other use
but to give a change in Vienna and Madrid to those in Ordinary. The weight of
the Mediation falling almost wholly upon the Ambassadors of Venice, the Truce
was by them point blank proposed in France and in Spain, but was encountered
with the wonted disagreements; for Richelieu desired it for eight or ten years,
and that every one should remain in possession of what he was seized; and
Olivares pretended it for a very short time, for the negotiating of the Peace
only, or, if it were to last for a long term, that Conquests should be
restored. Nor was there better success in the suspension of Arms by Sea, which
was also proposed, to give the Turks some apprehension; for the intentions
being no less differing than the interests, whatsoever inclination the
Spaniards showed to it, furnished the French with an argument to reject it, out
of a belief, that they were induced to yield their assent from weakness and the
fear of their Naval preparations. So that during all this present year nothing
else was wrought out for the Peace, but that the Emperor at the instance of
Giovanni Grimani, Ambassador for the Republic, consented a safe conduct to
the Palatine, to send his Ministers to the Meeting.

As to that of the Spaniards for the Provinces of Holland, after the Cardinal
Infant had by several means sought, but in vain, to bring them to a Treaty, he
dispatched it, but it was not by them accepted; for expressing, to grant it to
the Deputies of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, they pretended, that
it should have been said, To the Ambassadors of the States General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries: And upon this contest they dwelt long,
Spain not assenting to the Character of Ambassadors, thereby not to authorize
their Sovereignty, but willing rather to leave a blank for the quality, to the
end, it might be inserted by the States themselves, as they desired it. But
that pleased not Holland neither; so that careless of the dangers of the
Republic, and the threatenings and preparations of the Turks, so far was it
from facilitating Peace, that some rather doubted, that the Venetians
applications to the affairs of the Sea did much promote the Princes designs to
disturb Italy. And to say truth, she underwent strange and dangerous accidents;
for Prince Thomas, being come the beginning of the year out of Flanders to
Milan, held with the Cardinal his Brother Trivultio, the Governor, Aragona and
the Great Chancellor assisting, a close and secret Meeting, in which it was
resolved to make War in Piedmont. The difficulties they met with about the
manner were not small, because the Princes, what with the disposition of the
people and with Intelligences, hoped to make a Conquest of the Country for
themselves, and the Spaniards, who furnished the money and men for it,
pretended, that the advantage of the Conquests should be theirs, to balance it
with the losses which they received or feared elsewhere. It was at last agreed,
that what should come to be conquered by the Kings Forces should be kept by the
same, and as much as should voluntarily submit, should be at the disposing of
the Princes, who, transported by their interests, consented, that the two
Crowns, the one with open Hostility, and the other under the pretext of
succors, should rent Piedmont into pieces.

The Spaniards could have desired, that the Emperor would have sent a body of
his Troops into Italy, or at least a General to command those of the German
Nation, which they had in their service in the Milanese, to the end, that the
cause might have received authority from the Emperors Name, and he have been
constituted Judge betwixt the pretended Tutors of the little Duke; but Count
Traatmanstorf, Ferdinand's most favored Minister, kept him off from meddling in
the Affairs of that Province, the Emperor complaining rather of the Spaniards,
that for the interests of Piedmont the more weighty ones of the Empire were
neglected, and in particular those of Alsace, which so much concerned the House
in general. Nevertheless, to comply with them, he declares null the Testament
of the Duke Vittorio, and decrees the Princes Tutors to the Nephew. They under
this color publish a Manifest to gain them the people, and disanulled all the
acts of the Regent, who, with other Writings and contrary Edicts, maintained
her right and authority. But, passing quickly from the Pen to the Sword, the
Spaniards getting first into the Field, one part of the Army, with Martino d'
Aragona, went to besiege Centio, not so much to open the passages, as to draw
the applications and French Forces into those parts. The enterprise was carried
on by Antonio Sottello; for that Aragona, taking a view of the Town of
Salicetto, near to Centio, with the shot of a Musket was killed. In this while
Prince Thomas, with Spanish Troops only, surprises the Town of Chivas, not far
from Turin, and it was firmly believed, that he held intelligence with the
Governor; because, though he brake down the Gate with a Petard, there did not
appear, in those within, a disposal of those Orders for the defense, which in
case of sudden and unexpected accidents use to be given out by those that have
the command. The Prince Cardinal conveyed himself thither, to stir up the
people in his favor nearer hand, but the Garrison and the Governor were
placed by the Spaniards. Tomaso losing no time to go on, takes Chieri and
Moncalieri, so soon as he came before them. The Town of Aglie making resistance
was plundered, and Inurea taken by force after a short defense. La Valle d'
Agosta declared it self to be at the Princes devotion, and because both hearts
and Gates were opened to them, Verrua and Crescentino were given up, the
Inhabitants in this last hindering the French Garrison to defend it. To open the
Navigation of the Po, Pontestura in Monferrat was taken in.

Thomaso, coming near to the City of Turin, filled every thing with alteration,
and such a muttering, that the Duchess was more afraid of a tumult of the
people, than the assault of the Enemy. Nor did this so much arise from the
felicity of the late successes, and from the satisfactions which accompanied
the Name and Arms of the Prince, as from the great number of Partisans and
Confidents he had in Turin, some whereof first with secret and now with open
discourses stirred up the minds of all against the present Government. For this
cause the Regent, sending the little Duke and the Daughters, for greater
security, to Monmelian, was forced to commit herself wholly to the custody and
direction of the French. La Valetta orders the defense, Sentinels, and Guards;
whereupon the people, that fluctuated amidst various affections, were
restrained rather by fear than fidelity. The Prince, seeing no commotion in his
favor, retires. While he stayed at Valentino, the Nuntio Caffarelli, who
resided for the Pope in Turin, brought him, in the name of the Duchess,
advantageous conditions of Peace; but without effect, they excluding his coming
into Turin, and participation in the Regency, which the Prince pretended. The
French tempted the Cardinal, accounting it great advantage, if they could but
separate him from his Brother; in him, as in the eldest, residing the more
legitimate title to the succession and the tutelage.

But in the pitch of so propitious fortune the Brothers, not willing by
dividing to weaken their hopes and the party, linked themselves rather so much
the faster with the Spaniards; and Thomaso, in conjunction with Leganes,
marches to besiege Moncalvo, and, before it was rendered, separating with some
Troops surprises Villa Nova d' Asti. Both the Brothers afterward go to Asti, a
City furnished neither with Fortifications, Provisions, nor a sufficient
Garrison; but there being within it certain Companies of Piemontois, who at the
name of the Prince flying away, both Arms and Colors rendered without defense.
The Commander Balbiani, who was the Governor, retired into the Citadel, but
kept it not above three days; it being weak, little, and commanded by a small
Fort upon the Hill, possessed by the Spaniards. Nevertheless, because he
expected not the Cannon, he was suspected, that he had before the Siege been
overcome either by affection toward the Princes, or some other interest. The
Citadel remaining in the hands of the Spaniards, the City was delivered to the
Princes, either in order to the Agreement, because it rendered voluntarily, or
rather because, being exposed to whom was Master of the Field, Leganes did not
care to employ a Garrison there, keeping it under with the Citadel, which
remained in his power. The Cardinal fixes his residence there; but beginning,
together with his Brother, to be aware, that they were made use of, as
instruments of their own and the Country's slavery, they desired to raise a
body of men to act apart from the Spaniards, take places, and form a third
party, which might render them more valued by Strangers, and acceptable to the
people; and demanded of Leganes, in conformity to the Agreement, money to make
Levies. He furnishes it but scantily, to the end, that having Forces of their
own, they might not take the liberty and courage to free themselves from the
Spanish party. In the mean time making profit of the Enemies disorders, and of
the countenance but rather weakness of the Princes, he promoted the advantages
of the Crown, making progress in the Monferrat; so that having forced the
Castle of Moncalvo, he came to the Siege of Trino. A thousand Soldiers which
were within it were not sufficient for the great circuit, and the many
fortifications which environed that place. For which cause, la Valetta having
not been able to prevent the Siege by succors, the Spaniards had the good luck
not only to take the Outworks by assault, but to enter into it, mingled with
the defenders as they retired.

By this means Casal remained blocked; whereupon la Valetta, having received
out of France some little renfort, carefully put into it eight hundred
Soldiers, and assigns the Government to Monsieur de la Tour, the Duke of
Candale being dead there, who first had it. But not having Forces to be able to
resist in several places, he provides Carmagnuola, Chivasco, and some other
places, more commodious or suspected, abandoning Alba with some other Towns,
not possible to be kept. Cuneo also declares it self in favor of the Princes,
which served to open them the way to Villa Franca, and exclude French succors
by Sea; and Sant' Ja gave it self to the Spaniards: so that, except the
Metropolis, scarce any other remained entire in Piedmont. To oppose himself to
so many losses, la Valetta goes out of Turin, recovers Chieri, cutting the
Garrison in pieces, and together with the Duke of Longueville, come out of
France with some Troops, marches toward Asti, where by Intelligence he hoped
to surprise the Town, and take the two Princes Prisoners, who were then within
it. Understanding in his march, that the Plot was discovered, changing his way
he goes to Chivas, and sits down before it.

The succors, which Leganes upon knowledge of it sent, came not in time; nor
availed it, that he, to hinder Victuals, lodged with his Army betwixt that
place and Turin; much less, that assaulting the Lines, he attempted to force
them. Wherefore they being stoutly defended, he was constrained to abandon it;
so that the Baron de Sebach, the Governor having want of provisions and
relief, surrenders. During this Siege, the Prince Cardinal, invited by the
Governors of Villa Franca and Nizza, going toward these parts, taking in his
way Ceva with other places, found, that his reception into the Towns
forementioned came to be hindered by the French, who with 18 Galleys and 24
Vessels lay before them, when, at the appearing of certain Spanish Ships,
removing to chase them, the Governors opened the Gates, the Citadel of Nizza
only resisting for some days. The French intended with the whole Army to
attempt the relief of it; but not coming in time, having in their march taken
the Castles of Been, Fossano, and Mondovi, resolved to attacque Cuneo,
notwithstanding the Intelligence, they had within it, had been discovered. But
such conquests and attempts could not countervail the losses and the dangers;
whereupon, the Duchess making great complaints to obtain more vigorous
assistance from France, Monsieur de Chavigny, Secretary of State, arrives at
Turin, not so much to comfort her as to intimate to her, That there was no
other way of safety for her but that of putting her self and the Country
blindfold into the Kings trust, who then engaged in reputation and interest,
would with a strong hand and all his Forces come to her relief.

This was Richelieu's counsel, who equally fixed in the advantages of the King,
and implacable in his own revenge upon the Savoyards, preferred the profit,
offered him by the occasion, before all other considerations. The Duchess
resisting as much as she could, was at last forced to abandon Carmagnola,
Savigliano, and Chierasco to be garrisoned by French, for so long as the
Spaniards and the Princes should retain their Conquests; and it was agreed,
That the King, coming toward Italy the end of the year, should somewhere near
the Alps speak with his Sister to concert the succors, and give her reputation
among Strangers and the people by so evident an appearance of his protection
and kindness.

But a more lamentable accident confounded and cast affairs into greater
disorder; for that Leganes marching to relieve Cuneo, and divert the French
from that enterprise, Prince Thomas secretly separates from the Army, with a
thousand Foot and two thousand Horse, and with Ladders and Pettards coming to
Turin, where he wanted not Intelligence, climbing by night that which was
called the Green Bastion, and, throwing down the Gate of the Castle, putting
some few French to flight, which upon the sudden Alarm were flocked thither,
takes the Town. The confusion was such, as in surprises uses to proceed from
the darkness, the noise and fury of the Conquerours, and from the distraction
and terror of the conquered. The Prince restrains, though with trouble, the
Soldiers from pillage, not to provoke the people so well affected to his name.
Upon this success the French were forced to rise immediately from Cuneo, and
come near to the Citadel of Turin to strengthen it, and to withdraw the
Duchess, who had scarce had time that night to save her self, half clothed,
with some Ladies and certain Ministers.

Leganes, with excess of pride for so great prosperities, coming into Turin,
would have the Citadel besieged; for, that taken, as it seemed not difficult to
him in that constitution of things, French succors would be excluded out of
Italy, and Casal remain a secure conquest to him. But in regard he pretended to
garrison it with his own Soldiers, the Princes with opposite ends, ere they
would apply themselves to the Siege, required security, that that and other
places, gained undoubtedly rather by the reputation and favor of their
presence, than the power of the Spanish Arms, might be consigned into their
hands. Thus discord beginning to insinuate it self, the felicity of those Arms
was then at a stand, when it appeared to proceed with the greatest prosperity.
This state of things caused great apprehensions in Italy, it being doubted,
lest, all at last making way for the advantage of the more powerful, the
Spanish Greatness would extend it self to the Alps. The French making use of
this reflection, stirred up the Princes of Italy, both with the fear of the
progresses of Spain and with the hopes of their succors, to take part in the
Cause of the Savoyards.

The Pope, doubting that all tended to divide that Country betwixt the two
Crowns, endeavored by all sorts of offices to reconcile the Princes to their
Sister-in-law. Nor were the Venetians, notwithstanding the distraction toward
the Levant, exempt from the instances of both the Crowns; for Monsieur d' Vsse
for France solicited, that they would give assistance to the Duke of Savoy,
and conspire in the aims of that Crown; nay from instances passing to the
considerations of common concern and weighty dangers, he did in a manner
upbraid them, That forgetting their ancient Customs, they neglected the public
good for private offenses. That the present business did not concern Vittorio
deceased, but an innocent Orphan. Do then hatreds betwixt Princes last
eternally? The friendship of the Republic was deserved by all those that
equally loved the liberty of this Country, and have a common interest in it.
That the question now was concerning the enslaving of all Italy, and while
uncertain dangers were feared from the Turks side, evident mischiefs were
advanced by the yoke of Spain. To what purpose had she heretofore defended
Piedmont, and in Piedmont Italy with money, blood, and counsel, nay with
indangering her self, if, at last neglecting it, she should now leave all in
prey to the Spaniards? That in other times on appearances and threatenings, and
not only upon Invasions, she had been justly moved; had called in Friends;
stirred up the World; opposed Forces; but now unlike her self, forgetting in a
manner the recent Hostilities of the one, and abhorring the ancient friendships
of the other, carelessly beheld the issue of things. By the Conquests of
Monferrat and Piedmont succors are excluded out of Italy, and the Alps shut up
to France; but what does that import King Lewis, bating his great care of his
friends, who might elsewhere more profitably extend his Confines, and enlarge
his Conquests? The Senate was to consider of it, and the other Princes to give
their minds to it; for the disadvantages were at present such, as could not be
repaired with good offices, much less with desires or counsels. That States
were defended, Friends preserved, and Public Good protected with resolutions,
with arms, and with actions, not with cautions and reserves, interpreted by the
Enemy for fear and a superfluous awe.

To such apprehensions the Count della Rocca, the Ambassador of Spain, to
remove Jealousies, opposed a Discourse no less effectual; he assured, That his
King had no intention but to assist the Princes for the advantage of the Duke,
whose Countries, under pretext of aid and protection, were seen possessed by
the French. That the Governor of Milan did not, though on a subject so just,
engage so much of his own accord, as exhorted, entreated, and implored by the
Princes themselves and the people. Whilst the Duchess opened the Gates and the
Towns to French Garrisons, why should it not be lawful for the Spanish Armies
to oppose and prevent those that designed, by the Usurpation of Piedmont, the
oppression of Italy? Are then the Spanish Garrisons more to be suspected by the
Princes than the supplies of French Forces? Let them behold in Pignarol and in
Casal what was the issue of the Tutelage or of the assistances given by that
Crown. Let there be a composure of all things; let its own be restored by all,
to the House of Savoy and of Mantua; let Italy be put into its pristine state,
and the disturbers of the public quiet excluded, and let the World afterward
be Judge, which of the two Kings, with a mind more upright, is inclined to
Justice and to Peace.

He pressed besides, that the Count della Manta might be admitted to Audience,
sent by the Princes to Venice, under pretense to inform the Republic of their
Reasons and Rights; but aiming peradventure more secretly to procure them some
private assistance, to form that party, which they had in their thoughts,
independent from the Crowns. But the Senate refused to hear him, answering as
to the rest in the same expressions equally used to the Ambassadors of France
and Spain, exhorting to a general Peace, and above all to the tranquillity of
Italy. They alleged their just suspicions of the Arms of the Turks, which, if
at present they involved the Republic in apprehensions and troubles, tended to
greater advantages against all Christians. If such reasons had any force to
render the two Kings satisfied with the Republics Neutrality, they availed
nothing for conciliating a Peace, it appearing every day more clearly, that for
the same causes, for which there was a breaking into War, it was likely to
continue a long time. The Venetians therefore being to expect little succors
in their necessity, whilst they saw the danger slighted, applied themselves to
some kind of composure with the Turks, which might at least be able to retard
that mischief, for which there appeared as yet no remedy in a readiness.

Amurath, as has been said, being come to Diarbechir, intended to continue his
way to Constantinople; for the plague raging more and more, had almost consumed
all the Army, and the remaining Soldiers were mutined against the Grand
Vizier, murmuring at the King himself, as if, wont to palliate his avarice with
his cruelty, he had abandoned his Soldiers to the plague and to sufferings,
expressly to defraud them of those recompenses and gifts, which were wont to be
bestowed by the Ottoman Kings on those that well deserved, and the victorious
Armies. The Grand Vizier having had much ado to quiet them, solicited from his
own danger, counseled Amurath to remain in those Provinces, prognosticating
otherwise, that the Soldiers in his absence would lose all discipline and
respect, and the Conquests would with as much shame be exposed, as they had
been gotten with glory. But the self same considerations expressly hastened the
Kings departure, both to withdraw himself from the grumblings of the Soldiers,
and not to be a Spectator, without force, of that, which the Persians might
attempt. To take away every shadow and every chief, which might but in name
give countenance to sedition, since the Turks are not accustomed to seek Kings
out of the Ottoman Family, he dispatches, as he was upon the way, order to
Constantinople to take away the life of his Uncle Mustapha.

This unhappy man having twice scarce tasted the Empire, was kept in a most
strict prison, always hating life, and every moment fearing death. The order,
as usual, was immediately executed, though there remained none of the Blood
Royal but one Brother of Amurath, believed a Fool. The King, pursuing his
Journey, made a solemn Vow to his false Prophet, not to lay down his Sword till
he should have subjected the Christians to his Empire and Law. But God has set
limits to the fury of man as well as bounds to the Sea. Amurath, through the
strength of his body sottishly fierce, gave himself up as a prey to every
excess, particularly that of Wine. His Genius was his Lawmakers, though to the
contempt of the Alcoran, which expressly forbid it; and his example prevailing
over the Authority of the Law, drunkenness became familiar with the Turks. The
complexion of the King, though of the strongest, not able to bear incessant
disorder, was at last shaken, and on the way subjected to a dangerous sickness.
He found himself weakened in such sort, that moderating the pride of his mind,
he inclines to thoughts of Peace. At Smith, not far from Constantinople, his
pleasure was to hold a Council about it, and there it was fully considered, The
Army in Asia destroyed, the War of Persia not as yet ended, the difficulty to
put to Sea a powerful Fleet, thirty Galleys to bridle the Cossacks being to be
employed in the Black Sea: That the Venetians had advantagiously made use of
the time, provided for the Islands and Towns, increased their Fleet, and had
ordered and in a readiness all sorts of Provisions.

It was then secretly resolved to stoop to an accord; but such is always the
custom of that Government to show it self averse to it, to maintain its fast,
and meliorate the conditions. Their great preparations therefore made a great
noise, and the Venetians did oppose as great, having chosen Proveditor General
of the Sea, with Authority of Captain General, Luigi Giorgio, Procurator of St.
Marco, to the end, that he should arm and go forth, according as he should be
clearly informed of the Turks hostile intentions. The Tartars, called Crim,
depending upon the Ottoman Port, made at this time, to revenge themselves of
the Cossacks, and to arm the Turkish Galleys with Slaves, an Incursion into
Russia, bringing away a great Booty and number of men, which they sold (as is
their custom) to the Turks at a low rate.

But Amurath being come to Constantinople, made not his entry with any designed
Triumph; because, weakened with the late accident, he could not sit vigorously
on Horseback; some principal Prisoners only were brought in, and a great
quantity of Gold, which stupendiously exceeded the sum expended for the War of
Persia: So much are the Ottomans wont to make profit by their Armies, which to
other Princes serve to consume their Treasure. He presently let the Bailo know,
that he held him no more a public Minister, but the Hostage for Ships hostilly
taken within his Port. Displacing Mussa the Caimecan, he nevertheless orders
Mustapha, substituted into the same Charge, that he should not shut his ears to
a Treaty. Contarini was admitted to Audience, and the Bassa quietly hearing the
reasons of the fact and the fixed resolution of the Senate, not to deliver up
in exchange their own Galleys, condescended at last to an adjustment, which
consisted, In the Bailoes promising some money as in reparation of the hurt
done at Vallona, in restoring that Vessel which was in being, as properly
belonging to the Turks; as to other things, that all sorts of pretensions
should be silenced; that the Corsaires should be commanded not to molest the
Venetians and the Governors of Fortresses, not to receive them in the Ports,
till first caution given, not to make any disturbance. That the Commanders for
the Republic might punish the said Corsaires in conformity to the ancient
Capitulations; that Commerce should be renewed, and the Bailo be restored to
his liberty and house: As was done, the Caimecan sending him back with a Vest
of Gold, which is an Honor used by the Turks.

The advice of this agreement coming unexpectedly to Venice, raised in men's
minds (as it happens in great things and unlooked for) diversity of thoughts,
whilst some were not wanting, who confounding the reflections of the Government
with the discourses of the Vulgar, judged that it would have been good counsel
to have secured themselves with Arms rather than with Money, out of a doubt,
that the Turks making a show of Peace, would by this false security protract
their revenge, and under a feigned tranquillity, till a better conjuncture,
cover their hatreds and disgusts. But the Senate, from the experience of former
times and the conjuncture of present things, undeceived as to the hopes of
Christian assistances, soberly weighing the dangers, the charges, and the
consequences of the War, which might be carried on rather with good courage
than with equal Forces and good successes, having formerly commanded the Bailo
to endeavor an accord, approved the conclusion, participating to the Princes
to have resolved to procure honest conditions of Peace, since the state of
Christendom understood the trouble of such a War unseasonable. The resolution
was approved of all, and by the Pope, judging that the Peace had been prudently
managed by the Venetians, and with commendations equal to the Generosity with
which they had encountered the danger.

It happened at the instant the accord was ready to be executed, that the Turks
on the Confines of Dalmatia, for private disputes which are frequent amongst
those Neighbors, entered armed into the Territories of the Republic, so that
Marino Molino, who had been assumed into the Charge of Proveditor General of
the Horse, to repulse them and repair himself, attacques them in four places;
and in those Factions, Mustapha the principal Disturber of quiet being killed,
the Hurliburly with his life ended. At Constantinople all proceeding against
the Republic and all preparations for a Fleet ceased, but not the suspicion,
that there was not some design against Christendom elsewhere; for that Amurath,
recovered somewhat in his health and strength, sought for Peace with the
Persian. That King, after Amurath was gone, had retaken Revan, and having made
Peace with the Tartar Osbech, had the luck to beat the Mogor and to keep the
possession of Candahar. Nevertheless, because War with the Turks uses not to be
advantageous to the Persians, he desired Peace, and to negotiate it, had sent
Ambassadors to the Port, where the Grand Vizier was also arrived. The
difficulty about Revan consisted, that Amurath desired it should be restored,
and the Persians retaining it, understood, that the Capitulations made in the
time of Soliman should only be confirmed. Amurath determines to remand the
Ambassadors into Persia together with a Minister of his own, that might sound
intentions and observe affairs, for the future better direction of his Counsels
and Arms, since that in Europe he saw rising up several accidents, very
seasonable for his end to employ them against the Christians.

The Prince of Moldavia had obtained of the Port, by the wonted means of money,
to give up that Province to his Son, and himself to be substituted to the
Wallachian; but he publishing, that the Order came not from the King, but from
the corrupted Ministers, puts himself in defense, and marching against that
other, defeats him and drives him away. Amurath, that knew not what was doing
in Wallachia, or at least to cover the dishonor of the success, feigned, not
to know it, vents his wrath against the Caimecan, as if bribed by the Moldavian
he had concealed the business from him, and caused him to be strangled in the
seven Towers, confiscating all the Estate he had. He could not for all that
digest the affront, and disposed things, framing pretexts to disturb the
Wallachian again, in assurance to break out into a War against the Christians,
either in Hungary or in Poland, because it was believed, that the Transilvanian
and Polacks would not suffer that Prince to be destroyed, and it might well be,
that the Emperor, though greatly employed elsewhere, might be engaged in it.

But Heaven diverted this blow; for Amurath was surprised with a more dangerous
sickness, in the fears whereof being exhorted by the Musti and his Mother, he
vowed to abstain for the future from Wine, and, for the earnest of his Oath,
brake the most precious Vessels wherein he drank. Being scarce recovered, and
unmindful of the danger he had run, and of his promise, he falls again to such
exorbitant disorders, that relapsing he dyed the 7. of February of the year
following in the night, in the two and thirtieth of his Age, and the fifteenth
of his Empire.

Of several Sons which he had had, none remaining alive, the Empire fell to his
Brother Ibrain, who was seven and twenty years old; but either for fear of
death, which he expected every moment, or through the solitude of the Prison
where he was kept, amused in childish exercises, was of a stupid and dull
Understanding. He was not easily induced to believe, that the Empire was fallen
to his lot; but fearing rather to be haled away to be strangled, he would not
go out of his Chamber, till the body of his Brother was brought to him, at the
sight whereof he cried out, (uttering words not so simple) that a great King
was dead, but withal a most cruel Tyrant. Passing thereupon in a moment from a
Prison to an Empire, new to himself, much more to business, he leaves the
direction of them to his Mother and Mustapha the Grand Vizier.

The Republic, according to custom, appoints Pietro Foscarini as Ambassador
Extraordinary to congratulate with him, and Girolamo Trevisano to succeed to
the Bailo. Upon this mutation of Government at Constantinople, it in truth
looked as if Christendom might have a breathing, but it was afterward seen,
how blind the judgments of men are, and that where force prevails, it is
rendered more formidable, if reason step not in to correct it. But that shall be
reserved for the following years.

In Turin the spreading of the Troops had given means to the French, to whom
the Duchess had wholly committed the defense of the Citadel, to put a better
Garrison and Provisions into it; whereupon the Peace being rendered more
difficult, because the proposition of the Princes fell to the ground, that
together with the City the Citadel should be kept by Subjects trusted by both
the parties: The Nuntio at last prevailed in the consent to a Truce, from the
fourth of August to the twenty fourth of October, which was punctually executed
in Italy, though in France and in Spain it was with unanimous opinions, but for
differing causes, censured. To the French nevertheless it was of great
advantage; because the Duke of Longueville, with the Troops destined for Italy,
was able in Burgundy and Alsace to make considerable Conquests; so that Leganes
was so much the more blamed in Spain, by how much that, besides the putting a
stop to fortune in the most happy course of prosperity and keeping the Forces
employed in Italy, he gave time to the Enemy to strengthen themselves, and draw
advantages from elsewhere. The Marquess delle Fuente was then sent from Madrid
to Milan, to the end, that reproaching Leganes with his error he might more
effectually enjoin him to apply himself to Casal, without the conquest whereof
Olivares wrote plainly, that, notwithstanding so many successes, he accounted
nothing of moment done. But in Italy things proceeded not with the facility
which from far off the Conde Duke imagined; for by the attempting that place,
many Princes might grow jealous, and to use force, Prince Thomas was to be
persuaded to it, who, if doubting lest the Citadel of Turin should fall into
the Spaniards hands, had precipitated the conclusion of the Truce, and forced
the Governor of Milan to consent to it, it was not probable that he should
cooperate sincerely in the taking of Casal, which seemed the highway to the
slavery of Italy and the oppression of Piedmont: nevertheless Melo was by
Leganes sent to Turin to persuade him to it. The Spaniard intricated in these
Negotiations, the Emperor experiencing most sensible mischiefs complained
highly both of the Truce in Italy, and of the engaging the Army in that
Country, whilst he lost Alsace, and Banier, increased to little less than
thirty thousand fighting men, was wandering toward Bohemia to gain quarters
there.

The Spaniards counseled the Emperor to go himself into the Field, and
command the Army, being in great disorder through the discords and emulations
of the Chiefs; and in requital of the succors, which they received from him in
Flanders, besides the payment of six thousand Hungarians, they furnished him
with a great sum of money. But Ferdinand, abhorring the charge and the danger
which the assuming of the command of the Army carried with it, allots it to the
Archduke Leopold Guilielmo his Brother; but to make an effort capable to drive
the Swedes out of Germany, he had recourse to the Pope, demanding of him a
powerful assistance. Urban excuses himself, because the differences of the
Venetians with the Turks being not yet appeased, he professed, that for that
cause, abandoned by every body else, he was engaged to employ his mind and all
his Forces. The hopes then of Ferdinand depending upon Spain alone, and the
recovery of Alsace highly concerning him, he sends Hannibal Gonzagha
Ambassador Extraordinary to Madrid, by whom a Treaty was concluded to raise at
common Charge an Army for that purpose to be commanded by Melo. This Levy went
not forward to designs of War, the hopes of a Treaty intervening; for Duke
Bernard of Weimar dying at Neoburg in the thirty sixth year of his Age, snatched
away by a short sickness, in the greatest progress of Glory, the Austrians
believed with money and advantages to gain Erlach and other principal
Commanders, that had the Command of Brisach and the places of consequence.

But Richelieu, with his wonted Ascendant of Wit and Fortune, concludes a more
speedy and happy Treaty with them; for captivating with a vast sum of money the
mind of those, to whom the Duke in his Testament had committed the care of the
Army, he agreed with them, That they should accept the Duke of Longueville for
their General, and be obliged to make War for the advantages and interests of
France, who was to pay the Army and Garrison of Brisach, which, under the
Government of Erlach, should be composed of Germans and French.

It happened, that Charles Lodowick Palatine, who was then at London, no sooner
heard the News of Weimars death, but posting incognito through France,
endeavors to get to that Army, in hope not only by conformity of Religion,
Manners, and Tongue, but by money and promises from the King of England to
induce it to accept him for their Chief, by which means he afterward proposed
to himself, either by Force or Treaty, for the exchange of Alsace to recover
the Palatinate. Richelieu, who by many Spies had his eyes every where, being
advertised of such an intention, caused him at Molins in the Borbonnois to be
arrested, and did not release him, though the King of England, not without
complaints, pressed it, till the Treaty with the Weimarians was finished. Thus
in a moment fell into the power of France a Town, a Province, an Army, not
without great reflections of the Swedes, and greater of the Germans, who would
have wished that Crown an Assistant and Neighbor, but not so much advanced
into the Empire. Neither were other prosperities in the Provinces of Flanders
wanting to the same; for though in the beginning of the Campagnia Piccolomini
had beaten Monsieur de Fichieres, who besieged Thionville, and with many Arts
brought him with many others into that Town Prisoner; yet on the other side,
Monsieur de la Meillerey passing through the County of St. Paul, incamps with
ten thousand Foot and eight thousand Horse before Hesdin, a place of great
accounts, and having sprung two Mines and given three assaults, took it, being
rendered on conditions.

The King, who to countenance the action abode with the Cardinal at Abbeville,
entering into Hesdin by the breach, and adding reward to Merit, created him
Mareshal of France. The Infanta having taken Post at Bourbourg had attempted in
vain to succor it; for Orange seconding the design, sometimes threatening to
attacque Guelder, and then attempting to dis-imbark at the Sas of Gant, he had
been obliged to divide his Forces. The chief counsel of Richelieu consisted in
incommodating the Spaniards upon their own Frontiers, demonstrating to King
Lodowick, That the Enemy being invaded at home, would discover his weakness,
and that Monarchy want strength to supply in so many parts foreign accidents;
that many Provinces would quickly appear mutinous, all groaning under the
Government of insolent Ministers, with few Fortresses, and they without trusty
Garrisons, with Soldiers for the most part mercenary, and Strangers,
especially when they should be aware, that they were under a Government
burdensome, in Peace and in War unhappy. An imagination which came to pass
perhaps beyond the belief of the Author himself, through such casualties and
sad emergencies, that the World had occasion to believe, that though for the
most part humane counsels depend upon events, Fortune did adjust events to the
counsels of Richelieu. He laid the foundations of it in this year, by sending
the Prince of Conde toward the Pirenei, who took Salces, the first place that
lies nearest to the Mediterranean Sea, on the Confines of Spain, though after
some months it was recovered by Philip Spinola. He had conceived greater hopes
of the Naval Army, which, commanded by the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, in number
about sixty Vessels, plied to and again upon the Coast in the Ocean; but the
effects proved not suitable, for it effected nothing but the landing at Laredo,
taking and burning certain Ships, and plundering some weak maritime places.

On the other side, Spain received a notable blow; for after Bourdeaux was
retired into the Ports of France, 67 Ships, amongst which, some were of a vast
burden, spread their Sails toward Flanders, having upon them many Soldiers, a
great quantity of money and other provisions, to carry a powerful relief into
the Low Countries. The way to pass into those Provinces by Land being on all
sides stopped, and to provide them money, the exchange devouring a great part, it
had been resolved in Madrid to make an effort by Sea, in concert with the King
of England, who jealous of the Greatness and of the Designs of France, desiring
to see them succored and provided, permitted retreat and security for the
Spanish Ships into his Ports. But this Fleet no sooner appeared in the Chanel,
but Martin Tromp, Admiral of Holland, with thirteen small, but nimble and well
appointed Ships, comes up with it, provoking it with incredible boldness to
fight. Sixteen others a while after joined themselves to him, and by the
nearness of the Ports of Zeland and Holland receiving daily Renfort, was
quickly increased to such a face of a strong Fleet, that Anthonio Oquendo,
General of the Spanish, though superior in number and in the bulk of Ships,
thought good to retreat into the Downs in England, hoping that the Hollanders,
obliged to keep the Sea, would by ill weather and winds be constrained to go
further off. Tromp not only kept his course, but battered the Spaniards with
his Cannon, being supplied with powder, which he wanted, by the French from
Calais. A Mist at last was so favorable to Oquendo, that thirteen great
Vessels, with a good number of Soldiers and with all the money, passed without
being discovered to Dunkirk. Tromp, who now found himself strong one hundred
and six Ships, troubled above measure at such a passage, was so much the more
careful, that the remaining prey should not escape him. The King of England,
who, for the honor of his Port, was greatly troubled about the issue of this
accident, orders forty Ships to come into the Downs, that placing themselves in
the midst, they might hinder fighting, and without breaking with the
Hollanders, who exclaimed with threatening protests, might countenance the
Retreat of the Spaniards. Tromp for all that, not quitting his station,
Oquendo, forced to fight or be consumed to nothing, attempts under the
obscurity of a very foggy Mist an escape toward Spain. But he escaped not at
this time neither the vigilance of Tromp, who first pressing with Fireships
into the midst of the Enemy, and afterward with Men of War, burnt some of the
Spaniards and took others, besides those, which running on shore were plundered
and burnt also.

Oquendo with a few recovers Dunkirk, the remainder got the Coast of Spain torn
and ill handled by the Enemy and the Sea, there having perished above six
thousand men, Mariners and Soldiers, with the greater part of the Ships.
Tromp, bringing sixteen with a vast Booty in Triumph into Rotterdam, was
received there with great joy, this Victory being reckoned amongst the most
famous of those which have happened at Sea. The last close of this Campagnia
ought to be concluded in Italy, where it had its beginning.

King Lodowick arriving at last at Grenoble, according to the concert, the
Duchess of Savoy comes thither also, to deposite again with lively tears her
own interests and those of the Duke in the arms of her Brother and of
Richelieu, beseeching them to protect this innocent Cause with the same power
and generosity, by which they made the French Crown formidable. It was given
her to understand, that the depositing of Monmeilian was required, and
insinuated, that her Son should be sent to Paris, that he might be brought up
with the Daulphin in safety and with honor. She answered with no other reasons
but a flood of tears; whereupon the King moved in his affection and compassion
toward her, it was pressed further, and she was left, the Court returning to
Paris in great hopes of speedy and powerful succors. The Army of Italy, (the
Cardinal della Valette being dead) remained in that interim recommended to
Henry of Lorrain, Count of Harcourt, who was equally valiant and prudent.

The Venetians, for the diversion of greater evils, solicited the Pope to use
such earnest in procuring Peace, Italy, for their own safety and the common
defense, to employ their entreaties and offices, and, need requiring, their
Arms also. Urban contented himself to send Antonio Feragalli, Secretary for
decifering, that at Milan and in Piedmont he might endeavor a prolongation, at
least, of the Truce.

The Spaniards and the Princes complained, that, under the shadow of the said
Truce, the Duchess had delivered Towns to the French; and they quarrelled,
that the entry of some Soldiers into Casal, which afterward were brought in
by force, had been hindered by Leganes. Some expedients therefore being
discoursed of, but to no purpose, to prolong it; the suspension of Arms
expires, and the Cannon from the Town and Citadel of Turin declared it, that
began again to play with great fury. Harcourt kept the Field with an
indifferent strength of four thousand Foot and two thousand Horse, and it
happened, that almost at the same time, that he by several ways came to Chieri,
Leganes arrives unexpectedly there with eleven thousand fighting men,
invironing him at large with many quarters. Harcourt thereupon within a while
wants Victuals, though the Marquess Villa, making his passage through the midst
of the Spanish Posts, put in a Convoy; but that being not sufficient for the
necessity, the French were forced to resolve upon a retreat. They then were no
sooner gone out of Chieri, but they quickly felt the Spaniards at their heels,
and being come to the Bridge called Lakotta found Prince Thomas in their front.
Harcourt then, with excess of courage, giving no time to Leganes to come up
with the Body, attacques the Savoyards with so great fury, that he forces them
to yield him the Pass. Whereupon, night coming on, he thought best not to
continue his march, but employed it to fortify the Bridge behind him, to give
a stop to the Spaniards, as it happily succeeded; so that the day following
proceeding on his way, though the Spaniards attempted it with several
skirmishes, they could not hinder it or break him. This encounter cost indeed
the life of some of his Soldiers, and he was forced to leave some Carts of
baggage behind him; nevertheless it was reckoned amongst the most signal
actions which rendered his name famous in Italy, having reaped great glory from
that which uses to be reckoned amongst the most hazardous employments in the
War.

ANNO MDCXL.
From the discords of Piedmont were added new difficulties to the general
Peace, the French requiring Pass-ports for the Ministers of the Duke of Savoy;
pretending that the Duchess Mother should therein be mentioned in the quality
of Tutress and Regent, which being contrary to the late Decree of the Emperor,
was absolutely denied by the Austrians. There appearing therefore no hopes of
Peace, discourse was had of a general suspension of Arms; but, the inclinations
of the Crowns being discovered anew to be contrary to it, and the Emperor
opposing it, not to have the Swedes remain in the bowels of the Empire, and of
his own Countries, the project vanished. Nor did the Mediators much trouble
themselves to prolong that of Italy, they being not pleased that Piedmont
should be left in the power of the Crowns. Nevertheless the greatest difficulty
seemed to be on the Spaniards side, as well by reason of the pretension to
comprehend the County of Burgundy in the Truce, as for the hope which Leganes
gave to take Casal, by which they reckoned to remain so predominant in Italy,
as with their Conquest there to balance their losses in other places. This was
added besides, that they knew not well where to employ their Army, the Passes
being either stopped, or requiring long marches to send them elsewhere. On the
other side, the French by the advantage of situation in the center of the
Austrian Provinces might send their Militia, whither occasion most called for
them.

Amidst these Negotiations, the French insinuate more secret practices with the
Princes of Savoy, endeavoring above all to separate them from the Spaniards,
and divide them amongst themselves; in order whereunto, they offered Prince
Thomaso to dismember, under the title of Government, one part of Piedmont, that
so he might enjoy it as in absolute Sovereignty. He not trusting to such
flatteries, yet lent his ear to them, to keep the Governor of Milan in
jealousy, and draw more easily from him satisfaction and money. The Cardinal
Mauritio, more considered by reason of the Towns of Nizza and Villa Franca,
which he had in his power, was also less difficult to be treated with, and the
Duchess knowing that he inclined to marry, caused to be proposed to him Maria
Lodovica her eldest Daughter, as the only means to adjust the pretensions and
differences about the succession, if the Duke should come to fail. Though for
the present nothing was concluded, yet the Cardinal inclined somewhat to it, to
the great jealousy of the Spaniards, and of the Prince his Brother, who for
his own ends, and the interests of his Posterity, made use of the name of
Mauritio. It now clearly appeared, that the designs and preparations of the
Spaniards tended against Casal, nay, Leganes proudly boasted of the enterprise,
and having Treaties with the Princess of Mantua, and intelligence within the
place, he thought to go to a most certain Victory. The Princes of Italy grew
sensible of it; for, if with that of Casal so many other Conquests made in
Piedmont should be confirmed, there was formed even to the Alps a Wall so
strong, that there could remain no hopes to force it. Jealousies also were
suggested from discourses cast abroad by the Spanish Ministers, and by the
Count della Rocca Ambassador at Venice, in particular, that reckoning hence
forward Casal as a most secure Conquest, it was not concealed, that their Arms
should be carried on further, glancing at Mantua, and every other place, where
there appeared any shadow of the name or affection of France. France holding
Casal under the custody of their Garrisons, nay valuing it as the depository of
their honor for having heretofore preserved it with the terror only of its
name, and succored it with so many difficulties, the King could not at present
suffer it to be taken. But finding himself engaged with his Forces in other
designs, and the season yet frozen rendering the passage of the Alps difficult;
it seemed as if he neglected the danger, making also as if he abandoned it, to
induce the Princes of Italy to take upon them the defense of it. The Venetians
in truth took great thought for it, and finding themselves in a condition,
after the adjustment with the Turks, to back their offices as was fit, exhorted
Urban to arm himself, and to employ all his endeavors for Peace.

The Pope, though he apprehended the dangers no less than the Republic, stood
upon great reserves. He alleged the doubt of giving Jealousy to the
Spaniards, and bringing upon himself invasions and troubles; nor prevailed it
any thing, that the Republic assured, they would second him in his resolutions
and uphold him in dangers; for he stuck not to publish, that he would not
condescend to arm or use effectual offices, till the Republic should have
first entered into a League with him. It was sufficiently understood, that the
Pope, seeing his house suspected by the Austrians, and little trusted by other
Princes, aimed by this Union to conciliate reputation and respect to himself,
and give support to his Kindred. But for the proximate dangers of Casal, this
seemed to the Venetians a remedy too slow, and they rather thought it more
capable to raise Jealousies in the Spaniards, upon which they might afterward
and more readily pass to a Rupture, which only with a fair appearance of
resolution and constancy might be diverted. These Negotiations being not
unknown to the Spaniards, served to provoke them to hasten the undertaking, in
hopes that being in a short time master of their design, and overcoming in the
Italian Princes one fear by another, they would no more dare apply themselves
to prejudicial attempts or confederacies giving Jealousy to their Crown.

Leganes therefore sending two thousand men to attacque the Castle of
Rossignano, that it might not disturb the conveyance of Victuals to the Camp,
caused Wednesday, the Week before Easter, which happened to be the first day of
April, Casal to be invested by the Cavalry, and the Friday following, arrived
there with the whole Army. There were not within it above one thousand two
hundred Foot and three hundred Horse, all French, under the Command of Monsieur
de la Tour, and although some of the Monferrins joined themselves to the
Inhabitants, they served rather for jealousy than defense; because, according
to agreement of the Spaniards with the Princess, they were rather to receive
from them motives to render, than encouragements to hold out. La Tour then
being hardly able with so scanty a Garrison to keep the Citadel and the
enclosure of the City, abstains from Sallies, giving leave to Leganes to form
his Lines without opposition, and dispose of his Camp without other disturbance
than that of the season, which with unusual rains, hindered for certain days the
Works. Three attacques were designed with three batteries. The greatest force
of the Siege was used betwixt the Citadel and the Castle, or rather the
greatest appearance; for, besides the hope, that the people over-mastering the
Garrison would quickly surrender, Leganes held correspondences to be brought
into the Castle, and so the City being possessed, he designed to block the
Citadel by laying Forts about it, and then marching with the whole Army into
Piedmont oppose the French, if they should present themselves for its succors.
Upon this confidence he neglected the outward Line of Circumvallation, being
not able to persuade himself, that the French, either during a time so short,
or with a number proportionable, could be ready to march. He notified by Letter
to the Republic the motion of his Army, publishing the aims and intentions of
his King to tend only to Peace, which if it could not be obtained so long as it
was in the power of the French with Pignarol and Casal to disturb it, the
driving them away seemed to be a motive of expediency and zeal, not a
pretension to domination, or a desire to usurp that which is another.

At the same time he sends to Mantua the Count Mandelli, to assure the
Princess, that amidst these warlike proceedings he would as much as was
possible have respect to the Dukes interest; and she, to correspond, sends the
Count Gabioneda to reside in the Camp, in design, as was published, to preserve
Monferrat from the ruin and oppressions of the Soldiery, but with more secret
intentions, to authorize with the presence of her Minister the undertaking,
divert the Peasants from taking Arms, and exhort those of Casal to render,
rather than suffer extremities. Nevertheless, to cover such intentions, she
sought for counsel of the Venetians, entreating them to send a Minister of
theirs to reside with her, and insinuating, that, whilst the loss of Casal,
through the weakness of the French, seemed imminent, a proposition might be
made to have it deposited in the Popes hands, to the end, that, at a charge
common with the Republic, it might be preserved for the legitimate Prince. But
neither could the French in honor publish the want of power to defend it, nor
did the speed, with which Leganes prosecuted the enterprise, give time to
negotiate it. The Senate caused Andrea Rosso, who as Secretary was with Luigi
Giorgio, General in Terra firma, to pass to Mantua. But judging afterward more
effectual remedies necessary, it consents to the Treaty of the League with
Urban, deeming it honorable for Italy, a strengthening to the common Liberty,
a safety to the Contractors, and at least also of good example to the Princes
of Italy; and sends Ambassador Extraordinary to Rome (for Nani had obtained
his discharge) Angelo Contarini Cavalier Procurator with powers to treat and
conclude it. But at the first entrance weighty difficulties and many delays
were met with; so that Casal could hardly have been preserved, if from the
Bravery and Generosity of the Count of Harcourt more speedy remedies had not
been applied. The Siege drew out into a greater length than had been imagined
by the Governor of Milan, the Intelligences in the Castle vnaishing, and among
the Inhabitants the natural aversion to the name Spaniard prevailing more than
their inclination to the Princess.

Rossignano withal defended it self bravely. Nevertheless Leganes, Ferragalli
proposing to him a suspension of Arms for a month, rejects it, not without
upbraiding the Pope, that he aimed to give the French time to come to its
succors. Harcourt in the mean time hastily assembling the most of the
Savoyards and French Troops that he could, advances toward Casal with seven
thousand Foot, three thousand five hundred Horse, and ten pieces of Cannon, in
hopes that the Quarters of the Spaniards being unfortified, and at a great
distance from one another, either they would be obliged to abandon some of
their Posts, or keeping them all, would leave them weak. Leganes understanding
the French were marching, intermitting the approaches, applies himself to
finish the Circumvallation; but at their arrival all being imperfect, he was
beyond measure in disorder. Harcourt showing his Army the place, as a fatal and
threefold Trophy of the French Arms, makes choice to assault that part, where
the Gattola has its course. There were certain commanding Hillocks, which
Leganes would not comprehend within his Line, by reason of the largeness of the
compass, and that he believed them for the dirt and mire not climable by an
Enemy, much less for Cannon. He had only raised there certain Redoubts, which
Harcourt caused to be invested by some Troops, that they might be no hindrance
of his advancing with the body; and then surmounting all difficulty of the way
or situation, plants a Battery on the highest part, with which playing upon the
Spanish Soldiers that were in the Trenches, he forced them to retire. Putting
then himself at the head of certain select Troops, he in a trice forced his
passage into the Camp on that side which is called Saint George, while at the
same time the Marquesses, Villa and Pianezza, with the Savoyards, and Messieurs
de Plessis Praslin and la Mothe Houdancourt with the French made their
attacques in several other places.

The Spaniards, making a loose fight and divided, made but a short resistance.
Their Horse first taking the flight, attempted afterward in vain to make a
stand. The Germans labored to stop the Enemy a while, and Leganes ran from
place to place to give courage to the Fugitives, and redress the confusion. But
the French in a well closed order gave them neither time nor breath to recover
themselves. So that only Gatta, Sotello, Batteville, and Leganes himself,
joining themselves together with some Troops that remained, night coming upon
them, and not being pursued, concluded it best to retire toward Brem.

Casal being in this manner not only succored, but set at liberty, and the
Enemies Army scattered, there remained to Harcourt so clear a Victory, that,
(which seldom happens) both the Conquerours and conquered agree in the
celebrating of it. The slain on the Spaniards side were not above three
thousand; but the flight being greater than the slaughter, the disbanding of
the Army was most considerable. Besides many Prisoners, the Cannon, the Money,
the Spoils, and the very Writings remained to the French, who amongst them
found the Original of the Treaty, formerly concluded by Saiavedra with the
Duchess of Mantua. This success freed Italy a while from present
apprehensions. Nevertheless the Treaty of the League betwixt the Pope and the
Venetians continued for some time, nay some Articles were agreed on; That for
common defense an Army should be raised to take the field when there should be
occasion, of twelve thousand Foot and three thousand Horse, with a
proportionable number of Cannon. Of the Foot seven thousand should be allotted
to the Republic with two thirds of the Cavalry and Cannon. The obligation of
reciprocal assistance should then have place, when to one of the Confederates
War should be either denounced, or his Country invaded. In which case
seasonable diversions should also be made by Sea.

Concerning the Charge of General of the Army, with design to advantage the
Family, and to let it fall upon the Prefect, the Barberins pressed much, and
the Republic at last consented, that the Army coming to join, the Pope with
their good liking should name him. These things being agreed, the Senate
desired that the Treaty should be published, leaving some other points of
lesser importance to be afterward discussed; for, as the Venetians understood,
that in case of defense all the temporal Dominion which the Church possessed
was to be comprehended, so the Popes Ministers pretended to comprise the Fiefs
which held of the same. This seemed to the Senate a point of a deeper root,
because it might happen, that the Barberins would involve the Republic in
their designs upon the Kingdom of Naples, where it was suspected that the
French were participant of the Intelligences they held there; but time a while
after manifested, that they rather aimed to engage the Republic to join in, or
at least not disturb, the resentments, which from this present they designed
against the Duke of Parma. Whereupon the Senate, having endeavored with many
reasons to dissuade the Pope from it, but in vain, recalled their powers, not
to leave any longer depending a business of that import, which was very irksom
to the Spaniards; and the motive of the extraordinary Embassage coming withal
to cease, Contarini was recalled to Venice. And now the jealousies, conceived
from the designs of the Spanish Army, were converted into amazement at the
courage of the French; for that Harcourt, with ten thousand men only, had
undertaken the Siege of Turin with a vast Circumvallation, after he had
possessed the Bridge upon the Po, the Convent of the Capucins, and the Post of
Valentino. The City was guarded by above three thousand Soldiers with Prince
Thomaso, besides a good number of Inhabitants well trained to Arms. The
Undertaking therefore was held impossible to be effected, and so it would have
been, if the constancy and valor of Harcourt had not with equal glory
undertook and finished; it notwithstanding that he was several times rather in
the condition of one besieged than of a besieger, and that he was believed
overcome at the same time that he appeared triumphant.

The Siege lasting several months, in that while was quieted in France a
dangerous Insurrection in Normandy, which, though composed of the common sort
of people, yet received encouragement both from the cause, which was the
impositions, and from the Parliament, which gave a reputation no less than
authority to it. The people exclaimed, that Richelieu, making advantage of the
public evils, was Author of the War and Inventor of the Imposts, with the
wonted destiny of Favorites, who being considered burdensome in War and
offensive in Peace, are in either fortune either of prosperity or adversity
with detestation abhorred: But he sending Monsieur de Gassion with Soldiers,
and the Chancellor with authority, dissipated the revolt, many being punished,
all defeated, and the Parliament interdicted for a time. The intestine Peace of
the Kingdom facilitated the progress of Arms elsewhere; for Arras was besieged
by the Mareschals Chaune, Chastillon, and la Mailleray, with a very puissant
Army. The Town was found in a manner unprovided, the French by feigned marches
having not only misled the Enemy to other places, but induced the Governor,
who was the Count of Isemberg, to go out of it to provide for places elsewhere.

Arras is the Metropolis of Artois, a populous and great City, well fortified,
and so situate, that two Cities seem environed by one enclosure. The French
plant their Camp there, and entrench themselves with a strong circumvallation,
foreseeing that the weaker the defense within was, the greater effort would be
made by the Spaniards for its relief. Accordingly Philippo di Silva with part
of the Army draws near to it, and a while after the Cardinal Infant joins with
him, notwithstanding that Orange, threatening many places, kept a body of the
Spanish Army in a perpetual distraction. The Infant succeeded in hindering
Victuals from the French Camp, so that King Lewis, who with the Cardinal was at
Amiens, was forced to break through with great store of Provisions, under a
Convoy of ten or twelve thousand men hastily assembled, part the Militia of the
Country, and of the Kings Guards, part of the Nobless, who from the
Neighboring Provinces, to please the King and the Minister, flocked thither in
great numbers. It was concerted by the French, that at the same time that the
Convoy approached Chaune and la Mailleray should be out of the Camp to secure
its passage.

On the other side, among the Spanish Commanders there was difference in
opinion, some judging to go and meet the Convoy to be the best way to hinder
it; others, that they should assault the Trenches, when they were weakened; and
this counsel, as most specious, prevailed. Whereupon, when the two Mareshals
were gone at a good distance, the Camp was assaulted, the Spaniards entering
into it in several parts, and possessing some Posts. But la Mailleray, having
with great expedition brought the Convoy into safety, returns so seasonably,
that, the Fight yet lasting, he constrained the Spaniards to retire, and
abandon all they had gotten. The surrender of the place followed a while after,
the French Colors entering into it the tenth of August, to the exceeding glory
of their Arms, and as much consternation to the Country round about. King Lewis
thinking to have reaped an abundant Harvest from this Compagnia, returns to
Paris, where, with increase of felicity, he was enriched in the Month of
December with another Son, who was named Philip, with title of Duke of Anjou.

Good fortune carrying always its sting with it, so many prosperities to France
begat in some envy, in others jealousy, in the English particularly through
neighborhood and emulation. About this time the King of Denmark looked with no
less suspicions upon the progress of the Swedes; whereupon the Austrians
believing the occasion proper to strengthen their party, the Emperor sent the
Count Curtius into Denmark to propound Leagues and Concerts; and the Spaniards
dispatched the Marquesses of Vellada and Malvezzi to London, to insinuate
marriages of King Charles his eldest Daughter with the Prince of Spain, and
reciprocally of the Infanta with the Prince of Wales. But the Senate of that
Kingdom opposed the King of Denmark's inclination, and that of the English was
diverted by a general revolt of the Scotch, to whom the King had attempted to
propose a certain form of Ceremonies and Prayers, which were rejected by all
sorts of persons in an open tumult. It was believed that Richelieu secretly
fomented those stirs, either because he truly intended it, to break those so
jealous Negotiations with Spain, or because it was thought, that he, being in
this Age (so to call it) the Intelligence of the world, had an influence in all
great businesses, either by assistance or counsel.

Sure it is, that it seemed as if Fortune applied her self to nothing else but
to promote his advantages, and very often anticipate his very designs, and on
the other side to confound and disturb those of the Conde Duke; as if from the
antipathy of these two great Ministers proceeded the discord of Europe, and the
disparity of accidents was also occasioned. Not long after the rendering of
Arras happens that of Turin, where the Siege remained a long time by various
accidents, and by the event was ennobled above any other whatsoever. Harcourt
had no sooner entrenched himself in the view of Turin, but he was forced to
repulse many sallies, and one in particular, which made a deep impression into
his Quarters. After that Leganes shows himself behind him with twelve thousand
Foot and five thousand Horse, threatening to assault his Posts and the Bridge;
but having taken a view of the situation, and infested the Camp with some
Cannon-shot, he turns to Moncalieri, to pass the Po upon a Wooden Bridge which
was there. But the French having broken it, he commands Carlo della Gatta to
repair it, though he might with much ease have attempted a little higher to
wade it. The French disputed it, till at last Monsieur de Turain, that
commanded, being hurt, and the skirmish slackning, certain little Islands a
little lower were fortified by Gatta, under the covert whereof he lays over the
Bridge. The Governor now passes over to the Purpurata, and sends Gatta to
Cologno, to cut off the ways, and hinder the French Army of succors and
victuals from the Mountains. Harcourt also to incommodate Turin, took away the
use of the Mills, by diverting the Dora; but the besieged restored it to its
old course, and he at last beats them to pieces with his Cannon. But in the
Town they nevertheless supplied themselves with instruments manual; on the
other side in the Camp, the Soldiery was almost reduced to the extremity of
hunger, there being a want, besides that of Forage for the Horse, of bread and
all sort of other nourishment, except some little Pulse, which was scantily
given out to the Soldiers; and yet the Nation, though most impatient of
suffering, suffered every thing, the General keeping it by his dexterity in
Discipline, and encouraging it with good words and liberal promises. Nor could
Harcourt be possibly put to a harder pinch; for the dishonor of a retreat
between the Jaws of the Enemy was considered as the least loss; and to persist
amidst so many sufferings, could not merit other commendation than that of an
absolute resolution to perish. But having to feed the Army, the Citadel of
Turin and the Town of Chivas being disfurnisht of Victuals, nothing remained
for him but to abandon by a secret flight every thing in prey to the Spaniards,
or by a forced accord to deliver them the Keys of Piedmont.

But safety came from the Enemy themselves; for the Prince and Governor
disagreeing not only in Opinions, but also in Maxims and Interests, the one
would overcome with longer, but more cautious, counsels, and the other pressed,
that all things should be hastened, and to his instances joining threatenings
and protests, that if in four days the place were not relieved, and the Enemy
driven away, he would capitulate the Surrender, and withal make his own accord.
Leganes believing too much, because he feared too much, resolves upon a general
assault, in concert with the Prince, in so many places, that the French, now
but few, and they tired out, should not be able to resist in all, and the
design without doubt would have succeeded, if the execution had been as well
performed, as the counsel was most excellently ordered. But of the Spanish
Chiefs that were to command the attacques, some arrived at the Posts assigned
to them too late, others made their assault faintly, and some not at all.

Leganes, coming to Harcourts Quarter at the time that the Prince having made
his attempt was retired, thought fit to forbear, only Carlo della Gatta, at the
side of the Purpurata, broke into a French Quarter; but his Foot stopping there
to pillage the Huts, fell into such a confusion, that from plunder they easily
betook themselves to flight; for the French gotten again into order, recovered
an Intrenchment and a Fort, pressing upon Gatta, who with two thousand Horse,
interrupted on his way by many Trees cut down, advanced slowly. Prince Thomaso
making a Sally, dis-ingaged him, and brought him into Turin, where he served
but for a burden and ruin, consuming for man and horse all that which
preserved the place. On the other side, the Spanish Camp weakened in Horse, and
Gatta having abandoned Cologno, from which side Convoys to the Camp were more
easily hindered than from any other, Turenne brought in one so plentiful, that
it notably refreshed the Army. The state of things then changing, disagreement
also increased betwixt the Prince and the Governor, they reproaching one
another either with slackness or overmuch rashness.

Leganes repassing the Po, returns to his first Posts of the Hills, leaving the
passage of the Mountains open to the French, and he would have gone much
further off, if the Prince had not threatened him to surrender, if he did not
provide him with powder and meal. Leganes made several attempts to put some in,
but always in vain, because Harcourt, having straightned the first
circumference of his Lines, kept them with great care. Worthy of notice was the
Invention of Francesco Zignoni, of Bergamo, who, having added force to the
Mortar-pieces that are used in the casting of Bombes, flung some Bullets not
only with Letters, but with Powder and Meal, flying through the Air, into the
Town, or near to the Wall, the French wondering at it, and confessing, by not
being able to hinder it, that the Element of the Air is most free from the
command and violence of man. Nevertheless the artifice was rather esteemed than
the succors proportionable; for besides the great charge the quantity did not
supply the need. They resolved therefore in Turin, that Gatta should again
force a passage to return to Leganes. The Prince for a diversion made a real
attacque at one side. Carlo forces the Lines on the other; but encountering much
water, being that of the Dora, which, deturned by the French, flowed into the
Meadows, while he was in trouble to find a Ford, being charged by the Enemy,
was forced to return to Turin. It was then perceived, that Force elsewhere was
necessary, and the Prince invited and persuaded the Governor to a new attempt,
offering himself to assault and possess certain Forts betwixt the Capucins and
Valentino, and the Governor then to make an assault on his side also. Thomaso
failed not either in courage or success, for he attacqued and took those Posts;
but he either dead or run away, who with certain Fireworks was to have given
the sign of it to the Spaniards, the Governor ignorant of the success stands
still, and the Prince after having stayed a good while, leaving his Conquests,
retired. In the mean while Harcourt increased daily in Forces; for on the Fame
of so noble a Siege many Volunteers flocked from the neighboring Provinces,
and six thousand Soldiers at twice with much provision were brought by the
Marquess of Villeroy, Governor of Lions, and by Monsieur Castellan. Incessant
then were the Skirmishes, Sallies, and Attacques; but at last Victuals,
Forage, and Money wanting, the conditions being agreed, Turin on the 24. of
September was delivered to the French, and the Duke and Regent re-established
there.

The Prince going forth, concluded for himself a Truce for certain days, within
which his adjustment was to be treated, and he retired to Inurea, refusing (to
advantage himself by playing a middle Game betwixt the Flatteries and
Jealousies of both the Crowns,) whatsoever advantages was offered him by the
Governor of Milan, and hearkening to the propositions of accord, which by
Julio Mazarine, sent expressly for that affair by Richelieu into Italy, was
delivered to him in the Name of King Lodowick. The Spaniards then opposing
other offers to the progress of Mazarine, he ratifies a certain Writing agreed
by his Wife in Spain, in which he submitted himself and his house to the
protection of that Crown. To this he feigns to Mazarine to have been induced
from the desire of rescuing his Wife and Sons detained at Madrid. And with the
said Mazarine, the better to deceive him, concludes a while after a Treaty, in
which he obliges himself; To come the beginning of the next year to Paris; to
require of the Spaniards, besides his Wife and Sons, the restitution of places
to his Nephew, and not obtaining it to procure it jointly with France by Arms.

The King on the other side promised, To take the Garrisons out of those
places, which he held in deposito, when Spain should also render the places it
had gained. Concerning the Succession, if it should happen the Duke should dye,
he promised to protect the Right of the Princes, understanding those, who
should be adhering to his Party. As for the rest, to Thomaso was left in
Government that which he had in his present power for so long, till an
agreement were made with his Nephew and Sister-in-law, assigning great Pensions
to himself, his Wife, and his Sons, for one of which, hopes were given him of a
Marriage with the Daughter of the Duke of Longueville, endowed with great
Riches.

Under the faith of this Treaty, which for the present required secrecy, the
Truce was prolonged for all February of the next year. But amidst the
Negotiations of Italy, the hopes of the general Peace went in such sort
backwards, that the Pope, weary of the Charge and the dishonor of keeping a
Legate idle in Collen, recalls him, leaving for Nuntio Extraordinary Signor
Macchiavelli, Patriarch of Constantinople, to whom Rossetti a while after was
substituted. These discomposures of the Treaty rose chiefly from the revolts of
Catalogna and of Portugal, which filling one side with great hopes and designs,
and the other with perturbation of mind and perplexity, admitted not the
appearance of any expedients to reconcile their minds and interests. It has
formerly been hinted, how Olivares with an absolute power governed in Spain the
King no less than his Dominions, with a Spirit highly elated, Maxims severe,
and Counsels violent. He had proposed to himself to exalt the Power and Glory
of the King equal to the Title, which he had caused him to assume of Great; but
Fortune with unhappy events seconded so ill his purpose, that the Splendor of
the Crown seemed in a great measure darkened. Whereupon among Strangers there
was a relaxation of that awe, which rising from power was wont to keep them in
respect; and in the mind of the Subjects, accustomed under the vail of
reputation and prosperity to venerate as infallible the Arcana of the
Government, entered contempt and hatred toward the King and his Favorite.

The design of Olivares was manifest, not only to enlarge the Monarchy beyond
its first Confines, but in the Kingdoms themselves to establish the absolute
Authority of a Monarch, who in some of the Provinces, circumscribed by Laws,
Concessions and Covenants, seemed precarious, and that he enjoyed rather the
name than the force of Dominion. That which urged him to this, was chiefly the
want of money and men, to supply so many foreign Wars; for being to depend upon
the consent of the people, provisions came not to be furnished equal to the
necessity, nor ready for the urgency. Wherefore he thought to abolish or at
least to restrain so great a liberty, which some attributed to themselves, and
principally the Catalans, who provided with no small privileges, and free from
many burdens, kept their Liberty with no less zeal, than their Religion. The
King being some years since with the Court at Barcellona, they several times
opposed Olivares his demands; whereat he being irritated, nourished ever after
in his mind thoughts to chastise and humble them. The Kings, to say truth, were
wont to bear respect to that Nation, arrogant by Nature, and for the situation
important; because the Province, if from the Seacoast, by reason it has no
Harbors, it be impenetrable, on the Land side it seems inaccessible by reason
of the Mountains; and they piercing deeply inwards, and being divided into many
branches, form themselves into as many Fortifications, within which are
comprehended strong places, populous Cities, Towns, and a great number of
Villages; so that the whole Province may be resembled to one mighty Bastion
defended with several cuttings of retreats. The Neighborhood then to France,
the Passes of the Pirenean, the largeness of the Circuit, the population and
martial inclination of the Inhabitants, made it considered, and little less
than feared.

Nevertheless the Conde Duke busied his thoughts for an opportunity to bridle
it; but when he thought that Fortune had opened the way to it, he was not
aware, that it carried along with it a down-fal to the greatness and safety of
all Spain. We have formerly observed, how Richelieu, tempting the Confines on
that side, hoped to promote accidents, and particularly to irritate the mind of
the people amidst the inconveniences of War, and the mischiefs of Arms; and so
it punctually fell out. For Salses being lost, the Spaniards, to recover it,
were forced to plant their place of Arms in Catalogna, and when they had taken
it, left the Army to quarter there; so that, if during the Siege the Province
was grievously afflicted by the passages of the Soldiery, that people felt
afterward their license so much more intolerable, as they had not been
accustomed to it. Nothing was heard of but extortions and oppressions, Churches
profaned, Women ravished, goods taken by violence; to which excesses the Chiefs
making no reparation, an opinion was raised, that Olivares, to impose under the
title of necessary defense the yoke upon that Province, willingly suffered it.
Sure it is, that the Count of Saint Coloma, the Viceroy, instigated by
frequent Letters from him, to draw men and money from that Province, under the
countenance of the Army, without sticking at their privileges and expecting
the consent of the States, seized in Barcelona upon certain money, which
belonged to the disposal of the City, and because one of the Jurates (the most
considerable Magistrate) opposed so great a License, and insisted, that the
extravagances also of the Soldiery might be punished, he imprisoned him.

This was enough to put a people into commotion, which suffered obedience, but
was not yet acquainted with slavery. Arms were taken, the Prisons opened, a
torrent of people in the Streets, with so great and universal a tumult, that
the Viceroy, frighted, thought his safety only placed in running away. He
therefore gets into the Arsenal, where being as little secure; (for the people
putting fire to the Palace sought him over all,) he caused a Galley to come
near the shore; but while he was going to the Sea side to imbarque, being
overtaken by the Mutineers, was killed. The people now, partly terrified by
their own excess, partly inveigled and confounded amidst the apprehensions of
slavery and the appearances of liberty, judged, that there was no place left
for repentance, nor for the Kings clemency. Shaking off the yoke then, they ran
out into extremities, and the confusion being not able to subsist of it self,
an independent Government was formed, with a Council of an hundred, joined to
the other ancient Magistrates of the City. Upon such an example almost all the
Country fell into a commotion, and the Towns and Villages universally taking
Arms, killed and forced to fly all those that were native Spaniards.

The mind of the Conde Duke at so unexpected an accident being greatly
disordered, he neither durst make it known to the King, nor could it be
concealed. He endeavors to make him believe, that it was nothing but a popular
tumult, which would vanish of it self, or being quickly appeased by force,
would contribute to render the authority of the Government more respected; for
by Arms the Rebellion would not only be quieted, but the pride of the Catalans
brought down, and those privileges abolished, which rendered them contumacious.
But reflecting in his mind with more secret cares upon the importance of the
Province, the quality of the situation, and those greater mischiefs, whilst the
French would be brought in there, he weighed within himself, which, either
artifice or force, might more profitably be employed. Nor was he free from
doubt, lest other Kingdoms, especially Arragon, might follow the example. He
first trys, by the persuasions of the old Duchess of Cardona, who with the
people of Barcelona had much veneration and authority, and by the means of the
Minister of the Pope who resided there, to pacify their minds and quiet the
tumult; and that not succeeding to advantage, he resolves to use force with
such power and expedition, that the people should neither be able to resist,
nor the French arrive time enough for their relief. He then goes about to
assemble the Army; commanding the Fee-Farmers, and inviting the Nobility, and
among them, many of the most suspected, particularly the Portuguese, that they
might serve for Hostages, as well as Soldiers. But the Provisions could not be
so soon ready, but that the Catalans had time to provide themselves with much
resolution, and to send Deputies into France to demand assistance. It is not to
be said, with what satisfaction Richelieu, who had formerly with his wonted
arts nourished their first dispositions, entertained them. He heaps honors
upon them, and loads them with promises; but at the same time willing to make
use of the occasion, which chance offered him, he not only contrived to nourish
War in the bowels of Spain, but to reduce Catalogna to a necessity of rendering
themselves to the subjection of the French. He sends Monsieur de St. Paul with
some few Officers, and by Sea some Soldiers and Cannon, to the end that that
people might take heart to blood themselves with the Castiglians; and
dispatches Monsieur de Plessis Besanzon, an eloquent Minister and a witty man,
to discover the disposition of affairs and minds.

But Olivares having gotten the Army together, which amounted to thirty
thousand Combatants, the command thereof was committed to the Marquess de los
Velez, by birth a Catalan, and destined to be Viceroy of the Province, toward
which it was so far from his having any disposition of affection, that he
rather had causes of hatred and detestation, the people in Barcelona having
razed his house and confiscated his goods. In the month of December be begins
his march from Tortosa, a City participant in the Rebellion; but which, either
by the inclination of the Inhabitants, or for fear of the Army, was the first
that restored it self to obedience. He advances to Balaguer; many Towns, not
able for defense, rendering themselves every where. And there though the straits
of the Passes might have been defended by a few, yet the Guards of the Catalans
durst not expect him; whereupon the Marquess, breathing terror and severity,
proceeds as far as Combriel, the Mutineers place of Arms. The place, though
weak, despising the conditions, which to disband the people in it the Marquess
offered, had the boldness to hold out five days, after which, being willing to
render it self, it was not received but at discretion, the Town being laid
waste, the Magistrates hanged, and the Soldiers cut to pieces.

From this blood was hatched despair over all: In Barcelona particularly the
Citizens animated one another, to undergo all extremity, rather than fall into
the hand or under the Government of so arrogant a Conqueror, or a Viceroy,
become so cruel. Entering into consideration of their liberty and safety, order
was taken for the defense, fortifying Mongiovino, and, uniting their minds for
the common danger, they went on in the Government and in their resolutions with
vigor and concord. They nevertheless feared they should not be able to
withstand so powerful a shock, without a strong support. That apprehension was
fomented by the French Ministers, who represented to them imminent ruin on one
side, and succors at hand on the other. But demonstrating that it was not
reasonable, that the Crown, to procure another advantage, should abandon its
own, they insinuated amidst fears and discourses, how much it belonged to them
to oblige so great a King to support, both for honor and interest, that
Principality. The design took; for the fear of the danger and the hopes of
succors induced the Catalans to deliver themselves up to the protection and
dominion of France, with many conditions, which preserved their privileges,
those especially of the consent of the people in the laying on of Imposts, the
Collation of Church-benefices, and temporal Charges on those of the Nation,
except the Supreme of Viceroy, who might be a Stranger. To this all gave their
assent. The major part out of a desire of novelty; the simple out of a conceit
to change their condition for the better; the more wise for being aware, that
after the first steps of Rebellion, whatsoever liberty or servitude was to be,
it could not be enjoyed but with the same ruin and calamity.

This happened about the last days of the year, very near the time that
Portugal also, casting off the yoke, revived with a new King the ancient name
of a Kingdom. The emulation, which is betwixt the Castiglians and the
Portuguais, is natural, being imprinted by birth, nourished by the milk, and
transmitted as an Inheritance from their Ancestors, but was now rather become
an abhorrency and impatience, after these were forced to bend their necks under
the Dominion of the Castiglians. The Portuguais had several times applied their
attentions and hope to various accidents, which might give a change to their
present Fortune; but the potency and felicity of the Castiglians had till now
either kept off foreign designs, or prevented those at home.

The desire nevertheless greatly increased, and the consideration of the Dukes
of Braganza served to provoke it, who descending from Edward, Brother to King
Henry, were by many as much preferred in their Right, as they had been forced
to submit to the Force of King Philip. The present Duke John, observing that
the Castiglians had a waking eye upon him, showed himself so much the more
averse from all application and business; and a Tumult in a certain City having
happened some years past, upon the hearing of his name called upon, he had
contained himself within such a modesty, that he was believed equally averse
from ambition and deceit. Olivares considering the Rights of the House and the
Favor of the People, besides his Riches and Lordships, which exceeded the
condition of a Vassal, to secure himself of him, invites him to the Court with
rewards and employments, and with a dissembled confidence conferred upon him
Charges and Titles, which, it was believed, tended not to adorn him with
Dignity, but to expose him to dangers, to the end, that exercising particularly
his employment of Conestable, he should be obliged to go upon the Fleet, or
enter into some of the Fortresses, where they should by secret orders to arrest
him Prisoner. Giovanni with several excuses avoiding his going to Madrid,
governed himself with such reserves in general, that, though he could not avoid
the suspicions of others, he at least diverted his own hazards. Olivares makes
use of the Revolt of Catalogna and of the report that the King would go forth
in person to quell it, to invite the Portuguese Nobility, and amongst them with
greater earnest Braganza, to assist with his person, and with Forces in so
signal an occasion. But the same conjuncture served the Portuguais to awaken in
them their thoughts of old; so that many in their private conversations,
accustomed frequently to lament, that a famous Kingdom extended to the four
Quarters of the World, Conde Duke the Country weakened, the Great Men
persecuted, the Privileges infringed, and that Image which remained in
Portugal of Liberty and seemly Honor defaced. Then passing from the complaints
of the times to the reproach of themselves, as if in the Portuguais were
wanting that Courage and Spirit, which so highly ennobled the people of
Catalogna. They discoursed of the easiness to accomplish any great attempt,
being governed by a Woman and by a hated Minister, with few Garrisons and less
Provisions, at a time, that all Spain was in disorder, the Forces distracted,
the King not able to resist in so many places, and France ready to assist.

Margaret, Infanta of Savoy, bore the Title of Vice-Queen: The Government
therefore resided in certain Castiglians, and in particular the Secretary
Vasconcellos, who assisted her, and who, being a Confident of Olivares, and
raised by his favor, drew all to his Maxims to bring down the Great Ones, and
exercise an absolute Command. By the Conjunctures it truly appeared, that as to
an Insurrection the danger was greater in discovering their thoughts, than in
putting them in execution; whereupon certain of the Nobles meeting in the
Garden d' Autan d' Almeda in Lisbon, there was one who considerately showed;
That the weariness and weight of the present yoke was now more grievous than
the fear of future dangers. That the Government of the Castiglians, distrustful
and severe, did not think it self otherwise secure, but in the hardest
servitude of its Vassals; that at last that time appeared, implored by their
Fathers with sighs, and wished for by themselves with so much longing. Why
should any more time be lost? Are then the Portuguais less vigilant to
undertake for liberty, than the Castiglians were solicitous to introduce
Tyranny? Do we possibly stay, till the Catalans being subdued, the Sword and
the Hangman should be the punishment and revenger of present thoughts and
suspicions? Unless every one in himself be afraid of proscription and
punishment, let us altogether have the courage to attempt something of
consequence. Of whom are we afraid? The Garrisons are empty; the Castles
unprovided; the Government weakened and feminine; and the Castiglians but few?
They should in this day be sensible of (that which Nature denies not to the
fiercest of Beasts) their own strength, and the Nobility generously united be
confident, to have all the people their followers. It should be calculated, how
many Portuguais one Castiglian commands, and by consequence coming to Arms, how
few there will remain to fight with. They should but take the resolution; for
to be free, resolution was only wanting.

All being inflamed with this discourse, gave mutually the hand and promise of
secrecy, and never to abandon one another. They were in some perplexity about
resolving, what form they were to make choice of for the new Government. Some,
by the example of the Catalans, were pleased with the Orders of the Republics;
for that the supreme Jurisdiction of the Laws, Braganza, in whom, to justify
the cause and attract the people, concurred the most principal requisites, both
for right to the Kingdom, and for distinction of Fortune. They then sent
separately to him Pietro Mendoza and Giovanni Pinto Ribero, to represent to him
the unanimous Suffrage, and offer him the Scepter, and because these perceived,
that amidst the Dukes various thoughts, the appearances of many dangers would
represent themselves to him, they endeavored to clear all doubts, and il Pinto
particularly, mingling threatenings and protests with reasons and persuasions,
declares to him, that whether he would or no, he should be proclaimed King,
without that from his reluctance, himself or others should reap ought but
greater hazards of more certain ruin. The Duke at an object so great and
sudden as was the Crown stumbled in his thoughts; but his Wife, Sister of the
Duke of Medina Sidonia, being of a high Spirit, made him take heart,
reproaching him with meanness to prefer the momentariness of Life before the
Dignity of an Empire. Nor did the French, accessory to what was working, fail
by secret Messengers to strengthen and animate him, with large promises of
assistance and favor, making him believe, that the Crown was to stand so much
the more firm upon his head, as they let him see the others tottering upon that
of King Philip. He then was persuaded to give his consent, and the time and
manner was concerted for the declaring of it.

Although in this business secrecy was the pledge of the success, nevertheless
notice of it being spread amongst many, something of it breathed out to the
Vice-Queen, who failed not to advertise the Conde Duke several times of the
discourses and designs of the Conspirators. But he, accustomed to give credit
to himself rather than to others, believed it too late. Upon the first then of
December, many of the Nobles being gone to the Palace, at the striking nine a
clock in the morning, which was the sign agreed upon, at the discharge of a
Pistol discovered their Arms, and charged the Guards of the Vice-Queen, who
unarmed and scattered, expecting nothing less, easily gave way. The Palace
being possessed, the Nobles cried, Liberty; crying up withal the name of John
the Fourth for King; and others in the Marketplaces, some in the streets, some
from the Windows, among which was Michael Almeida, venerable for his white
hairs, animating the people, and stirring them up to Arms, the concourse was so
great in a few minutes, that, as if the same Spirit moved the people, there was
none that dissented, or were wavering. One Company of Castiglians, that entered
upon the Guard in the Palace, Anthonio Tello, with others that followed him,
forcing the Lodgings of Vasconcellos, who, hearing the noise, had shut himself
into a certain Cupboard, finds him, and having killed him flung him out of the
Window, that he might be a spectacle in the Courtyard, to the hatred of the
Commonalty, and a testimony withal, how little blood the change of a Kingdom
had cost. The Infanta, kept in the power of the Conspirators, was used with
much respect, and therefore obliged to command the Governor of the Castle to
forbear to shoot with the Cannon, otherwise all the Castiglians in the City
should be cut in pieces. He not only obeys the order to abstain from doing
harm, but immediately for fear or necessity makes haste to render it, alleging
to be so unprovided, that he could not have been able to resist an assault of
the people. It was a wonder to see a City, as Lisbone, great, populous, and in
commotion, to setle in so short a space in its own power, but with so much
order and silence, that no man commanding, all sorts of persons readily paid
obedience to the name of the new King.

Giovanni, understanding what had happened at Lisbon, causing himself to be
proclaimed King in his own Dominions, enters into that City the sixth day of
the same Month with unspeakable pomp, and having received the Oath of the
people, he reciprocally took that of the observance of privileges. The fame
hereof being dispersed through the Kingdom, every place hasted to follow the
example, with so much unity of minds, that there appeared not to be a mutation
of Government, but only that the King had changed his name to the extraordinary
joy of the people. The Castiglians scattered in some Garrisons, and those of
St. Gian; a Fortress of an invincible situation, surprised with a fatal
stupidity, quit it without dispute. The Infanta was accompanied to the Borders,
and some of the Castiglian Ministers were kept Prisoners, for the security of
those Portuguais which were stayed at Madrid. In eight days the whole Kingdom
was reduced to a quiet obedience: Whilst in the East Indies, in Brasil, on the
Coast of Africa, and in the Islands which are reckoned amongst the Conquests of
the Portuguais, when by Curriers dispatched in diligence the advice was
brought, it was no sooner heard, but abjuring with an universal consent the
obedience to Castile, the name of John the Fourth was acknowledged and
proclaimed.

ANNO MDCXLI.
If upon the first invasions on the Borders of the Pirenei it had appeared,
that Spain, empty of Victuals, money, and people, had scarce been able to make
resistance at home, greater evils were now presaged, when so many Enemies
discovered themselves in its very bowels. Olivares, perceiving that instead of
promoting the Monarchy and the pre-eminence of power, it self was forced to
contend for its own safety, not being able to resist in two places, stood in
doubt, which way he should turn his chief cares and Forces. At last he judged
it best to apply himself against Catalogna, hoping that the enterprise would
not last long, and withal fearing, lest with giving time the strength of the
Country, the fierceness of the people, and the succors of the French, should
make it much more difficult. On the other side the Borders being open,
assistances remote, the people less inured to War, and the whole Kingdom being
to be conquered in Lisbon alone, he fancied to himself, that leaving the
Portuguais in security and unmolested, they would have no care to strengthen
themselves; and that the Nobles, proud by Nature, would not long suffer the
command of one, envied by many, and equal to all. Nor would that thought
perhaps have fallen out otherwise, if his counsels had not always been fatally
opposed by a certain disaster, which in some crossed the opportunity, in others
took away the force, and equally condemned all to most unhappy events. Then
pursuing in Catalogna the War again in the Spring, Los Veles comes to the Siege
of Tarragona, which, after the Metropolis of the Country, is accounted for
largeness and nobleness the chief place; but being environed but with an old
Wall, though Monsieur d' Espenan with some French got into it, was quickly
rendered, the relief availing naught but to capitulate under the name of the
French safety also to the Inhabitants of life and goods. By this loss the
affairs and minds of the Catalans seemed much dejected, and, as it happens in
improsperous events, betwixt them and the French passed words of reproach, they
finding fault with the slenderness of the succors, and these proverbiating the
baseness of the resistance. But Los Velez coming in sight of Barcelona, against
all his belief found the defense so resolute and well ordered, and the
Mongiovino, so well fortified, that not being able to take any one Fort, he
retired, either for the rigor of the season, or for the want of Victuals and
Provisions. It is not credible, how much the Catalans from this were animated,
despising the Kings displeasure and arms, and seeing themselves supported with
a more forcible pulse of French arrived in great numbers under the command of
Monsieur de la Mothe Houdancourt. He presently besieges Tarragona; but the
Spaniards were resolved to succor it at any rate, and the Duke de Ferandina
with forty Galleys executes it, not without dispute with the Naval Army of
France, who having none but great Ships, and so not able to do much more than
fulminate with the Cannon at random, effected nothing but that many of the
Galleys taking fright did not adventure; so that eleven only made their passage
through the Ships and Guns into the Port. The Town for all this could not hold
out long, whereupon the Spanish Fleet, augmented to seventy sail, renews again
the attempt with success, and because that of the French, through great
negligence, suffered it self to be surprised at Anchor, a great number of
Barques and lesser Vessels entered into Terragona.

The French for this cause were obliged to remove, raising the Siege, and to
raise the courage of the Catalans with something of prosperous, advanced into
Aragon, and took Tamarit, and succouring Almenas constrained the Castiglians,
who had posted their Camp there, to raise it. To open the Passes of the Pirenei
for succors, the Prince of Conde entering into Rossillion took there, Canet,
Argiliers, and Elma. From these uncertainties in Catalogna the Portuguais made
their advantage quietly, bringing their new Government into train, and
strengthening themselves with foreign friendships. With France they renewed the
former Treaties, with a liberty to the Portuguais to supply themselves in that
Kingdom, with Ammunition, Arms, and Men, and to ratify them the Mareshal de
Breze goes to Lisbon in great pomp, and with a numerous squadron of Ships,
where he was received with a suitable welcome and applause. The chief point
agreed upon consisted, In arming forty Ships, to ply too and again in the
Ocean, to interrupt the Navigation of the Indies, and lying in wait at Sea, to
make prey of the Spanish Fleets and Treasures. The Hollanders were to join
twenty others: With whom a Truce also was stipulated by Portugal for ten years,
with many Articles, which concerned Navigation and Trade, especially in Brasil
and the Indies, it being agreed, That each should remain possessed of what he
held in those parts, and endeavors be used to drive out the Spaniards every
where: But that the Treaty, beyond the Equator, by reason of the distance,
should not take place till after a year.

The United Provinces making use of this time with great artifice and much
advantage, dispatched with diligence orders to Count Maurice of Nassau, who
commanded in Brasil, that he should with all expedition make profit of the
opportunity, as he did, by possessing on the Coast of Africa, San Paolo Loanda,
with certain Islands, and places of great importance, to the great damage and
bitter resentment of the Portuguais, who nevertheless were forced to dissemble
it. But they now wanted not an intestine and perilous storm. The Archbishop of
Braga had in appearance adhered to the revolt; but conserved in his heart a
most partial affection for Castile, retaining a confidence with Olivares, from
whom he secretly received incitations and encouragements. He communicates his
thoughts to Lewis, Marquess de Villareal, and found him no less inclined;
whereupon animating one another, the Marquess draws into them by force as it
were of persuasions and by authority, the Duke de Camina, and the Marquess d'
Armamar, the first his Son, and the other his Nephew. They agreed to kill upon
the third of July, the King, the Queen, and their Sons, to set the City on fire
in several places, and, if it could be compassed, the Ships also in the Port,
to the end that the people being in confusion, and distracted in several parts,
and amazed, should not mind succouring the Kings Palace, nor to suppress the
Conspirators. Hereupon the Archbishop, a man of a majestical authority, with a
Crucifix in his hand, was to cry up and persuade obedience to Castigle. Nor
were Troops to be wanting, in a readiness on the Confines, to be brought into
those places, where confusion opened the Gates, or the conjuncture required.
Treachery and Secrecy being for the most part incompatible, every thing was
revealed to King John, and he, seemingly hiding it, calls a Council, whereat
the Conspirators were present, and being come into the innermost Rooms of the
Palace, causes them to be arrested. The Archbishop was detained in Prison, the
others with public punishment expiated the offense.

The King with equal Art endeavored to revenge himself of the Castiglians,
tempting his Brother-in-law, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, to revolt with
Andaluzia, where he had good Credit and a great Estate. Nor should his
endeavors have wanted success; for upon the invitations of the Portuguais and
the insinuations of Richelieu, the Duke had lent his ear, and promised safe
shelter to the Fleet of the Mareshal de Breze, under the countenance whereof he
was to declare himself; but that the news coming of the relief of Terragona and
of the Siege raised, apprehending his own danger, he refuses to receive the
French Fleet into his Ports, and knowing, that Olivares had got knowledge of
the Intelligence, to clear himself of it, he challenges the King of Portugal to
fight with him, reproaching him with the title of Traitor and Infamous. He then
not having appeared, as was well to be supposed, in the field, he sets upon his
head a great sum of money. But King Philip being therewith not contented, the
Duke was summoned to Court, and he, not finding in Andaluzia an alienation to
the Castiglians, nor for himself the favor he had hoped, obeys with so much
readiness, that he caused the first suspicions to vanish, or at least to be
dissembled.

Whilst Portugal established it self, and the Armies were contending in
Catalogna, Richelieu easily made himself believe, that the Affairs of Italy and
Flanders would remain in prey to him; and in this push of Fortune every thing
might have succeeded for him, if the course of his felicity had not been
hindered in France it self by very considerable accidents, though quickly and
happily suppressed. It has been said elsewhere, that hatred against the
Cardinal was with his prosperity increased, corrupt and discontented humors
being now amassed to such a degree, that the vigor of the Government,
Reputation and Force it self were found not sufficient to digest and purge
them. It was doubted, that the Duke of Vendosm employed some to kill him.
Whether it were true or false, the Cardinal being in reputation to know every
thing, and pardon nothing, the Duke passes into England, where the Queen Mother
as yet resided, and thither repaired other dissatisfied and suspected persons.
The Parliaments of the Kingdom were also exasperated, and particularly that of
Paris; for that having showed a will to oppose certain Edicts, it had been
severely reproved by the King, with a command, that for the future it should
not meddle in any thing that belonged to the Government.

The people then in general, as they are wont to be the first to cry up
Favorites, so being also the readiest to execrate them, it cannot be said, how
much they abhorred the Name and Authority of this Minister. The Wars obliged to
vast expenses, and the Kings Revenues being ill managed, it was found, that the
grievance arose from the public want; for money being wanting in the Treasury,
there was a necessity to take it by force from the rich, and extort it with
vexations from the poor. All seemed full of lamentations, but each one passed
frequently under the accusation of a Spy, tears going not unpunished, and the
very sighs admitting of reproach Grief becoming at last too fierce could not be
suppressed any longer with fear, and if talking and discourses were forbidden
and punished, Writings and Pamphlets abounded, that filled all places with
detractions and invectives. There was raised at last a great storm, and the
body of it appeared assembled at Sedan, declared by the Duke of Bouillon, who
was Sovereign of it, the public refuge of the Malcontents. He was not
satisfied with the Court, and to his disgusts were quickly added those also of
others. The chief were the Count of Soissons and the Duke of Guise, who framing
to themselves a general Commotion of the Kingdom, oppressed by the Cardinal
with all sorts of calamities, represented, His Ministry as the sad Center of
the common miseries. He, Author of the War betwixt the Crowns, under a feigned
luster of prosperity, kept the mind of the King bewitched; in the mean while
extorted Treasures, consumed the spirits and the blood of the Kingdom, and to
preserve himself in this ambitious station, kept himself environed with Armies.
They described in him Cruelty and Avarice with equal horror to have joined
hands to defend him from the threatenings which he incessantly feared. That
nothing remained in France unviolated. That he had revenged himself of some of
his Enemies with punishment; others, of the clearest innocence, were more
secretly made away. That many had been forced to seek their safety by retiring
into other Countries, and that the Cardinal had either usurped to himself, or
distributed amongst his Kindred all their Charges, Goods, and Spoils.

For these public causes then, and to purge the Kingdom of a Monster so
hateful, who had either offended every body, or did threaten all with ruin,
they gave it to be believed they had taken Arms, protesting perfect obedience
to the King. But other private motives, and perhaps more powerful, were not
wanting. Soissons by reason of his generous and active Spirit was feared by the
Cardinal, and therefore, to bind him in the strict bonds of confidence, he had
tempted him to take one of his Nieces to Wife. But the Count publicly scorning
the match, by reason of the inequality of birth, the Cardinal from his ambition
falls into a hatred, and from hatred to meditate upon revenge, crossing all his
pretensions with the King.

Guise gave the Court that suspicion which was inseparable from the House of
Lorain, from whom he had taken away, with their Estates and Governments, all
authority in France. He enjoyed the Archbishopric of Reims, with other
benefices of the Church; and the Cardinal, desirous to have the spoil of them,
to impoverish him, assigns him a short day, to enter into holy Orders, knowing,
that being in love with Anna de Nevers, Daughter of Carlo the deceased Duke of
Mantua, he aspired rather to Marriage than the Priesthood: So that, not
yielding obedience, he was deprived of the benefices, and reduced to a very
narrow condition, without permitting him to resign any one of them to his
Brothers. To strengthen themselves with foreign Forces, the said Princes
concluded a Treaty with Micael de Salamanca, who, in the name of the Spaniards,
promised them a very great assistance of money and men, and that Lamboy with a
good body of an Army should come immediately to join with them.

Carlo Duke of Lorain concurred in the same sense, though in the beginning of
the year being gone to Paris, he had agreed to renounce the Austrian party, and
adhere sincerely to France, by which a part of his Country was restored;
Clermont, with Stenay, Dun, and Jamets remaining in propriety to the Crown, and
Nancy, till a general Peace, in deposito. He, that had aimed at nothing but to
recover some places out of the hands of the French, having obtained his
purpose, retires from the Court, and presently begins to make Levies; yet
making it believed, that he would join with the Mareshal de Chastillon for the
service of King Lewis.

Thus the revolt of the malcontents was rendered considerable by stranger
Forces, and perhaps by an internal disposition; it seeming to be without doubt,
that, if the United Princes should have happened in the first heat of some
advantage to enter into the Kingdom, and should have advanced into the
Provinces, there would have followed a general commotion of the Gentry,
Parliaments, and People. Neither was it without some appearance, but that to
the King himself the excess of pride and predominancy of the Favorite growing
troublesome, some opportunity would have been acceptable to be rid of him and
disgrace him. The Cardinal, sometimes opposing Counsel and sometimes Force,
took care for provisions and for defense. He closes with the Prince of Conde,
giving to his Son the Duke of Anguien one of his Nieces to Wife; for it highly
concerned that Family to keep Soissons under, who had assumed the title of
first Prince of the blood Royal; and sends La Meilleray with an Army to divert
the Spaniards from lending succors to the Mutineers, and the Mareshal de
Chastillon with another against the Princes united. The first, passing the new
ditch, the known and ancient border betwixt France and Artois, mastering
certain Forts which defended it, laid Siege to Air, a place most important,
secured not only by Nature with much moorish grounds round about it, but
strengthened by Art with all sorts of Fortifications within and without.
Chastiglion, being come near to Sedan, met, on the sixth of July, Lamboy
together with the Princes malcontents. The Kings Army was ranged in excellent
order upon a certain rising ground, with great advantage, having the flanks
covered with two little Woods. On the other side, that of the Princes, pressed
for want of room by reason of the situation, was rather confused than well and
orderly placed; but, not being able to avoid the shock, certain of Chastillons
Troops charged with so much resolution, that some of the divisions opening, and
others retiring behind the Artillery, Fortune showed the Royalists the way to a
signal Victory. Soissons hasting to remedy this disorder of his, armed at all
pieces, with the vizier open, and with few that accompanied him, while he was
mingled in the Fight being shot by a Soldier of the Company of Orleans with a
Pistol in the Eye, fell backwards from his Horse on the ground, losing at the
instant his speech and his life.

Whilst this ought to have confirmed to the Kings Army the advantage, it
happens by a contrary accident, that the Cavalry took basely the flight,
without being pursued by any, either because many abhorred the spilling of so
much of their fellow subjects blood, or that some were glad to celebrate the
Funerals of those beginnings, under which they hoped to make War for private
revenge upon the Cardinal. The issue was, that the Conquerours, stopped by
themselves in the course of their prosperity, nay rather turning their backs to
fortune, became conquered; for the Imperial Troops and those of the Princes
overrunning the Infantry, part were cut to pieces, and the rest with all the
Cannon and Baggage brought Prisoners into Sedan. Almost all the Officers ran
the same fate, either of death or being taken, Chastilion, with a few others,
saving himself with difficulty.

Nevertheless, with a notable example of the indulgence of Fortune toward the
Cardinal Richelieu, Soissons being dead, who was the soul or rather the fury of
the malcontents, the fruits of the Battle redounded not to the benefit of the
victorious, but to those that were defeated; for although Lamboi took in
Doncheri, a little and a weak place, yet such and so long was the resistance,
that it gave time to Chastillon to re-assemble in Rhetel the relicts of his men
together, with new recruits, and for the King to arrive with an Army so
vigorous, that he not only recovered Doncheri at the first appearance of it,
but threatening Sedan with a Siege, persuaded Bouillon to submit and make his
Peace. The place is, for its situation, for works, and defenses, truly numbered
amongst the strongest; nevertheless the Duke, considering the head of that
undertaking to be dead, the others weak and in a fright, Spain turmoiled in so
many parts, and Lamboy constrained to repair to the relief of Flanders,
endeavored to find his safety in the Kings favor, whereupon he stipulates an
accord, obtaining neutrality for the Town, pardon for himself and all the
party, except the Duke of Guise, and the Baron de Bech. Some of the
malcontents returned to their Houses, others would not at all trust
themselves there, but dispersed into several Provinces, or went into those of
Flanders, leaving to the Cardinal the merit or the fortune to have, though thus
a loser, subdued the Rebellion, without intermitting in so many other parts the
assisting his Friends and offending his Enemies.

The Siege of Air was in this interim carried on with great earnest, in such
sort, that, besides infinite other factions, one and the same Half Moon was
gained and lost several times. But remaining at last in the power of the French
gave them means to press the Town more powerfully, gain the Ditch, and after
mines and assaults, to fix a lodgment upon a Bastion. And now the place
capitulated, the afflicting the County of Boulloin, and the Country thereabouts
with great incursions, having not at all availed the Spaniards for the removing
Meilleray from the Siege.

Ghenep was also rendered to Orange upon the same day that Air was taken; but
the French retained that Conquest but a very short space: For the Cardinal
Infant joined with Lamboy straightened it so closely, that Meilleray, wanting
victuals, was hardly able to withdraw himself, leaving the place unrepaired and
provided. Whereupon the Spaniards entering into the Trenches and Posts abandoned
by the French; at the instance of the neighboring Provinces, who, fearing the
oppressions of the Enemy offered men and money, Air was again besieged. La
Meilleray having not been able to thrust in succors from Terrouane, attacques
la Bassen, and the gaining of it proved an easy Conquest. Lens was likewise
rendered to the Mareshal de Breze, and Baupaume defended it self but nine days.
Flanders besides was harrassed, and Armentiers threatened, Fontenay, who had the
body of an Army, being not able to hinder it, because Orange on the other side
gave jealousy to the Sas of Ghent, and made show as if he would pass the
Watercourse thereabout. But the Spaniards esteemed the recovery of Air to be
preferred before all they had lost, and at last took it about the end of the
year.

But yet those Provinces enjoyed not an entire contentment, for the Cardinal
Infant dies to the extreme grief of the Soldiery and of the People. He at his
entry into those Countries had gained a great applause; because, laying aside
that loftiness and gravity which seems contracted by the Princes in the Court
of Spain, he had to the excellent prerogatives of piety and virtue added
courtesy and affability, to the Flemmings most especially acceptable. Nor
failed they at Madrid to conceive jealousy at it, the Governments far distant
being always suspected, especially when administered by Princes of the blood
Royal, and supported by Arms; knowing withal, that the French had oftentimes,
by offering him to Wife the Daughter of the Duke of Orleans, tempted him to
make himself Master of those Countries, assuring him of all their own Forces,
and those of Holland. The French in this conjuncture conceived certain hopes of
a revolt in the Provinces, and the King comes with the Cardinal to the
Frontiers; but they remained quiet, and suffering rather than contented with
their new Governor, that was Francisco de Melo.

In Germany a Diet was this year held at Ratisbone, called by the Emperor, to
the end to break another more jealous assembly, which the Princes of the Empire
had a mind to have at Franckefort; but the Emperor found himself there in
great danger: For Banier with a speedy march being come from Erfordt near to
Ratisbone, the Danube being frozen, began to cause his men to pass over it,
environing that City, with great hopes to take the Emperor Prisoner, or at
least besiege him, and dissipate the Diet. The defense being disposed in much
haste and disorder, the River by special favor from Heaven was in a short
space so thawed, that Banier being obliged to halt on the other side, those
which had passed were beaten and made Prisoners. Banier moves thence, and going
to Cham had the good luck to take it. Piccolomini having beset Schlang, Felt
Marshal, and given time to the Archduke to come up with the Body, to receive
the honor of the action, obliges him to render himself, together with four
thousand Horse, all Prisoners. The Swedes, in this manner weakened, were forced
to retreat, pressed by the Archduke; and, to say truth, Banier made his most
excellent conduct appear, in that being inferior in Forces, and retreating
with the Enemy always in sight, and in passing the River Egra, he received not
the least disadvantage; but being come to Halverstadt, surprised with a great
sickness he there dies. The Swedes were every where pressed and pursued by the
Imperialists, when the Count of Guebrian, who had succeeded Longueville in the
command of the Weimarians, moving that Army, brought them a seasonable relief.
The strong place of Wolfenbutel in the Dukedom of Luneburg was now straightly
besieged by the Protestants, and Piccolomini, being come near to attempt the
relief of it, was repulsed with a very considerable blow. Nevertheless strong
resistance being still made, the aggressors were forced to retire. On the other
side, Dorsten in Westphalia fell into the hands of Hatzfeldt.

All these successes served rather to protract the War, than to end it; though
it appeared, that the Negotiations for the Peace were something more than
formerly facilitated; for that the Emperor at last consented, to the
satisfaction of the confederate Crowns, the safe conducts for the Princes of
the Empire, and, at the interposition of the King of Denmark, was in Hamburg,
by Lutzau, d' Ava, and Salvins, Ministers of the Emperor, France, and the
Swedes, a Treaty concluded, which was called, of the Preliminaries, by which
the Assembly, which formerly was to have been held in Colen, being transported
to Munster and Osnaburg, Cities which were left Neutral and without Garrison,
it was agreed that in the former should be transacted all that which belonged
to the Austrians, France, and Holland, and in the latter the interest of Swede
and its Confederates with the Emperor and his Adherents. But when things were
thought in a readiness to give a beginning to the managements of the Peace,
other difficulties arose; and the Emperor thought to clear them by publishing
in Ratisbone an Amnesty, or general Oblivion, or Pardon of things past, but he
rather increased them; for by excluding the cause of the Palatine, by remitting
it to a particular Treaty, many declared themselves not satisfied.

Amidst these universal agitations, the Republic of Venice restored to quiet,
felt only some little disturbance for private contests betwixt Borderers in
Dalmatia, occasioned by the exceeding ill will of Ali Bei and Durat his Son,
who bore the sway in the Vrana. Although the beginning brought some trouble,
the Turk entering with armed men into the Territory of Zara to the ruin of the
Campania, yet it was quickly quieted, the Port sending upon the complaints of
Girotamo Trivisano, Bailo, a Chiaux into those parts to reestablish the Peace.
It happened, that he coming near the Frontiers, those of Verpoglie, Subjects to
the Venetians, to repair some damages they had suffered, committed in the
Turkish Country far greater mischief. The Ministers thereupon offended, would
have revenged it upon the Territory of Sebenico with Arms; but Giovanni
Baptista Grimani, General of the Province, with his dexterity, whilst Luigi
Malipiero, that commanded the Cavalry, was ready to succor the places most
threatened, persuaded them to a composure, confirming the friendship by the
restoring of Commerce, and the Turks demolishing a certain new Fortification
raised at Verveco. The Port heard willingly the news of quiet; for having
settled a Peace with the Persian upon the former conditions, the Turkish Arms
were employed in the gaining of Asach, a most strong place, upon the Palus
Moeotis, kept by those Cossacks, who under the protection of Muscovia committed
in the Black Sea most cruel mischiefs, even within the sight of the Seraglio.

The Venetians therefore freed also from that care, stood immovable betwixt
the instances, which, with offers of great advantages, both the Crowns pressed
them with, each to draw them to their own party. The French represented that
plant fading, which not long since overshadowed Italy and Europe, and invited
them to reap together with the other Italian Princes the rich spoils; the King
willingly yielding to them the hopes and the fruits of so noble Conquests. On
the other side was showed by the Spanish Ministers the dangers of the Milanese,
and offered to consideration, whether, that serving as a Barricado and
Intrenchment to hinder the Inundations of the French into the bowels of Italy,
it ought not to be supported and defended by united Forces. The Republic, on
whom the desire of quiet was more incumbent than that which might spur on the
opportunity of Conquests, answered to the one and to the other with equal
expressions of respect and confidence. To say truth, affairs in the Milanese
passed with great confusion; for that in the beginning of the year, Prince
Thomaso having recanted his Treaty with France, the King of Spain at his
instance had removed Leganes, and substituted in the Government the Count de
Sirvela, the Government and the Power becoming thereby much weakened, both
because of his weaker capacity, and that the Power of the Monarchy, distracted
into so many parts, was not able to assist Italy with a vigor equal to the
necessity.

On this account Turenne, though with but indifferent Forces, easily regains
Moncalvo, and out of complacency to Mazarine, who counted himself greatly
injured by Prince Thomaso for the delusion of the Treaties, Inurea was besieged
at the time that the Prince himself was at Milan to make some agreements with
the Governor, and to demand assistance. The defense nevertheless was bravely
maintained by Silvio di Savoy, natural Brother to the Prince, and by Varcellino
Maria Visconti, Maestro di Campo, of Milan, who in the night by stealth got
themselves into it. Hartourt howsoever he approved not the undertaking, seeing
Turenne engaged, came to the Camp, and endeavored by a general assault to have
put an end to it; but that being withstood and repulsed with loss to the
Aggressors, he saw a while after, through the negligence of his Sentinels, the
Baron di Prel with four hundred Soldiers to enter into it. For all this he
retires not; but Prince Thomaso, who losing the place, remained without a place
of retreat at the discretion of the Spaniards, solicited the Governor of
Milan, that he would attacque the French Trenches. Sirvela on the other side
refusing to hazard all at one sole blow, assented rather for a diversion to
attacque Chivas, where a surprise by Scalade not succeeding, the Siege was
laid. To relieve it the French retired from Inurea, and the Spaniards having
gained their design stayed no longer before Chivas. Harcourt proposing to
himself more important designs, to force the Prince Cardinal, to open to
himself the communication with the Sea, and to enlarge his Quarters, possesses
without much ado Ceva, Mondovi, and other places thereabout; laying Siege at
last to Cuneo, a place, which for the fortifications and the situation upon the
folds of a Mountain, carried the boast never to have been taken by force. But
after many Factions and hard Encounters the Lieutenant Colonel Cataneo, that
commanded in it, upon the 12. of September renders it, succesless having proved
the utmost endeavors of Prince Thomaso and of Servela to send in succors or
attempt diversions. The loss of Cuneo troubled the Princes of Savoy, and no
less the Spaniards; but these were touched at the success of Monaco more than
with ought else.

That Town stands upon an eminence, which thrusts forth a promontory into the
Sea, and covers a Shore rather than a Port, where the River of Genona
terminates upon the Confines of the County of Nizza. It gives name to a little
Principality, formerly for a long time possessed by the Family of Grimaldi.
Till one thousand six hundred and five the Spaniards, allured by the
convenience of the situation, brought into it a strong Garrison, by the
consent, for his private advantages, of the Prince di Val di Taro, Uncle and
Tutor of Honorato, Prince of Monaco, then a Minor. There resided a Governor
for the Crown, who exercised very often, besides his Command, overmuch
license; besides that, the pay for the Garrison being delayed to be sent from
Milan by reason of the present occupations, the Prince was forced, to exempt
himself from the insolence of the Soldiers, to disburse it out of his own
money. His house also was the common Inn for all those that passed out of Italy
into Spain, so that he found himself exhausted and oppressed on all sides,
drawing very little from certain Lands in the Kingdom of Naples, and nothing at
all from the Pensions assigned him in recompense of the Garrison received.
Willing therefore to shake off the yoke, he sets on foot in great secrecy
practices with the French, without having been able for several years to
compass his intention, the French sometimes being not in readiness, and at
others the Garrison strong, and the Governor vigilant. At last Monsignor
Grimaldi passing that way, sent by the Pope to the Nuntiature of France, it was
taken for granted, that the Prince, as to a Kinsman, opened his thoughts to
him, and that he managed the business with Richelieu.

The Cardinal of Savoy having conceived no slight jealousy of it, gives notice
of it to Sirvela; but he not making any matter of it, only warns the Governor
to be upon his Guard, and he answers with great boasting, offering, when he
should be commanded, to bring the Prince Prisoner to Milan. A while after, to
supply the necessity of the Cardinal of Savoy, part of the Garrison of Monaco
was sent to his relief; and more to weaken the rest, the Prince took occasion
of the refusal of Roccabruna, a place of his, to disburse certain money, which
was just to serve for the payment of the Soldiers, and persuaded the Governor
to send sixty more to quarter there for a chastisement. Invited by this
occasion, he causes to be brought to him by night certain of his Subjects, who
for several offenses he kept imprisoned; and while the Governor and other
Officers slept more soundly from the Jolity and the Wine of a Supper, in which
the Prince had nobly entertained them, communicates to them the desire and
intention to rid himself of the Spaniards, now but few in number, and at
present sleeping in great security, provided they would be assisting to deliver
him from that oppression under which for so many years he had innocently
groaned. All, for the liberty which he promised them, consenting to the common
safety, shaking off their Fetters, armed themselves, and the Prince with those
of the Court, putting himself at the head of one Troop, and his Son at that of
the other, they set forward to assault in several parts the Garrison, who
expecting nothing else, were disarmed without defense, and after the death of
some, the rest made Prisoners. The Prince advertises presently to the Count
d'Ales, Governor of Provenza, who having in a readiness a relief of Provisions
and Soldiers, sent it without delay by Sea. The Prince then sends back to
Sirvela the Soldiers that were Prisoners and the Order of the Fleece, because
he had secretly consented to receive from King Lodowick that of the Holy Ghost,
to keep in Monaco a Garrison of French, and in recompense of that which he
should lose in Naples and elsewhere, to enjoy in Fief the Duchy of Valence in
Dauphine with advantages and pensions for himself and his Son.

THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE. THE TWELFTH BOOK.
AS an Appendix to so many others which tore Christendom in pieces, served the
War newly started up in Italy, if not great for the occasions, for the effects
and for the exploits, famous at least for the contention of minds, curious for
the variety of interests, and important for the quality of the managements. The
original was ascribed to certain disgusts of the Barbarins, Nephews of Urban,
against Edward Prince of Parma; and they came to be fomented from grudgings
already conceived by several Potentates against the Pope and his House; for the
Pontificate being governed in these last times by his Nephews with an absolute
command ( Urban being under the burden of his years weakened in his vigor and
authority,) it seemed, that with various injuries to the Princes, they abused
their power and fortune with an excess of license. He that had most of the
Popes affection and favor, was the Cardinal Francisco, deep in his designs,
often irresolute, always a friend to his own Counsels, easy to suspect, and
tenacious in what he affected. On the other side, the Duke Edward was of high
and active spirits, sensible of every displeasure, prone to resentments,
otherwise dignified with the Arts Military and Civil Sciences to such a degree,
that nothing wanted to rank him amongst the most commendable and greatest
Princes, but that Fortune had either given him an Empire and power equal to his
mind, or Prudence equalled his mind to his fortune and power.

In the forementioned War, undertaken by the Duke against Spain, with boldness
more than needed, some seeds of discontent had already been scattered betwixt
him and the Barbarins; either because it seemed to the Duke, that the Pope had
with coldness interposed to divert the dangers or rather imminent ruin of his
Countries; or that he had discovered from the propositions, which the Nephews
had caused to be brought to him in that conjuncture, to sell and alienate
certain of his Lands for their advantage, that the aim of that Family tended
more to their private convenience than to the interest of State. Edward
afterward going to Rome in the year one thousand six hundred thirty nine,
disgusts brake forth more openly; for not being treated with those Ceremonies,
which he affirmed were first promised him, nor the Prince Francisco Maria his
Brother promoted to the Cardinalat, in the pursuit whereof, with great hopes to
effect it, the Duke notwithstanding affirmed to have been engaged by the
Barbarins, he only obtained of Urban power to lessen the Revenue of the Monti,
with a half per Cent; upon the advance whereof, grounding a new increase of the
Capital, all he got was to go thence with a not contemptible sum of money. That
is called at Rome money de Monti, which in Venice is called di Zecca, deposited
by private persons, on the condition of an annual Rent, which by the Farnese
had been assigned upon the Revenues of Castro, a Dukedom they held in Fief of
the Church, and which, by the vicinity to Rome, serving them for convenience
and honors, gave notwithstanding no jealousy to the Popes, it having no
places of strength in it. The Barbarins secretly tempted, as in recompense of
the favor obtained, the mind of Edward, to cede to them certain places of that
State, contiguous to their Lands; but the motion being rejected, favors were
changed into unkindness: Whereupon, though the Pope did not recall the grant,
it was yet crossed by the Nephews, and with sundry delays and difficulties
prolonged and diminished.

The Duke, hereat irritated, hastens his departure from Rome, and vented his
discontents, publishing them to the Courts by not visiting the Barbarins nor
the Pope, by inveighing against the Cardinal Francisco and his Government so
highly, that Urban was moved at it even to fears; but they were quickly
converted into wrath, and sharp resentments. For the Duke, enjoying by
concession of the Popes, the draught of Corn out of his Country, Urban on a
sudden forbids it, and in that consisting the best Revenues of Castro, the
exportation failing, the Siri, Merchants, to whom the Duke had farmed it for
ninety 7000 Crowns per an. renounce the agreement; whereupon, that sum being
not able to be raised, which sufficed to pay the Montists, they had recourse to
the Courts of Justice, and obtained, that the Duke should be juridically cited.
He imputes all to the Barbarins, as if they designed to despoil him of that
Country, and seeing the person of the Judge not separate from that of his
Enemies, he believed he should be overborn; and therefore not regarding the way
of Judicature, he resolves to fortify himself against force not only with
right but Arms also, sending Delfino Angelieri, a Gentleman of Monferrat,
Governor, with a Garrison to Castro, and causing half-moons and Redouts to be
cast up about the place. This being judged by the Barberins a crime, as if he
would resist his Sovereign, a Monitory was published by the Auditor of the
Chamber, in which limiting to the Duke thirty days, to demolish the
Fortifications of Castro and disband the Garrison; it otherwise declared him to
have incurred Rebellion and Excommunication: The Thunder whereof was now
foreseen to be near at hand; for the Barberins raising Soldiers in all haste,
six thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, with some Cannon joined at Viterbo,
under the Prefect, as Generalissimo, and the Marquess Luigi Mathei Master de
Camp General, with other Chiefs, and great provisions. This sudden arming
awakened attention in the Princes, and various discourses amongst the people;
for in the Pope, who, while he was yet not so old, had with so much care
cultivated Peace, they were obliged to believe great thoughts and strange
designs, if in the extremity of his years he should resolve to disturb it, and
so much the more in a Conjuncture, that Christendom mangled and languishing
required from his fatherly care quiet and restoration, and Italy, exposed as a
prey to Strangers, gasped after remedy and safety from the concord of its
Princes. All was imputed to the Nephews, and their intentions were accused, as
either bent to secure themselves of the Duke, by depriving him of his Estate
near them; or extended, as was rather believed, to more vast objects.

The Viceroy of Naples showed himself above all jealous at it, because he knew,
that to the contrivances of the French upon that Kingdom the Barberins had lent
their ear, and perhaps their help in concert with some of the Barons, Ferdinand
also, the Grand Duke, was no less displeased to see the Pope armed upon his
Confines, and in design of making new Conquests, having, besides his own and
common considerations not to suffer him to increase in power, found the will of
the Barberins, originary of his Country, so averse from giving him
satisfaction, as, in whatsoever business he had with them, to obtain nothing
but prejudices or disgusts. Nor did differing thoughts reside in the minds of
others; every one showing himself at a stand at this novelty, and some covering
with the appearing jealousy of War the hope of advantages, if any disturbance
should be promoted. The Viceroy, above all afflicting himself, because this new
suspicion on the Confines kept him from sending into Spain and Milan the
succors demanded and necessary, became more earnest in his Mediation,
requiring from the Pope, that the proceeding against Edward might be only in an
equal and judicial way.

The Grand Duke also interposes his offices to the same effect; and believing,
that Parma also stood in need to have the heat of his Spirits moderated,
dispatches the Marquess Guicciardini to persuade the Duke to mitigate his
passion, and give way to a Treaty; and to induce him to it, in a manner by
force had denied the passage of Soldiers, which Edward was sending to Castro,
and prohibited some Provisions, which for the better providing of the place,
were to be drawn out of Tuscany. The Pope, with opposite and concise replies,
without other expressions, but a resolution to maintain inviolated the Decorum
of humbling his Vassal, and make himself be obeyed, gave no place for a Treaty.

At this time the Republic had no other Minister at Rome but Girolamo Bon, a
Secretary; the Ambassador Extraordinary, the causes ceasing which induced to
send him, having been recalled, and for an ordinary no care was taken to send
one, until the Elogium should come to be restored. The Nuntio was seldom
admitted into the College to Audience, and he comprehending of what importance
the Declaration of the Senate in the present affairs would be, not being able
to suppose it favorable to the Barberins, endeavored to keep their minds
either diverted or in a slumber; sometimes with artifice, considering the evils
imminent upon Italy from foreign Armies; and at others scoffing with derision
at the affair of Castro, as a thing of a slight importance. At last when
provisions increased, and Forces assembled, and that toward the Bolognese, he
assured that all was in order to Peace, and to suppress a certain capricious
attempt of the Duke of Parma, though the Pope should possibly be obliged to
send some few Soldiers to Melara on this side the Po, and on the Borders of
the Republic. But the Count Ferdinando Scotti, who, though under pay of the
Republic, served in this occasion the Duke of Parma, whose Vassal by birth he
was, with opposite offices represented in the present affairs the causes of the
hatreds and the intentions of the Barberins much differing. He alleged the
Right of the Duke, aggravated the violence which was done him, and together
with the ill example, the prejudices which would redound from it to all the
Princes. He demanded of the Senate counsel, the better to govern himself in the
business, and assistance to resist the force. He communicates the intention of
the Duke, if Castro were assaulted, to go himself to its relief, whilst that
place being maintained, the Barberins being humbled would without doubt incline
to Peace; but if he should yield, they by the felicity of it being rendered more
lofty, the heat of the War might be transported into Lombardy, and draw, to
take part, the Arms of the Crowns, greedy above measure to interest the
Italians in their differences. He expressed the intentions of the Duke as much
inclined to a just accord, as resolved, notwithstanding any hazard or
engagement, to maintain his affairs and his right.

The Senate, in so weighty an emergency, could not but stand perplexed
concerning the manner how to govern it self, being equally displeased at the
causes of new stirs in Italy, and the effects of the attempts of the Barberins.
Whereupon opinions differing, the Senate being assembled, Giovanni Pisari,
Cavalier and Procurator, endeavors to persuade, that the Duke might be received
into the protection of the Republic; haranguing to this purpose: From the
prudent and generous Customs of our Ancestors, to succor the weak, and assist
the oppressed, practiced so many times by our selves with glory and advantage,
the Duke of Parma has taken a rational confidence to have recourse to the
Patronage of our Republic. The cause may seem remote to some, and perhaps the
interest not great; but the Barbarins passing from private Contests to a War,
from Acts judiciary to Arms, the example is certainly of consequence to all,
and the danger of it near at hand. This Senate has voluntarily espoused the
glory of being the Guardian of the Liberty of Italy, and the Protector of
Princes oppressed. But in what cause can it employ it self more justly than in
that, in which if on the one side passion contends with interest, on the other
right appears destitute of power? That a Pope almost fourscore years of age,
arms, is a great consideration. But that his Nephews manage the Treasuries, and
the Armies resolve upon Invasions, and trample upon Princes, is very much done.
Certainly the blow tends not only where it aims; but if all be threatened, it is
reason that all should interest themselves in resisting. Ambition has its
Center, but limits not the Circumference. It covets and swallows all, and
dilates it self there where it seems to seek a boundary. Castro is concerned at
present. But why so great preparations for a weak place, ill provided, without
other reputation, but that which the same of the present affairs gives it? That
place taken, they will go forward; Parma and Piacenza shall not go free, and
Duke Edward vanquished, what seems not easy to the fast and avarice of the
Barberins? Who then will be so bold to call a great Undertaking a small
Business? A flame which will be increased by it self with the fuel of so many
designs and interests? The Spaniards, always cautious, fear for the Kingdom of
Naples. The Grand Duke, a most prudent Prince, apprehends for Tuscany. Others
observe with terror the example; for if he that offends will also revenge
himself, who is not offended by the Barberins? The Princes have several times
born without resentment their contempts; if they permit at present also a
profitable violence, to what height will their attempts grow? Who knows but
that the Nephews of Urban, knowing they have offended many, design not to
fortify themselves beforehand against all; or that in the decaying age of the
Uncle, perceiving their Dominion to be staggering, design not to maintain with
Arms, if not in their own persons, an hereditary Command, at least a continual
Pontificat in those depending on them in their Maxims and in their Interests. I
invite not the Senate to resentments, nor call to remembrance the injuries, the
disgusts, and the spightfulness, I would say, past, if the memory of their
attempts against our Dignity and the Piety of our worthy Ancestors were not
yet, even by the defacing of the Marble, conspicuous at present. I rather
exhort with a generous setting at naught of our own concerns to contribute, to
the good of Christendom, that much which may be pretended. But that we should
permit the oppression of the Duke of Parma, and suffer a fire, which will not
only burn Italy, but transport its flames into all the Catholic Provinces,
will stir up the Protestants, and inflame the Barbarians, is not my advice; and
if the Barberins, in a short and casual command, neglect the consequences of so
great evils, they ought not to be omitted by the Princes, to whom with the
perpetuity of Dominion is recommended by God the safety of the people, and the
care of the world. This cannot be better effected, than by opposing the
beginnings, maintaining Castro, and assisting the Duke of Parma, that he may be
able to succor and defend it; if otherwise it be lost, and that with this blow
of Sword and Fire there be added a new plague to the so many languishings of
Italy, and Arms come to be employed, the War will be so long, and accidents
will happen so unforeseen, that the most averse will be constrained to take
part in it. If by showing a force only we may gain Peace, why shall we let
Hostility run on with so much slaughter and such spreading calamities, that our
Posterity perhaps will have cause for many Ages to deplore the memory and
Authors of them. I firmly believe, that it is sufficient to declare our selves,
and give them to understand at Rome, that these Novelties, Violences, and
Invasions are not to be endured. The Barberins will hearken to Conditions, when
they see their Arms not likely to have success; and with the Equilibrium of the
Princes, and to the honor of whom shall have been the Author of it, a Peace
will be concluded, confirming thereby the greatest benefit, which our Republic
can possibly do to Italy, to Christendom, and to the Church it self.

Although some inclined to this course, nevertheless it seemed to the major
part not yet seasonable to resolve. Whereupon Vincenzo Gussoni, Cavalier,
spoke; War being the ultimate Decree of the power and of the right and reason
of Princes, it is fit to enter into it with a slow pace, and if the Barberins
do therein precipitate themselves, it belongs to us to oppose discretion to
impatience, and with prudence to bridle passions. I confess, that to the Popes
Nephews moderation would be of equal commendation and duty; but withal the Duke
of Parma has no need of Spurs; a fiery Prince, who provoked by himself runs to
resentments. The wisdom therefore of the Senate, for the asswaging of Spirits
and humors, ought to the one, to use effectual remonstrances, and to the
other, moderation of counsels. It is no time at present to add an increase of
evils to this afflicted Country. It languishes but too much by the War, which,
though it rage in the extreme parts, yet attracts the blood, the money, the
minds, and apprehensions of all. But if in that part which remains untouched by
the fire, we shall cut the veins and the sinews, what will follow of it else
but an extreme languishment, and in conclusion an unhappy falling under the
designs of Strangers and the desires of the Barbarians? Italy cannot make War
with the alone Forces of the Italians. Both the Crowns will greedily come in,
and confounding ours with their own interests, we shall relegate the hopes of
Peace to those Assemblies, where not to end them, the Treaties cannot yet find
a beginning. The invitations, the promises of two most powerful Kings, the
Conjuncture of the Times, the hopes of great advantages, have not hitherto been
able to remove us out of our Neutrality; therefore moderating counsels with
justice and prudence, we have let the World know, that there is no cause here,
that without cause can persuade us to a War. And shall we now by another way,
and that by compulsion, enter into the Labyrinth of the common discords, and
shall we therein be guided by casualties, accidents, and the will of others?
Who knows not, but when the Barberins shall believe themselves not able to
compass their designs, they will shelter themselves under the countenance of a
greater Power, and being to strives invited by both the Crowns, it will be at
their choice to declare for that which shall prove most advantageous, or appear
most successful? So the weaker joining it self to the one, the other in
opposition will necessarily intrude it self, or be called in. Shall we then see
the Mediators of the common Peace of Christendom fall foul among themselves,
with need of Interposers, or rather of assistance? Shall the Pope appear
environed with armed men? And will the Senate of Venice be willing to
contradict themselves in that boast, to have always employed their Sword
against the Enemies of the Church? My opinion is, that following the most
peaceable Counsels, such emergencies cannot spring up, as may dispute peace
with violence; but I rather foresee the case very easy: For if the Nephews of
the Pope shall be willing to alter and disturb the affairs of Italy, and with
the Arms of the Princes vent their private revenges, I know well, that it will
be of necessity to oppose them, and not to suffer the injustice and the
example. But if the end, which is tranquillity, may be obtained by peaceable
means; if the Spaniards, if the Grand Duke, if all else, according to their
interest or vicinity, use only the way of mediation, why shall the Senate be
the first to carry a brand to the fire, and not rather with reasons,
entreaties, and offices, do their endeavor to settle a Peace, or at least in
all events to justify a War.

It was resolved with full Votes for this Opinion, and by the Nuntio's, being
called into the College, and in Rome by the mouth of the Secretary, the Pope
was effectually entreated to yield to the instances and common satisfaction of
the Princes, who with unanimous desires interposed themselves for the Peace, by
giving time and expedients for a Treaty. To the Duke, forbearing in their
answers any mention of assistance, they gave counsel of moderation, insinuating
the respect with some sort of humiliation, which might be of avail to pacify
the Pope, and bring him honorably off the engagement. But whilst Courriers
flew to and fro with offices of Peace, the Barberins, (not to let themselves be
overcome by the common consent of the Princes) hasted their march all they
could, with a firm opinion, that having possessed, as it was not difficult,
Castro, either the fervor of the Mediators minds would be slackned, or the
Treaty be protracted with such intricacies, that the Dukes heat being abated,
and the endeavors of the Mediators, by many accidents that might happen,
growing faint, the Glory of the Counsels, and the Merit of the Enterprise would
fall out to their advantage.

A great part of this resolution and of others which were taken upon it, was
imputed to the Nuntio Vitelli, who, persuaded by false suppositions, and the
discourses of the Vulgar, that the Venetians; besides the making of a show, and
doing good offices, were (...) to interest themselves in the Affairs of Parma,
possessed the Court of Rome with a conceit, that they might safely take Castro,
and (...) yet further. Another Bull then was affixed, in which the time
prescribed to Edward was prolonged for fifteen days: A ^ut at the very same
time the Marquess Matthei, on the (...) day of (...)er, drew the Army out of
its Quarters, and entering into the Territory of Castro, presents himself before
the Rocca Montalto, which is toward the Sea, and found it abandoned by fifty
Soldiers, who had the Guard of it. Forty others at the Bridge of the Abbey
courageously stood the fight of them, about a Cannon shot off, but they also at
last retired into Castro.

There is a rocky Mountain, which for several miles environs the Ecclesiastical
State on that side, interrupted by certain ways, cut out by hand with great
labor. Where it descends toward the Sea, it terminates in a Plain, and forms
as it were a Cliff of a soft mouldring Stone, upon which Castro stands. There
is but one way which serves to ascend to it, which the Duke had caused to be
fortified with some little Forts. The Ecclesiastical Army appearing, they
quickly yielded; whereupon Matthei planting Cannon against the Town, and
flinging certain Bomboes into it, persuades the Inhabitants through fear to
solicit the Governor to deliver it, without expecting the succors, which by
permission of the Grand Duke, the Count Palmia was bringing through Tuscany.
Upon conditions of Life, Liberty, and enjoyment of Goods to the Soldiers and
Inhabitants, the Garrison, two hundred and fifty in number, marched out the
seventh day of the Siege. Angelieri, though he endeavored to clear himself,
accusing the baseness of the people and the the Peasants, who being retired
into the Town, preferring safety before fidelity and honor, had persuaded him
by force to render, the Duke caused him to be arrested, grievously vexed at the
news of the Surrender, which came to him, at the instant, that he in person was
intended to go toward those parts.

The Barberins triumphed as much at so speedy a Conquest, and that sort of
people abounding in Rome, which have no other revenue but flattery, exalted
with many discourses and applauses the order, the conduct, the whole
enterprise, and calling to remembrance, that by that way the Duke of Bourbon
had formerly led his Army to the Siege and Sack of Rome, the Pontificate of
Urban and the direction of his Nephews was celebrated with great Encomiums; for
that, by the reunion of Vrbino, that Flank being secured, the taking of Castro
did invincibly cover the other side of the Ecclesiastical State. The Barberins
also enjoyed equally public glory and private advantages, having secured their
Estate and Towns from the fury and invasions of the Duke, and foreseeing, that
if ever he should recover that State, his neighborhood would be so much the
more troublesome to them, as the injuries were more provoking, they resolved
never to render that they had taken, but to resist with Art and with Arms
whosoever should interpose offices, or employ force, taking it for granted,
that neither the Duke would have the vigor to act of himself, not would others
in the present Conjunctures, by giving him assistance, make themselves Enemies
to the Pope. Edward, to keep himself from those prejudices, which in the way of
Judicature, the Acts that had past might bring upon him, had caused to be
presented to the Auditor della Camera, a protest, in which he declared the
Barberins for his Enemies, but gave them to understand, that he had no other
Judge left him but force, nor did hope for favor but from his friends. He
renews therefore considerations and instances with the Venetians, and to set a
gloss upon them, offers all just humiliation to the Pope, that so he might know
how to encounter his good Graces. Showing also his doubt of being attacqued in
his Dominions of Parma and Piacenza, he besought of the Senate a thousand Foot
and a hundred thousand Crowns to garrison and provide the Towns. The Republic
persisting as yet in the way of Treaty, had a mind to renew their offices at
Rome, to the end that those judiciary Acts, being intermitted and suspended,
which put one side into engagements, and the other into dissatisfactions, the
Dukes humiliations might be admitted, and a way made for Treaty, for which they
were not averse to dispatch an Extraordinary Ambassador to the Pope.

Hereupon was variety of opinions amongst the Barberins; for some approved to
engage the Republic in the mediation, so to keep it off from declaring and
giving assistance to the Duke; others aiming to keep off a Treaty with
delusions, considered, that the Republic was that Prince that was least
capable to be deceived, most prone to resentments, and the most powerful
amongst those of Italy; so that it would be better to exclude them out of the
Mediation; because overlooking the occasion of engaging and interesting
themselves in the offices of assistance to the Duke, they believed it would
rather continue watching upon the general occurrences of Europe, and on the
successes of Piedmont and Monserrat, than apply it self to a particular
interest of small importance to Italy, and of no import to it self. The Pope
therefore seemed to hear with trouble the offices brought to him by order of
the Senate; and rather making light of them, not without scorn, refuses to stop
the course of Law, and admit Mediators betwixt Sovereign and Vassal, of whom he
intended to require humiliations, persisting to have him come in person to
render him the respect was due to him. Nor had the Barberins greater
apprehensions of the other Princes, observing, that the Ministers of Spain,
though fluctuant amidst most weighty jealousies, proceeded nevertheless with
great moderation, and the Ambassador of France, notwithstanding the protection,
which his King showed to have Prince Edward in, proceeded with coolness and
reserve, both the Crowns agreeing in the maxims and the interests, rather to
gain than make themselves Enemies with the Pope, and his House.

Moreover the Grand Duke and the other Italian Princes, the Pope being armed,
seemed rather in suspicion to receive disturbance, than capable to give it, and
so much the more, by how much the Barberins amused them in Treaty with greater
gentleness, discoursing in particular of several expedients with the Marquess
Montecucoli, sent to Rome by the Duke of Modena; and those, consisted in
depositing Castro in hand of the Cardinal d' Este, Brother of the Duke of the
same name, for so long till that the purchase of Pontremoli being concluded by
the Barberins, which, for want of money, the Spaniards were treating to sell,
this might be consigned to Edward, and that remain to the Church; or that the
Camera, undertaking the obligation to pay the Montisis, should recompense the
Farnesi, with other Fiefs in lieu of Castro. It was also proposed, that, to
secure present suspicions, an Ecclesiastical Garrison should remain in that
place for some years, and then, jealousies being removed, every thing to return
freely to their first owners. Yet the Cardinal Barbarin not long after declares
himself, that any expedient would hardly be admitted, which required the
restitution of Castro and Montalto; but as to the more open Country seems to
think, that to render that, the Pope would not be found much against it. There
was great difficulty in all, the parties agreeing in one point only, to make
use of equal art to gain the advantage of time, and protract with delusions the
Treaty; the Barberins on the one side proposing conditions to consume the Duke,
and weary the Mediators, and the Duke on the other giving them the hearing,
though resolved to grant nothing, the better to arm himself, make himself
Friends, and well impress his rights and interests in all the Courts.

But the Duke of M^dena quickly comprehending to what end the Treaty tended,
recalls his Minister from Rome, and the great Duke showed himself weary, having
not been able to obtain of Urban any limitation of time, and retardment of the
sentence, nor of the Duke, that, in token of obedience, he would send his
eldest Son to Rome, he resolutely refusing to put the Successor of his Country
into the hands of his Enemies. The Venetians kept themselves silent; but the
Barberins interpreting it, as in effect it was, rather an argument of
discontent than a token of satisfaction in the answers received, repenting the
harshness of them, commanded the Nuntio, that he should piece up the Treaty
again. He with the wonted forms showed, By the gaining of Castro, the War
ended, the Popes honor satisfied, the Law of Justice fulfilled, provided the
Duke would remain quiet. The Army afterward by the assistance of the Prefect,
being remarkably increased at Ferrara and Bologna, and Forts on this side the
Po raised at Figarolo, and Melara with strong Guards, the Nuntio represented
it, as a necessary caution and bridle to the Dukes transports, who turbulent
and fierce armed as if he would headily contend with the Pope about power, and
dispute right with his Sovereign.

This served not at all to mitigate jealousies and disgusts; for the fortifying
on the Banks of the Po was not only against ancient Covenants with those of
Ferrara, but might prove of extreme prejudice to the Polesine, a Country
betwixt the Adica and the Po, subject to the overflowings of many waters, and
endowed with as much population and wealth, as it was destitute of Towns, and
exposed without other defense, but that which the nature of the situation with
the Dikes of the Watercourse and Rivers gives it. With all this, the Senate,
not at all amused with the Nuntios expressions, strengthened the neighboring
Garrisons, Rome in this interim Monitories and Bulls thundered one after the
other, citing the Duke to the Court with a safe conduct, in which was
prescribed him a train of fifty persons only. But the Duke published a long
Manifest in print; which, though a while after answered by the Ecclesiastic
party, was nevertheless relished by the world with great applause, because with
much moderation and modesty it deduced the Treaties, Privileges, and Rights,
which supported his cause. He declares withal his intention to send an
Ambassador to Urban, to carry him his obedience, and those motives which he had
not been able to allege in the Process; but the Pope excluded his admission.
The publication nevertheless of the sentence was deferred for some days, not so
much for certain terms, which they call contumacious, as, because Raggi the
Auditor della Camera, to whom the publication of Bulls belonged, being of the
number of those promoted to the Cardinalat, that charge was for some days
vacant. In the foresaid promotion, Urban at last was willing, knowing that it
was not his interest to continue for this cause in greater disgusts, to flatter
the Princes with exalting to the Cardinal dignity, the Prince of Este,
Mazarine, and Peretti, named by the Emperor and both the Crowns. For the
Republic was promoted Mark Antonio Bragadino, Bishop of Vicenza, whose
Grandfather, barbarously starved in Cyprus by Mustasa after his valorous
defense of Famagosta, rendered the Nephew so much the more worthy of that
Purple, which is so fitly dyed in the Blood of the Martyrs for the Christian
Faith.

ANNO MDCXLII.
The jealousies and thoughts what would become of the affair of Castro, were
extended also to Strangers, who, seeing the Princes of Italy arm so eagerly,
either not thinking the cause deserved it, or believing, that it being easily
composed they would turn themselves to greater designs, endeavored to strifes
to assure themselves of their intentions, and draw them to their party. The
Spaniards in particular propounded, that, laying aside for the present the
dispute of Castro, or agreeing it with some easy expedient, the Princes of
Italy should unite in a League with their Crown, and concert the defense and
common quiet, by upholding the present state of things. To say truth, in Italy
men's minds stood in suspense, concerning the motion of the French Armies; for
that in the beginning of the year, in the cold season, the King, with the
Cardinal, being come from Paris to Lions, and the Mareshal della Meilleray
being advanced before them with a very flourishing Army, left it doubtful,
whether so great a preparation tended toward Catalogna or Italy. And though
within a while after the Forces were seen engaged before the Fortress of
Perpignan, nevertheless the Cardinals mind was discovered to be inclined, the
place quickly taken, as he hoped, to send the Army into Italy, before the
Campania should be at an end. And this he thought to do upon so much the better
ground, by how much that in Piedmont the Princes of Savoy were agreed with
their Sister-in-Law, and by consequence declared of the French party by a
Treaty; in which to Mauritio, besides the promising him to Wife the Princess
Lodovica Maria his Niece, was left in Government Nizza with its appurtenances,
as also to Prince Thomaso Inurea and the Biellesa, with title of the Dukes
Lieutenant, for so long as the Duke remained in his minority. To the Duchess
remained the quality and authority of Regent, without other obligation, but to
admit her Brothers-in-Law into the Council, when they should be at Court, and
to communicate to them the most weighty matters concerning the State. With this
agreement the Princes being composed, but the Country dismembered, little else
was left the Duke but the name, and that great gate of Italy was thought to be
set wide open to the French, which was wont to be kept shut by the Savoyards
with force, or to be opened with great caution. The French besides had promised
the Princes great advantages, and in particular kept Thomaso in secret hopes
and agreements, to assign him an ample part of the Milanese in Sovereignty,
when it should be conquered with united Forces.

To say truth, the Governor of Milan failed not to employ all his endeavors,
to keep those Princes adhering to Spain, but found, that it was in their name
demanded, that, there appearing in the King of France a disposition to withdraw
the Garrisons from those places, which in the past revolutions the Duchess had
trusted to him, the Spaniards would also restore those others, except Vercelli
and Trino, which they might keep in their possession till a general Peace, and
so long as the French should enjoy Pignerol and Casal. The answer was such as
before the instance made had been supposed; for the Governor alleging that he
kept those places, the better to facilitate a Peace, in the Treaty whereof it
would be fit to speak of them, refused to withdraw the Garrisons. Yet, though
vexed at Thomaso that he would not accept of his propositions, and comply with
his will, he recalls some hundred of Soldiers out of Inurea by a precipitate
Council; but to the great joy of the Prince, who shaking off the yoke, caused
the Gates to be shut before their face, when Sirvela repenting his oversight
countermanded them, with earnest instances that they might be readmitted.

On the other side, the Garrison, which with the Camp Master Tuttavilla was in
Nizza, not willing to leave it by fair means, was constrained by the
threatenings of Mauritio, who, having assembled three thousand men of the
Country, put himself in a posture to force them. Thus the Scene being changed
in Piedmont, Fortune smiling on the French, solicited them to undertake most
assured Conquests in Italy, and for that cause the Spaniards proposition to
close in a union came to be hearkened to by the Princes of it, and more than
formerly considered; but in the turbulent conjuncture of the present contests,
all being not able to unite themselves in one party, that might be of force to
withstand Strangers, thought it a less evil not to adhere to any of the Crowns.
Therefore were also rejected the Propositions of the French, who instigated
particularly the Pope, by remonstrating to him the glory, and the opportunity
to make advantage of so many Troops, raised for a more noble design than the
gaining of Castro, tempting him together with the puissant Forces of their
Crown to drive the Spaniards out of Italy, which in the present state, that
that power could no longer be said distracted but lacerated into so many
pieces, and in a manner ruined, they represented easy to be done. To flatter
him the more, they left to his arbitrament the disposal of the Conquests, and
offered the Crown of Naples to his Nephews, promising to be assisting with six
thousand Foot and a Naval Army by Sea to assist the enterprise, esteemed so
much the easier, as that, besides the ancient intelligences with many of the
Barons, the people weary of the intolerable impositions, desired a change of
Government.

Urban, knowing the propositions more specious than easy, refused them. In
this uncertain state of things Monsieur de Lionne was sent by France into
Italy, to add warmth to the offices in the cause of Parma, but much more to
observe and lay hold of the conjunctures seasonable, to persuade the Princes of
Italy into the party of that Crown, till Cardinal Mazarine, designed for that
service, should arrive. As for Parma, the Affairs were quickly brought to a
desperate issue; for, there being not obtained, from the pressing endeavors of
many Princes, and those which the Venetians, rebuted a new with severe answers,
were willing to reiterate, any delay of the sentence, after these accidents,
which for a few days, as has been said, the order of the cause carried with
it, Edward was declared to have incurred the greater Excommunication, deprived
of his Dominions and Fiefs, of the dignity he held of the holy See, and
condemned in all charges done and to be done. In execution whereof his Palaces
and the Goods in Rome were exposed to sale, and the Camera took possession of
Castro, Urban as yet deferring the Declaration to comprehend it in the rigorous
Bulls of Pius Quintus, which forbid any alienation of that which was reunited
to the holy Chair. The Princes were greatly moved, as if all their instances
had been despised by the Barberins. Edward stirs himself up so much the more
against them; showing therefore not the least fear, calling together the
Nobility and the Chief of the people, with power and eloquence deduces the
causes of the War, the hatred of the Barberins, and his own right, exhorting
them to fidelity and constancy. Being heard with applause, there were not any
that promised not obedience. He thereupon causes the Religious persons, that
were Strangers, and the Bishop of Piacenza to depart his Dominion, that by
observance of the censures or other means they might not stir up the people.
Lionne passes to Parma and to Rome, with several propositions; but in the
Barberins was clearly discovered an aversion to render, and a repugnancy in the
Duke to hearken to any expedient whatsoever; because to the exchange, in which
those that interposed, insisted more than in ought else, and especially the
Duke of Modena, who had again dispatched Montecucculi to Rome, the obstacle
was, the impossibility to find another Sovereignty, which for the quality, the
extent, and situation could be equalled to Castro.

A Marriage betwixt the Barberins and the Farnesi, which might pacify the
present disgusts, and secure from future revenges, was projected, but in vain;
so that the Treaty being suspended anew, the Barberins only gave out, that they
would assent to a Truce, provided both parties disarmed: For as much as they
despised the Dukes Forces, they nevertheless apprehended his activity and
daring; but he considering, that the expense taken away, and the jealousy
extinguished, the Negotiation would be greatly cooled at Rome, refuses to
consent to it. A breach therefore was speedily drawing on, accidents frequently
happening, and every day bringing forth disgusts and suspicions.

And now men's minds were perplexed, by reason of a certain report, which
afterward was judged invented by the Duke of Modena, or at least countenanced
and increased by him, that in order to a supposed Marriage of a Daughter of the
Prefect with the Duke of Mirandula, an Ecclesiastical Garrison was to be
brought into that place. The report for some days was so currently believed,
that from Milan the Governor sent the Count della Riviera; from Mantua the
Princess dispatched her Physician; and the Republic caused to go thither
Giovanni Baptista Battarino, Secretary of Luigi Giorgio, General di Terra
firma. But it was found, that the minds of the Princesses, Mother and Aunt, who
governed the Duke yet under age, were wholly averse from such thoughts: so that
these Ministers had nothing to do but to return, after having reconciled a
certain domestic disagreement of the same Princesses, which breaking forth
again a while after, was again quieted by Anthonio Antelmi, Resident for the
Venetians at Mantua, whom they sent thither express. But the Princesses from
others jealousies suspecting, that, as the Duke of Modena had given being to
that rumor, so he might aim to intrude himself into that place by an Imperial
Decree, which he gave out to have with power, to put a Garrison into it,
brought into it, if need required, to the satisfaction of the Borderers, some
of the Militia of their Territory.

This stir was scarce at an end, but greater emergencies were heard of; for
that Montecucculi, in the despair of concluding any thing, being once more
retired from Rome, a certain Religious person arrives at Modena to amuse the
Duke with various projects of Peace, not unlike those formerly discoursed of in
Rome; but whilst he hearkened to them, they were disapproved by Barberino, and
on a sudden there appears at Modena, in the name of the Prefect, the Auditor of
the Camp, to demand passage for the Army against Parma and Piacenza. The Prince
was much disturbed at it, and the other Princes his Neighbors no less, to whom
he gave notice of it, in regard it seemed, that the Barberins scorning the
interpositions of so many, aimed at greater things, it being certain, that the
tentative drew along with it the oppression of the Duke of Modena with quarters
and passage, dangers to him of Parma, and by consequence the overwhelming and
confusion of Italy. The Barberins nevertheless had other designs; for believing
it apparent, by this rumor to surprise the Princes not yet fitted for War,
they hoped in consequence, that none daring to oppose them, the Duke would
remain so frighted, that, to the end to preserve the rest, he would acquiesce
in what he had lost, and consent to the Truce and disarming. He had endeavored
to raise some Soldiers; but all he could make was much less than what he had
need of. The Modenese was also totally unprovided, the Duke having not above a
thousand Foot in pay.

The Venetians and the Grand Duke abhorred to come to Arms but as the last
remedy; nevertheless upon this advice troubled beyond all belief, communicating
counsels with all expedition, they resolved to pass joint offices with the
Pope, and of the same tenor, to suspend the March. In the same instances
concurred also the Ministers of France and Spain. Urban taking this common
apprehension to be but the fruit promised him by his Nephews of the generosity
and expedition of Counsels, persisted so much the more in denying any delay,
not to give time to the Duke, and to others, to take courage and to arm. The
Duke of Modena then grew more and more bound up not to grant the pass, and
defending himself with general answers from the demands of the Auditor, comes
the Count Ambrogio Carpegna to bring him threatenings, giving him to know, that
in the Quarters of Castle Franco, upon his Confines, the Army of between
eighteen and twenty thousand men was in a readiness to take it by force, the
Cannon mounted on the Carriages, Train in order, and all that which was needful
for the March. The Duke moved at such a declaration, consents to it for a
month, on the condition, That there should be six days before the Army should
move, that so having considered with himself, he might appoint fit Quarters;
that in other four, it should be out of his Confines, and should march at a
distance from his Towns and the chief City.

In the participation hereof to the Princes, he concealed not, that though his
consent had been extorted from necessity, he was as ready, if he might have
assistance, to show his resentment of such a violence, either by contesting the
pass, or receiving an Army in their Rear, when they should be entered into the
Territories of Parma. He in great haste arms three or four thousand of his
Subjects to keep the Towns, and that whilst Edward puts himself into the field
with a thousand Dragoons, a thousand two hundred Horse, and five thousand Foot.
Having provided Puiglio, he was purposed to incamp upon the River Lenza to
dispute the entrance with the Pontificians; but his strength being
disproportionable, he presently found them also diminished by Run-aways for
want of pay. The Governor of Milan having failed him of succors, which,
either to draw from him advantages, or to cover his weakness, offered him some
men, but upon condition, that he would declare himself of the Spanish party and
admit a Minister of that Crown to reside in his Court; he presses the Venetians
and the Grand Duke for a speedy supply of money and men. They doubted, lest in
the Dukes Country the Barberins might have some secret intelligence, and some
Mine might spring in their consciences; so that the people, though they showed
themselves well inclined and obedient, yet at the appearing of the Pontifician
Colors, Arms, and Censures, would remain affrighted, or at least, that Edward
being forced, through inequality of Forces, to shut himself up in his strong
places, the Country would remain in prey. Wherefore not desiring that the Duke
should perish, nor that the Barberins should be accustomed to the happy issue
of their Counsels, they immediately sent to Parma seventy thousand Crowns; that
is, the Republic forty, and the Grand Duke the rest, and it was a seasonable
assistance that served to encourage the Militia, and give credit to the cause
among the Subjects, who thence conceived hopes of greater succors.

Offices at Rome for a suspension being at this very time not intermitted,
there were read to the Ministers of Venice and Florence by Monsignor Bichi,
Auditor di Rota, in the name of Barberin, certain ambiguous answers, in which
it seemed to be expressed, that the Pope would suspend offenses, when he should
be assured to receive none; but withal added, that if he possessed the Dukes
Countries, he would restore them, when and to whom it should be thought
beseeming the honor of the holy See. To the Ambassador of France it was
plainly said, that, to take away Jealousies, a suspension of Arms should be
embraced, when by the Dukes friends promise should be given, that he should
bear respect to the Ecclesiastical State, yet the Sentence for that Cause not
to be intermitted, nor more words made of the restoring Castro, which, by
reason of the debt to the Montists, and the charge of the War, the Camera
reputed their own. Such answers satisfied not the Princes, and they were much
more displeased with the instances, which the Prefect to the Duke of Modena by
Carpegna reiterated, that six days after, which happened to be the 10. of
August, in conformity to the promise, the pass should be open for the Army.
Believing then more resolute courses necessary, and that above all the march
was to be hindered, for the diverting those accidents, which were apprehended
from the successes of the War, the Republic resolved to send three thousand
Foot and three hundred Horse, under the Command of Alphonso Anthonini,
Commissary of the Cavalry; that joining with two thousand, which, under the
Conduct of the Marquess Guicciardini, were sent by the Grand Duke, they might
defend the Modenese, that Duke being persuaded to promise opposition, and
dispute the pass with such assistance, and the assurance, which Giovanni
Baptista Ballarino, Secretary of the Republic, brought him, of greater
supplies, if need should require. All this had been reciprocally concerted,
under promise and faith given, there having not been time for more express
Treaties; but it being judged necessary to conclude one, by reason of future
casualties, there arrived at Venice the Prince Luigi and the Secretary Giovanni
Dominico Pandolfini, the one for the Grand Duke, and the other for the Duke of
Modena, and the Senate deputed to treat with them Baptista Nani, and Vincenzo
Gussoni, Cavalier, to the end they should discuss the means of common defense,
and the ways to preserve Peace. But as on the Princes side, and that also of
the Barberins, it was believed, that with showing resolution, and by advancing
some steps, it would be obtained; so each one going on in the way of engaging,
stumbled at last into a War. The Barberins were now greatly perplexed at the
rumors of the Marches, and Treaties, and their Army, which, composed of new
men, thought to go into the Country of Parma, as to an easy and secure
Triumph, was intimidated in such sort, that the Soldiers in great Troops
running away, was in a short time greatly diminished.

The Prefect publishes, that he would delay his March, and sends Carpegna to
Modena to demand, that in case of Edwards opposition he might have leave to
halt in the Modenese. He foresaw beforehand the answer, which was just what he
looked for, that the Duke of Modena could no longer dispose of his Country and
of himself without participation and the consent of the Republic and the Grand
Duke; nor did he desire it other, to the end that he might have occasion to
defer his March, and giving in that interim informations to Rome of the state
of Affairs, receive Orders and also Supplies. Urban, contrary to his belief,
seeing by the stirring of the neighbor Princes the opposition great, calling
to him the Ambassador of France; of his own accord (for he had not at present
been desired) consents to a suspension of Arms for fifteen days. Just at this
time happens a hurly-burly in Rome, which, though it was foreign to the present
interests, served greatly to increase the confusion in the Barberins minds. And
it was, that the Bishop of Lamego, sent Ambassador from Portugal to render
obedience to the Pope, although not admitted in that Quality, remaining
nevertheless (as a Prelate) in Rome, met with the Marquess de los Velez,
Ambassador of Spain, in a certain Street, and their Retinues quarrelling,
there arose a Skirmish that made such a noise, that the French coming in to the
aid of the Bishop, in so great numbers, the Spaniards were obliged to retire,
some of them being killed, the Marquess hardly saving himself by flight.

The Spaniards imputing this disorder, though accidental, to the Barberins,
because they had admitted the Bishop, and neglecting those cautions which might
hinder such rash confusions, showed themselves so highly offended, that the
Ambassador went his way to Naples, and the Cardinals of the Nation, except la
Queva that was sick, retired to Frascati. The Emperors Ambassador also, to
show an equal sense in the common interests of the Family, goes to Albano. In
Rome, a City naturally talkative, many discourses were made of more dangerous
consequences, minds being inflamed betwixt the Factions of France and Spain; so
that the Barberins being in trouble, were forced to strengthen the Militia, and
place Guards with such orders, as might keep the Peace. Upon this occasion
distracted in mind betwixt apprehension and negotiation, they so much the more
willingly promoted the suspension of Arms; upon notice whereof the Troops of
the Republic, already on their way, made a halt in the Mantuana, and the
Florentines in the Lunigiana.

The Duke of Parma thereupon bewailed himself that he was sinking under the
burden of the Soldiery and of jealousies, and the other Princes also perceived
the dangers rather suspended than ceased; judging they would rather in future
be so much the greater, by how much the Barberins discovered themselves not
only incensed against the Duke of Parma, but irritated against all those that
had declared themselves contrary to their designs.

The Deputies therefore of the Republic, and those of the Grand Duke, and of
Modena, had secret and frequent meetings, to communicate Councils, and concert
resolutions, in case that, after the fifteen days of suspension, the Barberins
should continue their march. Some were of opinion, and particularly the
Modonese, making use of the present confusion, to prevent and move the Army
into the Ecclesiastical State, to disburden themselves of their own Soldiery,
and by bringing the Barberins to a Peace by force, secure themselves of the
doubt, that, having recovered courage and strength, they should not attempt
greater and more notable revenge. They had in their aim also to get for their
Duke out of the present troubles some considerable profit; so that under the
countenance of the League, getting into possession of something, he might
happen to do himself right in part of that which he pretended was detained from
him by the Pontificians. But the Venetians with more dis-interessed Councils,
content to have saved the Duke of Parma from invasion, and diverted damage from
the Modonese, aspired not by the League to ought else, but to advertise the
Barberins of the difficulty they would have to meet with in their designs, and
by consequence incline them more easily to a Peace.

To this opinion the Grand Duke at last adhered, though Pandolfini at first was
bent upon attempts more resolute. A League was then concluded betwixt the
Republic, the Grand Duke, and the Duke of Modena, drawing the motive from the
present making War upon the Duke of Parma, which being capable to bring greater
disturbances into Italy, the Princes desirous to keep them off by procuring
their own preservation and the common Peace, united for their own defense, for
mutual succors, in case any of them were attacqued; and for that over and
above, which for the defense of other Italian Princes should happen to be
needful, it was agreed, To make up an Army of twelve thousand Foot and eighteen
hundred Horse, whereof the half should belong to the Venetians; of the rest two
thirds to the Grand Duke, and to Modena the remainder; the same proportion to
be held in provisions, in money, and, when there should be occasion, in the
increasing of Forces. The command of the Army was committed to him of the
Princes Confederates, in whose Country it ought to be made use of, and remain;
but in neutral places the nomination of a General was reserved to the
Republic, with the consent of the others. The invaded remained free from
common Contributions to the Army, while he was to be vigilant with his Forces
upon his own defense, to which the others were to resort, either with succors
or diversion, as should be concerted at the time of need. The Contractors could
not treat or conclude Peace or Truce but by common consent, nor oblige
themselves to other Treaty, that should derogate from the present.

These were the Articles that were published; but there was added and kept
secret, to assist the Duke of Parma, as there should be need, and to admit him
into the League, when he should seek it, upon those terms and conditions which
should then be concluded. The expedition of the transaction having prevented
the fame of it, the conclusion of such a League was no sooner divulged, but it
was variously understood by the Princes. The Barberins showed themselves very
suspicious and touched with it, and the Pope himself secretly complained, that
his own Ministers had deluded him with false suppositions, and engaged his
Nephews too far. On the other side, Edward conceived so much the more
stoutness; for, by the protection of the League, his Countries of Parma and
Piacenza being covered, he hoped, in the astonishment of the Enemy, to open
himself a way, either for the recovery of Castro, or the seizing upon some
other place that would serve to exchange for it. Having then obtained of the
Duke of Modena the Pass, he sets forward against the State Ecclesiastic with
about three thousand men on Horseback, men chosen for their courage; but
without Foot, or Cannon, and without any provision whatsoever, that might be
useful in a Siege of importance. But he had good Commanders, over whom, by
reason of his dignity, the Mareshal d' Etre commanded, who, to satisfy the
Barberins, being by the King of France removed from his Embassage of Rome,
remained with the Duke, giving credit to his Arms, and to the march, as if
France by such an appearing had concurred in it. But in truth, besides the
disbursement of a small sum of money in discount of his Pensions, France
contributed nothing in favor of the Duke but offices: Lionne only offered him
two thousand Foot, on condition they should serve in Garrisons; but the Duke
refused it, being jealous lest the French should seek anew a way to get into
his places. This march greatly displeased the Venetians, and the Grand Duke;
because Edward provoked the War, which they with offices and appearances hoped
to avoid, their fear was, lest he, entering deep into the Ecclesiastic State,
overpowered by the Enemy Forces should perish there, or that retiring with
disreputation in disorder and beaten, should draw after him the Popes Army into
the heart of his Country.

Therefore by the Senate was dispatched to meet him Giovanni Battista
Ballarini, who a little before had been to communicate to him the conclusion of
the League, to represent the opinion of the Confederates, and those
considerations, which by safe Councils, instead of vain hopes, might in a short
time bring quiet to all, and to himself most assured fruits of glory. The Duke,
who in communicating to the Princes his march, had alleged in excuse his
inability to keep his Troops any longer in his Country, finding himself now
upon his way, with great fast and confidence intermingles in his answer, with
lively expressions, reasons with his excuses, and continues his march. The
Venetians, and the Grand Duke were obliged to cause to enter into the Modenese
the Troops hitherto remaining on the borders, to cover that State from the
dangers, which the loss, certainly believed of the Duke of Parma might bring
upon it. But Edward entering into the Bolognese brought so great terror to the
people and to the Popes Army, that they in the unlooked for accident not
considering the strength, and these fearing more than was their duty the
danger, all was in a moment seen in confusion and disorder. The Prefect retires
flying into Ferrara. The Soldiers quit their quarters, Matthei prevailing
nothing with entreaties, authority, or command, to stop them, no not so much as
a small body, that might oppose it self to the Duke, or at least follow him.
Thus without Blood and without a Battle the Army being dissipated, Edward had
an open way to a Voyage, which was one of the most worthy to be remembered;
because in an Enemies Country more could not have been done by an Army never so
powerful.

There is no doubt, but he might have been able by possessing some places to
have settled Contributions and Quarters in the Enemies Country, and then have
negotiated the restitution of Castro by exchange. But through his generous
mind, aspiring to recover it with the fame of his Arms, and carry the terror
of his name with a loud report within the very walls of Rome, he entertained
his Soldiers with such vast hopes of prey and plunder, that besides a certain
becoming familiarity, for which the Soldiers loved him without fear, and
obeyed him without dispute, every one followed him with a secure belief of
extraordinary advantage. From Saint Cesareo he comes in one night with his
Quarters near to the City of Bologna, writing Letters to the Cardinal Durazzo
Legate, and to the Inhabitants, exhorting them to persist in a constant
obedience to the holy See, himself also professing an immutable duty to the
same, and that he had not put on Arms, but in his own defense, against the
oppressions of the Barberins. Notwithstanding that populous City had no cause
to fear an Army never so powerful, fear nevertheless was so great in the minds
of the Citizens, that not only none went forth to disturb the Dukes sleep, but
not to irritate him, though they omitted the offer of their service, they yet
answered with Letters of much respect. The day following proceeding in his way,
and putting to flight with the view only some Companies of Soldiers, which
were carelessly marching toward Bologna, the Governor of Smola sent the Keys
to meet him, the Cardinal Franciotti, Legate of Romagna, having not been able
to hinder it, the City being unfurnished of a Garrison, and of all sorts of
provisions. The Duke refusing them, contented himself to guard the Gates,
whilst his Troops passed through the Town, which was performed with such order
and so much quiet, that it seemed a passage of people that were friends. Faenza
made a show to shut the Gates, but being threatened by the Duke, the Governor
descended from the Wall to meet and pacify him, and hardly obtained that he
would content himself with passing. At Furli, which, as of a greater circuit
and better inhabited, endeavored to resist, he made as though he would fasten
a Petard and burn the Country round about; whereupon the Bishop and the
Guardian of the Capuchins, coming forth with tears, endeavored to pacify him;
and he received them at discretion, saving out of grace their lives, women
their honor, and the Churches. Nevertheless no greater hurt was done, but to
lodge there one whole day to refresh his Soldiers, from the weariness and
rains, whence alone arose some difficulty in his march. Victuals, for fear of
pillaging and insolences, every where abounded, nor was there any place, which
did not voluntarily offer to open their Gates. The Duke to shorten way, and to
avoid the Ecclesiastic State, where by Nature and Art it is strongest, bending
to Meldola, enters toward the Territory del Sole in Tuscany, to get by a
shorter cut into the Perugino, and from thence to advance to Castro. At the
same time that he arrived on the borders, he sends to demand the Pass of the
Grand Duke, who grants it, seeing him engaged so far; but withal sends the
Marquess Lorenzo Guicciardini, to counsel him to stop there, or by the way of
Pontremoli return to Piacenza; it seeming, that, without exposing his own
affairs and those of his friends to greater hazards, that he had sufficiently
by his courage satisfied the world and his own glory, by mortifying the Enemy
with making him appear so contemptible. The Duke not yet arrived half way to
his designs, intended to enter into the Territory of Perugio, where, at
Castiglion del Lago, the Governor making no resistance, taking out four
Cannons, he comes to the Town of Pieve, and condemns to contributions and to
the fire a certain place, which shot upon some of his Foragers.

Upon such successes fear, not to be expressed, increased in Rome; a City,
which being composed of the basest sort of Inhabitants, unaccustomed to
dangers, or of Strangers, who are pleased with Reports, Novelties, and
Accidents, seemed distracted by various affections, some fearing plunder,
others desiring disorder, and all reproaching the Government. In this
hurly-burly Guards were distributed, the command of them repartited amongst the
Prelates, hand was put to Fortifications, and other Preparations made. In
Orvieto and Viterbo the Guards were strengthened, and Soldiers levied every
where, taking in Rome the Coach-Horses to mount Soldiers. The Prefect was
recalled to Court, great murmurings rising up against him for having showed as
much baseness in danger, as he exercised avarice in the Government. The
Cardinal Antonio supplying the necessity with a greater vivacity goes out of
Rome with Bali Valenze, a French man, but a valiant and expert Soldier, and in
several places gave orders for defense. The Cardinal Francesco having recourse
to the Arts of Negotiation, thought with hopes of Peace to delude the Duke, and
amuse the League. He causes the Abbot of Bagni to move the Grand Dukes
Ambassador at Rome, and the Cardinal Bragadino to insinuate to the Venetians,
that they would interpose with the Duke of Parma; and at the same time proposes
to the Marquess de Fontenay the depositing the State of Castro till the
business might be composed. But all to gain time, with equivocal and dark
discourses amuses the Confederates, the Grand Duke troubling himself at
Florence, into whose hand the deposition ought to be trusted.

At Rome, Bichi Auditor di Rota, pressed the Resident of Modena, that the
deposition accomplished, the League would then declare for Urban. Vitelli at
Venice in a discourse more prolix and ambiguous, to discredit the Mediation of
the French showed their intention to be suspicious, as if, aspiring to have
Castro in deposito, they were not afterward, by reason of the convenience of
the situation, so easily to let it go, and insinuated, that the Pope would much
rather trust it to the Republic. But he had no sooner named that offer, but
turning his discourse another way, assured, that the expedients for a Composure
were easy and many, if there were any at Rome that would manage them with
sincerity, or had powers necessary to conclude them. All this tended to induce
the Senate to send an Ambassador to Rome; for the Barberins, repenting more
and more to have rejected the insinuations, had now commanded him to solicit
it. The Senate comprehending, their will, at present forced by fear, would not
last longer than the fear it self, showed to desire, before they resolved, more
precise and less obscure propositions.

On the other side the Grand Duke judging, that in this wambling of their minds
fear had prevailed over animosity, closes with the business, declaring, that it
might be deposited in the League, or at least in one of the Confederates, or in
the Genouse, neutral and disinteressed persons. At the same time his Army of
eight thousand Foot and a thousand Horse with twenty two pieces of Cannon, came
near to the Borders, putting the Barberins into great doubt, lest he would make
use of the time, either to do himself right in certain pretensions he had, or
show his resentment of former distastes. But he had no aim but to procure
Peace; and by the means of the Prince Matthias his Brother, rather to persuade
the Duke of Parma to retire out of Tuscany, by offering him Quarters, to the
end, that remaining engaged in the Ecclesiastic State he might not receive
some blow, which putting courage again into the Barberins, might render the
Treaty more difficult. Edward would not take this counsel; but quartering
betwixt Monte Pulciano and Chiusi, kept the Country in fear and contribution,
publishing, that the Prince Francesco Maria, his Brother, was coming through
Tuscany to strengthen him with four thousand Foot and five hundred Horse. The
Duke of Modena solicited the Venetians to give him leave, with their Troops,
which he had in his Country, to enter into the Ferranese, which being all in
confusion, and without a Garrison, an opportunity was offered for considerable
progress, in recompense of that much, he pretended to be due to him from the
Pope. But the Senate denied their assent to his request, and rather earnestly
dissuaded him from adding imbroilments to the business, and fire to the flame,
which it was so studiously endeavored to adjust and extinguish.

The Cardinal Barberin was not wanting to himself in any cunning, and aiming
not only to negotiate with the Princes of the League, but withal to give them
jealousy, proposed to the Vice-King of Naples to unite the Pope with the Crown
of Spain. The Spanish Ministers, taking it for a dissembled proposition,
believed, that he was rather resolved to close with France, and endeavored
also to imprint the suspicion in the Princes Confederates, that the French,
having together with Prince Thomaso easily possessed Crescentino and Nizza de
la Paglia, would at present besiege Tortona, in design to come nearer to
Piacenza, and what with jealousy and force oblige the Duke to yield Castro.
These Treaties having cast in some delays in the proceedings of Duke Edward,
who no less than the Grand Duke was in great hopes to end them with advantage
and honor, Cardinal Anthonio had diligently got together twelve thousand Foot
and three thousand Horse, people raised in haste, and little inured to War; but
commanded by good Officers, who were of opinion, it was best not to hazard them
so soon to a Battle, much less not to think so meanly of them, as to retire
with them under the Walls of Rome, but advancing slowly with them, under the
countenance of Towns of Orvieto and Viterbo to straighten Edward in his
Victuals and Quarters. Barberino seconded the counsel; whereupon the Cardinal
Spada, dispatched to the Confines with Title of Plenipotentiary, showed all
possible readiness for an agreement. Concerning the Deposition, there seemed
not any further controversy; but the thing treated of was concerning the
manner: For the Duke of Parma had plainly told Lionne, that he would not
consent to the depositing but with security, that it should be restored to him
within a prefixed time; and Cardinal Spada affirmed, that for a certain
appearance of honor he could not condition that; but that, either with a
tacit consent, or declaring it in the ear of the Depositary, he would let pass
the effect. Lionne about this was obliged to many Voyages to one and the other,
and in this while Barbarino continues to amuse the Grand Duke with several
questions; whether with the deposition the League would be content; whether
that done, it would declare it self in favor of the Pope; whether the
deposition was to be in the French, or in the League, and in that case, where
were the Ministers to agree the conditions of it?

The Grand Duke perceived, all tended to delays; nevertheless answered, that
the end of the Princes united being to restore Edward to his States and to the
Popes favor, they with the effect thereof would certainly be contented: They
were also ready to receive the Depositum, and the other Ministers being not
arrived, offered himself, remembering, that all good consisted in expedition. In
the mean while the Duke of Parma being gone to Aqua-pendente, a City situate
high, and defended with a good Garrison, obtained it of the Governor, that let
himself be overcome with fear, upon conditions. The Cardinal Anthonio then
putting great Garrisons into the Towns, advances with seven thousand Foot and
two thousand Horse from Viterbo to Montefiascone to straighten the Duke, and
dispute his entry into the State of Castro. He made also two motions toward
Aqua-pendente; but the Duke making a show to get on Horse back and to advance
toward him, though with Forces so unequal, the Cardinal retired, choosing
rather to overcome with prudence, than run the hazard of Fortune. But the Duke
dislodging from that Quarter for want of Forage, and settling at Ponte Centino,
the Ecclesiastic Army also takes up their Quarters at San Lorenzo delle
Grotte. The rains, (it being the month of October) greatly incommodated those
of Parma, and therefore the Barberins pretended so much the more to tire them
with delays, showing, to gain more time, to incline to the deposition into
hands of the League, but that there were no Ministers with whom the Conditions
might be negotiated. To take away the pretext, the Grand Duke comes himself to
San Quirico upon the Confines. The Duke of Modena sends thither Fulvio Testi,
and the Venetians more out of complacency to the others than for any thought
that the Treaty would succeed, dispatched thither Angelo Cornaro, Cavalier, who
was Proveditor of the Militia in the Modenese.

Before he came, the Duke of Parma, the Prince Matthias, and Testi, with
Monsieur de Lionne, had expressed themselves in writing, that their ultimate
intention was, That all that which within and without Rome belonged to the
House of Farnese, should be delivered in deposito to the Duke of Modena, to
render it some time in December next to whom it of right belonged; that the
League, over and above the Affairs of Castro, and the dependencies on it,
should declare to pretend nothing else; that with the answer the assent was
expected within the term of two days only; that all delay or alteration was to
be interpreted a refusal.

But the Pope showing his dislike of such a form, and the Grand Duke himself
not approving it, as too severe, the Treaty was continued for some days. The
Cardinal Spada cooperating with the intentions of the Barberins, to keep the
Negotiation on foot as long as might be, sends by the Father Virgilio, of the
Congregation of the Oratory, his Brother, to offer the Duke of Parma, that the
Pope, Out of his own Clemency, the intercession of so many Princes, and for the
sparing of the people, should absolve him from the Excommunication, and Castro
being delivered in deposito to the Duke of Modena for six months, should within
that time by common consent be restored to the first Owner, and the Revenue be
deposited to pay the Montists, the new Fortifications be demolished, and the
Arms and Ammunition brought into the place be withdrawn, on condition that the
Duke should retire into Lombardy, without touching upon the State
Ecclesiastic, and should disarm; the Confederates were only to declare
themselves herewith content, and remove their Troops from the Ecclesiastic
Confines.

The Duke, as to the absolution, refers himself to that which France should
demand, and to the Judgment of the same left the decision, whether all the
Fortifications or only the Outworks of Castro should be demolished. He only
insisted on the security, that Castro should be restored by the Depositary. And
that seemed to be out of doubt; because the Cardinal Spada had several times
repeated to Lionne, that he would tacitly give his consent to it. Betwixt the
Dukes therefore of Parma and Modena passed an agreement and writing to perform
it before the present year should be at an end. The accord then being held for
secure, Lionne publishes it for concluded, and Edward gives notice of it to the
Confederates. But while he looked that Lionne should bring it to him signed, he
gave him to understand, that the Cardinal Spada avoided subscribing it,
alleging for a pretext, that it was not fit for him to do it, as under a force
and with Arms in hand: That he proposed therefore a suspension of Arms for five
days, and because the Duke was reduced to such a want of Victuals and Forage,
that he could subsist no longer, offers him Quarters betwixt the Rivers Paglia
and Chiani. But recalling soon after the offer, two miles of desolate Country
were offered him, from whence every thing necessary for the food of man, the
Hay being first burnt, had been carried away. It is not easy to imagine, how
Edward stormed, and how highly, being fiery by nature, he was moved with such
proceedings; but of his Troops some had perished for want, others after great
Booties had disbanded. And for the rest, there was not wherewithal to feed
them, nor did the season permit to advance further, or to keep the field. He
resolves then to retire into his own Country, and demanded passage of the Grand
Duke, who blaming this hasty departure out of the Ecclesiastical State, as a
fault equal to the unseasonable haste of his entering into it, offers him in his
own for some days Victuals and Quarters, as being doubtful, lest the Barberins,
delivered from their apprehensions, should turn the Treaty topsie-turvy. Edward
vexed, that the Grand Duke, with superfluous hopes of Peace, had first withheld
him from advancing in the sudden fear to the Gates of Rome, and afterward had
denied to second him with his Arms to advance to Castro, despising the offers,
and leaving the Mareshal d' Estre, who at leisure brought back the remainder of
his men, passes Post into Lombardy.

For all this, the Cardinal Spada, though he had gained his intent, did not
presently break the Treaty; but making his Brother the instrument, proposes to
the Grand Duke the same conditions formerly sent to the Duke of Parma, with
very little alteration, save that he desired, for observance of what was
agreed, the League should oblige it self. His aim was to beget some disgusts
betwixt the Mediators; for Lionne had already declared, that it was
dishonorable for France, that other caution, besides that of their authority,
should be demanded. The expedient for this appeared easy, because in the
capitulation, leaving the appearance and the honor to the French, he proposed
that with a Writing apart the League should warrant the Treaty. Greater
difficulties arose from the variety of propositions; for, the Barberins
succeeding not in persuading the Viceroy of Naples to hearken to a Treaty for
a League, less to afford the assistance which they asked, as was due by the
Fief of that Kingdom, nor yet to permit any of its Subjects to go to their
service, they persuaded him at last to propound a suspension of Arms, for which
he dispatches Courriers to Venice and to the Grand Duke, pressing that they
would persuade Edward to accept it.

At this time that the Nuntio in Naples labored with the Viceroy that he
would interest himself in the Treaty, and that to the Grand Duke were
insinuated in the name of Barberino propositions of a League of the Italian
Princes, in it comprehending the Spaniards; the Cardinal Spada entertained
Lionne in a discourse of the opportunity to employ so many Armies ready and at
hand in conquering the Kingdom of Naples, of which so considerable a part might
be given to Edward, that Castro would be no great matter to leave if he would
to the Prefect. Betwixt the Grand Duke and Parma jealousies were also sown with
great art; endeavoring to make the former believe, that Edward, for the
obtaining of his own, offered to invade together with the Pope Tuscany; and to
the latter, that the other offered to abandon him, so Castro it self might be
given up to him. Artifice always halting in some part, such projects were at
the same time published and laughed at; and the Confederates would not so much
as propose to Edward the suspension of Arms, judging it better to insist upon
the accord, so far advanced, that neither party could go back without a public
blemish.

But because the Cardinal Spada was more and more wavering in his proposals,
the Ambassadors of France and Tuscany thought fit clearly to inform themselves
of the Popes true intentions, by speaking to him expressly about it. He at the
mentioning of the deposition, showing it to be near to him, at first troubled
and afterward perplexed, at last not averse from consigning it to the League,
confessed, that the Cardinal Spada had powers to treat, but not to conclude. In
conclusion, Spada, having put to paper the Articles of a Treaty, together with
the Marquess Riccardi the Grand Dukes Minister, and Testi, and sent them to
Rome; Barbarino in addition proposes three points, not only contrary to the
things hitherto negotiated, but also not possibly to be admitted by the
Confederates. It had always been taken for granted, that France should demand
of the Pope absolution and pardon for the Duke of Parma, to the end to avoid
many intricacies, and those prejudices, which Edward feared for his interests
in future. But the Cardinal now proposes, that he himself should demand it,
that the Montists besides should be paid; which the Duke refused not, when
their right should be restored to its first state. Lastly, that the Princes of
the League should declare themselves satisfied, not only for the Affairs of
Castro, but renounce all other pretensions and interests which they had with
the Church. This condition seemed to the Confederates unsufferable, businesses
and rights of great concernment being there under comprehended, which being
already of very ancient standing, if hitherto they had not been promoted by
Arms, ought less in future to disturb the Peace, and so much the rather, that
being not mentioned or comprehended in the League, they had no reference to the
present subject, in which, Castro being restored, they declared themselves
entirely satisfied.

By this it clearly appeared, that danger ceasing, put an end to the fraud;
whereupon the Princes themselves, incensed at this proceeding and vexed at the
delusion, the Assembly was dissolved, after which the Confederates concealed
not their sharp reproaches against Lionne, who had not sufficiently made sure
of the Powers, and he the same against Spada, who by showing him a false Copy
of them, had deceived him. Many doubted, whether the said Cardinal was in truth
the deceiver or the deceived, and upon it several Manifests and Writings ran to
and fro. But the Confederates looking at the issue of the business more than at
the formality, and ascribing every thing to the Barberins, considered how to
resent it. The Grand Duke therefore and the Duke of Modena looked with some
reflection in this Conjuncture upon the proceedings of the French, since that,
by the gaining of Tortona, though under the name of Prince Thomaso, to whom it
was said it was to be granted in Sovereignty, it was visible, that their Arms
were silently entered into Italy, and were Neighbors to the Confines of many
Princes; so that those of the Austrian party justly apprehended, and that not
without some resentment, to be over powered by that Crown. Nevertheless, the
provocations of the Duke of Parma, and the recent scorns of the Barberins
prevailing, (besides that with the death of the Cardinal Richelieu, happened
about the end of the year, many of his designs were thought extinguished) they
showed themselves as resolute not to suffer their injuries, as the Barberins
were constant in provoking them to it. The Dukes then of Modena and Parma
having spoken together communicated to the Venetians their thought to take up
some Quarters in the Ecclesiastic State, to ease their own Country during
Winter, desiring, that at least by connivence they would give way to them to
make use of the Soldiers of the Republic which were in the Modonese. The
Senate and the Grand Duke not approving, that the one should be exposed to
greater dangers, and the other be separated from common counsels, exhorted them
to suspend moving in so cold a Winter-season, in which delay took not away any
vigor from their power, but rather added strength to their counsels. The Dukes
were satisfied with it, chiefly because at the instant of their setting forward
Modena had discovered, that by the imprisonment and death of some, an
intelligence was vanished, which he had in Ferrara; whither having sent certain
of his Subjects, under other names to inrool themselves in a Company, they,
having the Guard at a Port, were to deliver it to the Duke. Besides, he of
Parma, whose aim was to possess Cento, a place, which from the Territories of
Ferrara and Bologna might draw important Contributions, was diverted by
Cardinal Anthonio, come into those parts with supreme Authority of Legate, and
by his providing and fortifying that place.

Whilst these things were in agitation, the Venetians had sent into the Sacca
di Goro, to maintain the Jurisdiction of the Sea, certain armed Parks, which
finding there some Vessels laden with Corn and Oil, had, as is usual, sent them
to Venice, from which Ferrara and the Army finding some inconvenience of
Victuals, certain Redoubts were raised by the Pontificians betwixt Magnavacca
and Volane, with eight pieces of Cannon on them to protect Ships under their
countenance; but being found of no advantage, they within a while demolished
them. And now through the dispositions of minds and preparation of Forces, all
really tended to War; whereupon the Prince Luigi, and Pandolfini, being
returned to Venice, Meetings were again renewed with the Deputies Nani and
Gussoni. The Barberins endeavored to render them suspect to France and Spain,
suggesting, that the Princes of Italy were not so much united for the affairs
of Castro as to form a third Party, that might balance their Arms, and engage
it self as occasion should be offered, as if their intention were to give Law
to both the Crowns, and continually insinuated to the Spaniards projects of a
League, upon which, and to have a pretext to introduce a Minister, the Regent
Casanate was sent by the Viceroy of Naples to Rome. But he no sooner arrives
there, but the Cardinal Barberino being now out of fear, he found him far from
his own propositions, and rather involved in a like Treaty with France, though
his more veritable intentions were to amuse both the Crowns without concluding
with either. The Spaniards, to flatter him, gave him hopes, that by Vrbans
closing in a League with them, the Authority of the Catholic King would induce
Modena and the Grand Duke to facilitate the adjustment of Castro; and the Count
della Rocca, gone already from Venice, was going to Florence, to Modena, and to
Parma, to exhort those Princes to Peace, with offer of his Mediation, and with
propositions to Edward, that if he would adhere to the Spanish party, he would
procure him the restitution of Castro, by recompensing the Prefect with other
Lordships in the Kingdom of Naples. All this fell quickly to nothing; for the
projects of the Barberins to the Spaniards varied from the first intention, and
those of the Spaniards to the Princes had no foundation.

In the mean time foreign affairs were carried on with important accidents,
things in Germany being reduced to great extremity, by several blows of
consequence given to the Imperial Armies; one near the Rhine, where by Count
Guebrian, General of the Weimarians, Lamboy was totally defeated; another in
Silesia, Franc Albert, a Duke of Saxe Lawemburg, being beaten and taken
Prisoner, to whom, though a Lutheran, the Emperor had given the body of an
Army, in hopes that many Soldiers of that belief would willingly serve under
his Command, and those would flock to him of the contrary party, in which he
had been a Commander for many years. In consequence of which disaster, Olmitz,
the Metropolis of Moravia, and other places were given up to the Swedes. Yet it
would not have been difficult to have repaired all, if the Archduke, who with
the greatest body of the Army besieged Leipzich, a City fatal to great Battles,
had not by Torstenson, who came to attempt its relief, been utterly defeated;
whereupon, the Patrimonial Provinces remaining without defense, and the way
free for the Enemy even to Vienna, so great was the consternation of men's minds
in that City, that nothing else preserved it, but the spreading of the Swedes
in prosecution of their advantage.

The Emperor therefore commanding his Ambassador to return to Rome, desired
succors of the Pope; and Rabbata at Venice demanded of the Senate with
unwonted and great earnest three thousand Foot to defend the Passes of the
Danube and the City of Vienna; that the Army of the Swedes being by that means
stopped, it might not come nearer, with the wonted insolency of Conquerors, to
Italy, and the Confines of the Republic. Urban denies assistance, under the
pretext of the jealousies wherein he was, and the Venetians answered in a sense
little differing, showing how Italy was disturbed and overturned by the
Barberins. Monsieur de Lionne being also come to Venice, declared the Fortune
and the Power of the Austrians every where laid low; exalted the intention of
King Lewis, who, not ambitious but of glory to himself and liberty to others,
had conquered Tortona by Arms, and in Generosity given it up to Prince Thomaso
He invited to an Union with France and to the Conquest of the Milanese, of
which he offered to the Republic such a portion as it self would choose. But
the Senate persisted fixed, not to interest it self betwixt the Crowns
otherwise than in what concerned the Mediation of Peace.

Besides the proceedings in Italy, which are before mentioned, the accidents
are worthy relating concerning the Crown of France, whose Arms being every
where victorious without the Kingdom, it was nevertheless intestinely disturbed
with furious commotions. Richelieu, heaping up for himself and those that
depended on him vast riches, rendered the universal poverty of the Kingdom so
much the more intolerable to the people; and by vainly boasting his Authority,
and preferring his own Glory before that of the King, made himself burdensome
and maligned. Lewis was naturally suspicious, but timid; whence, Princes having
no Guards that can preserve them from disquiet, he was perpetually tortured in
his mind, sometimes with jealousy at the excessive power of the Minister, and
at others, with the grief at the necessity to suffer him. The Cardinal, to spy
out his intentions, kept him environed with his Confidents, which reported to
him his words and the tendencies of them. The King inclined to amuse himself
very often privately at home, as it were to vent his affections with some of
his Familiars; whereupon the Cardinal easily insinuated into his favor
Monsieur de Saint Mars, of the House of d'Effiat, and promoted him, in the
flower of his years, to the Charge of Grand Escuyer, which in that Court they
call Monsieur le Grand, with so great a suite of propitious Fortune that in a
short time the Kings affection rose to such a height, as to obscure the chief
Minister, and render the confident young man aspiring to high things.

The enterprise on Perpignan being resolved, the Cardinal persuades the King to
go thither, carrying along with him the Queen and his Brother, and leaving the
little Children kept in the Bois de Vincennes, the Governor whereof was
Monsieur de Chavigni. Together with the people all the Court murmured, that the
Cardinal, arguing from the Kings weak health his death to be near, by carrying
him together with the Queen and Orleans to the Army that depended upon him, and
was commanded by la Meilleray his Nephew, and by leaving the Sons deposited in
the power of his Confident, aimed in all events to dispose of the Regency, nay
of the Royal Family and the Kingdom. But the Queen, opposing her tears to the
Cardinals counsels, obtained to remain at St. Germans with her little Sons. The
King recommending the Government of Paris to the Prince of Conde, and the
defense of the Frontiers of Flanders with an indifferent Army to the Counts of
Harcourt and de Guische, departs; the Mareshal la Meilleray, always chosen by
the Cardinal for the employments of greatest moment, being advanced before.
Perpignan, but a little distant from the Sea and from the Pirenees, is the
chief City of Rossiglion, considerable for the exact Fortifications both of
Town and Citadel, and at present provided with a numerous Garrison. To take it
therefore by force, being thought no easy matter, it was resolved to block it,
and by hindering it of Victuals, to overcome it with Famine. The Spaniards with
four thousand Musketeers conducted from Colivre a great Convoy into it;
whereupon it was found necessary to shut that door of the Sea, by possessing
that place, defended by the Marquess di Mortara with three thousand men. The
preparations and the motion of the King of France had given great apprehensions
throughout all Spain.

But amidst so many disturbances, the Conde Duke publishes in the Court a
certain Henrico for his natural Son, till now not only concealed, but in such
sort cast off, that, taking a desperate Voyage into the Indies, he had passed
several years there in sordid and base courses. But now Olivares, to vent a
certain Genius of Ambition and Power, introduces him with great expense and
equipage into the Kings Service; the Constable of Castile being persuaded to
give him his Daughter to Wife, to the scandal of the other Grandees, who in
Spain are not wont to prefer the Idol of Favor before the Nobleness of Blood.
Afterward desiring to cover his own extravagancy, by having the King emulate
his example, seduces him to declare Don John of Austria for his Son, then but
thirteen years of age, born of a mean Woman, and obscurely brought up, and
confer upon him the Title of Generalissimo against Portugal, with the
assistance of a certain Council. All this was attended with the scorn and
murmuring of many, that in the greatest pressures of the Monarchy, distraction
was seen in men's minds, and the Treasures consumed in actions and expenses,
both unprofitable and unworthy, to the abandoning of the Kingdoms, and contempt
of the lawful Heir, which was yet kept under the care, and might well be said
captivity, of Olivares's own Wife. The clamours and wishes of all solicited
the King to go out of Madrid, and draw near to the Frontiers, whilst he of
France was heard to be arrived at Narbon, to the end, that if the one came in
person for conquest, the other would at least show himself a far off for
defense.

Olivares doubtful, lest the King going forth should either get light how
affairs stood, or that others should inform him of the infelicity of his
governing, sometimes with artifice hiding the dangers, and then exaggerating
the inconveniences, and above all the expense, which the Kings moving
necessarily required, endeavored to stop him. The King nevertheless, his will
at this time over-mastering that of the Favorites, resolves to go to
Saragozza, but with such a slow pace, that, going out of Madrid not with a
military Equipage, but rather for divertisement with delightful Entertainments
and Players, sometimes staying to delight himself with them, sometimes going
out of the way, and always making very little Journies, arrives late, and yet
the motion of the Army was much later. Colivre not being able to expect so much
delays, the Conde Duke orders, that at any rate it should be relieved, and the
Fleet being not yet ready, that it should be attempted by a select body of
Horse by Land. The execution proved more difficult than the command; for there
was a necessity to cross over Catalogna, with the Rivers and Mountains between,
without Victuals, with the Enemy, in the Flank and Rear of them. However the
Conde Duke, far from the danger, and accustomed in things of difficulty to
arrogate to himself whatever had a prosperous issue, and where it fell out
otherwise to lay the blame of it on Fortune or the Instruments, pressed that it
should be hazarded, though with never so great appearance of loss. So that
making choice of three thousand men on Horseback, the most part reformed
Officers, under the Marquess de Pouar, the passage was attempted; but Monsieur
de la Mothe Odancourt following them, and the Peasants withholding Victuals,
and interrupting the ways, the Spaniards quickly found themselves without bread
and without Forage, in the Mountains so beset, that there being no means of
coming to fight nor to escape, they in a body render themselves with Colors,
Arms and Horses, Prisoners. Thus the best of the Spanish Forces being blasted
without blood, those of Colivre yet continued the defense, till la Meilleray
piercing into the Wall with a Mine blew up the Aqueduct; whereupon for want of
water they capitulated, together with the Castle of St. Elmo, lying close by
and upon a height. And now the Siege was laid before Perpignan, honored with
the presence of King Lewis, whilst the Cardinal at Narbonne was indisposed with
pain in an arm, which almost withered by blood-letting and by scars, had for a
long time tormented him. The French thought the enterprise would succeed well,
and not last long, supposing that there would be found a want of Victuals in
the place. But the Marquess Flores d' Avila, the Governor, gave them out with
such exactness, and concealed them, expressly to strengthen that opinion, that
for that cause the place would quickly be taken; that so the French being
deceived in their hopes, might spare blood and force, and by prolonging the
Siege, time might be given for its relief.

Holding out therefore some months, affairs in Flanders proceeded happily for
the Spaniards; for that Melo, not able for the distance to send succors into
Spain, endeavored to give them aid by diversion, finding his Army twenty five
thousand strong, and with all things else well provided. So that he easily
recovered Lens, and la Bassee was rendered to him. Dividing his Army, he
afterward threatened to invade France in two several parts; and to oppose them,
the French Army being separated into two bodies, he on a sudden rejoyns his
own, and falls upon the Count de Guische in his Quarters, which near Chastelet
he negligently kept. The Count saved himself by flight, leaving the Camp with
that which was in it in prey to the Enemy. From that side which is much
exposed, Melo might have gone even to Paris; and some counseled him to it, to
promote in the Kings far absence confusions and tumults in that vast City.
Others were of opinion, that he should carry the Army to the Rhine, and repair
those disadvantages, which after the defeat of Lamboy the Catholics sustained
by the Weimarians. Melo having express commands from the Conde Duke not to
engage the Army in ought that might divert the Forces from those vast designs
he framed to himself, destroys the benefit of the Victory.

Olivares built upon the intelligence held with Monsieur le Grand, who changing
into hatred the benefit of his raising, studied revenge against the Cardinal,
because he had hindered him of the honor of being admitted into the secret
Council, of the Title of Duke and Peer, and of the Marriage with the Princess
Maria of Nevers. He had observed in his confidences with the King, that
Richelieu was become troublesome to him, and by consequence was rather tolerated
than loved, nay he affirms, that Lewis had secretly given him leave to make use
of the means that might ruin the Cardinal. But wanting experience, and
transported with ambition, he fails in choosing of the way. Finding himself to
want a party; (for the private favor of the King was not sufficient to defend
him against the public Authority which the Cardinal had the management of;) he
seeks to make other friends, and before he went with the King from Paris, he
contracts friendship, Monsieur de Thou being the instrument, with the Duke of
Bouillon, and both strengthened themselves afterward with Orleans, to have the
applause and name of a Prince of the Blood.

Orleans, besides the impatience of a private life, was irritated against the
Cardinal, both for old businesses and for a new suspicion, that upon the Kings
death he had thoughts to assume the Regency to himself. It was therefore
resolved to be rid of him by all means, and Bouillon offering Sedan for a place
of Retreat, it came to be considered, that men, money and credit, to support
themselves and withal to undertake, was wanting. To obtain the means for it,
they send into Spain Monsieur de Frontailles, who in the greatest secrecy
concluded a Treaty, in which under the pretext of promoting the general Peace
and the Service of King Lewis himself, who was declared to be oppressed by the
Cardinal, it was agreed; That when Orleans should be come to Sedan, the
Catholic King should deliver to him twelve thousand Foot and five thousand
Horse, with four hundred thousand Crowns to make new Levies and necessary
provisions of Ammunition and Cannon. Over this Army was to command the Duke
himself, assisted with two Mareshals of the Field, which should be Bouillon and
St. Mars; that of Flanders was by a good concert to second their undertaking.
To the Duke, with the assistance of a Spanish Minister, should be permitted to
grant Peace or Neutrality with those Provinces of the Kingdom that would demand
it; excluding nevertheless the general Peace betwixt the Crowns, which was not
to be made but by common consent, and with restitution to the Spaniards of all
that was taken. Lastly, that Orleans should be obliged to declare against the
Swedes, and against all those which were Enemies to the Austrians.

The Contractors by this Treaty aimed much further than at the ruin alone of
the Cardinal; for the Spaniards aspired at the discord and division of the
Kingdom, Orleans gaped after the Sovereignty, or at least to have a share in
the Regency. And the others, either thought to revenge themselves of the
Favorite, or to procure themselves advantages. But because the malcontents
did believe, that the person alone of the Cardinal was to oppose their designs,
they resolved to kill him, and that St. Mars should execute it, not only as
having the greatest courage, but because he passed through the Guards with less
observations and greater confidence. And he in the Journey might have performed
it at Briara near Lions, for that he found him there not well guarded; but
abstained from it, either desiring, that in so great a change of things Orleans
should be in Court, or at least judging with designs perhaps more vast, that
the Cardinal being so soon taken away, further attempts would remain
languishing and discredited, which had their principal support from the hatred
conceived against him.

The Cardinal having gotten notice of their designs, the King being arrived at
Perpignan, staid, as has been said, at Narbonne, believing he might remain a
far off with greater safety, and besides, the vivacity of mind and the artifice
of wit in cases of the greatest extremity not abandoning him, he caused his
deplorable condition of life to be published by his Attendants and the
Chirurgions themselves; to the end, that from such hope the Conspirators might
abstain from blemishing themselves with the blood of him, of whom nature was
within a while to be the more just Murderer. The King falls grievously sick in
the Camp of a Dysentery, and in the contingency of his life arose in the Court
and also in the Army great divisions; some adhering to Meilleray, who supported
the party of the Cardinal, others to Monsieur le Grand, who declared himself
for Orleans. Lewis's health in a short space recovered, quiets that stir; yet
giving means to le Grand to the end to entertain the King in his aversion
against the Minister, to draw arguments from what had happened of Richelieu's
excess of power and thoughts of the Regency. The Cardinal perceiving that he
had no more support in the Kings favor, and seeing rather, under the shadow of
his connivence, the party of the malcontents increasing, had thoughts of
retiring from Narbonne, where he thought himself not safe; but before he would
do it, supplicates the King, that he would come to see him, either to unloose
him from the malcontents, or to awaken in him with Eloquence and Art his
former thoughts of him. Lewis refusing to do it, be then knew he was totally
lost, and therefore as fast as he could, though in a bad season, causes his
Guards to carry him by hand in a certain Couch of Wood, where he reposed upon a
Bed, toward the Baths of Terrascona, to go forwards afterward into Dauphine
and Provenze, whither the Governors of those Provinces, which were depending
upon him, invited him. In this Conjuncture came the News, that Guische had been
defeated on the Frontiers of Flanders, and that Paris was in great
apprehension. Many judged, that the Count being in a strict intelligence with
the Cardinal, had by an affected negligence been the cause of this sinister
accident, to the end, that in the confusion of things the King might know, how
necessary would be to him the Minister, in whom the intelligence of the Kingdom
rested. In effect, no other Expedient offered it self to Lewis but to send a
Courrier after the Cardinal, requiring him, that to so sudden an emergency he
would apply seasonable remedies; for the better ordering whereof he desired in
some place to speak with him. But as the same Fortune, in opposition to the
Kingdom, contributed to the prosperity of the Cardinal, so did he heap much
greater advantage from the accident; for continuing his Journey, very uncertain
what measures to take, the Treaty of Orleans, made with the Spaniards, came to
his hands. He presently sends it to the King, to the end that he might know
that whatsoever wounded the authority and favor of the Minister, did withal
strike through his own felicity and the Grandeur of the Kingdom.

Lewis was as much moved as the relapse of his Brother, the ingratitude of le
Grand, and the perfidy of others deserved; wherefore changing his affections
into anger, he goes to Narbonne, and there, to the end the Arrest might be done
out of the Camp and with less noise, he caused St. Mars and de Thou to be put
Prisoners, ordering secretly in Italy, whither Bouillon was gone to command the
Army, that the same should be done with him. He then goes to Tarrascona, where
the Cardinal staid, and there speaking together, they vented even with tears
their affections and past disgusts. The King communicates all that to the
Cardinal, which they had suggested against him, and this confirmed the King in
the opinion, that in his fidelity and power consisted the greatest defense
against foreign Forces and domestic Treacheries. Thus the Mine being sprung
into the Air, Orleans asked the Kings pardon, who grants it him, on condition
to see him no more, and that with an assignment of two hundred thousand Francs
he would retire to Nissi, a Town upon the Confines of Savoy. Melo, the hope
vanishing of raising so great a storm in France, draws near to Sedan to
persuade at least the Mother and Wife of Bouillon, who was now a Prisoner in
Italy at Casal, to admit into the place a Spanish Garrison. But he obtained it
not, because those Princesses considered the preservation of it, the best
caution they had of the Dukes life. Making then an Incursion into the Territory
of Bologne with the taking of certain Forts, presently retaken by Harcourt, the
Spaniards ended the Campagnia on the side of Flanders.

The minds of the King and his Minister being reconciled, and by that concord
the Forces also of the Army strengthened before Perpignan, by the concourse of
much Gentry from the neighboring Provinces, the French prepared themselves to
resist the more resolute attempts, which the Spaniards gave out they would
hazard. The Naval Army of Spain, under the Command of the Prince John Carlo di
Medici, General of the Sea, was to second by Water the Relief which the
Marquess di Torrecuso was to attempt by Land. But retarding his march too too
long, Perpignan, the Victuals after several months siege being spent and the
Garrison wasted, was at last rendered to the Mareshals Schomberg and la
Meilleray, whilst the King, weakly in his health, was at some distance from the
Camp. The loss of this place was of importance to the Spaniards, and most
afflicting to the Conde Duke, who, to hinder it, had without effect employed
Treasures, Treaties, and Arts infinite. The doubt more particularly tormented
him, lest while the happiness of successes maintained Richelieu amidst so many
contrarieties, his ill Fortune should at last weary the Kings affection toward
him. And the report was, that he came into the Kings Cabinet lamenting and
afflicted, and falling upon his knees, with tears demanded leave to expose
himself to some certain danger, to kill himself, or at least to retire into the
most obscure corner of the World, to deliver himself from that unhappy Destiny
which pursued him, and that the King asking with apprehension the cause, and
understanding it to be the loss of Perpignan, did embrace and comfort him,
ascribing all to the disposition of the Divine Will. After Perpignan, Salses
was also taken, and at last out of time the Army appears commanded by the
Marquess of Leganes, which consisted of twenty thousand Foot and six thousand
Horse; but coming to a Battle with the French, that were inferior in number,
the Spaniards at first prevailed, but at last, superfluously busying themselves
in drawing off three Cannon, gained in the first shock, la Mothe Haudancourt
rallying his men, charges the Vanguard and disorders it. Night thereupon coming
on, both Armies retired, each ascribing to it self the Victory. The Spaniards
having possessed Aitona, a weak place, and more weakly defended, were quickly
wasted through scarcity of Victuals, which were to be brought from far and with
excessive charge.

Richelieu triumphed over his intestine no less than foreign Enemies; for
Perpignan rendered, St. Mars and Thou had their heads cut off at Lions; and
Bouillon, threatened with the same punishment, ransoms himself with the delivery
of Sedan to the King, to which Cardinal Mazarine, betwixt the terrors of death
and the hopes of great recompense, persuaded him. In these distractions was
highly advantageous to Richelieu the common desire of the Confederates of
France to maintain him; for having some of them his Pensioners, and in a manner
all depending on him, they employed their offices with the King; and Orange in
particular, little less than with protests, gave him to understand, that in the
belief of the Cardinals ruin, he, contrary to his former inclinations, had
counseled the Provinces to hearken to a Truce with Spain, fearing, lest Maxims
being changed with the change of Government, there might be a change also with
new Favorites in the faith of the Crown toward its Confederates.

At this time the Queen Mary, Wife, Mother-in-law, and Mother of the greatest
Kings of Europe, wandering without shelter or refuge, as a spectacle of humane
misery, dies at Collen in a poor and hired house, driven by the Parliament from
London, rejected by the Hollanders, and forsaken by the Spaniards. This
accident also was by the Cardinal, as a despiser of Fame, numbered amongst his
felicities, risen, to say truth, in the eye of the World to the highest point,
but in himself contaminated by unquietness of mind and infirmities of body. He
had discovered many of the Kings Guards participants in the contrivances of St.
Mars, and in particular Monsieur de Treville, Captain of the Musketeers. For
the last proof of his Authority and of the Kings patience, he desires that he
would discharge him, and moreover that he would come out of St. Germans to
speak with him, and give way, that his Guards might mingle with the Kings for
his greater security. The King was truly troubled at it, as loving Treville,
and comprehending how insolent the demand was, yet after certain days
reluctance, the Cardinal otherwise protesting he would retire, he complies with
him, out of a belief, that the War, promoted by his ambition, and the affairs
imbroiled by his Arts, could not be supported and dis-intangled but by his
abilities.

But when the Cardinal thought himself in a manner delivered from the
changeableness of Fortune, Nature would exercise her rights; for wasted with
many diseases, death took him away upon the 4. of December in the fifty eighth
year of his age. Armand, Cardinal and Duke of Richelieu, of noble but ordinary
Parents, and, as it happens, that the beginnings of our lives, buried in the
deepest darkness, give no discerning, whither the Laws of Destiny will be
extended, he applies himself in his Youth to Studies, and afterward to the
life of a Churchman. Aspiring always to the greatest things, he made it
visible, that from every corner of Fortune the highest degrees are to be
attained to, provided a man have the confidence to promote and believe himself
worthy of them. Insinuating himself into the Court, he intrudes himself into
the Factions, and succeeds, either in sowing discords, or composing them so
excellent, that Art never failed him, and was seldom abandoned by Fortune. If
he introduced himself into favor, if he enjoyed it, it was always against the
inclination of the Prince that raised him. He sets the King at enmity with his
Mother, with his Brother, and, it may be said, with his own self, constraining
him to give up his Authority to him, though he denied him his affection. He
balanced favor against envy, supported by the King, but always hated by the
Princes, execrated by the people, and sought to be intrapped by Strangers. He
never grew remiss in prosperity, nor despaired in the crosness of affairs, in
which either chance furnished him with accidents, or his wit suggested
counsels. Having disarmed the Huguenots in France, laid low the Great Ones,
weakened the people and the Parliaments, he established the vigor of the Kingly
Government. On the other side, usurping all power to himself, fearing the
security of Peace, and thinking himself more secure amidst the revolutions of
Arms, he was the Author of Wars and of long and grievous calamities, with so
much shedding of blood and tears within and without the Kingdom, that it is no
wonder, that many have published him for a man fallacious in his word, cruel in
his hatred, and inflexible in revenge. But certainly, leaving to God the more
exact judgment of his intentions and deeds, those gifts cannot be denied him,
which the World is accustomed to attribute to great Personages, his Enemies
agreeing in a confession with his Friends, that he possessed such and so many,
that whithersoever he had directed affairs, he had reaped success and power.
This may be said, that having united France, succored Italy, confounded the
Empire, divided England, and weakened Spain, he was the Instrument, chosen by
Divine Providence, for the ruin of Europe. The King, honoring his death with
tears, and his memory with praises, fluctuated amidst many thoughts in the
choice of another Minister, doubting, lest after one so great and so accredited
every one else would be despised by his Subjects, and not esteemed by the
Princes his Friends. Yet he now tasted the liberty of Government without the
shadow of a troublesome Favorite. But being rather accustomed to leave
execution to others, than to set forth his own counsels, he proved timid and
irresolute. Richelieu, disposing also as he was dying of the Kings Will, had
left Mazarine Heir to the Post he possessed, beseeching the King to establish
him in it, and to maintain him for the important Service of the Crown; whilst
instructed by him in the Affairs, Interests, and Designs, he had in all found
him of so excellent an ingenuity, that he seemed born for that alone, in which
he had, according to occurrences, been variously employed.

The King, persuaded by his Wife, inclined not to leave the direction of things
to a Confident of the deceased, by reason of the hatred which he saw
universally of his name. Many others therefore aspired to the favor, and
thereto employed the Arts of Court, which is as much as to say, Mazarine the
primacy and the favor. His Ancestors being of Sicily, he was born at Rome,
with noble but slender beginnings of Fortune: but scorning his first
foundation, from the Militia, in which he commanded a Company of Foot in the
Valteline, passing to the Treaty of Piedmont, from that to Prelacy, and the
Nuntiature of France, and from thence to the strict confidence of that Crown,
by the nomination thereof to the Cardinalat he seemed arrived whither not so
much as his own hopes had pointed him out the way. Seeing Richelieu falling at
Perpignan, he thought of withdrawing from the thunder stroke, and got himself
to be sent into Italy, under pretext to adjust the differences of Parma with
the Pope; but the Duke rejecting him, as distrusted by him, or for old
distasts, by reason of the dependency which Mazarine had upon the Cardinal
Antonio, this hinderance served as a rebound to his Fortune; for by Richelieu's
surmounting the snares laid for him, continuing at the Court, he was also in a
capacity to succeed him in his station. He though a stranger, and without
support, nay rather with the hatred, which from the very ashes of Richelieu
rose up against those which had been his Confidents, knew how to exercise a
precarious authority. Therefore governed himself in such sort, that leaving to
Lewis the pleasure of the Government, and easing him of the burden, he seemed
rather a Minister, than director of the Royal intentions. Then toward others
he endeavored, that that which is so envious, should in him be rendered
acceptable from his modesty. So with obsequiousness to the Prince, with
liberality to the Courtiers, to all pleasing and Courteous, he introduced
himself with a general applause into the place, and withal exposes himself to
the expectation of the world, where so great a force of Fortune was to end.

ANNO MDCXLIII.
His first care was to assure the Confederates of the Crown, that there should
be no change of a constant continuance in their friendship; and with the
Princes of Italy he affects to beget a greater confidence, as one that born
under the same Climate, and versed in the Affairs of that Country, had a better
inclination toward it; and therefore shows himself sollicitous to procure a
Peace betwixt the Pope and the Prince of Parma. But at the instant that he
intended to set upon the Mediation with earnest, it happened, that the Ambassador
Fontenay with Lionne were retired from the Court of Rome. The cause seemed not
great; for, Urban having deposed from the Generalat of the Dominicans the
Father Ridolfi, upon a Schism raised in the Convocation of that Religion held
in Genua, the Spaniards thereupon, saving Rodolfi his rights, had chosen Rocca
Mora, and the French, with the Italians, Mazarini, Brother to the Cardinal, the
Pope having made void that Convocation that they might proceed to a new
Election, the Ambassador of France pretended, that that was against the promise
made him to promote Mazarini, and leaves the Court. The pretext seeming too
slight, though he aimed chiefly to gain the good graces of the new Favorite,
he added other disgusts, and amongst them, that the Portuguese Ambassador was
not admitted, and the Mediation of the King had been slighted in the
fraudulencies of the Treaties with the Duke of Parma. But the Court at Paris
ill resented, that he had engaged himself so far, the Cardinal abhorring, that,
under the cover of the Kings favor, his private interests should so soon
appear to the world: He therefore orders the matter so, that the Ambassador
with some appearance of satisfaction should return to Rome; and the Venetians
were in the Kings name desired to interpose, notwithstanding their so slender
confidence with the Pope in the present Affairs. They nevertheless employed
their offices, but the business was quickly silenced; for the charge of Master
of the holy Palace being conferred on the Father Mazarini, and he flattered
with greater hopes, easily let fall his pretensions to the Generalat. The
Ambassador now come to Court again, employs himself with greater warmth than
formerly in the agreement of Parma. But all without effect, because the
Cardinal Barberino put more confidence in Tricks than Treaties, and therefore,
sending the Abbot de Bagni to Florence, proposed to the Grand Duke, That to
Edward should be given the absolution of the censures, with the forms contained
in the Ceremonial; that to his eldest Son the investiture of his Dominions
should be granted, with the restitution of all that was possessed, except
Castro, Montalto, and so much Country round about, as a Cannon-shot could reach.

These propositions, handed by the Grand Duke to the Venetians, were by common
advice rejected, they seeming not admittable by the Duke of Parma, and little
honorable to the League, who declared themselves Protectors of that Interest.
For this cause the Treaties were confirmed more closely in Venice, whither were
come the Cavalier Giovanni Battista Gondi, the Grand Dukes chief Secretary, in
the place of Pandolfini, who was sick; and the Duke of Modena, to recommend to
the Senate, besides the public, his own private interests also. He had a great
desire, that his pretensions with the Pope might be comprehended in the League;
but they, importing many and weighty difficulties, could not but too much
disturb Italy, besides that every one of the Confederates would thereupon have
reason to produce their own, that were of no less moment. It was therefore
resolved, that they should not abandon their first ends, of protecting the Duke
of Parma, procuring Peace, and also showing resentment of the contempt in the
late Treaties.

But in the interim of these Negotiations, Duke Edward, put forward by the fury
and fervor of his Genius, sends under the Marquesses Sciabuf, and Edward
Scott, about three thousand Foot, cross the Appennines through the Lunigiana to
be embarked, where the Magra falls into the Mediterranean, upon certain
Tartanes, hastily got together, in hope, that landing upon the shore, and
easily taking the weak Rock of Montalto, they might speed also in possessing
themselves of Castro in the sudden astonishment of the surprise. To second the
design, and divert the Enemies Forces, he with fifteen hundred Horse intended,
as formerly, to enter into the Bolognese. The cold of the Winter, and the
difficulty to pass over the Snow, retards so long the march of the Foot, that
advice of it came to Rome, so that they had time to prepare for the defense,
and strengthen the place. But the Dukes Soldiers came not there at all; for
being scarce embarked, and the Tartanes put from the shore, so fierce a storm
encounters them, that being driven to Genoua and Porto Fino, they were forced
to cast Anchor and save themselves there. Victuals wanting, that were but
scantily provided, and money, part of the men perished, and the rest disbanding
were received into pay by the Spanish Ambassador, who seasonably sent them to
strengthen the Governor of Milan, who besieged Tortona. Upon this accident the
Barberins published, that it was evident, that Fortune from Heaven had fought
upon the Sea in favor of their cause. Seeming afterward to doubt, that the
Duke, rather irritated than wearied by ill success, designed to possess that
part of the Ferrarese, which beyond the Po confines with the Republic, the
Cardinal Anthonio talked of laying a great Fort at Lago Scuro, to pass a Bridge
over the River, and draw a Chain cross it, which was there ready upon the
Banks, with all preparations to fortify himself on this side the Po, and send
men thither. If the Venetians had in the beginning been troubled, when by the
Barberins certain Guards had been sent thither, and a certain Fort traced,
that, to avoid at that time jealousies, proceedings were discontinued; they
were at present so much the more moved, as they saw the design to shut up the
River to others, and facilitate passage for their own Army, which passing to
this side of the River might ravage as far as to the Adice, possess or at least
lay waste the Polesene, and drown it at their pleasure. They therefore gave it
to be understood, that they were not to suffer the novelty and violation of so
ancient agreements, and ordered Giovanni Pesari, Cavalier and Procurator,
succeeded into the Generalat di Terra firma to Luigi Giorgio deceased, that
with powerful Forces he should go into the Polesene to save harmless their
concerns, and to hinder the building of the Bridge, or destroy it if he found
it built. He marching immediately thither with six thousand five hundred Foot
and a great number of Horse, was the cause, that the Cardinal Anthonio
suspended putting it in effect.

Minds being in this manner irritated, they netled one another on all
occasions. In Sacca di Goro, a Flemish Vessel loaded with Corn for Ferrara was
by the Soldiers of armed Barks, who feigning to be Fishermen came in there,
surprised and carried to Venice, where the Nuntio, demanding the release of it,
had for an answer, that the Senate was minded to exercise their Jurisdiction of
the Sea. The Lading confiscate, the Vessel at the entreaties of the Hollanders
was restored to the owners. Another Vessel also was taken away by a Galley from
under the Tower of Magnavacca. But notwithstanding that all tended to a
rupture, the Confederates disapproved the frequent attempts of the Duke of
Parma; because, not able to go forth to any purpose, by reason of the fewness
of his Forces, his unhappy success equally diminished the vigor and reputation
of his Arms. He nevertheless, always restless and impatient, demanded passage
through Tuscany to go with fifteen hundred Horse and a few Foot to the recovery
of Castro. The Great Duke denies it so long, till having settled some concerts
at Venice, it might be resolved upon a better ground. But to repel any license
that might be taken, he sends men to keep the Passes, while on the other side
the Prince Matthias with seven thousand men guarded the Borders, which the
Ecclesiastics kept in Arms, by reason of the so frequent reports of Duke
Edwards motion. He knowing, that the Confederates inclined to declare
themselves more openly in his favor, whilst at Rome Savelli, Casanate, and
Fontenay, in the Name of the Crowns, were active in interposing offices, had
more clearly understood, that the restitution of Castro would not be effected
by Treaty, sends to Venice the Count Ferdinando Scotto not to participate in
the Meetings, but to observe the Negotiations and Resolutions. But being
desired to enter into the League, as he refused it not, not to disgust the
Princes Contractors, so desiring to engage them and keep himself free, casts in
several difficulties, particularly concerning the Command of the Army, which,
though in their Countries, he pretended to by turns with the Grand Duke and the
Duke of Modena.

This gave no stop to the Negotiation of the Deputies, who agreed in all the
points, except that, which the Florentines proposed, to form two Armies, the
one in Tuscany, and the other in the Modonese, to be employed in several parts,
and the Venetians dissented from separating the Forces at so great a distance,
doubting, lest the Barberins should make a diversion in the Polesene, but
proposed to possess with their own Forces, at the first motion of the Army, the
Banks of the Po, to secure the passage over the River, cover their own Country,
and, facilitating the conjunction of the Armies, open a way of Commerce betwixt
the Confederates. On the other side the Grand Duke knowing the convenience and
the profit of it, doubted to remain himself in that interim exposed to dangers;
and therefore insisted, that above all the body of an Army might be formed in
Tuscany with his own Forces, with those of the Republic, which were in the
Modonese, and with other three thousand Foot and a thousand Horse, to be
divided betwixt the Duke of Modena and the Republic it self. But by this means
the Modonese was left unprovided, into which if the Pontificians should enter,
they not only quelled that Duke in a few days, but separating the others
Countries, the designs and concerts remained wholly in disorder. This point was
debated for several weeks, to the great advantage of the Barberins, to arm
themselves powerfully, and send Soldiers to Ferrara and Bologna. But the Duke
of Parma with a mind greater than his Forces reviving the War, when it seemed
most suppressed, cuts short the tediousness of consultations, letting the
Confederates know, that, necessity being now in him converted into reason, not
being able to maintain his Troops any longer, he was forced to lead them into
the Enemies Country.

The communication went along with the effect, for he was already on his march
along the Po, demanding of the Duke of Mantua passage through his Country, at
the instant that he was ready to take it. He had with him six weak Regiments of
Foot of several Nations, and as many of Horse, with one of Dragoons and eight
pieces of Artillery; but to the end they might not hinder his march, leaving
them with the Foot, which might follow with less haste, he enters into the
Ferrarese, and comes to Bondeno, which lies upon the right hand Chanel of that
Branch of the Po, which is called di Volane, where the Panaro with other
Watercourse enters into it, and had been fortified by the Pontificians, to
shut the passage betwixt the Modenese and the River. Francisco Murriconi, a
Neopolitan, who with five hundred Foot and four hundred Horse had the keeping
of it, though persuaded by Valanze with the hopes of speedy succors to resist,
no sooner heard a Volley of the Dukes men, come in the duskiness of the evening
near the Fort, but he runs away, followed by the Garrison, into Ferrara, where
afterward he lost his head. The Parmesians then possessing it without blood,
not to give time for relief they attacque la Stellata, which, though better
defended, for the straitness of the place, was nevertheless in a very short
time taken. Cardinal Antonio, to hinder the Dukes further progress, and observe
what the League might be able to undertake, immediately incamps at Hosteria
Nuova, a convenient place betwixt Ferrara and Bologna. The Confederates,
understanding the Duke was marched, knew it was fit without making more
difficulty to come to a conclusion, while it was better to do it, the Armies
being in motion, before that either the people should shake off that sudden
fright, or the Cardinal Antonio, assembling his Forces, should defeat or make
the Duke of Parma retire. A new Treaty was therefore on the twenty sixth of May
subscribed by those Ministers and Deputies, which had also negotiated the other
in Venice, in which, adhering fully to that of the year past, it was agreed; To
increase the Forces to eighteen thousand Foot, and two thousand six hundred
Horse, or to such a greater number as the occasions should require. Two bodies
of Armies were consented to be formed; the one in Tuscany, consisting of the
Troops, to which the Grand Duke was obliged, with a thousand Horse and two
thousand Foot more, if they were Strangers, or three thousand of another
Nation, which the Confederates were to send to them. The other was to be
assembled in the Modenese; and in both, the Colors of the League was to be
carried spread. In each, for the directing of the undertakings, a consultation
was resolved on by vote of the Confederates, of whom the plurality was to take
place. What should be taken was to be held in the name of all, till the Duke of
Parma should be restored to what was his. Place therefore was left for him in
the Treaty, to come in with his Forces proportionably to the Armies of Tuscany
and the Modenese. In this 'twas granted him, if he were present, to command by
turns with that Duke, and he was obliged to contribute three thousand Foot and
four hundred and fifty Horse, when any of the Confederates should be invaded.

As for the motion of the Army, it was agreed, That the Venetians should seize
upon the banks of the Po and when there was occasion of taking the field, the
Troops in the Modonese with those of Parma also, if they could join, should at
the same time second the enterprise. The Venetians then sending the Army to the
other side of the River, the two bodies should be formed, and the number agreed
on sent into Tuscany, without that the consult of the Modenese should have
power to hinder it. The Ministers were to be recalled from Rome; from Venice
and Florence the Nuncios to be discharged, the Revenues of the Barberins to be
sequestered, and concerning the true intention of the League inclining only to
Peace, and the repairing the Duke of Parma, participation was to be given to
the Princes, to clear the jealousies, which it was known were suggested
particularly to the two Crowns by the Barberins.

These were the good dispositions of the League; but the good order to execute
them was by various accidents interrupted: For, though great union and
constancy appeared in the Princes, yet their Countries and Forces being
divided, much time was oftentimes lost in communicating counsels, and
concerting resolutions. It happened, that at this instant the Po being
extraordinarily risen, the Venetians feared, lest Cardinal Antonio should cut
the Banks, to lay the Polesene under water, and hinder the movings of the
Armies, by interposing a vast intrenchment of Water: They therefore command the
General, that he should speedily repare thither, though in the Modenese they
were not yet ready to march.

That district of Country which belongs to Ferrara consists in two streaks,
more long than large. The greater, of which the chief Town is Trecenta, runs
from the Confines of the Mantuan to Polesella, where for a little way the
Country of the Venetians, facing to the River, cuts off the other, which
besides Crispino has few other Towns, and passes from Polesella to the borders
of Adria, wholly belonging to the Venetians. Into the first, there being some
Fortification and Garrison, Pesari sends three bodies of men; the one to
Melara, commanded by Carruccio Colonel of the Nations Croatte and Albanese;
another to Figarolo, that was more numerous, by la Valetta; the third to Lago
Scuro, by the Count Giovanni Battista Porto. The Posts were every where
possessed with ease, and into the lower part, abandoned by the Pontificians, it
sufficed to send some to take possession of it. Pesari makes his head quarter
at Trecenta, and orders that the Fortifications of Lago Scuro and Melara should
be bettered, and in particular a good Fort planted at Figarolo.

To the gaining of all this, the Prince of Parma had also aspired, because,
being over against Stellata, he had intended to enlarge Contributions and
Quarters for his men. Some of his Troops in Barques were just arrived near the
shore, but found they were prevented by those of the Venetians, not without
some displeasure to the Duke, who afterward informed of the reason, was easily
pacified. In pursuance of the foresaid seizure, there came also out of the
Modenese, taking post at the Red Church, the Troops of the Republic, with some
few of the Dukes; for, the Florentines conformable to the Agreement which the
Treaty consented, were by the Grand Duke recalled into Tuscany.

The Venetians now sent to the other side of the Po other six thousand Foot and
a thousand Horse, to fulfill their obligation, though Pesari, that considered
the new Conquests on the Banks remained more weak and exposed to accidents,
unwillingly condescended, but constrained to it by re-iterated orders, sent
them at twice, first the half under la Valetta. and the rest afterward with
Camillo Gonzaga, one of the Princes of Buzzolo, entered lately into the
Republics pay with the charge of General of the Artillery.

Cardinal Antonio had removed his Camp to Cento, and the place lying at the
head of the Modenese, so fortified himself there, that he equally defended the
Territories of Ferrara and Bologna. The Confederates to make some advance
desired to dislodge him, and la Valetta with seven Companies of Horse and four
hundred Musketeers was sent to view the Post; but, by the Guides fault,
arriving late, and being discovered, he nevertheless attacques a Guard
advanced. Matthei, to support them, comes forth with a body of Horse, and the
skirmish grew so hot, that, the Pontificians being more in number, la Valetta
retires, under the favor of two hundred other men, and the Musketeers placed
in good order longst the Hedges and Ditches. The Cardinals quarter discovered
by this faction to be stronger and better fortified than was supposed, the
consults and minds of the Confederates were very wavering; that which opposed
the sending the concerted Troops into Tuscany and making further attempts,
being the disturbance which rose from the Duke of Parma; because, the Princes
having taken for granted, that he would not recede from that Union which had
been concluded for his protection and assistance, had in the division made
state of his Forces, in that number that himself had offered, that is to say,
one thousand four hundred Horse, six hundred Dragoons, and sixteen hundred
Foot. They therefore solicited him to underwrite the League, or at least to
contribute to the undertaking his person and his Army. He with sundry excuses,
either to fortify the Posts possessed, or to recruit his Troops, and by
demanding, that the League would absolutely oblige it self to the recovery of
Castro, kept off; for, deeming to have obtained his intent by the taking of
those Posts, which, by reason of the necessity of the passage of the Po, the
Confederates were bound to maintain, he had no further care, and having so much
in his power as was sufficient to make Castro be restored to him, he judged it
best to keep himself free.

The Troops then in the Modenese from the very beginning began to languish
betwixt delays and disgusts. The Venetians employed one part of their Forces at
Sea, infesting the Coast with six Galleys and with armed Barks even to Ancona,
and interrupting Commerce. They took also after some shot of Cannon the Tower
of Premiero, which, a while after recovered by the Pontificians, was
demolished, and they landed at Cesenatico, where were in Garrison two hundred
forty Foot with forty Horse, and the place being taken by force, was laid in
ashes by a fire which was kindled in the fight.

There was also taken near Premiero and demolished a little Fort, the
Ecclesiastics having made another more inward, and upon the Confines of Loreo,
Niccolo Delfino, Proveditor, surprised in the night by Scalade that which,
called delle Bocchette, the Ecclesisticks had in former times built there. The
Towers of del Abbate and di Goro were rendered by threatening the Garrison with
the Gallows, if they should dare to expect the Cannon. Arriano, a great Town,
and easy to have been defended, because there was no access but by two Dikes
only, being in a fright, driving out the Garrison of their own accord, yielded
to Delfino himself. He now roves to and fro on the other side of the Po, and
spoiling the Country, routs two Companies of Horse which were quartered at
Cologna. They then assaulted Codegoro, where were assembled six hundred Foot
and two hundred Horse, either to attempt the recovery of Arriano, or for some
other design; and there the Albanian Soldiers, enraged at the sight of the
blood of some of their Officers that were hurt, entered with so great fury, that
cutting to pieces without distinction almost all the Inhabitants and Soldiers,
and setting fire to it, they savage-like burnt the place.

Cardinal Anthonio observing the pause and demur of the Confederates in
invading the Ferrarese, and thinking by carrying the War into the Country of
Modena, to give their Army greater employment for the defense of it, sends from
the side of Castle Franco, Mathei with a thousand Foot and as many Horse, who
took in Spilimberto, Vignivola, and St. Cesareo, open places of that Frontier;
threatening to go further in toward Sassuolo and into Montagna. The Duke with
the Proveditor Corraro and with all the Army follow him, Cardinal Anthonio
coasting upon it not far off.

The Confederates desired to draw him to a Battle; for though their number were
not greater, surely the Discipline of their Troops was more veteran and
experienced. They resolved to invest under his eye Crevalcuore, a good Town of
the Ferrarese, but not strong at all, and sent thither to attempt it la Valette
with a thousand Foot and four hundred Horse, who dividing the Foot into three
Troops, thought to take it at one assault. But finding the Ditch large and full
of water, he causes to be brought two small pieces of Cannon to make a breach,
which gave time to Cardinal Anthonio to bring succors into it and attacque la
Valette, who with a few Foot, and abandoned by the Cuirassiers, was constrained
to retire in disorder, and leaving one of his Cannon sticking in the miry ways.
He had carefully solicited the whole Army, which was not far off, to move; but
the Duke and the others of the Consult, by reason of this disorder changing
counsel, and considering of what importance it would be, if any misfortune
happening, the Modenese should remain in prey to the Enemy, stirred not. The
Pontificians had little loss save one French Captain of Cuirassiers killed. The
Confederates loss about two hundred men, and amongst those one Captain of Foot,
and another was taken Prisoner. After this the Confederates pursuing their
resolution to march, obliged Matthei to go out of the Modenese, and abandon all
the Posts, except that of Spilimberto. They then alted for some days at Buon
Porto, and Cardinal Anthonio quarters at St. Giovanni.

In this interim the Grand Duke coming to St. Casciano had put the Army into
the field, under the Command of the Prince Matthias and the direction of
Alexander del Borro, a valiant and experienced Soldier. Barberino sends
against them betwixt Petigliano and Sorano a body of betwixt five and six
thousand men, commanded by the Duke Frederico Savelli, who, as a Roman Baron
and Subject of the Church, being obliged to obey the Pope, was by the Emperor,
at the instance of the Confederates, discharged from the Embassy, which in his
Name he exercised in the Court of Rome. But notwithstanding that opposition,
the Florentines advanced into the Ecclesiastical Territory, and having taken
the strong Pass of Buterone, attacqued the City della Pieve, where the
Garrison, though of fifteen hundred men, scarce staying for the Cannon, went
out with their Swords only. From thence Borri with eight hundred Horse and two
thousand Foot made an Inroad as far as Orvieto, obliging Savelli to retire more
into the Country. Monteleone then was rendered, and the Army was scarce come to
Castigliano del Lago, but Fabio della Corgna, who possessed it in Fief,
overcome, as was said, by the Great Duke with secret Treaties, gave it up
without defense. He was therefore by sentence and censure declared by the Pope
a Rebel. The gaining of that drew along with it Passignano upon the same Lake.
The Galleys also of the Grand Duke scoured the Coast of Romagna; but he now
pressed the Republic, that it would send him, for a greater Renfort to his
Army, the men promised by the Treaty.

The Venetians showed to have not only fulfilled what they were obliged to, by
sending beyond the Po all the men of their repertition, according to the
disposition of the League; but also to have superabounded by keeping for the
common benefit the Banks of that River with their own Soldiers, and by
distracting the Enemy with another body of men upon the Confines of Loreo, and
by obliging them with Barks and Galleys to the custody of a long tract of
Country; besides that they were forced to furnish to the Army of the Modonese
Victuals, Carriages, and Cannon with their draught, and to garrison Finale, a
Town belonging to the Modonese, which situate amidst the Waters of the Tanaro
served exceedingly for communication with the Posts, kept by the Parmigians,
and with the Country possessed on this side the Po. But in truth all disorder
arose from the two Dukes, the one proving to be no help, and the other serving
for a burden; for that Edward stood within his strength, idly looking how
things went, and he of Modena, not being able to defend his Borders, because he
had not in the field above a thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, kept the
whole Army of the Confederates busied in defending his Country; though the
Republic, to dis-ingage it, offered the pay of two thousand Foot, if he could
levy them of his own Subjects or Strangers.

The Grand Duke thereupon was contented, that for the present four hundred
Horse should be sent to him for so long, till the three thousand Foot, which
after many contradictings and difficulties the Republic had in France obtained
to be levied in Provenze, should be dis-imbarked at Ligorn to remain in
Tuscany, whither the Senate sends Bertuccio Valiero with Title of Proveditor to
assist the Grand Duke at the Consults and other occurrences.

Amidst these motions, or rather unquietness of Armies, treating was not given
over by the French Ministers; for that the Ambassador d'Amo presented a sheet
of Paper in Venice, which the Marquess de Fontane had received in Rome from
Barbarino, in which was contained; To restore the State of Castro to Duke
Edward, the Fortifications being demolished, and the Rights reserved to the
Montists, when the League, withdrawing their Arms, should render what they had
taken, and the Duke should ask absolution and pardon, the Pope offering an
ample Brief, secretly to be dispatched to free him from prejudices which he
feared to incur, when by giving his consent to the acts past and to the
excommunication, he should legitimate the crimes of Felony, which were laid to
his charge.

But no sooner was this exhibited to the French Ministers, but Barbarino
sollicites the Spanish Cardinals to propose to the Grand Duke a suspension of
Arms and the depositing Castro into his hand, with a Brief apart, which should
give him power to render it to the Duke of Parma, when he should perform those
humiliations which should be agreed on. The Confederates, besides displeasure
conceived at the late manner of proceeding in the Treaty, found many doubtful
significations and sly evasions to be contained in the present Propositions,
and, above all become jealous that Mediators and Propositions were so often
changed, refused the suspension of Arms, declaring notwithstanding to the
Ambassadors of both the Crowns their will to be most inclined to Peace, when
it might be obtained upon conditions that might render it lasting, honorable,
and safe. The Count della Rocca, Ambassador Extraordinary from Spain, being at
this time arrived at Venice, and Giovanni d'Frasso at Florence, and they
insisting upon things already rejected, obtained answers not differing. The
Spanish Cardinals thereupon at Rome hearkened to new Propositions of Union
betwixt the Pope and King Philip, which the Cardinal Barberino ceased not to
suggest, to give jealousy to the Confederates; but the Republic in the name
of all the League made so lively complaints of it at Madrid, with a protest,
that the League on the other side would accept the invitations which France had
so long made them to close with that Crown, that the King immediately orders,
that all such practices should be broken off. Nay the Vice-King of Naples, upon
the Popes demand of nine hundred Horse due for the investiture of that Kingdom,
in case the Ecclesiastic State should be invaded, denis them; this not being
the cause of the holy See, but of his Family and Kindred. And to say truth, the
Crowns, by reason of the employments wherein they were engaged, and much more
for the condition of their domestic affairs, had little reason to interest
themselves but by mediation and offices; for in Spain, with the disgrace of the
Minister, and in France, with the death of the King, Government was changed.

King Philip returned from Saragossa to Madrid, had in his heart somewhat
cooled his affection toward the Conde Duke; whether it was, that by reason of
continual disgraces, the unhappy director of his Affairs was become troublesome
to him, or that he had perceived, things had been hitherto represented to him
by the Favorite in a prospective differing from the truth. And now many from
necessity saw themselves bound, laying flattery and fear aside, to speak plain,
but none durst be the first, till the Queen, supported by the Emperor with
Letters under his own hand to the King, and with the discourse of the Marquess
di Grana his Ambassador, resolved to break through the vail and discover the
secrets. All then took the Cue, and the very meanest persons, either by notes
in writing, or by word of mouth solicited the King to put away the Minister,
and assume the Government to himself. He marvelling within himself, to have
ignored till now the causes of this disgrace, overcome with the light of so
many advertisements, which all at a time unvailed him, was wavering at first
with himself, apprehending the burden of the Government, and doubting lest the
wonted frauds of Court were practiced against the Favorite; but at last not
able to resist the consent of all, orders him one day on a sudden to retire
himself to Loeches. Olivares undaunted readily obeys, going disguised out of
the Court, for fear of the people, who, if they are wont to follow Favorites
whilst they shine in the station of favor and greatness, endeavor much more
to tread them under foot, when they are precipitated by Fortune.

This resolution was applauded by all with excess of joy. The Grandees,
formerly sent away and oppressed, returned to serve the King, and render the
Court more majestical; and the People offered to strifes men and money,
animated by the report, that the King would take upon him the care of the
Government hitherto neglected. But either fainting at the burden, or new to
business, and with more new Ministers, in the tediousness of business, and the
difficulties of various accidents, he had fallen back insensibly into the
former affection toward Olivares, if all the Court had not with an unanimous
murmuring opposed it, nay if Olivares himself had not rather precipitated his
hopes; for willing, by the publishing of certain Writings, to clear himself, he
offended many in such sort, that the King thought it best to send him yet
further off, and confine him to Toro. There, not accustomed to quiet, and
afflicting himself, as great wits are wont to do, he dies within a while of
grief. It cannot be denied, but that he had great parts, of vivacity of wit,
and application to business, but they were either corrupted by a rash violence,
which oftentimes in counsel carried him to extremities, or were frustrated by
fortune, which always crossed his designs. He never suffered himself to be
corrupted by Strangers, but it was imputed to him, that with flattery or not
opposing he sometimes betrayed the Kings service. He possessed with great
jealousy the Kings favor and the power, which, to arrogate it to himself
alone, he took from the Council and every body else. He employed few, and those
of his dependants; but he proved so unfortunate a Judge of abilities, that of
all those he employed, some wanting diligence, many capacities, and all
approbation, he was very often for the faults and errors of others condemned
by the world. He always vainly showed his power; but he laid up no great
riches, nor fortified his private power against the public authority with
Places, Armies, and Governments. For this cause, if his Government was not
applauded, his fall made no great noise, nor was his death considered. The King
in truth, though he published the contrary, could not or would not govern by
himself alone. Whereupon Luigi d' Haro, Nephew, but withal an Enemy to
Olivares, insinuates himself by little and little, and, with great modesty
showing his obedience to the King, in a short time takes upon him the
administration of the Government.

But in France, conformable to the nature of the people, the changes passed
with a greater noise; for that Lewis, amidst the cares of his mind, and the
unquietness of his body, was fallen sick even to extreme languishing. By reason
of the tender age of his Son, he was exercised in difficult thoughts, about the
direction of affairs, and no less were troubled the principal Ministers, the
relics of Richelieu's Faction fearing, lest the Queen, coming to the
authority of the Regency, should for former disgusts revenge her self against
them. Mazarine therefore, Bottiglier, Superintendent of the Finances, and his
Son Chavigni, Secretary of State, being reduced to serious consults about their
Fortune, endeavored to possess the King with the danger to which he exposed
the Crown and the Heir, if the Government should fall to the Queen, not only
new in Affairs, but offended by past usage, and of a strange Nation, nay an
Enemy toward whom she had not at all lost inclination and affection. Nor did
the counsel succeed ill; for Lewis by way of Testament orders the disposition
of the Government in the minority of the Son; Leaving to the Wife the name of
the Regency, but the power and effect to the Ministers. To his Brother he
commits the Lieutenancy of the Crown; To Conde the chief place in the Council,
but subordinate to Orleans. He established Mazarine in the Post of chief
Minister; and for Counselors added Sequier the great Chancellor, who was also
of Richelieu's party, Bottillier, and Chavigni, with a caution that they should
not be excluded but for crime or by death. By this Council with plurality of
Votes were to be decided the most weighty matters, charges military and civil
dispensed, and when occasion was, the Ministers of the Council it self to be
supplied. In the disposition of Benefices Ecclesiastic, he obliges the Queen
to follow the judgment of the Cardinal Mazarine. He ordained also, that
Chasteauneuf the Guard Seau, and the Duchess of Chevereuse should not be
permitted to return into the Kingdom; and as to other Exiles and Prisoners, he
lest them to the disposition of the Council. He wills, that this his Will
should be signed and sworn to by the Queen and the Princes, and by the
Parliament verified. The Queen having no party could not oppose it, though the
Duke of Beaufort declared himself in her favor, and at St. Germans, where the
King lay sick, Conventicles and Factions were formed.

Every one perceived, that the favor not only continued to the dependents of
Richelieu, but that the supreme Authority of the Government was by the King
left to them, and Mazarine had the greatest share; for, besides the dependency
of the Clergy, which with the distribution of benefices was made partial,
either joining with the three Ministers, he had the majority of Votes, or
standing as a neutral betwixt the Queen and the others he made himself Arbiter
to whatsoever side he inclined. Amidst these commotions of affections and
discourses, the King with remarkable piety renders his Spirit to God upon the
10. of May, in the forty third year of his age, and having just upon that day
completed the thirtieth year of his Reign. Having by Arms enlarged the Power,
the Renown, and Majesty of his Kingdom, reformed it with good Laws, and
dignified it with exemplary Manners, he would certainly have been numbered among
the Princes of greatest fame, if to his praises the Glory of Richelieu had not
been interposed, to whom the World ascribed the counsels and success. He lived
and dyed without knowing to defend himself from the Arts of Favorites; he was
adorned with many Virtues, with Piety, Religion, and Justice; but suffered the
exceeding great defects of his Ministers. Though Heresy were disarmed in
France, yet abroad it was countenanced and promoted. Himself sparing in his
Diet, in his Clothing, and, except it were in Hunting, abstaining from all
sorts of pleasures, abandoned the wealth of his people in prey to the profusion
of Favorites. With the Title of Just he covered many severe examples, filled
often the Bastille with Innocents, and managed the Sword of the Hangman to the
private revenge of his Confidents. The Brother was a Fugitive, and the Mother
forced to fly. If then the Greatness of the Name of Richelieu obscured in
famous acts the Glory of Lewis, it also resoued him from many blames, saving
only that, that jealous and avaritious of his Authority toward his Kindred, he
was superfluously prodigal of it to his Ministers.

Lewis the Fourteenth, who had not yet completed the fifth year of his age,
takes the name of King, and thereupon great Revolts were foretold, whilst to
the intern confusions, which the Regency of a Spanish Woman, the novelty of
Government, the affections of Ministers, and the pretensions and disgusts of
the malcontents pointed out, stranger Forces were quickly added, and the Army
of Melo, which consisting of seventeen thousand Foot and seven or eight
thousand Horse showed it self on the Frontiers to offer invitation and
encouragement to them that should attempt novelties. He having during the Kings
sickness waited some days without attempting any thing, resolves at last to
invade France to promote disturbance more powerfully, with an assured hope to
find no resistance, and the King once dead, the Government would be turned
topsie-turvy. The Army then with the increase of new Forces entering into
Tirasche, and laying waste many places with Fire and Sword, besieges Rocroy, a
little place on the Frontiers of Champania, which alone he thought might hinder
his march as far as Rheims, and from thence perhaps to Paris.

Heaven, to say truth, showed it self very partial in this conjuncture to
France; for if Melo, retarding his march, had maintained the credit of his
Army, or if the thought of taking the place succeeding, he might have been able
to advance toward Paris, to countenance those that were for him, and put the
rest in confusion, without doubt out of the Sepulcher of Lewis would have been
raised the Fortune of the Spanish Crown.

The Duke of Enguien, Son of Conde, who scarce out of his Childhood, commanded
the Army in those parts, assisted with the Mareshal del' Hospital and Monsieur
Gassion, upon notice of the Siege, speedily assembles as many Troops as he
could, which amounted not to more than fourteen thousand Foot and six thousand
Horse, and came near to the place, situate in a Plain, and environed with low
Grounds and Woods. Melo, out of a persuasion to take it with ease, having only
five unfinished Bastions with some Outworks and a scanty Garrison, had thought
a Circumvallation needless; which gave Gassion the means to thrust into it,
through the midst of the Enemies Batalions, some men, with which the Garrison
being strengthened makes a Sally, and recovering a Half Moon, gave time for the
gross, with which the Duke arrived upon it with so much resolution, that showed
he would not refuse a Battle. Melo, superior in Forces, rejoiced already in
the Victory, and was so far from avoiding the engagement, that he rather
assured himself, that Fortune offered him that occasion to ruin the obstacle
of that Army to his great designs. He removes from the Siege of Rocroy to range
himself in order in the Plain and offer Battle; but he lost an exceeding
advantage: For Enguien not being able to dis-ingage the Army so soon, from
certain narrow passages betwixt the Wood and the Moorish grounds, was by the
night surprised with his Troops divided, and Melo did not care to attacque him,
pretending to stay for a Renfort under the Command of General Bech, who was
coming with four thousand men, and to overcome, as he boasted, at one blow, not
only a part, but all the Enemies. The French during the night quickly reunited
themselves, and the Chiefs receiving the advice of the Kings death, with
express order not to hazard in that conjuncture a Battle, kept it secret, not
to take away courage from their own, nor increase confidence in the Enemy,
since they found themselves so far advanced, that they could not retire either
with safety or honor.

The Army then was put into order, and Gassion with the right wing made choice
of a place of such advantage that he could conveniently attacque the Spaniards
in flank. Melo with a redoubled error not caring to stay any longer for Bech,
for whom he had the evening before neglected the advantage to defeat one part
of the Enemy, readily accepts the engagement, and in the beginning had the
success to rout and pursue all the left-wing, with the gaining of eight
Cannons, taking Monsieur de la Ferte Seneterre Prisoner, and the wounding of
Monsieur del Hospital. This notwithstanding Anguien with an undaunted courage
played still the part of a Commander, and suggesting to himself, if not from
experience, at least from his birth, the memorials and provocations of glory,
restores the broken Troops to courage and order, and leads again those that
were most entire to the Fight. Gassion, with the natural fury of the French,
shocks the left-wing of the Spaniards in such a manner, that the Cavalry could
not withstand him. The Duke of Albequerque was General of it, arrived to that
degree by the favor of Melo, and he just, unmindful of the public danger and
his own honor, was the first that betook himself to flight; whereupon the rest
easily followed him. Gassion then charges in the rear of the right wing, which
being victorious, pursuing advantage, had scarce been put to a little stop by
Monsieur de Scirot, who seasonably with a body of reserve was moving to
encounter it. But feeling on a sudden blows from behind them, turned aside, and
at last gave way totally. The Foot, which consisted of the best of the Italian
and Spanish Troops, made resistance with the proof of great courage, as long as
they were able. The Marquess de Fontaine, their General, having by the Gout the
use of his Feet taken from him, died upon a Chair at the head of the
Battailons, with a great number of Soldiers, whose bodies were seen lying in
ranks, so unmoveably had they kept their station. Many flinging away their
Arms, endeavored to escape by flight, and amongst those Melo, after having
given greater proof of courage than experience, flinging away his Truncheon of
command saved himself not softly. Five other Squadrons closing themselves
together withstood a long time the charge of Gassion, resolving not to part
with their lives but at the price of a great deal of blood. But they abandoned
and environed by the French, who at last intended to bring Cannon to overcome
them, were forced to yield. The Prisoners were six thousand, which with the
Cannon, Baggage, and a great number of Colors, remained in the power of the
French, who found of theirs not above two thousand wanting. Anguien warmed with
the battle and fierce for the Victory, casts himself into the Enemy Country,
not only recompensing with burning the mischief done in the Tirasche, as hoping
in that consternation of minds for some great revolt. But the Flemmings,
observing France also by the death of the King tottering, kept themselves
quiet. He applies therefore to more profitable Conquests, besieging Thionville,
which, through the importance of the situation in Lutzemburg having been
formerly attempted, after a bloody Siege was now rendered, and a while after,
Sirch ran the same Fortune.

The Queen in this interim, after the Husbands death, comes with her two Sons
from St. Germans to Paris amidst long files of the people in Arms, and entering
with the new King into the Parliament, Orleans, and Conde assisting, expresses
rather with tears than words, showing the Sons as pledges of her affection, and
the Kingdoms felicity, that nothing remained to her but Widowhood and tears.
She referred to the Kings disposition of the manner of the Regency, to which,
Orleans and Conde declared to have given their consent only, not to defile with
reluctance and disgusts the quiet of the Kings last breath. To many of the
Parliament it self, it seemed incapable of admission, no less than new. Being
therefore abolished with unanimous Votes, the Regency remained decreed to the
Mother of the King alone, with an absolute power: Yet it is true, that to have
the two abovementioned Princes consent to it, it was before concerted, that
the Queen should confirm them in the charges conferred by the King, and that
the same Ministers should be continued in the Council. As the first act of her
authority, to the end to avoid any intestine over-turnings, the Queen recals
the exiled, and sets the Bastille open; and to gain applause, she bestows
charges and gifts upon those she knew she could not wish better, publishing
that her desire was during her Regency to make appear all the virtue, but none
of the defects of the past Government. To the Princes Confederates and Friends
she steadfastly affirms, that she would persevere in the alliances and
affections of her Husband deceased. As to Ministers of the Counsel, it quickly
appeared, that she desired to bring into it persons more in her own confidence.
They were but few, and had outlived the persecutions of Richelieu, neglected,
rather than preserved, by reason of the opinion of their mean abilities:
Wherefore (the others beginning to fear a fall) the Chancellor, to uphold
himself, employs as much money as he could, and as much art as he knew, for the
gaining of those who being most conversant with the Queen, should remonstrate
on all occasions to her his ability in employments, and the facility, with
which he suffered himself without reserve to be bowed to the supreme will of
the Government; a quality not to be despised in a new Regency.

Bottillier having the Keys of the Treasury, as his Son managed the Pen of the
secrets of State, having with such eminent charges and immense riches provoked
the hatred of the people and the envy of the Court, judged, it would be
available for the preservation of the rest, to renounce the superintendency,
which was by the Queen divided betwixt the President Bailleul, her Chancellor,
and Monsieur d' Avo, both in the reputation of sincere and dis-interessed
virtue. Nevertheless a while after, Chavigni also, under the title of sale, was
forced to yield up the Secretaryship of State to the Count de Brienne, a person
of exemplary integrity, and of the Queens oldest Servants. To the charge of
chief Minister, as difficult to be disposed of, as to be undertaken, because
confidence and capacity were in an equal degree requisite; she destines the
Bishop of Boves, kept from Court by Richelieu as long as he lived: But he,
being at first in the opinion of probity and sufficiency, was no sooner arrived
at Court, but that in the darkness of so many affairs and interests, he found a
new and obscure element, and passing from a private to a public life, he
seemed like a River, which in its own Chanel running clear and quiet, when it
enters into the Sea becomes troubled and fluctuant. He erred at first against
his own fortune, by not removing Mazarine from Court, believing to keep him at
his pleasure to be informed and instructed by him. But he quickly came to know
that the excellency of wit keeps predominancy in all things and places. The
Cardinal, in this eclipse of fortune, abandoned by all those, who a little
before worshipped him, is not amassed, but, faining to accommodate himself to
the time, with civil and submiss carriage moves compassion and affections,
leaving the Bishop to lose himself in the weight of the affairs, or grow vain
in the ambition of the place. The truth was, all those that negotiated with him
were displeased at his want of experience; but above all, the Ministers of the
League of Italy were offended with him; for, having with the favor assumed the
ambition to adorn himself with the Purple, the King having obtained his
nomination to the Cardinalat, he showed himself most partial to the Court of
Rome. Mazarine, seeing him tottering, began to absent himself from Council,
alleging that being excluded from his former Post, he could no more appear
there; whereupon the Government was quickly sensible of the weakness and
alteration of the Ministers, and the Queen, more new in business than all, knew
not what to counsel or resolve.

There is no doubt, but there appeared in the Queen a kind of inclination
toward the Cardinal, at which the Bishop taking jealousy stirred up others
also, who in his Government hoped to have a great share, to form a party to
discard him. Perceiving at last that he was not able to do it alone, it was
published, that the Duke of Beaufort would take upon him to kill the Cardinal,
and Papers with sharp invectives were scattered in the Apartments and private
Cabinets of the Court. The Queen, moved at it, caused Beaufort to be arrested
Prisoner, and commands the Bishop to retire to his Residence. The Dukes of
Vandosm and Mercure, Father and Brother of Beaufort, went out of Paris, and
Madam de Chevreuse left it also. Thus the Court changing face in a moment, gave
Mazarine opportunity to establish himself. In the want of other capable
persons, by the means of those that took party with him, he caused it to be
divulged, That the quality of a Stranger ought not to prejudice him, but was
rather to be judged commodious for the common good, being neither obliged to
the factions of the Princes, nor exposed to the hatred of the great ones. That
the Natives had kindred, riches, and parties, in which they were confident,
either to find excuses for their oversights, or pardon for their faults. That
himself, destitute of all protection, could not hope for support but in his
innocence. That he willingly exposed himself to the hatred of the turbulent,
being always ready to deliver the lovers of Peace out of troubles.

All applauded these conceptions, some to bespeak his favor and to advance
him, others to expose him to the public hatred, and to ruin him. And many,
being not able to bear the superiority of Equals, inclined rather to a
Stranger. Thus the Cardinal saw himself in a moment got up to that height of
authority, to which Richelieu in the progress of many years scarce arrived with
so many difficulties, he as a Stranger governing that Kingdom, which having
placed the glory of it in Arms, he had very often rejected the commands of the
King, and not valued the fovour of his nearest affections. There was no
difficulty in the Queens satisfaction, she being new in Affairs and desirous of
Peace.

Orleans weary of his banishments and of former troubles, of a Genius otherwise
tractable, and now satisfied with the posture wherein he was, and desirous to
be employed in the Armies, was pleased with the submissions and flatteries of
Mazarine, who supplied him with his satisfactions and money, and designed him
the next year for the Command of the Army of Flanders.

Conde also settling after the doubtfulness of the Regency, and intent upon
heaping up wealth, and therefore a friend to Favorites from whom he received
advantage, was at present content with his condition, the Cardinal, serving him
to obtain of the Queen all that which his interests suggested him to pretend
to. Anguien, his Son, who having happily tasted the first glory of War, breathed
nothing but a Martial Genius, professed himself bound to the new Minister, who
destining him for the command of an Army, furnished him also with those means
for his subsistence, which his Fathers Patrimony contributed scantily to him.

For the rest, the Great men finding themselves without places and without
Governments, the people exhausted both in their Wealth and Blood, no body could
oppose all rather applauded the Cardinal, who in this beginning made it his
glory not to appropriate to himself Riches, Governments, or Honors, but labor
and toil only; with inflexible rigor to keep his Kindred far distant; to
refuse the Queens favors and benefits, and above all, trusting in his fidelity
and the services which he proposed to render to the Crown, to detest any
Defense and Guards, content with his own House and the modesty of a frugal
Family.

Such were the beginnings of his Government, in which increasing always in
favor, he was notwithstanding acceptable to all. But Strangers could not
believe this Ministry durable, or the Peace of the Kingdom lasting, yet it
quickly appeared, that it was confirmed, nay rather increased in Dominion and
Glory; Power and Authority being so enlarged, that the change of the Minister,
the death of the King, the government of a Child, and the direction of a
Stranger had no power at all to shake it.

The Queen in these beginnings showed a desire to Peace, and the Cardinal, to
keep the people with those hopes contented, caused Pass-ports for the Ministers
of Spain to be dispatched, and consents that a beginning should be given to the
Meetings, for which the Pope deputed Fabio Chighi, Bishop of Nardo, Nuntio at
Collen, and the Republic dispatched Luigi Contarini. But in Italy, amidst the
the considerations of foreign occurrences, the successes of the Armies
Pontificial and Confederate were attentively observed. The Duke of Modena with
the Vote of the Commendator Vgolino Grifoni, who in that Army assisted for the
Grand Duke, had resolved to incamp in sight of Castle Franco, though Corraro
believed it more proper, that it should have gone to Finale to incommodate the
Ferrarese, and keep it self nearer to the Quarters of Parma, to the Po, and to
the Territory of the Republic.

Cardinal Anthonio foreseeing the march, sends a great Party into the Mountains
of the Modonese; so that the Duke was forced to follow it with his own men and
two thousand Venetian Foot, the rest remaining at Buon Porto. He desired
afterward, that that also might move, but Corraro denied it, because the Duke
had not made sufficient provision of Victuals, nor had wherewithal to carry it
after the Army cross the Mountain. The intention of Mathei being discovered, to
keep the Confederates in motion and the employment of their own defense, he on
a sudden goes out of the Modonese with the loss but of one Company of Horse,
which was defeated by the Duke. Valanze moved then with all the Army toward
Finale and Bondeno, threatening to attacque some of those Forts; and because the
Duke of Parma, who had not done ought but force the Quarters of four hundred
Horse at St. Pietro, was reduced to a very weak number of Foot, and not to
above a thousand Horse, the Venetians resolved to lend him some Troops to keep
the Outworks of Bondeno. Corraro, who coasted upon the Enemies march, was
afterward in the Quarter of Campo Santo assaulted by Valanze with three
thousand Foot and five hundred Horse; but he withstood and repulsed him. His
Judgment was, that the Duke remaining to guard his own Confines, should send
him the two thousand Foot of the Republic, which he had with him, that he
might invade the Ferrarese, with which he should not only have diverted the
Enemy from molesting the Dukes Country; but the Posts of Communication and the
Banks of the River should have been kept defended: a counsel, which event
afterward showed, how advantageous it would have been. But the desire
prevailing in the Duke to enter into the Bolognese to draw the Cardinal
Anthonio after him, the March was resolved on, having first strengthened Finale
with five hundred Foot more, which the Venetians sent beyond the Po, that in
the absence of the Army, the Pontificians should not attempt to exploit any
thing to break the Communication and shut out the Army.

Corraro then and the Duke having a mind to join, Cardinal Anthonio, that
understood all their designs, caused, to the end to hinder them, Nonantola to
be attacqued by four thousand men. The place lies beyond the Banaro without any
defense of Fortifications, and was then kept by the Venetians with two
Companies under the Colonel St. Martin, who resolved whatever happened to
defend the attacque and the Battery of two great Guns, to give time to the
Duke, who was then at Modena, to come with his own and two thousand Foot of the
Venetians to its succors. He coming to the Bridge of the Navicello, found it
possessed by four Companies of Horse; but driving them away, comes through to
Nonantola, and obliges the Enemy to a Retreat. This being quickly done, he
forthwith returns, when in his way the Cardinal appeared to oppose him, and
although the March had wearied the Soldiers, the Duke nevertheless resolves to
fight him. He scarce began to move, but the Pontificians betook themselves to
flight, in which being pursued with the death of some, and amongst those of
Francesco Gonzagha, Sergeant Major General of the Army, the Cardinal, whose
Horse was killed under him, hardly escaped from being of the number of the
Prisoners, which amounted to two hundred.

The Confederates resolved, demolishing Nonantola, not to engage a Garrison in
so weak a place, to march to Spilimberto, whence they entered into the Territory
of Bologna, plundering to the very Gates of the Town, to the damage and terror
of the Country. Piumazzo, abandoned by the Inhabitants, at the appearance of
two hundred Foot and five hundred Horse was possessed. The Baron de Deghenselt,
who commanded the Horse of the Republic, had Bazano delivered to him, and
judging it not easy to be kept left it. But the Pontificians having brought
three hundred men into it, moved the Confederates to repossess it, as was
easily done, the Garrison rendering on conditions, which were not observed,
because, contrary to the tenor of them, some certain powder was found amongst
the Baggage, whereupon being stripped by the way, they were all made Prisoners.

In Tuscany, Savelli in this interim had recovered Passignano, cutting the
Garrison of two hundred men in pieces, keeping the Commander Prisoner, and
afterward attempted the City of la Pieve with a Petard, but without success.
The Confederates had taken Paciano, and the Grand Dukes Army consisting of
eight thousand Foot, fourteen hundred Horse, and thirty pieces of Artillery,
being encamped in the Plain of Castiglione del Lago; gave so much terror to
Perugia, that the Prefect who was there thought himself not secure, and was
doubtful of some commotion of the Inhabitants; whereupon Savelli, drawing the
Army under the Walls of it, durst not enlarge his quarters. The progress would
certainly have been very considerable also in the Bolognese, as the
Confederates designs were not small, if Cardinal Antonio had not with a new
sprightly party overthrown their counsels. He, seeing that on that side the
strength of the Army consisted in the Forces of the Republic, and to oblige it
to call back their Troops for its own defense, caused thirteen Boats by night
to be put into the Po, and hastily imbarquing four hundred men upon them, sends
them a little below Lagoscuro to take Post upon the Banks on this side of the
River. Captain Tritonio, who with a Company of Horse was going the round,
opposed them, but, being overpowered by the number, was forced to let them
land. The Pontificians marched immediately to the same Post of Lagoscuro, ill
fortified, and worse provided with men, and although Count Giovanni Battista
Porto, and the Cavalier Mark Antonio Strozza valorously defended it for six
hours, yet Valanze being in this interim passed to this side with three
thousand Foot, fifteen hundred Horse, and some Cannon, they were at last
overcome and made Prisoners.

At the first reports of the Enemies passage, the General Pesari sends Mark
Antonio Brancaccio with five hundred Foot to relieve the Post attacqued; but
being come to Chiaviche, and there understanding it was taken, stopped, till the
General himself, who was also marching, should arrive. Pesari had not with him
above eighteen hundred Foot, and betwixt three and four hundred Horse, the many
Garrisons and frequent expeditions to the other side of the Po having lessened
his Forces. Having understood, that with the liberty and safety of the Pass the
Enemy was every day more and more strengthened, he resolved to halt there, to
expect reinforcement, recalling from Finale the last five hundred Foot he had
sent thither, two Companies of Horse from Mantua, and dispatching orders and
advice to all places, to defend the Country and increase the Forces. He
conferred there with the Duke of Parma, desiring him to join with him; but
Edward; having but a very few men, advised that he should expect the Army out
of the Modenese.

All this passing with great retardment, the interim served the Pontificians to
plant a good Fort there, just over against the other, which on the other side
of the Po was also called by the name of Lagoscuro. In the Polesene, and in
Rovigo, by reason of this passage, the fright was truly great; but the
Pontificians, not willing to be shut up amidst those Ditches, contented
themselves with the advantage they had gotten, advancing only with some
incursions as far as Paulino and Fiesso. The Senate, troubled at this accident,
sends four hundred Soldiers in Garrison to Rovigo, and Michele Priuli,
Proveditor of the Terra firma, came seasonably thither to re-animate the minds
of the Inhabitants. He over and above commands, that four thousand of the
Trained Band should be assembled, that they might trouble the Enemy from the
Confines of Loreo; and that Lorenzo Marcello, Proveditor of the Fleet, should
come with a good Squadron into those waters. The most ready succors depended
upon recalling Corraro, to whom the General had dispatched orders to return,
leaving the Duke two thousand Soldiers. Although the matter of self-defence
admitted not of consultations, nevertheless in the consult of that Army it was
resolved, abandoning the Bolognese to return to the Po, the Duke seeming
contented to retain four hundred only of the Venetian Soldiers. The
Confederates, having their march at several Passes interrupted by the Cardinal
Antonio, arrive at Bondeno, and there among the Venetians themselves were
diversities of opinions. For Corraro approved the going to the other side of
the Po, there to make diversion, and at the same time attacque both the Forts
of Lagoscuro. But Pesari sustaining that the Forces were not so strong that
they might with safety be divided, and fearing lest the Fort of Figarolo should
be assaulted, orders that the Army should pass over, which was executed with
some slowness, by reason of the diversity of opinions; concerning which, not
without some contention of minds, each of the Chiefs were willing to give the
Senate information, which referred it self to the Consult and to the plurality
of the Votes of those to whom it was committed that were upon the place. Pesari
advances with the whole Army in sight of Lago-Scuro, and in the viewing of it,
met with a thousand Horse divided into seven Squadrons that were easily
repulsed; nor was there other encounter, the Pontificians within their
Fortifications not being to be forced, nor was it their interest to sally
forth, not to expose to a doubtful event that great advantage of the Post,
which was so serviceable for their preservation.

The Venetians whom it equally concerned not to give battle, not to leave, in
case of a sinister accident, in prey to the Enemy a Country of so great
importance, and lying in such sort open, that it could not be preserved but
with an Army, went to Fiesso to fix a Quarter there, and with the Fort of
Figarolo of one side, and the Polesella on the other, they thought to
straigthen the Enemy, and keep their own Country covered. Nevertheless, not to
abandon the Duke of Modona, two thousand men were sent back to him, that he
might infest the Ferrarese and defend his own Country. The Senate little
satisfied with these resolutions, and less with the successes, made choice for
Proveditor in the Camp of Priuli and Corraro, which formerly were, the one in
Terra firma; and the other in the Modenese; and into the Generalat substitutes
Marco Justiniani Procurator, calling home Pesari to clear himself of several
negligences which were imputed to him; of which things, being better
understood, he was afterward absolved, and a few years after assumed to the
Principality of the Republic. Justiniani, being arrived at the Army, had a
Meeting with the Dukes of Modena and Parma, to which last some re-inforcement
of men being come to him out of his own Country; and it was resolved, that the
General sending some other Soldiery beyond the Po, at the same time should be
attacqued the two Forts of Lago Scuro.

The Conference was scarce separated, but the Duke, contrary to what was
resolved, demands so many men and so many provisions as left the General
without Forces to act what on his side was agreed. He of Modena laid afterward
the fault on Edward, as having a mind not to do any thing at all. Then,
although Justiniani offered fifteen hundred Foot more, the Dukes with several
excuses delaying to resolve, perhaps that knowing the enterprise to be in truth
difficult, they had no mind to hazard their Honor and then Troops; yet he
comes before the Fort, dividing his Quarters, his own with Gonzagha above, the
other of Priuli and Valette, a little below. On the other side of the River was
Cardinal Anthonio with the whole Army of thirteen thousand men, and
notwithstanding the Batteries of the Venetians from the Dikes, had, at least by
night, convenient passage to relieve it, nay oftentimes assaulted the Quarters
themselves, though his attempts were always repulsed. The most signal Faction
was, that a Soldier Corso having by flight out of the Camp of the Venetians
carried the Word to the Enemies, they, three thousand strong, commanded by
Count Frederico Mirogli, came, and by night assaulted the Generals Quarter. The
Alarm being given, Gonzagha hastes to it, and the Aggressors were beaten back
with loss. Many were drowned in the Po; eighty were taken Prisoners, and
amongst them Mirogli with some few wounded. But this was not done without some
hurt to the Venetians; for on that side were killed Carrucci, a gallant Colonel
of Croats and Albanese; Colonsa, their Sergeant Major, besides two Captains,
and Cupis an Ingeneer.

Notwithstanding this advantage, the General perceived, that by the facility of
the passage and of the succors, the Enemy received, the enterprise could not
be carried through; thereupon drawing all his men into one Quarter, he retires
to Poazzo in good order. Priuli being sick, a while after dies, and to him was
surrogated Sebastian Veniero, who upon the Confines of Loreo supplied the place
of Delfino, who was also indisposed. Before he came into the Polesene, he had
several times hindered the Pontificians to pass to this side the River; and now
sending some Troops to the other side, attacques in Cologna a Quarter of three
hundred men, and firing the Town with the death of ninety, brought away fifty
Prisoners besides. Nine Galleys also and two Galliasses with the Proveditor of
the Fleet roved at Sea, incommodating the Commerce of the Subjects of the
Church; but nothing of note happened, but that in passing by shooting upon
Sinigaglia, a Cannon shot took away the life of Thomaso Contarini, Captain of
one of the Galliasses, a person young in years, but in affairs of the Sea of
the highest expectation. But the season not serving longer for it, little could
be done by the Confederates at Sea; they only ordered re-inforcement for the
year to come, and because the Pope in the Mediterranean calling the Galleys of
Malta to join with his, had obliged those of Tuscany to retire, the Venetians
offered the Grand Duke, their Galleys not being accustomed to that Navigation,
to arm at a common charge some great Vessels, and in the approaching Campania
to trouble the Enemy on that side also.

In this interim the Revenues of the Maltesians in the Dominions of the Princes
United were sequestered, notwithstanding those Cavaliers would have excused
themselves, as not having been able to deny to serve the Pope their Sovereign.
The successes in Tuscany fully compensated those less happy on the other side;
for although the Grand Duke, a little indisposed, was retired to Florence, and
that Monterchio was possessed by the Pontificians, nevertheless the heat of the
Armies not cooling, the Enemy was beaten off from St. Casciano; and Passignano
was recovered by the Confederates. La Magione, a rich Abbey belonging to
Cardinal Anthonio, was plundered, and a certain Wall of great concernment
broken down, which holding up the waters in the Chiani to the prejudice of
Tuscany, diverted them from the Tevere, where formerly having their course,
they were the cause of Inundations and great mischiefs to Rome. Monte Cotognola
was also forced, the Garrison of some hundreds of Soldiers remaining
Prisoners. The four hundred Horse, viz. three hundred of the Venetians under
Girolamo Tadini, and a hundred of the Duke of Modena, after some delay, by
reason of what had happened at the Po, arrived at last in Tuscany, and some
Soldiers of the French Levies began to dis-imbark at Ligorn; wherewith the
Army taking vigor gave no small apprehension to Perugia. To divert it,
Vincenza della Marra, Knight of Malta, Neopolitan, and Mareshal General of the
Field, Savelli by reason of indisposition being retired, designing an Incursion
into Tuscani, and the surprise of the City of Pieve, was upon his march thither
with three thousand Foot, eight hundred Horse, and four pieces of Cannon. But
meeting with the Prince Matthias, who crossed him in his way, alted upon the
Hill della Madonna di Mongiovino, playing with his Cannon upon the Princes
Vantguard; but they being obliged to double their steps, seized upon another
Eminence, from whence he so galled the Pontificians, that they, abandoning the
first Post, endeavored to get up upon a higher point of the same Hill. Being
then closely pursued, and Cornelio Malvasia, Lieutenant General of the Cavalry,
running away with two hundred Horse, the rest remained at the discretion of the
Confederates. Marra retiring with a few into a certain Castle without defense,
seeing himself beset, renders himself Prisoner with four Colonels, seventy
Officers of several qualifications and about a thousand Soldiers, leaving all
their Colors and the Cannon with all other Provisions in the hands of the
Conquerours. Monterchio was hereupon recovered; Castle Leone with Piegaio
taken; Montalere and the Mills of Perugia battered.

But a new Army was quickly set on Foot consisting of seven thousand Foot and
seventeen Companies of Horse, under the Command of the Commendator Nari and of
Tobia Pallavicino, to execute the design of the Barberins to assault the Grand
Duke in several parts, whilst the Venetians and the Duke of Modena, reduced to
their own defense, they had their Forces less engaged, and the Grand Duke
having not lent his ear to particular Treaties, several times proposed to him,
to the end to separate him from the League; they had hopes either to give him a
blow with their Army, or for fear to induce him to an accord, and afterward
with all their force to fall upon the Venetians. The attacques in Tuscany were
to be made in three places; at Petigliano with the new Army from the Perugino;
at Pistoia by the way of the Mountains with that of the Bolognese; and lastly
Monsieur de Codre Monpensier, General of Romagna, toward the City del Sole,
and that part of the Dominion, which beyond the Appennine belongs to the Grand
Duke, which, as exposed and weak, was also ill guarded. They contrived at the
same time to send into the Country of Parma the Count de St. Secondo, who
pretended to possess himself of certain places belonging to the House of
Farnese, backed by the Colonel Garnier, who without observation levied men upon
the Lands of Buzzolo and in the Mantuan. Three hundred Horse also, wading the
Panaro, were by the Plains of the Modenese to be sent by the Cardinal Anthonio
to those parts, with great appearance that they might do great mischief, and
raise confusion in the Country. The Duke of Modena, having got notice of the
design, desired no better but that the said Horse should be suffered to pass
the River, that then from convenient places they might be surprised and cut to
pieces. In opposition to this, he of Parma, who with very weak Forces kept
himself at Bondeno, thought it better to employ effectual offices at Milan and
at Mantua, to the end, as it happened, a stop might be put to the Levies of St.
Secondo and Garnier. But Valanze marching against Tuscany with four thousand
Foot and a thousand Horse by the way of Poretta, came upon Pistoia so suddenly,
that the Great Duke had not time to thrust succors into it. Nevertheless the
Town, though weak, by the courage of the Inhabitants and some few Soldiers
repulsed the Scalade, which Valanze attempted, who frustrated of his chief
design, contented himself to do some spoil in the Country round about, and with
the gain of four Cannon, which he found by the way. If the possessing of
Pistoia had succeeded, the Pontificians intention was to advance toward
Florence, and, with the terror of Fire and Sword moving men's minds and crying
liberty, to have attempted to incense the people. There was in truth great fear
within the City, that had not for a long time been accustomed to feel an Enemy
so near; but the news of the success quickly quieted their hearts, and the
Grand Duke, to show confidence, put Arms into the peoples hands, which the
Medici, during their Government, had not till now hazarded to do. The Prince
Matthias hasted with four thousand men to the greater need; but leaving the
Senese exposed, the Barberins attacqued it also from that side.

The Grand Duke demanded succors of the Confederates, and the Venetians,
though with much apprehension they remained fixed in the preservation of the
Polesene, sent to the other side of the Po two thousand five hundred Foot more
and three hundred Horse with Veniero and Valette, to join with the others of
their men to divert the Enemy. Duke Edward showed a desire to go to the
assistance of the Grand Duke, and without believing to obtain it, demanded four
thousand Foot and a thousand Horse of the Venetians, who not much satisfied
with his lying idle, thought it better to employ their own Officers, exhorting
him to trouble the Enemy in that interim in the Ferrarese. But he not stirring,
the Duke of Modena joins to five thousand men of the Venetians a thousand two
hundred Foot of his own and eight hundred Horse, sending them by the way of the
Mountains into the Rear of Valanze. The Marquess Colombino, Modenese, pillaged
Rocca Cornetta; the Count Raimondo Montecuculi forced Vergato, defended by two
hundred Foot and six hundred Peasants. Valette having defeated a Company of
Horse, plundered to the Gates of Castle Franco, and as far as Bologna. Bazano
was retaken with the death of one hundred and fifty Foot and sixty Dragoons
that kept it, but the Count of Montecuculi was there hurt. Montevia,
Serravalle, and other walled Castles, where the people had put their Goods for
safety, were in like manner taken. The Commander Panzetta with part of the
Garrison of Modena surprised Crevalcuore, a great place, cutting to pieces the
Garrison of about three hundred; but the Soldiers, for plunder having
neglected the Guards, Codre Monpensier enters into it, taking Panzetta himself
Prisoner, and killing fifty men with a Captain of Horse, whilst the rest saved
themselves by flight.

By the motion of the Confederates with such success, Codre was diverted from
the thought of attempting the City del Sole, and Valanze perceiving the design
to cut off his way, with the loss of some men in the Mountain retired into the
Bolognese. The Great Duke now had the liberty to employ all his Forces on the
other side, where Cardinal Barberino, come into Aqua-pendente, had sent Tobia
Pallevicino toward Burgo St. Sepulcro with five thousand men. The Governor of
the place sallying forth with two Companies of Horse, cut to pieces a Party of
three hundred with their Commander, whereupon the gross withdrew; but not long
after Cesare delli Oddi, Commissary General of the Horse, besieges Pitigliano,
Cardinal Rapaccioli assisting in the Army. The attacque was for sixteen days
withstood by the Colonel Grisoni, who with eight hundred men commanded within
it. At last the Prince Matthias marching that way, Strozzi, Sergeant Major
General de Battaille, preventing them, puts himself into the field with two
thousand Foot and six hundred Horse assembled in haste, and from Sorano
advancing to Casone, attacques a great Party of the Pontificians which were
plundering in that Quarter. He had the good fortune to beat and dissipate it
with so great a fright to the rest, that a Pannick fear entering into the Camp,
the Siege was raised with great confusion and a direct running away. Strozzi
pursuing this terrified Army dispersed a good part of it. Cardinal Rapaccioli
was not slow in saving himself. Barberino, who was upon his way from Rome to go
animate the Army with his presence, failed but little of being taken Prisoner.
Eight pieces of Ordnance, four Petards, with many Colors, and all the Military
provisions remained in prey to the Conquerours. The Commander of the Castle
Ottieri in Tuscany seized upon Montorio, and the Pontificians, who had newly
gained Monterchio, abandoned it, totally dis-incumbring the Dominions of the
Grand Duke. The season proper for the action of Armies ending with this
success, of equal honor and advantage, the Troops were distributed into
Quarters, and those of the Confederates being about la Fratta, Tobia
Pallavicine, going inconsiderately out of the place, was taken Prisoner.

On the other side the Count dal Maestro Sergeant Major General de Battallie,
fell into the hands of the Pontificians, who in that Quarter recovered Val di
Nestore during the Winter. In Polesine the Autumnal Rains falling in
extraordinary abundance, had very seasonably hindered action there, the Country
being low and dirty. The Enemy remained only incommodated by the Venetians by
way of the Sea, and by Delfino were defeated at la Garda one hundred and fifty
Foot and as many Horse, and by Anthonio Grimani alla Zocca four Companies of
Dragoons, burning the Country round about. Veniero lodged with the Venetian
Troops in the Modenese at Spilemberto, and the Pontificians with three Cannons
came in great numbers to attacque him. Valetta, not trusting himself in the
quarter but weakly fortified, goes forth with the Cavalry to meet them, and,
being seconded by five hundred Foot, obliged them to retire. After that by the
direction of a Company of Croats, come from the service of the Barberins to
that of the Republic, he attacqued by night the quarter of Castle Franco,
where defeating two Companies, some Horses were brought away. The roughness of
the Winter hindered at last every where even the smallest occasions, giving way,
that with more quiet of mind applications might be made for a Treaty, which
amidst the management of Arms had not been intermitted: For Alexandro, Cardinal
Bichi, sent by the Crown of France to mediate, being arrived in Italy,
persuades the Pope and the Princes Confederate to nominate Plenipotentiaries,
to meet and treat of Peace; and thereto were appointed by Urban the Cardinal
Donghi; by the Venetians, Giovanni Nani Cavalier and Procurator; by the Grand
Duke, il Gondi, and by the Duke of Modena, il Testi.

A difficulty presently rose about the place; for Donghi demanding, that, to
show some respect to the Pope, the meeting might be held in his Dominion, the
Confederates dissented from it, to the end not to let it appear, that other
interest was there to be managed besides the private of the Barberine Family,
with whom (saving the obedience to the holy See) they professed to have the
contest. It was then proposed to call it in a neutral place, and particularly
in the Mantuano; and when the Emperor named the Prince de Bozzolo, and the
Spaniards the Cardinal Albornos, to meet there; Bichi, who desired that the
merit might be ascribed only to France and to himself, let fall the
proposition: But going into the Modenese, proposes in writing to the Dukes of
Parma and Modena, and to the Proveditor Corraro: That the absolution and the
pardon for Edward should be asked by others; that his Country should be
restored, the rights of the Montists remaining as before. He, over and above,
offers his endeavors with the mediation of the Crown, the better to discover
the truth of their intentions, whether the Confederates pretended ought else.
To the Grand Duke, besides these propositions, he glances at a suspension of
Arms. He then proposes to go to Rome, to show respect to the Pope, and assure
himself of the intentions of the Nephews, not having found at Bologna in Donghi
that extent of powers which was judged necessary. In effect Urban discovered to
be not only inclined but desirous of Peace; for, burdened with his age, and
weary of the cares War carries with it, though his Kinsman concealed from him
the things that were most grievous, and disguised the informations of matter of
fact, yet the clamours of the people for so many devastations came to his ears,
and he began to be sensible of losing his own, out of a desire to retain that
which was another. He therefore consents to a Treaty, with the restitution of
Castro, and prays the Cardinal to hasten the conclusion of it, that he might
enjoy peace in that little residue of life which he had yet to live. In
Barberino Bichi found wonted obstinacy; for it being at that time, when with
the passage of the Po he thought to have put the Ferrarese out of danger, and
that he intended an invasion into Tuscany, he sought all evasions; so that, to
frustrate the propositions of Bichi, he causes to be insinuated to the Emperor
the depositing of Castro in his hand, and the Austrians were greatly pleased
with it, that so their name and the Imperial authority might be interposed in
the Treaty, and to exclude the French from the Negotiation and the deposition
it self.

But the Princes of the League, always more jealous from the alteration of
propositions, kept their intentions secret, resolving not as yet to express,
whether with the alone preservation of the interests of Parma they would remain
contented. The designs of Barberino against Tuscany vanishing at last with
dishonor and loss, the Cardinal Antonio comes also to Rome, to require many
things that were wanting, which could not be supplied but with great charge. He
also gives account of the state of the Army, and of the necessity of
reinforcement; he declares the burden which the State bore for quarters; the
groans of the subjects for the desolation of the Country, and the difficulty
either to recover what was lost, or in making Conquests upon the Confederates.
The congregation therefore of State, expressly set on foot for the discussions
of such Affairs, siding with the Pope, concluded that Castro was to be restored
to the Duke Edward. Cardinal Barberino could now no longer withstand the common
inclination, though he saw, that, with the restitution of Castro, a
dishonorable Peace was to be the consequence of an unhappy War. Nevertheless,
the Pope retracting the offer of the deposition made to the Imperialists, as if
it had rather been a casual discourse than an express proposition, a Writing
was delivered to Bichi with a promise of the said restitution. If with this
alone the Confederates would be satisfied, was as yet very doubtful; for those
of Modena in the Assemblies at Venice pressed, that, if not their rights upon
Ferrara, at least those of Comaccio might be protected by the League in favor
of the Duke. The Venetians judged it best not to insist upon ought else but the
interests of Parma; but not to express themselves in it, till the intentions of
Barberin in that point should be more fully declared, to the end that secured
from further troubles, the Treaty might have no new disturbance. But the Grand
Duke, who felt the burden of the War to be heavy, declares to Cardinal Bichi,
who in his way from Rome to Venice passed by Florence; that saving his own
rights and ancient interests, the Confederates would be satisfied with the
redintegration of the Duke of Parma. Upon the arrival of the Cardinal at
Venice, thither came the Dukes of Modena and Parma, and Gondi and Testi were
already there, debating with Nani and Gussoni, whom the Senate had again
deputed for that purpose, not only the propositions of Peace, but proceeded by
anticipation upon the concert of Arms, in case the Treaty should come to
nothing; so that to remedy those inconveniences, which the division of Forces
had been the cause of in the last Campagnia, it was designed to make up
together a body of thirty thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse, and joining
into one body sixteen thousand of the one, and four thousand of the other,
every one with the rest keeping his own Frontiers, it was resolved to make an
attempt upon Romagna, a Country abounding with Victuals, that had not many
strong places, and whereinto the Army being once entered might receive
Provisions and Recruits by Sea.

For this purpose the Venetians having resolved to increase their Fleet with
sixteen Galleys, offered to employ it to second the undertakings by Land, and
proffered money to the Duke of Modena, to provide himself with Soldiers to
execute the concerts on his side also. The greatest and most effectual
difficulty herein consisted in the raising of men; for, although the Republic
had given out orders for many Leavies, not only in their own dominion in Italy
and in that beyond the Sea, but in Germany and in France, entertaining amongst
others in their service Giles d' Has, a Commander of much repute, on condition
to levy three thousand Germans; yet the diligence of the Pontificians, to
hinder the effecting of it, prevailed in many places; so that some of the
Cantons of the Swizzers, stirred up by the Nuntio, openly hindered the passages,
and the Grisons denied them to make their market of them.

The Ambassador of France secretly also crossed them, doubtful, lest the
remainder of the Weimarians, running to the new Levy, should totally disband.
On the other side, expressly to ruin that Army, the Arch-Dutchess Claudia of
Insbruch, at the entreaty of Luigi Contarini Cavalier, in his way to the
meeting at Munster, opened the ways of Tirol, and Girolamo Cavazza, Secretary,
at last agrees for those of the Grisons, with the recognition of a certain sum
of money; the Bishop of Coire cooperating therein, though severely threatened
by the Barberins. The Pope, burdening his Subjects with many Imposts, the
Genouese furnishing ready money upon them, and by taking a great sum out of the
Castle of S. Angelo, of that, which had been laid up by his Predecessors for
War against the Infidels and other the most urgent occasions, was sufficiently
provided of money: So that Soldiers flocked to him, invited by the greatness
of pay, and a good many also came out of the Province of Avignon, and out of
France, the Cardinal Mazarine secretly consenting to it, who, seeing Urban in a
declination, and France without a party in the Court of Rome, desired to
support himself by that of the Barberins, and arm them with a Nation depending
on himself, to be able in some measure to promote in the Election of the next
Pope his own interests, and that of the Crown.

ANNO MDCXLIV.
Such Contests, which without profit equally endammaged the Princes, and ruined
the People, made way at last to the good of the Peace; which if it seemed more
necessary than honorable to the Barberins, was of no less profit and glory to
the Confederates. Bichi, arriving at the very end of the year past at Venice,
immediately proposes, that the absolution and pardon should be demanded by
France for Duke Edward, and that Castro should be restored to him; restoring
only to the Church what was possessed by the Confederates, and the rights of
the Montists remaining as before; and because he observed the greatest
difficulty to lie in the distrust, which the Confederates had of the intentions
of the Barberins in executing that which should be agreed, he offers the word
of France, with a declaration and promise, that their Arms should be employed
against him that should fail in the execution of the Agreement.

Though the Grand Duke had declared himself to be contented with Castro;
nevertheless, in the meetings at Venice, Gondi insisted, that the Pontificians
might by the Treaty be prohibited to repair the ruined Wall, which holding up
the waters in the Chiani overflowed the Country of Siena. But by the Venetians
was given him to understand, that promoting the interests of one of the
Confederates, there would be a necessity to open a gate in the Treaty for the
others also, to the rendering it more tedious and difficult. The Grand Duke
thereupon desisted, and the Venetians razing those Forts possessed by them near
Loreo, provided in some measure on that side against the disturbance which
resulted from thence on the borders.

The Austrian Ministers bore with great impatience to be excluded from this
Treaty, and the Emperors Ambassador shows in Venice a Plenipotence to assist
at the meetings; but the Confederates easily excused it: For, the conditions of
Peace being by the Barberins put into the hand of the French Mediator, they
could not but lend their ear to him, that brought more ample and the securest
propositions. The Treaty therefore went on, although some millitary accidents
interposed; for the Venetians had contrived the surprise of the Fort of
Lagoscuro on the other side of the Po; but by uncessant rains for three whole
days the ways being overflowed, the design was hindered, and Cardinal Antonio
having got the Wind of it, strengtheus the Garrison, and for fear of
intelligence changes the Commander. Marino Badoaro also from Figarolo attempts
that of that other Fort on this side; but some few Soldiers, coming like
laborers to possess it, being discovered, the others that followed were
constrained to retire. Giacomo Riva had success in beating up the quarters of
the Pontificians at Zecca, and the armed Barques of the Venetians, after some
contest, carried away from Premiero some Vessels laden with Corn.

To make themselves amends for these insults, the Pontificians assaulted a
quarter of the Venetians at Schienta; but being repulsed and pursued by
Giovanni Paulo Gradenigo, Paymaster in the field, and by la Valetta, the
encounter grew hot near to Lagoscuro on the other side of the River, and ended
in the flight and loss of the aggressors; so that the Cardinal Antonio, who
sallying out of Ferrara attempted to countenance the faction, was hardly able
to save himself with the swiftness of his Horse, leaving more than a hundred of
his men dead upon the place, and about an hundred and fifty Prisoners, amongst
which were the Vice Legate of Ferrara, Carassa, Antonio Doria Governor of that
Fort, and other Officers and French Captains The death, if it had happened, of
Urban, fallen now extremely sick, might have caused a great alteration in the
Treaty; whereupon Cardinal Bichi hastens the conclusion, and fearing not to
compass it time enough, proposes a suspension of Arms, lest perchance there
might happen a vacant See. The Confederates, although such an accident, which
could not pass without great revolutions in the Dominions of the Church, and in
the Court of Rome, would open to them a way to many advantages, were not
against it, by reason of that respect which they professed toward the holy
See, and because, with the death of the Pope, the authority also of the Nephews
expiring, those motives would fall to the ground, which had been the cause of
taking Arms.

Nay the Grand Duke upon the first notice of Vrbans sickness, which was thought
deadly, dispatches Letters to the Cardinal Montalto, in the which justifying
his intentions to the future Conclave, offers himself to interpose with the
other Princes for the consenting to a Truce.

The Senate also wrote to Cardinal Bragadino, requiring him by provision, if
there should be a vacancy in the Sea, to assure the Conclave of their upright
intentions for Peace; but it was in truth believed, that the Grand Duke had
been transported too far, by separating his endeavors, and offering that, of
which the League had not as yet been desired by the Court of Rome. Wherefore he
excusing the speed of his dispatch with the doubt, that the Popes life would
not have lasted so many days, as were requisite to understand the judgments of
others, recalls his orders to Montalto, and leaves the instances of Cardinal
Bichi to be consulted of in the wonted Assemblies in Venice.

Edward remonstrates the fit conjuncture to revenge themselves of the
Barberins, to attempt Conquests, and by the means of them to secure Peace. The
Duke of Modena shows also the opportunity which was opened for advantages, but
fell back notwithstanding, as at last Edward also did, to more wholesome
counsels; so that it was concluded, That the Truce should be accepted during
the vacancy of the Sea, and some certain days after the election of a new Pope;
provided nevertheless it should be desired in the name of the Conclave, and
that in that interim a Letter should be written to the Cardinals in the name of
all the League, to justify the necessity of their past resolutions, to inform
them of their intentions tending to Peace, and to offer all their Forces for
the security and liberty of the said Conclave.

But as they were ready to send their answer to Bichi, the notice of the Popes
recovering induces them, omitting further Treaty of a Truce, to hasten the
conclusion of a Peace. The Articles proposed by the Cardinal had in several
Assemblies been ventilated, where rejecting some, and correcting others, they
were at last concluded by the common consent of the Confederates; and the
Cardinal having a mind to carry them with all speed to Rome, was received in
all places of the Ecclesiastic State with the acclamations and prayers of the
people longing for Peace. Nor in approving of the project was there any
difficulty made by the Pope or his Nephews, by whom were only altered some few
words, but of no importance. Passing then with the same diligence through
Florence, he returns to Venice with the Treaty signed by Donghi, and with his
Powers, in which the Confederates having desired some amendment in the
expressions, no difficulty was made. The Duke of Parma refused to admit the
Treaty in other form than that agreed at Venice; but he was by the League given
to know, that there being an agreement in substance, and the few words changed
at Rome not altering it at all, the end being accomplished for which the
Princes had united, when the Powers of Donghi should be received in the form
desired, their intention was to proceed to the conclusion, though without his
consent. With this protest, and a Voyage, Cardinal Bichi made to Parma to
render him that respect, which was the thing he aimed at, he also was persuaded
to approve it. So that it was subscribed in Venice for France by the Cardinal
Bichi; for the Republic by Giovanni Nani Cavalier and Procurator; by the
Cavalier Giovanni Battista Gondi for the Grand Duke; and for Modena by the
Marquess Hippolito Estense Tassoni, in whom the Plenipotence appeared to be.

The Capitulations were divided; the one agreed by France with the Pope, in
that which concerned the Duke of Parma, who, for the observance of what was
promised, had given a Writing to the said King; the other concluded immediately
betwixt the Pope and the Confederates. In the first, some wonted expressions
being premised concerning the Popes zeal to Peace, The King besought him for
absolution and pardon for Edward. That so the Excommunication being taken off
from his Dominion, he might be restored into the favor of Urban, desired by
the Duke himself with the humility which was expedient. Then sixty days after
the Ratifications Edward was to retire out of the Stellata and Bondeno, the
Fortifications being demolished; and Castro was to be rendered by the Pope with
every thing confiscated and possessed, the Fortifications also to be razed, and
the Ammunition and Arms, any where introduced, to be reciprocally withdrawn. To
the Montists remained their Rights as before the War. Prisoners were restored,
and those pardoned which had served on either side, the Duke obliging himself
to disarm, Garrisons necessary for his Country being excepted.

All this, as has been said, passed betwixt the Pope and the King, who by
consent of the Pope himself promised to employ his Arms against him that on his
side should fail in performing the things promised. The other Capitulation,
correlative to the abovesaid, and subscribed the same day, declared, The
Confederates to have taken Arms for no other cause but for the redintegration
of Duke Edward, firm as to other things in their most constant obedience
toward the Pope and the Holy See; it was agreed after the subscribing to
suspend Hostility, and the United Princes promised, the Ratifications being
dispatched, to retire their Forces within their own Confines, leaving only
necessary Garrisons in the places possessed, and them also after sixty days to
quit, the Fortifications being demolished, the Ammunition and Arms belonging to
them being withdrawn. It was reciprocally agreed to demolish within each others
Country the Fortifications toward the others Confines, which had been raised
by the occasion of this War, giving each to other the List of those he
pretended should be razed, and having the liberty to send Ministers to see it
executed. Betwixt the State Ecclesiastic and Tuscany not any novelty of moment
having happened, all was left in the condition things were at present, the
Controversy of the Chiani being referred to the ancient Capitulations betwixt
the Pope and the Grand Duke. To the persons and places which had served or had
rendered themselves to the other Party pardon was granted, the Duke of Cornia
being expressly named; and Prisoners were set at liberty; the Religious persons,
who had withdrawn themselves, having permission to return, and the
Sequestration of the Rents of the Knights of Malta being taken off. All Rights
were clearly reserved to the parties as before the War; all pretension to
satisfaction for damages received was excluded, and disarming was promised,
except that of the Venetians; who, accustomed before this War to keep a body of
men, promised to dispose of them into such places as should give the
Ecclesiastic State no jealousy. For the execution of all this, Hostages were
given to the King of France, and the King to the satisfaction of the Pope and
of the Confederates declared, that his Arms should be in favor of him that
executed the accord, and against those that observed it not.

The Powers of Donghi being come, adjusted to the satisfaction of the
Confederates, the Peace upon the first day of May was published with a public
Mass in the Church of St. Mark at Venice. The Hostages, delivered at Casal,
were for the Pope the Count Frederick Mirogli, for the Venetians, Ridolfo
Sbrogliavacca, both Sergeant Majors de Battaille, the Commendator Grifoni for
the Grand Duke, and for Modena the Marquess Tassoni.

The Duke of Parma coming to Venice renders thanks for protection to the
Senate, from which he declared to acknowledge the restoration of his Country.
The entire execution of the Treaty was by common consent prolonged for thirty
days, because the work of demolitions required a greater time and labor than
had been supposed, and the Venetians lent Pioneers for that of Bondeno and that
of the Stellata, Duke Edward taking little care for them, as places far distant
from his Countries. And yet there happened a difficulty; for it being pretended
by the Venetians, that some Works about Comacchio should be slighted, the
Pontificians refused to do it, as of a place not so near the Frontiers, not
without suspicion that they from thence sought to put a stop to the Peace.

But the Republic, to take away all pretext, consents, that they should
proceed in the rest, leaving this point undecided, being ready to refer it to
the interpretation of the King of France as Mediator of the Peace. Thus Castro
was rendered, and the accord on all sides executed, to the great commendation of
the Cardinal Bichi, who in the Mediation confirmed the opinion of his no less
dexterity than wisdom. The Senate caused most ample thanks to be rendered to the
Crown of France for its interposition by their Ambassador in Ordinary,
Battista Nani, Author of the present History, Son and Nephew of Giovanni and
Battista, both Brothers, by reason of many Employments frequently mentioned.

The Grand Duke sent thither a Gentleman of his express; and the World from
this particular adjustment of Italy conceived good Presages of the general one
of the Crowns; to the end that Wars after so many years continuance ceasing,
the felicity of Peace might at last reign every where with a blessing.

FINIS.
Errata, perverting the sense.
Page 5. l. 12. r. if at all times, l. 13. r. gotten great commendations, p. 8.
l. 42. r. who still. p. 9. l. 18. r. that for the succession. p. 10. l. 10. r.
with great plainness. l. 41. r. and that the Princes. p. 11. l. 10. r. of. l.
11. encompass them. p. 12. l. 20. r. saw Italy in ashes. l. 28. in resenting
injuries. l. 33. Town shut for. p. 13. l. 13. robbing by night. l. 18. by the
major part. p. 18. l. 12. of Land and Sea. p. 19. l. 33. sacking the Territory.
p. 20. l. 29. with twelve Ships. p. 21. l. 10. blood swilled. l. 14. and tears.
l. 23. here the Carcasses. p. 23. l. 7. with Treaties. p. 25. l. 3. and to
their friendly. p. 27. l. 6. assisting. p. 28. l. ult. covers himself. p. 29.
l. 22. the security of. p. 38. l. 44. than they are. p. 36. l. 24. one of their
Barks. l. 25. dele this. l. 26. Albania, they still. p. 41. l. 40. but that is
an imperfect. p. 42. l. 13. scourges and tortures. l. 34. it. The Indies. p.
43. l. 21. enjoys his quarters. p. 44. l. 23. perform it. For the. l. 29. was
sent a Regiment. p. 45. l. 7. had with liberty. l. 14. pension of 4000 p. 17.
l. 34. pleasantly rises. p. 48. l. 7. the Town of Castilione. l. 28. beyond
him. p. 49. l. 12. with five Batteries. p. 55. l. 11. little more open. p. 56.
l. 28. so many Posts. p. 57. l. 24. yet near by. l. 32. to have Ice and. p. 63.
l. 12. to regain their. l. 37. now the Republic p. 64. l. 36. del. Don. p. 65.
l. 35. in induced. l. 46. the Governor. p. 67. l. 42. your States, your
Treasures. l. 46. your interests. p. 69. l. 34. Remora to the. l. 39. shall be
overcome with. p. 70 l. 21. directed them. p. 73. l. 29. The Assailants joined.
p. 77. l. 23. with ten Companies. p. 81. l. 6. which would make. l. 7. to him.
l. 30. restrain incursions. p. 82. l. 24. this Post. l. 34. governed the
Lionese. p. 84. l. 1. Court of France. l. 45. the more streigthning Vercelli.
p. 85. l. 6. the Duke justly excused. p. 87. l. 6. desires and intentions. p.
89. l. 20. 21. This error sprung from the enemy themselves, because. p. 91. l.
2. and not relieved by such. l. 34. Coast even to Trieste. p. 92. l. 4. toward
Fiume. p. 93. l. 4. 5. but afterward in the attempt to enter it Bosco. l. 23.
in these Factions. p. 95. l. 2. thirteen Frigates. l. 17. Slaves and Presents.
p. 96. l. 9. they knew laid way for them. p. 102. l. 22. contented by this one
occasion. l. 40. when there should. p. 103. l. 33. Battery upon the Bastion of
Saint. p. 107. l. 17. all three Captains. l. 31. a Bridge at Mainizza. p. 109.
l. 45. which wholly employ. ibid. exempting those. l. 46. of some slight. p.
111. l. 13. being only called. p. 115. l. 26. presages of. p. 116. l. 39. the
Emperor and Ferdinand. p. 117. l. 40. him, deposed. p. 128. l. 23. sworn to?
God forbid. l. 33. representation. p. 129. l. 8. than force. l. 21. waves. p.
130. l. 15. the Bishop. l. 25. of convenience. p. 133. l. 40. the weal of. p.
135. l. 19. conquer the City. p. 138. l. 44. through the Milanese. p. 140. l.
15. Donato, then Ambassador. Opinion. p. 142. l. 23. 24. to the money of all
without a League. p. 143. l. 8. 9. the praise of liberality in imparting of
their own, Princes. p. 144. l. 33. dangers, insomuch that. p. 147. l. 23. the
elect. p. 148. l. 7. being in disorder, the Duke. p. 153. l. 33. they would
adhere. p. 155. l. 40. He then turns. p. 156. l. 18. amazement; of the. p. 158.
l. 21. and the Princes to their interest. p. 162. l. 38. beginning by it, and
ibid. their friendship to it ready. p. 163. l. 1. it might be delivered. l. 10.
in the time of the minority. p. 164. l. 46. Fer a sollicites. p. 168. l. 3.
closely conjoined with. l. 16. and continence. l. 23. who making. l. 24. by the
sound of interest. p. 172. l. 8. adding considerations and disaffections. p.
175. l. 1. to be of so. p. 180. l. 40. their parts. p. 201. l. 30. calls to
him. l. 33. in the Wars. p. 253. l. 29. to break up. p. 256. l. 16. offered
him, for. p. 257. l. 5. was evermore overcome. p. 259. l. 8. least whilst. p.
260. l. 46. Widow of Frederick. p. 261. l. 13. would have been. p. 266. l. 21.
of the Public. p. 272. l. 15. no less perplexed. p. 278. l. 4. we anticipate
destruction. l. 34. honor panting. p. 287. l. 5. thirty four. l. 16. together
with her. p. 289. l. 29. like dying men. p. 290. l. 13. venerated by the
French. l. 43. to expect the issue. p. 291. l. 16. a Prince born. p. 292. l.
15. readiness, it had. p. 293. l. 1. to cause a restit. to be made. l. 9.
Fridland was. p. 296. l. 15. like Heaven, in which all the. l. 34. which is
the. p. 298. l. 9. gone again to Mantua. p. 300. l. 10. for six years. p. 303.
l. 24. at least, that. p. 304. l. 7. consider and make use of them. l. 25. the
more jealousy. ib. He showed moreover. l. 45. impatient. p. 305. l. 21. but
for a reserve. p. 330. l. 33. which is a Nursery. p. 339. l. 1 yield; ye glory,
p. 344. l. 41. with Gallas, p. 406 l. 9. metamorphose, p. 411. l. 43. and
Naumburg.

THE TABLE.
A.
ADam of Trautmestorf, General for the Archduke in Friuli 57. passes the
Lizonso, and is attacqued by the Venetians in his Quarter 73. retires 75. makes
an Inroad into Istria 78. fortifies Rubia 92. is killed. ibid. Augustino Nani,
Ambassador to the Emperor. 20. 139 Alba taken by the Savoyards. 11. 99 Albert
of Wallestain faithful to Ferdinand 134. defeats Mansfelt 254. made Duke of
Fridtland, takes Mechelburg 259. invades the Kingdom of Denmark 259. with great
success 293. invested into the Dukedom of Mechelburg, straightens Strassond
293. disswades the Emperor from disarming 347. lays down the Generalat 348.
takes it up again 367. stops the King of Swede near Nuremberg 374. his designs
375. beaten at Lutzen 376. suspected by his actings 379. neglects the most
important dangers of the Empire 388. required again to lay down the Generalat,
be endeavors to gain the Soldiery 389. in Counsel at Vienna resolved to ruin
him 390. ibid. abandoned, retires to Egra ibid. is killed 391. the Authors
judgment of him. 391 Albert the Archduke dies. 169 Alexander Cardinal Bichi
sent by the Crown of France for the Peace of Italy 576. which is treated and
concluded at Venice. 571. Alexander Lodovisio, Popes Nuntio for the Peace of
Piedmont 66. created Pope. 164. Look Gregory. Alphonso de la Queva, Ambassador
of Spain, assures the Republic of his Kings intention for Peace 14. provokes
the Senate by his instances concerning the interests of the Archduke 64. hated
in Venice by the people 97. proposes a suspension of Arms 112. his artifice
221. parts without taking leave. 123. Ali Grand Vizier, troublesome to the
Republic 150. dies. 150 Almori Nani Bailo in Constantinople pacifies the
complaints of the Turks for the loss of the Merchant Galleys. 98 Ambrosio
Spinola with the Spanish Army relieves the Emperor, and disbands the Princes
of the Union 152. 177. enters into the Palatinat 178. takes Juliers 179.
besieges Berghen Opzoom 192. retires 193. besieges Breda 217. takes it 222. is
appointed for the Government of Milan 311. his designs against Casal 315.
besieges it 325. ill used by the Spaniards, dies. 341 Amurath the Fourth
succeeds into the Turkish Empire 195. how qualified 445. resolves the siege of
Babylon 446. summons the Barbary Pirates to help defend the Sea 446. his
cruelty 450. provoked against the Republic for taking the Barbery Galleys out
of the Port of Vallona 451. besieges Babylon 453. takes it 454. answers
disdainfully to the Republics Letters 455. his several designs against
Christendom ibid. his providing against the Republic ibid. demands insolent
conditions of Peace from the Persians 456. retires from Babylon by reason of
the plague ibid. returns toward Constantinople 466. falls sick 469. inclines
to Peace with the Republic 467. and with the Persians 468. designing War
toward Walachiza 469. dies. ibid. Andrea Freletich, Head of the Uscocchi,
disturbs the execution of the Peace, protected by Ossuna 116. infests the Gulf
146. is killed. 180 Andrea Paruta fortifies in Lombardy the Confines of the
Republic. 148 Andrea Rosso, Resident at Mantua. 477. Angelo Contarini,
Ambassador to the King of England 255. to the Pope 320. 477. to the Emperor.
432 Angelo Corraro, Ambassador in France 440 Proveditor in the Modonese was
sent into Tuscany 526. his opinions and actions in the Army of Tuscany 558.
Proveditor in Campagnia. 561 Anna the Empress dies. 130 Anna Maria, Queen of
France, passes into that Kingdom to her Marriage 58. is Partaker of the designs
against Richelieu 249. obtains of the King to remain at Paris with her Sons
532. her Regency limited by her Husband 551. she gets it at large from the
Parliament 555. is about introducing new Ministers. ib. Antonio Antelmi,
Resident with the Switzers, swears to the League 131. sent to Mirandola to
adjust those Princesses. 416 Antonio Barbaro, General in Istria, falls sick 78.
returns to that Command 89. Proveditor General for the Sea 150. General of the
Terra firma. 217 Antonio Barberino, Cardinal Legate for the Peace of Italy 300.
returns to Rome successless 325. accepts the protection of France 382 commands
the Army against the Prince of Parma 523, 525. provokes the Venetians with
jealousy 542. opposes the Duke of Parma and Confederates 544. invades the
Modonese 547, 558, 559. by the surprise of Lago Scuro, defeats the designs of
the Confederates 560 counsels Peace. ibid. Antonio Baron de Rabbata,
Ambassador from the Emperor to Venice. 425 Antonio Capello, called Terzo,
Captain of the Galliasses, defends the French Ships in the Part of Alesandrette
296. Proveditor of the Fleet pursues the Pirates of Barbery 447. besieges them
in the Port of Vallona ibid. carries away their Galleys 448. chosen a
Counselor. 449 Antonio Donato punished for Peculat. 140 Antonio Foscarini put
to death, and afterward found innocent. 180 Antonio Giorgio betrayed and
killed by the Uscocchi. 52 Antonio Lando, General in Friuli, besieges Gradisca
88, 89. thinks of going up to Carso 89 does it 91. is attacqued in his Quarter
107 being sick, retires from the Camp. 107 Antonio Pisani brings the Galleys of
Candia safe to the Fleet 146. made Proveditor of the Sea, chases some Pirates,
chastises others 215 convoys the Queen of Hungary from Ancona to Trieste 338.
Captain of the Galliasses. 452 Antonio Priuli, General at Land 16.
Generalissimo 72. deputed for the execution of the Peace with King Ferdinand
115. dies. 202 Antonio Trivisano killed in a Tumult of the Soldiers. 73
Armando de Richelieu named by the King for a Cardinals Cap 151. enters into
favor and the chief Ministry 205. his Jars with the Duke of Buckingham 221.
blamed for the Peace of Monzon 253. his excuses 253 his parts and arts 249,
250. discovers the designs against France 262. makes division amongst the
Huguenots 263. undertakes the Siege of Rochel 264. loses the favor of
Queen Mother and the Kings Brother 280. strengthens the Princes of Italy in the
interests of Mantua 281. exalted by the taking Rochel, persuades the King to go
into Italy 291. having concluded the Treaty of Susa, returns into France to
overcome the Huguenots 304. hated by the Queen Mother and the Kings Brother
310. is appointed to relieve Mantua 315. suffers himself not to be deluded by
the Savoyards 319 forces them to declare themselves 323. his disgusts with the
Dukes increase 323. attempts to take him Prisoner 324. gets Pignarol, ibid.
vexed with the faction at Court 326, 345. endeavors to repair the discredit by
the peace at Ratisbone 345. is pleased with the possession of Pignerol 356.
created Duke and Peer of France, and Patrician of Venice 262. the death of the
Mareshal of Maivilliac imputed to him 370. revenges himself of the Spaniards
373. pinhes the Lorrainers 381. speaks with Oxenstern 412. troubled at the
invasion of the Austrians, orders the defense of the Kingdom 422. endeavors to
make advantage of the misfortunes of the House of Savoy 463 counsels the King
to make War in Spain 472 hated universally in the Kingdom 494. whence arises a
great storm of the discontented Princes; he defends himself and weathers it 497
becomes troublesome to the King himself 534 persuades the King to the enterprise
of Perpignan, and aspires to the Regency 531. St. Mars with Orleans and the
Spaniards conspire against him 534. discovers the Kings kindness toward him
cooled 536. defeats the conspiracy 536. dies, his Elogium 538, 539 The Army of
France by Sea prey of money belonging to the Genouese 232. infests the Coast of
Spain 472. the English Fleet attempts in vain to take Cadiz, and the Fleet
there 255 Army Naval of Spain attempts in vain Susa 146. avoids an encounter
with Turks, ibid. give jealousy to the Venetians 170, 312. pretends to convoy
the espoused Queen of Hungary through the Adriatic 338. prepares for an
enterprise on France 395. surprises the Islands of Eres 411. is beaten by the
Hollanders 472 Army Naval of the Turks scoures the Sea, and pillages the Coast
of Puglia. 96, 146, 150 Army Naval of the Venetians opposes the invasions of
the Spaniards in the Adriatic 95. defends it self in the Port of Lessina,
ibid. reinforced with a new supply of armed Ships 96. go forth but slowly out
of the Port of Curzola against the Spaniards 97. with which he fights 113.
ranges the Sea, and takes many Vessels 118, 145. is reinforced with the
Galleys of Candia 245. thence chases the Pirates 446. takes their Galleys out
of the Port of Vallona. 448 Armies Naval of France and Spain meet to the loss
of Spain. 440 Arras besieged by the French, not being relieved renders. 480
Asti described 47. attacqued by the Spaniards, and defended by the Duke of
Savoy 48. is rendered to the Princes of Savoy. 462 Avo, Ambassador of France,
stirs up the Republic to assist the Duke of Mantua. 285 Austria superior
rebels 134. is punished by Bavaria 153. rises in commotion again, and is
subdued. 256 Axel Oxenstern governs the Swedes affairs in the Empire 378. has
a Conference with Richelieu 412. sends Count Gualdo to Venice. ibid.
B.
BAbylon besieged by the Turks 453. taken by assault. 454 Baltasar Maradas with
Spanish Soldiers comes to assist the Archduke in Friuli 72. attempts to
surprise the Venetian Quarters 89. reassures the people of Istria, ibid.
assumes the chief Command of the Army 92. succors Gradisca, and attempts the
Quarters of the Venetians. 107, 108 Barbery Pirates called by the Turks to help
keep the Sea 446. enter into the Adriatic, ibid. retire to Vallona, ibid.
their Galleys taken by the Venetians 448. the Turks incensed. 449 Battle of
Prague 154. at over Ersheim where Dourlach beaten 186. at Hochst Alverstat
defeated 187. at Burgsteinfort defeated again 203. at Leipzich the Imperialists
defeated 359. at Lutzen, the King of Swedes death 376. at Nordlingen, the
Swedes beaten, and consequences of advantage for the Empire 393. at Sedan, with
the death of Soissons and defeat of the Kings Army 496 at Leipzich, the
Imperial Army beaten 531 at Rocroy, the French victorious. 553 Battista Nani
maintains the Authority of the Council of Ten 295. Commissioner for the Borders
of Loreo 366. deputed to treat with the French Ministers 386, 414. deputed to
treat the League with the Princes of Italy. 519 Battista Nani, Ambassador,
gives the King of France thanks for his Mediation of Peace. 573 Bellievre,
Ambassador of France to the Princes of Italy 401. exhorts the Republic to
unite with his King. 402 Benedette da Leggi Proveditor in Istria outlawed by
the Count Petazzo. 54, 55 Benefices Ecclesiastical prohibited to the Sons of
the Dukes. 180 Bergen Opzoom besieged, described, and relieved. 192, 193
Bernard, Duke of Wiemar, after the King of Swedes death assumes the Command of
the Army 375, 378. takes Ratisbon 385. beaten at Nortlinghen 393. closes with
the French 413. defeats the Imperialists in Alsace, and takes many places there
433. and Brisach 442. dies. 471 Bethelem Gabor makes War in Hungary 137. makes
a Truce, ibid. breaks it 157. makes peace again 177. seeks assistance from the
Venetians, but obtains it not. 203 Bohemians rebel 125. what were the occasions
127. the effects, ibid. form a Government 129. offer the Crown to several
Princes 136 confer it on the Palatine, ibid. have recourse to the Turks, ibid.
other Princes interest themselves 138. are beaten at Prague. 156 Boisleduke
besieged by Orange 307. is taken. 308 Bormio important for the situation,
recovered by the Grisons and left. 160 Breda besieged and taken by Spinola 222.
recovered by Orange. 430 Brem, a Fort built by Savoy 409. taken by Leganes. 437
Borgia Cardinal protests against the Pope. 369
C.
CArdinal Pasman demands assistance of the Pope. 369 Charles, Duke of Lorrain,
leans to the Austrians, and receives Orleans in his Country 361. humbles
himself to the King of France 362. reunites with the Austrians 380. is
attacqued by the French 381. gives over his Country to his Brother, ib. is
forced to put Nancy into the Kings hands, ibid. makes new Treaties with the
King, and breaks them. 496 Carlo, Duke of Nevers, goes into Casal 13. his
designs against the Turks without effect 30 protected by the King of France
272. succeeds into the Duchy of Mantua 271. sends Ambassadors to the Emperor
without effect 274. defends himself against the Emperors Commissary, and has
recourse to the Venetians 284. raises Troops in France with his own money 286.
sends his Son to the Emperor, and to pacify him, attempts other means 288.
complains of the Treaty of Susa, but presses the execution of it 302. tempted
to a Composure by the Austrians 312. consents to a cessation of Arms without
effect 318. environed with domestic Treacheries 326. encouraged by the French
and Venetians 334 retires into Porto, renders himself, and goes to Melara, and
there supplied by the Republic 336. is restored to his Country 353. the Pope
denies him a Dispensation to marry with his Daughter-in-law 370. enters into a
League with France 402. dyos. 435 Carlo, Duke of Rhetel, comes to Mantua,
marries the Princess, secures the Succession 271 goes to Vienna, brings back
severe answers 288. dies. 354 Charles the Second, Duke of Mantua. 354 Charles
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, his designs to enlarge his State, the occasion offered
by the death of his Son-in-law the Duke of Mantua 6. holds a Council about the
enterprise on Monferrat, and resolves it 10. surprises several places 11. with
a general disturbance, and the dislike of the Venetians 12. justifies himself
to the Spaniards, ibid. confides in the Governor of Milan 15. displeased with
the Venetians, ibid. sends his eldest Son into Spain 16. attacques Nizza della
Paglia 23 but is hindered by the Spaniards 24. they press him to restore, and he
endeavors to avoid it 26. but yields to it with reserves 27 is constrained to
disarm 29. complains of the conditions imposed upon him by Spain, his courage
31. avoids seeing the French Ambassador, ibid. arms against Spain 33. sends an
Ambassador to Venice 34, 39. opposes the Spaniards with their opinion of it
38. not satisfied with the offers of France for the peace 40. exhorts the
Venetians to join in a League with him 41. seeks assistance elsewhere in vain
42, 46. signs a Treaty of Peace without effect 43. clears himself of the
Imperial Ban 45. justifies his intentions, and accuses those of Spain 46.
denies to consent to the conditions that Crown would impose upon him, ibid.
defends Bistagno and Asti 47. with great courage 48. demands the Republic
caution for the peace 49. signs it 50. offers himself to the Republic 57.
disarms with caution ib. seeks to know Toledo's intentions, discovers Treachery
and Arms 65. demands assistance from the Princes and Venetians, of whom he
obtains it 70. consents to a suspension of Arms 78. discovers the designs of
Nemours 79. breaks out into a War with Spain invading the Milanese 80. gives
battle 81. constant in his Union with the Venetians 83. strengthens himself 84.
makes progress into Monferrat 99. his magnanimity when betrayed 100. attempts
to relieve Vercelli 103. vexed at the loss of it, falls into the Milanese 104
offers himself to the Venetians 112. with whom he unites 119. renders what had
been taken to the Spaniards 120. adheres to France 124. assists the Bohemians
131. refuses that Crown 136. his ends on the emergencies of the Valteline 162.
does not make the Levies promised the Republic 172. undertakes the surprising
Geneva 172. stirs up France against the Spaniards 210. and against Genoua 211.
is angry not to be seconded by the Venetians 214. tempted by the Spaniards 215.
marches toward the Genouese 228. displeased with Desdiguieres 231, 232 forced
to retire 233. succors Verrua 235 is succored by the French 236. angry at
Richelieu for the peace of Monzon, flatters the English and malcontents of the
Kingdom 250. suspends Hostility against Genouse 252 applies himself to the
affairs of Mantua, and joins with the Spaniards 269. despises the offers of
France 270, 273. complains of the Marriage of his Niece with Rhetel 273.
possesses part of Monferrat 282. is stirred up against Genoua, ibid. denies
passage to the French 286. endeavors to sow jealousy betwixt France and the
Republic 292. refuses conditions offered by that Crown 299. is succored by
the Governor of Milan, ibid. endeavors to stop that Kings march 300. and make
peace with him on any conditions 301 avoids executing the Treaty of Susa 303.
leans to the Emperor 311. endeavors again to stop the French 319. disgusts
increase betwixt him and Richelieu 323. flies from Rivoli 324. discharges the
Ambassador of Venice ibid. flings himself into the arms of the Austrians 325.
and is succored by them 325 angry with Spinola 339. dies, and judgment upon
his life. 340 Carlo Emanuel the Second, Duke of Savoy, dies, judgment of his
death. 434 Charles Lodowick Palatine goes toward Alface, arrested Prisoner and
set at liberty. 471 Charles, Prince of Wales, goes into Spain to demand the
Infanta in Marriage 195. not granted by the Spaniards, marries a Sister of the
King of France 207. succeeds into the Crown of England to his Father,
endeavors the restitution of the Palatine, and to relieve Breda 220. is
disgusted with France 221, 255. is displeased with the Austrians 240 sends a
Fleet against Spain, ibid. his engaging with other Princes against France 251
endeavors the relief of Rochel in vain 289 jealous of the designs of France
upon Flanders 399, 100. distracted by the commotion in Scotland. 481 Carlo,
Prince of Spain, dies. 378 Carlo Quirini banished. 253 Casal besieged by the
Spaniards 282. its situation, ibid. well defended 287. the Siege raised 302.
garrisoned by the French, ibid. begirt anew by the Spaniards afar off 315
straightned by Spinola 325. defended by Thoiras 339. succored by the French,
together with an advantageous Treaty 344. dealing about garrisoning of it,
ibid. French enter into it 369. are reinforced by la Valette 463. besieged by
Leganes to the commotion of all Italy 475. succored, and the Siege raised by
Harcourt. 477 Castro fortified by the Prince of Parma, becomes the subject of a
War 505. situation of the places, easily taken by the Marquess Lewis Mathei
510. resolution at Rome to restore it. 569 Catalogna, its situation,
privileges 485. revolt 486. submits to France 487. attacqued by the Spaniards.
492 Christian, Administrator of Halberstat, takes Arms 177. assists the
Palatine 187. defeated by the Imperialists at Hochst and Burgsteifort 202.
dies. 254 Christian, King of Denmark, undertakes the restitution of the
Palatinat 226. takes Arms against the Empire 253. is beaten at Luther 254.
succored by other Princes, sends Ambassadors for assistance 258. pursued by
the Imperialists 259. refusing hard conditions of Peace, is invaded in his own
Kingdom 260. concludes a Peace with the Empire 305. grows jealous of the
Swedes. 481 Christina, Duchess of Savoy Regent 434 tempted by the Spaniards
437. constrained to join her self to France, ibid. the people ill satisfied
with her Regency 461. casts her self on France, who impose hard conditions 462.
the City of Turin surprised, ibid. speaks with the King at Grenoble 473. agrees
with the Princes. 514 Christina succeeds her Father in the Crown of Swede. 378
Christofero Suriano, Resident in Helvetia 45 hires Ships in Holland 117. treats
the League. 140 Christofero Veniero taken with his Gally, and killed by the
Uscocchi. 121 St. Mars brought into the Kings favor by Richelieu 532.
conspires against the Cardinal 534. is beheaded. 538 Concino Concini, Mareshal
d' Ancre, powerful in France, killed by the Kings order. 101 Confines of
Dalmatia disturbed by the Turks. 468. Conspiracy discovered in Venice and
Corema 121. in Genouse 283. in Mantua 312 in Casal. 438 Council of Ten, its
Authority. 294 Corby taken by the Spaniards 422. recovered by the French. 424
Correctors of the Authority of the Council of the Commonwealth. 295
Correspondence intermitted betwixt the Austrian Ambassadors and those of the
Republic 218. restored. 425
D.
DAmvilliers taken by the French. 430 Diets in Germany for the affairs of
Bohemia 138. at Mulhausen to moderate the power of the Emperor but without
effect 261. at Ratisbonne for the election of a King of the Romans 341. another
there where the Emperor was near being taken by the Swedes. 498 Desdeguieres
Mareshal of France, Confident of the Duke of Savoy comes into Italy 70. offers
Troops to the Republic 71. succors the Duke of Savoy 83. returns into Italy
98. called thither again 99. succors the Duke by the Kings order 103. returns
into Piedmont for the affairs of the Valteline 162. offers the Venetians an
Army 162. commands the French Army against Genua 229. retires with little
credit 233. Disgusts betwixt the families Carnaro and Zena in Venice. 296
Dourlach assists the Palatine 186. is beaten by Tilli ib. undertakes against
Alsace and is suppressed 257. defeated by Wallestain. 260 Duke of Buckingham
jarrs with Richeleu 221. is not admitted to come into France 251. lands at the
Isle of Re 263. retires 264. is killed. 281 Duke of Feria makes use of the
troubles of Rhetia 133. 134 hearkens to the offers of the Valteline, and makes
advantage by it 159. overthrows the Treaty of Madrid 169. succors the Genowese
slowly 232. complains of the Treaty of Chierasco 353. contrives new designs
against Mantua 354. troubled to see Pignerol in the hands of the French 355.
passes with an Army into Germany and dies there. 585 Duke of Lerma favorite of
Philip the third, no friend to the Duke of Savoy 10. 32. inclines to treat the
Peace betwixt the Republic and the Archduke 87. is made Cardinal and loses
the favor. 167 Duke of Memorancy adheres to Orleans 370 taken Prisoner and
beheaded. 371 Duke of Nemours conspires against the Duke of Savoy 79. the
French denying him passage, his men mutiny, he retires, and accords. ib. Duke
of Rohan head of the Hugenots raises Languedock 264. makes Peace with the King
305. passes to the service of the Republic 312. sent to the General 333.
leaves that service and commands for France in the Valtelline 357. takes it
400. invades the Milanese and then retires 419. driven away by the Grisons. 428
E.
EBrain succeeds to the Ottoman Empire. 469 Eleonora Empress passes through the
Territory of the Republic. 276 Ernest Count Mansfelt ingages in the troubles
of Bohemia and possesses Pilsau 131. beaten by Buquoy 135. entertains the
Austrians with feigned Treaties 154. enters into Alsace 173 marches into the
Palatinate 185. succors Haghenau 187. his march toward the Low Countries 189.
fights at Fleuri 191. joins Orange, succors Bergen Opzoom 192. receives money
to invade the French County 199. he notwithstanding chooses rather to make War
in Germany 202. is there beaten 303. assisted by England and France to recover
the Palatinate 207. beaten at Dessau repairs himself 254. enters into Silesia
256. passes into Hungary, where environed with Imperial Troops he saves himself
and dies. 257 Elogium changed by Pope Alexander the 3d. to the great resentmen
of the Repulick. 415
F.
Favorites in France their power. 247 Frederick Cornaro made Cardinal 252. is
made Patriarch of Venice 319. obtains the abolition of the Elogium of Alexander
the the 3d. 459 Frederick Palatine retards the Election of a King of the Romans
126. could not that of an Emperor 134. accepts the Crown of Bohemia 136.
assisted by none but his own Forces 139. dissatisfies the Bohemians 139. is
proscribed by the Emperor 152. flies from Bruma 153. his Forces defeated in
several Incounters 154. retires from Prague 156. disorders in his Government
157. retires into Holland 177. goes into Mansfelts Army 186. leaves it again
188. refuses the conditions offered him for a composure 289. 197. dies. 378
Frederick Henry Prince of Orange takes the command of the Army of the United
Provinces 222. takes Boisleduke 308. resentments betwixt him and Richelieu 399.
retakes Schinks Schans 423. Breda 430. attacques Gheldre without success. 441
Frederick Nani beats Ossunaes Ships 148 Ferdinand Cardinal and Duke of Mantua,
refuses that Mary his Niece should be carried out of the house from him 8.
takes counsel of the Venetians ib. asks assistance of them and obtains it 13.
sends to the Governor of Milan 13. to whom he denies to send his Niece 16.
sends an Ambassador to Venice 24. assisted by the Grand Duke 24. who proposes
a Marriage and a League 25. facilitates an agreement with Savoy 28. continues
to deny the Princess 29. makes a show to facilitate an accord 32. executes the
Peace of Asti 49, 50. resents new Invasions into Monferrat 229. dies. 268
Ferdinand, Cardinal Infant, passes out of Spain into Italy 382, 384.
arbitrates the differences betwixt Genoua and Savoy 384. passes into Germany,
ibid. joins the King of Hungary, wins the battle of Nortlingen, and passes into
Flanders 393. dies. 498 Ferdinand, Duke of Thuscany, interposes with the
Emperor in the affairs of Mantua 285 proposes to the Duke a change of States
287 is jealous of the Popes arming 505. endeavors peace, ibid. assists the
Duke of Parma with money 510. and the Duke of Modena with Troops 518. counsels
Parma to moderation 523. shows his strength to the Barbarins, but endeavors
peace 524. sends Troops into the Ecclesiastical State with success 548.
sollicites the assistance of the Confederates, ibid. makes conquests in the
Territory of Peruggia 559. with various factions 562. attacqued in several
Quarters, defends himself every where, and retires with advantage. 563
Ferdinand II. Emperor, but first Archduke of Austria, displeased with the
Republic for the surprise of Novi 53. refuses a suspension of Arms 54.
complains of the invasion of his States 60. assisted by the Spaniards, ibid.
relucting against peace, ibid. attempts in vain to esloignate the Venetian
Ambassador from the Emperors Court 104. aspires to the Empire, and closes
with the Spaniards, ibid. is made King of Bohemia 105. and King of Hungary 126.
abhorred by the Heretics 193. straightned in Vienna, and succored by the
Great Duke 135. elected Emperor 136. assisted by many Princes 138. the
prosperity of his Arms 176. arrives to great power 227, 257. confirms peace
with the Turk 227, 258 confers Church Lands on his second Son 260. in the
affair of Mantua depends on the will of Spain 274. makes a show to compose them
amicably 284. sends thither the Count of Nassau, ibid. endeavors the restoring
of Ecclesiastical Goods 293. carries an Army toward Italy 298. publishes an
Edict for Church-Goods 305. assists the Polacks 306. and the Spaniards,
Flanders 307. sends Troops into Italy 308. calls them back, assembles the
Electors at Ratisbone 346. disarms Wallestain 390. desires peace in Italy 350.
busied against the Swedes, dissembles the effect 157. afflicted by their Arms
360. demands assistance of the Pope and the Princes of Italy 368. dies 432
Ferdinand III. proclaimed King of Hungary 227. commands the Armies 392.
recovers Ratisbone, ibid. besieges Nortlingen, joins the Infanta, beats the
Swedes, gains the place, returns to Court 373. elected King of the Romans 424.
succeeds to his Father 432. counseled to command the Army, leaves it to his
Brother 470. meeting with many disasters, demands help of the Pope and
Venetians. 531 Ferrante, Prince of Guastalla, pretends to the succession of
Mantua. 268 Fillip II. King of Spain, his Maxims. 4 Fillip III. King of Spain,
unaccustomed to Government 4. orders the Duke of Savoy to render what he had
taken in the Monferrat 26. prescribes conditions of peace for Italy 29. not
liked by the Princes interessed 29, 31. but the King persists 32. and better
explains his intentions 46. favors the Archduke against the Venetians 60.
yields his Rights to the States in Germany 105. dying, orders the restitution
of the Valteline, his qualities. 168 Fillip IV. King of Spain, succeeds his
Father 168. leaves the direction to the Conde Duke ibid. assists France in the
siege of Rochel 266 satisfied with the neutrality of the Venetians 407.
publishes Don John of Austria his illegitimate Son 532. goes out of Madrid to
oppose the French 533. disgraces the Conde Duke 550. takes Lewis de Haro into
favor. 551 Fillipsburg delivered to the French 394. recovered by the
Imperialists. 398 Francesco Barberino Cardinal sent Legate into France 224.
without effecting any thing for the peace 238. sent into Spain 239. his Genius
503. refuses the restitution of Castro 512. makes several and doubtful projects
518. with artificial Treaties repels the invasion of the Prince of Parma, and
deludes the Confederates 524, 525, 527, 529, 541. is afterward little inclined
to peace 567. at last yields to it. 569 Francesco di Melo defeats the French
534, infests the Frontiers of the Kingdom 537. invades it 537. is defeated. 553
Francesco, Duke of Modena, closes with the Spaniards, and gets advantage by it
401. attacqued by the French and the Prince of Parma 417. is succored by the
Spaniard, ibid. interposes to quiet the differences betwixt the Pope and the
Duke of Parma by several expedients 511, 516. the Pontificians desiring
passage, defends himself 517. is succored by the Republic and the Grand Duke
519. lays a correspondence in Ferrara, but is discovered 529. invaded by the
Pontificians in his Country. 547 Francesco Erizzo after many employments
created Duke. 363 French Princes malcontents disturb the Kingdom 33. sends to
Turin and to Venice 34. compose with the Regent, ibid. arise anew and adjust
again 59. takes arms for the imprisonment of the Prince of Conde 66. and in
favor of Queen Mother 124, 151. their Genius against Favorites 253. another
civil War raised by the malcontents, who are beaten and quieted. 495
Franchental taken by the Spaniards. 188 Friuli, that part described where the
War was 55. the first invasion of the Venetians Army 56. inroads, encounters,
and attempts. 61
G.
Galleys laden with Merchandise robbed by Ossunaes Ships 97. the Republic
pretend restitution 187. France interposes 109. and promises 109. the Treaty
not executed by Ossuna 113. but makes difficulty, ibid. is at last done by
Cardinal Zappata. 180 Gaspar de Gusman, Duke d'Olivares, assumes in Spain the
direction of affairs 168. feigns confidence with Richelieu 266. draws unhappily
the Arms of France to the Confines of Spain 431. advanced by the King for the
relief of Fontarbia 441. his designs and violent maxims 445. dubious whether he
should endeavor to recover first Portugal or Catalogna 491. produces an
illigitimate Son 532. endeavors to divert the King from going out of Madrid
533. afflicted for the loss of Perpignan 537. is commanded from Court 550.
dies. 551 Gaston, Brother to the King of France, by reason of his Marriage
foments the troubles of the Kingdom 250. marries the Daughter of Monpensier,
ibid. inclined to a second Marriage with the Daughter of the Duke of Nevers
280. distasted with Richelieu, retires from Court into Lorrain 310. marries
that Dukes Sister 362. enters the Kingdom with an Army 371. division among his
Followers, ibid. defeated at Castelnodari, ibid. humbles himself to the King
372. slips away again into Lorrain, ibid. closes with the Spaniard, and after
reconciles with his Brother 398. angry with the Cardinal, adjusts with him 424.
conspires anew against him, and concludes a Treaty with the Spaniards 534. asks
pardon of the King 537. by whom he is left Lieutenant of the Crown. 551
Genouese strengthen the Spaniards with their Militia 44. hated by the Duke of
Savoy 211. their Country divided betwixt France and that Duke 214. attacqued,
find themselves in confusion 229. resolve to defend themselves 230. lose many
places, and beaten in several encounters, ibid. perplexed in their counsels
232. recover what lost 234. suspension of Arms with Savoy 252. troubled at a
conspiracy discovered, and at threatenings of the Spaniards and of Savoy 282.
withdraw themselves from the predominancy of Spain. 386 Girolomo Cavazza
assists at the Treaty of Chierasco. 350 Girolomo Marcello taken by the
Uscocchi, and released. 19 Girolomo Soranzo, Ambassador to the Emperor,
concludes a peace with the Uscocchi 19 treats at Rome restitution of Goods
taken by Ossuna 118. adjusts the manner of putting a Garrison into Casal. 344
Girolomo Trivisano designed Ambassador into Holland to swear the League 145.
persuades the approving the Treaty of Monzon 245. Bailo at Constantinople. 470
Giesuits not admitted by the Republic at the instance of the Pope and King of
France. 165 Giacomo, King of England, offers assistance to the Republic
against the Turks 30. being a Lover of peace, promotes it for Savoy 46, 66 his
failings and ends for the interests of Bohemia 136. promises assistance to the
Republic 167. treats a Marriage for his Son with the Infanta, ibid. assists
his Son-in-law weakly 178, 188. provoked against the Spaniards, calls a
Parliament, and dissolves it without effect 207. dies. 220 Giaques Piere enters
with an ill intent into the Service of the Republic 122. lays treacherous
designs, is put to death. ibid. Giorgio Coranaro banished. 292 Giorgio Giorgio,
Ambassador in France 266 and to the King of Poland. 378 Giorgio Justiniano,
Ambassador, insists for the execution of the Treaty about the Uscocchi 52
admitted to Audience by Ferdinand after the Peace 115. Bailo at Constantinople.
150 Giovanni Baptista Grimani, General in Dalmatia. Giovanni Baptista Padavino
treats for the Republic with the Switzers and Grisons. 71 Giovanni Bembo, Duke
of Venice. 59 Giovanni Casimir, Prince of Poland, Prisoner to the French not
set at liberty at the instance of the Venetians, but only by a Treaty made with
that Crown. 443 Giovanni, Count of Nassau, carries three thousand Hollanders to
the service of the Republic 90. his differences with Medici 91. takes the
Enemies Forts upon the Carlo. 93. dies. 107 Giovanni, Count of Nassau,
Commissary for the Emperor at Mantua 284. presses the Duke earnestly. 284, 298
Giovanni, Count of Tilli, defeats the Marquess of Baden 186. and Halverstadt
287, 203. the Protestants 226. the King of Denmark 255. proceeds against that
King 260. takes Magdenburg and destroys it 358. is beaten at Lipswich 359.
dies. ibid. Giovanni Cornaro Duke 228. admonished by Renieri Zeno 296. dies.
319 Giorgio de Medici commands the Army of the Republic in Friuli 76. attempts
to divert the Enemy 88, 89. his differences with Nassau, his maxims and
retardings of progress. 91, 92 Giorgio, Elector of Saxony, assists the Emperor
against the Palatine 153. joins with the Swedes 358. possesses Bohemia 359.
reconciles with the Emperor. 411 Giacomo Pancirolo, the Popes Nuntio for the
peace betwixt the Emperor and Duke of Mantua. 318 Giacomo Piscina, Ambassador
of Savoy, in Venice, his offices done there. 34 Giacomo Zane, General of
Dalmatia, repulses those of Trieste 61. takes Scrisa 77. Captain General. 96
Giorgio Justiniano, Ambassador in Spain. 395 Giorgio Grimani, Ambassador to
the Emperor, 425 Giorgio Mendozza, Governor of Milan, confounded by the
variety of the Duke of Savoy's projects 13. insinuates to him the rendition of
what he had taken in Monferrat 14. the Dukes Confident 15. arms himself 16.
marches against the said Duke 24. treats with rigor both the Dukes of Savoy
and Mantua 27. demands the Princess Mary of Mantua 28. presses Savoy to disarm,
and makes War upon him 37. raises the Fort Sandoval 39. passes the Tanaro; and
then retires 43. demands assistance of the Princes of Italy 44. finds
difficulty in the siege of Asti 47. accused in Spain, but absolved by the King.
59 Giorgio Nani disswades the League of the Republic with Holland 141. and the
attacquing the Germans in their Posts about Mantua 329. Ambassador to the Pope
457. exhorts him to endeavor peace betwixt the Christian Princes, and procure
assistance against the Turk 457. Plenipotentiary for the Treaty of peace with
the Pope 568. signs it. 592 Giorgio Paulo Gradenigo commands the Galleys of the
Republic 296. Proveditor at Cattaro. 452 Giorgio Pesari Ambassador in Savoy
161. France 185. at Rome 364. endeavors to persuade the Senate to protect the
Duke of Mantua 506. General in Terra firma, possesses the Banks of the Po 542,
545. defends the Polefene 560. appointed for the Treaty of Peace. 425 Giovanni
IV. proclaimed King of Portugal 490. treats with the French and the Hollanders
493. discovers treachery, and punishes it, ib. sollicites the Duke of Medina
Sidonia to rebel. 494 Giulio Mazarine negotiates with the Duke of Mantua 313.
concludes a Truce in Piedmont 340. persuades the Duke of Savoy to leave
Pignenol to France 351. preserves Casal with the adjustment concluded betwixt
the Armies of France and Spain 344. most confident with France, is chosen its
Plenipotentiary for Treaties of Peace 459. made Cardinal 513. Heir of the Kings
favor to Richelieu 539. after whose death laid low, he raises again and
exercises the chief Ministry about the Queen Regent. 557 Giosep, a Capucin,
insinuates to the Duke of Mantua an exchange of that Country with France 303.
sent by Richelieu to the Treaty at Ratisbone. 341 Goito possessed by the
Germans 317. the Venetians practice to regain it. 332 Gonsales di Cordua,
Governor of Milan, sends Soldiers to the Confines of Mantua and of the
Venetians 270. complains of the Duke of Rhetel 273. persuades the Council of
Spain to the enterprise of Casal 275. his Forces increased by the Militia of
the Genouese, ibid. moves toward Casal, and sends Paulo Rho to Venice 276,
280. the Duke of Savoy exclaims and threatens the Genouese 283. fears the
relief of Casal by the French 286. perplexed at the descent of the French into
Italy 292. weakened before Casal, ibid. retires. 301 Goritia described. 56
Gradisca, its situation 56. besieged by the Venetians 62. assaulted without
effect 63. straightens it more closely 88. several times relieved 107.
suspension of Arms in order to the Peace concluded. 112 Gregory XV. Pope
solicited by the Spaniards for the interest of the Valteline 164. receives the
Ambassadors of Venice, and seeks by them the restitution of the Jesuits in the
Territories of the Republic 165. accepts the deposition of the Valteline 200.
dies. 201 Grisons sought to for a League, and passage for the Republic deny
all 71. at discord among themselves 114. some rising in a tumult from new
Tribunals 132. seek a League with the Republic 157. march against the
Valteline with ill success 172. oppressed by the Arms of Leopold 173. deluded
and divided by Treaties with Feria 182. take Arms again tumultuarily, ibid.
cozened by the Proposition of a Truce 183. surprised by the Archduke, are
assisted by the Confederates 216. surprised by the Imperial Army 309. France
demands the restitution of those Passes 311. drive the French out of the
Valteline, and agree with the Spaniards. 428 Gustavus, King of Swede, succors
Strassond 229, sends an Ambassador to several Princes concerning the affairs
of the Empire 306. enters Germany with an Army 348. makes progress 358. beats
the Imperialists at Leipzich 359. sends an Ambassador to Venice 360. his
progress in the Empire and against Bavaria 367, 373. incamps near Nuremberg
374. killed in the battle of Lutzen 377. his Character. ibid.
H.
HEnry Count of Harcourt recovers the Isles of Eres 430. retires from Chieri
474. raises the siege of Casal 478. besieges Turin 479. takes it 483. his other
conquests in Piedmont. 501 Henry, Count de la Tour, head of the Bohemian
Rebellion 128. besieges Vienna 135. retires ibid. engaged in the Service of the
Republic 215. passes into that of Denmark 258. defeated by Wallestain. 379
Henry, Count of Berg, commands the Spanish Army in Flanders 307. revolts and
attempts to form another party. 372
I.
ISle of The attacqued by the English 263. relieved by the French. 264 Isles of
Eres taken by the Spaniards 411. recovered by the French. 430 Istria hostillity
in that Province betwixt the Venetians and Archiducalians 53. a description of
the Province. 55 Italy, the heart of Europe, left in peace by the Spaniards 2.
attempt to greaten themselves 4. embrace the opportunity 5. the inclinations
and interests of its Princes ib. is disturbed by the death of the Duke of
Mantua. ib.
L.
LEague of the Princes of Italy thought unseasonable 25. that of the Republic
with the Grisons, opposed by the French 35. with the Switzers, contested by the
Spaniards 36. concluded with two Cantons 45. sworn to 131. with the Grisons,
hindered by the Ministers of France and Spain 45. with the Princes of the North
offered, but not accepted. 57 League Catholic in Germany declares for the
Emperor. 138 League betwixt the Republic and Duke of Savoy 119. betwixt the
Republic and Holland. 141 League betwixt France, the Republic, and Savoy,
projected in Lions 185. the Spaniards vexed at it ib. concluded 197. the diverse
ends of the Confederates 209. betwixt France and Holland 206. 397. betwixt
France and Savoy against the Genouese 214. betwixt Spain and Savoy to divide
Monferrat 275. betwixt France, the Republic, and Mantua 300. betwixt France
and the Republic, to recover the passes of the Grisons, but not executed 310.
betwixt France and Swede. 357. 380. 412. 424 League betwixt France, Savoy,
Mantua, and Parma 402. betwixt France and the Duchess of Savoy. 435 League
proposed betwixt the Pope and the Republic, treated and broken off 479.
betwixt the Republic, the great Duke, and the Duke of Modena for defense 520.
is treated also for offense 543. concluded. 544 Leganes Governor of Milan
takes Brem and Vercelli 437, 438. besieges Casal and is beaten. 478. Leucata
besieged by the Spaniards and relieved with their defeat. 431 Leopoldo Archduke
dies. 378 Leopold Guglielmo Archduke provided with Church goods 260. commands
the Imperial Armies. 471 Lodowick XIII. King of France jealous of the authority
of the Mareshal d' Ancre. 101. causes him to be killed ib. gives himself in
prey to Luines ib. applies to the affairs of Italy 102. but quickly grows cold
103. presses the Spaniards to restore Vercelli 120. interposes in the affairs
of Bohemia 151, 152. restores Religion in Bern 122. applies to the affairs of
the Valteline 163, 184, 206. makes War to the Huguenots, and then Peace 176.
cares not to succor Breda 220. disgusted with the King of England 221, 255.
procures his Confederates to approve the Treaty of Monzon 253. disorders in his
Kingdom for the Marriage of his Brother 248. goes into Britany 250. for the
succession of Nevers to the State of Mantua, trys the way of Negotiation 268,
272. having taken Rochel enters into it 289. opinions in Council concerning the
relief of Mantua differ 290. resolves to go into Italy 291. comes to the foot
of the Alps 298. forces the passage 301. returns into Languedoc against the
Huguenots 304. and afterward to Paris 309. quiets domestic divisions 310.
sends the Cardinal into Italy 315. reconciles with his Brother, enters into
Savoy, and comes back to Lions 306. sends Ambassadors to the Diet at Ratisbone
341. promises money to the King of Swede, ibid. falls sick at Lions 343.
pursues his Brother 361, 362. his Arms in Germany 366. and in Lorrain 370.
assists the Swedes 380. gets Philipsburg 394. invaded by the Austrians in his
own Kingdom 422. speaks with his Sister at Grenoble 473. is sensible of the too
great power of the Cardinal 496. forces the Princes malcontents to an accord
497. goes to the Siege of Perpignan 532. disgusted with Richelieu 536. who
dying, disposes of the Government in the power of the Favorites 439. dies, his
Character. 552 Lodowick XIV. his Birth. 444 Lorenzo Marcello, Captain of the
Galliasses, hurt at Vallona 447. elected Censor. 449 Lorenzo Veniero General in
Dalmatia 55. takes Novi 53. animates the people of Istria, and attempts
Moschenizza, ibid. Captain of the Ships defies those of Ossuna 95. Captain
General. 98 Lovain assieged by the French, who there consume their Army. 398
Lewis Contarini Ambassador in England 266. concludes Peace betwixt Crown and
France 296. Ambassador in France, ibid. at Rome 366. Bailo at Constantinople
justifies what happened at Vallona 450. arrested Prisoner 451. adjusts those
differences 467. Ambassador at the Meeting for Peace 558. obtains Levies for
the Republic in Tirol. 568 Luines stirs up Lewis XIII. against the Mareshal
d'Ancre 101. succeeds him in the favor 102. his designs against the Huguenots
175. made Constable, dies. 176
M.
MAgdenburg taken and ruined by the Imperialists. 358 Mantua described 314.
garrisoned and fortified by the Republic 315. besieged by the Germans, ibid.
relieved by the Republic 317, 318. the Germans draw further off 318. is
reinforced by the Venetians 321, 334. is betrayed 335. and sacked 336.
restored to the Duke, garrisoned by the Republic 354. reinforce it. 440 Marco
Anthonio Businello, Resident for the Republic in Mantua, Prisoner to the
Germans, and released. 337 Marco Anthonio Corraro, Ambassador to the King of
England. 255 Marco Anthonio Manzano counsels the Siege of Goritia. 56 Marco
Anthonio Memo Doge dies. 59 Marco Anthonio Padavino, Resident in Naples. 338
Marco Giustiniano coasts upon the Army of the Germans, and encamps at Sonato
334. attempts Caneto and the relief of Mantua 334. General in Terra Firma.
Marco Loredano General in Istria. 55 Margaret Duchess of Lorain pretends to
the succession of Mantua. 274 Margaret Infanta of Savoy, wife of Francisco D.
of Mantua 5. being a widow pretends to be with child 6. retires to her Father
9. returns to Mantua to her daughter 355. the French drive her thence 596. Vice
Queen of Portugal is driven away by the rebellion of the people. 491 Maria,
Princess of Mantua, desired by the Duke of Savoy and Spaniards to be in their
power 7. Ferdinand her Uncle refuses to deliver her, but the Spaniards insist
upon it 7, 8. Matthias the Emperor and the Queen Regent of France dissent from
it 8, 9. thoughts of marrying her to the Duke of Rhetel 272. and married to him
271. assumes the Regency 435. disgusted with France 489. in concert with the
Spaniards, procures the taking of Casal. 417 Mary, Queen of Hungary, comes into
Italy 338. the Republic deny her passage by Sea, and at last conduct her with
their own Fleet. 338 Mary, Queen Regent of France, against War in Italy imploys
endeavors in favor of the Duke of Mantua 25. sends Ambassadors into Italy
66. imprisons Conde, ibid. against Nevers 280. offended at Richelieu 280, 309.
attempts putting him out of the Government 326. under custody at Compiegne,
escapes to Brussels 362. dies at Cologne. Marcheville, Ambassador of France,
in the Empire stirs up the Princes against the Emperor. 262 Martin Tromp,
Admiral of the Hollanders Fleet, defeats that of Spain. 472 Maximilian,
Archduke of Austria, dies. 130 Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria, refuses the
Imperial Crown 126. possesses the upper Austria 153. and Prague, having
defeated the Palatine 156. the Elector at conferred upon him 197. treats with
France and England 197, 198. jealous of the Emperors power, not separate from
him 261. exclaims against Wallestain 346. proposed General of the Armies 348.
closes with the French. 361 Maestricht besieged and taken by the Hollanders 373
Marriages reciprocal betwixt France and Spain much contested by the Princes
malcontents 33. executed 58. that of the Prince of England with the Sister of
the King of France causes disgusts betwixt those Crowns. 221 Mattheo Cardinal,
Priuli refuses the Bishopric of Bergamo. 80 Matthias Galasso beats a body of
Venetian Soldiers 327. re-inforces Goito 331. drives la Valette out of his
Quarters in the Mantuan, and pursues the Venetians 332. takes Valezzo 333.
invades France 423. retires with little advantage. ibid. Matthias, the
Emperor, sends the Prince of Castiglion into Italy 15. does not assist the
Archduke against the Republic 60. nominates Commissioners for the Peace 63.
cedes the Crown of Bohemia to Ferdinand 105. endeavors to pacify the
Bohemians 129. jealous of Ferdinand, ibid. moved at the imprisonment of
Cardinal Gliselius 130. dies. 134 Maurice Cardinal, Prince of Savoy, opposes
the Spaniards in Piedmont 82. upon the death of his Brother the Duke comes to
the Borders of Piedmont 435. returns thither with great applause 460. takes
Nizza and Villa Franca 463. inclines to marry. 475 Maurice, Prince of Orange,
relieves Bergen Opzoom 193. succeeds not in the relief of Breda 219. nor in the
surprise of the Castle of Antwerp 220. dies. 222 Melchior, Cardinal Glisclius,
Favorite of the Emperor Matthias 8. arrested Prisoner 130. sent to Rome, and
there absolved. 131 Meldole shakes off the yoke of the Prince of Castiglione
149. the neighboring Princes stirring in it, the business is adjusted. ibid.
Michael Priuli takes Ostia 331. Proveditor in Terra firma 436. incourages those
of Rovigo 560. Proveditor in the field 561. dies. 562 Meilleray takes Hesdin,
and made Mareshal of France 471. takes the Town of Air 496. chosen for the
Siege of Perpignan 532. takes Collivre. 533 Monaco garrisoned by the Spaniards,
puts it self under the protection of the French. 501 Monferrat pretended by the
Duke of Savoy 5. described 10. an exchange proposed by the Spaniards 33.
oppressed on all sides 80. several places possessed by the Savoyards 84, 98.
others garrisoned by the Spaniards 84. invaded the French and Savoyards 229.
and by Leganes, Governor of Milan. 433 Mont Albano besieged by the King of
France without success 176. taken by Richelieu 305. the Mountain of Pleurs
falls. 131 Montvesuvius casts fire 360. Moravians rebel 134. vexed by the
Cassocks. 153 Mustapha succeeds to Achmet in the Turkish Empire 98. deposed
117. put to death. 466
N.
NIchola Francesco, Duke of Lorrain, marries and flies out of Nancy. 394
Niccolo Contarini persuades the Senate to assist the Duke of Savoy 69.
Commissioner for executing of the Peace 115. Duke 321. dies. 363 Niccolo
Delfino takes many places from the Pontificians. 547 Niccolo, Marquess of
Bagni, commands the Popes Troop in the Valteline. 217 Niccolo Donato Doge. 116
Nizza della Paglia besieged by the Savoyards 23. taken by the Spaniards. 287,
433 Novi surprised by the Venetians, complaints of the Archduke, their
justification. 53 Nuntio presents to the Republic a Letter from the Pope for
the Victory of their Fleet over the Pirates of Barbery 456. exhorts to send
Ambassadors to Rome 457. endeavors to take away jealousies at their raising
Arms against the Duke of Parma 506. promised himself too much of the Venetians
509. endeavors to amuse them with flatteries 512. and invitations to send an
Ambassador to the Pope 462. sent away from Venice. 554
O.
O Edward, Duke of Parma, tempted by the Spaniards 383. joins with France 401.
invades the Milanese 407. attacqued by the Spaniards 418. inclines to peace,
and concludes it 426. his parts and distaste against the Barberins 503.
fortifies Castro 505. has recourse to the Republic 506. publishes a Manifest
513. excommunicated, proceeds to secure his affairs 515. puts himself into the
field, demands assistance 517. marches against the State Ecclesiastic with a
memorable Voyage 521. deluded after many Treaties, returns into his own Country
527. makes new attempts by Sea 542. had a mind also to do it through Tuscany
543. inclines not to enter into the League, ibid. marches and possesses Bondeno
and the Stellata 544. confounds the designs of the Confederates by not
seconding them 546, 549. succors not the Republic 560. nor the Great Duke
564. after some difficulty consents to the peace. 570 Olland levies in the
Republics pay 90. to the great disturbance of the Spaniards, who complain of
it to the Pope, but are quieted by the Ambassador of the Republic 139.
confederate with the Venetians 145. assist the Palatine 153. do not succor
Rochel 265. refuse a Truce offered by the Spaniards 308. beaten at the Scheld
and at Ghelre. 441 Oneglia besieged and taken by the Spaniards. 41 Oration
Baglioni persuades to pursue advantages upon the Carso against the Austrians
92. endeavors to hinder succors to Gradisca, is killed. 108 Oration in the
Senate to stir up moving Arms for the outrage of the Uscocchi 21. others of a
contrary opinion 22. of the Duke of Savoy with invectives against Spain 31. and
to exhort the Republic to join with them 41. of Carlo Scaglia his Ambassador
with the Republic to demand assistance 67. of Niccolo Contarini to persuade
the Senate to assist the Duke of Savoy 69. of Simeon Contarini to the Pope 90.
of Henry, Count de la Tour, to the Bohemians 128. of John Nani to dissuade the
Republic from a League with the Hollanders 141. of Sebastian Veniero
persuading it 143. of Girolamo Priuli to the King of France 162. of Count
Mansfelt to his Soldiers 292. of Giovanni Basadonna against the undertaking of
Genoua 212. of Girolamo Trevisano to approve the Treaty of Monzon 245. of
Simeon Contarini to defer the resolution in favor of the Duke of Mantua 276.
of Dominico Molino to the contrary 278. of Battista Nani upon the authority of
the Council of Ten 295. of Pietro Foscarini to drive the Germans out of the
Posts about Mantua 327. of John Nani in the contrary opinion 329. another of
his to the Pope 457. of Julio Mazarine to persuade the Duke of Savoy to yield
Pignarol to France 351. of Bellievre, Ambassador of France, to persuade the
Senate to a League with his King 402. of the Spanish Ambassador de la Rocca to
dissuade it 425. of Monsieur de Husse who demands assistance for the Duke of
Savoy 465. of the Spanish Ambassador la Rocca against it 465. of Giovanni
Pesari, that the Republic would take the Duke of Parma into their protection
506. of Vincenzo Gussoni on the contrary. 508 Ornano, Governor of the Kings
Brother, promotes disturbances in France 248. his imprisonment and death. 249
Osmond succeeds in the Turkish Empire 117. deposed and killed. 194 Ostia taken
by the Venetians. 331 Ottaviano Bono, Ambassador to the King of France 60.
recalled by the Republic. 110
P.
PEace of Asti, and its conditions. 50 Peace betwixt the Republic and the
Archduke treated at the Emperors Court 65. transferred into Spain 87. and
thither also the Treaty of that betwixt Spain and Savoy 87. an Imperial
Ambassador arrives there 105. further Negotiation suspended 106. is
transferred into France, ibid. is concluded at Paris, as extended in Madrid
109. the conditions of it, ibid. approved by the Republic, though not content
with their Ministers 111. the execution for Piedmont concerted, ibid.
interrupted by Toledo, ibid. the ratifications exchanged, and Commissioners
appointed 115. and executed betwixt Ferdinand and the Republic. ibid. Peace
for the Valteline treated at Paris without effect 238. is concluded at Monzon
243. its conditions, ibid. various judgments 244. the aim of the Contractors,
ibid. the opinions the Confederates had of France, ibid. the Republic approves
it. 246 Peace betwixt France and England. 297 Peace of Susa not executed. 301
Peace betwixt the Emperor and King of Denmark. 305 Peace of Ratisbone for the
affairs of Italy 342. complaints of many Princes, ibid. executed in Piedmont
344. disapproved by France 345. is moderated by a new Treaty at Chierasco 351.
the Governor of Milan complaining 353. is executed. ibid. Peace betwixt
England and Spain. 345 Peace of Prague betwixt the Emperor and the
Protestants. 411 Peace general meets with great difficulties, yet the Pope
sends a Legate, and the Republic Ambassadors to negotiate it 425, 431. some
Pass-ports are granted 432, 460. a Treaty betwixt France and Swede concerning
the management of the peace 444. greater difficulties still arise 474, 484,
499. a beginning given to the Meeting. 558 Peace betwixt Spain and the Prince
of Parma. Peace betwixt the Princes of Savoy and their Sister-in-law and
France. 414 Peace of the Pope with the Princes of the League and with the Duke
of Parma managed by the French Ministers 549. disturbed by the propositions of
the Barberins to the Spaniards, ibid. Cardinal Bichi employed and
Plenipotentiary are named 566. the opinions of the Confederates 569.
Propositions of Cardinal Bichi at Venice 570. interruptions feared by the Popes
sickness, ibid. recovers 571. is concluded, the Articles comprehended in two
Capitulations, ibid. are published and executed. 572 Palatinate possessed by
Bavarians and Spaniards 174. succored by Mansfelt. 178 Paulo V. Pope
endeavors the peace of Italy 13. the peace betwixt the Republic and the
Archduke 53. betwixt Spain and Savoy 66. solicited by the Spanish Ministers
against the Republic 72. fears lest the peace break for the cause of the
Valteline 163. dies. 164 Perpignan, its situation blocked by the French 532.
besieged by the King in person 533. is rendered. 538 Plague in Italy 319.
destroys the Armies 326. Mantua unpeopled 329. lays waste the State of the
Republic and the City of Venice 337. ceases 350. is manufactured in Milan. 350
Piacenza straightned by the Spaniards. 426 Pietro Contarini, Ambassador in
England, hires Ships for the Republic. 117 Pietro Barbarigo, after many
employments, made Captain General. 222 Pietro di Toledo inveighs against the
peace of Asti 83. comes Governor to Milan, and reinforces the Army 59. demands
of the Republic to withdraw their Army from Gradisca, and gives jealousy to
their Borders 64. endeavors to break the Treaty of Asti 65. with various
Propositions to Carlo, against whom nevertheless he hatches treachery, ibid.
draws near with his Army to Piedmont, corrupts the Duke of Nemours 79.
endeavors to separate Carlo from the friendship of the Venetians 83. not
caring what Monferrat suffered, besieges Vercelli 99. takes it 103. invades the
Confines of the Republic 111. afterward publishes the peace 112. makes
difficulty to execute it in Piedmont 120. hatches a conspiracy in Crema 122.
renders Vercelli. 123 Pietro Foscarini counsels to force the Germans from their
Posts near to Mantua 327. Ambassador at Constantinople. 469 Pietro Girone,
Duke of Ossuna, and Viceroy of Naples, renders the Republic jealous by Sea 72.
arrests their Ships 93. incourages the Uscocchi, ibid. his various designs 94.
sends Ships into the Adriatic, ibid. publishes a design against the Turks, and
demands the Galleys of the Princes of Italy 95. but intends rather to stir up
the Turks against the Republic 95, 96. sends Galleys into the Adriatic 97.
takes Merchant-ships belonging to the Republic, ibid. invade the Adriatic
anew 113. does not restore the Booty, ibid. his disturbing thoughts 116. arms
more and more, and treats with the Turk 117. to make the Republic jealous 118.
withdraws his Ships, ibid. hinders the restitution of Goods taken, ibid.
advises of new attempts against the Republic 119. partaker of the conspiracy
in Venice 123. continues to trouble the Republic by sending out Ships to rob
146. desirous to maintain himself in his Government 226. the King jealous of
him, appoints a Successor 147. goes into Spain, and dies in prison 148. his
Ships taken by the Venetians. ibid. Pietro Gritti, Ambassador in Spain,
insinuates the peace 86. concludes it. 109 Pietro Hein, Admiral of Holland,
takes the Spanish Fleet. Petillano, besieged by the Pontificians, raises the
siege, and are beaten. 564 Polesene important to the Venetians. 565 Pompeo
Justiniano taken into the Venetian pay 44. commands the Army in Friuli 55.
abandons Lucinis 56. offers to besiege Gradisca 61. dies. 76 Portugal rebels.
488 Prague taken by the Catholics. 156 Prefectureship of Rome given by the
Pope to his Nephew, to the distaste of the Princes 364. whose Ambassadors
abstain from the Churches ibid. encounter of the Venetian Ambassador with the
Prefect 364. the matter composed. 366 Princes moved by several affections and
interests especially those of Italy. 267 Princes of the Union in Germany
approve the Republic resentments against the Archduke 60. they disunite for
fear of the Spaniards. 177 Princes of Italy, invited by the Republic to a
League, are hindered from several considerations 98. give jealousy to France
102. exhorted again by the Republic to a League 119, 139. tempted by the
Crowns of France and Spain 299, 382. withdrawn from the dependency on Spain
381. confer together about making a League 386. admit neither the invitations
of France or Spain. 513 Princes of Savoy unite with the Spaniards 460. made by
the Empire Tutor to the Duke their Nephew 461. make a great progress in
Piedmont 461. desire to raise Forces of their own 462. tempted by the French to
separate themselves from the Spaniards 475. agree with their Sister-in-law and
with the King of France 513. demand of the Spaniards the places of Piedmont.
514
Q.
QUarnaro, the Gulf described. 17
R.
RAgusians foment the designs of Ossuna against the Republic 94. render a
Holland Ship into his power 95. damaged by the Venetian Fleet 113. their Ships
taken by the Venetians, restored by favor. 320 Rambolt, Count of Collalto,
commands the Imperial Army in Italy. 312 Rambogliet, Ambassador of France,
presses the Duke of Savoy to a peace 40. concludes it at Asti. 50 Reniero Zeno,
Ambassador at Turin 39. well received by the Duke 41. concludes an Union
betwixt the Republic and Duke 119. Ambassador to the Pope 202. hurt by
Giorgio Cornaro 294. Ambassador to the Emperor. 432 Rochel bridled by the
Fort Lewis 180. declares in favor of the English 264. its strength and
description of the place, ibid. besieged and the Sea shut out by a Dike 265.
succors in vain attempted by the English 281. is rendered 289. demolished.
ibid.
S.
SAbioneda jealous to its Borderers 230. desired and pretended by many, is at
last yielded to the Spaniards by the Duke of Parma. 421 Salses taken by the
French, and recovered by the Spaniards 472. retaken by the French. 537 St. Jean
d'Angeli taken by the King of France. 176 St. Ja preserved from a conspiracy.
99 Scavona in vain attempted by the Savoyards. 234 Shichsconce surprised by the
Spaniards, besieged by the Hollanders 399. recovered by the Hollanders. 423
Schatteau en Cambresi taken by the French. 430 Scrisa taken by the Venetians.
77 Sigismond, King of Poland, assists the Emperor 137. refuses peace with
Swede 260. dies. 374 Simeon Contarini Ambassador to the Pope, Princes of
Italy, King of France, Emperor, King of Spain, of the Turks, and a second time
into France harangues to suspend the resolution of the Senate in favor of the
Duke of Mantua. 276 Sollevation in Bohemia 127. Austria and Moravia 134.
Hungary 137. of the Valteline 159. of Zaintonge 424. Normandy 479. Catalogna
486. Portugal. 488 Spaniards make a show to desire quiet in Italy 14. the
judgment of those Councils concerning the Treaty of Asti 58. and the War
betwixt the Republic and the Archduke 60, 63. endeavor to divert the King of
France from the affairs of Italy 102. their ends in promoting Ferdinand to the
Empire 104. disgusted with the Venetians 139, 145. hope for advantages from the
intestine divisions of France 361. jealous of the Popes arming. 505 Stralsundt
besieged by Fridland, relieved by the King of Swede. 293 Swedes after their
Kings death continue the War and make progress 378, 392. especially against
Bavaria 380. several successes of their Armies. 412, 432, 442, 499 Switzers
move to assist the Grisons 159. at variance among themselves, refuse to enter
into the League for the Valteline. 198
T.
TArragona besieged by the French, and succored by Sea by the Spaniards. 492
Thoiras defends the Isle of The 263. goes into Casal 302. made Mareshal of
France 344. Ambassador to the Republic 354. is killed at Fontanetto. 419
Title of Eminence to the Cardinals decreed by the Pope, not well taken by the
Republic 365. satisfies the Republic. ibid. Thomaso, Prince of Savoy,
pillages Candia 44. defends Savoy 82. goes to Venice 150. goes to serve the
Spaniards in Flanders 387. returns into Italy 460. surprises Chivas 461. draws
near to Turin, and refuses conditions of agreement 462. surprises it, is
besieged there 464. renders himself and treats with France. 483 Treaty at
Vienna betwixt the Republic and the Archduke about the Uscocchi not executed
20, 23. in Milan to agree the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua, without effect 34, 35.
betwixt the Austrians and Spain 105. at Madrid for the Valteline 169. the
Archduke Leopold and Duke of Feria making difficulty, ibid. betwixt the Dukes
of Savoy and Mantua without effect 208. at the Hague against the Austrians not
concluded. 240 Treaty of the Duke of Lorrain with the King of France 362, 496.
of France and Poland for the liberty of John Casimir 443. of the Republic with
the Turks for what passed at Vallona 467. of the French with the Wiemarians
471. of France with Prince Thomas 484. of the Spaniards with the malecontent
Princes of France 497. of Preliminaries concluded in Hamburg for the general
peace 499. of peace betwixt the Pope and the Duke of Parma artificially handled
by the Cardinal Spada 525, 527. of the Duke of Orleans and other malcontents
with the Spaniards. 553 Truce in Piedmont not concluded 78, 80. concluded and
broken in the Palatinate 177. expired in Holland, War kindles again in the
United Provinces 179. concluded in Piedmont, but universally blamed, yet
executed 340. proposed betwixt the Crowns, but rejected 431, 458, 459, 474.
concluded and executed in Piedmont 470. the prolongation excluded. 474 Trier
the Elector declares himself under the protection of France 360. who take his
Town 367. recovered by surprise by the Spaniards, the Elector Prisoner. 397
Trino taken by the Duke of Savoy 11. and by the Spaniards. 463 Turks lose
Galleys taken by Octavio d'Arragona 30. grow jealous of the motions of Ossuna
95. offer assistance to the Republic 96, 227. are pacified for the loss
received by taking the Merchant Galleys 97. confirm peace with the Emperor,
but reject a Truce with Spain 227. promise Levies to the Republic, ibid.
confirm peace again with the Emperor 258. imbittered for the success of
Vallona 450. busied in the Siege of Asach. 500 Turin defended by the French,
the people inclining to favor the Princes of Savoy 462. surprised by Prince
Thomas 464. besieged by Harcourt 479. is rendered. 483
V.
VAlenza besieged by the French and their Confederates, defended and succored
by the Spaniards. 407 Valetta driven from his Posts in the Mantuan, is taken
prisoner by the Germans 332 escapes 334. attacques the Quarter of the
Pontificians in the Ferrarese 546. and Crevalcuore 547 Valezzo, a place where
was lodged the Army of the Republic 313. abandoned in disorder 332. possessed
by the Germans 333. left by them. 352 Valteline described 157. important for
the situation 158. the Inhabitants offer themselves to Feria 158. revolt 159.
the Grisons attempt to recover it 160. but are defeated, ib. the Spaniards
cloak their interest with Religion 163, 164. Feria fortifies himself there, and
divides the Grisons 166. for their restitution a Treaty is concluded at Madrid
169. but the Spaniards interpose difficulty, ibid. the Treaty transported to
Rome 181. and at Madrid a depositing is spoken of, ibid. Feria concludes apart
with the Grison 182. the Spaniards offer the deposition to the Pope 199. who
accepts it 220. with dislike of the Confederates 220, 204. yet consented to by
the Ambassador Sillery 205. the French change afterward the form of the
Negotiation 206. demand of the Pope the redelivery of the Forts 209. take arms,
ibid. which are moved 333. with advantage to the Confederates 334. to the
resentment of the Pope and the Austrians 218. the Arms of the Confederates
advance into the two Counties 222. are stopped at Riva 224. those situations
described, ibid. and several factions 225. the Confederates endeavor an accord
betwixt the Valteline and the three Leagues 240. conditions of the peace of
Monzon 243. are executed in the Valteline 252. new designs of the French upon
the Valteline 357. enter there again with their arms 400. with various success
409. are at last driven out of it. 428 Venetian Ships defend the French in the
Port of Alexandretta. 296 Venice, its original, undertakings, and increase from
the first to the tenth page. Venetians exhort the Duke of Savoy to peace 12.
assist him of Mantua 13. recall their Ambassador in Turin 15. arm 16. molested
by the Uscocchi 18. besiege Segna 23. increase their strength 27. endeavor
peace 35. give audience to Piscina, Ambassador of Savoy, ibid. resent the
injuries of the Uscocchi 36, 37. send Renieri Zeno to Milan and Turin about
peace 39. strengthen themselves more and more 44. Warrant for the Treaty of
Asti 49. moderate their assistance to the Duke of Mantua, ibid. their reason of
resentment against the Uscocchi 53. suspend Hostility 54. invade the Territory
of the Archduke 55. justify themselves for it 59. draw off from the siege of
Gradisca 64. reject the Popes propositions, ibid. after many consults resolve
to assist the Duke of Savoy 70. endeavor to adjust him with Mantua 85.
molested by Ossuna, arm at Sea 93. refuse the assistance of the Turks 96.
complain of the actings of Ossuna 98. invite the Princes of Italy to an Union,
ibid. enlarge their assistances to Savoy, ibid. revoke their powers for peace
from Madrid 104. invaded by Toledo 111. arm more and more by Sea 117. deny
passage by Sea for the assistance of Ferdinand 119. a new League with Savoy,
ibid. dissemble the conspiracy, though discovered 121. deny assistance to the
Bohemians 131. interest not themselves in their Treaties at Constantinople 151.
by many Princes sought to for assistance, ibid. deny the Transilvanian 157.
troubled at the revolt of the Valteline, sollicitous for a remedy 159. in
particular of the French 162. of the Pope 165 of the King of England 167. agree
with the Duke of Savoy for new Levies 172. assist the Hollanders 179. hire
Mansfelt into their service 182. dissent from the enterprise on Genoua 212,
228. endeavor to divert the King of France 214. strengthen themselves 215.
flattered by the Austrians separate not from the French 226. refuse the offers
of the Turks assistance 227. counsel the invasion of the Milanese, ib. but
refuse to do it alone 228, 234. increase their Troops in the Valteline 237.
endeavor peace betwixt England and France 252, 266. approve the Treaty of
Monzon 253. deny succors to Dourlach and the King of Denmark 258. their
thought concerning the succession of Mantua 271. lured by the Imperial
Ministers 274. carry into Spain offices for peace 280. consult about the
interests of Mantua 276. resolve together with France to assist Nevers 280.
encourage him 284. consent to join with France 285, 292, 298, give money to the
Duke of Mantua 286. 302. send an Ambassador into France 300. resolve to invade
the Milanese 301. are withheld by the Treaty of Susa 302. tempted by the
Austrians 309. resolve to maintain Mantua 309, 312. with great forces 312.
solicit the King of France 315. distasted with the Pope 319. deliberate about
driving the Germans out of their Quarters 331. threatened by the Germans in
several places 333, 337. not frighted at the disaster of Valezza 333, 337.
jealous of the Seacoast 337. denying passage to the Spanish Fleet, they with
their own Galleys conduct the Queen of Hungary to Trieste 338. participate of
the concerts of France with the King of Swede 341. send Ambassadors to
Ratisbone 442. refuse to sign the Treaty of Peace without the French 346.
solicited by them put a Garrion into Mantua 354. will not interest themselves
in the designs of the French upon the Valteline 357. deny assistance to the
King of Swede 360. displeased with the Pope for several causes 364, 365, 385,
414. refuse to assist the Emperor 369. at also to have any hand in the
concerts about Sabioneda 370. and to correspond with the Duke of Savoy, after
having taken the Title of King of Cyprus 384. and to unite with the King of
France 386. resolute in neutrality betwixt the two Crowns 400. 402. endeavor
Peace 413. deny passage to the French and Germans 419. after the death of the
Duke of Mantua employ offices for that House 435. reform their Militia, and
discharge the Treasury of debts 436. interpose betwixt France and the Princess
of Mantua 489. stand and pause after the Victory at Vallona against the Barbary
Pirates 419. they arm and demand assistance of the Christian Princes 452. send
an Ambassador to the Pope 457. remain still neutral in the affairs of Piedmont
betwixt the two Crowns 400. incline to compose with the Turk 466. and approve
the Treaty 467. solicit the Pope to mediate for the Peace of Italy 473.
resolve to interpose with offices betwixt the Pope and Duke of Parma 509, 511.
excluded out of the Treaty 511. grow jealous 512. also for a report of the
designs of the Barberins upon Mirandola 516. relieve Parma with money 518. and
Modena with Troops, ibid. and refuse to concur to invade the Ecclesiastic
State 520 incommodate with their Galleys the Commerce of Ferrara 530. excuse
not to assist the Emperor 531. and to conferate with France, ibid. whose
correspondence with Rome they endeavor to restore 541. jealous of the Borders
of the Polesene, send Troops thither 542. command the possessing of the Banks
545. send their Army to the other side of the River, ibid. employ also their
strength by Sea 547. do more than perform the conditions of the League, protest
to Spain in case of Union with the Pope 549. give Troops to the Duke of Parma
558. succor the Great Duke 564. make new agreements for the War, and raise
Troops with great difficulty. 568 Vercelli blocked by the Spaniards and
relieved by the Duke of Savoy 82. besieged by Toledo 99. the Duke attempts in
vain to bring in powder 100. assaulted, ibid. the Duke endeavors to relieve it
103. is rendered, ibid. restored to the Duke 123. besieged again by the
Spaniards 437. the French succeed not in bringing in relief 438. renders. 439
Verrua besieged by the Duke of Feria 235. relieved by the Savoyards. ibid.
Vescovo, Bishop of Bertimoro, endeavors the Peace of Italy. 16 Vescovo de
Boves, chief Minister of the Queen Regent of France, succeeds not in the
direction of affairs. 556 Vescovo of Mantua, Ambassador to the Emperor 274.
proposes Articles of Peace 288. Bishop of Lamego, Ambassador of Portugal at
Rome, meets and fights with him of Spain 519. Wesel surprised by the
Hollanders. 308 Vests with large sleeves regulated in Venice. 415 Uguenots
disunited 178, 181. their agreement with the King 185. are subdued. 305 Viadana
taken by the Imperialists. 313 Vincenzo, Duke of Mantua, would marry his Niece
268. dies. 269 Vincenzo Gussoni, Ambassador for the Republic, with the Duke
of Savoy recalled 15. to the King of France 60. visits in his Voyage the
Princes of the Rhine, ibid. recalled out of France 111. harangues in the Senate
in the occurrences betwixt the Pope and Duke of Parma 508. deputed to treat the
League. 519 Vienna besieged by the Count de la Tour. 134 Vienville favored by
the King of France for a little while. 205 Vipulsuna taken by the Venetians. 75
Vittorio Prince of Piedmont goes into Spain 16. received ill there returns into
Italy 32. takes Masserano and Creveceur 84. marries with the sister of the King
of France 124. attempts Scavona in vain 234. opposes the passage of the French
286. beaten by the Duke of Memoranci 339. succeeds his Father in the Dukedom
340. yields Pignerol to the French 355. 352. assumes the Title of King of
Cyprus 384. unites with France 401. invades the Milanese 407. plants the Fort
of Brem 409. dies. 434 Uladislaus elected King of Poland. 378 Vote Electoral
given to Bavaria. 195. 197 Urban 88. created Pope 201. engaged in the affairs
of the Valteline 202. labors the Pass might be left to the Spaniards 204. who
attempts to gain him 206. resents the possession of the Valley taken by the
Confederates 218. sends a Minister into France and Arms 223. appoints his
Nephew Legate 224. the Confederates moved 239. his aims ibid. sends Soldiers
242. counsels the Republic to call the French into Italy for the affairs of
Mantua 272. arms and builds the Fort Urban 273. resolves to be Neutral, and
sends the Cardinal Anthonio Legate 300. a commendatory Brief to the Republic
for the peace of Italy 353. Unites the Fief of Urbino to the Church 363.
confers the Pretorship of Rome upon his Nephew 364. excuses assisting the
Emperor 368. inclined to France 382. jealous of the Spaniards, ib. interposes
for Peace betwixt them and the Duke of Parma 383. and betwixt the Crowns 413.
grants voluntarily to the Republic Tithes upon the Clergy 459. cancels the
Elogium placed by him in the Royal Hall, ibid. disgusts betwixt him and the
three Crowns 458. endeavors to reconcile the Princes of Savoy with their
Sister-in-law 465. excuses assisting the Emperor 471. sends a Minister into
Piedmont to procure Peace 474. proposes a League to the Republic 476. growing
old, leaves the power to his Nephews 503. arms and makes the Princes jealous
508. resolute in ruining the Prince of Parma 506. proceeds against him with
Excommunication and Arms 500. deny the Mediation of the Republic 511. the
persons desired by the Crowns promoted to the Cardinalat 513. moved by the
French to make War against Spain resists 515. agrees to a suspension of Arms in
the affairs of Parma 519. the fear of the Duke of Parma's Arms ceasing, grows
cold in the Treaties of Peace 529. denies assistance to the Emperor 531.
inclines to Peace 566. falls sick 570. recovers, and the Peace concluded. 571
Urbino united to the Church. 363 Uscocchi, situation of the places where they
dwell, their Original, do mischief to the Venetians and Turks 17. an accord
betwixt the Republic and the Archduke 20. not executed, ibid. after other
successes they surprise a Gally, ibid. the Republic complains 21. besieges
Segna 23. yet continue their invasions 36. why tolerated by the Austrians 51.
success at Scrisa 52. disgusts with insults augment 54. fomented by Ossuna,
rove near to Venice 96. dispersed after the Peace. 116
Z.
ZAccaria Sagredo General in Terra firma 327. concerts a design against the
Germans in the Mantuan 331. abandons Valezza 332. the Treasury disburdened of
debts. 436 Zemino possessed by the Venetians 88. restored. 116 Zuccarello taken
by the Savoyards 41. serves for a pretext to make War upon the Genouese. 212.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for John Starkey Bookseller, at the Miter in
Fleet Street near Temple Bar.
DIVINITY.
1. THirty six Sermons, Preached by the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert
Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln; the fifth Edition corrected, in Folio,
price bound 18 s. 2. Eighty Sermons, Preached at the Parish Church of St. Mary
Magdalene Milk-street, London, by the late eminent and learned Divine Anthony
Farindon B. D. the second Edition corrected and enlarged, in Folio, price bound
24 s. 3. The Jesuits Morals, collected by a Doctor of the College of Sorbon in
Paris, who has faithfully extracted them out of the Jesuits own Books, which
are Printed by the permission and approbation of the Superiors of their
Society. Written in French, and exactly translated into English, in Folio,
price bound 10 s. 4. A Practical and Polemical Commentary or Exposition upon
the third and fourth Chapters of the later Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy. By
Thomas Hall B. D. in Folio, price bound 10 s. 5. Tetrachordon: Expositions upon
the four chief places in Scripture, which treat of Marriage, or nullities in
Marriage. Wherein the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce is confirmed by
explanation of Scripture by Testimony of Ancient Fathers, of Civil Laws in the
Primitive Church, of famousest Reformed Divines. And lastly, by an intended Act
of the Parliament, and Church of England, in the last year of Edward the Sixth.
The Author J. Milton, in quarto, price 1 s. 6 d. 6. Tho. Hall Apologia pro
Ministerio Evangelico, Lat. in octavo, price bound 2 s. 7. A Confutation of the
Millenarian Opinion, plainly demonstrating that Christ will not reign visibly
and personally upon Earth with the Saints for a 1000 years, either before the
day of Judgment, in the day of Judgment, or after it. By Tho. Hall, B. D. price
bound 1 s.
PHYSIC.
8. Basilica Chymica and Praxis Chimiatricae, or Royal and Practical Chemistry;
augmented and enlarged, by John Hartman. To which is added his Treatise of
Signatures of internal things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and
lesser World. As also the Practice of Chemistry of John Hartman, M. D.
Augmented and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions; all faithfully
Englished, by a Lover of Chemistry, price bound 10 s. 9. The Art of Chemistry,
as it is now practiced. Written in French by P. Thybault, Chemist to the French
King, and Englished by W. A. Doctor in Physic, and Fellow of the Royal
Society, in octavo, price bound 4 s. 10. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief
Account of the true Grounds and Principles of the Art of Physic, with the
Insufficiency of the vulgar way of preparing Medicines, and the Excellency of
such as are made by Chemical Operation. By Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. in
octavo, price bound 1 s. 11. Aurora Chymica, or a rational way of preparing
Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals for a Physical Use; by which preparations
they are made most efficacious, safe, and pleasant Medicines, for the
preservation of the life of man. By Edward Bolnest, Med. Reg. O^d. in octavo,
price bound 1 s. 6 d.
LAW.
12. An Abridgment of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
Alphabetically digested under several Titles. By Henry Rolls, Sergeant at Law,
published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all the Judges, in
folio, price bound 40 s. 13. The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight, in three
Volumes, in English: Allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition,
carefully corrected by the Original, in folio, price bound 45 s. The first part
of the Institutes of the Laws of England; or a Commentary upon Littleton,
Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke, the eighth Edition in Folio, price
bound 18 s. 15. The second part of the Institutes of the Laws of England;
containing the Exposition of Magna Charta, and many ancient and other Statutes:
Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. The third Edition, with an Alphabetical
Table added, in Folio, price bound 14 s. 16. The third part of the Institutes
of the Laws of England, concerning High Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown,
and Criminal Causes. The fourth Edition, Written by the Lord Chief Justice
Coke, in folio, price bound 6 s. 17. The fourth part of the Institutes of the
Laws of England, concerning the Jurosdiction of Courts: Written by the Lord
Chief Justice Coke. The fourth Edition, with an Alphabetical Table not
heretofore printed, in Folio, price bound 9 s. 18. Brief Animadversions on,
Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records to the fourth Part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdictions of Courts. By
Will. Prynne Esquire in folio, price bound 12 s. 19. Action upon the Case for
Slander, or a Methodical Collection of thousands of Cases in the Law, of what
words are Actionable, and what not: By William Sheppard Esquire in folio, price
bound 6 s. 20. Thesaurus Brevium, or a Collection of approved Forms of all
sorts of Original and Judicial Writs in the King's Bench, With their special
directions: By J.C. in folio, price bound 6 s. 21. Brevia Judicialia, or an
Exact Collection of approved Forms of all sorts of Judicial Writs in the
Common-Bench, together with their Returns: By Rich. Brownlow, in folio, price
bound 12 s. 22. The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof,
containing a Vindication of the Laws of England; together with a short History
of William the Conqueror. By Silas Tailor, in quarto, price bound 3 s. 23. The
Complete Solicitor, performing his Duty, and teaching his Client to run through
and manage his own Business, as well in his Majesty's Superior Courts at
Westminster, as in the Mayors Court, Court of Hustings, and other Inferior
Courts in the City of London and elsewhere. The fourth Edition, in octavo,
price bound 3 s. 6 d. 24. An Exact Abridgment in English, of the Cases reported
by Sir Francis Moor, Knight; with the Resolution of the Points of the Law
therein by the Judges. By W. Hughes, in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 25. An
Exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in Force and Use, made in the 16, 17, and
18. of King Charles the First, and the 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16. of King Charles
the Second. By William Hughes Esquire in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 26. The
Touchstone of Wills, Testaments, and Administrations, being a Compendium of
Cases and Resolutions touching the same; carefully collected out of the
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Canon Laws, as also out of the Customs, Common Laws,
and Statutes of this Kingdom. By G. Meriton, in twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d.
27. A Guide for Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of
Highways, Treasurers of the County Stock, Masters of the House of Correction,
Bailiffs of Manors, Toll-takers in Fairs, etc. showing the extent and power of
the several Offices; the third Edi^^on enlarged, collected by George Meriton,
in twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d.
HISTORY.
28. The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
Complete History of those Countries; whereunto are added, the Travels of
Mandelslo, from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and finished in
1640. The whole illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures. Written
Originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy; Englished by J. Davis:
The second Edition, in folio, price bound 18 s. 29. The present State of the
Ottoman Empire in three Books; containing the Maxims of the Turkish Polity,
their Religion and Military Discipline: illustrated with diverse Figures.
Written by Paul Ricaut Esquire late Secretary to the English Ambassador there, now
Consul of Smyrna. The third Edition, in Folio, price bound 10 s. 30. The
History of Barbados, St. Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego, Martinico,
Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight; in two
Books, containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands: Illustrated
with diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable Rarities
therein described; in folio, price bound 10 s. 31. The History of the Affairs
of Europe in this present Age, but more particularly of the Republic of
Venice. Written in Italian by Battista Nani Cavalier and Procurator of St.
Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood Knight, in Folio, price bound 14 s. 32.
Il Cardinalismo di Santa Chiesa, or the History of the Cardinals of the Roman
Church, from the time of their first Creation, to the Election of the late Pope
Clement IX. with a full account of his Conclave, in three Parts. Written in
Italian by the Author of the Nipotismo di Roma, and faithfully Englished; in
folio, price bound 8 s. 33. The World Surveyed, or the famous Voyages and
Travels of Vincent le Blanc, of Marseilles, into the East and West Indies,
Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco, Guinney, and through all Africa, and the principal
Provinces of Europe; in folio, price bound 10 s. 34. The History of the Life
and Death of William Land, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury containing the
Ecclesiastical History of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
from his first rising, viz. 1621. to his death 1644. by P. Heylin, D.D. in
folio, price bound 10 s. 35. A brief Account of Mr. Valentine Greatrakes, the
famous Stroker, and diverse of the strange Cures by him lately performed.
Written by himself to the Honorable Robert Boil; in quarto, price stitched 1
s. 36. A Relation of Three Embassies, from his Majesty Charles the Second, to
the Great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark,
performed by the Right Honouble the Earl of Carlisle, in the year 1663. and
1664. Written by an Attendant on the Embassies; in octavo, price bound 4 s. 37.
Il Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews from the time of
Sixtus the Fourth 1471. to the death of the late Pope Alexander the Seventh
1667. Written in Italian, and Englished by W.A. Fellow of the Royal Society,
the second Edition, in octavo, price bound 3 s. 38. A Relation of the Siege of
Candia, from the first Expedition of the French Forces, to its Surrender, the
27. of September 1669. Written in French by a Gentleman who was a Voluntier in
that Service, and faithfully Englished; in octavo, price bound 1 s. 39. The
History of Algiers, and its Slavery, with an account of that City, and many
remarkable Particularities of Africa. Written by Sieur d' Aranda, sometime a
Slave there, Englished by J. Davies, in octavo, price bound 3 s. 40. An
Historical and Geographical Description of the great Country and River of the
Amazones in America, with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of French; in
octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 41. The Works of the Famous Mr. Fr. Rabelais,
treating of the Lives of Gargantua, and his Son Pantagruel; to which is newly
added, the Life of the Author. Translated out of French into English, by Sir
Tho. Vrchard Knight; in octavo, price bound 5 s. 42. The Novels of the famous
Don Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, Knight of the Order of St. James; whereunto
is added, the Marriage of Belphegor, an Italian Novel: Translated from
Machiavel: faithfully Englished; in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 43. The
History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogul; together with
the most considerable passages for five years following, in that Empire, with a
new Map of it; to which is added, an account of the extent of Indostan, the
Circulation of the Gold and Silver of the world to discharge it self there, as
also the Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same, and the principal cause of
the Decay of the States of Asia: by Monsieur F. Bernier, Physician of the
Faculty of Montpelier. Englished out of French, by H. O. Secretary to the Royal
Society, in two Parts, in octavo, price bound 7 s. 44. The Amors of certain
Great men and Famous Philosophers, written in French, and Englished by J. D. in
octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 45. Deceptio Visus, or Seeing and Believing are
two things, a pleasant Spanish History, faithfully Translated, in octavo, price
bound 2 s. 46. The History of France, under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine,
viz. from the death of King Lewis XIII. to the Year 1664. wherein all the
Affairs of State to that time are exactly related. By Benjamin Priolo, and
faithfully Englished by Christopher Wase, Gent. in octavo, price bound 4 s. 47.
The History of the Twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin, by C.
Suetonius Tranquillus, newly Translated into English, and Illustrated with all
the Caesar's Heads in Copper Plates, in octavo, price bound 5 s. 48. The Annals
of Love, containing select Histories of the Amors of diverse Princes Courts,
pleasantly related. By a person of Honor, in eight Parts, in octavo, price
bound 3 s. 6 d. 49. The present State of the United Provinces of the Low
Countries, as to the Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs,
Revenue, and Territory of the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors, by W. A.
Fellow of the Royal Society, the second Edition, in twelves, price bound 2 s. 6
d. 50. The Present State of France, containing the Orders, Dignities, and
Charges of that Kingdom: Newly corrected and put into a better method than
formerly. Written in French, and faithfully Englished, in twelves, price bound
2 s. 6 d. 51. The Present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy: The
second Edition enlarged, with the manner of Election of Popes, and a Character
of Spain. Written Originally in English, by J. Gailhard, Gent. in twelves,
price bound 1 s. 6 d. 52. The Policy and Government of the Venetians, both in
Civil and Military Affairs. Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay, and
faithfully Englished, in twelves, price bound 1 s. 53. The Voyage of Italy, or
a complete Journey through Italy, in two Parts, with the Character of the
People, and the Description of the chief Towns, Churches, Palaces, Villas,
Gardens, Pictures, Statues, Antiquities; as also of the Interest, Government,
Riches, Force, etc. of all the Princes, with Instructions concerning Travel. By
Richard Lassels, Gent. who traveled through Italy five times, as Tutor to
several of the English Nobility, Opus Posthumum, corrected and set forth by his
old Friend and Fellow-Traveller, S.W. never before extant, in twelves, price
bound 4 s. 54. A Relation of the Coasts of Africa called Guinnee, with a
Description of the Countries, Manners, and Customs of the Inhabitants, of the
Productions of the Earth, and the Merchandise and Commodities it affords, with
some Historical Observations on the Coasts, being collected in a Voyage made by
the Sieur Villault Escuyer Sieur de Bellefond, in the Years 1666, and 1667.
faithfully Englished. The second Edition, in twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 55.
A Relation of the French Kings late Expedition into the Spanish Netherlands, in
the Years 1667, and 1668. with an Introduction discoursing his Title thereunto,
and an Account of the Peace between the two Crowns, made May 2. 1667. Englished
by G.H. in twelves, price bound 1 s.
POETRY and PLAYS.
56. The Works of Sir William Davenant Knight, consisting of those which were
formerly Printed, and those which he designed for the Press. Now published out
of the Authors Original Copies, in Folio, price bound 24 s. 57. Andronicus
Comnenius, a Tragedy. By John Wilson, in quarto, price stitched 1 s. 58.
Heraclius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy. By Lodowick Carlel Esquire in quarto,
price stitched 1 s. 59. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Mountague
Esquire in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 60. Aminta, the Famous Italian Pastoral.
Translated into English, in octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 61. Paradise
Regained, a Poem in four Books, to which is added Samson Agonistes. The Author,
John Milton, in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d.
MISCELLANIES.
62. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon
Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the
Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most ingenious Persons of that
Nation. Englished by G. Havers, in two Volumes, in folio, price bound 30 s. 63.
A Treatise of the Sybils, giving an account of the Names and Numbers of them,
of their Qualities, the Form and Matter of their Verses, and of their Books.
Written in French by David Blondell, Englished by J. Davies, in Folio, price
bound 7 s. 64. The Merchants Map of Commerce, wherein the universal manner and
matter of Trade is compendiously handled, the Standard and Current Coins of
sundry Princes observed, the Natural and Artificial Commodities of all
Countries, for Transportation declared, the Weights and Measures of all places
of Traffic collected, and all reduced to the Practice of the City of London.
By Lewis Roberts, Merchant: The second Edition enlarged, price bound 16 s. 65.
A French and English Dictionary composed by Mr. Randle Cotgrave with another in
English and French, with large additions to the whole, by James Howel Esquire in
folio, price bound 22 s. 66. A Justification of the present War against the
United Netherlands, in two Parts, Illustrated with several Sculptures, by Henry
Stubbe, in quarto, price bound 4 s. 67. Reliquiae Wottoni^nae, or a Collection
of Lives, Letters, Poems, with Characters of sundry personages, and other
incomparable pieces of Language and Art, also additional Letters to several
persons not before Printed: By Sir Henry Wotton, Knight, the third Edition,
with large Additions, in octavo, price bound 5 s. 68. The Golden Calf, in which
is handled the most rare and incomparable wonder of Nature, in transmuting
Metals, viz. how the entire substance of Lead was in one moment transmuted into
Gold Obrizon, with an exceeding small Particle of the true Philosophers stone,
at the Hague in the year 1666. Written in Latin, by John Frederick Helvetius,
Doctor of Medicine at the Hague, and faithfully Englished, in twelves, price
bound 1 s. 69. Accidence commenced Grammar, and supplied with sufficient Rules;
or a new and easy method for the learning of the Latin Tongue. The Author
John Milton, in twelves, price bound 8 d. 70. Tho. Halls Translation of the
Second Book of Ovids Metamorphosis Grammatically, in octavo, price bound 1 s.
71. The Rules of Civility, or certain ways of Deportment observed in France
amongst all persons of Quality upon several occasions, faithfully Englished, in
twelves, price bound 1 s.
FINIS.

