A Brief ACCOUNT, and seasonable IMPROVEMENT of the late EARTHQUAKE in
Northamptonshire, Jan. 4. 1675/6. In a Letter to a Friend in London.
Licensed Jan. 27. 1675/6 Roger L'estrange.

SIR,
HAd I not long since been assured that the Designs of all your Enquiries are
sober, and pious, bec^ming a Christian, your Importunity to be satisfied in the
circumstances of the late Concussion, had knocked at my Door in vain. For I am
seldom at so desperate a loss how to entertain my self, or bestow my subcesive
H^ures, that I should be necessi^ated to fill up my Thoughts with, or place out
my leisure Minutes upon the Gratifying the Itch of Curiosity; A Salt Humor
which while we strive to please by Scratching, we do but the more irritate it is
Pruriency, which in time w^ll issue out in the Scab of Impertinency.

I have ever reckoned it amongst the Symptoms of a degnerate Age, that Men
fill up their converses much like the Athenians, who spent their time in
nothing else but either to tell, or hear some new thing. Act. 17.^.
Their Parturient Tongues either groaning to be delivered of, or their Itching
Ears longing to be tickled with Novelties, and Prodiges: for hence is it, that
the most Tremendous Providence of God evaporate into Idle Chat; And serve to
furnish out the triflings of a Coffee-house, but rarely sink down into the
Heart, to beget a Holy Admiration of the Divine Majesty, which removes the
Mountains, and they know it not; which overturneth them in his Anger; Job 9.5 6
which shakes the Earth out of her place, and the Pillars thereof Tremble.

But though you seem in great have to receive information in the particulars of
this Phenomenon, that you will neither allow me room of Time or Paper to turn
my Pen in, and I am obliged to make Brick without Straw* Yet must I beg your
pardon if I demur a little, whether it were an Earthquake or no? for you must
confess it hugely Preposterous to enquire, De Modo rei, ubi nondum constat de
re: To be solicitous and elaborate about Accidents and Circumstances, before we
are arrived at a plerophery of the thing it self.

And all the Reason in the World will oblige us to suspend a while this
Narrative, since I can assure you, some Learned Persons are confident it was no
Earthquake, caused by Subterraneous Fires, or Exhalations, but A Concussion of
the Air, by a Cavalcade of Spirits Trooping it through the Lower Region. But
whither these Spirits were Bound; or where was the Place of their Rendezvous,
or upon what Errand they were Dispatched, or whether they were Celestial
Courtiers, or of the Black Guard of Pluto, they are not pleased to inform us.

I looked upon it as a Blot in the Escutcheon of the old Philosophy, that it
assigns a distinct Intelligence to every of the Orbs, where they are placed
(like Children at the Spinning-Wheel,) to whirle about the Spheres, because
they could not else conceive a Reason of their perpetual Motions: And as 'twas
a violation of the Sacred Laws of Comaedy to introduce (...), an Angel from
Heaven to extricate the poor Poet, when he had run his wits into confusion with
his own Plots; so it looks but oddly to have recourse to Spirits and Demons,
when the case admits of fair Salvo's, and may spare these extraordinary
contrivances.

But the Naked matter of Fact is the best confutation of this ingenious Fancy,
and I shall now as briefly, as impartially, address my self to the Relation of
it.

On Tuesday the 4th of this instant January, about 8 of the Clock at N^ght,
being alo^e in a room remote from all destracting Noise, and disturbing Company
(circumstances advantageous for Observation) I was suddenly startled from some
fixedness of thoughts, by a Loud, Roaring, Hollow, Terrible Noise. And I was
the more surprised with it, and concerned to attend unto it, because I had
observed that all that preceding Day, and Evening there was not the least
Whisper, or Breath of Wind stirring: I presen^ly fancied that a Chimney in the
next Rooom had taken Fire, the Roaring noise of which this did exactly imitate,
as formerly being in the same place I had met with a terrifying experiment; and
indeed up in after consultati ^n with others I found many concurring in the
same apprehensions; but this conjecture as it suddenly entered, so it as
suddenly vanished, when I heard the Window to shake and tremble, as if the
Decrepit Glass would immediately have dropped down, the Floor of the Chamber over
my Head to Crack once and again, and the House it self seem to Totter; I
wond^ed that such a gust of Wind should assault the House, but upon stri^t
ob^ervation I could not discern or Tree or Bush to move; Thus being much amazed
(for I will not conceal my secret fears,) my Heart sh^ok as much as the House,
and I set my self with what composedness I could command, to expect the issue,
and in half a quarter of an hour or less, the Noise, and together with it the
Shaking, ceased: and this in short is the total of my personal Observation.

Should I tell you what Informations I have received from other pers^ns, and
Places, that some did sensibly feel the Chaires wherein they sat to shake under
them; that others standing upon their feet were apparently seen to stagger;
that one had his Book almost shaken out of his Hands; with the terror that
seized them; and to give you all this, and much more s^lemnly attested under
the Hands of Persons of unquestionable Credit, and of Cautelous Judgments, not
to be imposed upon by Panick Fears, I conceive perfectly superfluous: for
though some may haesitate at the Cause, yet none amongst us do question the
Truth of the Thing; and for you at this distance, as I cannot create you a
Faith, nor force you to a belief of my Testimony, so am I not much Ambitious of
it.

They who are of such wary Heads, that they will suspect what Hundreds will
readily avouch, do but teach others to suspect their most confident Assertions,
and as St. Austin in another case, He that believes not the Miracles of Christ,
is himself the greatest Miracle; so will I take the freedom to say, He that
believes not a Fact, in which all Men uniformly, and unanimously concur,
deserves never to be believed: And let such a one wear the same Feather which
the conceited Hobbes carries in his Cap; Aut ego solus insanio, aut omnes
insaniunt; Either the Leviathan alone was out of his wits, or else all the
World. And which of the Two is most probable is of no difficult Determination.

There are nevertheless Three or Four particulars, which if you despise as
below your notice, yet I judged them worthy of mine.

1. That there had been all the Day before this terrible Concussion such a dead
Calm, and the Air in such a posture of stagnation, that I well rememember I
took so far notice of it as to say not above two Hours before, That in the
Aristotelian Philosophy, such a (...) was ever reputed one of the special
Prognostics of an Earthquake.

2. That during this dreadful noise, neither the Trees, nor Plants betrayed any
Agitation or Motion in the Air: which confirms their N^tion, who have styled
Earthquakes, Subterranean Thunders; and 't^s also a great prejudice to their
Opinion, who would obtrude upon us the conceit of Angels, or Spirits riding
Post through the Air. For had that been the cause of this Noise, and Shaking,
then, 1. The Motion would have born all one way, as coming from, and tending to
a determinate Point; whereas here, no Motion was discernable but that of
Trepidation. And 2. this violent Motion would have had the same effects with
Storms, and Tempests, cau^ed the same disturbance in the Air, tossed the tops
of Trees; for seeing that all Noise arises from the Collision of Bodies, to
which there is required a Motion proportionable to the Noise. Had th^se
supposed Spir^ts moved a^ such a rate, as to beget that Noise, they must do it
by Motion, which wo^ld have discovered it self in the common and ordinary
effects of Moti^n unless we will again fly to supernatural Reasons and
Miracles. Now that there was no such Commotion in the Air, is asserted by those
who were then abroad in the Fields, who were sensible of no such disturbance,
and which indeed created, or augmented their wonderment.

3. I observe that this Earthquake (for such I will now take the liberty to
call it) was not universal, in respect either of the Towns, or Countries, where
it came, but Topical; As being felt in one part of some Towns, and not in an
other; and again, observed in some whole Towns, yet not at all in some
Neighboring Villages; following perhaps the inviting track of the Nitrous, and
sulphurous Veins, and guided by the attractive Steams of the inflammable
materials. It was also Desultory; The next Village to us but at half a miles
distance knowing nothing of it, and yet some places more remote toward the
same point sharing in the Terror of it. And lastly it was Unequal, both as to
the Noise, and Trembling: and yet herein might possibly be a mistake; for it
might be from the weakness of their Houses, the Multitude, and largeness of
Windows, that the shaking was apprehended more terrible than in other places.

4. Very few missed the notice of this particular; That just before the
Concussion, the Air was very obscure, and yet immediately after it cleared up
and became very serene; And some do impute the former obscurity to those
fuliginous Reeks which from the Bowels of the Earth might creep forth; and the
after clearness to the violence of the discharged Subterraneous Thunder: But I
must entreat you, Sir, for your satisfaction to go to the Philosophers.

For that which will most profitably fill up the Remainder of my time, and
sheer, must be an enquiry of another Nature, viz. What good use, and practical
improvement may be made of this great work of God? And my Pen will more
cheerfully travel in that Service: 1. Because I perceive some too apt to abuse
these Appearances. For there are those (by what Patent I know not) that would
Monopolize all the Prodigious Works of God to their own use and behoof; As if
the Almighty was bound to abett some single Party, or to espouse their little
Interests; when as indeed to the impartial Considerer his Works speak the same
language with his Word, which indifferently preaches to us all: Hag. 1.5.
Now therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways. And the Echo
which all our hearts should make to this voice of God, Lam. 3.40.
is this, Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. There are
those also, who swelling with Atheistical Scorn, can throw up their Noses at
these Providence of God, and with one puff of contemptuous Arrogance blow away
all considerations of them, saying in their Hearts; Who is the Lord that we
should Tremble before him? And 2. the rather, because the rare and unusual
Works of God have ever been adjudged by the most Sober, and Temperate of
Christians to be Warnings and Awakenings to any people: Thus Eusebius of the
Prodigies in Jerusalem, tells us they were (...) -- And (...), Eccles. Hist.
Lib. 3. c. 8.
The evident Prognostics of Future Judgments, and the very Sermons of God
himself. And surely when the great God shall condescend to preach to a People
by his Works who have so notably despised his Word, it will become High and
Low, the Best and the Worst of the Sons of Men, to be his Attentive Auditors.

(1.) First then we may certainly learn a lesson of Praise to God, that we were
not all Buried in the Ruins of our own Habitations. He that shook our Houses,
could as easily have overturned our Houses; but he showed both his Greatness
that he could do it, and yet his Goodness that he would not do it.

The unquestionable Records of History do abound with Instances of this Nature:
Josephus informs us, Antiqu. Lib. 15. De Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 14.
that in the 7th year of Herod above ten thousand persons were overwhelmed by
Earthquake in the Ruins of their Houses: but I shall not attempt to reconcile
himself to himself, when (speaking of the same dreadful providence) he tells
us, that there chanced a great Earthquake which slew thirty thousand People.

Pliny in his Second Book of Not. Hist. reports, c. 48.
That in the Reign of Tib. Caesar, there happened the greatest Earthquake that
ever was known in the Memory of Man, whereby Twelve Cities in Asia were
destroyed in one Night: But Nicephorus reckons Fourteen, and gives us their
Names, Ephesus, Magnesia, Sardis, Mosthene, Hiero-caesarea, Philadelphia,
Tmolis, Timus, Myrina, Cyme, Apollonia, Hyrcana, Dia, Cybara. And I think it
was the most remarkable Charity that cruel Emperor was ever guilty of, that he
contributed to their Re-edifying. Ne Provincias ulla Liberalitate sublevavit,
excepta Asia, disjectis terrae Motu Civitatibus: Sueto. in vit. Tib.
He never extended his bounty to any of the Provinces, excepting only Asia,
when so many Cities were destroyed by an Earthquake. But he that had so few
good works to boast of, might well be allowed to be proud of that one, and
therefore to eternize his Magnificence, he coined Money with this Memorative
inscription: Civitatibus Asiae Restitutis: In memory of the Rebuilding the
Asiatick Cities.

Thus An. Mun. 3599. Deus Helicen, and Muram, Achaiae urbes undis, terraeque
hiatibus absorpsit: Johan. de Mey. Sacr. Phys. Par. 2. cap. 3.
God (says my Author) swallowed up Helice and Mura, two Cities of Achaia, with
a Deluge, and Earthquake. And An. Chr. 1424. in Catalonia twenty one Cities
were utterly destroyed, and Pertona devoured by Earthquake. And in Burgundy, a
Mountain removing out of its pla^e, destroyed many thousands of the poor
Husbandmen.

Psalm. 147.17.
The Psalmist asks this Question, Who can stand before his Cold? And certainly
should the Almighty let loose upon us his Winter's Cold, or graduate the
Summer's Heat; should he take his Restraint from the Seas, which he holds in
the Hollow of his Hand; or should he pluck off his double Bridle with which he
curbs the raging Storms, and foaming Tempests; should he enlarge his commission
to Thunder, Lightning, Earthquakes, we must in one moment perish. But the Lord
reigns, and therefore let the Earth rejoice, Psalm. 97.1.
let the Multitude of the Isles be glad thereof. And let us amongst the rest
acknowledge and rejoice that the Lord reigns: for, as all Naturalists teach
us, no places are so obnoxious to Earthquakes as Islands; because the Earth
being there most Cavernous and Porous, admits the Humors, Arist^t. 2. Meteor.
of which are begotten Vapors, which striving to deliver themselves from
Prison, and Repelled by the Waves of the Sea, being rarefied by violent motion,
and requiring more room, force themselves a passage, with most dreadful
effects: No People in the World are so obliged to thankfulness as Islanders,
being daily preserved from Deluges and Earthquakes to which we are so liable.

(2.) Let the sleepy World Awake, and the secure Sinner rowze up his sluggish
Soul to Repentance at these Lesser Concussions, lest God destroy them by
Greater. Men are certainly in a deep, and dead sleep when Earthquakes will not
Alarm their Consciences: If we despise him that thus speaks to us from the
Earth, the next time we may hear of him from Heaven. When our Heads, begin to
ache, who can secure us that it shall not end in a Fever, which may put a period
to our Lives? And when the Earth begins to Tremble, who knows whether it be not
an Accession toward that last, and great Ague fit of the Creation, wherein the
Heavens, and the Earth, and all the Elements shall be blended in an Eternal
Chaos? for we are warned from the unerring records of Holy Writ, that There
shall be great Earthquakes, Luke 21.11.
before the great and notable Day of the Lord come: which prophesy though it
received a lesser accomplishment in the destruction of Jerusalem, yet most
learned Men are agreed, that these shall be the prodromous tokens of the
D^ssolution of the World.

Heathen Rome it self had such dreadful apprehensions of Earthquakes, that upon
these occasions, they appointed solemn days of Sacrifice to their Gods: Sueton.
in vita Claudii.
Nay the Historian observes it of Claudius Caesar; that he gave order, ut
quoties terra in urbe movisset, ferias, advooata concione, Praetor indiceret:
That as often as there was an Earthquake in the City, the Praetor should
proclaim a Holy Day. And A. Gellius observes that because Philosophers could
not agree about the Natural causes, that therefore whenever they decreed a
solemn Day upon this Account, they never named the particular Deity to whom it
was dedicated, (as otherwise the custom was) lest they should mistake the God
that caused it; And that if the day were polluted, they expiated it by
Sacrifice, Si Deo, si Doae, etc. to that Numen at all adventures, whether it
were God or Goddess. Agreeable to the practice of the Athenians, who in the
time of a raging Pestilence, that they might be sure to hit upon the right
Deity, erected an Altar, and offered sacrifice thereon, (...), to that God who
was fit for the purpose: most probably the same which St. Paul found at Athens
with this inscription, (...), To the unknown God. Acts 17


And as the Roman Decemviri in these exigencies were enjoined to consult the
Sibylline Oracles, so let us who have a more sure word of Prophesy, and to whom
there is but one, the Living, and the true God, consult the H ly Scriptures for
our duty, which direct us to the Sacrifices of Prayer, Repentance, a Broken and
Contrite Heart, and above all to our Advocate with the Father, to turn away his
deserved Wrath. And let us all make the same use of this, Act. 16.30, 31.
which the Jayler made of his Earthquake and cry out, Sir's! what must we do to
be Saved? and take the answer with thankfulness: Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and you shall be Saved.

(3.) Let us search out those particular Sins for which God may have a
Controversy with us, Neglect, and Contempt, or at best an inconsiderable, and
disproportionable improvement of the Gospel, Pride, fullness of Bread, Security,
Worldliness, indifferency of Spirit in Religion. Christ charges Sardis, that
she had a Name to Live, and yet was Dead. And History informs us that God
reckoned with Asia by Earthquakes about the 12 of Nero An. Chr. 68. Nothing
less than a serious through-reformation of these abominati^ns will divert the
displeasure of God. What the Natural Effects of Earthquakes have been,
Naturalists are very liberal in their informations: How they have rent away
some parts and limbs of a Country from the main body; so was Sicily torn off
from Italy; so was Cyprus forced from the continent of Syria; Euboea, from the
main Land of Boeotia; and as some think, by an Earthquake was Britain divided
from France. And how sometimes they have heaved up Islands in the midst of the
Seas, as it were to compensate the loss of those which they had swallowed up:
Thus were Delos, Rhodus, Aenaria, with some others raised out of the Bosom of
the Ocean, into which by the like cause they may again subside. And how they
have caused Pestilential Contagions from that exhalation, which being long pent
up in the Bowels of the Earth contracts poisonous qualities, which breaking
forth, impress their Ve^em, and Malignity upon our Bodies; And how they cause
barrenness of the Earth, from the same poisonous exhalations, which as they
pass through the pores of the Earth do not only leave a venomous Tincture in
the Earth it self, but destroy the seminal Particles of the Seeds already
lodged in the Ground. Let the Natural Philosophers spend their verdict how they
please; all I shall say is this, that they may signify more to us then they
can effect.

Psalm. 104.32.
(4.) Let us therefore own the Hand of God in these shakings: who looks upon the
Earth and it shakes, who touches the Hills and they Smoke. If a look of God
can shake the Earth, what can his touch do? and if the Finger of God be so
powerful, what is his Arm? Second Causes of these covulsive Motions, must be
allowed, but not to jostle out the First, to whom the other are subordinate,
concatinated to, and depend upon: Let the subtle Cardan, and Scaliger quarrel,
and vex themselves and others, whether Fire, Water, or Air be the true causes
of these Commotions; Let others tell us how these Subterraneous Thunders owe
their Birth to sulphurous, Pseudodox. Epidem. p. 69
and Nitrous Veins fired, upon rarefaction, and forceing their way through
resisting Bodies. Let the Heathens call their Idol Neptune (...), A. Gell.
Noct. At. Lib. 2.
the great Earth-shaker; we are taught to eye, adore, and fear before the Lord,
who hangs the Earth upon nothing, and can thither reduce it.

(5.) Lastly, let us labor to get an Interest in this great God, and live by
Faith upon him, Psalm. 46.2.
then shall we not need to fear though the Earth be removed. Psa. 125.1.
For they that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be
removed, but stands fast for ever.

Thus far, Sir, at your Importunity I have drawn out this Discourse, for your
private entertainment and satisfaction: I have already exceeded the bounds of a
Letter; And if the Remainder of my Paper will give me leave, I will take leave,
when I have subscribed my self,

Jan. 18. 1675/6. Sir, your humble Servant. N. N.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Sign of the Peacock in
Chancery Lane, and in the Poultry, near Cornhill.


