(...) the ground of Temptation is in the heart (...) the Creature.
WEre there not a ground and part in the creature, the Devil has power in, and
over, no creature could be tempted to sin, and offense to Gods Spirit of truth
in the heart; for no thing or creature ^^thout thy sense adulterate with it)
can tempt thee; the ^eness and adiction to sin and offense to the Spirit of
God, ^g in a mind subject to vanity, and adicted to such temp^^^^on, the Spirit
of God does manifest (to and in the crea^^^^), which state all creatures are
made subject to, not wil^^^^ly, but by reason of him who has subjected the
same, in (...) (which causes the groaning and traveling together of (...)
creation in pain) to be delivered from the bondage of corrup^^^^ waiting for
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of the body, From. 8. 20, 21, etc. which
state the temptation works (...) that the tempter has a part in (in the
creatures ^nesse).

But if the mind of such creatures be strongly bent and set ^d upon that the
tempter leads to, and works in (in a part ^th power over,) that the spirit of
God manifests his ^^^gment against, in a sense awakened in the creature [of
(...) same,] the hope of God (in that thus subjected) is de^ed from, that is
given for an Anchor to the soul, in the ^e of trial [that is sure and
steadfast,] and so the man runs ^eadlong against the Rock (that through
presumption or ^^^pair he splitteth himself against,) and never comes to the
^^^^h that gives evidence of things not seen [in a state of hope (...)*] and
that is the substance of things hoped for; and when (...) of tribulation
overtaketh (which shall come on eve^^ soul that sins,) it works not
patience, neither comes he to the experience, that works and preserves in the
hope that makes not ashamed, ( Christ in us the hope of glory, that brings to
endure the cross, and despise the shame of the world,) but faith in God for
deliverance [in and from such state] is weak, and the love of God it works by,
grows cold, and the mercy and fo^givenesse of God not kept in, but dies from
that state of the creature, and so he grows sensual in judgment, and
divelish, watchfullnesse over the work of the enemy being gone from, and a
departure out of the counsel of God for advice, and a self security got up and
over the soul, and a hardiness over the man, where is the fierceness, and
heady high-mindednesse, and a despising them that are good, and wilfulness in
every evil work [in such his souls condition], and then there is one past
feeling, and given up to a reprobate sense, and to believe lies and to be
damned: But such that live in a sense of their own weakness, and of the enemies
work and besettings, are always kept and preserved in a fear and watchfulness
over self (in this particular), and have a strong faith and confidence in God
(under all the trials they may meet with in the world) of deliverance in all
and every straight they have been and are brought into, in the same mind they
are made sencible of their weakness, (and have been ready to prefer every one
in that work before themselves,) and there is a watchfulness over the work and
power of the enemy, until deliverance spring up in the soul from God, through a
life that ha^h been hid with Christ in God, and a secret work begun in the soul
by the spirit of God, in which they have been kept retire to God, and out of
the worlds fight, that has a judgment according to appearance; but as Christ
their life does appear and break forth, so they come with him, and appear in
the glory of the work, that has been done in secret, and spoke in the ear,
but now comes to be made manifest openly, and preached on the house top, in
what is come forth through the tribulations and fiery trials, pure and refined,
and has the patience of Saints, and experience of the man of God, from which
they can declare of the glory of this work, in a hope they cannot be made
ashamed in; or afraid of evil tidings from men of corrupt minds concerning the
things of Gods Kingdom (that are eternal and everlasting).

And as to this ground and part in the creature, it is flesh, and has the
fleshly motions and actions (arising in and proceeding from it) through a
tickling delight of fancy, that works therein; for that delight was first
fancied in the flesh (when Adam began to look out at the glory of the state he
was first placed in, and was thereby struck into a deep sleep, in the dream of
which was fancied the delight of the flesh, and she took from him that which
promoted that work in secret, and loves the secrecy of pleasure she takes
therein); and were there real satisfaction in what answers that part (in which
the creature has a sense and knowledge of good and evil) he should never more
hunger therein; but the contrary being experienced, I need not go far for a
testimony hereof, in that many do know, that the Tempter over-powering the
desire of him that wants opportunity (always to put in practice what the mind
lusts into and longs after) being ready to attend with evil, as opportunity
serves him therein, does as enviously accuse, as subtily tempt; and wherein he
cannot persuade the creature to go on (in any sin and offense to the spirit of
God), and to embolden himself against the testimony thereof (after lead aside
thereby, and overcome thereinto), he is there ready to object the folly of such
fancy the creature was lead by, that he may come to despair of any sure guide
to his mind; but if he be once prevented in this work, and find himself
discerned in the house of God, presenting himself before the Lord, he (when the
day of the sons of men comes to be considered of by him [that judges
righteously] that he is a perfect man, and one that fears God and escheweth
evil [that he thus has wrought on], and he himself brought into the same
consideration) to avoid his own torment, begins to accuse for worldly respects;
and then, do such serve God for naught? Have thou not made a hedge about him
and all that he has? put forth now thy hand and touch all that he has, and he
will curse thee to thy face; and then having given into his hands all that he
has power over, be sure what ever is near to such a man; be it wife, or
children, or goods, (oxen, sheep, or camels,) that which is most dear in
affections (out of the perfect life) is under his power, and that which his
power stands in, is left to tempt, that he may curse God and dye.

And the temptation is, and in every man works, according to the place they are
in, or gift they have received* from God (be it inward or outward), wherein the
greatest and best gifts a man or creature may receive from God, are accompanied
with the chiefest and worst temptations; for what ever state the creature is
in, or gift he have received, was, and is that which took being in and from a
life that desired it and led thereto; the thing and creatures life (desiring or
desired) being not absolutely good or evil (in its self), though both good and
evil was and is concerned therein, and is accordingly so made to the creature
(by the frame and temper of what the desiring part works in, and is acted by);
for that which tempts the desire, and feeds the desirable part (in the
creature) knows both, though it properly enjoys but one, and can serve but one
master at a time; wherein the gift of God deferreth the desire of the creature,
in a blessing or curse its condition is capable of, in that whatever has been
desired out of a capacity of Gods blessing, is pursued with trouble and care
(of the life it is received in); therefore the thrifty, rich and honorable (in
and of this world) and also the unthrifty, poor and ignoble (therein) have
purchased a condition (in a desire of their life's motion, of ease and
satisfaction to the flesh) that they are tried in the exercise of and under,
that the knowledge of a good and evil in, becomes thereby a temptation to them
(to presume or despair of Gods blessing therein); and thus the desire of no
creature is, or has been answered beyond what both a good and evil does
attend them in, and the temptation to evil is answerable to any good the life
of the world may desire, wherein no men are tempted by the gift of God, but
from his own desire and hearts lust, which being conceived brings forth sin,
and sin finished brings forth death (that which is out of a capacity of good
and blessing to any condition, being the evil of the desire and strength of the
temptation, aggravating hurt to such creatures state, that God suffers not
the temptation to work toward beyond his ability therein to preserve (in what
he is thus tried by): And as no temptation of affliction occasioned by the sin
and offense to Gods spirit, is for the present joyous, but grievous etc. so
there is no temptation to sin, but is joyous and delightsome to a part, in the
present acting of, and committing the same: wherein is the creatures trial
(after the acting and committing of sin) which he will join to, whether that
which over-powreth the joyous and delightful part (of and in the mind) to
vanity, or that which manifests the vanity and folly of such adictions of the
minds delight.

Therefore how requisite is it (in this day) that a spirit of distinction (in
God) go along with men in their several judgments of the work of God, that are
ready to make themselves judges of and over all that does cross their opinions
and persuasions (in that way or form the mind is adicted to and set on), and a
hardness against all that cannot presertly conform to what man is so ready to
set up; but let the spirit of sound judgment and of a sound mind weigh the
matter (in this particular), and let men be quiet until God arise to be Judge
of the controversy, and the fierce and high will then be bowed down (to the
foot of God), and the bitter aswaged and allayed, and all will be cool, and in
good order; for I am sencible the tempter has got ground (in this day) over
the conditions of many, in whom God has begun a good work; and had I not first
read at home, I could never have seen abroad.

And thus much I know, and am made sencible of, that to terrify people with
words and exclamations and out cries against any sin and offense to Gods
spirit, that does not reach Gods witness (wherein the way to escape the evil
and danger, as well as the danger it self is shown) does become a vain babble in
this day of God, and at best can but make subject for wrath; for though the
creature of God may and does suffer in that part which has been tempted to
folly and vanity of this world (in sin and offense to Gods spirit); yet is not
he the sinner and offender against Gods spirit, that with his mind does serve
the Law of God (though he may have that part wherein dwells and rules (in the
members) that which has overpowered the whole man in the acting and committing
of sin, and with his flesh has served the Law thereof); but in the misplacing
of the mind, the tempter has entered, and the temptation prevailed, to the
bringing that in him, and him (in that) into and under the sufferance of the
enemies work, that has his delight chiefly and alone in God, and never have
bent the minds delight after satisfaction to and in the flesh, and sought
opportunities to answer the same (though therein he has been tempted by a Law
in the members warring, etc.)

For which cause I may be hearkened to by the weak, and the poor may have an
eye and ear well inclined (in this particular), and a mind bended to my
complaint, and ready to receive me in that which thinks and means well to all,
and no ill to any: In that I have tried many things, and have had a mind
exercised in diverse conditions (as well in the outward as inward), and in all
conditions had learned content; but no condition I have found like to that
which is low, and poor, and mean, (in selfs eye); for in this I have been
comforted under the power and pangs of death (when like a flood my soul was
compassed about therewith), and the life of submission to the will of God, is
that whereby I have known many fiery darts of Satan quenched: And if any are
tempted (in the particular before mentioned,) let them not conclude they are so
tempted of God, but from their own hearts lust, for God tempts no man.

But to the ground of life (in which the root stands, and from whence the tree
springs) let all have an eye of respect, that has brought forth what gives
knowledge of good as well as evil, and evil as well as good; and while the
fruit (that has been tasted) is fed on by the mind made wise therein (as a
God), the temptation needs must remain (with and in the man) and a necessity
provoked in him that has abused a state of liberty and freedom of spirit (he
at first was placed in); for the tree that God created (when he saw all that
was made, to be good) may and does tempt, in the sufferance of what was
ordained for his creatures trial and standing (in that state), though Gods
will is the creatures preservation under the same: And let none be too
confident in selfs work and approbation (in the first man's will, and that man's
part), but let such that think they stand, take heed least they fall; and then
the same measure has been meeted to others, such must expect from God, that
come under the condemnation of the wicked, for such need no other accuser than
Moses, in whom they seem to trust.

Think not therefore I will accuse thee to God (in these things), for one is
judge that is near thee (that do such things): For concerning the fiery
trials, they are manifest to the flesh, in which we have great trouble on every
hand (both within and without), though no temptation happens, but what was
common to the Saints of old, and these things are suffered for the trial of our
faith in God, that on every side being spoken evil of, we might have great
boldness and confidence toward him, knowing our reward to be with him;
wherefo^e arm your selves with the same mind (as did him that suffered in the
flesh, that ceased from sin, that he no longer should live the rest of his
days in the lust of his flesh, but in the will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 2.) For the
time is come, that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution: And when there was a suffering for evill-doing, we had our reward
with men, and though we took their buffetings patiently, yet what glory had we
therein; but hereunto are we now called of Christ, that for well-doing we also
suffer patiently, knowing that this is good and acceptable with God, as he that
was reviled, reviled not again, and when he suffered threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteousl^: Therefore let the woman no
longer lay the blame on the Serpent, nor the man on the woman, seeing every one
must suffer for his own evil, and the earth does labor and groan under her
sore travails; but if man does suffer loss in his works, it is that he may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

What therefore shall I say to these things? if God be for us who can be
against us? And if he spared not his own son, but freely gave him up for us
all, shall he not with him freely give us all things? Seeing it is thankworthy,
that for conscience sake we endure grief, and suffer wrongfully, that we may
know how to behave our selves among the froward, as well as the gentle; and who
is he that can harm us while we are followers of that which is good?

Therefore will I lay no greater burden on any, than what is already borne, and
of which the upright in heart is made judge, and to them that are under the
temptation of the enemy I write these things, that they arm themselves with
patience in God, and be like minded in the truth, to him that is gone before:
And the God of truth and peace preserve the simple hearted to the end of this
work, and in the end crown them with immortality in God.

THE END.

