THE NARRATIVE OF THE SESSIONS, February 26. 1678/9. WITH A particular Account
of the TRIAL of the Notorious COINERS, That received Sentence for TREASON: AND
All other Malefactors Condemned, Burnt in the Hand, or to be Whipped, and their
respective Crimes.

LICENSED, February 27. 1678/9.



LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678/9.

The Narrative of the Proceedings at the Sessions, February 26. 1678/9.
THis Sessions beginning in the Old Bailey, 26 February, the first person
brought to Trial, was an unhappy Wench, whom the Devil had seduced to
endeavor, to cover the filthy sin of Fornication, with the Scarlet Mantle of
Murder, having made away her own newborn Bastard-Child, and in a very
barbarous manner cut the Throat of it so violently, that the Head was almost
separated from the body, which being found so exposed in an Alley near Bishops
gate street, and not far from the Prisoners dwelling, search was made for all
persons liable to be suspected; and amongst the rest she charged, who at first
denied that she had had any Child, at last confessed that, but not the whole
truth: however, on full evidence, nothing necessary here to be related, she was
found guilty.

As were likewise a Man and a Woman for a Burglary, who broke into a poor
Woman's House in the Evening, whilst she was gone to buy Candle, and upon her
return, were taken in the manner, having removed several Goods, but carried
none quite away, though narrowly prevented, for the Man-prisoner being by
profession a Porter, was busily preparing for their removal. As for the Woman,
her Husband but the last Sessions received the reward of his Merits at Tyburn.

Another Woman whipped but the last Sessions save one, was now Convicted for a
Felony, stealing a parcel of Cloths out of an House, but discovered before she
had quite secured the booty, and forced to drop them in the street, for which
she was Condemned.

A Man coming to drink at an Alehouse in Birchin-lane, made such use of his
Art to convey away a Silver Tankerd, but scarce knowing what to do with it when
he had it, gets a band-box, and putting the Tankard therein, goes to another
Alehouse in Finch-lane, where he was wholly a stranger, and gives the said Box
to the Gentlewoman of the House, to lay up for him till he called for it; who
perceiving something in it to rattle, and the Box having neither Lock nor Seal,
out of an innocent curiosity took up the Lid, where seeing a Tankard Inscribed,
with the Name and place of Dwelling of her Neighbor, she sent for him, and
sometime after the Prisoner calling for his Box, was apprehended, and now burnt
in the hand, which he well deserved, if we consider either his wickedness in
stealing, or his folly in managing the Theft.

The same punishment was awarded another Man for the like offense of stealing a
Tankard from an House in Woodstreet, with whom was Indicted a Woman, but she
passing for his Wife, and so the Law favorably supposing what she was
concerned in the Fact, to be by Coertion of her Husband, was acquitted.

A young fellow coming to a Sempstresses shop, pretended to buy Cravats, who
showed him several, and some Money he had bidden for two, which she refusing to
except, he resolved to have them cheaper, (though like to prove a dear bargain)
for on a sudden he betakes him to his heels, but she crying out after him, he
was quickly seized. In this case, because he had the Goods delivered into his
hand by the Prosecutor to look upon, some scruple was raised, whether the
running away with them afterward, was Felony; so that the Jury found the
matter specially, and it is left to be determined by the Judges.

A bold Woman, that had lately been Servant to a Gentleman of Quality, having
purloined a considerable quantity of his Plate, and being thereof fairly
Convicted, was sentenced to dye.

In the Afternoon, on Wednesday, a Lad belonging to a Ship, called the Laurence
and Mary, lying below Wapping-dock, was Tried for Killing one Tho. Young on
board another Ship, called the Advance, lying hard by the former. The Prisoner
was trying his skill in shooting at the Cat-head of his own ship as a Mark; but
the Bullet glancing thereon, flew to the other ship, and through the boards of
the great Cabin, and there unhappily killed the said Young, who was casually
come on board to see the Ship, hitting him in the Forehead, that he presently
died; whereupon they that were with him running out on the Deck, and enquiring
who fired that Piece, the Prisoner owned it, and presently came on board of his
own accord; declaring both then, and now at the Bar, his hearty sorrow for the
Mischance: for as he had no malice, so could he not ever see the person dead,
or those that were with him, because they were in the Cabin as aforesaid.
However, it being adjudged an unlawful Act in him to shoot so negligently on
the River, where so many Vessels and People are continually passing, he was
found Guilty of Manslaughter, and carries a Memorandum in his Hand, to make him
and others more wary for the future.

The next was a base and horrid Cause, horrid in the pretensions, and a sin not
to be named amongst Christians; and base in the management, since nothing of
that kind could be made appear. The person accused was a Man of good repute and
competent fortune, which it is feared was the first motive to the Prosecution,
hoping to get a sum of Money out of him, rather than endure the disgrace even
of being charged or suspected of such an odious Crime. The Girl that pretended
the wrong done her, being between 13 and 14 years of Age, told her Story very
confidently; but by her own showing it appeared, that for 12 Weeks or upwards
she never spoke a word of it, and two Surgeons and a Midwife that had searched
her, utterly confuted what she alleged; besides 'twas made out, that her
Father would have compounded the business, but demanded 100 l. etc. Upon all
which Circumstances, and many persons of Repute justifying the Prisoners credit
and conversation for many years without Blemish, he was thereupon acquitted by
the Jury, and with particular notice of his Innocence from the Court
discharged, and the Girls Father ordered to give Security for his good
Behavior.

A Fellow at Stepney having one Night made an invasion on an Hen-roost, and
carried away captive about 18 of them, of which some were found at one of his
Neighbors house, where he left them, was for the same found Guilty of petty
Larceny, and ordered to be Whipped. As also was another for stealing a laced
Wastcoat out of a Ship, which was sound upon his Back.

A Woman was Convicted of Felony, for robbing one in Hattongarden on the 2d of
February. Having lately been Servant there, she had observed where they used to
lay the Key of their outward Door, when they went forth, and so comes with two
of her Companions, goes into the house breaks open a Closet door and a Desk,
and takes away 11 l. odd Money and a Sword, and so locked the Street-door and
go their way* but left behind them a Chezil, which was proved to have been
borrowed the same Afternoon by her in Fetter-lane: and that she and two men did
go forth together, as soon as she had got that Tool, and were also seen at the
House where the Robbery was done.

Two Rag-women were Indicted for stealing two Gowns and several other
Wearing-cloaths, in the Strand. A Gentlewomans door being accidentally left
open, there were several strong presumptions against them, but no positive
proof, so they were acquitted on Thursday in the forenoon.

A person was Convicted for stealing two Livery Cloaks, and the seats out of
two Coaches at Piccadilly, and being pursued, the Goods were taken in the same
Room with him at Maribone. So was another for breaking open a Shop in
Fetter-lane the 14th of February, and stealing one Beaver, and several other
Hats, to the value of Ten pound; some of which were taken upon him in
Middlesex, and therefore he was tried by that Jury.

A Wench, formerly a servant to a Washerwoman in St. Margarets Westminster,,
had four Indictments brought against her for stealing of Linen, some of which
was the Washerwomans own, but most of the parcels other peoples: The Prisoner
acknowledged she did pawn the things, but pretended it was done by the Dames
order; and it did appear, she had sent her sometimes with things to the
Pawn-brokers, so that she was cleared of three Indictments; but a Gentlewomans
shift that her Mistress washed to, being found on her back, she was on the
fourth found guilty, to the value of ten pence, and so to be well whipped. As
likewise were two Men for stealing a couple of Pigs at Wapping, they appearing
very sorrowful for their Crime; which as they affirmed it to be the first, so
they protested it should be the last that ever they would be guilty of, in that
or the like kind.

A Woman Arraigned for breaking an House in the day time, and stealing Goods,
and that she had confessed one put them out to her at an hole; denying now very
confidently, that she knew of, or was any way concerned in the business; the
Court of a sudden asking her, what the Woman's Name was, that so flung the
things out? to which, before she was aware, she replied, Mary, and so in effect
owned her own share in the Fact; but the things being of no great value, it is
like only to cost her a whipping Pilgrimage.

But the most considerable Transactions of this day, were the Trials of two
most notorious Coiners and Clippers of Money; who upon full and plain Evidence,
and their own Confession at Bar, were found guilty of two Indictments of
High Treason apiece; and indeed, it is believed, they have not equals in that
wicked Mystery in England. They stamped Groats, Nine-pences, Six-pences,
Shillings, Half-Crowns, and Five-shilling pieces; no sort came amiss to them;
and they had an Art to make a Nine-pence or Groat just new made, look as if it
had been Coined these hundred years. Two Witnesses swore directly against each
of them, that they had severally seen them at work, both Coining and Clipping,
and produced great variety of the individual pieces, which they had seen pass
through their skill and handling. Their Instruments likewise, mixed Metals, and
other Utensils taken in their respective Lodgings were publicly shown. They
were both of a Gang, and confessed they had for some years been concerned in
such practices. The Witnesses had been acquainted with them, and designing a
discovery, seemed to comply with them, and furnish them with large Money, which
first they would Clip, and with those Clippings and baser Metals, Coin new
Money, and then Clip that too to make it pass with less suspicion. Four
Five-shilling pieces they will afford for twenty shillings good Money, and
twenty shillings in Groats of their own Manufacture, for fifteen shillings
Sterling; and one of them offered to teach one of the Witnesses such his Trade
for six pound, and to make and sell rare stamps for Coining, at Ten pound a
pair. The matter was so evident, that they had nothing to say for themselves,
and so could not but be both found guilty by the Jury, of the several Crimes of
Treason, wherewith they stood charged, and were accordingly condemned to be
Drawn and Hanged.

Two honest 'men of Fulham were charged for stealing a Mare, but upon a long
disquisition of the matter, it not appeared that the Mare in question, was the
same the Prosecutor lost, but rather on the contrary, that one of the Men at
the Bar, had this Mare given him by a Worthy Gentleman in Sussex, whereupon,
they were acquitted. So likewise was a Woman of St. Martins in the fields
Indicted for Murder, but by the Witnesses it only appeared, That as long ago
as last Easter Holy Days, a fray happened between her and the party deceased,
and that they were down together, but the Prisoner uppermost; that the said
party lived till since Christmas, and then dyed, having been infirm, and as
was asserted, troubled with a Dropsy.

Three persons were Convicted of Felony, for Robbing a Scotch-Merchant (or
Pedlar) of above five pounds worth of Holland Callime, flaxen Stockings, etc.
in the night Feb. 1. at his Lodging in Rochester, three Men forced into his
Chamber with drawn Swords, etc. who took away the Goods, but understanding
afterward, some Pedlers were seen carry a bundle, he on enquiry got their
Names, whom he followed, and at the House of one of them, found part of his
things, and hard by the Persons, and on one of their legs, a pair of his
Stockings, in another pocket his Tobacco-box, and a third confessed the
Robbery; whereupon, being Indicted only in Middlesex, it was but a simple
Felony, for which they escaped with a Brand; whereas in Kent it would have
proved a Burghlary, which mexcy the Court minded them of, as a grand Argument
to warn them from running into any future Crimes of that kind, since they are
like no more to be indulged by any favor.

A complaint having been made, that a considerable sum of Money had been
extorted by some under Officers, from the Relations of a person lately
Executed, before they could obtain his Body to bury it, the Court was pleased
to inquire thereinto, and nobly expressing their detestation of the inhumane
practices of such Vulters, as would make a prey even of Men's Carcasses,
compelled one that had received some of the Money, to refund it in their
presence, with farther marks of displeasure threatened to be inflicted.

There were in all fourteen burnt in the Hand, and nine Condemned to Die, viz.
two Men for Treason, one Woman for Murder, a Man and a Woman for Burghlary,
and four Women for notorious House-breakings and Felonies, most of them having
formerly been Whipped, burnt in the Hand, or received other chastisements, and
yet would take no warning.

FINIS.

