A NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings AT THE Sessions House In the Old-Bailey, April
21, 1680. The Number of persons Condemned for High Treason and other Crimes.
IT would be both too tedious, and to little purpose, to publish every
particular Trial and the Circumstances of all ill Acts which were here
examined, and the Actors thereof brought to Justice; we shall only speak of
the most considerable, amongst which we must account
The business of Mr. Harrison, Indicted for the Murder of one Mr. Jacob: they
lived at Westminster, and were both Swordmen: the party killed having a
suspicion of his Wise, had several times had quarrels with him about it, and
forewarned him from keeping her company; but notwithstanding, understood one
day that they were together, and was so enraged, that the Prisoner thought fit
to make his escape, as fast as he could backwards, to avoid his fury, who came
upon him with his Sword, and made several passes at him, so that the Prisoner
was obliged to draw his own Sword, which he used so unhappily, that Mr. Jacob
was killed. Upon a long discussion of the whole Circumstances, Mrs. Jacob being
an Evidence against him, he was found guilty of Minslaughter.

A brutish fellow, said to belong to Bridewell, was found guilty by the Jury
for Middlesex, for a barbarous Rape, committed on a Child not above seven years
old, and very small of growth for that age; he enticed her into the House where
he and his Mother dwelt, by giving her an Apple, and there began to practice
his filthiness, which he pursued so far, that the Child some few days after,
complaining to its Mother, who when she came to search, sound her most
lamentably abused: several Women, and two Chyrurgeons gave Evidence against
him, making out the Crime as far as the Law requires, and the Child from the
very first, and ever constantly charged him with it, and that no body else had
meddled with her. It Was proved that he had a Gonorrhea, of the soul disease, when
he did this villainy, and thereby endangered the Child's life, as well with that
Contagion, as by the violence, so that he was justly found guilty.

Another was prosecuted for a Rape, by a woman of about four or five and twenty
years of age, but it was done, as she said, two years ago, and though she had
seen the man several times, yet she never complained till now, so that it was
supposed, that because he did not come at her again, or to get a little Money,
was the chief cause and end of the prosecution.

There were a great number of Clippers and Coyners Arraigned at this Sessions,
whereof several were Convicted, others Acquitted: of the former sort were Mrs
Richardson and her Son, a brisk bold young fellow, and pretending himself a
Dancing Master; another woman was Indicted with them, but Acquitted. Mrs.
Richardson had brought a Trunk locked to this other woman's house, and set it
obscurely under the Cellar-stairs; in this Trunk there were found the Tools for
Clipping; likewise at home when she was taken, there were some Clippings
discovered, and she cried out of a window, and said, she was undone; and the
Son endeavored to fly for it, so that they were found guilty.

One Underwood, and a Wench he kept company with (a very courteous Lady, for at
the Bar she boasted, she never had been unkind to any man in her life) were
likewise Convicted of High Treason for the like offense, much clipped Money and
Clippings, and the necessary Implements being found upon them. Both these and
two former lived near Pickadilly, and it is supposed, were all of a gang, or had
conversation together; they were first discovered by means of a Card-match
Girl, to whom this Underwoods Mistress boasted, that she could get a Guinney a
day by this Mystery; and told her something of the way, and who held a
Correspondence with them; but this Girl is since dead on a sudden, not without
suspicion of Poison, to prevent her Testimony: however, there was enough
without her to do their business, being both found guilty.

Another person who drove the same Trade alone by himself, was also found
guilty: the matter was proved so plainly on him, that there could be no doubt
or difficulty made of it.

A person living, in or near Grubstreet, and his Wife, were likewise charged
with the same Offense: The Evidence for the King made out several presumptions
against them, but there was a multitude of their Neighbors and others that
came in to testify as to their Credit, etc. And the Prisoners alleged, the
prosecution was upon an old grudge, and endeavored to recriminate upon one of
the chief Evidence; it did appear that four years ago, their House had been
searched on suspicion of this Crime of Clipping, and then nothing found that
could rendes them obnoxious to the Law, so that after a full and fair Trial
they were acquitted.

Several persons, as is usual every Sessions, were Convicted for stealing of
silver Tankards, and diverse for Shop-listing, the particulars too redious to
relate.

One Daniel Mackarty, an Irishman, was Tried and Convicted of Treason, as
being a Popish Priest: the manner of his Apprehension was thus. A woman in
Charles-street being very sick, this Father officiated with her, said Mass, and
Administered the Sacrament to her, of which the Nurse gave notice to some honest
Neighbors, who took out a Warrant and seized him in the said sick woman's
Chamber, who much interceded and begged that they would not take him away, for
if they did, she should be in danger of losing her Soul; but they advised her
to send for a Protestant Divine, and take instructions from him, and not to
trust such blind Popish guides, with their Idolatrous Masses, and foolish
Ceremonies of Extreme Unction and groundless Absolutions, where there is
neither true Faith or Repentance. The Nurse testified that she had heard the
Prisoner say Mass, and exercise other parts of the Priestly Function. Dr. Oats
likewise was a Witness against him, that he confessed to him that he was a
Priest when he was brought to his Chamber. In his Pocket when he was taken,
there was found a Petition to the Venetian Ambassador, expressed by the name of
Daniel Mackarty Priest, setting forth his being in want, and desiring relief;
as likewise a Letter in French directed to him, and signifying likewise, that
he was a Priest, which Papers were read in Court. He had little to say for
himself, but behaved himself impudently, calling the Witnesses scurrilous
names, etc. Nothing could be made more plain than his Priesthood, which in
truth he scarce denied, and so was found guilty, which he seemed not at all to
regard, being a person (as most of them are) of a wonderful confidence.

The Petition beforementioned was in French, and therein it was specified what
Order he was of; likewise there was another Paper in the same Language,
purporting to be directions how (if he were taken) he should behave himself,
what excuses and pretenses he should make, what he should say if confronted by
Doctor Oats, or any other of the Kings Evidence; whereby we may see they have
Lessons set them in every case. He thought to have baffled the woman that gave
Evidence against him, by asking her what clothes he had on when she heard him
officiate; who answered, the same he had now, whence he would infer that it
could not be, because in saying Mass, they use such and such Vestments; but
this was quickly contradicted, for though he had not all his Formalities, which
they cannot conveniently always, nor safely now especially, carry about with
them, yet to supply that defect, there was found about him, and now showed in
Court, a thing called in their holy Gibberish, A Stole, being a piece of Satin
or Taffata, of near two yards long, and three or four Inches broad, of a kind
of deep blew, or almost purple color, which they use to fling over their
shoulders, and that alone serves instead of all the rest of their gear. The
woman mentioning her hearing him say Mass, was asked how many were present, she
answered, she could not certainly tell, but was sure there was above
threescore; and being demanded if she knew any of them, replied, yes, there
were enough of them now about the Court, or in the yard, or words to that
effect.

There was a young Gentleman of good note, took a Trial on the Friday touching
a Rape charged to be committed on the Daughter of one Mrs. a Girl about ten
years of age. He was ordered by a Relation to demand Money of this Child's
Parents, who kept an Ale house, and they contrived, as may be thought, this
Stratagem not only to satisfy that Debt, but screw more Money out of him. The
Girl told the story that he meddled with her in the Chamber at her Mothers; and
her Sister a wench about sixteen years of age confirmed it, by saying she came
up and saw it, and that he gave her two shillings to hold her tongue; and
Midwives swore the Child had had some Abuse. But the Gentleman proved by a
Servant-maid, that the eldest Daughter went abroad, picked up a man, brought him
home, who went to bed with both her and her Sister, and began with the least
first, so that then she cried out and might receive the prejudice. It Was also
proved, that they sent for a Composition, 60 pound down, and Judgment of an
hundred more, and were importunate to have him give them so much, and then they
would put it up, etc. So that upon the whole matter, the Gentleman was fairly
Acquitted from this damnable Aspersion, and directions given to Prosecute the
Mother for keeping a lewd House.

A Woman was Convicted for stealing a Trunk of Lace, valued above 100 l. a
Country woman brought it to Town to sell; the Prisoner invites her to lodge
with her, in the night purloins it away by several of her Companions, who came
into the Room on frivolous pretenses. In the Morning cries out, she had lost
her own Muff, and by and by the Trunk was missed, and never could be heard of,
for which she was Condemned.

Mr. Thompson the Printer was admitted to Bail, there being no Indictment
against him, so were several of the Apprentices.

There were in all Fifteen burnt in the Hand, and no fewer than Four and twenty
that received Sentance of Death, of whom Three Women (one a Clipper) were, by a
Jury of Matrons, after they were Attainted found to be quick with Child, so
that as to them Execution must be respited. The Number being so great, the
common Bar could not contain them, but several of them were forced to be put
into Captain Richardsons seat: Many of them much lamented their condition, but
the Irish Popish Priest was observed to laugh at his going away from Sentance.

FINIS.

