A NARRATIVE OF AFFAIRS Lately received from his MAJESTY'S Island of Iamaica:
VIZ. I. His Excellency the Governor Sir Thomas Linch's Speech to the Assembly
met Sept. 21. 1682. II. Samuel Bernard Esquire Speaker of the said Assembly, his
Speech to the Governor. III. An humble Address from his Majesty's Council, and
the Gentlemen of the Assembly, to his most Sacred Majesty. IV. The Governor's
Speech at the Proroguing the Assembly.


HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers Hall. 1683.

A NARRATIVE OF Affairs from Iamaica.
His Excellency Sir Tho. Linch, Governor in Jamaica, his Speech at the
convening an Assembly (at St. Jago de la Vega) in Jamaica, Sept. 21. 1682.
GENTLEMEN,
AS I expect you should not do much, so I suppose you may imagine I should say
but little; the posture of our Affairs does not require it, nor will the
disorders of my head permit it: However, I must tell you, The Council and I
have convened you by the directions of your own Act, that enjoins your annual
Meeting and Sitting ten days; otherwise it is probable we had not given you this
trouble now.

Whatever may be said, I must profess I am glad of the occasion of seeing so
many of my good Friends together; but withal, I do assure you, it is not that
Consideration made me continue this Assembly: for, to be plain, if I believe
you knew (in October when the Laws past) that my Lord C. was removed, I must
needs conclude, you were neither partial to me as the King's Governor, nor
very kind as your Friend; and who reflects on it now, will say so.

But the reason that induced the Council and me to continue this, rather than
call another Assembly, is, we think the Country eased by it; and that they
cannot visibly make a worthier Choice: for it is you, Gentlemen, have made these
Laws, that we hope will be a Magna Charta to us and our Children, as well as a
Boundary to me and all future Governors. And if there be any thing to be added
or retrenched to make them pass at home, we judge it is fit you do it; that you
who have had the charge and trouble of raising this great Structure, should
have the thanks and glory of finishing it.

I suppose, Gentlemen, no body will enter into Disputes about the Legality of
this Assembly; for the Lords at home say it is lawful: And then you all know
you are called by the King's Writ, so not dissolved by change of a Governor,
no more than Parliaments in England and Ireland are by the death or removal of
Lieutenants or Chancellors.

I need not have said this, Gentlemen: for I know you are too wise to enter
into Disputes about Niceties; and do consider, that as the King and his
Ministers intend we shall have all those just Liberties and Freedoms that
belong to Englishmen and good Subjects, so our reflecting on things that are
not pertinent, or reviving those detestable names of Caballers, Prerogative,
and Property-men, may give them offense, and that will make us uneasy; and as
it will be troublesome now, so may it be ruinous hereafter: for common Sense
tells us, We should not kick against the Pricks; and the wise man. That it is
madness to contend with those that are too mighty: And indeed the Contest must
be fatal, where it is so unequal as to have Power and Right too on the same
side.

Though I cannot, Gentlemen, speak any thing directly from our Lords about the
Laws, yet I shall take the liberty to say this from my self, that if it is of
the utmost import our Laws pass, it may be fit for you to consider now whether
they will or no; and if you judge they will not, then resolve of removing the
Obstructions. This conjuncture is favorable, and may give more encouragement
than can be expected next year, when I shall be foreclosed all Concessions by
positive Orders and the Laws determination.

Pray, Gentlemen, consider how much better it is to go voluntarily a step or
two back, than run the hazard of being driven God knows how far. I shall
explain my self, if you enter into debate of this matter; if not, it must lie
at your door: for it is you must answer to this, and it may be future Ages, the
losing another opportunity of establishing the Peace and Laws of this great and
prosperous Colony.

I beg you, Gentlemen, to believe, that herein I solicit not my own Concern:
for God has been pleased to give me a moderate Estate, and the King a
competent Salary, that I am sure to be paid here or in England; so I neither
need nor desire any thing from you: I only beg we may do our selves the right
to pay the Duty, Submission, and Gratitude we all owe the King as our sovereign
Lord and great Benefactor; and that for our Peace and Interest sake, we let no
factious or scrupulous Spirits insinuate any thing that may make us mistrust a
just Prince, and prudent Ministers: Such is the King, such are those Lords that
govern us under him. Do we not know the bitterest Enemy his Majesty (or which
is worse, Monarchy it self) has, cannot say he ever took the least thing from
the meanest Subject by violence, or contrary to Law? And if he has ever erred,
has it been in any thing but in the excess of his Bounty and Mercies? Can
Faction, Malice, or Impudence it self then suggest, that such a Prince should
violate the Laws, to take from a young and needy Colony the Revenue himself
gives, and commands to be raised for the support of their own Government, and
that at a time he has appointed us an Auditor-General, a particular Office to
see it is not misapplied? Nor is it possible it should, so long as your Act
exists; and that every one of you knows, and I positively affirm. But pray
pardon me; for I am assured, Thoughts so criminal, and Jealousies so
unreasonable, are far from every one of us; nor can they lodge in any breast
but such as have banished that Loyalty and Reverence that is due to Majesty and
Truth.

I call God to record, I knew of no design to injure or invade your just
Liberties, nor have I other Instructions than to do right, and govern according
to the Laws of England and this Island. I appeal to you all, if you do not know
I did not so, to the best of my understanding, when I had the honor to command
here before. I must tell you, it is my opinion, it was that Consideration and
your Satisfaction, made the King and his Ministers to send me again, that all
those Passions that have so long agitated you, might be calmed, and every thing
that gave you ombrage, removed.

Believe me therefore, Gentlemen, should our Sins, Caprice, or Follies, make us
miss that Port that now frankly offers it self, and launch into the deep of
needless Jealousies and Disputes, it is to be feared we may find it a wide Sea
of Confusion, where we shall not escape Shipwreck without a Miracle; the
apprehension of which so discomposes me, that I cannot say more than God have
mercy on us, and direct you.

Samuel Barnard Esquire Speaker of the Assembly, his Speech to the Governor, Sept.
21. 1682.
May it please your Excellency,
TO confirm their own Judgment, the Assembly are pleased to continue me their
Speaker; and that I take likewise to be the reason that prevails with you to
approve their Choice. I shall not presume, Sir, to be tedious: however, we do
in all humility acknowledge the frequent and ample Testimonies of his most
Sacred Majesty's repeated Favors, whose goodness, like the Sun extends to the
utmost corners of his Dominions; and especially for this last and most signal
one in returning your Excellency to us, thereby demonstrating your Government
to be both to his satisfaction, and that of all his subjects here; who shall
always preserve their Loyalty entire to him, and of consequence their Obedience
to your Excellency his immediate Minister: and that however represented, we can
never believe any distinction between the King's interest and the Peoples; for
indeed whoever preaches up that Destructive Position, does from an ill division
of an ill chosen Text, deduce worse Doctrine.

The uncertainties and difficulties, under which for some years past we have
labored, have been very great: I am willing to touch on that no farther than
to say, being impartially weighed, it can never be reasonably imagined we had
any other design but to continue under our old form of Government, which his
Majesty had been pleased to constitute at first, as near that of his Realm of
England, as so great a Volume could be comprised in so small an Epitome, and to
preserve the quiet fruition of those Estates which our own industry (blessed be
divine Providence) had acquired, under the same method of making Laws, as is
observed in our Native Country, from which, as the famous Roman says, there is
defended, a greater Inheritance to us, than from our Parents. A truth I may
say, without offense, verified in the major part of the Inhabitants of this
Island.

The whole matter of this then being seriously considered to be done upon these
ends only, if we may not presume to merit or lay claim to, yet from so great a
goodness, as that of his most Gracious Majesty, I doubt not but we may
certainly hope for pardon.

I have now only to add in behalf of these Gentlemen, humbly to crave the
preservation of their usual Privileges, freedom of Debate, and access to your
Person, and in particular your Excellencies pardon of the inadvertancies of me
their Speaker, beseeching you to deem them Errors of Judgment, not will.

His Majesty's Council and the Gentlemen of the Assembly for his Island of
Jamaica, being met at St. Jago de la Vega the 21th day of September 1682. by
order of his Excellency the Governor Sir Tho. Linch, humbly beseech the Lord
President and Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, for
governing his Majesty's Foreign Plantations, to present to his most Sacred
Majesty this their most humble Address.
May it please your Majesty,
HAving received more frequent Testimonies of your Royal Grace and Bounty, than
others of your Subjects, we ought to have been the first to have made
profession of our Loyalty and Gratitude to your Sacred Majesty; but the
unsettledness of our Affairs, and that vast distance we are at from your
Kingdom of England, may move your Majesty (the best of Kings) to pardon the
omition, and accept a late but hearty and humble tender of our Duty.


Dread Sir,
We do (as we have the greatest reason in the world for it) bless God and most
humbly thank your Majesty, for your Care in protecting us, for your Grace and
Justice in assimulating our Government to that of our Native Country of
England, for your Majesty's favor in ordering us supplies of Negroes at
reasonable rates, and for those many repeated Acts of Grace, Justice, Bounty,
and Protection which your Majesty has been pleased to confer upon us and this
your great and flourishing Island.


SIR,
To evidence in some measure our Thankfulness and Duty, we most humbly present
to your Majesty an Act of Revenue, formed by advice of our present Governor,
which with our former body of Laws, we hope quadrates with those Orders and
Directions, the Lords of your Majesty's Privy Council sent hither: We prostrate
them, and our selves at your Majesty's Royal feet, humbly beseeching your
Majesty will be pleased graciously to pass them, considering how much the
establishing of known Laws, will contribute to the satisfaction of your
Subjects, and prosperity of this your Majesty's Island.


Dread Sovereign,
Although we are the remotest of all your Subjects from your Royal Throne, yet
have we (to our great trouble) understood there may have been designs to
subvert and shake it; and that some would have imposed on your Majesty, others
altered the Succession and secluded your Royal Brother, and in order to that or
worse ends would have entered into Association: All which we utterly detest,
and humbly beseech your Majesty to believe, that we shall always obey your
Commands, dutifully revere your Person, faithfully support your Majesty's
Government and lawful Succession, to the utmost of our power; the long and
happy continuance whereof, both in Church and State, we heartily pray for.

By order of the Council signed this 6th day of Oct. 1682. Rowland Powell, Cl.
Council. By order of the Assembly, Sam. Barnard, Speaker.


The Governor's Speech at proroguing the Assembly from October. the 4th 1682. to
May the 4th 1683.
Gentlemen,
YOu may believe the disorders of my Head, and misfortunes of my Voyage, are
something alleviated, by the joy I have to see this Session so happily and
suddenly ended; though God has been pleased to confer on me many great and
signal Blessings, yet none of them methinks ever relisht like this, nor is it
reasonable they should: they have been particular, and concerned my self only.
This is public, and may, I hope, reach White Hall, and affect not only us
here, but every individual man in this great Island, and those that shall
succeed us in it.

We have, Gentlemen, fluctuated many years between Fears and Jealousies among
our selves, and of our Governors, which has occasioned angry disputes here,
that have rather enlarged, than cemented the Breach.

Like ill Sculptures, some would have made the Head too big, as others the
Members, neither of them considering that the perfection and beauty of the
Figure consists in the symetry and due proportion of the parts: for it is in the
Body Politic as in the Natural; if the Head attracts too much nourishment, the
Members become debile and weak; if the Body does it, the Head will be rendered
incapable of exercising the Divine Function lodged in it.

But you, Gentlemen, like good Subjects and wise Patriots, have duly weighed
this, and considered there is a Duty to be paid a Prince, as well as a Care to
be taken of our selves; and that we cannot express our Duty better than in
trusting his Majesty, we need not fear to do it, since he has merited so much
from us; and that it is certain our Prosperity is his true Interest: for
Colonies that do not thrive, are like Scabs, they render nothing to, but draw
nourishment from the Body.

We that were of the old Army, thankfully remember the Donative his Majesty
gave us: All of us know, he has constantly sent us Supplies in our need, Ships
to defend us in our danger; when we could not, he paid our Ministers, and gave
Salaries to our Governors and others, allowed Money for our Fortifications,
and now gives and permits his Rents to be appropriated to the Charge and
Support of our Government: this and much more his Majesty has done for us, and
to make this Care, this Munificence, like himself, perfectly gracious,
perfectly obliging. It was done for us here, in those times his Majesty was
under the greatest Pressures and Wants at home.

You, Gentlemen, have dutifully and gratefully acknowledged this by separating
your Laws from his Revenue, and by that frank, hearty, and humble submission
you make of all, to his Majesty's Justice and Grace. I am sure ^^u'll find the
advantage of it, and that there is no other method of transa^^ing with Princes:
for there is no parity betwixt us and them, they cannon be bound; they must
therefore be trusted. And this confidence (were it lawful to make the
Comparison) I durst say must necessarily have the some effect on the King, as
our Faith has on God, if we believe, he will do us good.

There Is no other way to retrieve the good opinion of our Lords at home, to be
settled and united among our selves, and to establish that Credit abroad that
may bring People and Trade to us. If we should continue at variance among our
selves, or have contest with our Prince and Governors, who would love Jamaica
(though it has so many Charms) or stay in it though it has so many Advantages
if one could but breath any where else? Does not every one know what influence
Agreement and Peace have on men's minds and fortunes? which is the reason,
Morality, as well as our Reason, bids us pursue Peace with all men.

If Peace, Gentlemen, be of this import, that it is to be pursued as a summum
bonum, what do we all owe to you, that have thus overtaken it, and thus
established it among us? Surely since Heaven is best described by saying it is
the place of Peace and Union, you that have brought down and established, and
fixed such a Resemblance of it here, ought to expect and have all our Praises,
all our Thanks, and every man of you, is sure of all the Services I can ever
render him.

God I hope will give to you, all those Blessings in your fortunes, in your
minds, and in your persons, promised to Peacemakers; and to us those that are
the consequences of Peace and Union it self.

FINIS.

