A NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE AND SURRENDER OF Maestricht, TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN
KING.

On the 30 of June.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1673.

A Narrative of the Siege and Surrender of Maestricht, to the most Christian
King.
HIs Majesty having resolved to begin his Campaign with the Siege of
Maestricht, thought it necessary however to conceal his Intentions, as far as
could be from the Enemy, and leave them only uncertain Conjectures where he
would first Attack them, until his arrival before Maestricht had unfolded the
Mystery. This was the reason of his Majesty's assembling his Troops on the Lys;
his coming with his Army to the Walls of Ghent, and his continuing there some
time; his sending out a Body of Men to pass the Vaert, between that place and
Bruges, under the Command of the Duke de Feuillade, and afterward several
Squadrons of Horse under the Command of Monsieur; his sending the Marquess de
Rochefort with 6000 Horse toward Vilvoerden; and lastly, of his Encamping
before Brussels, that so he might disguise his design of besieging Maestricht,
and give equal jealousy to the Dutch and their Allies; who being thus
concerned for themselves, could not send the Forces, they would otherwise have
done, into Maestricht to reinforce that Garrison.

His Majesty having thus passed through Flanders, the Third of this instant
June, S. N. Commanded the Count de Lorge, one of his Lieutenant Generals, with
6000 Horse and Diagoons to go and invest Maestricht. He parted with this Body
of Men about Midnight, taking his way through Tilemont, S. Truyen, and Tongres,
and arrived the Fifth, in the Evening, before Maestricht, where he found the
Count de Montal, Governor of Charleroy and Tongres with 1500 Horse drawn out of
this latter place and Maseyck.

At their first arrival they were saluted from the Town with several Shot,
notwithstanding which, they gave every where the necessary orders; and the next
day, about Six a Clock in the Morning, began to Invest the place on this side
of the Meuse.

The Seventh arrived the Sieur du Piloy with 3500 Horse of Monsieur Turennes
Army, and the next day the Sieur de Reveillon Brigadier, with several Regiments
of Foot from the same Army. The same day the Sieur de la Talec arrived likewise
with other Troops, who all together finished the Investure of the place, on the
other side, called wyck, and a Bridge of Boats was made over the River for the
Communication of the several Quarters. In the mean time, the Count de Montal
having caused Seven thousand Bores to come out of the Neighborhood of Liege,
began to work on the Lines of Circonvallation and Contravllation: This let the
Governor see we were in earnest, who thereupon omitted no endeavors for the
defense of the place, being very glad that he had some days before received
into the Town 1000 Spanish Foot and 500 Horse: Accordingly he caused all the
Inhabitants, as well as Soldiers, to work for the raising of Three Batteries on
Three Cavaliers, from whence they could see all our Quarters and incommode them
very much; and besides, caused frequent Sallies to be made through by-ways, and
undiscernable by us, by reason of the Redoubts which were far advanced, and the
very high Corn that was round the place.

The first Sally, they made out of the Tongres Gate with 150 Horse, who with
great courage fell upon one of our Out-Guards, which were but 20 of the Kings
Musketeers commanded by the Sieur de Paygnace, the Enemy making slight account
of this small number, whom they thought to destroy with ease, put not
themselves into that posture they would perhaps otherwise have done, and so
were deceived by the great courage of our Men, who made so brave a resistance,
that they killed 20 of the Assailants, and beat the rest as far as their
Counterscarp, notwithstanding they fired violently with their small Shot from
thence. The Sieur de Paygnace was killed with a Cannon Bullet, with one
Muskettier more, and two wounded.

The Ninth the Enemy made an other Salley by the favor of their Redoubts, and
the high Corn, they killed two of our Men, and forced our Out-Guard to retire;
but the Count d' Auvergne having notice thereof, went immediately out with a
Party, and forced the Enemy back; Their intention was to have taken the
Standards, which stood along the Line, and three of their Officers had already
Seized Two Standards of the Kings Regiment, though they held them not long, for
one of these Officers was killed with a Musket Bullet, and the other two taken
Prisoners.

During these first days of the Siege, there were several other Skirmishes, in
which the En^my had no farther Advantage; They lost the Marquis de Vervic,
Nephew to the Count of Rrouay, who was very much wounded, and taken Prisoner.

The Tenth the King who parted at Midnight from St. Truyen, seven great Leagues
from Maestricht, arrived in the Camp about noon, accompanied by Monsieur, with
his Gens d Arms, and part of the Infantry, notwithstanding the difficulty of
the Ways, and the slow march of the Foot; his Majesty was no sooner arrived,
but went to visit the several Posts, to observe the Situation of the Place,
and its Fortifications, and to assign the Troops that came with him, their
several stations. On this occasion there happened a new Skirmish, in which the
Kings Dragoons took one Prisoner, whom his Majesty immediately gave his Liberty
again, with this Commission, that he should tell the Besieged, That unless they
Surrendered suddenly, they could not expect any Quarter.

The following night his Majesty was at the By-watch, as he has been ever
since; The next Morning he caused the Bridge of Communication to be finished,
and the rest of the Infantry being come up, he assigned them their several
Quarters round the place. That day Monsieur went and took his Quarter on the
side of Wyck, with 6000 Horse, and 9000 Foot; The King took his at a Village
called oilre, which is about half Canon shot from the place, and secured in
some measure from the Enemies Cannon, by a small Hill that covers it.

The Twelfth was employed in working at the Lines of Circonvallation and
Contravallation: That night his Majesty caused a Redoubt of the Enemies, which
was far advanced, and incommoded us very much, to be Attacked, which after a
short dispute was taken, most of them that defended it, which were 30 in all,
having been killed or taken Prisoners.

The 13 happened a small Skirmish between 50 of the Enemy, and some of our
Guards, who at first, as being much the weaker, were forced to give way, but
being assisted by a Party sent to them from the Camp, they beat the Enemy to
the foot of their Counterscarp. That night his Majesty caused the Infantry to
match nearer to the Place, being secured by the Cavalry, and Monsieur did the
like on his side, so that the Besieged could not stir out of their
Counterscarp, without coming under our Shot.

The Fourteenth we seized on a close way, by which the Enemy securely made all
their Salleys; 2000 Horse were Posted there, and a Retrenchment made to secure
them against the Enemy. This day the Lines, as well on this as the other side
the Meuse, were finished, although that of Contrevallation is about four Miles
about, and that both are 12 Foot broad, and six foot deep.

The Fifteenth great Provision was made of Faggots, and other Necessaries for
the Siege, the King in the mean time with his accustomed Vigilance, observing
what Places were fittest to be Attacked, and taking care that all things were
in the posture they ought to be, before he opened the Trenches.

The Sixteenth his Majesty resolved that the Trenches should be opened the next
Morning, not far from the Tongres Gate, and in the mean time our Men began to
work, for the raising of two Batteries on this side the Serre, and a third on
the other side, on the Mount St. Peter, in Monsieur Montals Quarter, on the
side of Lietembergh, the Guns being so ordered, that they could not only
dismount those of the Enemy, but also incommode them very much in their
Outworks, which the Enemy were Fortifying all they could, the Women as well as
the Men being employed at the Work; and in the mean time fired more furiously
then they had done before.

The Seventeenth about Nine at Night, the Trenches were opened in the places
his Majesty had appointed, which are on the side of his Quarter, by two
Bataillons of French Guards, and one of Swisses, Commanded by the Duke de la
Feuillade, Lieu^enant General, on the Right, and by a Bataillon of Picardy, and
two of the Royal Regiment, Commanded by the Marquis de Vaubran on the Left,
being in all 4800 Men, and assisted by eight Squadrons drawn out of the Kings
Guards, Gensdarmes and Light Horse, under the Command of the Chevalier de
Hautevilie; The Enemy all this while fired very briskly upon us, but killed
only three or four of ou^ Soldiers, and wounded a Lieutenant of the Royal
Regiment; the night was very favorable to us, and our Men continued their
Works till Morning, without any opposition, with so much vigor, that by break
of day, those under the Command of the Duke, de Feuillade, had advanced 1000
Paces, counting the turnings; and those under the Command of Monsieur Vaubrun
200, and besides made a Line of Communication between the two Trenches, which
were at first distant from each other, above 800 Paces, and now there remained
only 1500 Paces to the Counterscarp; The Enemy who had been very silent all
night, about three a clock in the Morning began to fire very warmely with their
small shot upon our Musketeers, though without any great effect, there having
not been above five or six killed, and some few wounded, and amongst others the
Marquis de Terms, Aid Camp, and the Sieur de Villeron; likewise Aid de Camp,
received light hurts; Here I cannot omit to tell you, that the day before, in
the taking of the Redoubt, the Sieur de Charlieu, Captain of the Kings
Regiment, was shot in the Shoulder.

The Eighteenth by break of day, our three Batteries began to play upon the
Town, one having 12 Pieces of Cannon Mounted on it, the second 8, and the third
6, each of them carrying Bullets of 24 pound weight; This day 3800 shot were
made into the Town, not without doing considerable execution, In the Morning we
Battered down two of the three Cavaliers, which they had raised upon their
Rampart, and by four in the afternoon we had likewise Battered down the other;
However the Enemy with much difficulty Mounted two of their Guns again, with
which they fired into Monsieur Montal's Quarter, though without any effect,
whilst he was acting with all imaginable vigor: About 11. a Clock this day,
Monsieur Montal sent out a Party of 50 Men, of the Regiment of Bandevile, to
seize on a House, which stood in his Quarter, which was Guarded by 18
Soldiers, Commanded by a Lieutenant and a Sergeant, who had orders from the
Governor not to yield, he having promised to send them on all o^casi^ns, such
Succors, as the importance of that Post would require; Our Men soon made
themselves Masters of one Place, taking the Lieutenant and his Soldiers
Prisoners, with the loss on our side of three Men killed, besides five or six,
with two Sergeants wounded, as was likewise the Sieur de Covrelle, Major of the
Regiment of Bandeville.

The Eighteenth Night, the Marquis de Rothefort, Lieutenant General, ^elieved
the Duke de la Feuillade, with a Bataillon of Navarre, another of the Crown,
formerly called Artois, and a thirds of the Kings; The Chevalier de Lorraine
Mureshaq de Camp, Relieved the Marquis de Vaubrun, with Bataillon of Piedmont,
and two of the Regiments of Dauphin, being Guarded as the day before, by eight
Squadrons of Cavalry, under the Command of the Marquis de Chazeron, Brigadier
of the Gensdarmes; That Night the Trenches were advanced 600 Paces, and within
900 of the Counterscarp, the Enemy all this while firing very violently to
repair their silence the night past, no withstanding we had only two Men
killed, and 14 or 15 wounded, besides the Sieur Permangle, Mareshal of the
Kings Guards of Light Horse, and the Sieur de la Bossiere, Captain in the Kings
Regiment, were both wounded with a Shot from a Musket. This Night the King, who
still like the meanest Soldier, exposes himself to the greatest danger, came to
visit the Trenches, accompanied by Monsieur, who had been likewise in the
Trenches the Night before.

The Nineteenth our Batteries began to Fire again very furiously upon the Town,
and with that success, that we again dismounted all the Enemies Cannon, and
battered down their works. In the Evening, the Count de Lorge, Lieutenant
General, relieved the Marquess de Rochefort, with a Bataillon of the Marine,
and two of Anjou, and the Chevalier de Fourilles, Marshall de Camp, relieved
the Chevalier de Lorraine, with three of the Kings Regiment; the Trenches were
advanced very near to the Counterscarp, and we began to dig, to discover the
Enemies Mines; notwithstanding, there fell a great deal of Rain, and the
constant Fire of the Enemy. A Lieutenant in the Regiment of Anjou was killed,
with two Sergeants of the Kings Regiment, and the Major of the Regiment of the
Marine was dangerously wounded, besides 17 or 18 Soldiers which were killed and
wounded. The King according to his custom visited the Trenches, being
accompanied by Monsieur, who to that purpose, was come from his own quarter on
the side of Wyoke: And whilst every one, with a great deal of bravery,
endeavored to put himself in the greatest danger, the King commanded, that no
Volunteers should go into the Trenches without order.

The Twentieth the Duke of Monmouth, being the youngest Lieutenant General,
relieved the Count de Lorge with two Bataillons of the Royal Regiment, and one
of Swisses, and the Count de Montal Marshall de Camp, relieved the Chevalier
de Lorraine, with a Battaillon of the Regiment of Bandeville, and two of
Alsace. This Night the Trenches were advanced to within thirty paces of the
Counterscarp, the Enemy all the while Firing very thick from their Palisadoes,
though without doing us any considerable hurt.

The One and twentieth the Duke de la Feuillade, and the Marquess de Vaubrun,
mounted the Trenches the second time. The Two and twentieth, the Marquess de
Rochefort, and the Chevalier de Lorraine; the Three and twentieth the Count de
Lorge, and the Chevalier de Fourilles, during which three days, they carried
their Trenches to the Foot of the Counterscarp, the Enemy making all the
opposition they could: We lost some Men, but nothing near so many, as might
have been expected, considering the smartness of the Service. The Twenty fourth
it was the Duke of Monmouths, and the Count de Montals turn to Mount the
Trenches, which being now advanced as far as could be, their next work was to
lodge themselves upon the Counterscarp. In order to which, four several Attacks
were made, two False and two Real; the Count de Lorge, le chevalier de
Lorraine, and Monsieur Vaubrun commanded the False Attack on the side of Wyck,
which they did with that Success, that they beat the Enemy out of their
Outworks, being 400 Men; the Officer that commanded them as killed with a great
many others, and about 30 of them taken prisoners; and had they been prepared
to go farther, they would certainly have taken Wyck; in this Action they had
about 100 Men killed and wounded. At the same time the Duke of Monmouth, and
the Count de Montal, (for all the Attacks were made together upon Firing of
Five Pieces of Cannon from the Main Battery) fell likewise on, Monsieur Montals
Attack being on the Left of the Duke of Monmouth, who had at this time under
his command the Kings Regiment commanded by Monsieur Monbron, and the Grand
Muskett ers commanded by Monsieur??d' Artognan. The Attacks were made with
extraordinary courage and resolution, and after a brisk disput, our men gained
the Counterscarp, and from thence advanced farther, and Attacked the outward
Half Moon which was before the Brussels Gate, which they likewise carried,
though the Enemy all this while was not idle, but gave us good store of small
Shot, and besides blew up three Fourneaux, though without any great effect. In
the mean time the Duke of Monmouth stood ready, in case our men should give
ground to Sally himself in person to their relief, which our Success prevented
him in; for our men fell immediately to lodge themselves in their new Posts;
several prisoners were brought away to the number of Fourscore, amongst which,
a Spanish Lieutenant Colonel. The loss on our side was not inconsiderable,
there having been in this Action above 400 men killed and wounded, and many of
them Officers and Persons of note, and amongst others Sir Henry Jones, who that
Night waited upon his Grace as a Voluntier, and was unfortunately shot dead in
the Trenches with a Bullet through the Throat, at the first great discharge of
the Enemy, as the Sally was made. Our men still continued their Works to make a
Communication between the Trenches and the Half Moon, whilst the Enemy
retrenched themselves on the other end of it. In working we discovered a Mine,
in which was Six Barrels of Powder, ready to be fired: By Eleven of the Clock
the Line of Communication was finished, when on a sudden a Mine sprang on the
Right Hand, by which, above 50 men were killed, with a Captain, and an Ensign,
which was immediately followed by a Sally from the Town, who fell upon our men
with a number so far exceeding ours, that they were forced to give ground;
whereupon the Duke immediately sent away a party of the Grand Musketeers to go
and make good that Post; but the Enemy were already in possession, and not
easy to be dislodged, when his Grace with an undanted courage, and a
resolution befitting the occasion, resolved to go himself in Person to endeavor
the recovery of these Posts, being only attended by about a dozen English
Volunteers, Persons of Quality; with this Company, his Grace too impatient to
pass by the ordinary way of the Sally Port, leaped over the Works, and through
a storm of Shot that fell on all sides, marched along the Palisadoes, and
passed through a Sally-Port of the Enemies to come to the Half Moon, which he
saw the Soldiers forsaking, not being longer able to maintain it, till he with
his presence encouraged them to return, which they did with new vigor, and
being followed by what force they could rally up in the Trenches; the Enemy was
the second time beaten off, though not without the loss of several Officers and
Soldiers which were wounded and slain in greater numbers, then at the Night
Attack. Monsieur d' Artagnan, Captain of the Grand Musketeers, was killed, as
he stood near his Grace, with a Shot through his Reins, and Captain O Brien was
Shot in the Leg. The Kings Musketeers, who behaved themselves with
extraordinary gallantry (as indeed all in general did) were most killed and
wounded: And now came 400 Men from the Camp to reinforce us, though we had not
any farther occasion for them; for the Duke continued absolute Master of his
Conquest, and left the quiet possession of it to the Duke de la Feuillade, who
came to relieve him at the usual hour. The King was at the end of the Trenches
at his Graces coming out, who received him with expressions of joy for his safe
return, and all manner of satisfaction in his Conduct. In these Attacks 700
Men, together with Officers were killed and wounded.

The other Attack commanded by Monsieur Montal, had not the like success,
though it was managed with all the courage and gallantry imaginable, his Men
having gained the Half Moon, were again beaten off with the loss of 500 killed
and wounded.

The Twenty fifth at Night, and the next day, was employed in Fortifying our
selves in our new Posts, and preparing for a new Attack, which was resolved to
be made the Tuesday following, and accordingly the Count de Lorge, and le
Chevalier de Fourilles, whose day it was, had Orders to make two several
Attacks, our Cannon having as well this day as the day before, fired very
furiously upon the Enemy, and very much Battered their Fortifications, where
the Attacks were intended to be made, though in the mean time the Governor
omitted no endeavors to repaie them again, and to put all things into the best
posture of defense he could; The Count de Lorge had Orders to Attack a Horn.
work, which was on the left hand of the Half Moon, taken the 24 and 25 instane,
and the Chevalier de Fourielles, to attempt a Green Half Moon on the Right hand
of the Brussels Gate, near that part which is set under Water. About eleven of
the Clock at Night, the Sign being given by two pieces of Cannon, a Mine of
ours which was fixed under the Horn-work, was Sprung, and immediately
thereupon, our Men made the Attack; The Enemy made a stout residance, firing
very furiously upon us from all parts, casting abundance of Grenades amongst
us, and besides Springing seven Mines, one after another; notwithstanding
which, we beat the Enemy, and gained the Post, having killed many of them, and
taken several Prisoners, amongst which was, the Major of the Italian Regiment,
and several Miners, who discovered several other Mines, and which were by that
means prevented from Springing; In the mean time le Chevalier de Foureille,
advanced as successully on the other side, who after a hot dispute, made
himself Master of the Green Half Moon, and thence advanced farther, and gained
all their Outworks; Some of the Prisoners said, that the Governor himself
Commanded in the Outworks, the better to encourage his Men, and that he ran
great danger of being taken Prisoner; This done, our Work was to secure our
selves in our new Acquisition, which had cost us this day, about 400 Men.

Wednesday Night the Duke of Monmouth Relieved the Count de Lorge, and Monsieur
Montal the Chevalier de Foureille, who advanced somewhat farther, till within
10 or 15 Yards of the Ditch, which was dry, there being nothing between us and
the Town, but this Ditch, and the Walls, which were very much Battered; In the
mean time the Enemy omitted nothing on their part, to defend themselves; that
night they Sprung five Mines very near us, yet not so near, as to do any
execution, which we thought they would have followed with a Salley, but they
did not; The Thursday which was the 29, the Duke de Feuillade, and Monsieur
Vaubrun came upon the Guard, but nothing past that night; on our side we were
preparing for a general Assault on the Town, and the Besieged began it seems to
think on a Surrender, looking upon themselves to be unable, after the loss of
all their Outworks, and having no hopes of Relief, to hold out, accordingly on
Friday Morning early they desired a Parley, and in two hours time the
conditions for Surrender were agreed, and immediately the Kings Regiment of
Guards marched in, and took possession of the Brussels Gate: The Articles were,
That the Garrison 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse, should March out with Bag and
Baggage, Drums beating, Colors flying, etc. with two pieces of Cannon, and one
Mortar piece, either to Boisleduc or Breda, as they thought best. The Governor
pressed hard, to stay in the Town till Monday, but at length agreed, to march
out the next day, the 31 instant.

THus we have seen an end of this Siege in three weeks time, to the great
Surprise of all people, who consider the strength of the place, and the great
Garrisen that was in it, and especially of those who thought it impregnable, or
at least, that the taking of it would have cast the King many Months, and
greatest part of his Army; Though certainly it may chiefly be attributed to the
great Conduct and extraordinary Courage of the King, who has himself during
this Siege, performed all the parts of a General, with an unintermitted
Industry and Vigilance, In this Siege we have had 2000 killed, and as many
wounded And the Enemy has lost 1000, the Italian Regiment that was in the Town,
being quite destroyed; and to do them right, they defended themselves very
stoutly, and perhaps might have made the Siege last longer had they not put so
much confidence in their Mines, on which account perhaps they used the less
opposition, to hinder our approach at first.

FINIS.

