AN ANSWER To Monsieur DE RODON'S Funeral of the MASS.

IHS NOMEN DOMINI LAVDABILE


By N. N.

At DOUAY in Flanders, 1681.

To the Honorable, SIR, JOHN SETON OF GARLETON, Son to Lord GEORGE, Late Earl
of WINTON.
SIR,
THE great Obligations, I had to your Honor before I parted from Scotland,
claim with much reason to some Fruit of my Labor. Be pleased then to accept of
a little work of mine from Flanders.

I am confident the Subject will please you, because it is suitable to your
Devotion, and to the piety of your most Noble and ancient Family.

Our Savior by the occasion of the Jews seeking him for Bread, spoke to them
of the Bread of Life, and I, by the occasion of three sheafs of Corn, I find in
your Scutchion, or in the Honors of your House, will speak to you, in
reference to the Subject of this little Book, of the Bread, termed by the
Church, the Bread of the strong, I mean of the most Holy Sacrifice, and
Sacrament of the Altar.

Ligor ne dispergar saycs your motto, I am bound lest I scatter, your glorious
ancestors being united and tied together in the Faith of this Sacrament, were
not scattered by the Enemies of their Souveraign, when helped by the miraculous
valor in a Child of the house of Duglas, they galantly brought Queen Mary out
of the Bondage of Lockleven, and lodged Her safely the first night in my Lord
SETON'S own House at Netheree in West Lothian. They keeping still Faith to God
and their Sovereigns, after this action spread even under Persecution, as
Camamoile trodden down, both to more Wealth and Honor.

'Twas for the Virtue of the SETON'S, that Noble Motto invia virtuti via nulla,
no way hard or unpassible to Virtue, was given them. And where, I pray, in
their persuasion then, and still in yours is the seat of Virtue but in this
Bread of the strong?

If the Prophet Elias refreshed with that Bread, which was only a Figure of our
Sacrament, walked forty days and as many nights, wonder you that those great
Men, of whom you have the Honor to descend, receiving it often were quickened
to generosity, and Christian Duty to King and Country?

Sir CHRISTOFER SETON by ROBERT A BRUCE, sutnamed the Good, merited for his
Devotion to the Sacrifice of the Mass, to have after his Death the daily
Sacrifice offered for him, and this was performed by the same King ROBERT,
whose Sister he had Married, for he founded a Chapel near Dumfrice, called
Christel Chapel, and a Priest to offer Sacrifice in it for the Soul of Good
Sir Christofer, as he out of a loving respect was pleased to call him. This
renowned Champion dyed at London as Honorably as Cruelly by the hands of the
English, whom he had often stoutly opposed and pestured in the service of his
Country.

But why was Christofer the first his Predecessor called more Devout than
Worly? But because his Heart was powerully, tho sweetly, drawn to this
Sacracrament, as Iron to a Lodestone? Hoc specialiter, says Thomas a Kempis l
4. de imit. Chapter c. 1. Devotorum corda trahit, this Sacrament draws by a special
way the hearts of Devout People; and thus from a special respect to this
Sacracrament a Man worthily obtaines the tittle of Devout.

Lord George the third a Prudent Man, and very Familiar with King James the
third, divided his Devotion to the Altar with his Lady Dame Jeane Hepburn,
called by the History a Noble and Wise Lady Daughter to the Earl of Bothuel.

O Lord, said, the Royal Prophet, I have loved the beauty of thy House, Psalm.
25. Were not those two great Souls inflamed with the same Zeal, when striving
as it were who might do best, they set themselves to decore the Colledg-Church
of SETON?

The Lord paved and seiled the quire; and the Lady ^aised an I Will on the
Northside, and having taken down that on the the South side, Built by the
Devotion of Dame Catherine Sinclar, rebuilded it again with proportion to make
a perfect Cross, and founded two Prebends to serve the Altars. The Lord, not to
speak of other Ornaments, gave it a complete Suit of Cloth of Gold: And the
Lady complete Suits of all the Colors of the Church, for Advent, Lent,
Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins; for all the solemn Feasts of the Year of Purple
and Crimson Velvet richly flowered with Gold, white Damask, etc. Not forgetting
a Suit of black Vestiments for the Dead with other fine Chasubels. Also a great
Silver Cross, a Silver Eucharist Ciborium or Remonstrance for the B. Sacrament
with a fair Chalice Silver and Gilt, all for the Majesty and Decorement of the
Altar.

Some may think I had done better in a Dedicatory, to busy my Pen in
describing the Courage of a Governor of Barwick of the House of SETON, who in
cold Blood chused rather to see his Son violently put to Death, than to fail
in his trust to King and Country, and in such like signal actions admired by
Men, than in rehersing these liberalities made to the Altar, which are but
petty things in the Eyes of worlings.

But my aim is not so much to show the worly grandeur of your Family, as the
Devotion to this Mystery, (which makes the Subject of my Book) of the great
ones in it. This their Devotion made them truly great. Take from a Man the
sense and respect he has for God, and for what relates to him, and what is he
with all he has, or may possess? little, a nothing an object of contempt. As
God dismaly at last slights them who slight him, and what regards his Honor,
so he stupendiously glorifies them, who have made it their work to seek his
Glory. 1 Samuel 2. v. 30. Live then for ever Souls nobly affected to contribute
to the Majesty of this daily Sacrifice, which is upon Earth God's greatest
Glory.

O change of times and manners! where is he or she in Scotland now a days, who
make it their study to imitate those forementioned Noble Persons? What a loss
is the want of such for the House of God! How many poor Families, monasteries
Churches, and Altars mourned at the Death, especially of that pious Lady?

If the monastery of Seins in Burromure nigh Edinburgh were standing, it would
tell you 'twas hither she retired her self after the decease of her Lord; to
attend in solitude with more freedom to God. I am now defaced, she is Dead, who
having chiefly founded me; while she lived, conserved me, and decored me.

SIR, can you forget, or not respect the memory of so much piety? To which they
were powerfully moved by the belief they had of the adorable Sacrifice of the
Altar. As often as you see the three Crescents in your Arms, remember that you
must increase or grow as they did in a lively Faith of this Mystery, which is
the seed of Divine Love and Charity to your Neighbor. I know you have hazarded
something already for your Faith, but if an other occasion be given you,
mindful of one of the Noble Motto's of your House, hazard yet further, in what
is prudently acknowledged to be the Service of God, there is no danger to be
redouted, or so much as apprehended. Your very name SET-ON minds you of
generosity in what you act for God, or may undertake for the Service of his
Vicegerent upon Earth, the King.

God and you know best what hope you have laid up in Heaven, as the Apostle
speaks to the Colos. 1. v. 5, But much of Your Charity the World has seen. I
am the Subject of a notable part of it, and Witness of your sheltring poor
Strangers, considering distressed Tenants, clothing the naked, feeding
orphelins, visiting the imprisoned in Person, the sick by alms, entering some
fore-lorne into the number of your domestics, and honestly burying the Dead,
that had no Friend or Relation, able to do that Duty. Such actions done in the
Spirit of Christ, make savor at present in the Eucharist, the sweetness of the
hidden Manna there, and will Crown hereafter the Christian in the solemn day of
the general Resurrection.

Infin, Since the Treassures of your Arms being Flower Delucies, as good as
tell you, you must flowrish, strive to flowrish in the Faith of your ancestors.
Ambulo in fide, says the Author of the Imitation of Christ, l. 4, C. 11.
exemplis confortatus Sanctorum, I walk in the Faith of the Real Body and Blood
of Christ in the Eucharist: comfortably held in it by the example of the
Saints, this Faith gives Men a Victory over the World making them fear, esteem
and Love only this God of Love, (a Love surprising in this Mystery) And being
fully satisfied, with the expected possession of him, breath now after the
Loveliness of his Eternity. This flowrishing condition, I cordially wish you as
I am

SIR, Your most humble and obliged Servant, N. N.

THE PREFACE.
NO wonder our Ghostly Enemy is so earnest to persuade men that there is no
true Sacrifice in the Mass. He knows that it is the very Center of Christian
Religion, the Arcenall of arms against him, the Storehouse of all perfection,
and the great means the Church has to pacify God in his Wrath, and draw down
from Heaven blessings upon her Children. He knows it is the permanent
succeeding Sacrifice to all the Sacrifices of the Old Law; a most perfect
holocaust, in which JESUS is Sacramentally consumed in the fire of his Love, in
acknowledgment of the grandour of his Father; An Eucharistical, because in
thanksgiving for the daily benefits we receive from above we can offer nothing
more pleasing; A Sacrifice of Satisfaction, because the hatred, which God
carries to the sins of the World, is not so great, as the Love he bears to his
Son, whose merits far exceed the enormity of our offenses; A Sacrifice of
Impetration, because the Father cannot refuse any thing to a Son who in all his
life and death upon Earth, has so highly obliged him. Wherefore the Priest, tho
in contemplation of his own sinful condition, is always bound to say, O Lord, I
am not worthy; yet having at the Altar Christ in his hands, he may also say
with an humble confidence Respice in faciem Christi tui; Eternal Father; though I
am not worthy to petition either for my self or others, yet be pleased to grant
us what we in humility demand for the Love of him, who vouchsafed to dye for
the Love of us, since as our offering is the offering of Christ, so our request
is his, and he ordained us to mind thus Your Majesty by this commemoration of
his Death.

The Son of God finding his Father not content withal the oblations which pure
men could offer him for their sins, Sacrificium and oblationem noluisti. Hosts
and oblations and holocausts and for Sin thou would not, neither did they
please thee, then said I (the Son of God) behold I come that I may do thy will.
Hebr. 10. v. 5, 6, 7. Out of his Love to men resolved to be both our Priest and
Victime, a Body thou have fited to me, behold I come. So sacrificing himself in
a bloody way upon mount Calvarie, he laid into the Treasury of the Church an
inexhaustable ransom for all mankind; having provided before by the Sacrifice
he made at the last Supper (commanding his Disciples to offer in like manner in
remembrance of him) for our daily necessity of a daily Sacrifice, (daily
Sacrifice of a Lamb commanded, Exo. 29.38.) daily to acknowledge God's supreme
being; to give him daily thanks for his daily benefits; and to obtain new helps
in our daily infirmities; where he instituted his Body and Blood to be offered
daily under the Forms of Bread and Wine, according to the Order of
Melchisedech; commanding (hoc facite, do this. Luc. 22. v. 10.) his Apostles
and their Successors in that function to make the Sacrament in it for the
spiritual food of the Faithful.

To prove this truth efficaciously as I undertake by the help of God to do in
this Book, in which I answer Chapter for Chapter Monsieur Rodon's funeral of
the Mass.

I prove first of all the Catholic tenet, both for the Reality of the Body and
Blood of Christ in the Eucharist, with other Doctrines relating to it; and that
in our Liturgy or Mass is made a true and proper Sacrifice, (every one in their
proper place) by proofs, which either did not come into Monsieur Rodon's mind,
or if they did, he thought good to take no notice of them. Next I solve his
objections, some of which, if the Catholic Reader find set out by me in a more
convincing way then by Monsieur Rodon himself, let him not censure me for that,
but remember that sometimes a Surgeon makes the wound the wider to cure it the
better.

Moreover let the Protestant Reader be pleased to reflect that Mr. Rodon's
arguments are drawn from our senses, which are plausible to men of Flesh and
Blood, whereas many of our answers in this Mystery of Faith, are drawn from
Faith, or Reasons grounded upon Faith, which are above the reach of Flesh and
Blood, and must mount to a higher story than that of our senses, to be
applauded. Math. 16. v. 17.

If he who has not been acquainted with Philosophy, much less with Divinity,
think my expressions to be harsh, not to say Barbarous, when I repeat Monsieur
de Rodon's terms A quo and Ad quem, and use others of that nature common in the
School. I answer for us both, that we cannot discourse properly on School
matters but in School terms; as he who speaks pertinently of Herauldry, uses
terms, which are no more understood than Hebrew by him, who is ignorant of that
Court and noble Knowledge: Nevertheless, here and there I render them in
English, or give an English explication of them.

For my Greek and Hebrew quotations I was advised to put them in Characters
common to our Language; so they who are ignorant of those Tongues may have the
satisfaction to pronounce the words to themselves, and take notice of them,
when they hear them pronounced by others.

Courteous Reader, if in my Proofs and Solution of Mr. Rodon's greater
objections,) or in my remarks here and there, and notes which are the seed of
Answers, fore-running and short Solutions of difficulties, you your self see
the Solution of many of his petty instances, don't wonder that for brevities
sake I pass them when I come to them as equivalently answered already.

An answer to Monsieur de Rhodon's FUNERAL of the MASS.
The first Chapter
Concerning the exposition of these words, THIS IS MY BODY.

WE say these words This is my Body prove clearly the real presence of Christ's
Body in the Host. Because they ought to be taken in their proper sense, in
which they would prove it clearly by the grant of our adversaries, who therefore
say, they are to be taken figuratively. Now that they ought to be taken here in
their proper sense I prove 1. positively.

SECTION I. Positive Proofs.
1. WHen in a speech a word is indifferent of it self, to be taken in the
literal or figurative sense, you must look to the words that follow in the same
speech: if they express the property of a figure, the word is to be taken
figuratively; if the property of the real thing, then the word is to be taken
in the literal sense.

For example, when one tells me I have seen the King, I know not yet what he
means; whether his person or picture; but when he adds, set in a frame of Gold,
I know he means his picture, because it is the property of a picture to be set
in a frame. If he adds, speaking with the Chancellor, I know he means the
King's person, because it is the property of a person to speak with another.
Just so when Christ says Luke 22. v. 19. This is my Body: I know not yet what
he means, whether his Real Body, or only a figure of it. But when he adds,
which is given for you, I know he means of his true Body, because it is the
property of a true Body to be sacrificed for us.

2. I prove again that these words of Christ, This is my Body, are to be taken
in the literal sense, by the protestant principle, which is this. When two
passages relate to, or speak of the same matter in Scripture, the obscurer
passage is to be explaned by the clearer.

But these two passages relating to our Lord's Supper This is my Body; and, Do
this in remembrance of me; This latter is the obscurer, and that former the
clearer; then this latter ought to be explaned by that former, that is to say,
to the sense of that former viz. Christ having changed a piece of Bread into
his Body by his almighty word, says there to his disciples Do ye for the food
of others souls, what ye have seen me do for the food of yours: Change ye
lykewayes, by pronouncing the words I have ordained for that end, Bread into my
Body: but do it with such circumstances that people standing by may be mindful
of my death and passion.

But the clear proposition ought not to be explaned by the obscure one, thus:
This is my Body, that is to say, this is a figure only or a remembrance of my
body, because he said after do this in remembrance of me; for the thing was now
done, and he had told them what it was in clear words before he said Do this in
remembrance of me; He did not say, this is a remembrance of me, no, but Do this
in remembrance of me; He did not speak of the substance of the thing but only
of the manner of doing it. By these words then in remembrance of me, he only
intimated, that they should make at that same time a sensible expression of his
passion to the people, as is seen done in the sacrifice of the Mass. If by,
This, he understood a figure or remembrance, then he had said, do or make a
remembrance of me in remembrance of me, or remember me to remember me, which is
ridiculous.

Now, let any indifferent and judicious man be judge, if these words do this in
remembrance of me, be as clear to prove, that in the Eucharist or the Lord's
Supper is only a Figure of Christ's Body; as these words This is my Body, are
clear to prove, that the Eucharist is his true Body.

If you instance, that as Christ said This is my Body, so he said also I am a
vine, and consequently as the latter proposition must be taken figuratively, so
must also the former. I answer it does not follow, there being a great
disparity. For we all, protestants as well as Catholics, avow that
propositions in the Holy Scripture cannot be taken in the literal sense, if so
taken they imply or intimate something contrary to faith, as this proposition
I am a vine literallie taken would do. For protestants as well as Catholics
believe that the Divine word has assumed no nature but that of man; then he
has not assumed that of a Vine, and consequently it is against faith to say in
the literal sense Christ is a Vine.

But these words This is my Body taken in the literal sense imply nothing
against faith; no more then he, who showing you a knife, says This is a knife;
for the term This and the term Knife suppose for the same thing, and not for
different natures; so in Christ's proposition This is my Body, This, and Body,
suppose for the same thing, not This for Bread, but for The Body of Christ; as
well as the word Body supposes for it, tho in a different way of signifieing,
This obscurely and Body clearly and distinctlie.

Here I humbly entreat the protestant reader to reflect, that in the mysteries
of Religion we must captivate our understanding 2. Cor. 10. v. 5. (that is to
say; suspend it from asserting what it might judge, had it nothing to rely
upon, but the sole relation of our senses) to obey Christ.

God will have, as an homage due to him and his veracitie, this proud faculty
of man, which is earnest to judge of all, submit to his word. The assent of my
understanding by which I judge a thing to be, because I see it with my eyes, is
an assent of science, which is a knowledge quite different from the assent of
faith. In the mean time we Christians, as Christians are called, not
philosophers the Reasoners, but the faithful. fides est, as we say, credere
quod non vides, Faith is to believe that which thou do not see. This is the
praise of faith, says St. Aug. tract. 29. in Io. If that, which is believed,
be not seen. Blessed are they, said Christ Io. 20. v. 29. who have not seen and
have believed. Faith is an argument, (or persuasion) says S. Paul, of things
not appearing. If they appear, and I assent that they are because I see them,
my faith ceases, Science coming in with faith's destruction.

If you say I believe that the Son of God became Man, because God has revealed
it, and my senses do not control it: your faith is lame, not able to stand
alone, and consequently is an unworthie sacrifice of your understanding to the
word of God.

What would the King say to that Noble man, who should distrust his relation
made in presence of all his courtiers, of a thing done by his Majesty upon his
Royal word; who should, (I say), distrust it, because he heard it controlled by
a footboy or some such mean person of as little credit?

As humane faith requires I rely upon the sole testimony of a man, so does
divine faith require I rely upon the sole testimony of God. shall I trust the
word of a man sometimes contrary to sensible appearance, as when I trust upon
the word of a Doctor or a Surgeon that that which I feel hurts me, will do me
good, and shall not I trust the word of God because my senses seem to control
it?

But be not mistaken, neither sense nor reason controles the real presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist. For, sense after the consecration finds its
whole object, color, taste etc. Just as before the consecration unchanged, and
meddles not to judge whether the Body of Christ or the substance of bread be
under the accidents, as a thing belonging to the understanding, and not within
the compass of its object. And reason tells us that although all the accidents of a
substance be present, nevertheless their substance is not there, if the author
of nature has revealed that he hinders its presence to them; and therefore does
not control our saying that the substance of Bread is not in the Eucharist
after the consecration, because the author of Nature has revealed the
contrary. No more then it controles Protestants saying that those three, who
appeared to Abraham Genes. 18 with all the accidents of men, were not men but
Angels, because God has revealed it was so.

3. Christ by his almighty power could change Bread into his flesh, and he
tells us Math. 26. in these words This is my Body, that he has done it; why
shall not I believe it? O but it seems strange to our apprehension! must God
then in that thing in which he will make to all men a memorial of his wonders
Psalm. 110. v. 4. do nothing but what is within the reach of meaner wits, and
falls under their senses? this clame is too proud therefore in humility, which
gives light I answer, (which is a negative way of proving) Monsieur de Rhodon's
objections.

SECTION II. Negative Proofs.
Ob. 1. IF Christ had meant the real presence of his Body in the Host he had
spoken to the contrary usage of the world.

Answer 1. What then although he had done so when he was giving man a testimony
of his prodigious love and mercy to him. If the action itself was an
expression o^ love infinitely exceeding the common usage of the world, why
might there not be something extraordinary in the way of expression?

Answer 2. Speaking so, he spoke not contrary to the usage of the world in
practical or factive propositions which make their objects. Such as these are
This is my Body, Math, 26. Let there be light. Genes. 1. Thy Son lives. Io. 4.
v. 50 This ring is yours. The first turns Bread into Flesh. The second changes
Darkness into light. The third the noble-man's Son's sickness into health The
fourth makes the Ring which was not yours, yours, to wit, when I gift a person
with a Ring in those words.

Reflect then well upon the difference between a purely Enunciative and a
practical proposition, that presupposes the whole existence of its object;
this does not presuppose it, but makes it.

Mr. To. Urges. Words are Images of Conceptions and Conceptions the Images of
Things. Therefore things must be such before we can conceive them to be such,
or say, they are such.

I answer, did. the consequent. Things must be always actually a fore words
and conceptions, which are Images of them, I deny, for my idea of a thing,
which I invent, supposes the thing never to have been, and by this idea of it I
am moved to try to make it and give it a being. Things must be possible before
we can conceive them, I grant. Also the thing which is made by words as the
object of factive propositions can not be actually before the words, because an
effect can not be before its cause. And consequently that which our Savior
gave his discipels, saying This etc. was not there before these words This is
my Body were pronounced; because it was made to be there by them. Neot, In a
factive proposition a thing must not be such the whole time the proposition is
pronuncing, as it will be at the end of the proposition, because the whole
proposition maks it and gives it its being.

Mr. To. Urges farther. A proposition must be expounded according to the nature
of the thing in question: but when Christ taking bread in his hand said This is
my Body, the thing in question was bread: therefore the proposition ought to be
expounded according to the nature of bread, the nature of which is to be, not
the real body, but only the figure of the Body of Christ.

Answer. I deny the minor proposition, that the thing in question was bread,
and say that the thing in question was that which Christ meant by This, and
that which he meant by this was that which he intended to make by his whole
proposition, which was his true body; as we gather out of the following words
Which is given for you.

It Is another thing when a man in a painters shop pointing at the Kings
picture, says this is the King; the thing in question there or signyfied and
meant by This, is the picture, because we know he cannot mean otherwise, unless
he were distracted, his words not being of power to change the picture into the
King's person, as the almighty words of Christ were of power to change bread
into his body.

Note, the article, This, alone signifies nothing present, because to signify
present, past, or to come is the property of Verbs. So when I pointing to a
book say, This is, you know not yet what I mean, till I say English; Good
paper, a witty book. Also when Christ said to his disciples, Jo. 15. v. 11.
This is my Commandment, they knew not what he meant, till he added, That you
love one another.

Wherefore This in Christ's proposition, before he added is my Body, signifying
nothing present, did not signify the Bread which was then in his hand: but
joined to the rest of the proposition signified his true Body.

Obj. 2. The Eucharist is the Sacrament of Christ's Body, then it is not his
true Body.

I answer 1. did. the antecedent. The Eucharist is the Sacrament of Christ's
Body Intransitively, i. e, without passing from the Sacrament to the Body of
Christ as to a different thing, or so that the Sacrament and Christ's Body be
one and the same substance, I grant. Transitively, i. e. passing, and so making
them two diverse substances, I deny the antecedent. The Eucharist then is the
Sacrament of Christ's Body, i. e, the Sacrament which is Christ's Body: or
Christ's body under the outward form or accidents of Bread is a Sacrament, or a
sensible sign by the Species of Grace, which it work's in us.

Answer 2. The Eucharist taken inadequately, or partially for the Species, is a
Sacrament or sign of Christ's Body, the Consecration being made, I grant.
Adequatelie and Totally taken for the whole Eucharist, I deny. For so it
includes both Christ's body, and the Species, before of Bread, now of his Body.

Thus the Eucharist may be called a figure or representation, viz. the Species
of Bread and Wine separated from one another, a representation of Christ's
death; The Species of Bread alone (the consecration being made) a figure of the
Body contained under it.

Note. An Image, sign or Sacrament may have within it the substance or essence
of the thing by it signified or represented in another manner. God the son is
the Image of his father, and has his father's substance, yea the father all
within him by circumincession, i. e, a mutual being of the divine persons in
each other. So Christ's flesh invisible and spiritual in the Eucharist, is the
sacrament or sign of the same flesh palpable and visible crucified. In the
Sacrament it represents it self as on the Cross, not different in substance,
but in quality and manner. As when God 1. Reg. 10. v. 9. is said to have given
to Saul another heart, viz. in quality not in substance: So it is said 1. Cor.
15. v. 50. Flesh and blood shall not possess the Kingdom of Heaven, and again
it is certain flesh and blood shall possess the Kingdom of Heaven, viz. When it
has put on Incorruption. The same in substance in both propositions, but not
the same in quality.

Obj. 3. In these two propositions This is my Body. This Cup is the new
testament in my Blood. The word, is, must be taken in the same sense, because
they are alyke having been pronunced on the same matter viz. the one upon the
one part of the Sacrament and the other on the other part of it, and because of
like things we give alike judgment. But in this proposition This Cup is the
new Testament, the word is, is not taken for a real and transubstantiated
being, but for a Sacramental and significative being etc Therefore in this
proposition lykwayes This is my Body, the word, is, is not taken for a real
and transubstantiated being, but for a Sacramental and significative being.

Answer. If the two propositions be set down as S. Math. (who was present and
heard them out of the mouth of Christ) relates them Chap. 14. v. 22. and v. 24
This is my Body. This is my Blood, granting the Major I deny the Minor
proposition.

If the one as S Matthew sets it down, and the other as S. Paul who was not
present, and sets only down the sense of Christ's words in a figurative way: I
let pass the Minor, and deney the consequence, because the two propositions so
taken are not alike as to their expression, and I say that the H. Ghost might
have had a particular reason to move S. Paul to rehearse the sense of what had
been related by S. Matthew This is my Blood, in these words, This is the new
testament in my Blood to give us another sensible impression of the mystery
viz. This Cup is the new testament in my Blood, as if he should say, This cup
is an authentic instrument, or, as it were paper, in which my new testament
and last will of giving you eternal life, if you believe and obey me, is
written, not with Ink, but with my oun Blood, which this Cup contains, as the
Paper the writing of the Testament. So Alapide.

Now in this proposition the word, is, cannot be taken in the proper sense of
the words as in the other This is my Body, because there would follow an
absurdity, viz. a real Identity between the Cup, or what is contained in it,
and the testament signifying or the outward expr sion of his will, which is
absurd and evidentlie false. And in that sense above I let pass the Minor, for
if by Testament you understand the Testament signified, not the Testament
signifying, the word is may be, and is taken for a real and transubstantiated
being, because the Blood contained in the Cup is that which he left by his last
will to the faithful. So, that, which is in the Cup is changed into a
Testament, being by the whole proposition as the cause, transubstantiated into
the Blood of Christ, and consequently this proposition This Cup is the New
Testament, must not be expounded thus, the wine that is in the Cup is the sing
and Sacrament of of the new Testament, but thus: The consecrated wine that is
in the Cup is the real Blood of Christ and new Testament. That he made then his
new Testament I shall prove in my 8 Chap. When I say that all that Christ said,
when he instituted the Eucharist must be taken literallie and without a figure,
I mean as the institution of the Eucharist is related to us by S. Matthew who
was present at it, and heard the words out of the mouth of Christ in the very
institution it self.

Since Mr Rodon contends so much for the figurative sense of the words in the
Consecration, I avow that in the consec ation as related by S. Luke in these
words Touto to poteer^on he kainee diathekee en to haimati-mou to huper humon
ekkunomenon. This Cup is the new testament in my Blood, which is shed for you.
The word Cup is taken figurativelie for the thing contained in it; because from
it taken in the proper sense would follow an absurdity, viz. That the Cup it
self wood or metal was shed for us, because the Relative Which and the
participle Shed is referred by S. Luke. to Cup (as he who understands Greek
sees in the forementioned words) not properly taken, then Metaphorically or
Figurativelie taken for the thing contained in the Cup, or Blood of Christ
which is said to be shed for us.

Obj. 4. When a man says a thing is such, if it be not such during the whole
time, which he employes in saying it is such he makes a false proposition, then
Christ according to Romanists made a false proposition, when he said This is my
Body because his Body was not under the form of Bread the whole time he was
pronouncing the proposition.

Answer. I did: the antecedent. If the proposition be purely Enunciative or
speculative, its true, because such a proposition presupposes its object; If it
be a factive or practical proposition such as the proposition of Christ in the
institution of the Eucharist was, it is false; because a factive proposition
makes it is object and consequently supposes it not to be before the whole
proposition is utered, which whole proposition taken all together, and not any
part of it taken alone, causes the object.

I end this chapter with two reflections. The first, That Mr. Rodon and other
protestants to impose upon men their word for the word of God use violence to
the words of Christ; when they explain these his words This is my Body, thus:
This Bread signifies my Body, or thus: This Bread is a sign of my Body;
especially since Christ prevented all such interpretations by his following
words, Which is given for you Luke. 22. v. 19. This is my blood Which is shed
for you. Was Bread sacrificed for us? or wine shed for us?

The second. Since God speaking by the scripture is their only judge of
Controversy, why will not they understand his words in their proper
signification? How shall a judge do the duty of a judge, if he give his
sentence darkly and enigmatically, so that the two parties go still by the ears
after they have heard his sentence, neither they, nor any other who was
present seeing clearly in whose favor he has given it.

The second Chapter.
Concerning the exposition of these words He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood has eternal life. My flesh is meat indeed. Jo. 6.

SECTION. I.
Some remarkes for the intelligence of the 6. Chap of S. Io. In order to the
precept given there, v. 52. of eating and drinking the body and Blood of Christ
Sacramentally.

Remark. 1. That Christ by the occasion of the Jews seeking him for Bread
called himself Bread, and told them that they did not seek him for the
miracles he had done, by which viz. he intended to move them to believe in him,
but for the loaves sake, with which he had filled them. Then he bad them work
(or earnestly seck) not the meat which perishes but which dures until life
everlasting, and told morover that this work was to believe in him.

Rem. 2. That this mere spiritual eating of him, or believing in him he then at
that time exacted of them, to wit That they should believe that he was the son
of God, and therefore he checked them for not believing in him saying v. 36.
You have seen me ( viz. In the miracle of giving them miraculously bread, and
his crossing the water without a boat) and you do not believe. (to wit, some
of you.)

Rem. 3. After some believed that he was the son of God, as S. Peter for
himself and some other Apostles testified. v. 69. And consequently were
disposed to believe whatsoever he should propose to them, then v. 51. he told
them plainly that he would give them his flesh to eat, saying The bread which I
will give, is my flesh for the life of the World at which proposition when he
saw some stumble, then he repeated it again in stronger terms with a
threatening Amen Amen I say unto you Unless you eat the flesh of the sone of
man and drink his Blood (to wit when I will give it to ye) You shall not have
life in you. 53.

Rem. 4. here, That this eating is different from that mere spiritual eating of
which he spoke in the beginning of the Chapter, when he aimed only to make
them first believe that he was the son of God. That he required at that present
time, and therefore checked them then for not believing. This he required only
after he had given them his flesh to eat, which he then promised, and performed
only a year after, to wit when he instituted the Sacriment, and after gave it
to his Disciples. for we cannot eat a thing before we get it to eat, and
Christ did not say then. v. 52. The bread which I give but which I will give is
my flesh. Which, as I said, he performed only at the nixt passover or Easter.
Hence gather that that eating was a Sacramental or sensible eating by the mouth
of the Body, and not a mere spiritual eating by the mouth of Faith. Which he
exacted v. 36. and which some had performed already.

Rem. 5. That 'twas our Saviors custom to warn his Disciples before hand of
things he was to do, or suffer after, when he foresaw that they would be very
surprising. And this for two reasons. First that they might not be scandalized
when they fell out. So he says Io. 16. v. 1. I have said those things that you
be not scandalized, viz. When for my sake you shall be your selves cast out of
the Synagoges: but rather, that you have a ground of comfort and says in me
who foretold you of it. 2. That when they ^ell out they might not be
starteled, but to re confirm* in the belief of them by reason they h^^ been
foretold by him. So he said Io. 14. v. 29. And now I have told you before that
when it will be fulfilled, you believe.

Thus he foretold that persecution of his Disciples; Io, 16.11. His own
ignominious death. Math. 20. v. 18. That he would be scourged etc. He foretold
that he w uld institute Baptism, and solved Nicodemas his difficulty Io 3. v.
5. He foretold his sending of the H: Gh st. Io 14. v. 16.

Now shall n t we also believe, That he foretold this great mystery of giving
his Body and his Blood at the last supper to his disciples since they were not
surprised, when he said Take eat This is my Body? which had it not been
foretold might have seemed very strange, and a subject of asking him with
submission what he meant by those words, as they asked him the meaning of the
parable of the tares of the field. Math. 13. v. 36. But he foretold this
mystery no where, if not in this 6. Chap. of S. Io.; then those words Unless
you eat the flesh of the son of etc. were meant of the sacramental eating by
the mouth or the Body (as the Disciples did eat it at the Last supper) and not
only by the mouth of Faith.

If Protestants to justify their eating by faith only bring this passage of S.
Austim. tract 25. in Io. Quid paras denies and ventrem creed and manducast^.
Wherefore do you prepare your teeth and st match believe and you have eaten. I
answer believe and you have eaten mere y spiritually of which Christ was
speaking in the beginning of that 6. Chap. of S. Io, I grant. Sacramentallie,
of which we are speaking in our controversy with protestants, and of which our
Savior spoke when he said, Take eat, This is my Body, I deny. For the
sacramental eating must be a sensible eating by the mouth of the body. That S.
Austin did not mean there a sacramental manducation or eating, is clear,
because he admitted Infant communion, or the sacramental communion of Infants,
who could not receive the Body of Christ by faith, or eat it by faith when
they received it sacramentally. See S. Aust lib. 1. De pec Meritis and Remis.
Chap. 20 where to prove to the Pelagians That there is a necessity to baptize
Children D^minum, says he audiamus non quidem hoc de sacramento S. lav^eri
dicentem, sed de sacramento ^rensae suae quo nemo rite nisi baptizatus accedit
^isi manducaveritis carnem filii hominis etc. non habebitis vitam in vobis.
quid ad hoc responderi potest? etc. An ve^^o quisquam etiam hoc dicere audebit
quod ad parvulos haec senten i^ non pertineat, possintque sine participatione
Corporis hujus and sanguinis in se habere vitam? i. e. Let us hear, says he,
our Lord not indeed speaking of the sacrament of the holy layer (Baptism) but
of the sacrament of his table, to which no man comes lawfully unless he be
baptized Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man etc: You shall not have
life in you. What can be answered to this etc. Dare an^e say that this sentence
does not belong to Children and that they may have life in them without the
participation of this Body and Blood?

Rem o. That it is not likely that S. Io. whose desing in his Gospel was to
speak of the greatest mysteries of the life of Christ would have omitted that
of the Eucharist or of his giving his Body and Blood to his Disciples at the
last supper, which the three other Evangelists so accurately set down, as if
one would not omit to confirm what the other said of this mystery: but if he
did not mean of it when he relates what Christ in his 6. Chap. said of giving
his body and his Blood, threatening them if they did not eat it and drink it;
he has omited it

SECTION II.
We must eat the real flesh of Christ and drink his Blood sacramentallie i. e.
sensibly by the mouth of the body and not by the mouth of faith only.

TO prove this Catholic truth we bring these two passages. Unless you eat the
flesh and drink the blood of the son of man you shall have no life in you. Io.
6. v. 54. and v. 56. For my Flesh is meat indeed etc:

To prove that this eating and drinking is to be understood only of an eating
and drinking by faith, protestants, according to the principle of comparing
scripture with scripture, the obscurer passage with the clearer to know the
true sense of both, bring two passages, which follow relating to the same
matter, to be compared with ours. viz. It Is the spirit that quicknes, the flesh
profits nothing. The words which I have spoken are spirit and truth. v. 64.

We say that these latter passages are the obscurer, and do not prove so
clearly that we must eat and drink the Body and Blood of Christ only by faith:
as ours prove that we must eat the Body and drink the Blood of Christ by the
mouth of the Body. 1. Because these two passages do not speak of faith, but
only of spirit and life, there are other acts of spirit and life than acts of
faith, the acts of love and. The zeal of thy house has eaten me. says David.
Psalm. 69. v..9 in the protestant Bible, in ours 68. v. 10. How prove you that
Christ means here an act of faith? 2. We know there is no other proper mouth in
man but that of the body, wherefore when Christ says unless you eat the f esh
and drink the blood of the son of man etc. We understand he means with the
mouth of the body.

Again since to eat and drink are the proper acts of the mouth, till you prove
to us that we cannot receave the body of Christ spiritualised or having the
property of a spirit, into our mouths, why shall not we believe that Christ
meant we should eat his flesh with the mouth of our Body, since a term sine
addito, if you add nothing, is alwise taken for the thing for which it supposes
properly. So Homo a man, if you add nothing supposes for a true man, and not a
painted man wherefore Christ saying Unless you eat the body of the son of man,
without adding, by faith, that eateing he speaks of, is to be understood by the
mouth of the body, this being that which we understand properly by the term
eating. Nor does its not nourishing the body hinder it to be eaten by the mouth
of the body, no more then poison, tho it nourish not, hinders to believe that
many have drunk poison Since then these two latter passages are the obscurer,
they ought to be explained to the sense of the former two passages brought by
us, or so that they do not contradict them, which are clear. Wherefore I
explain them thus.

It Is the spirit that quickness etc. i. e, It Is my divine spirit or my Divinity
that quicknes the receaver of my Body to a supernatural life, as the soul
quicknes the body to actiones of a natural life; and as the body could not be
quickened to hear or see without the soul so could not the receaver of my Body
or he who eats it sacramentallie be quickened to a supernatural life were it
not united to my divinity. Of which divine spirit quickening or giving life, to
wit, supernatural, the words I have spoken are to be understood. 2. My words
are spirit and life. i. e. They are to be understood spiritually, or that you
are to eat my flesh being in the sacrament after a spiritual way with the
property of a spirit for the nourishment of your soul; not being there in a
carnal way like a piece of dead flesh to be divided with your teeth for the
nourishment of your body. 3. My words are spirit and life. i. e. My words
intimated v. 54. Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man. etc Obeyed will
give you my spirit and by it a supernatural life, or grace which leads to
eternal life. Christ adds presently v. 65, There are some of you which do not
believe, as if he should say the reason wherefore you stumble at my promise of
giving you my flesh to eat is because you do not believe really that I am the
son of God, and so able to do all things howsoever strange they may seem to be.

By what I have said in this section you see proven that these words of Christ
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life. Io. 6. v. 55.
and, my flesh is meat indeed etc. v. 56. are to be understood of a corporal
eating by the mouth of the body and not of a mere spiritual eating and drinking
by faith.

I say not a mere spiritual eating, because we hold we must add an act of faith
to our sensible, eating of his Body, nay this Corporal eating may be called a
spiritual eating in a good sense, in as much as we believe That the Body of
Christ in the sacrament as it is reallie there, so it is spiritualiy, I mean
with the property of a spirit. As S. Paul. 1. Cor. 15. v. 44. says, Our
bodies shall rise spiritual, i. e. spiritualized- viz. in glory they shall have
the properties of a spirit.

Note, as Heat is called the property of Fire because the nature of Fire has a
clame to Heat and an exigence or a natural appetite of it, tho actual Heat (not
the exigence or natural apetite of it) might be given to water; so to be all in
all and all in every part of an improper place is called the property of a
spirit, because the nature of a spirit has an exigence of it, tho this way of
existing (not the exigence of it) may by the almighty power of God be
communicated to a body. If then a glorious body has this property of a spirit
to enter through a wall without making a breach, why may not the whole body of
Christ be in the whole, and least part of the host? So our way of eating him
there is conform to his way of being there, which is spiritual with the
property of a spirit, his whole Body being in the least particle of the host:
not carnal as if we divided his body with our teeth. Spiritual again in as much
as we believe That his real Body so received in that spiritual manner as he
commands under the accidents of bread by the mouth of the Body, feeds the soul
or spirit by the grace it produces there. And this eating of Christ's Body and
drinking his Blood that way satisfies the hunger and thirst we had of his grace.

Another proof that Christ meant the real manducation of his true Body when he
said Take eat etc. For this is my Body, is, what he said to the Jews. Io. 6.
v. 51. The Bread which I will give you. (is), viz. at present, my Flesh. Where
I remark the word, is, the sacrament not being yet made, could not import
Signifies my flesh; but because the Bread, only as a sacrament could signify
his flesh) imports an identitie or samety of that bread, he spoke of, with his
flesh. Hence the sacrament he made after, and which we now receive under the
form of Bread being that bread he promised to give, it follows that it is his
real Flesh, and therefore our eating of it is a real and corporal manducation
of his Body,

Add to all I have said, that Christ's flesh is not meat really and indeed to
him who believes only, no more then the King's picture is to him that sees it,
the King indeed or truly the King. For things that are said to be such indeed
according to our common way of speaking are understood to be such properly and
not figuratively.

SECTION. III.
Mr. Rodon's objections against our understanding of those words of Christ He
that eats my Flesh etc. of a corporal eating by the mouth of the Body and not
only by Faith, answered.

Ob. 1. Christ says Io, 6. v. 35. He that comes to me (to wit by faith) shall
never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst. Then the eating of
Christ's flesh is spiritual by Faith and not corporal.

I answer denying the consequence. And say that who believes in Christ shall
neither hunger nor thirst, because to the believer Christ will give his Body
and Blood to be eaten and drunken corporally which will satisfy the Believer's
hunger and thirst of him, and more over hinder in him the hunger and thirst of
perishing things. It Is not then a bare believing, which is only a beginning and
disposition to the satisfying of the hunger and thirst of the soul, but the
worthy eating the body and blood of Christ which gives that satisfaction Who
eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me and I in him. Io. 6 v. 57.
Belief alone does not do the turn, Not every one that says to me Lord, Lord,
(and consequently believes) shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Ma. 7. v.
21.

Obj. 2. Christ says Io. 6. v. 55. Who eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood has
eternal life. But a reprobate according to the Romanist may eat the Body and
drink the blood of Christ by the mouth of the Body, then it is the eating and
drinking by faith that gives eternal life.

Answer. I deny the censequence and say that the reason why the reprobate
receiving the Blood of Christ by the mouth of the Body has not eternal life, is
because he presumes to receive it being in mortal sin, and so eats and drinks
unworthily, and consequently eats and drinks his damnation according to S.
Paul. 1 Cor. 11. v. 27.

And here I remark that according to protestants Christ's body cannot be eaten
unworthily. For according to Mr. Rodon in this chapter, and other protestants
Christ's body cannot be eaten but by faith ( viz. a saving faith, for
historical faith or the faith of miracles is not a manducation or eating of the
Body of Christ) but who eats the Body of Christ with a saving faith does not
eat it unworthilie (for I cannot save and damn my self both at once by the
same act, but the eating with a saving faith saves me, and the eating
unworthily damnes me, then if I Could eat the Body of Christ unworthily I
could save and damn my self by the same act) then a protestant cannot eat the
Body of Christ unworthily which is flat aagainst S. Paul and consequently
heretical.

Obj 3. S. Aug. lib. 3. de. Doct chapter cap. 16. speaks thus. To eat the flesh of
Christ is a figure etc.

Answer 1. S. Aug. does not say simply To eat the Flesh of Christ is a figure
but bringing the words of Christ Io. 6. Unless you eat my flesh etc. says,
Christ seems to command a wicked act or heinous offense, Figuraest ergo it is
then a figure. I subsume, but Christ does not seem to To: Catholics, who
believe he spesaks in that place only of a sacramental manducation, to command
there a heinous offense, then according to S. Austin. we have no need to take
his words figuratively. But for Capharnaites, to whom he seems to command a
heinous offense, they ought to take them figuratively, that they may not
censure him. To understand then this passage in the apprehension of the
Capharnaites; you must reflect that as we are wont to kill those beasts, whose
flesh we eat, before we eat them: So the Jews out of Christ's words had
apprehended that they ought first to kill Christ, and after to eat his flesh
cut in pieces boiled or rested.

This without doubt was a wicked or heinous offense. He means then says S.
Augustine a figure of his death, not his true death, and that they ought not to
kill Christ truly, but by taking the sacrament of the Eucharist represent his
slaughter, and by their manners express his death, that they ought not to kill
Christ but to mortify themselves, and do what S. Paul said he had done Colos.
1. v. 24. I fulfill those things which are wanting of the passions of Christ in
my flesh for his body which is the Church. So Maldonat upon the 6 Chap. of S.
Io. v. 53,

Answer. 2. We heartily acknowledge that the Eucharist and the Preist's eating
of it, is a figure or representative of the passion of Christ, Teaching us
(continues S. Austin) viz. preist's, such as he was, to partake of Christ's
passion, to wit, when it represents it to them by their eating the Body under
the form of Bread separate from the species of Wine, and after drinking the
Blood under the species of Wine which was consecrated separate from the species
of Bread; And to imprint, adds S. Aug, in our memories with delight and profit
that Christ was crucified for us. For can it be but delightful to a man to
think of his salvation purchased to him by the death of Christ, if he pleases,
and profitable to encourage him to live a good life in order to make it sure?

Having answered this objection by which he would have S. Augustine seem to deny
the real presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist Let me bring him a passage
from the same S. Austin by which he clearly asserts it.

It is. conc. 1 in Psalm. 33. where he speaks thus. Et ferebatur in manibus
suis, says he speaking of Christ, hoc, says he, quomodo possii fieri in
homine quis intelligat? Quis enim portatur manibus suis? Manibus aliorum potest
portari homo, manibus suis nemo portatur. Quomodo intelligatur in ipso David
secundum literam non invenimus, in Christo autem invenimus, ferebatur enim
Christus in manibus suis quando commendans ipsum Corpus suum ait Hoc est Corpus
meum, ferebat enim illud Corpus in manibus suis. And he ( viz. Christ) was
carried in his hands: who can understand, says he how this could be done if a
Man? A man may be carried in the hands of others, in his own hands no man is
carried. We do not understand how this may be understood in David himself
literallie or according to the letter, but we find it in Christ. For Christ was
carried in his own hands when commending that same Body of his, he said, This
is my Body, for he did carry that Body in his own hands.

Calvin lib. 4. just. Chap. 17. Answers.

and explanes this passage thus: Christ carried himself in his own hands, but
improperly and figuratively, to wit because he carried the sacrament of his
Body. Answer. I could also carry a sign or picture of my self in my own hands,
and that is not hard to be understood, but S. Austin says 'Tuas impossible to
other men to carry their Bodies in their own hands as Christ did his.

S. Aug. again lib. 2, cap. 9. cont. adver: Legis and proph. says We receive
with faithful heart and mouth the mediator of God and Man, Man Christ Jesus
giving us his Body to be eaten and his Blood to be drunk though it seem more
horrible to eat man's flesh then to kill, and to drink man's blood then to shed
it. And again Epist. 162. Tolerat ipse Dominus Judam diabolum furem and
proditorem suum sinit accipere inter innocents Discipulos quod fideles norunt
Pretium Nostrum. Our Lord himself suffers Judas a Devil a thief and his
betrayer, he lets him receive among the innocent disciples, that which is known
to the faithful, Our price i. e. (ransom)

Be pleased now to reflect out of these passages. 1. That Judas his eating our
price, to wit, Christ, was a Corporal eating by the mouth, of the Body for he
did not eat him by faith. 2, That our receiving our mediator with faithful
heart and mouth, as S. Austin speaks, cannot stand, if we exclude our corporal
eating Christ's Body in that spiritual manner I explained in the second section
of this Chapter.

Obj. 4. Cardinal Cajetan in his Com: on S. John. 6. says To eat the flesh
of Christ and drink his Blood is faith in Christ's death etc.

I answer that it is faith in Christ's death that makes us eat the flesh and
drink the blood of Christ, so that if I cease to fulfill this his commandment
of eating his flesh and drinking his blood I show I have no faith in his death
without which there is no life of the spirit. Moreover when we eat the Body
and drink the Blood of Christ we ought, not flightly to reflect, but as we chew
our meat and let down our drink by little and little, ruminate, and consider
maturely the death of Christ represented to us in our communion.

Christ saeth not, says the Cardinal, he that eats worthily or drinks
worthily, has, to wit, eternal life, but he that eats and drinks. Hence Mr.
Rodon infers this eating and drinking is to be understood not of the sacrament
but of an eating and drinking, viz. by faith, the death of Christ.

Answer. Tho Christ did not say, who eats or drinks worthily, he meant so, as
may be gathered from the following words, has eternal life, for none, I
suppose, will ascribe eternal life to an unworthy eating as to its cause and
condition. But how does Mr. Rodon from eats or drinks solitarily put, without
by the mouth of the body or by the mouth of faith, gather that the Cardinal,
and Christ before him meant of an eating by says or an eating of the death of
Christ, since when we hear mention of eating and drinking without any addition,
we presently understand by the mouth of the body. as when we hear named a man,
we understand a rational sensible creature, not a painted man or that which
improperly is called a man.

Obj. 5. The action whereby Jesus Christ is applied to us for Righteousness and
sanctification is nothing else but faith, therefore the spiritual eateing and
drinking by faith and not the corporal by the mouth. is the action whereby we
have that life which Jesus Christ has purchased to us by his death.

Answer. I deny the Antecedent, and say we are justified also partially by good
works Iac. 2. One of which is to obey Christ's command in taking by our
corporal mouth his Body under the form of Bread And so S Paul Romans 5. is to be
understood, when he says we are justified by faith. As the other passages Act.
15. and Io. 6. That God purifies our hearts by faith, but not by faith only but
also by good-works. Was not St. Marie Magdalen justified when her sins were
pardoned her, because she loved much. And is not her love here alleged by
Christ for the cause of her justification? I do not deny but that she had faith
also as a disposition to the same justification.

Does not S. Paul say 1 Cor. 13. v. 2. Had I faith to remove a mountain, Si
Charitatem autem non habeam Nihil sum? And have no charity I am nothing?

I grant again that eating and drinking by says, (as Protestants speak) to wit
Faith while we eat with our corporal mouth our Saviors real Body obtaines
remission of sins etc. but not, if we condemn or neglect the eating of it by
the mouth of the Body.

Take notice when Mr. Rodon quotes S. John 3. v. 3. Except a man be born again
(he leaves out, by water and the Holy Ghost. Why? was it not that he had not a
mind to avow that Baptism has a force to justify and that it is necessary for
the salvation also of Children? as you may clearly see in these following
passages of S. Paul and S. Peter. You were given to lust, drink, covetous but
you are washed, but you are sanctified (to wit, by that washing or Baptism) but
you are justified in the spirit of God. 1 Cor. 6. v. 11. S. Cyprian. lib. 2. ad
Donat: confesses what he was before Baptism, and what he presently became after
Baptism, and what Christianity gave to him, calling Christianismus, his
Christning Mors criminum and vita Virtutum. The death of Crimes and life of
Virtues.

And Peter. 1 Cap. 3. v. 21. Quod and nos nunc similis formae salvos facit
Baptisma The like figure whereunto, even Baptism does also now save us, as if
he should say. As the Waters of the deluge raising the Ark, and with it Noe and
his people, did not only declare, but saved them really from death, so Baptism
saves us, makes us just and holy, and does not only declare us to be such; as
Luther with other Heretics would have it understood.

Also ad Ephesians. 5. v. 26. He loved his Church Purifying her with the Laver of
water and in the word of life. Where you see the word of Life added to the
matter, viz. of waeter sanctifies and purifies the Church from sin.

Obj. 6. The flesh, of which Christ speaks, when he says, My flesh is meat
indeed; is a spiritual food, but the Body of Christ in the Eucharist is not a
spiritual food but only his body on the Cross, then he meant of his Body on the
Cross and not his Body in the Eucharist when he said My flesh is meat indeed.

Answer. I deny the minor proposition, and say that the flesh or body of
Christ in the Eucharist is a spiritual food called so without a figure; because
producing by a supernatural operation (which force it has from its union with
the divine nature) grace, or sanctification in us, it is realy food, and meat
indeed to the soul without a figure. So that FOOD is Genus to corporal and
spiritual food. To strenghten or increase Life is Genus, or the more universal
term: to strenghten by changing into the thing strenghtened, and to strenghten,
not by changing, but by Producing grace, by which we are strenghtened are the
two differences or the less universal terms. The first makes Corperal food, the
second Spiritual. The bare sign is no meat, because not it, but the act of
Faith only btings forth Sanctification (as Protestants hold) in them.

Moreover I say that Christ's Flesh broken, and his blood shed on the Cross
was not spiritual food indeed, because they were never to coexist actually with
our spiritual feeding, as Christ's flesh in the Eucharist does, and therefore
is meat indeed. The food, to be food indeed to one, and the feeding must be
joined together, but when we now believe Christ's death, it is not present, but
past, and therefore is not food to the believer; but when we believe and take
by the mouth of our Body Christ's flesh, it is there joined with our spiritual
eating, producing Grace, strenghtning and increasing our spiritual life, and
therefore is meat indeed.

Obj. 7. That doctrine which opposes sense and reason and seems to imply
contradictions is to be rejected, if a more suitable and rational sense can be
found out for those passages which seem to prove it.

I Answer 1. What if the Sabellians not conceiving how the Paternity should not
be communicated to God the Son as well as the Divine Essence, since the
Paternitie and the Divine Essence are one and the same thing, should have said
it is a more suitable and rational sense of passages which seem in scripture to
say there are three distinct persons in the Divine nature, that there is only
one person having three different functions, called Father as he creats, Son
as he redeems, and Holy Ghost as he sanctifies. Would this pretty doctrine
please Mr. de Rodon? No, neither can his conceit in the matter of the Eucharist
be applauded by Romanists.

Answer. 2. Our doctrine in the Eucharist neither opposes sense nor reason, as
I have shown Chap. 1. Sect. 1. Nor seems so much to imply contradiction, as the
Mystery of the B. Trinity, which will be seen better in the next chapter. Nor
is the way he and other Protestants have found out rational to explane the
passages we bring for our Doctrine, as, I hope, will appear to the impartial
and serious considerer of our proofs in the first Chapter.

To end this Chapter remember again that Christ by the occasion of the Jews
seeking him more for bread to eat then for his miracles. Io. 6. v. 26. by which
miracles he labored to persuade them to believe in him, or that he was the Son
of God, called himself bread that does not perish, and spoke first of spiritual
eating by faith that he might advance his hearers by little and little to this
mystery of a Real eating of his Flesh, teaching them first what they ought to
do to merit this true and heavenly Bread, saying Work (or seek earnestly) not
the food that perishes, but which remains to eternal life etc. Adding This is
the work, of God that ye believe, as if he should say This is the work of God
That ye believe that I am come from Heaven, and that I am the Son of God, which
if you once believe, you will not stumble at what I shall say to you here-after
concerning the real eating of my flesh and drinking of my Blood, nor be at all
amassed (as appeared in the Apostles) when actually, viz. at the last supper, I
shall give it you.

CHAPTER. III. Of Transubstantiation.
SECTION. I. Transubstantiation is proved.
IS it not pretty to hear Mr. Rodon with some other Protestants speak of one
of the darkest mysteries of our faith as of a natural thing, and when their
weak reason looking only to nature cannot reach it, conclude as it were with
triumph, in the Eucharist there is no transubstantiation. Would that man be
thought a good Christan, who, because it thwarts his gross understanding to
conceive a father to beget a son by speaking, should conclude that the divine
word is not the son of the eternal Father? or a good divine, who, because it is
true to say in the B. Trinity that the essence is communicated to the son, and
the peternitie is not communicated to the Son; should conclude, that the
essence and the paternitie are not the same thing.

Here I remark in passing that Mr. Rodon's Philosophy unwarilie touches the
mystery of the most B. Trinity in his 4. chap. where numb. 12. for an example
of a plurality of things really different he assigns the three Divine persons
and concludes from thence, that a real difference of things does not infer
Division. But he should have taken notice that the Sacred Science teaches us
that tho there be three different Persons in God there are not three different
things, because A different thing signifies a different essence. Hence S. Aug.
lib. de Fide ad petrum chap. 1. says, Una est patris and Filii and Spiritus
Sti. essentia, in qua non est aliud Pater, aliud Filius, aliud Spiritus
Sanctus; quamvis personaliter sit alius Pater, alius Filius, alius Spiritus
Sanctus. The essence of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is one, in which the
Father is not one thing, the Son another, and the H. Ghost another; although, as
to Person the Father be one, the Son another, and the Holy Ghost another. If he
was rash in touching the B. Trinity we must not wonder to see him stray also in
this Mystery, following only the strain of his human Philosophy. Mr. Rodon then
was not content merely to believe, but would see, that he might believe, tho S.
Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 13. v. 12. That such a sight is reserved for the next
Life, and that now we see only through a Glass darkly. But I desire him who is
so earnest to have a clear account of Divine Mysteries, to clear me first in
some natural things.

How is it possible to cover the whole Heavens with the Wing of a Fly? Yet this
can be done if it be divided in as many parts as God can divide it. For after
every division, the least part will still have its three dimentions, length,
breadth, and thickness, by all which it may be still divided.

Now if he deny this, saying the Wing is composed of Indivisibles, he runs
himself into as great difficulties, as to avow that a snail makes as much way
in an hour as the sleetest Race-Horse; for the Race-Horse cannot make an
Indivisible of space or way without some part of time, and that cannot be less
then an Indivisible of time, and in the same Indivisible of time the Snail
moving cannot make less then an Indivisible of space, and so go along with the
Race-Horse the rest of the Indivsiibles of the hour, and consequently the Snail
will have made as much way as the Race-Horse at the hours end, which is absurd.

Neither tell me the Horse can run over a hundred points or parts of space in
an instant, for his motion is also divisible in points, one part must begin
before the other, and so comes in again my argument: As for the sweld points
maintained by some, they confound a Body with a Spirit and therefore are to be
rejected.

How is it possible, that, since three Men cannot get in at once at a narrow
Door, the pictures or species (which are not Spirits but material things) of a
whole Army should all at once enter without confusion into the apple of the Eye
of a Man, who from an eminence regards it?

If all Philosophers Wits are drowned in a drop of water not being able to fell
with satisfaction what is the matter or the Form of it, and whither it be
compounded of divisible or indivisible parts, must we claim to a full
satisfaction of our reason before we will believe this Mysterious
Transubstantiation, and thus banish Faith out of the Church of Christ? Let us
not soar to high, nor dive to deep in this matter, since a searcher of the
Divine Majesty will be oppressed by Glory. Having premitted this discourse to
raise Men above their senses when they come to consider mysteries of Faith. I
now prove the mystery of Transubstantiation, thus.

As God can create, so he can Transubstantiate: And as he has revealed, Genes.
1. That he has created Heaven and Earth, so he has revealed, Math. 26. v. 27.
That he has made a Transubstantiation of Bread into his Body in the Eucharist.

If you wonder at the strange things that follow from this Transubstantiation,
consider that creation made something of nothing, which seemed so strange to
the ancient Philosophers, that they tell us flatly, Ex nihilo nihil fit, of
nothing nothing is made. Had they had Faith, they would have acknowledged
Creation; submit you your Judgment to Faith, and you will acknowledge in the
Eucharist Transubstantiation.

SECTION II. Mr. Rodon's objections answered,
Object. IN every substantial conversion that thing into which another thing is
converted is alwise newly produced, as when Christ turned the Water into Wine
was the Wine was newly produced. But the Body and Blood of Christ cannot be
newly produced in the Eucharist.

Therefore the Bread and Wine are not substantially converted into the Body and
Blood of Christ in the Eucharist.

Answer 1. I distinguish the Major. In every substantial conversion, that thing
etc. Is alwise newly produced Entitatively, or modally, I grant: alwise
Entitatively, I deny; that is, in every substantial conversion there is alwise
the production at least of a new manner of being. So the Body of Christ in the
Eucharist has a new manner of being, viz. a Sacramental being, which it has not
out of the Eucharist. But there is not alwise in every substantial conversion a
production of a new substance.

Answer. 2. I dislinguish the Major again. Naturally, be it so. Supernaturally,
and when the question is about the almighty Power of God, I deny it, and say
that it is sufficient that the whole substance of Bread be destroyed and the
Body of Christ put in its place; something remaining common to both, viz. the
accidents of Bread, which now by the consecration become the accidents of the
Body of Christ morally, in as much as they show to all the faithful, the
consecration being made, that the Body of Christ is now there; and receives a
new being, not as to the substance, which it had already, but as to the manner
of being, a sacramental being, under the form of Bread.

If you ask how the Body of Christ can begin to be there without leaving the
place where it was before. I answer, when a child grows by the nutrition or
feeding, does the reasonable soul leave the rest of the Child's body to come to
the added part of matter, or is there a new reasonable Soul produced in it? If
not, but the same Soul acquires only a new presence of relation to the added
part of matter, reason the same way concerning the Body of Christ in the
Eucharist.

Ob. 2. In every substantial conversion that thing which is converted into
another is destroyed; but the Bread is not destroyed in the Eucharist, because
after Consecration it is said to be Broken, Divided etc. therefore it is not
destroyed.

Answer. I distinguish the Minor. The Bread is not destroyed as to the
substance (which is only required) I deny; as to the accidents, I grant, and
say that by reason of these remaining the Host is said to be broken, divided
etc. and is still called Bread Per distractionem as we speak in Philosophy. So
our Savior said to the Disciples of John. Math. 11. v. 5. The blind see,
because they, who then did see, were before blind. They were still called Blind
by that way of speaking.

If you ask me what he invited them to drink when he said to his Disciples.
Math. 26. Drink ye all of this? I answer be invited them to drink a cup of
Blood, for the Wine was converted into Blood before they drunk the cup, for the
cup's being the cup of his blood was the reason he brought to move them to
drink it, now we do not bring the reason to move a man to do a thing after he
has done it, but before.

Also the demonstrative particle This as it does not demonstrate a thing that
is not yet, neither does it demonstrate a thing that is past, but joined to a
verb of the present tence with a full sense, it demonstrates a thing present.
If Chrict had meant of what they had drunk before, he would have said That was,
and not, Tkis is, so you may suppose he did not give them the Cup before he had
ended his speech.

But why does S. Mark, chap. 14. Set the consecration after the drinking?
Answer, it is a figurative speech we call Histerologia, when we relate first
that which was done last As when S. Math. in the 27 chap. relates the
Resurrection of the bodies of the Saints before the Resurrection of Christ, who
nevertheless rose first. Again by the same figure S. Math. Chap. 11. from the 2
verse to the 20 relates concerning John Bap. the things that fell out before the
mission of the Apostles, which mission he had related before in the 10. Chap.
Nay I hope Mr. Rodon will not have our Savior to have consecrated or blissed
the wine by saying this is my blood when it was in the disciples stomachs.

Mr. To. urges. When a thing is converted into another we cannot see the
property of the thing converted, but only that into which it is converted.
Answer. In a natural conversion which is not a Sacrament, I grant; in a
supernatural, which makes a Sacrament, I deny; for the Eucharist being a sign
of our spiritual nourishment it is such by the species of Bread which nourishes
the body. Also the property of the Body of Christ in the Eucharist, which is to
nourish the soul by Grace, being an object of says is seen by the
understanding, but not by the eye of the Body, so Abraham saw by faith that
those who appeared to him Genesis 18. like men, were Angels.

For brevities sake to his saying In every substanstial conversion, etc.
Answer in every substantial conversion which is not of the whole substance
there must be a subject to pass from on substance to another, I grant; if it
be of the whole, as Transubstantiation, I deny; for God's almighty power is
able to change the matter as well as the form of a thing, when it pleases him.
Neither is it a Creation, because the accidents are something common to both,
and the Body of Christ was before existent.

To his saying that Transubstantiation destroys the nature of Accidents; this
I deny, because the nature of an accident is not to inhere actually, but to
have an exigency or an innate appetite of inhering which a substance has not:
because naturally a human nature demandes a human subsistence, would Mr. Rodon
have said that there is a human person in Christ?

To his saying that Transubstantiation destroys the nature of Sacraments; that
I also deny, and show the contrary. Because the Body of Christ as it is united
to the species of Bread is the Sacrament, which has not only an absolute
being, but also a relative, Sacramental, and significative being, as Mr, To.
requires, for as the species of Bread represent and signify to us bread which
nourishes the Body, so do the same species by the Consecration of the Host
represent to us the Body of Christ, which nourishes the soul by the grace it
produces in it.

Thus you see

1. In the species. an Analogy or relation to the thing signified viz.
Nourishment.

2. A double being of the Sacrament; the absolute being in the Body of Christ,
and the Relative being in the Species. And so you see that Transubstantiation
does not any wise destroy the being of a Sacrament ar Sign.

Note that the substances of Bread alone or Wine alone are not signs, for
substances do not fall under, or affect our senses, but by their accidents, so
the whole force of signifying is in the species which move our senses, and
consequently it is not required that the formal signs be such that they may
nourish our Bodies to save the likeness between the Sacrament and nourishment
signified by it. It Is enough that the species signify nourishment in the
Eucharist, as they did before in the Bread: in the Bread, nourishment of the
Body by Bread; in the Eucharist nourishment of the Soul by the Body of Christ.
If you say the Body of Christ under the species cannot nourish the Soul. I
answer. Materially and corporally, I grant; Effectively and Spiritually
producing grace in it, I deny.

To Mr. To. saying, The Council of Trent commands the adoration of the
Eucharist. And therefore the accidents of Bread and Wine are not the Sacrament
of the Eucharist.

Answer. The accidents are not a part of the Sacrament, I deny, they are not
the whole Sacrament, I grant. The Sacrament is said to be adored when the chief
part of it, the Body of Christ united to the Divinity is adored, for the
species, they are only adored per accidens as the garment of Christ by him who
adored his person.

To his saying a Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace. But in the
Eucharist the Body and Blood of Christ are not visible. Therefore in the
Eucharist they are not the Sacrament. Answer I distinguish the mino^ They are
not a visible sign alone, I grant; joined to the species I deny. Neither do we
say That the Body and Blood alone are the Sacrament, nor the species alone but
the Body and Blood joined to the species are the Sacrament, and that whole is a
visible sign.

To his saying that nothing can be both the sign and thing signified. Answer.
Nothing can be the sign and the thing signified in the same manner in which it
is the sign I grant, in an other manner I deny. Did not the Angel give the
sheepheards for a sign of our Savior Born that they should find a Child in a
manger, who was the Savior himself? He in the quality of a Child in a manger
is a sign of himself as the Born Savior, So Christ in the Eucharist may be a
sign of himself on the Cross. Also a loaf of Bread exposed in a window is a
sign of it self to be sold.

But to give you more, the Body united to the accidents of Bread is a visible
sign, not of Christ's Body, but of the invisible grace which this Sacrament
produces in the Soul, so the sign and the thing signified are different.

CHAPTER IV.
Against the real presence of Christ's Body in the Host or consecrated Wafer.

SECTION. I. A Preamble.
HERE Mr. Rodon brings a number of Philosophical arguments so often objected,
and so often answered by Philosophers in that question, whether the same Body
may be at the same time in diverse places. Before I go farther I desire my Reader
to be pleased to reflect that to prove the Catholic doctrine of
Transubstantiation, it is not necessary to admit a Body to be in two places.
Because to be in a place properly, or in an univocal place is to have situal or
local extension which the Body of Christ has not in the Eucharist; as a soul is
not in a place but by reason of its Body, which is in a place, so Christ's Body
in the Eucharist is only in a place by reason of the species which are in a
place.

Again since to walk, to meet, to be distant, to be wounded, etc. are
affections of a Body, which is circumscriptively in a place, that is, having
its parts answering to the parts of the uppermost superficies of the Body that
contains it, all Mr. Rodon's arguments of that nature are of no force against
the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, it being thereafter the manner of a
spirit. Yet when they are looked upon with an unlearned eye, Mr. de Rodon seems
to triumph.

Just as if I speaking with a country cloun of the motion of the Sun should
strive to persuade him that at the most it makes only twenty miles an hour,
while another should undertake to prove it makes twenty thousand. My opinion
would be received with more applause by the Cloun, than that of the other: but
if both spoke t^ an Astronomer he would laugh at my opinion in respect of the
other's.

What makes so different a sentiment in these two Men? The Cloun is led by
sense, and the Astronomer by reason.

This is my case with Mr. Rodon treating this Question. If we speak to vulgar
People, or to those who have no Faith, Mr. Rodon will be applauded. If to Men
of Faith and reason I Will have the better of him. Why? because the vulgar,
especially if they want Faith, will believe nothing that mounts above their
senses: But the wise Christian not measuring supernatural things by his Eye, or
as they appear in his weak Imagination, but by Faith, and seeing by his reason
there is no contradiction in all Mr. Rodon brings against this Mystery, more
than against that of the Incarnation or of the most B. Trinity, has no
difficulty to submit the judgment of his senses often deceived in natural
things to the word of God proposed to him by the Church.

This preamble being made I now prove our tenet. Christ's Body has been
circumscriptively, that is, locally in its shape in two places both at once,
then it may be in Heaven locally, and in the Host or consecrated Wafer
Sacramentally both at once. I prove the antecedent. Christ standing by Paul; as
S. Luke relates, Act. 23. v. 11. in these words The Lord stood by him and said
be of good cheer, Paul, was circumscriptively or locally in that place, and at
the same time he was in the Heavens, which shall retain him till the general
Resurrection, Act. 3. v. 21. therefore he was circumscriptively or locally in
two places both at once.

If yon say 'twas an Angel standing by him that spoke to him from Christ, as
one spoke to the Jews from God on mount Sinai; Then the words of St. Paul 1
Cor. 15. v. 8. saying, he, viz. Christ, was seen of me also. Were of no force
to prove Christ's Resurrection which he was proving there. For to see an Angel
was not to see Christ. Yet he would persuade them that he was risen, because he
had seen him.

This is confirmed out of Io. 6. v. 9. and 13. Where it is said our Savior fed
5000 Men with five Loaves and two Fishes. I suppose these Loaves were not
bushel Loaves for the Boy who had them, could not have carried them, but
ordinary Loaves.

Now I say, that these five Loaves might feed 5000 Men, the same piece of Bread
must have been in diverse mouths at once, it being probable that Christ gave to
each a competent piece: for if he Created other Loaves he did not then feed
them all with five Loaves which is against Scripture.

SECTION II.
A part of Mr. Rodon's Objections against the real presence of the Body of
Christ in the Host are answered.

Object. 1. CHrist's Body cannot be produced in the Host. 1. Bacause that
cannot be produced which is produced already. 2. Because terminus aqu^ and
terminus ad quem are distinct, or there must be a distinction between the term
of departure, and the term of arriving. 3. In all substantial conversions a new
substance must be produced.

Answer. I deny the antecedent, and as to its first probation I distinguish;
That which is produced already cannot be produced as to its Essential being I
grant, as to its manner of being, or as to a Sacramental being I deny. The
second probation I grant, and say that the term Aquo or of departure is the
Body without the second presence, or relation, viz. to the species; the term Ad
quem or of arriving, the Body with the second presence to the species in the
Eucharist and these two terms are different. For the third probation, I denied
it in my answer to the 1. Ob. Section 2. Chap. 3. and gave there the reason of
my denial.

Mr. Rodon urges. If a Man would go from Paris to Rome, he must leave Paris;
therefore Christ's Body which does not leave Heaven, neither comes nor is
brought to the Host.

Answer. 1. In the opinion of those who explane the being of Christ's Body in
the Host by adduction, do not say that it is brought or comes thither
Circumscriptively by a proper Local motion, because this motion supposes a Body
to have it is parts answering to the parts of a place, which Christ's Body has
not in its adduction to the Host, and consequently it does not leave Heaven,
because we do not leave the place in which we were, to go to another, but by a
proper local and continued motion. The equivocal and severed motion by which
Christ's Body is adduced to all its Sacramental places is improperly called a
motion.

Answer. 2. I deny the antecedent, because to put a Body in two places suffices
the production of a second ubication, for ubication is the formal reason making
a thing to be in a place.

You Will say supposing that the Body existing at Paris, be put also at Rome, now
either this Roman ubication is produced in the Body existing at Paris or
existing at Rome; neither can be said, not the first, because the Roman
ubication cannot be at Paris; not the second, because the Body would be at Rome
before it had the Roman ubication: therefore the Body which is at Paris cannot
be at the same time at Rome.

Answer. I deny the major, and say that this Roman ubication is produced
neither in the Body existing at Rome nor existing at Paris, but is produced in
the Body spectato secumdum se considered in it self, which indeed materially
was before at Paris, but by a new ubication is also at Rome. If you say the
Roman ubication must be produced at Rome; but it cannot be produced at Rome
unless it be produced in the Body existing at Rome: therefore the Body must be
at Rome before it be at Rome, which is absurd.

Answer. I distinguish the minor. It cannot be produced at Rome unless it be
produced in the Body existing at Rome consecutively, I grant; antecedently, I
deny. And therefore I also deny the consequence. The Roman ubication is then
produced in the Body existing at Rome ut quo in as much as it is the Form,
which makes the Body or the subject to be at Rome.

Ob. 2. In a true human Body such as Christ's Body is the Head is above the
neck and the neck above the shoulders, but this cannot be in a Point; then
Christ's Body cannot be in every least part of the Host.

Answer. I distinguish the major. In a true human Body, etc. naturally existing
the Head is above the neck, its true: supernaturally existing, being
Spiritualized or having the quality of a Spirit by which it is all in all and
all in every part of the improper place in which it is, I deny the major.

Mr. Rodon confounds here Entitative quantity which is to have a number of
parts, with Situal quantity or Extent which is to have all its parts one
without another. The Body of Christ has its Entitative quantity, but not its
situal quantity in the Eucharist this Extent or Situal quantity is an accident
which the Entitative quantity can want.

Ob. 3. To move and not to move, etc. in the same time are contradictory things.

Answer. Considered under the same respect its true; under a different respect
its false. For example, my Soul moves in my hand at the same time that it is
stock still in my head. The same way the Body of Christ may be moved as it is
in Heaven and not be moved as it is in the Host.

Ob. 4. Two relatives are alwise different as the Father and Son.

Answer. I grant it, and tell you that a Body in two places is not two Bodies;
so the relation of distance of which we speak here, is between the two places,
not between two Bodies.

Mr. Rodon urges. It is only the distance of places that makes the distance of
things existing in them.

I Answer once again, we are not speaking here of things but of one thing. But
let us speak of two other things existing in two different places. I say that
the distance of place is only the partial Cause of their distance, and that the
total Cause is the dlstance of places and the existing of things in them.
Otherwise things which are now together might be said to be distant, because
the places in which they were before, are still distant.

Mr. Rodon presses further. Peter at Rome might draw nigher to himself as he
exists at Paris.

Answer. Neigher to himself I deny, neigher to his ubication at Paris, I grant;
that is, he might have an ubication nigher to that he has at Paris, but he
would never come so close that the same parts of his Body would meet with the
same, but the right hand with the left, or the palm of the hand with the back
of the hand: And so as there is a difference between those different parts
there may rise a relation of meeting; and as there is no repugnance that I
touch my self making one hand touch the other; so there is none, that I meet
with my self, different parts of my Body meeting with different parts of the
same. And if I will have my right hand, which meets with my left, press
forward, I must also will to put back or aside my left, they being both solid
parts.

Let my Reader take these answers to divert himself a little with the humor of
Mr. de Rodon; but let him not think that his objection presses us, for as
distance supposes proper places, so meeting supposes a proper motion. And the
Body of Christ is neither in a proper place, nor properly moved in the
Eucharist as I said before. But were it Circumscriptively there, these foresaid
answers and the following in this matter blow-up all his objections.

Ob. 5. It Is a perfect contradiction that a Body should be one, and not one; but
if Christ's Body should be at the same time in Heaven and in the Host upon
Earth 'twould be one, and not one: then it can not be in Heaven and in the Host
both at once. 'Twould be one as is supposed, and not one as is proven, because
it would be divided from it self.

Answer. I deny the minor, and as to its probation I distinguish, 'Twould be
divided from it self Extrinsecally, that is, as to place, I grant.
Intrinsecally, as to it self, or Essential principles of which it is composed, I
deny. For nothing of it is Essential principles would be in one place, which
were not in the other. The Body of a man, for example, bilocated would not be
in one place where the Soul were not, nor the Soul in another where the Body
were not with it. The sole Ubications of the same Body are divided. Now since
two Bodies may be in one place by penetration, as when Christ entered into the
Caenacle of the Apostles the Doors being shut, and came out of his B. Mother's
womb she still remaining a Virgin, why may not one Body be by a like miracle in
two places? since the thing placed relates to the place, just as the place
relates to the thing placed in it. As one thing naturally requires to be in one
place at once, so one place naturally requires to have only one thing in it at
once, why then may not one thing supernaturally by the almighty power of God be
in two places at once?

Mr. Rodon urges 1. The division is true, when between two there be Bodies of
diverse natures.

Answer. This I grant, and say That our supposition is not of two, but of one
Body which is the same in Heaven and in the Host.

He urges 2. Things that are divided locally are also divided Entitatively:
Therefore the Body of Christ being in divided places, must be divided
Entitatively. He proves the antecedent thus, else no reason can be given why
two glasses of Water taken from the same Fountain are really different, since
these Waters are like in all things except in reference to place.

Answer 1. Our supposition is not of things, but of one thing or Body as I said
before.

Answer. 2. I grant that local division infers alwise Entitative division if we
look only to the ordinary course of nature; but not in cases, in which God will
show his almighty Power; we know then that the Body of Christ being only one,
is now sacramentally in different places by the almighty power of God, because
he has revealed it, as we know the same Body was Circumscriptively in
different places, when being in Heaven he stood beside Paul at the same time
upon Earth. Act. 23. v. 11.

A reason also is easily given why the Ocean is not one single drop of Water,
to wit, because one drop is not naturally in innumerable places, but only by a
miracle, which God does not ordinarily and for nothing. Neither is God and
Nature to be said to do in vain when they do according to the natural exigence
of a drop of Water, which is to be only in one place at once. Is God bound to
do all he can do?

Neither might one man replicated in 10000. places beget in one night 10000.
Children, because his force is limited to the power of one man; the second and
third Ubication giving him no new force, but only a new place.

Add to all this that God is in places divided from one another, viz. in France
and England both at once.

You Will say he is a Spirit; but I reply the reason that makes seem impossible
for a Body to be together in diverse places, is not so much it is bulk as its
Unity: But the Spirit is as much one Spirit, as one Body is one Body.

You Will say again that God, at the same time that he is in France and England,
is in all places between.

I Answer. What if God by his almighty power should annihilate or destroy both
as to matter, and form Sea, Earth, and Aer, between France and England, would
he cease to be in both? If not he would be in two divide^ places. The same may
be said of a reasonable Soul remaining in a member separated from the rest of
the Body, if God by his almighty power conserve it there.

SECTION III.
More of Mr: Rodon's Objections against the Real presence answered.

Object. 6. JESUS CHRIST cannot be in diverse places at once if another Man
cannot be so too. But Peter cannot be at Paris and Rome at the same time; for
it is impossible that Peter should be a man and not a man at the same time; but
this might fall out if he were at Paris and Rome at the same time; because he
might be wounded and dye at Paris, and live at the same time at Rome: And so at
the same time be a live and not a live, which is to be a man and not a man.

Answer. In that supposition that Peter ceases to live at Paris while he lives
at Rome he could not be said absolutely not to live, and consequently not to be
a man but a Carcass; for it is not enough not to live at Paris, where the
Ubication of the Union between the Body and Soul ceased by a wound, if he live
at Rome, as is supposed, to say absolutely he does not live: Because a
particula negativa restricta, as summolists speak, ad non restrictam, From a
negative particle restrained to the same not restrained it does not follow. For
example, Peter is not an Englishman, then he is not a man: So he does not live
at Paris, it does not follow, then he does not live. Although it follow A
particula affirmativa restricta ad non restrictam, from an affirmative particle
restrained to the same not restrained.

For example Peter is an Englishman, then he is a man. So it follows he lives
at Rome, then he lives. And consequently he is not to be called dead, simply,
when the Parisian Ubication of the union between his Body and his Soul ceases
to be, if the Roman Ubication of the same union remains; because to be dead at
Paris it is not enough that the Ubication of the Union cease to be at Paris; but
moreover it is required that the Union it self, which was at Paris cease
absolutely to be between the Body and the Soul: but if he live, yet at Rome the
Union does not cease to be between the Body and the Soul (tho not at Paris)
therefore he is not to be called simply dead. Apply this principle of a
particle restrained to it self not restrained to his other instances of that
nature. In the mean time all this discourse of Mr. Rodon supposes Peter, of
whom he speaks, to have both at Paris and at Rome Situal quantity or Extent,
which Christ's Body has not in the Eucharist, and therefore I give him the
foresaid answer without necessity.

To his Army made of one man replicated or put in a thousand places all at once.

I Answer. 'Twould appear many men, but would be only one with the limited
force of one man, (unless God should give him a supernatural force) whom two
men in that case might overcome. Say the same of a candle as to light, and a
drop of water replicated in order, to carry or bear up a Boat, which it could
not do having the limited force, in order to bearing of one drop. For Ubication
gives to a Body merely to be in a place, and nothing else.

Obj. 7. Christ's Body is not seen in the Host; therefore it is not there.

Answer. It Is not seen with the eye of our understanding elevated by Faith; I
deny. With our corporal eye, I grant, and the reason is, because it is not
there in a way proportioned to our corporal sight, or in its own shape; and it
is so for the exercise of our Faith, which would cease if we saw it in Glory.
Was not Christ's Body glorious after his resurrection, and yet did the
Disciples see its Glory the forty days he conversed with them before his
Ascension?

The reason why Christ's Body is not seen in the Eucharist by our Corporal eye
is, because it has there no Extent, and is all in a point; not because it is
under the accidents, which hide it, or in another place then the accidents,
they being above and it below, nor do Philosophers mean any such thing when
they say that substances are under their accidents, because pure substances
have no proper places, they mean only that the substances sustentate or support
the accidents, in as much as the accident naturally depends of its proper
subject, which support from the substance of Bread, or Body of Christ in its
place is supplied to the accidents in the Eucharist by the almighty power of
God. Just then as substances possess no place but by reason of their accidents,
so the Body of Christ in the Eucharist is in no place but by reason of the
species which are in a place. And as substances which are under their accidents
according to this way of speaking of Philosophers, are not seen, so neither the
Body of Christ in the Eucharist under the species, is seen.

Mr. Rodon asks how can Christ's Body be without posture and without external
form seeing (as we say) it is whole and entire in the whole host, and in every
part of it?

Answer. Because, although Christ's Body has in the Eucharist all its essential
extension, or all its parts in order to themselves in the whole host, and in
every part of the host (which we call to be whole and entire in the whole host
and in every part of the host as our Soul is all in every part of the Body, and
only all in the whole Body. Yet it has not local extension in order to place
which is a separable property of essential extension, as actual heat is a
separable property of fire, as was seen by the almighty power of God in the
furnace of Babylon; where, as he suspended the operation of that element to
manifest his glory, so he hinders the local extension of the Body of Christ in
the Eucharist and the light of its glory to exercise our faith.

And this answer's all Mr. Rodon's whimsical questions of the postures of
Christ's Body in a whole or divided host, since division as well as the posture
of a Body depends of Local Extension. For if God put all the parts of a Body
after a spiritual manner (as the Body of Christ is in the Eucharist) in a
point, and a point cannot be divided, in that case how will you devide that
Body? and without deviding it you cannot make it appear less, how much so ever
you devide the host, In a word a visible Body of a man is a man's Body in its
shape, which the Body of Christ has not in the Eucharist, for want of Local
Extention, and therefore is not visible there.

Obj. 8. Christ in the Host can act, or not?

Answer. He can act, know and love, although he has not there the disposition of
Organs fit for those operations, which require Local extention. We gratefully
to him avow that his Body in the H. Host is Modo mortuo after the fashion of
one dead, and this is the change the Priest makes of this victime in his
oblation of it to the eternal Father in the daily Sacrifice of the Mass.

And as Christ does not exercise there the operations, which depend of situal
Extension, neither would the World reduced to a point or the parts of it, the
Sun and Moon, etc. act as they do now, for want of situal disposition to such
operations.

Neither do we say that Christ's Body is as big and as tall in the H. Host as
on the Cross, as Mr. Rodon inconsideratly alleadges, for that bigness on the
Cross comes from the situal extension he had there and wants in the H. Host.

Obj. 9. A Body can not cease to be in a place without being destroyed or going
to some other place: but the species being consumed, Christ's Body is neither
distroyed nor goes to another place, therefore it was not in the Eucharist.

Answer. I deny the major universally speaking, and ask when a man's Leg is cut
off, does the soul go to another place or is it destroyed? yet it ceases to be
there. Reason the same way of the Body of Christ which is in the Eucharist with
the property of a Spirit, and as it came thither by the sole production of a
new presence, so it ceases to be there by the sole destruction of the same.

Obj. 10. The properties of one species or of one nature are incommunicable to
every other species or nature: but it is the property of a spirit to be all in
all and every part of a place; therefore the Body of Christ can not be all in
all and in every part of the Host.

Answer. I grant the major and distinguish the minor. It Is the property of a
spirit to be all in all, etc. by Exigence, I grant, by accident I deny. For
example water has heat by accident, which Fire alone has by exigence, and
therefore the exigence of heat is the property of Fire: and not the actual
having of it, which is communicable to water. The clame and exigence of seeing
God as he is in himself is the property of God flowing from his Essence in
communicable to a creature; but the actual only seeing of God as he is in
himself will be favorably communicated by him to happy men in the other world
1. Io. 3.2. And therefore rigidly speaking is not his property. So then what a
spirit has by exigenbe. the Body of Christ without confounding different
species, may have by accident in the Eucharist. Quaeres wherefor to be actually
all in all, and all in every part of an improper place is called the property of
a spirit and not of a Body largely speaking? Answer. Beeause a spirit has a
natural appetite of that way of existing, which a Body has not, also because a
spirit is indivisible, and has no parts.

Answer.. 2. I distinguish the major. The property of a species, that is, the
exigence of one species is incommunicable to an other, I grant; the act of the
exigence is incommunicable, I deny. For example, Heat is the act of the
exigence of Fire, and is communicated to water.

Hence I grant that naturally Bodies are in places circumscriptively, that is
the parts of the Body are in the parts of the place and not the whole Body in
every part. But not so if it please the author of nature to put them by his
almighty power in places definitively or Sacramentally, that is, in an
equivocal or improper place (which in rigor is no place) without local
extension.

I said definitively, or Sacramentally because the Body of Christ in the
Eucharist is not limitated according to a rigid definitive way of existing, as
the soul is in the Body, bounded with a certain continued place, but is without
limitation in as many discontinued sacramental places, as the Consecration is
made in.

SECTION. IV.
The rest of Mr. Rodon's objections against the real presence answered.

Object. 11 IF the Body of Christ were in the Eucharist 'twould be subject to
many ignominies; to be eaten with mice, burned, stolen, etc. thererefore it is
not there.

Answer. I retort his argument thus. If he, whom we call Christ, was God, God
was subject to many ignominies to be called a Seducer, a Blasphemer, a Drinker
of Wine, a Glutton, to be scurged at a post like a rogue and hanged like a
thief; therefore he was not God. Is this a good inferrence? No. Neither the
other.

Monsr. Rodon. speaking of the Eucharist, says; as it is a God that cannot
keep himself from being stolen, so neither can he keep himself from heing
burned.

Answer. 1. did not the Jews deride Christ the same way upon the Cross? Save
thy self, If thou art the Son of God come down from the Cross. Math. 27. v. 40.

I Answer. 2. then he could have come down from the Cross, and can hinder also
the Host from being profaned. But the first he suffered for the love of man,
the second he suffers for the exercise of our faith.

Note, the Body of Christ ceases to be in the stomach when the species are
altered there, but, did it join with the excrements they could not annoy or
hurt him no more then a dunghill defiles the beams of the Sun. Nay the Body of
Christ now impassible were not worse in Hell it self, than at the right hand of
his father.

To Claude de Xainte's, saying we exclude not one from the true and corporal
receiving of the Lord's flesh in the Sacrament let him be Turk, Atheist, yea
tho he should be the Devil himself incarnate.

I Answer. That is to be understood if his unworthiness be unknown to the
Priest, or known only by Confession. For of this he cannot make use to diffame
him: Did not Christ give the Communion to Judas?

Ob. 12. God makes no miracles without necessity, but what necessity is there
for the miracles we avow to be made in the Eucharist? Then they are not made
there, and so Christ's Body is not there.

Answer. I distingish the major, without an absolute necessity, I deny. Without
a certain consequential necessity supposing that he will make an extraordinary
show of his power or goodness, I grant. And this was the reason wherefore he
made so many miracles, which were not absolutely necessary in the bringing the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, to wit, to give an extraordinary show of his
power. And in the Eucharist he makes some, where he would also give an
extraordinary show of his singular goodness and love to man, foretold by the
Royal Prophet. Psalm. 110. v. 4. He has made a memory of his mavelous works,
to wit, in giving his Body and Blood to be a spiritual Food to these who fear
him.

Mr. Rodon asks here if it can be said that the Eucharist is for the Salvation
of the Soul of him that eats it, since the reprobate eats it too, and the
Faithful under the Old Testament and Infants in the New do not eat it.

Answer. Yes it can be said, because it is the reprobate's fault that it does
not save him. Neither that the Faithful of the Old Law and Infants in the New
are not saved by an eating of it, makes any thing against it, because it was
not instituted for them.

Mr. Rodon asks again, if it can be said with Bellarmine and Perron, that the
Host being eaten serves as an incorruptable Food for a glorious resurrection,
since the Faithful of the Old Testament and Infants in the New rise again
gloriously without it.

Answer, Yes, it can be said, because Christ says, Io. 6. v. 54. Who eats my
Flesh and drinks my Blood has eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. And the Council of Nice calls the Eucharist Symbolum resurrectionis
a token of the Resurrection, and S. Ignatius M. Epist. 14. to the Ephesians. terms
it Pharmacum immortalitatis, a medicine of immortality.

Now if you ask the manner how it serves as an Incorruptible Food for a
glorious Resurrection?

I Answer, the species being altered by the heat of the stomach, the Body of
Christ ceases to be there, but his Diety remains after a special manner in the
Soul (as the virtue of Wheat remains in the corrupted Grain to raise it again
at Spring) feeding it with grace, and at set times affording it new infusions
of actual Grace, divine lights and heavenly affections: And in the Resurrection
raises again the Body and unites it to this Soul. But this proposition being
affirmative does not exclude from Glory, those of the Old Testament and Infants
of the New, who have not for want of Capacity the Participation of this
Sacrament. Who says that a Ship serves to go from Leith to London does not say
that a man cannot go without it, viz. by Horse. Neither is S. Paul against us
but for us, when he says Romans 8. If the Spirit of him who raised up JESUS from
the dead dwell in you, he shall also quicken your mortal Bodies by his Spirit
that dwells in you, viz. as the efficient and the immediate cause, this Spirit
being the seed and virtue left by the Eucharist, the eating of which was a
remote cause conveiging in a particular manner by way of disposition this
Spirit to us.

Mr. Rodon's last Objection is, The Heavens must contain Christ until the time
of restitution of all things, Act. 3. v. 21. And he himself said I leave the
World, etc. Io. 16. Therefore he is not in the Eucharist.

Answer. We don't say he leaves Heaven to come to the Host, or that he has not
left the World as to his visible presence; but we say he is and will be with us
even to the consumation of the World, Math. 28. in an invisible way, viz. in
the Eucharist.

Mr. To. adds, that Christ Math. 24. warnes us, not to believe, when false
Prophets in the last day shall say, he is in the Desert, he is in the secret
Chambers, and remarks that the Greek for secret Chambers has en Tameiois, that
is, in the Cup-boards, which is to be understood of our Cabinets on our Altars
according to Mr. Rodon's explication.

Answer. I remark that where the Greek has Tameiois which signifies an
Excheker, (which relates to secrecy) as well as Cup-board, the Syriach has In
Bed Chambers, that is, as A Lapide explaines, a most inward room; and that the
vulgar Latin has In penetralibus to the meaning of Christ. The Greek word is of
no force more than the Latin or Syriack, that Gospel having been written in
Hebrew of which we have not the Authentic Copy.

Here I may say with S. Aug. Lib. 22. de Civit. Dei. Cap. 11. Ecce qualibus
argumentis omnipotentiae Dei humana contradicit infirmitas quam possidet
vanitas. Behold with what arguments human infirmity possessed with vanity
opposes the almighty power of God.

CHAPTER V.
Against the Adoration and Worshipping of the Host.

SECTION. I.
That we ought to adore Christ in the H. Host is proven.

A Blind Servant thinks himself obliged to take off his hat when he is told his
Lord is in the Room. Then I am bound to adore Christ when my faith tells me,
that Christ is present in the Host. I prove the Consequence. I am as much bound
to adore Christ present my Lord and my Redeemer, as the blind servant is bound
to the taking off his hat in the presence of his Lord and Master.

Mr. Rodon remarks that Moses, Exodus 3. was commanded to approach with
reverence and adoration the Bush that burned and was not consumed, because God
did manifest some what of his power and glory in that place. I subsume, but
Christ does manifest some what of his power and glory in the H. Host: Therefore
we ought not to approach it, but with reverence and adoration.

I prove my subsumption. Christ gives there to the purer Souls surprising
delights, and works admirable changes in them, which is a manifestation of his
power, and a ray of his glory there, this is known to the faithful, which made
the heavenly enlightened Author of the following of Christ, lib. 4. cap. 1.
say, O admirahle and hidden grace of the Sacrament, which the faithful only of
Christ know! If you say this is not sensible to the imperfiter Souls amongst
Romanists. I answer that does not make it not to be true. God showed much of
his power and glory in the Manna to the perfect ones of the Children of Israel,
when it relished to them all they could covet of delightful; although this was not
sensible to the wicked.

If S. Paul will have every knee to bend at the hearing only of the Name of
JESUS Phil. 2. v. 10. to wit because it puts us in mind of our Redeemer; why
should not we adore our present Redeemer himself in the sign or Sacrament of
his excessive Love to us? I see there as well by Faith that ray of his glory,
to wit his manhood personally united to the Godhead; As the show God makes of
his Majesty to the Angels in Heaven: for which, tho it be not sensible to me,
Mr. Rodon will have me bound to adore God in Heaven, by those words of Christ
when we pray, Our Father which art in Heaven, and these words of the Apostles
Sursum corda Lift up your hearts. Where I remark Mr. To. avows this command
Lift up your hearts to have been given by his Apostles ( chap. 5. Numb. 11) I
add in no other place but in their Liturgy or Sacrifice of the Mass, then they
had the Sacrifice of the Mass.

A fourth probation I take from S. Austin in his Commentary upon the Psalm. 98.
where explaining these words Adore the Footstool of his feet, he says, the
Footstool of the feet of our Lord is the Earth, according to the Prophet
Isaiah. 66. Terra autem scabellum pedum meorum, and he enquires how it is
lawful to adore the Earth without impiety. Fluctuans, says he, wavering I
turn my self to Christ, and I find how without impiety the Earth is adored he
(Christ) took Earth of Earth because Flesh is of Earth and of the Flesh of
Marie he took Flesh: and ipsam Carnem manducandam nobis ad salutem dedit, nemo
aeutem illam manducat nisi prius adoraverit, inventum est quemadmodum tale
Scabellum Domini ut non solum non peccemus adorando, sed peccemus non Adorando.
That is to say, And he gave that same Flesh to us for our Salvation, but none
eats it unless he first adore. We have found how such a Footstool of our Lord
may be adored, so that we not only, not sin by adoring, but we sin if we do not
adore.

And in his Epist. 120. Adducti sunt ad mensam Domine and accipiunt de Corpore
and sanguine ejus, sed adorant tantum, non etiam ^^turantur, quia non
imitantur. They are brought to the Table of the Lord, and they receive of his
Body and Blood, but they adore only. they are not filled because they do not
imitate. By these passages you see how they adored the H. Host in primitive
times, but of primitive times you shall see more in my seventh Chapter.

SECTION II.
Monsieur Rodon's Objections against the Adoration of Christ in the H. Host
Answered.

Object. 1. WE do not adore God in a Stone, or a Tree, nor Christ in the Water
of Baptism, although God be in the Stone, and the Tree, and what is adorable in
Christ, is in the Water of Baptism: therefore, although Christ were in the Host,
we should not adore him there.

Answer. I deny the consequence and give the disparity. A Stone, a Tree, and
Water are complete beings, so because men have adored such things, he, who
bends his knee to adore God in them may be thought to adore them, as well as
God in them. But in the Eucharist Christ being only the complete Being, and the
Species only an accident never considered as Adorable by men; when we see a man
adore the Eucharist, we presently conceive he Adores Christ there. An other
disparity is that the Divinity is Hypostatically, ( i. e. personally) united to
the Body of Christ, not to a Stone, a Tree, or the Water in Baptism.

Ob. 2. We are only obliged to adore God in all places in which he appears in
his glorious Majesty. Therefore Christ or God is not to be adored in the
Eucharist, although he be really there.

Answer. I deny the antecedent. For Mr. Rodon in this fifth Chapter numb. 7.
Will have tht Beams of Glory, which oblidge us to Adoration, to be sensible in
that place, in which the Adoration is made, and consequently thousands may have
lived according to his Doctrine forty or fifty Years, and dyed without having
been ever obliged to adore God: because all that time the Beams of Glory which
God shows to his Angels in Heaven were never sensible to them, (they knowing it
only by Faith) neither was his Glory sensible to them upon Earth, as to Moses,
by any miraculous Beam.

Quaeres 1. What meant Christ commanding his Apostles when they Prayed, to say
Our Father who art in Heaven?

Answer. Not that they should only adore God in Heaven, or where he makes
appear, as there, a Beam of his glorious Majesty, but that they should weane
their affections from the Earth, by an apprehension of the Glorious sight which
he shows to his Saints in Heaven.

Quaeres 2. What meant the Apostles commanding in the Preface of the Liturgy or
Christian sacrifice to say sursum corda, Lift up your hearts?

Answer. Not that when we are present at the Sacrifice We lift up our corporal
Eyes to Heaven to adore God only there; but to raise our minds above our
senses, and our thoughts above nature to believe this supernatural work done in
the Sacrifice, and so become partakers of its Fruit.

Ob. 3. We do not adore Christ in that Host which the Priest has newly eaten.

Answer. Because it is not then morally present to us.

Note, I take no notice of Mr. Rodon's speaking of Christ's appearing in the
Host sometimes in Form of a Child, because as he does not credit such stories,
neither do I look upon them as matters of Faith, nor have I any need for my
purpose to allege them.

Ob. 4. In lawful Adoration we must be assured that what we adore is the true
God.

Answer. This I grant and say that the Essential part of Adoration (honor est
in honorante) is in my mind, which being directed to Christ, if he be not
there, rests not upon the piece of Bread, but goes to him in Heaven: So we know
what we Worship and are sure it is God. And to move me to adore it is enough that
I am morally assured of the presence of Christ's Body in the Host. For we have
no more than moral assurance to oblige us under the pain of breaking the
commandment of God to honor and obey such or such a man for my Father: And to
use his comparisen, as the Woman who doubts if such a man be her Husband ought
not to admit him as a Husband; no more ought a Catholic to adore an Host if he
prudently doubt of its consecration.

But it is not prudent to doubt if any Host be consecrated, when it is proposed
to be adored, because some have counterfited the Priest, who were not, or being
really, may have maliciously (tho to their own damnation) omitted the
intention. As it were not prudent in me to doubt if such a man were my Father,
for no other reason, but because many have thought him to be their Father, who
really was not.

To Mr. Rodon's saying, That Heathens might have retorted the Catholic
arguments made against them by S. Chrysos. etc. If the Church had then believed
that Christ's Body was in the Eucharist: As when S. Chrisos. said, they bring
their gods into base Images of Wood and Stone, and shut them up there as in
Prison. And Arnobius Lib. 6. Your Gods dwells in Plaster, etc. and they suffer
themselves to be shut up and remain hid, and detained in an obscure Prison.

Answer 1. No, they might not, because our mysteries were not known then to
them as they are now to Protestants. Nay they were keep secret from the very
Catechumens. Hence that famous saying in primitive times, speaking of his
Mystery norunt Fideles, The Faithful know, to wit what we believe there.

Quaeres, Why was this Mystery concealed from the cathecumens, or those who
ware not yet Baptized?

Answer. Because they had not yet the Eye of Faith, by which they might see it,
Hence don't wonder if you find some Fathers to have wrote some what obscurely of
this Mystery in the Birth of the Church.

Answer 2. No, the Heathens might not equally retort, etc. because 1. Christ is
in the H, Host, and was in his Mothers Womb; so that his Godhead is and was
else where. 2. We do not say, That Christ leaves Heaven to come to the H. Host
as the false Gods one place to come to another. 3. Their Consecration was the
mere word of Man, ours the words of Christ commanding Do this, and speaking by
the mouth of the Priest This is my Body. 4. They adored the Metal after its
dedication as God; We do not adore so the species.

Answer 3. If the Church did then believe that Christ had remained hid, and
shut up in his Mothers Womb as in an obscure Prison* might not the Heathens
have retorted what Arnob. Lib. 6. said against their Gods detained in an
obscure Prison, And for their Retortion in this particular, would Mr. Rodon
have denied that Christ remained nine months in his B. Mother's Womb?

I end this Chapter with this,

Quaere. Wherefore do we adore Christ more particularly in the B. Sacrament
then his Godhead every where?

Answer. Because God the Father will have God the Son specially honored by men
for his special Love to them in their Redemption, of which we are particularly
minded by the presence of his Body in the Eucharist. 2. Because the humanity of
Christ represented to us by the Eucharist is personally united to the Divinity.

And God the H. Ghost, who guides the Church, inspired her in her invocations
of the three Divine Persons in the beginning of the Mass, to invoce the first
and third Person under the common name of LORD, Lord have mercy on us. But God
the Son under the Name of his Manhood saying thrice, Christ have Mercy on us,
so honored will God have, and dear to us this Manhood of Christ, the
instrument of our Redemption.

CHAPTER VI.
Against the taking away of the Cup, or the Communion under one kind.

SECTION. I.
The lawfulness of Communicating under one kind, is proven.

1. THE precept of Communicating, or of taking the Body and Blood of Christ, is
only Io. 6. v. 53. in these words, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood ye have no Life in you. But with those words stands the
lawfulness of Communicating under one kind: Therefore it is lawful to
Communicate under one kind.

I prove the minor. 1. Because there is only commanded the sumption, or
receiving of both Body and Blood as to the substance, not the manner of
receiving them under both kinds. 2. If you think the manner is commanded also,
giving, not granting you that; we answer that the Particle, And, may be taken
for, Or, as in many other places of Scripture, for example when Solomon
speaking to God says, mendicitatem and divitias ne dederis mihi, Poverty and
Riches give me not. Prove. 30. v. 8. Where, And, is taken for Or, he desiring of
God, neither to be Rich nor Poor. And Act. 3. v. 8. Argentum and Aurum non est
mihi Silver, 2. And Gold I have not, for Silver, Or Gold I have not.

If with the Hussits you will not relish this solution, then we answer.

3. That this command was given by Christ not to every particular man but to
the community of Christians, by which it is fulfilled, some, viz. Priests,
taking it under both kinds to represent and announce to the People the death of
Christ, according to the command laid upon them Math. 26. In these words Do
this in remembrance of me (there also was the command to the Priests of making
the Sacrament for the People.) So Exodus 12. v. 3. it is commanded that The whole
multitude of the Children of Israel shall Sacrifice, viz. the Paschal Lamb. Did
every one in particular sacrifice? No, but only the heads of families in their
families. Also Genes. 9. v. 1. Increase and multiply. Does not oblige every
particular man to marry. Again when our Savior said, Math. 28. Teach all
nations baptising them, he laid that command on the Church, not on every
particular man to teach.

Now to make appear that this answer is not brought without ground from
Scripture: take notice that when Christ would signify that every one, or every
individual person should be baptized, he expressed himself in the singular
number Io. 3. v. 5. Nisi quis, etc. Except a man be born of water nd of the
spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Whereas Io. 6. v. 53. he says
in the plural number Nis^ manducaveritis, Unless ye eat, etc. which is
fulfilled by the community, if some of them receive under both kinds, although all
do not. And a little after when he turns his speech into the singular he
speaks indifferently of both or one kind, He that eats my Flesh and drink my
Blood has life everlasting v. 45. and v. 58. He that eats this Bread shall
live for ever. Which passages signify that one kind suffices, for if by an
impossible supposition Christ could contradict himself, yet our opinion would
stand; since in jure if what is said last, contradict what was said before, Iura
posteriora corrigunt priora, The latter Law corrects the former.

That the precept of receiving this Sacrament was here, Io. 6. v, 53. I prove
again. The command of receiving the Sacrament of Baptism, or Baptism
Sacramentally was Io. 3. v. 4. For in no other place is mentioned Water, which
Protestants acknowledge to be necessary in Baptism as well as Catholics,
Therefore the command of receiving the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood
Sacramentally, viz. in a sensible way by the mouth of the Body is here, Io. 6.
v. 53, I prove the consequence, because a like expression to the same people
caries a like command, but Io. 3. He commanded Baptism. saying, Except a man be
born of Water, etc. Then he commands the receiving of the Sacrament of his Body
and Blood, saying, Except ye eat, etc.

Obj. The command of receiving the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ
was Math. 26. in these words, Take eat this is my Body, Drink ye all of it this
is my Blood But there both kinds are particularly commanded, therefore it is not
sufficient to receive under one kind.

Answer 1. I deny the major, and say that those words were not a precept but an
invitation only made to the Apostles alone, as a Friend does to his Friends
invited to Dine with him. For when S. Mark Chap. 14. says They all drunk of
it. All those who drunk were all those, or comprehended all those, who were bid
drink, but all those, who drunk, were only the Apostles, then all those who
were bid drink, were only the Apostles; and consequently if you make it a
command, 'twas a command only obliging the Apostles.

Answer. 2. The washing of the Feet to one an other, Io. 13. v. 14. was not a
precept, therefore far less these words, Take eat: for there he says
positively, Debetis alter alterius, etc. Ye ought to wash one another's Feet,
for I have given you an example that ye should do as I have done to you.

Out of my answer to the Objection,

Remark that the Apostle 1 Cor. 11. from the v. 23, to 27. relates only what
Christ did to the Apostles, and what he commanded them, viz. as they were
Priests, to wit to make this Sacrifice in remembrance of his death, telling
them that as often as they eat that Bread, and drink that Cup, they should
announce his Death, viz. by their separate taking of the species of Bread from
that of Wine. Then S. Paul of himself adds. Whosoever shall eat this Bread or
drink the Cup of our Lord unworthily will be guilty of the Body and Blood of
our Lord. As if he had said, although you eat the Body of our Lord in a good
estate, if you drink the Cup after, having conceaved in your heart before the
drinking a grievous sin you are guilty of both unworthily received. Why? but
because under each kind both are contained; And thus on the contrary, we
receave the essential good effect of both under one kind, as we incurr the
guilt of both profaning both by an unworthy receaving under one. I know some
Protestant Bibles have Whosoever shall eat this Bread And drink this Cup. etc.
1. Cor. 11. v. 25. AND for OR but that is a corruption as you may see in the
Greek Printed at London the year 1653. by Roger Daniel which has, OR, with the
Latin version.

By this essential effect of the Sacrament we distinguish what belonges to the
substance of the Sacrament, from what belonges not to it. For example because
in Baptism by aspersion is had the same effect of the Sacrament as by a triple
mersion, we conclude the triple mersion is not of the Essence. Say the same of
one kind in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. For I hope Protestants will not say
that when Christ gave the Sacrement in the time of Supper, Math. 26. v. 26.
Under the form of Bread, the effect of the Sacrament was suspended till he
gave the Cup after supper, Luke. 22. v. 20. If not, then the giving of the Cup
was not necessary for receaving the Grace of the Sacrament. This Mr. Rodon
seems to avow in his 12 number of this Chapter, when he says Drinking of Wine
is a corporal action, and therefore commanded to those only that can drink it.
I infer then they who cannot drink it, may have the effect of the Sacrament
without the Cup. And this the Calvenists must say in France when they give the
Eucharist under the kind of Bread only to those who cannot taste wine, as you
may see in their 7 Art. of the 12 Chap. of their discipline which is of our
Lord's Supper. And Mr. Jurieux a Minister in France confirms this custom in
his book entitled Le Preservatif, etc. Page 267. When speaking of the Person
who has received only under one kind. This, says he.

N'est pas un veritable sacrement quant au sign, mais c'est un veritable
sacrement quant a la chose signifiee, puisque le fidele recoit J. Christ,
signify par le sacrement, and rccoit tout autant de graces que ceux qui
communient au Sacrement meme, and que le Sacrement luy est present tout entier
de voeu and de caeur. That is, This, says he, is not a true Sacrament as to
the sign, but it is a true Sacrament as to the thing signified: since the
faithful receives J. Christ signified by the Sacrament, and receives as much
grace as those who receave the Srcrament it self, and that the whole Sacrament
is represented to him to his sight and heart.

Also since Protestants believe they receive not only the figure, but also the
proper substance of JESUS CHRIST at least by says. I ask, when they have
received the Bread of our Lord's Supper before the Cup, have they received the
whole substance of Christ? or not? If they have received the whole, then they
have received the whole Grace of the Sacrament, and consequently the Cup is not
necessary. If not. I ask again is the substance of Christ divided? of which one
part is received with the Bread, the other with the Cup?

Note. when S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. says Let a man examine himself and so let him
eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup. he does not give a command. 'Twas
Christ only who gave the command of eating his Body and drinking his Blood as
to the substance of the Sacrament, but not as to the manner, which certainly is
not of the Essence of the Sacrament, the Sacrament being a permanent thing (for
Christ having said This is my Body, 'twas now a Sacrament before the eating,
according to that of S. Aug. tract. 80. in Io. Accedit verbum ad Elementum and
fit Sacramentum) And the use of every permanent thing being posteriour to it,
and consequently not Essential.

SECTION II. Other objections, answered.
Obj. 2. A Broken body by wonds is void of blood, and has not blood by
concomitance, but Christ's Body was broken, therefore it had not Blood by
concomitance, and so we ought to take the Blood a part.

Answer. I distinguish the minor Christ's Body was broken on the Cross, and
there void of Blood, be it so; when he offered it up for us at the last Supper,
and after his Resurrection, I deny. And consequently when we receive it in the
Sacrament, it has Blood by coneomitance, and therefore we need not receave the
Blood a part. It Is true also that Christ's Body at the last Supper or in the
sacrifice is daily broken as to the species, but not in it self, and therefore
being a living Body it has Blood by concomitance, and for this reason we need
not take the Blood a part.

Obj. 3. We go from the practice of the primitive Church.

Answer. As to the essence of the Sacrament, I deny, as to the manner of
administration of it, upon some considerable circumstances, be it so. So the
Protestants go from the practice of primitive times in Baptism, by using now
the sprinkling of water on the Child, whereas a triple dipping was used in
primitive times. I said, be it so, because in primitive times they gave it also
sometimes under one kind.

If you ask me why Christ gave it to his Apostles under both kinds?

I answer he both foresaw Heretics, as the Manicheans who would deny the thing
in it self to be lawful (which is an error) and different circumstances in
which the Church should think good to give it under the species of Wine, as to
infants: which action of his justified the Church in that, and the like
circumstances. We avow then that the Sacrament was given some times under both
kinds, and in particular to discover the Manicheans in the time of S. Leo
Pope. But we deny that there was a command from Christ of giving it so.

Obj. 4. To take Christ's Blood in taking the Host, is not to drink it.

Answer. It Is not to drink it cannally, that is, to be carnally refressed with
it, I grant, Spiritually, that is, to be Spiritually refressed with it, I deny.
So S. Cypr. says in the beginning of the Sermon of the Lords Supper,
manducaverunt and biberunt de eodem pane secundum formam visibilem, that is,
they eat and drunk of the same Bread, according to the vibsile form. Remark, he
says, They drunk of the same Bread, and makes no mention of Wine.

Also Tertul. lib. de Resur. Caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, ut
anima de Deo saginetur, that is, The Flesh feeds of the Body and Blood of
Christ that the Soul may be full of God

And S. Augustine lib. quaest. in Levit. q. 57. speaking of this Sacrament,
says, A cujus Sacrificii sanguine in alimentum sumendo non solum, etc. that
is, from the Blood of which Sacrifice to be taken for aliment, etc. Where you
see the Blood is called food or aliment.

By which passages you may take notice that the Holy Fathers put the force of
their words in the thing, and not in the way of taking it, because whither
taken by way of food, or of drink it has the same effect.

Ob. 5. He that eats Bread dipped in Wine, although he has Wine in his mouth,
does not drink. Therefore he who receives only under the form of Bread, does
not drink.

Answer. 1. I distinguish the antecedent. He who eats Bread dipped; etc. does
not drink it, in the strict acception of drinking, I grant. In the less rigid
acception of drinking, I deny. (did you never hear say of him who drinks a
heavy thick Wine, he eats and drinks both at once?)

Answer. 2. He does not drink as to the substance of drinking, which is to take
a liquid matter by the mouth, I deny. As to the whole corporal manner and
effect of Drinking, I grant. So Pascasius lib. de Corp. Christ speaks thus. Hic
solus est qui frangit hunc panem and per manus Ministrorum distribuit
credentibus dicens accipite and bibite ex hoc omnes, that is, Its he alone who
breaks this Bread, and by the hands of the Ministers distributes it to the
faithful, saying Take and drink all of this. to wit Bread, where he makes no
mention of Wine.

But much less do Protestants drink Christ's Blood by an act of faith that
Christ dyed for them, in which the eating and drinking is one and the same.

Ob. 5. The sacramental words operate what they signify, but they signify the
separation of the Body from the Blood; therefore they operate the separation of
the Body from the Blood, and consequently we ought to receave under both kinds
to receave both.

Answer. I distinguish the Major. The Sacramental words operate what they
signify formally, I grant; what they signify occasionally, I deny. And say
that these words This is my Body and these This is my Blood signify formally
and primarly the Body and Blood of Christ, although occasionally and secundarily
they signify the separation of the Body from the Blood of Christ, in as much as
they are an occasion to me hearing them pronounced apart and knowing that (the
force of these words only attended) the Body would be under one species, and
the Blood under the other, tho by concomitance both are in each; to represent
to my self the death of Christ or his Body separated from his Blood.

Ob. 6. As much as is taken away of the Sacrament, as much is diminished of the
persuasion of the certainty of God's promise.

Answer. As much as is taken away of that part of the Sacrament which causes
Grace, be it so; Of that which does not cause grace, but only compleats it in
the being of a representation of the death of Christ I deny.

I said be it so, because the Sacraments were chiefly instituted to signify and
cause in us sanctifying grace which is both signified and caused by the Body
and Blood of Christ under on kind as much as under both: Yet the other kind is
necessary in the Priest, not to confirm more God's promise, as Mr. Rodon would
have it, but to represent the death of Christ. And since he thinks two
Sacraments better then one, why does not he take in the Sacrament of Penance
so signally set down Io. 20. as a sensible sign of sanctifying Grace brought
forth in a penitent Soul by the absolution of the Priest, signified by these
words Whose sins ye remitt are remitted to them. Since three Sacraments are as
much better then two, than two are better than one. Or how proves he the Lord's
Supper to be a Sacrament, and the Priests absolving a sorrowful penitent from
his sin to be none?

Ob. 7. Christ foresaw the inconvenences of taking under both kinds for
Lay People as well as we, and yet he commanded it to them, as S. Paul to the
Corinthians after him.

Answer. I deny that either Christ or S. Paul commanded the lay people to take
the Eucharist under both kinds, more then Christ commanded that the Ministers
should wash the Communicants feet by his example of Washing them to those to
whom he gave the Sacrament. See the ground of this my denial in the 1. Sect. of
the 6. chap. nay Christ signified abundantly one kind to suffice when he said,
Who eats this Bread shall live for ever.

Ob. 8. God's word should not be taken from all, because some are deaf:
therefore the Cup should not be taken from all lay people, because some cannot
drink Wine.

Answer. The Cup is not taken from all lay people for that reason, but because
that, and other reasons being on one side, and on the other side it not being
necessary to give it the lay people for the proofs I have brought above, the
Church does not think good to give it at this time, which she may change (it
not being a matter of Faith or Command of God) when she pleases. But the word
of God is necessary to those who hear, because Faith comes by hearing, and is
always supplied to the deaf by outward signs, and stronger inward inspirations
from God.

Be pleased to reflect that Mr. Rodon, who inveighes against the Roman Church
for taking away the Cup to avoid scandals or inconveniences; for one of the
same allows in this 6. Chap. numb. 13. to substitute rather the ordinary drink
of a Country instead of Wine, notwithstanding that Christ instituded it to be
given in Wine.

SECTION III.
The discovery of Mr. Rodon's disingenuous representation of the Decree of the
Council of Constance. Sess. 13.

THe taking away, says Mr. Rodon, of the Eucharistical Cup, was established as
an Article of Faith by the Roman Church, representative assembled in the
Council of Constance, in the Year 1414. Sess. 13. in a Canon.

Answer. That Is a Calumny, as shall appear in the discussion of his quotation.
It is indeed an Article of Faith, to believe that under the species of Bread is
both Christ's Body and his Blood, because his Body is a living Body; He dies no
more, Romans 6. v. 9. Wherefore the Council of Constance finding the Church to
have been in a long custom of giving the Sacrament under one kind for good
reasons; to show that the former Church had not erred in that custom, thought
good to order them to be punished as Heretics, who should presume to say that
that custom was erroneous, sacrilegious and unlawful. But why punished as
Heretics? Because they seem to doubt if the Blood be under the Form of Bread.

Yet she did not define to be believed as an Article of Faith, and of divine
right for Lay People to take it only under one kind, for it is only of Church
right, for some particular reasons, which were not at the time the Apostles
gave it. One of which is this same which moved the Council: Another, the Church
being now extended to Countries, where it is hard to get so much Wine, and many
being found in the great body of the Church, who have an antipathy to Wine,
since there is no necessity, its better in the way of taking, to keep an
uniformity in the sick (to whom it could not be keept or conveniently carried,
nor was carried in primitive times) and in those who are in health; and so
avoid scruples which might arise in weak heads: not to speak of the danger of
irreverence in spilling, the Commons of Christians being not now so fervent as
they were in the first age. Yet we do not hold it unlawful jure divino, by
divine right, for Lay People to receive under both kinds more then it is
unlawful jure divino, to eat Flesh on Frydays. Since it is at present the
practice of the Greek Church at Rome, to give the Communion to the Lay People
once a Year, under both kinds.

Now to show the infidelity of Mr. Rodon's quotation of the Council's decree.
The Council says, Praesens Concilium, etc. definit quod lice: Christus
instituerit and dederit Sacramentum hoc post cocnam sub utraque specie
Discipulis, hoc non obstante approbata consuetudo ecclesiae servarit and servat
quod hujusmodi Sacramentum non debet confici post cocnam, neque a fidelibus
recipi non jejuuis (Here the Council should have added neque sub utraque
specie, to make out what Mr. Rodon says, which it has not) nisi in casu
infirmitatis aut alterius necessitatis a jure vel Ecclesiae concesso. That is,
The present Council defines; etc. That although Christ instituted and gave this
Sacrament AFTER SVPPER ( these Words Mr. Rodon leaves out) under both kinds to
his Disciples, notwithstanding this the approved custom of the Church has
observed, and observes that this Sacrament ought not to be made AFTER SVPPER
nor to be received by the Faithful who are not fasting (these words again,
which alone relate to the Council's saying, NON OBSTANTE, he leaves out) unless
in case of Infirmity, or other necessity, etc. allowed by the Law of the
Church. Where the Council does not speak at all of both kinds, when it says,
This notwithstanding but only of the time of Communicating, whither BEFORE or
AFTER SVPPER. Viz. Although our Savior, instituted it after Supper, that does not
hinder the Church's now ordaining it to be taken only by those, who are fasting
unless in case of necessity.

Note, as the Council learned from the H. Ghost that Christ's giving it after
Supper did not hinder to take it fasting in another circumstance of time; so it
also learned from the same that the Primitive Church's giving it under both
kinds (she giving it also sometimes under one as to the sick, see Eusebius. lib.
6. cap. 44. Edit. val. in the Hist. of Serapion: also see Tertul: de orat. cap.
14. and to Infants, see S. Cypr. sract. de Laps.) did not hinder to make a Law
at that time to give it to the laytie only under one or special reasons; one of
which is this, Since this custom (says the Council in the same place) has
been reasonably brought in by the Church and Holy Fathers, it ought to stand
for a Law which it is not lawful to disapprove or change at pleasure without
the authority of the Church.

Neither does the Council say not withstanding Christ's command, but only not
withstanding his Example. Now Christ had a particular reason why he gave it
after Supper, viz. that the Typical Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb might go
before the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, which was figured by it. Also to conform
himself to the custom of those times which was to sacrifice after meat in
thanksgiving: and the Church an other particular reason to give it since to
none but fasting, because Christians falling from the primitive servour eat
and drunk intemperatly, of which S. Paul complains 1. Cor. 11. v. 22. and so
rendered themselves unworthy, not having that purity of Soul, which our Lord
gave to understand as a thing required by washing his Disciples Feet before he
gave them the Srcrament.

Christ then commanded the substance of the Sacrament to be given, but left the
manner of giving it to the Church, changeable in a different circumstance of
Times and Persons. That particle then of the Council notwithstanding imports
only, that Christ's giving the Sacrament AFTER SUPPER does not hinder it to be
given to those who are Fasting. And indeed if that were a breach of his will,
do not Protestants break it as well as we? do not they take their Communion
before Supper, and for the most part Fasting? If the Example of Christ were to
be followed in the Ceremony of giving it, the Priest or Minister should before
wash the Feet of those to whom he gives it.

To what Mr. Rodon says, at the beginning of this Chapter of the Churches
forbidding Marriage and certain Meats.

After Mr. Rodon had unadvisedly said that we freely confess, that the Decree
of the Council of Constance is contrary to the institution and command of
Christ, which we are so far from confessing that we have proven the contrary.

He adds, If we alleadg that S. Paul Timot. 4. says, That they who forbid to
marry, and command to ^ob. slain from Meats, do teach the Doctrines of Devils:
Romanists need only answer that although S. Paul does say so, yet they must not
believe it, because the Romish Church has determined otherwise.

Again, if we alleadg (says he,) that the same Apostle Ephesians 2. says,
That we are saved by Grace through Faith and that not of our selves, it is the
gift of GOD, not of works, least any man should boast. Romanists need only
Answer that, although this was written by the Apostle, yet they must not
believe it, because the Romish CHVRCH has determined, that we are Saved by
Works and Faith, as coming from our selves, and from the strength of our own
free will.

Answer. We know the general approved Councils being guided by the H. Ghost
cannot determine against S. Paul, We avow it is a Doctrine of Devils, to forbid
absolutely to marry, as if marriage were ill in it self and of Satan, as the
Ebionites taught, see S. Irereus, Lib. 1: Cap. 22. And to command to abstain
from certain Meats, believing they were of the Devil with the Manicheans. See
S. Aug. Haeres. Manich. 46. But we do not hold it to be a Doctrine of Devils to
forbid Priests to marry, who cannot use their marriage without breaking their
vow made to God. If a man be bound to keep his promise of fidelity or conjugal
chastity to a Wife, is not he as much bound to keep his promise of perpetual
Continency made to God?

The Church I say does not determine against S. Paul, 1 Timot. 4. nor against
what he says, Ephesians. 2. But heartily believes with him that we are saved by
Grace through Faith, and that this Faith is not of our selves, but it is the
gift of God, not of works done by the force of nature, or of the Old Law, of
which the Jews boasting, thought themselves more worthy of Salvation, than the
Gentiles. Yet she determines, against Mr. Rodon, that S. Paul here by Works,
does not exclude Works that flow from Faith, as acts of Hope, Repentance, and
Charity, for S. Mary Magdalen was justified because she loved much.

Obj. They do not celebrate the memory of Christ's Death as they ought, who do
not partake of the Cup, whereby only we commemorate the effusion of Christ's
Blood: therefore all ought to partake of the Cup.

Answer. I distinguish the antecedent, they who do not partake of the Cup, do
not as they ought, celebrate the Death of Christ, Passively, that is, they have
not an occasion of receiving, and do not receive a representation or a memory
of the Death of Christ, I deny. They do not celebrate the memory of the Death
of Christ, Actively, I subdistinguish, within themselves, producing in their
mind a thought of the Death of Christ, I deny; without themselves, putting the
Body of Christ under the species of Wine, I grant; but all are not bound to do
so, or celebrate a memory of his Death so, but only the Priests to whom he gave
that command, saying, Do this in remembrance of me, and as often as you sball
eat this Bread and drink this Cup, you shall show the Death of the (your) Lord
until he come. And that Protestants understand this to be said to the
Ministers only, they show, when they say that this Sacrament cannot be rightly
ministered without a Sermon of the Death of CHRIST. I ask do the Lay People
Preach then?

CHAPTER VII.
The Sacrifice of the Mass proved by Reason. by the notion of a true Sacrifice.
By Scripture. By the tradition of our Country. By the Authority of the Holy
Fathers and the Church.

SECTION. I. Proofs.
SUBSECTION I. Proofs from Reason.
I. REASON.
WE must not refuse to Christians that, which all other People have had by an
instinct of nature, viz. to offer a true Sacrifice to the Supreme Being. God in
the 1. Chapter of Leviticus v. 2. does not say by way of command, ye shall
offer. But supposing what they knew to be done by the light of Nature, he only
prescribes there the manner of Sacrificing.

S. Paul having cured with a word of his month a Lame man at Lystra, the People
thinking him for that to be God, presently found themselves naturally moved to
bring Oxen to Sacrifice to him, Act. 14.

Men Sacrificed in the Law of Nature, in the written Law, the Pagan infidel as
well as the Faithful Soul all led by this innate light, he is to be honored in
a singular manner who is above all.

The chief end of a Sacrifice is to acknowledge by it God's supreme Dominion
over us his Creatures as Author of Life and Death, and shall Christians, who
have been by divine favor enlightened above other People, be ignorant of this,
or less sensible, than others of their duty to him, from whom they have
received more Grace? No. Then Christians have a true Sacrifice, but no other,
than that of the Mass, then that of the Mass is a true Sacrifice.

I prove the minor proposition, because, beside the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Christians have now no Sacrifice but their offerings of Prayers or other Acts
of virtue, which are only Sacrifices improperly; nay God himself distinguishes
them from a true Sacrifice, saying by the Prophet Samuel, 1 Reg. 15. v. 22.
Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and Math. 9. v. 13. I will have Mercy and
not Sacrifice.

You Will say we have the Sacrifice of the Cross.

Answer. That is past. People in succeeding Ages could not be present at that,
to do their due homage to God. That was made, and was sufficient to Redeem all
men from their Sin's past, present, and to come, as much as was required of
Christ, or on his side as Redeemer, but it was not made to Redeem them from
their first Duty to God, which is still, and ever to acknowledge him as Supreme
Lord, as well in all other times, as in that, at which the Sacrifice of the
Cross was offered.

If that Sacrifice sufficed for all Duty's, what need have we now of
Sacraments, Faith repentance etc.? If we have moreover need of Faith for our
selves, why have we not need of a true Sacrifice, as a testimony of our Faith
in God, to others?

The holy Patriarchs had Faith in their Hearts, but did not think themselves
to do sufficiently by that, their Duty to God, without a Sacrifice as a public
profession to men of this their Faith in him.

You must distinguish the condign, or fully satisfying Sacrifice for Sin, from
other Sacrifices: That the eternal Father required, and accepted from his Son
alone, in Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices for Sin thou have no pleasure, then
said I (God the Son) lo I come, etc. Hebr. 10. to do thy Will, O God: a Body
thou have prepared to me. v. 5. to wit, in which he might Sacrifice himself.

Sacrifices for other ends God required, and accepted from mere men showing the
pleasure he had in them; as in that of Abel and Elias, which he consumed with
fire from Heaven, 3 Reg. 18. in the Protestant Bible, 1 Reg. 18. and that of
Noe, for which he promised not to drowned the Earth again. Genes. 8. v. 21.

II. REASON.
REligion according to the common opinion of Divines is a virtue inclining man
to give to God his due Honor. And shall those men claim to have any Religion,
(let Protestants be pleased to reflect) who find in themselves no inclination
to give to GOD a true and proper Sacrifice, which is the Honor due to Him?

III. REASON.
A True Sacrifice is the Worship only due to God; all other Worship may be
given to men. If Kings will not want the Worship due to them above their
Subjects, should we deprive GOD for whole Ages of the Worship due to him above
his Creatures? No. In the mean time all must acknowledge this to have been
done, and to be still done, who do not acknowledge the Sacrifice of the Mass.

IV. REASON.
SAcrifice is the chief Act of Religion or Divine Worship, and shall the Church
of Christ come short of the Synagogue in this? In the Synagogue they Sacrificed
daily, Exodus 29. v. 38.

God having as S. Paul speaks, Hebr. 11. v. 40. provided something better to
the Spouse of Christ than to the hand made, has not he more loving to her,
furnished her with a more noble means to obtain it? Yes. And this is the
Sacrifice of the Mass. in which the Priest destroying in the Host the substance
of Bread, and offering to God what is now there by the force of his words, both
acknowledges him as Supreme Master of Life and Death, and offers him a
Sacrifice worthy of himself.

The Synagogue was with us participant of the Sacrifice of the Cross, as
general to all, but Christians alone have an application of it more powerful,
then by any other way, in the Sacrifice of the Mass:

V. REASON.
IF the Preist-hood being translated, it is necessary according to S. Paul.
Hebr. 7. v. 12. that the Law be translated: Then the Preist-hood ceasing, it is
necessary that the Law cease, which was under that Preist-hood. Hence;

I infer, since the Law of the New Testament does not cease, the Preist-hood of
the New Testament does not cease, and under it there are still Sacrifices, no
other but those of the Mass, therefore that of the Mass is a true Sacrifice.

Quoeres. May not the Sacrifice of the Cross be called the Sacrifice of the New
Testament in this sense, that CHRIST made his Testament there?

Answer. No. For I shall prove in the next Chapter that he made it at the
unbloody Sacrifice, he offered after the eating of the Paschal Lamb.

SUBSECTION II.
The Sacrifice of the Mass, proved by the notion of a true and proper Sacrifice.

A True and proper Sacrifice, is an oblation of a sensible thing made to God by
a Priest, in acknowledgment of his Supreme Dominion over all with some change
of the Host or Victim.

But the Sacrifice of the Mass is such; then it is a true and proper Sacrifice.

1. The Sactifice of the Mass is an oblation 2. Made to God, viz. alone. 3. Of
a semble thing, whether you consider the Bread, the substitutive Host, about
which (in imitation of the Old Law preparing the Victimes, as by washing the
Sheep in the probatick Pond before they were Sacrificed, etc.) instead of the
Body of Christ, it not being there till the Consecration, the Ceremonies of
preparing the Host are made by laying the Preist's hands over it, etc. Exodus
29. v. 15.

Or whether you consider the Body of Christ under the species, or Forms of
Bread and Wine, the principal Host of this Sacrifice, which also, the
Consecration being made, is sensibly known by the species to be there.

4: It Is made by a Priest, viz. a man called by God or his Church, lawfully
ordained, and anointed for that function. Exodus 30. v. 30. And having his
hands consecrated for that end, Exodus 29. v. 9. Clothed with sacred and
mysterious vestiments, (as Aron, Exodus 18.) significative, and relating to the
action he is going about.

5. In acknowledgment of God's Supreme Dominion over Life and Death with some
change of the Host or Victime, signifying that Dominion, or making you mind it.
This is done by the destruction of the substance of the Bread, and by Christ's
being there mystically immolated, or by his being there by the force of the
Sacred words, modo mortuo, after a Dead manner.

If; because we call the Sacrifice of the Mass a Sacrifice of the Body and
Blood of Christ, you will acknowledge no other Host in it, but the principal
Host, to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ, which the Priest seems to insinuat
when offering the Bread, he says to the B. Trinity, suscipe Sancte Pater,
receive Holy Father, (where Father is taken Essentially for the whole Trinity,
not for the first Person.) This immaculat Host, and offerrimus, etc. We offer
to thee O Lord the chalice of Salvation, etc. Those terms supposing properly
for the Body of Christ and his Blood, not for mere Bread and Wine; if, I say,
you will not have this Bread and Wine to be any ways the Host, but only the
Body and Blood of Christ, in place of which this Bread and Wine are offered.
And then you begin to quible about the real change of the Body and Blood of
Christ in this Sacrifice, denying any real mutation of them to be made in it.

I answer then with Vasquez. That there is no necessity of a real mutation in
the thing which is offered in this Sacrifice, Because the mutation in the thing
offered, is only necessary in as much as God is signified by it Author of Life
and Death; therefore if there be any oblation by which without the real
immutation of the thing offered God may be denotated, or signified Author of
Life and Death, 'twill be a true Sacrifice: Such is the consecration of the
Body and Blood of Christ, then it is a true Sacrifice.

For, the immutation is not the formal reason of a Sacrifice, but only some
thing required, Ex part signi, in the Sign, that it may be fit to signify the
formal term of the Sacrifice, to whom tends, and in whom ends the Sacrifice,
which is God as Author of Life and Death: Now in the consecration, the Death of
Christ is represented in this same, that by the force of such an action, the
Body is made separate from the Blood and consequently ut sic, as so, or as such
an action, it signifies, God Author of Life and Death.

I know, Amicus says, that this signification of the Almighty power of God
over Life and Death, fundari debet in aliqua reali mutatione rei quae
significatur, that it, ought to be founded in some real mutation of the thing
which is Sacrificed. To whom my answer is, In other Sacrifices which have not
the force to signify God Author of Life and Death without their own
Destruction, it is true; in the Eucharist, I deny it for the reason I gave
before. But if this my answer does not satisfy you, know that the Sacrament is
destroyed, or ceases to be what it was by the Preist's consuming of it. In
which consumption, you see a real change of the Victime, which is not only
Christ's Body and Blood, but Christ's Body and Blood joined to the species,
which whole is destroyed by the alteration of the species in the Stomach.

SUBSECTION III.
The Mass proved by the Tradition of our Country.

WIll we condemn the Piety of our Ancestors, marking the chief terms of the
Year by a singular devotion above all other Nations to this Mystery, with the
name of Mass or Oblation, (Missah in Hebrew signifies Oblation or Offering,) as
to mind us to offer up then a Mass of Thanksgiving either for special Spiritual
favors, bestowed upon mankind on those days, or for Rents or Fruits of the
Earth coming in at those times. We have upon record, that all the tennants that
held Lands of the Cathedral Church of York, which is dedicated to S. Peter, ad
vincula, which is the first of August, were bound by their Tenure to bring a
Lamb alive into the Church at high Mass on that day, hence they called, and
likely we from them, the first of August, Lammas-day.

Since we are speaking of Lambs, I mind that in the written Law the Children of
Israel were commanded, Exodus 29. v. 38. to Sacrifice every day a Lamb in the
morning and another at night. Why? (supposing the general reasons of a
Sacrifice,) but moreover to foresignify by the offering of a Lamb the daily
offering of the Lamb of God in the Law of Grace, which is done in the Sacrifice
of the Mass.

SUBSECTION IV.
The Sacrifice of the Mass proved by Scripture.

PROOF I.
THe Evangelical Prophet, Isaiah c. 61. v. 6. Prophesied that there would be
Priests in the New Law, who would be called the Ministers of our GOD, and
consequently he Prophesied that there would be Sacrifices, no other (beside
that of the Cross) but the Sacrifice of the Mass; therefore the Sacrifice of
the Mass is a true Sacrifice.

Quaeres Why are Protestant Churchmen, called Ministers, and not Priests.

Answer. Because they have no Sacrifice to which Preist-hood relates. Every
High Priest, says S. Paul,. is ornained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices. Hebrews
8 v. 3.

Note, the difference between the high Priest and low Priest, is not in their
offering of Sacrifice (which is common to both,) for the low Priests in the Old
Law offered Sacrifice as well as the High Priest; but in this, that the High
Priest has a superiority over the Low Priests, and a special assistance of the
Holy Ghost to judge in matter of religion. Sacerdotes ( says Guliel. Whitaker
contra Grego. Martin.) ii vere and proprie sunt qui Sacrificia faciunt, qualis
fuit Aaron and Aaronis filii and Melchisedech, and quem illi adumbrabant: that
is, Priests truly and properly are they that offer Sacrifices such as was
Aaron, and the Sons of Aaron, and Melchisedeck, and Christ whom they
prefigured.. So that Protestant Doctor.

PROOF II.
The Mass was also foretold by the Prophet Malachie, c. 1. v. 11. where having
reprehended the ancient Priests for their offering polluted Sacrifices; God
promises that a pure Sacrifice shall be offered among the Gentiles, in these
words, from the rising of the Sun even unto the going down of the same my name
shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered
unto my name, and a pure offering. Which cannot be understood but of the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist, which for the Sanctity of the Victime, is called
pure, and for the universality of the offerers is said to be offered in all
places from the rising to the going down of the Sun. Again its called pure,
says the Council of Trent. Sess. 22. cap. 1. because it cannot be defiled
either by the malice or unworthiness of the Offerers.

Mr. Rodon's interpreting Malachie by what S. Paul says, Romans 12. v. 1. and
15. v. 16. is of no force, since S. Paul's offering the repenting Gentiles, and
they their repentance, and the Romans the like, or other acts of virtue by
which their bodies became living Hosts breathing the service of God, are only
Metaphorical Sacrifices: Whereas the Prophet foretells a true Sacrifice like to
that of the Jews; and such is that of the Eucharist of which S. Paul speaks, 1
Cor. 10. v. 20. and 21. The things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice
to Devils and not to God, And I would not that you should have Fellow-ship with
them. (Viz. eating a part of what they Sacrifice and so becoming Participant of
their Altar.) For, Are not they who eat the Hosts partakers of the Altar, v.
18. Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table (that is Altar) and of the Table
of Devils to wit eat the Body of Christ which we sacrifice on our Altar and a
part of the beast which they sacrifice on theirs. Don't wonder that S. Paul
calls the Altar Table, because on the Altar, on which we Sacrifice, is set down
to the faithful the Bread of Life and the food of our Souls: so the Prophet
Malachie called also the Altar Table chap. 1. v. 12. having said before (to the
wicked Priests) v. 7. Ye offer polluted Bread upon my Altar.

Be pleased to read this chapter from the 14 verse to the 22. where the Apostle
dehorts and fears the Christians from eating of meats offered to Idols,
because, who eats of the sacrifice offered to Idols is partaker of the Altar
of Idols or a worshiper of Idols; as who eats of the altar of Chrst, and is
partaker of the altar of Christians, or a worshiper of Christ; and, as who
eats of the altar of the Jews is partaker of the altar of the Jews, or a
follower of the Mosaik law. And consequently since the Christians would not be,
nor be thought Idolaters, they ought not to eat of meats offered to Idols.

But here take notice, he mentions three tables or altars; one, upon which the
Gentiles sacrifice to Idols; a second on which the Jews offered victims of
beasts to God; and a third on which Christians offer the Body and Blood of
Christ, and consequently this oblation of the Eucharist in S. Paul's opinion is
a true sacrifice, as that of the Jews, and that of the Gentiles. But, were
offering of the Prayers, and other such acts of virtue Sacrifices; yet they are
not the Sacrifice of which Malachy speaks, because the yare not pure: not in
themseleves, as Protestants avow, nor pure because they are accepted as pure,
for, say I, their impuritie hinders them to be accepted, it being as much as to
offer God polluted Bread upon his Altar, which was rejected Malach. 1. v. 7.

PROOF III.
What the prophet Malachy foretold, our Savior insinuated after, Io. 4. v.
19. to the Samaritan Woman: She finding that he was a prophet, proposed to him
the Schism which was then between the Samaritans and the Jews about the place
of Sacrifice. The Samaritans held they ought to Sacrifice upon mount Garazim;
the Jews, that they ought all to Sacrifice in the Temple of Jerusalem. Our Lord
gave her a twofold answer; the first as to the place of Sacrifice; the second
as to the manner of it. The hour or time is come, (that is, will be immediately
after my death) says he, when ye shall neither adore (that is, Sacrifice) on
this mountain nor in Jerusalem. (to wit, only) As if he had said hereafter the
true adorers, viz. Christians shall not only offer Sacrifice on this montain or
in the temple of Jerusalem, but they shall build Churches in every place to
Sacrifice in, as Malachy foretold.

Note, by the word Adore, is here meant Sacrifice for the Jews did not deny,
but that they might adore simply and pray God every where; but they held it was
not lawful to Sacrifice but in the Temple of Jerusalem: therefore they came
far and near to Jerusalem, as the Eunuch to adore, that is to Sacrifice Act.
8. v. 27. And some Gentiles Io. 12. v. 20. had gone up, viz. to Jerusalem, to
adore, that is to Sacrifice on a festival day, because there only was the
place of Sacrifice. As to the manner; the true adorers shall adore, that is
Sacrifice in spirit and truth. In truth contrary to the samaritans, who
sacrificed to a false God; and in Spirit otherwise then those Jews of whom God
complained that they honored him with their mouths, but that their hearts were
far from him. The true adorers then shall accompany their outward offering to
the true God with an inward devotion of mind.

PROOF IV.
The sacrifice of the Eucharist foretold by Malachy and insinuated by Christ
to the Samaritan woman, S. Paul. declares by a particular circumstance of the
Christian's partaking of it to the exclusion of the Jews, who serving the
tabernacle were debarred from sharing in the Host, which came of the altar of
the Christians. We, (viz. Christians) have an altar, says he, Hebr. 13. of
which they have no right to eat who serve the Tabernacle. Note; Altar (or as
the Greek text has thusiasteerion, that is, That place on which the sacrifice
is made or put; from the verb histeemi I put, and thusia an Host from the verb
thuoo I Sacrifice) and a sacrifice, are relatives, one of which cannot be
conceived without the other: Quid est altar (says Opt. mil. lib. 6.) nisi
seeds and sanguinis and corporis Christi? That is. What is an Altar but the
seat of the Blood and Body of Christ? If then the Christians in S. Paul's time
had an Altar, they had also a true sacrifice: no other but that of the
Eucharist: then the sacrifice of the Eucharist is a true sacrifice.

PROOF V.
Infin; What Malachy foretold, our Savior insinuated to the Samaritan woman,
and S. Paul declares 1. Cor. 10. S. Luke stronly confirms relating to us, Acts.
13. v. 2. the practice of this sacrifice; in the Apostles, leitourguntoon de
auton, they (as Erasmus himself explanes) sacrificing to the Lord and fasting;
which Fasting is premitted by apostolical tradition to the ordination of
Priests. See S. Chrysostom. on this place. It Is also to be remarked that S. Luke
describing the sacrifice of Zachary Luc. 1. v. 23. makes use of the word
leitourgias to signify his sacrifice or ministry. And again the same S. Luke
has This Cup the New Testament in my Blood, which Cup IS powered out for you.
Note 1. he says, The Cup is poured out; that was not done at the Cross, for
the Vessel, out of which the Blood of Christ was poured there, was his Body;
here the CUP. 2. The present time IS poured out declares, the pouring out at
the last Supper, not on the Cross. 3. FOR YOU and not TO YOU, signifies an
Oblation or Sacrifice. 4. The pouring out was a Libation or Sacrifice.

SUBSECTION V.
The Sacrifice of the Mass, proved by the Authority of the Holy Fathers.

AFter I have proved by Reason, the Notion of a True Sacrifice, the Tradition
of our Country, and Scripture the Sacrifice of the Mass, I ask: Is not that to
be believed which was believed by Christians in primitive times, or the first
five Centuries? I ask again: Who can tell us best what they believed? Men, who
are living now with us, or tho^^, who lived in the same times renowned both for
Piety and Learning? If you grant those ancients can best tell us what, they and
the People of their time believed, consult their works left to posterity, and
you will find

In the first age.
1. ST. Paul, We have an Altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the
Tabernacle. Hebr. 13. v. 10. And 1 Cor. 9. v. 13. They that serve the Altar,
participat with the Altar. Note, the English Bible 1562. has here for Altar,
Temple, though Norton's of 1625. has Altar.

2. St. Andrew, who said to the Tyrant Aegaeas, I daily Sacrifice to the
Almighty GOD the Immaculate Lamb, who persevers living and entire. although he be
truly Sacrificed and his Flesh truly eaten by the People. This is related in
the Book of his Passion, written by his Disciples, who little dreamed then that
Protestants in these days should question this truth.

3. St. Denis, speaking of the Eucharist Eccl. Hier. cap. 3. says, O Divine
and Holy Sacrifice. And again in the same Chapter, Hence the Divine Priest
standing at the Divine Altar. I know Calvin denies that Book to be St. Denis
his, but I preser the Authority of St. John Damas. Lib. 1. de Fide orth. cap.
12. Of the second general Council of Nice approved, anno 787. under Hadrian the
first: Citing in Can. 2. a Testimony out of the Eccl. Hier. under the name of
St. Denis, whom the Council calls Magnum, Great, and of others to his, vide
Gual. 1. Saec. page 40.

4, St. Ignatius Martyr. I do not delight in the nourishment of Corruption, nor
the pleasures of this Life; I will the Bread of God the Heavenly Bread which is
the Flesh of Christ the Son of God. Epist. ad Romans beyond the middle. This
passage is not for the sacrifice but proves strongly that the s^^rament is the
true Body of Christ.

In the second age.
1. ST. Justin Martyr in his Dial. with Tryph. post medium. Neither does God
receive Hosts from any but from his Priests: All then who in his Name (offer)
the Sacrifices which Jesus left or signified to be made, that is, in the
Eucharist, of Bread and Wine which are made in every place of the Earth by
Christians, etc.

2. S. Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 32. speaking of Christ, says, Giving council to
his Disciples to offer to God the first Fruits of his Creatures, he took
created Bread and gave thanks, saying, This is my Body, and likewise the Cup,
etc. he confessed to be his Blood, and he taught a new OBLATION of the new
Testament, which the Church receiving from the Apostles Offers to God through
the whole World.

3. Tertullian lib. ad Scap. Cap. 2. We Sacrifice for the safety of the
Emperor but to our God and his. Item. lib. de Ora. cap. 14. he makes mention
of standing at the Altar and Sacrifice.

4. Again: What meant the Pagans objecting to Christians their murdering of a
Child in their divine Worship and eating of its Flesh. Dicimur sceleratissimi
(says Tertul. apolog. advers. Genesis cap. 7.) de Sacramento infanticidii and
pabulo inde. We are called most wicked for murdering a Child in our Sacrament
and eating of its Flesh. Would we have been called most wicked for eating a
piece of Bread and drinking a Cup of Wine in Remembrance that Christ dyed for
us? Or was this a Mystery to be concealed from the Cathecumens?

In the third age.
1. ORigines speaking of the Eucharist, lib. 8. contra Celsum. Says, We set
forth with thanksgiving for the benefits received Bread made the Body, viz. of
Christ. And Hom. 23. in Number. he says, It seems to me that it belongs only to
him to offer the continual Sacrifice who has dedicated himself to a continual
and perpetual chastity.

2. S. Cyprian Epist. 66. ad Clerum and Plebem Furnitanorum, speaking of the
Duty of Priests, says, all honored with Divine Preist-hood ought only to
serve the Altar and the Sacrifices and attend to Prayer. And in Caena Domini
post med. speaking of the Eucharist, says, This Sacrifice is a perpetual and
ever remaining Holocaust.

3. St. Hippolitus Episcop. and Martyr. in his speech of the end of the World
and Antichrist, says, The Churches will grievously mourn (viz. then,) because
neither Oblation nor Incense will be offered, and the Liturgy (that is, the
Mass) will be extinguished.

Note, The Greek Fathers by the word Liturgy understand Sacrifice. So St. Paul,
Hebr. 9. v. 21. speaking of the Vessels of the Mosaic Sacrifice, calls them
ta scevee tees leitourgias, The Vessels of the Liturgy. And Hebr. 10. v. 11.
The Priest stood daily leitourgoon, that is, Ministering. See S. Luk's Greek
Evang. cap. 1. v. 8.9.23. Note, Liturgy is composed of leeitos and ergon, that
is, public service.

In the fourth age.
1. I begin the fourth age with the Testimony of the first general Council of
Nice, which Calvin himself lib. 4. Inst. cap. 2.. 8. professes to embrace and
reverence as Holy. The Council can 4. edit. lat. but 18. of the Greek edition,
speaks thus, Hoc neque regula neque consuetudo tradidit, etc. Neither rule nor
custom has allowed that those who have not power to offer Sacrifice, give the
Body of Christ to those who offer.

2. St. Basil in his 19. hom. which is a speech upon St. Gordius Martyr; beyond
the middle inveighs against the profanations of his time, thus, The House of
Prayer was cast down by the hands of profane Men, the Altars were overthrown,
neither was there Oblation nor Incense.

3. St. Cyrill of Hier. Cathec. 4. Mystag. nigh the beginning, Knowing says
he, and having for certain that the Bread which is seen by us is not Bread,
although the taste feels it to be Bread, but to be the Body of Christ: And that the
Wine which is seen by us, although it appear to the sense of the taste to be Wine,
is not Wine, but the Blood of Christ.

4. St. Ambrose lib. 5. Epist. 33. vel 13. ad Marcel. says, This morning fell
out a disturbance in the Church, I continued my Office, I begun to say Mass.

5. St. Optatus Mileu. initio lib. 6. contra Parmes. Donat. says, What is so
Sacrilegious as to break and raze the Altars of GOD on which you your selves
Sacrificed before.

In the fifth age.
1. ST. John Chrisost. hom. 83. in Math. beyond the middle, says, Let us
therefore believe God every where, nor mutter against him, although what he says
seem absurd to our sense and thougt etc. Since then he said, This is my Body,
let us not doubt at all but believe. And a little after, O how many say, I would
see his form and shap! (he answers) behold you see him, you touch him, and eat
him. And in the beginning of his Liturgy which is in his fifth tome, he brings
in the Priest praying thus, O Lord, etc, Strengthen me that inculpably
assisting at thy Altar I may end the unbloody Sacrifice.

2. S. Austin. Conc. 3. in Psalm. 33. He (Christ) ins ituted of his Body and
Blood a Sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedech. And in the 11. chapter of
his Manual he prays thus, Most sweet JESU, etc. I pray that while, though
unworthy, I assist at your Altars desiring to offer to you that admirable and
Heavenly Sacrifiee worthy of all reverence and devotion, etc. S. Aug. con. 1.
in Psalm. 33. Nondum erat Sacrificium Corporis and sangu. nis Domini, quod
Fideles norunt and qui Evangelium legerunt; quod Sacrificium nunc diffusum est
toto orb Terrarum. The Sacrifi- of the Body and Blood of our Lord which is
known to the faithful and to those who have read the Scriptures was not yet,
which Sacrifice is now spread over the whole World.

3. S. Cyril of Alexan. expounding those words of Malachie, In every place is
Sacrificed and offered to my name a pure offering, Malach. 1. v. 8. says, He
(viz. God) fortel^s that his name shall be great and Illustrious among all
mortals through the World, and that in every place and Nation, a pure and
unbloody Sacrifice shall be offered to his Name.

Now hear S. Augustine speaking of the Holy Fathers who were the chief members
of the Church of Christ in their time Tom. 7. contrr Jul. Pelag. l. 2. cap.
ult. What they found in the Church, they held: what they learned, they taught:
what they received from their fathers, this they delivered to their Children,
etc. Nondum vobiscum certabamus, says he and eis pronunciantibus vicimus. We
did not as yet then debate with you, but yet by what they said then, we now win
the cause.

Let a sober judgment remember that Calvin one of our greatest Enemies, call's
lib. 4. inst. cap. 7. 22. Gregory Pepe and S. Bernard Holy men. I infer if
they were Holy men in his judgment, then their faith was Holy, because without
Faith, (viz. true Faith) it is impossible to please God: yet they believed the
Sacrifice of the Mass: witness what S. Greg. says Hom. 8. on the Evang.
Because we are to celebrate three Masses to day, (viz. on Christmasse day) my
discourse on the Gospel will be short. And S. Bernard in his second Sermon of
all saints. Now, says he, I must end because High Mass which is not yet said,
calls us. And if Calvin judged their faith Holy, can he judiciously challendge
us for embracing it, nay is it not best to follow the footsteps of Holy men?

SUBSECTION VI.
The Authority of the Church, grounded on her infallibility is a strong
argument to believe what she asserts.

MY last Proof for the Sacrifice of the Mass is this. The infallible Church of
Christ has always believed, and still believes that in the Eucharist is the
true real Body and Blood of Christ, and that in her Liturgy or Mass is made a
true and proper Sacrifice; and therefore I believe it.

That the teaching Church of Christ is infallible in what she teaches, as
matter of Faith, is clear out of the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians, where S. Paul
says that Christ made some Pastors and Doctors, v. 11. Why? That now we be not
Children wavering and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine. Hence we Infer,

Then they are infallible in what they teach us as matter of Faith. For if I
thought them fallible, I might still waver, fear and be ready to be carried
away with the Wind of another man or Angel's Doctrine, which would make void
the aim of Christ, in giving us those Pastors and Teachers, that we might not
waver.

Thus it is made manifest from Scripture that the teaching Church of Christ is
infallible; and also clear from reason, grounded on the same Scripture, that
this teaching Church is the Roman. For since no other teaching Church than the
Roman so much as claims to this infallibility in teaching; and infallibility
in teaching, must be found in some Church to make good the words of St. Paul,
and of the Scripture in many other places, it follows by a necessary
consequence that it is to be found in the Roman. And so that in the Mass is
made a true Sacrifice, because she has ever; and still asserts it.

That the taught Church is also infallible in her assent, to what she is taught
by those Pastors in matter of Faith, or in her receiving their Doctrine is also
gathered from these words of Christ speaking to the Church, he that hears you,
hears me, Luc. 10. v. 16. for, by that promise, if I infallibly assent to the
Doctrine of Christ, I also infallibly assent to the Doctrine of his Church.

If a Protestant think he can give such a turn to these passages that they
appear to have no force to prove the Churches infallibility.

I ask him, if he be infallibly sure that the Protestant Church is the true
Church of Christ, or not? If not, then what he believes may be false, and
consequently it may be false that Christ is God; in a word he has no Divine
Faith, which is an assent to what we believe, for the Testimony of God above
all, that is, an assent so ferme, that it stands immovable against all the
arguments of Men or Angels, ad Gal. 1. v. 8. But the Protestant's assent is not
such, then it is not an assent of Divine Faith. When Protestants say they have
an objective infallibility, but not subjective, that is, that the object of
their Faith, viz. God, and other Evangelical Truths are in themselves
infallible, while they the Subjects or Receivers of these Truths are fallible;
they seem to say something in words, but in reality they say nothing, as to the
controversy in question. For the question is whether a Christian is
subjectively infallible, that is, whether or no his understanding be the
Subject of an infallible assent in matters of Faith, or whether it produces in
it self in matter of Faith an assent infallible, or which stands immovable
against what an Angel, not from Hell, but from Heaven, (if that were possible)
might oppose to the contrary; by reason of which assurance the Christian is
denominated infallible in his assent. S. Paul says, yes, saying although an Angel
from Heaven Evangelize to you beside that which we have Evangelized to you, he
be Cursed. This not standing with Protestant principles they must either leave
them, or avow they are not of S. Paul's Religion.

If he says he is infallibly sure that the Protestant Religion is the true
Religion, I ask from whence he has that infallibility? Not from the Church, as
he avows; not from the Scripture, as I prove.

1. Because he cannot so much as Read Scripture in order to know infallibly that
the Protestant Religion is the true Religion, before he is infallibly sure that
the Spirit, that Guids him in Reading it, is the true Spirit, (for if it be a
false Spirit, he will make that appear white, which is black, and black, which
is white,) and again he cannot know infallibly that it is the true Spirit that
Guides him, before he has tried it by Scripture, Io. 4. v. 1.

Thus he must know the Scripture by his Spirit, and his Spirit by the
Scripture, which is to make a manifest Circle, and prove idem per idem, the
same by the same, while he proves ultimately that his Spirit is a good Spirit,
because it is a good Spirit. Its a good Spirit, says he, because its approved
by the Scripture taken in the true sense; and it is the true sense he takes it
in, says he again, because his Spirit tells him so, which is equivalently to
say, my Spirit is a good Spirit, since none but a good Spirit can assure us of
the true sense of Scripture. So a 1. ad ultimum, from the first to the last he
proves it to be a good Spirit, because its a good Spirit, which is ridiculous.

2. You cannot be infallibly sure from Scripture, that the Protestant Religion
is the true Religion, before you are infallibly sure that the sense in which you
understand it, is the true sense; but of this you can never be infallibly sure;
then you can never be infallibly sure from Scriptrue, that the Protestant
Religion is the true Religion.

I prove the minor. A Body of Men, (I mean the Roman Catholic Doctors,) using
the same means that you use, to know the true sense of Scripture, and
understanding it (as we Romanists) in a sense quite contrary to you, are not
according to you infallibly sure that we have the true sense. Then neither you
using only the same means we use, are infallibly sure that you have the true
sense, when you udderstand it in a sense quite contrary to us.

Or tell me what it is, that makes you hit infallibly upon the true sense more
than we. If you say it is this, that you are of the Elect, and the Elect are
guided by the Spirit of God, which makes you see the Truth.

1. Who told you that you are of the Elect? If you say, the Spirit which you
have received, gives Testimony to your Spirit that ye are the Sons of God, Romans
8. v. 16.

I Answer from Io. c. 4. v. 1. you ought to try that Spirit, before ye trust it,
and so ye return into your former Circle.

2. Suppose you are of the Elect, some of the Elect have not been always
guided by the Spirit of God, as St. Paul: Nay after he had received the Spirit
of God, he was feared to loose it again, saying, I chastise my Body and bring
it under servitude, lest after I have Preached to others I become a reprobate
my self, 1 Cor. 9. v. 27. How know you then that at this time you are guided by
the Spirit of God, especially if it be true that a man knows not whether he be
worthy of Love, or hatred? Eccl. 9.1.

S. John, if you would hear him, would tell you a better way to try your
Spirit, to wit, by the Church's approbation of it; Io. 4. v. 6. We (viz.
Governors of the Church) are of God, he that knows God hears us, (viz.
Governors of the Church) he that is not of God hears us not, in this we know
the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of Error. To wit, those who are led by the
Spirit of Truth, submit themselves to the Church; whereas those who let
themselves be guided by the Spirit of Error, will not this submission, but
rest in their own Judgment, and by this wedding themselves to their own
Judgment, they become Heretics, being condemned of themselves, as S. Paul
speaks, Tit. 3. v. 11. Other great Sinners are cast out of the Church by the
Governors of the same, but the Heretic he retires or withdraws himself by his
singular and self Judgment, contrary to the Judgment and Sentiment of the
Catholic Church.

If you ask me what gives a man so much security in addressing himself to the
Church, as we are advised by S. John c. 4. v. 6?

Answer. It Is, that she shows her self by her marks to be the Oracle of God to
Men, and as it were his mouth by which he speaks sensibly to Men. 1 These. 2.12.
Her marks are these.

1. Her perpetual visibility, Math. 5. v. 14. 2. Her antiquity, Ierem. 6. v.
16. 3. Her easy way to Heaven, for the Ignorant as well as the Learned by
following only Her Direction, Isa. 35.8. 4. Her having converted all Nations
(which now acknowledge Christ) from Paganism to the Christian Religion, Isa. c.
2. v. 2. and chap. 60. v. 1. 5. 11. 5. Her working of Miracles, Mark. 16. v.
17. Note, it is not necessary that every one to believe, see Her Miracles, it is
enough they be very credibly related to them. Blessed are they that have not
seen and yet have believed, Io. 20. v. 29. and Mark. 16. v. 14. Our Savior
blamed his Disciples for their not believing the relation of Mary Magdalen, and
others of his Resurrection. 6. Her unity, and having an efficacious means to
conserve unity among Her Children by their submission to Her in matter of
Faith, and by Her Authority given Her by God to condemn all Heretics, Isa. 54.
v. 17. 7. Her being Holy in Her Doctrine which breads People up to Saintity, 1
Petr. 2. v. 9. And who by their lives, show the force of the Grace of the
Passion of Christ, (as is seen in many of our Religious Persons,) Ephesians. 5. v.
25. and 26. 8. Her being Catholic or universal, spreading through all times,
and sending of Her Children to all places to Convert Souls, Math. 28. v. 19.
Note, the Roman Church would not justly be called Catholic, if she had not had
in all ages from Christ to this present time, a Body of Men; believing all the
same Articles of Faith which she believes now. For if they had only believed
some of Her Articles, they had not been the same Church with Her. And by this
mark all other Congregations pretending to the name of Catholic, are excluded
from it. 9. Her having a Succession of infallible Pastors, lawfully descending
from S. Peter to this present Pope Innocent the 11. Ephesians. 4. v. 11.12.13. 10.
Her having a true and proper Sacrifice, foretold Malach. 1. v. 11. All which
marks taken together, you will find in no Church, but the Roman, and therefore
she is the Church God will have us hear. Math. 18. v. 17.

For brevities sake I send you to other Controvertists for a larger explication
of those marks.

I am of opinion that this sole Argument, which proves that the Protestants
cannot be infallibly sure, that the Protestant Religion is the true Religion,
(not to speak of what I have said beside to the same purpose in this 6.
Subsection,) being well weighed in all its parts, and set together in the
consideration of a serious well meaning Man, free from Passion and Interest,
may make in his understanding (to use Mr. Rodon's expression) the Funeral of
the whole Protestant Religion.

SECTION II.
The Solution of Objections. Mr. Rodon's Objections against the Sacrifice of
the Mass, answered.

TO his first Argument, saying, that Christ in the institution of the
Eucharist, did not Sacrifice nor offer his Body and Blood to his Father, and
that in the three Evangelists and St. Paul, there is not the least Foot-step to
be seen of a Sacrifice, or Oblation of Christ's Body and Blood.

Answer. Christ was a Priest, and in acknoledgment of his Father's Supreme
Dominion over Life and Death, he put his Body under one Form, viz. of Bread,
and his Blood under an other separate Form, viz. of Wine, upon the Altar,
having by Consecration destroyed the Substance of Bread and Wine, and so
offered them to his Father, for them and others, or the Remission of Sins, if
we may believe him, saying to his Disciples, Luke 22. This is my Body which is
given Greek didomenon, for you: Which is broken kloomenon, for you: viz. quoad
speciem Sacramenti: This is my Blood which IS poured out, Ekkunomenon for you.
Neither for you only, but for many; was not this an unbloody Sacrifice?

Is not there a Foot-step of a Sacrrifice, Hebr. 13. where St. Paul speaks of
an Altar; which is a correlative of a Sacrifice?

He Objects that Bellar: lib. 1. of the Mass chap. 27, confesses that the
Oblation which is made after Consecration belongs to the entireness of the
Sacrament ( Bellar. has Sacrifice) but is not of its essence.

Answer. And so do I too: but telling you withal that the oblation which is
made in the Consecration; is of the essence of the Sacrifice: Deo offertur
(viz. Christus) says Bellar. That sacred thing (viz. the Holy Host) is offered
to God when it is put on the Altar of God, and this one suffices for that part
of the essence. lib. 1. de Missa. c. 27. toward the end.

For Salmeron and Baronius his putting the Sacrifice of the Eucharist among
unwritten traditions. Answer. They do not deny it to be written also. Some
things the Apostles have delivered to us by writ, word, and practice, as the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Baptism adultorum of adults that is, of those
who are come to a full age: others only by word and practice, as the Baptism of
Infants.

The belief of three persons in the H. Trinity is it only an unwritten
tradition? If so, and you believe it, why may not you as well believe the
unwritten tradition of the Sacrifice of the Mass? If you say it is also written.
I answer. And so is the Sacrifice of the Mass in clearer terms, for which I
attest your own Conscience.

A strange thing, says Mr. Rodon, that the Mass which is the fundation of the
Romish Church (for the Doctors require nothing of the people but that they
should go to Mass.

Answer. that is false we require moreover they live a good life, and if they
fall in Sins they confess them etc.) cannot be found to have been instituted or
commanded by Jesus Christ

Answer. If an Arian should say to him, It Is a strange thing that the Godhead
of Christ who is the fundation of the Church cannot be found in all the
Scriptures: Mr. Rodon would answer; you are deceived, it is found there, but
your pride in wedding your self to your own judgment hinders you to see it. So
say I to him: the sacrifice of the Mass is found in scripture to have been
instituted, and practiced by Christ himself and his Apostles, Luc. 22. This is
my Body which is given for you. That is, offered to my eternal Father for you,
and commanded by Christ to his Apostles, Do this in remembrance of me; which
they did, Act. 13. As they ministered to the Lord: the Greek word
leitourgountoon is turned by Erasmus himself Sacrificing Remark the Apostles
ministered to our Lord when they Sacrificed and ministered to the People when
they gave them the Sacrament. And Heb. 13. v. 10. St. Paul says, We have an
Altar whereof they have no right to Eat who serve the Tabernacle. Now an Altar
relates to a Sacrifice as I said, so since Christians had Altars in S. Paul's
time they had also a Sacrifice: no other but that of the Eucahrist: then the
oblation of it to the eternal Father is a true Sacrifice, since a Sacrifice is
a visible offering of a sensible thing to God by a Priest, And to eat relates
to the Fucharist, not to the Sacrifice of the Cross. All had right if they
pleased, to eat, that is, to believe and participate of Christ's death: but
Christians only have right to eat of the Altar of the Eucharist, not the Jews.

Thus you see the Sacrifice of the Mass is to be found in scripture though Mr.
Rodon merited, for his vanishing away in his own thoughts refusing to submit
them to the Church, to have his heart obseured Romans 1. v. 21. and to have this
Mystery (which is revealed only to little ones, or the Humble) hide from him.
Math. 11. v- 25.

From the Testimony of the H. Scripture, the Council of Trent has declared to
all Christians that it is an arrticle of our faith. Sess. 22. de sacrif. Miss.
can. 1. 2. 3. We have also the unanimous consent of all the Holy Fathers.

Is then that to be called only an unwritten tradition, which a General
Council, and all the Holy Fatthers and Scripture it self attests?

Object 1. St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. mentioning the offices, which Christ left his
Church, makes no mention of Sacrificers.

Answer. When St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. v. 11. says that Christ made some Apostles, he
mentioned Sacrificers sufficiently, because to Sacrifice is one of the
frunctions of an Apostle. Neither does he mention Baptisers in that place it
being sufficiently understood by his making some Pastors, of whom one duty is
to Baptize. Neither had the same Apostle writting to Timothee and Titus about
the duty of a Bishop, need to instruct them to Sacrifice since they had been
newly instructed as to that, when he made them Bishops, and were now in a daily
exercise of that function. Moreover Non valet consequentia ab authoritate
negata, no good tonsequence is drawn from a negative or denied authority,

Obj. 2. The thing Sacrificed must fall under our senses.

Answer. I grant it; and tell him, That the thing Sacrificed is the Sacrament,
or Christ's Body with the Species of Bread, and not Christ's Body alone: Which
Sacrament is not hid, but is visible by its Species, though a part of it, viz.
Christ's Body, be not seen; just as the Substance of Bread visible by its
species, is not seen.

Note, then that though the Body of Christ is not cognizable (before the
Consecration) by this visible Species of Bread; yet the Consecration being
made, the Sacrament is cognizable to the Faithful by it, because this Species
belongs now as much to the Sacrament, being a part of it, as before it belonged,
and was a part of the visible Bread.

Hence it is clear, that the destruction or change of the Species suffices for
the verifying of this proposition, The thing Sacrificed is changed or
destroyed: For if it were necessary to have the whole thing destroyed, the
Material part as well as the formal part of a thing, there had never been a
true Sacrifice: Which to say is absurd. It suffices that the whole, or the
totum, which was before cease to be, by the change which the Priest makes of it.

You Will say: the Council of Trent says the Sacrifice of the Mass, and that of
the Cross are the same.

Answer. As to the substance of the Victime, I grant: As to the manner of
Sacrificing or Sacrification I deny.

The action by which Christ was offered on the Cross differs effentially from
the action by which he is offered in the Sacrament: since that was a real
destruction of the union between the Body and the Soul; this, but a Sacramental
one: but a Sacrifice if you regard the thing signifying consists chiefly in the
Immolating action Sacrificium exparte rei significantis ex action immolativa
maxim constat. Then if this Immolating action be of a different kind in the
Sacrifice of the Cross, and that of the Altar; the Sacrifices also will be of a
different kind, as to the sacrificing action, though the same, as to the thing
offered, and the last term signified, which is God as author of Life and Death.

Note in the adductive or productive action of Christ's Body and Blood is
pointed out that two fold dominion of God? of Death, by the destruction of the
Bread and Wine: Of Life, by the production of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Note 2. Though bloody or unbloody are accidents to the Body of Christ, they
are not accidents to a Bloody or Unbloody Sacrifice, as although Color be an
accident to the Wall, it is not an accident to a colored Wall; so that if you
destroy color in it, you destroy the Essence of that whole which was before.
viz. a colored Wall.

Hence it follows, first that the Sacrifice of the Mass is not a Sacrifice of
an Accident, but of a whole Sacramental being rising out of Christ's Body and
the Species of Bread, and that the thing which is destroyed in the Sacrifice,
is the same with that which was produced or made by the Consecration, viz. the
Sacrament of the Body of Christ under the species of Bread.

Secondly, it does not follow that the Sacrifice of the Mass will be offered in
the Priest's stomach only, for the putting of it on the Altar is the offering
of it; which is done by the Consecration, by which also the chief part of the
thing Sacrificed, viz. Christ, is Mysteriously deprived of Life, while his Body
and Blood (if we regard the force of the words only) are put separatly under
the species of Bread and Wine, which Mystical separation, and putting of him
there after a Dead manner; is made sensible to us by our hearing the words, or
the Priest's adoration of the Host, and his laying it on the Altar which is an
offering of it.

Thus you have the offering and sensible change of the thing offered, which are
of the Essence of the Sacrifice, before the consumption of the Host in the
Preist's stomach; ac in the pacifick Sacrifices of the Old Law, the Victime was
offered and killed before a part of it was consumed by the Priest, and a part by
the Person who offered.

But if you think the sensible change of the thing offered in the Eucharist, is
not sufficiently made before the communion of the Priest, then I say this change
also is sufficiently made before he parts from the Altar; for it is not required
that the species be quite destroyed, no more then in Libations or Sacrifices of
Liquid things. For example, in the effusion of Wine on the ground, the thing
did not presently cease to be what it was, but ceased to be capable of the use
men make of it, and so was looked upon as morally destroyed; the same I say of
the species of the H. Host.

SUBSECTION I.
Mr. Rodon's passages out of S. Paul to the Heb. answered.

You Will Object: Hebr. 9. v. 22. almost all things are by the Law purged with
Blood, and without shedding of Blood there is no Remission. Note: He does not
say of Sins, for the Remission which was made in the Old Law, by the Blood of
Beasts, was only Remission of a Legal uncleanness and temporal Pain, but not of
Sin; for it is impossible, says St. Paul, for Sins to be taken away by the
Blood of Bulls and Goats, Hebr. 10. v. 4. It was therefore necessary that the
Paterus (viz. the Tabernacle or Old Testament and People and Priests living
under them,) of things in the Heavens, (that is, of the New Testament or the
Church of Christ, as is clear out of the 8. chap. v. 5.) should be purified
with these, viz. Sacrifices of the Old Law, but the Heavenly things themselves,
viz. the People of Christ, with better Sacrifices, (viz. that of the Cross and
that of the Mass, for that on the Cross was only one) then these.

Answer. From this passage nothing is brought against the Mass, although the Sins
of the Church of Christ figured by the Synagogue be said to be purged by Blood,
for the Sacrifice of the Mass affords not a total and complete Remission, but
presupposes the merits of the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross, of which it is
only an application; and so it is true that without the shedding of Blood there
is no Remission: And thus Heavenly things, viz. the Church of Christ, is
purified with more excellent or better Sacrifices, viz. that of the Cross
meriting the Remission of all the Sins of Men, and that of the Mass, applying
this Ransom of Christ to Men. And this is the force of that word Sacrifices in
the plural number. And don't tell me that the Sacrifice of the Cross is called
Sacrifices in the plural number as Baptism, which is but one, is called
Baptisms in the plural number, Hebr. 6. v. 2. For the Baptisms there mentioned
are the three Baptisms, viz. of Water, of Blood, and of the Holy Ghost, of
which the Catechumens were instructed in their Catechism, or first Lessons of
Christian Doctrine: And these are different as to their manner, and remote
matter.

You Object: Hebr. 10. v. 16. I will put my Laws into their Hearts and in their
minds will I write them, and their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more,
and where Remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin, and
consequently there is no need of the Sacrifice of the Mass.

Answer. I explane the words of St. Paul, that is, in the New Law, I shall
pour such abundant Graces into the Hearts of some, that they shall so abhor
their former Sins, that I shall remember them no more; as those of a Magdalen,
an Austin, etc. to punish them with eternal fire, and that for the merits of my
Son. Now where Remission of those is, there is no more offering for Sin. That
is, as a new Ransom, or an other Ransom than that Christ has given, its true:
As an application of that Ransom given, I deny.

I ask does not God still remember so far the Sins of some Elect Protestants
that he punishes them with a temporal Pain? How often do they avow in their
Preaching, that they have sinned, and that the Lord scourges them for their
Sins? And do not they offer up their fasts and Prayers to God on their days of
Humiliation, to pacific the Lord's Wrath against them? And do not they think
that they must believe and repent that the merits of Christ may be applied to
them? Why then do they stumble at our Sacrifice or offering in the Mass not as
a new price for our Sins, but as an application of the price given, Christ in
his Passion not having actually applied it to all, who after have by Faith and
other conditions required by him, applied it to themselves, and some in a
greater measure then others: Unless they will not have it true, that, as a Star
differs from a Star in Light, Saints differ from Saints in Sanctity, 1 Cor. 15.
v. 14. and 42.

From the passages of St. Paul, Hebr. 9. v. 27. and Hebr. 10. v. 1. Mr. Rodon
Forms these Arguments. First, the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ must not be
reiterated; for St. Paul says, that Jesus Christ offers not himself often.

Answer. Jesus Christ offers not himself often as the price of the Redemption
of Mankind, I grant. As the application of that price to men, I deny. Therefore
the Sacrifice of the Mass, is not the Sacrifice of the Cross reiterated
formally as to the manner and end of it, as such, which was to be the Ransom
for mankind, I grant: It is not the same materially as to the Host offered, I
deny. Now the reiteration which St. Paul denies, is only of the Sacrifice in a
Bloody manner which God would have once, ( si posuerit pro peccato animam suam,
Isa. 53. v. 10.) for the Redemption of man, and no more, because it was
sufficient not only for the Redemption of the men of one age, but all ages past
and to come: And in this the Sacrifice of Christ excells those of Aaron, which
being weak and unsufficient, one was offered for one Sin, and an other for an
other, neither could they altogether give a worthy satisfaction for one Sin: so
they were not a Remission, but a commemoration, Hebr. 10. v. 3. that men might
remember of their Sins, and know that they were not remitted by the Sacrifices
they had offered, but that they ought to recurr to the Cross and Sacrifice of
Christ by Faith and hope in him.

Secondly: The Apostle adding else he (viz. Christ) should often have suffered
from the Fundation of the World, makes it appear that Christ cannot be offered
without suffering.

Answer. Cannot be offered in that manner that S. Paul means there, viz. as the
Price for the Redemption of mankind without suffering; its true; because the
eternal Father would have that offering in a Bloody way: Cannot be offered by
way of application of that Redemption, I deny. Hence, when the Apostle says,
that Jesus Christ offered not himself often, (understand, as the Redemption for
Sin;) otherwise he should often have suffered, which is true; because, as I
said before, God would have that offering in a Bloody way.

Thirdly. These words From the Fundation of the World, says Mr. Rodon, are of
great weight; for it is as much as if the Apostle had said, if the only
Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross be not sufficient to take away sins committed
after, neither was it sufficient for sins committed before, and so Christ
should have suffered From the Foundation of the World.

I answer. That the Sacrifice of the Cross was all sufficient to take away all
Sins past, present, and to come, in as much as was, required on Christ's side,
but not in as much as was, and is required on our side, as Protestants must
grant; because he required our application of those his merits to ourselves,
which Protestants make by Faith and Repentance: We by Faith, receiving the
Sacraments, Oblation of the Eucharist commanded by Christ, Do this in
remembrance of me, and other good works, S. Paul Colos 1. v. 24. says, I fill
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, etc. He
filled up what was wanting, not of Ransom, but of application of it.

SUBSECTION II. His other Instances answered.
TO his fourth Instance: I answer the sense of the Apostle's comparison is not
that, he fains to himself, that Christ having died on the Cross, will be no
more upon Earth till he come to Judge the Quick and the Dead; but this: As it
is decreed in Heaven for the Sin of the first man, that all man Dye and after
Death come to Judgment; so Christ having taken upon him the Sins of all men,
would once Dye, offering himself as a Ransom for them, and after come to
Judgment, but not with the burden of Sin or as an Host to be offered for them,
but as Judge to call them to an account of the Favor he had done them, by
dying for them, to reward, or punish. And thus the Hebrews had no reason to be
scandalized that their Messiah dyed, neither does the Mass infer that he will
come in human shape before the day of Judgment. But what will Mr. Rodon say, to
what is said, Act. 23. v. 11. The night following, the Lord stood by him and
said be of good cheer, Paul. Was not that in human shape upon Earth, since the
Ascension, and before the day of Judment? And did not St. Paul by his appearing
so to him, prove his Resurrection?

To his fifth Instance: I answer. sacrifices that take away all sins by way of
ransom for them ought not to be reiterated, as that of the Cross, I grant.
Sacrifices which only take away Sins by way of Application of ransom given for
them in the Sacrifice of the Cross, ought not to be reiterated, as that of the
Mass, I deny. And in this those two Sacrifices differ the one being by way of
Ransom in a Bloody manner; the other by way of commemoration for an application
of what was purchased to us by the Sacrifices of the Cross: as if a Child who,
to move the King to give him something promised for his fathers sake, should
show the King his Father's Corselet through which he was shot defending his
Majesty's person. Hence gather that the fruit and efficacy of the Sacrifice of
the Cross dures for ever, affording us for ever the ransom of which more or
less is applied to men by every Mass; but the Sacrifice of the Cross alone
without any thing done by men is not sufficient for our complete and actual
Sanctification: as appears in the Elect who are not Sanctified at least before
they make an act of Faith.

So when St. Paul says Hebr. 10. v. 14. without one oblation he consumated for
ever them that are sanctified, is to be understood as much as was required of
him as redeamour, or on his side, that is, in actu primo, in a readiness for
application to be made by us, but not inactu secundo, actually applying his
merits, which is done by Baptism, the Sacraments, of Penance and Eucharist, and
(in the Protestants mind) by Faith.

To his last instance or 16 Numb. Saying That Christ was constituted high
Priest for ever.

I Answer. 1. Where there is a High Priest there is also a Low Priest, for High
and Low are correlatives and a Low Priest must have his Sacrifice: No other but
that of the Mass then it is a Sacrifice.

Answer. 2. That Christ has an unchangeable Preisthood, that he is able to
save etc. and that Peter did not succeed to him as Eleazarus succeeded to
Aaron, viz. in an equal degree of dignity of Preist-hood, Nay St. Peter was
not his successor, yet he was his Vicar supplying his place upon earth, as a
Lieutenant does that of his Captain being absent, which does not hinder Christ
to be at the same time High-Preist, and High Priest for ever.

To his reply to our distinctions and saying that the Sacrifice of the Mass
differs essentially from the Sacrifice of the Cross, because the natural death
of Christ is of the essence of this.

Answer. That if he takes the Sacrifice of the Mass reduplicatively as the
Sacrifice of the Mass, it differs essentially from the Bloody Sacrifice of the
Cross, though Christ, who is the dignifying part in both the Sacrifices be
offered in both.

So Album as Album formally and reduplicatively taken differs essentially from
the wall which is white; because white enters necessarily into the conception
of a white thing and not into the conception of the wall. So a Sacrifice
offered only by way of application, differs essentially from the same thing
offered by way of ransom; because Ransom enters the conception of the one, and
Application the conception of the other. But the Council of Trent does not take
it so, but that the same Christ is offered in both: neither will the Council
have it a mere representation of the Sacrifice of the Crosss, as a picture
represents the King; for, the same Christ is really offered in the Mass who was
offered on the Cross, though not in the same manner, nor precisely for the same
end: neither is it a mere application for the same reason.

Does a young Prince representing unto his Father upon a stage how he faught in
the field differ as to his essence or natural being from himself in the field?
No, but only in the manner of being or representative being. And so what is
offered in the Mass differs not essentially from what was offered on the Cross.

You Will say: the Sacrifice of the Cross is of an infinite value and has force
to take away all sins, and therefore there is no need to reiterate it in the
Mass.

I Answer. distinguishing the antecedent in actu primo, that is, in a power
applyable, I grant, in actu secundo, that is, in a power applied, I deny. I
hope Mr. Rodon will not say the Sacrifice of the Cross takes away all Sin in
actu secundo, that is, actually applies Christ's merits to all men: for so
there would be no reprobate, none damned. I pass over things answered before.
Note. 1. we bring no more water from the Well then our vessel will hold, tho
there be more in the well, so the Mass is of more or less profit fit to the
Priest according to his disposition and capacity.

Note. 2. Sins remitted by the Sacrifice of the Mass were expiated by the
Sacrifice of the Cross in actu primo, but the expiation was not yet applied in
actu secundo, and this is done in the Sacrifice of the Mass A number of such
objections you may easily solve by what I have said before in this chapter.

Mr. Rodon says the application of the Cross may be considered on God's part
and Man's part: on God's part when he offers Jesus Christ to us withal his
benefits both in his words and Sacraments: on Man's part, when by a true lively
faith working by love we embrace Jesus Christ with all his merits offered to us
both in his word and Sacraments.

Answer. First, we find Christ offered for us. Luke. 22. and that was the first
Sacrifice of the Mass.

Secondly. On God's part all was done by Jesus Christ's offering; on our part,
our application is indeed by faith operating by good works, one of which is our
assistance and offering with the Priests in the Sacrifice of the Mass: The
Plaster indeed for our Spiritual wounds is Christ's Body and Blood, the
application is made by says joined to good works, of which the chief is the
Sacrifice of the Mass. but to believe only, as I have said so often, is not a
sufficient recourse or application of our Spiritual Plaster, or a sufficient
laying of it on our wound. Not every on who says Lord Lord etc. Math. 7. v.
21. Faith is only a condition requisite with the works.

Mr. Rhodon remarks that S. John chap. 3. does not say whosoever sacrifices him
viz. Christ, in the Mass, but whosoever believes, etc. shall have life
everlasting.

Answer. Whosoever believes as he should do, I grant; for such an one will also
do what Christ commanded to be done; if he be a Priest he will offer the
Sacrifice of the Mass. If he precisely believes and no more, which may be done,
I deny: he who only cries upon Christ Lord, Lord, believ's Christ dyed for him,
otherwise he would not call him Lord; yet he will not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, because he does not add to his belief good works, or do the will of
the Eternal Father. Math. 7. v. 21. I also heartily bold with St. Paul that God
has set forth Jesus Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his Blood,
and that says in the Blood of Christ is the beginning and disposition to
propitiation to our Sins, Snitium substantiae, as he terms it Hebr. 3. v. 14.
The beginning of our spiritual subsisting, but it alone will not do the turn;
so this does not exclude the Sacrifice of the mass so much spoken of in other
places.

To S. Thomas his authority p. 3. quest. 83. art. 1. I Answer. 1. We are sure
St. Thomas of Aquin believed that i^^ he Mass is made a true and proper
Sacrifice since in his Rhyme upon the Mass on Corpus Christi day he speaks thus
Docti sacris institutis panem Vinum in Salutis cansecramus Hostiam. that is,
being taught by sacred institutions we consecrate Bread and Wine into an Host
of Salvation. It Is known that an Host relates to sacrifice.) Again in the same
he says Dogma datur Christianis quod in Carnem transit Panis and Vinum in
sanguinem, that is, It Is a decree received among Christians that the Bread is
changed into Flesh and the Wine into Blood.

2. In the conclusion of his tenth article, P. 3. quest. 82. he tells Priests,
they must celebrate on the chief feasts principally in order to God, to whom
Sacrifice is offered in the Celebration of the Eucharist, warning them of what
is said to Priests. 2. Machab. 4. v. 14. Ita ut sacerdotes etc. So that Priests
did not apply themselves now to their duty about the Altar but flighting the
Temple and neglecting the Sacrifices etc.

3. St. Thomas in the conclusion of the cited article by Mr. Rodon assigns two
ways by which the Mass may be called a Sacrifice. The first, because it
represents the Sacrifice of the Cross, as the Picture of Cicero. The second,
because by this Sacrament we are made participant of the fruit of our Lord's
Passion. As to the first, says he, Christ was Sacrificed in the Figures of the
old Law, for example, in the slaughter of Abel, ( viz. representatively only.)
But as to the second it is proper to the Sacrament quod in ejus celebratione
Christus immoletur, because in its celebration Christ is immolated. Note, he
was immolated improperly in the first, then, that the second may be
distinguished from the first, in it he is Sacrificed properly. And ad 2. in the
same article he says we must say, that as the celebration of this Sacrament is
a representative Image of the passion of Christ, so the Altar is a
representative of the Cross t In which Christ in his own form was immolated.
Note that Altar in the Mass relates to a Sacrifice. So if Mr. Rodon will
subscribe to St. Thoma's Doctrine touching the Mass he will acknowledge both
that in it Bread and Wine are changed into the Flesh and Blood, ( viz. of
Christ) and that it is a true Sacrifice in which he is Sacrificed in an other's
shape or the Form of Bread.

Quaeres 1. Ought not a living thing, when it is Sacrificed, to be killed?

Answer. Yes, if it be Sacrificed in its own Form, not if in an other Form, as
Christ in the Form of Bread.

Quaeres 2. Why the Church in the Latin Translation of these words of St. Luke,
This is the Cup in my Blood, which is shed for you, puts, shall be shed for you?

Answer. To comply with the Intention of Christ, who so offered his Blood at
the last Supper, that he would have it daily offered, thenceforth as a
commemorative Sacrifice of his Passion, to keep us in mind of his precious
Death, Do this in remembrance of me. Item, because we have it so in the Form of
Consecration of that Sacrament instituted by our Savior, and conveyed by
Apostolical tradition down to us. So, is shed, and, shall be shed, are both
true. Our Savior who conversed with, and instructed his Apostles forty days,
between his Resurrection and Ascension, of things belonging to his Church,
could best tell them his mind.

An OBJECTION, Omitted in the II Section of the 7. Chap.
Object. IF God's Justice be now satisfied for sin by the destruction of
Christ's Sacramental being only, whereas before it was not satisfied for sin
without the Destruction of his natural being, his Justice will not be always
the same: Therefore the Justice of God is not now satisfied for sin by the
Destruction of Christ's Sacramental being, and consequently the Sacrifice of
the Mass is not propitiatory for the Sins of the Living and the Dead.

Answer. If God's Justice be now satisfied for sin by the Destruction of
Christ's Sacramental being as a Ransom for sin, I grant that his Justice will
not be the same, if he be satisfied with it; not as with a Ransom, but as an
application of the Ransom for sin, I deny that his Justice will not be always
the same.

And as Protestants think that God's Justice is always the same, although they
Judge, that it is satisfied with their Faith and Repentance as an application
of the Ransom given for them by the Death of Christ, and that it would not be
satisfied without them on their side, (for they don't hold that the Sacrifice
of the Cross, without any more a do suffices for the actual Remission of all
the sins of the Elect, but moreover they require Faith and Repentance in them,)
so we think also that it is always the same, although we Judge that it is
satisfied with our Faith and Repentance, and other good works, and especially
by the Sacrifice of the Mass, as an application of the Ransom given for us on
the Cross.

CHAPTER VIII.
A reply to Mr. Rodon's answers to some of our Proofs, both for the Real
presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, and the Sacrifice of the Mass.

SECTION. I. For the Real Presence. Our first Proof.
OUr Proof that these words, This is my Body: This is my Blood, should be taken
in their proper sense, and not figuratively is this, because men, ( viz. wise
men, such as eminently Christ was,) making their Testament, speak plain.

Mr. Rodon, to usher in more smoothly his answer, says first, That Articles of
Faith and Sacraments, are not always expressed in proper terms, and busies
himself to answer that which is not so much as thought upon to be denied, much
less Objected. Then he says: I answer, that in H. Scripture, Testaments are
not always expressed in proper terms without a figure; for the Testament of
Jacob, Genesis 49. and Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. are nothing but a chain of Metaphors and
other figures; and Civilians will have, that in Testaments we should not regard
the proper signification of the words, but the intention of the Testator.

I reply: What he brings for Testaments in those places are Prophecies of Jacob
and Moses, not Testaments: Nay, after Jacob had foretold all, the text adds
he blessed every one with their proper blessings, of which in particular the
Scripture is silent, and ordered them to bury him in the Field of Ephon.

Secondly, suppose they had been Testaments there was a special reason for
speaking in covered terms; first, because they were at least also Prophecies,
which the Holy Ghost would not have yet clearly understood by every one, but
that they should have their recourse to the Priests for the understanding of
them; thus keeping the People in humility, and the Governors of the Church in
Authority. Next, there was no danger of any one's loosing his right by others
misunderstanding of the words, because Jacob and Moses were infallibly sure
of God's promise. But in Christ's Testament there was a reason of making the
words clear, to encourage men to be earnest to get what he had left them.

As to the saying of Civilians, That in Testaments we should not regard the
proper signification of the words, but the Intention of the Testator.

I Answer, the reason is, because it falls out sometimes, that Testaments
conceaved in proper words are ambiguous; for example; suppose a man who has
two Nephews, one the Son of a Poor man, to whom he always testified Love above
the other, who was the Son of a Rich man, should Test thus: I leave 100. lib.
to my Nephew: Here the Intention of the Testator is to be attended, and by this
adjudged to the poor Nephew by reason of his singular affection to him; although
the proper signification of the word pleads as much for the other.

If you ask me, how in the best conceived Testaments there may be some thing
ambiguous?

I answer with Aristotle, because, Res sunt innumerae and pauca verba, that is,
Things are without number but words are few, and so by one word we must
signify many things.

He urges: Christ did not then make the new Testament, but only the sign of it,
for the Covenant was made with all mankind in the Person of Adam after the
fall, when God promised him that the seed of the Woman should break the
Serpent's Head; and was after renewned in Abraham.

Answer. First. Whatsoever was made in the Old Law, is not that which our
Savior in the Ghospel calls the New Testament, for all that was Old, when he
spoke: Nay, the New Testament was not the same Covenant made in the Person of
Adam, for if the New Testament was made with Adam, and renewed with Abraham, I
ask who was that before Adam with whom the Old Testament was made? Item,
different conditions make a different Covenant. Now, to believe in CHRIST COME
and TO USE HIS SACRAMENTS are conditions which were not in the former.

Secondly, I deny that he did not make at the last Supper his New Testament,
because, as by God, Exodus 24. the Old Testament was made, or his will of giving
to the Jews the Land of Canaan, if they kept his commandments and ceremonies
prescribed by him; was made, I say, and signed with the Blood of Beasts, Hic
est sanguis faederis quod pepigit vohiscum Deus: This is the Blood of the
Covenant which the Lord has made with you. Said Moses: so Christ by the
effusion of his Blood in a Sacrifice, (for Liquid things are offered by
Effusion) made and signed his New Testament of giving us spiritual things and a
heavenly inheritance, if we keep his Commandments, and use the Sacraments
instituted by him.

And now I prove that he made it here and no where else: Because here, and no
where else he fulfilled the conditions required in a Testator making his
Testament.

First, he signified that he was making his Testament in these words, This Cup
is the New Testament in my Blood, Luke 22.

Secondly, he promised and left some thing to his Inheritors, he promised
Remission of Sins to his Apostles, and many, or to the Jews in the word vobis,
and to the Gentiles in the word multis, so called, because they were truly many
in respect of the little number of the Jews; and left them his Body and Blood to
be offered for that end.

Thirdly, he ordered some thing to be done by his Inheritors, viz. That they
should love one another: As God in the Old Testament proposed by Moses the
Commands of the Law.

Fourthly, He did it before witnesses, viz. the Representative Church, or all
the Apostle, who knew he was making his Testament.

Fifthly, Here he was in a living condition at the signing of his Testament,
not so at the Cross. Hence avow, that at our Lords Supper the New Testament was
made, and the figure of the Old fulfilled.

Quaeres. Did he speak plain when he said, Drink ye all of this Cup?

Answer. Grant he did not, that was not of the essence of the Sacrament: Next,
a figurative speech, so commonly used, that it would be odd to understand it
otherwise then in the sense of the speaker, is aequivalent to a proper speech.
CUP, has two significations by the institution of men: Taken alone, it
signifies a certain Vessel; joined to DRINK, it signifies the thing contained.

Note: Although we say he spoke without figure in instituting this Sacrament, as
it is set down by St. Matthew, who alone of all the Evangelists, that relate to
us the institution, was present: We do not say that he spoke always so.

Obj. The Apostles asked Christ the meaning of Parables, why did not they ask
the meaning of these words which carried such strange consequences, as one Body
to be in diverse places at once? etc.

Answer. He had cleared them sufficiently by what he said in the 6. Chap. of
St. John, so that St. John having spoken of it there, does not so much as
mention it before his Passion, nor any Disciple seemed to wonder, hearing the
words of the Institution; although many of the Disciples before, Io. 6. v. 61. had
said, This speech is hard, and who can hear it? They were wiser, after they had
heard what he said, Io. 6. than to say with the Capharnaites, How can he give
us his Flesh to Eat? Or with the Protestants, How can he be at once in two
places?

SECTION II. For the Real Presence. Our second Proof.
WE say the Type ought not to be more excellent than the thing Typified, since
S. Paul, Collos. 2. v. 17. compares the Type to a shadow, and the thing
typified to a Body; but if the Eurharist be a mere piece of Bread, the Paschal
Lamb being the Type of it, the Type will be more excellent than the thing
Typified; then the Eucharist is not a piece of Bread.

Mr. Rodon, To avoid this Argument, says, That the thing Typified by the
Paschal Lamb is not the Eucharist, but Christ; as St. Paul shows clearly, says
he, 1 Cor. 5. saying, Christ our Passover was crucified for us.

Answer. 1. Should I rely upon Mr. Rodon's sentiment against the Judgment of
the Fathers? Tertul. lib. 4. in Marcionem. Cyprian lib. de unitate Eccles.
Hierom. in cap. 26. Math. Chrysos. Homil. de Prodit. Iudae. August. lib. 2.
contra Literas Petiliani cap. 37. saying, Aliud est, says he there, Pascha
quod Iudaei de Ove celebrant, aliud quod nos in Corpore and Sanguine Domini
accipimus. I bring only the Passage of St. Aug. a Father of great Authority
with Protestants, for brevities sake. The Passover that the Jews celebrated in
a Lamb, was different from that we take in the Body and Blood of our Lord. Here
he calls the Body and Blood of our Lord the Passover.

And this Sentiment of his and the other Fathers, has its great ground out of
the Ghospel, Math. 26. and Luc. 22. Because our Lord, for no other cause
instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist after he had eaten the Paschal Lamb
according to the Iudaick rite and Ceremony, but that he might signify, as S.
Leo sermon. 7. de Pas. remarks, That the Old observation (or Figure) was
fulfilled and taken away by the New Testament. When the Legal Festivity is
changed, says he, it is fulfilled.

Answer. 2. The Paschal Lamb may be considered; First, as killed only, and so
it is a figure of Christ's Death.

Secondly, as 1. Immolated. 2. And eaten. 3. The 14 day. 4. In the evening, 5.
Within the House; and so its a Figure not of Christ's Death, but of the
Eucharist, or his Body Sacrificed or given for us. Luhe 22. And eaten, the 14.
day, in the evening; (for he died the 15. day, being the Full Moon,) and eaten
only by those who are within the Church, or the House of God, Exodus 12. v. 46.
Whereas the Passion of Christ extends to all men, to those who are within, and
to those who are out of the Church, that they may come in. See S. Cypr. lib. de
unit. Eccles.

Note, St. Paul does not say, 1 Cor. 5. v. 7. Our Passover Christ was
Crucified, but Immolated, Greek Ethutee, that is, Sacrificed. He adds v. 9. Let
us keep the Feast, etc. with the unleavened Bread of sincerity and Truth. This
relates to eating, indeed we keep the solemn Feast of our Passover by eating
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which was first instituted and made for us at
our Lords Supper.

Object 1. The Types of the Old Testament were instituted, that the Faithful of
those times might come to the knowledge of the things Typisied and signified in
the New; but those of the Old Testament never came to the knowledge of the
Eucharist by the Paschal Lamb; then the Paschal Lamb was not a Type of it.

Answer. They were not instituted only for that reason, but also, that we in
the New Law might understand that we are one and the same Church with them,
they having had at least in Figure, and consequently an obscure knowledge of
what we have in reality: And so the Paschal Lamb was a Figure of the Eucharist,
although the Jews came not by it to a knowledge of the Eucharist.

Ob. 2. The Passover was a Type, and the Eucharist is also a Type of Christ,
Therefore, if the Passover had been a Type of the Eucharist, it had been a Type
of a Type, and not of a thing Typified.

Answer. A bare Type may be the Type of that which is not a bare Type. So the
Paschal Lamb was a Type of the Eucharist, which in one respect is the thing
Typified, and in an other the Type: The thing Typified in respect of the
Paschal Lamb; and a Type in respect of Christ's Death, which it represents. So
also the Paschal Lamb was in one respect a true Sacrifice, and in an other it
was the Type of the Sacrifice of Christ made in the Eucharist, and on the Cross.

The nullity of Mr. Rodon's answer to St. Rigau's Proof which he looks upon as
our third Proof may be seen in my Chapter 4. Sect. 1.

SECTION III. For the Real Presence. Our fourth Proof.
GOD can put two Bodies in one place; then he may put one Body in two places,
or at once in Heaven, and in the Host. The antecedent is proven by Christ's
entering into the Canacle of the Apostles, the doors being shut. Io. 20. v. 19.

Mr. Rodon's answer, is to explane those words, thus, The doors having been
shut, which explication suffers the opening of them; again, to let Christ in.
But that which annull's all his frivolous explications of those words, is, that
the Greek Original text has thuroon kekleismenoon, in the Genetive absolute,
the doors being shut: and the English Protestant Translation, has, when the
doors were shut came Jesus: Both which import a simultaneus entry of Jesus with
the door's being shut: or that Jesus entered while the doors were shut, and
consequently, two Bodies were penetratively in the same place.

2. Christ came out of his Blessed Mother's womb without opening it; but Mr.
Rodon for certain assures the contrary, because Luke 2. he was presented to the
Lord, as is written in the Law, every male that opens the womb, Luke 2. v. 23.
But let me ask: Because Christ submitted himself to the Law, was he subject to
the Law? Because he took upon him Circumcision the mark of a Sinner, was he a
Sinner? No more had he opened his Mother's Womb, although he was presented to the
Lord. Must we degrade the Mother of God of the title of a Virgin; or go from
the common notion of a Virgin to ply to Mr. Rodon's Faithless imagination?

3. Was not Christ risen before St. Mary Magdalen, said, who will roll away the
Stone, Mark. 16? And consequently, in rising penetrating it, was in the same
place with the Stone,

3. St. Paul says, Hebr. 4. That Jesus Christ penetrated the Heavens, and
consequently the Heavens and his Body were in one and the same place. Mr. Rodon
answers: That is to be understood improperly, that is, that the Heavens gave
way to his Body as the Air to an Arrow. But I reply: The Holy Scripture is to
be taken in the litteral sense, when so taken (as here,) it implies no
contradiction, nor any thing against Faith, or good manners. Moreover St. Paul
spoke so, to let us know, that Penetrability or subtility, is one of the Gifts
or Endowments of a Glorious Body. Mr. Rodon is not of that Authority, to make
his bare word be taken against the sentiment of all the Orthodox Divines.

Mr. Rodon objects Numb. 15. That a modal accident (in the opinion of those
Romish Doctors who hold them) cannot be without a subject; therefore the
Species of Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, cannot be without a Subject.

Answer. I deny the consequence, because the Modal Accident, in the opinion of
those who hold them; is jultima rei determinatio, it ultimatly determines its
Subect; and consequently when it exists, it is with its Subject: But other
Accidents, as the Species of Bread or Wine as Color, Savor, etc. do not
ultimately or actually determine a Subject, but only have naturally an appetite
to be in a Subject; so Fire naturally has an appetite to burn, yet, by Divine
power its actual burning was hindered in the Furnace of Babylon.

SECTION IV. For the Sacrifice of the Mass. Our first Proof.
TO Mr. Rhodon's answer to our first Proof for the Sacrifice of the Mass out of
the Prophet Malachy, I reply in my 7 Chap. Subs. 4. where I deduce that proof
at length.

What he says about the word New offering is out of purpose, for we have not
that word in our Bible, but only Oblatio munda, a pure offering. Only let his
Defender take notice; that Sacrifices are not acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, unless the Offerers be living stones, or living members of his Church
by Grace, 1. Pet. cap. 2. v. 5. And not that every abominable sinner who breaks
the Commandments of God, tho he believe in Christ, may think his Sacrifice will
be accepted, so he offer it by Jesus Christ. No, God hates the impious, Prove.
15. So far he is from accepting their offering. And Christ says, Not every one
that says to me Lord, Lord, this I repeat often to imprint it well in
Protestants mind (such believe in him, otherways they would not call him Lord)
shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven, but who does the will of my Father, Math.
7.2. Christ is not a coverer of iniquity that still remains in the heart of
the sinner.

SECTION V. For the Sacrifice of the Mass. Our second Proof.
WHich Mr. Rodon answers, is taken from these words. Melchisedech King of Salem
bringing forth Bread and Wine (for he was a Breist of God the most High)
blessed him, Genesis 14.18.

From these words according to the unanimous consent of Greek and Latin Fathers
whose passages you may read in Bellarm. lib. 1. de missa. chap. 6. We say 1.
That Melchisedech Sacrificed there, 2. That the chief difference between the
Sacrifice of Aaron, and that of Melchisedech made there, was in this, that
Aaron's was Bloody, and Melchisedech's Unbloody, or in Bread and Wine; and
therefore since Christ, according to David, Psalm. 109. and St. Paul, Hebr. 7.
is called a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, and not after the order of
Aaron, as St. Paul v. 11. expressly intimates, it behoved him to Sacrifice
under the forms of Bread and Wine, as he did at the last Supper, when having
changed a piece of Bread into his Body, he said, This is my Body which is given
(that is, offered) for you, and This is the Cup the New Testament in my Blood
which is poured out (that is Sacrificed) for you, Luke 22. And consequently the
oblation which is made in the Mass (it being the same with that which Christ
made at the last Supper) is a true Sacrifice.

An other difference taken from the Person Sacrificrificing, is that
Melchisedech neither succeeded to any in his Presstly dignity, being without
Father and Mother in order to his Preist-hood which he had not carnally by
right of Inheritance, but was the first of that order, neither had he a
Successor, as Aaron had Eleazer, and in this he was a Type of Christ a Priest
for ever.

Mr. Rhodon to weaken this our Argument for the Sacrifice of the Mass, from
these words, Genes. 14. Melchisedech King of Salem bringing forth Bread and
Wine, (for he was a Priest of God the most High) blessed him. Says, we falsify
the Text in three places putting the Participle Bringing for brought, the
causal For for And. and leaving out another And.

Answer. I freely avow, our Translation does not follow the Hebrew Text word
for word. Is a Translator bound to more than the true, and full sense of what
he Translates? May not he change an active Verb into a Passive, a Verb into a
Participle, etc. If I should translate the French, Jay froid, thus, I have
cold, would not I be rediculous to an English man who says, I am cold? Do not
the Grecians who are lovers of Participles say hansomely by a Participle, that
which in Latin we say by a Verb? St. Ierom then knowing the meaning of the H.
Ghost in that Passage, by the sentiment of the Church and all the H. Fathers,
did not stick to the words in his Latin Translation, but gives us neatly the
sense. But Protestants in their Translation disturb the sense, making the words
and was a Priest relate to and he blessed him, whereas they relate to the words
going before, and therefore we turn this Particle Vau, which signifies both For
and and, For. Now here is the reason why the words For, or And he was a Priest
relate to the former words, viz. Brought forth Wine and Bread, because in the
Hebrew Text after these words For, or And he was a Priest is put the accent,
which the Hebrews call Soph Pasuch, which signifies that the period is ended
there.

Note, more over 1. It makes the same sense whether you say, Bringing forth
Bread he blessed him, or He brought forth bread (viz. to Sacrifice) because he
was a Priest) and blessed him.

Note, 2. The word proferens bringing, or according to the Hebrew word hotsi,
that is, brought, tho of it self signifies nothing but bringing or brought, yet
oftentimes for the exigence of the place it is used to signify the bringing of
the Host to be Sacrificed: as Iud 6.18. And we take it so here, for the reason
I Will bring by and by in the sixth note.

Note, 3. Although the Hebrew has Vau, that is And he was a Priest that makes
nothing; because Vau is taken most frequently, as Ballarmine remarks for the
causal ki, that is, for, or because, as Psalm. 95.5. The Sea is his AND he made
it, St. Jerome turns, BECAUSE he made it. And Isa. 64. v. 5. Thou art angry
AND we have sinned, says the Hebrew and Greek and Latin, tho the Protestant
Bible translates For, that is, because we have sinned. And Genesis 20. v. 3. Thou
art but a dead Man for the Woman's sake which thou have taken FOR she is a
Man's Wife: the Hebrew has Vau i. e. And she is married to a Husband.

And he blessed him, viz. Melchisedech blessed Abraham, not as a Priest, but as
a greater Person, for Abraham was also a Priest and had often Sacrificed. Item
Salom. 3. Reg. 8. blessed the People although he was not a Priest, but because he
was a greater person; ( Hebr. 7. v. 7. The less is blessed of the better.)
Priest then here relates to Sacrifice, and not to Blessed Him.

You Object in these words Blessed Him the Relative Him relates to the Person
to whom the Bread was offered; but 'twas Abraham he blessed; then the Bread was
offered only to Abraham, not to God, and consequently there was no Sacrifice.

Answer. Him relates etc. to whom the Bread was offered first or Sacrificed by
crumbling a little of it on the fire, I deny, to whom the Bread was offered by
a second action to make him participant of the Sacrifice, I grant: So Christ
first offered his Body and Blood to his Father, which after he offered or gave
to his Disciples.

Note 4. When Bellarmin does not deny that Melchisedech brought Bread and Wine
to refresh Abraham, it is not to be understood Corporally (for they had no need
of that, being refreshed immediately before) but Spiritually, by making them
participant of the Sacrifice, ut de Sacrificio participarent, says Bellarm.

Understand, the Jews of whom St. Jerome writes to Evagrius, in the same sense,
and Joseph and Damascen when they say that Melchisedech brought Bread and Wine
to refresh Abraham and his people, vix. spiritually: as those words of Damascen
intimate lib' 4. de fide. chap. 14. Mensa illa (Melchisedech) Mysticam hanc
(speaking of the Eucharist) adumbrabat, that is, That Table (of Melchisedech)
represented this, (viz. of the Eucharist) mystical one. Or if this does not
please you, remember that David was refreshed corporally with the Loaves of
proposition which had been offered to God, so Melchisedech might have refreshed
them with the Bread and Wine after he had offered both to God. 1. Samuel. chap.
21. v. 6.

Note 5. Howsoever St. Ciprian and St. August. translate that passage. And he
was a Priest, or For he was a Priest; it is clear they hold that Melchisedech
offered there Bread and Wine in a Sacrifice, St, Ciprian lib. 2. Epist. 3. ad
Caecil. after he had cited those words of the Psalm, Thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech, he adds Qui ordo utique est de Sacrificio illo
quod Melchisedech Sacerdos Dei summi fuit quod panem and vinum obtulit, quod
Abraham benedixit. Nam quis magis sacerdos Dei summi quam Dominus noster Jesus?
qui Sacrificium Deo Pairi obtulit and obtulit hoc idem quod Melchisedech
obtulerat, i. e. Panem and Vinum, suum, viz. Corpus and sanguinem. i. e. Which
order certainly was of that Sacrifice, viz. that Melchisedech was Priest of God
most high, that he offered Bread and Wine. etc. And St. Aug. Epist. 95. ad
Innoc. Papam. which he writes in his own Name, and in the Name of other
Bishops, he says Melchisedech prolato Sacramento Mensae Dominicae novit
aeternum ejus Sacerdotium figurare. That is, Melchisedech having brought forth
the Sacrament of our Lords Table knew to represent his eternal Preist-hood. And
lib. 16. de Civit. Dei. cap. 22. speaking of the Oblation of Melchesedech; Ibi,
says he, first appeared the Sacrifice which is now offered by Christians to God
all the world over.

To return to the word hotsi. Note 6. that there is a necessity to give the
same signification to the word hotsi here, that it has Jud. 6. For this is the
necessity, because we have no other place in Scripture telling us what was the
Sacrifice of Melchisedech as it is condistinguished from that of Aaron: and
therefore there was an obligation to translate the Hebrew particle Vau, which
signifies both And and FOR, for and not AND, bringing so the reason wherefore
he brought Bread and Wine, viz. to offer them to God before he gave them to
Abraham and his people, to make them participant of the Sacrifice.

Note. 7. It Is not probable that St. Jerome's latin translation of this passage
for he was a Priest is corupted, because in his Hebrew questions and in his
Epistle, to Evagrius he translates and he was a Priest, because he is to be
judged to have wrote with more application and exactness his Translation of the
Bible, which, if approved, was for the whole Church and to be read till the end
of the world, than his answers to some particular questions or to a missive
Letter.

And, since Mr. Rhodon avows here Number. 25. that the Hebrew particle, viz. Vau
used by Moses does sometimes signify FOR, and St. Jerome had two reasons
obliging him to turn it so there, 1. To show what Melchisedech's Sacrifice was
(which we have no where else.)

2. To show that Christ was a Priest for ever according to that order, viz. by
his Sacrificing under the forms of Bread and wine till the end of the world,
how can he say that it is a manifest falsification? to me its a manifest
falsification in him when he says in the same Number. that the greek septuagint
translate it as Protestants do, and he was a Priest; for the London Edition of
the Septuagint 1653. by Roger Daniel has even de hiereus but or for he was a
Priest, not and he was a Preistj for the particle de signifies not only but;
but also gar, that is, for in good English as Henricus Stephanus tell us in his
Greek Dictionary when he comes to that particle. to tell the truth I have not
by me the old Latin interpreter to see his expression, and therefore I will not
contradict Mr. Rodon in that.

If you say Christ is a Priest for ever because he remains for ever.

I Answer. That remaining for ever makes him capable to do the function of a
Priest for ever be being a Priest, but that alone does not make him a Priest
for ever, no more then it makes an Angel, who will remain for ever, a Priest
for ever.

Neither can you say that he is a Priest for ever because the virtue of his
Sacrifice on the Cross remains for ever. For the virtue of the Sacrifice of
Noe which obtained that no more deluge should come upon the Earth for ever
Genes. 8. so remains or dures for ever, yet I hope you will not say that Noe
is a Priest for ever.

Would you say at the death of a man, whom the King makes Lord Chief Justice,
and deprives him of his office at the years end, he living yet 19. years after,
he was Lord Chief Justice 20. years? No; because he did the function of a Chief
Justice only one year.

No more could we say that Christ is a Priest for ever, if he did not do the
function of a Priest for ever. And the function of a Priest, according to St.
Paul, Hebr. 8. v. 3. is to offer: every High Priest is ordained to offer Gifts
and Sacrifices, wherefore it is of necessity that this man (viz. Christ) have
some what also to offer. He speak's not here of intercession, as if it were the
proper partial function of a Priest, by reason of which Mr. Rodon would have
Christ called a Priest for ever.

If you say with Calvin, lib. 4. Inst. cap. 18. he offers himself in Heaven. I
ask; is that oblation made in Heaven a proper Sacrifice? If so, then the
Christian Religion is no more upon Earth but translated to Heaven, because The
Preist-hood being translated, there is made of necessity says St. Paul, Hebr.
7. v. 11. A translation also of the Law.

Note 8. Christ is not called a Priest for ever because he intercedes for ever;
for to intercede is common to a Priest and other men: but because he Sacrifices
for ever. That is, to the end of the World the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, of
which he is the chief offerer.

Note 9. Although it was not necessary we should know how Melchisedeth executed
his Kingly Office, yet is was necessary we should know how he exercised his
Preist-hood; because he is not mentioned to have had aspecial Kingship, but he
is mentioned to have had a special Preist-hood. And because no mention is made
in the Scriptures of the end of his Preisthood more than of the end of his
Life, he is called in them a Priest for ever, and in that, a figure of Christ's
Preisthood for ever, but not that he was truly a Priest for ever, as Christ.
So he is said to have been without a Father or Mother, not, that truly he was
so, but only without Parents mentioned in the Scripture.

Mr. Rodon in his last answer number. 28. says, its false that the difference
between the Preist-hood of Melchisedech, and that of Aaron did consist in this,
viz. that Aaron offered the bloody Sacrifices of Beasts, and Melchisedech
offered an unbloody Sacrifice of Bread and Wine; Also he says its false, that
the likeness of the Preist-hood of Melchisedech to that of JESUS does consist
in this, viz. That as Melchisedech did Sacrifice Bread and Wine; so JESUS did
Sacrifice his Body and Blood, under the Species of Bread and Wine. And that
these are human inventions, neither founded on Scripture or Reason.

Answer. They are not human inventions, since they are grounded on Scripture,
as the Church and Fathers interpret it; against whose Authority, if Mr. Rodon
thinks his bare assertion is of sufficient force, I may say in French, Mr.
Rodon radote, or deviats from the right tract. As to that he says, That the
Apostle writing to the Hebrews places the difference between the Preist-hood of
Melchisedech and that of Aaron, and its likeness to that of Christ in quite
another thing then in that we allege; this I deny, and grant, that he places
the difference of the Person of Melchisedech from that of Aaron, and some
likeness of the Person of Melchisedech with that of CHRIST, in quite an other
thing, but not the difference of the Preist-hood of Melchisedech from that of
Aaron, or the likeness of the Priest hood of Melchisedech to that of JESUS in
other things, than those which are asserted by the Roman Church. St. Paul is
here silent of both, as to their formal difference or likness, for a reason
which I shall bring by and by.

By this that Melchisedech receives tithes from Abraham and blesses him, he is
declared by the Apostle to be a greater Person then Abraham, but by this is not
signified the difference of his Preist-hood from that of Aaron and others, who
were yet in the Loins of Abraham; by that also that he was a King, and a King
of Peace, the greater likeness of his Person than that of Aarons, to CHRIST, is
intimated, but not the likeness of his Preist-hood.

If you ask me why the Apostle does not here assign formally and openly the
difference between the Sacrifice of Melchisedech and that of Aaron: And the
resemblance of Melchisedech's with that of Christ in the Eucharist.

My answer is, that the controversy between the incredulous Jews and St. Paul,
was not about that difference or resemblance, (and besides by reason of their
incredulity and weakness, they were not capable of understanding the Mystery of
the Eucharist) but whither or no all the Sacrifices of Aaron and his order were
sufficient for the general redemption and satisfaction for the Sins of all
mankind; and he answers, no, and says, that they had need of a greater
Sacrifice, viz. that of the Cross, and a greater Person to be Priest, figured
by Melchisedech, who was eminently above Abraham, and all the Order of Aaron,
and who was to be a Priest for ever, viz. by the proper act of Preist-hood,
that is, was to Sacrifice till the end of the World, (which is not done by a
perpetual intercession, unless it be joined to a Sacrifice and so makes one
thing with it, for a pure Intercession is not the proper act of a Priest.) And
this was foretold by David, Psalm. 109. Thou art a Priest for ever after the
Order of Melchisedech.

Yet he intimated the difference of Melchisedechs Sacrifice from that of Aaron
sufficiently to the Faithful, ( Sapientia pauca, a word suffices to those who
know the thing already,) when he spoke of his Preist-hood, condistinguished
from that of Aaron (because a special Preist-hood cannot be conceived without
the special Sacrifice to which it has a reference.

Note 1. It Is indifferent to Preist-hood to have been a King or not: to have
one's Birth mentioned or not; also it is not the proper act of Preist-hood to
bless, but only because Preist-hood is a dignity above all human dignity,
therefore it is given to the Priest to Bless, his proper act being to Sacrifice.

Note 2. From these words of St. Paul, If then consummation was by the
Levitical Preist-hood, (for under it the People received the Law,) that the
People of God were made a Lawful Community under God by the Preist-hood, by
means of which they adored God as he desired: so that the Preist-hood
altering, the Law altered, they being annexed or tied together.

Note 3. The Old Preist-hood and its Sacrifices were not translated into the
Preist-hood and Sacrifice of the Cross, as the only Preist-hood and Sacrifice
of the New Law; because at this Sacrifice, all People could not be present to
acknowledge God's supreme Dominion all the time of the New Law, as People were
present at the Levitical Sacrifices during the Old Law; so then the Levitical
Prist-hood of which St. Paul, Hebr. 7. v. 12. was translated into the
Preist-hood after the Order of Melchisedech, and the Levitical Sacrifices into
the Sacrifices of the Christian Church made in the Eecharist, as the Mosaic
Law was translated into the Christian Law. Did not the Prophet, Isaiah
foretell. Cap. 61. v. 6. That there should be Priests in the New Law, and can
Priests be without proper Sacrifices? And are there any proper Sacrifices in
the Christian Church if that of the Mass be not a true Sacrifice?

Mr. Rodon concludes his Book with this Argument: Jesus Christ has offered no
Sacrifice, but after the Order whereof he was established a Priest: Hence he
concludes that according to us, he has offered no Sacrifice but that of the
Mass.

Answer. Jesus Christ has offered no Sacrifice for ever, but that of the Mass,
I grant, no other Sacrifice for once, I deny. Again: He was only established a
Priest according to the Order of Melchisedech for ever, I grant: for once, I
deny; and say, that this Order for once, was a special one for the sole
Sacrifice of Redemption. Yet the Sacrifice of the Cross may be also called,
according to the Order of Melchisedech in a good sense, because he who made it
was a Priest after the Order of Melchisedech: As a French Sermon made by an
English man, may be called an English piece, viz. a piece proceeding from an
English man.

The EPILOGVE.
NOw to end this little work, I wish Protestants may weigh the force of our
Proofs in Order to believe, and Catholics meditate the same in Order to be
fervent in the daily practice of what they believe. St. Bonaventure, in his
traitise of the preparation to Mass, will have the Priest come to the Altar,
not only all a fire, but also wholly crucified totus ignitus, says he, and
totus crucifixus: All burning with the Love of this Lovely Lord, possessed with
a strong apprehension of his Death and an equal feeling of his pain. Such pain
in the Priest and all the assisting offerers, may be well joined with an
excessive Joy to see themselves, have a hand in giving God at that moment the
greatest honor all his grandour can receive. If it was a great honor to
Charles the fifth Emperor, landing at the Town of Naples to have had all the
way laid with Cloth of Gold from the Ship to the Palace: What an honor is
given to God, when in this Mystery, not Gold and Silver is trodden underfoot,
but a Divine Person equal to himself is Sacrificed to honor him.

May the offerers look for little from the Person who is honored with such a
Gift? We know the more holy was the sacrificer among the ancient Patriarchs,
and the more Noble was his Victime, the more favorably was both looked upon by
God: respexit Dominus ad Abel and numera ejus, says Moses, Genesis 4. v. 4. God,
who frowned upon Cain, had a complacence both for the Person of Abel and his
Gifts: Now, what was the sanctity of Abel to that of Jesus, and Abels offering
to his?

What may then they who with a lively faith are present at this Sacrifice
expect from Heaven. since Christ makes over to them, all, with which his father
for this Sacrifice might liberally acknowledge him? see Conc. Trid. Sess. 22.
can. 2. a great measure of grace in order to a full repentance, and a great
remission of pain due to Sin, great lights to discover the more perfect way to
Salvation: great strength to walk and persever therein. But mind always that,
Justus ex fide vivit, as all our spiritual Life springs first from faith, so it
grows not to perfection without the same. Let us then endeavor never to come
to this fountain of all good without a lively one.

To the greater glory of our Savior in this Mystery of his Love to Men.
FINIS.
ERRORS in the Printing. P. stands for the Page; l. for the line of the page.
R. for read.
Page 1. lin. last xpress. R. express P. 7. l. 3. neot. R. note P. 10. l. 28.
sing. R. sign P. 11. l. 3. to. R. too P. 11. l. 4. humon. R. humoon P. 16. l.
19. truth. R. life P. 19. l. 29 after but make ( P. 19. l. 20. after flesh) P.
25. l. 17. neces. R. neces* P. 25. l. 38. wac. R. wa P. 26. l. 4. after food.
put P. 28. l. 15. peternitie. R. paternity P. 32. l. 26. this. R. this P. 41.
l. 29. neigher. R. nigher P. 43. l. 38. pla. R. place P. 84. l. 35. exigenbe.
R. exigence P. 58. l. 29. dwells. R. dwell P. 58. l. 36. his. R. this P. 59. l.
36. invoce. R. invoke P. 61. l. 12. after Silver 1. blot out 2. P. 61. l. 13.
nd. R. and P. 62. l. 15 blot out again P. 65. l. 12. ermanent. r. permanent P.
66. l. 23. cannally. R. carnally P. 66. l. 24. refressed. R. refreshed P. 85.
l. 3. adumbrabant. add Christils P. 86. l. 18. and is. blot out and P. 88. l.
22. stronly. R. strongly P. 88. l 23. leit^urgim. R. leitourgountoon. P. 97. l
4. after cursed add Gal. 1. v. 8. P. 97. l. 18. after Scripture add 1. Io. 4.
v. 1. P. 98. l. 14. R. 1. Io. c. 4. v. 1. P. 98. l. 27. R. 1. Io. 4. v. 6. P.
99. l. 6. R. 1. Io. c. 4. v. 6. P. 101. l. 10. them. R. his Disciples P. 103.
l. 9. hide. R. hid P. 103. l. 15. Fat there is. R. Fathers P. 105. l. 31. ac. R.
as P. 111. l. 14. without. R. with

