THE LIFE OF Mr. THOMAS FIRMIN, Late Citizen of London.

Written by one of his most intimate Acquaintance.

WITH A SERMON On Luke x. 36, 37.

Preached on the occasion of his Death.

Together with an Account of his RELIGION, and of the present State of the
Unitarian Controversy.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by A. Baldwin in Warwicklane. MDCXCVIII.

THE LIFE OF Mr. THOMAS FIRMIN.
THE long Acquaintance, and intimate Friendship, I had with Mr. Firmin, are (I
confess) warrantable Causes, that so many do expect from me, an account of his
(memorable) Life. If some other man would answer the public expectation, with
more Address; as to Expression, Method, number and value of Observations and
Reflections; in a word, more Ambitiously: yet I will not be wanting in
Sincerity, or Truth.

Thomas Firmin was born at Ipswich in Suffolk; in the month of June, Anno 1632.
being the Son of Henry Firmin, and of Prudence his Wife. Henry and Prudence, as
they did not overflow with wealth of the World; so neither was their condition
Low, or Strait. God gave them, the wish of Solomon, neither Poverty nor Riches;
but that middle Estate and Rank, which contains all that is valuable and
desirable in Wealth, without the Gaudery, Vanity and Temptations, that
(generally) adhere to Riches. But these two were very considerable in their
degree, or place, both as to esteem, and plenty; by means of their Sobriety,
Diligence, and good Conduct, the effects of their Piety. They were of the
number of those, who were then called Puritans, by the looser sort of people:
who were wont to impute Precisianism, or affected Puritanism, to such as were
more Devout; and withal, more Conscientious, and Exemplary, than is ordinary;
tho in the way of the Church of England.

When he was of capable years for it, they put their Son (Thomas Firmin) to an
Apprentiship in London; under a Master who was (by Sect or Opinion) an
Arminian, a Hearer of Mr. John Goodwyn. Our young man, accompanying his Master
to the elegant and learned Sermons of Mr. Goodwyn, soon exchanged the (harsh)
Opinions of Calvin, in which he had been educated; for those (more Honorable
to God, and more accountable to the Human Reason) of Arminius and the
Remonstrants. And now it was, that he learned, as was the commendable Custom of
those times, to write Shorthand; at which he was so dextrous, that he would
take into a Book, any Sermon that he heard, word for word as it was spoke by
the Preacher; if the Sermon were not delivered, with too much precipitance. Of
this he made a double use; both then, and in the very busiest part of his Life.
For, if the Sermon was considerable, for (judicious) Morality, or weighty
Arguments; he often read it, in his Shorthand Notes, for his own further
Improvement: and then took the pains, to write it out (in words at length) for
the benefit of his Acquaintance. He left behind him a great many little Books
of that kind; Sermons, copied fair from his Shorthand notes: which, not
seldom, are multum in parvo.

As to his demeanor, in his Apprentiship; he was so nimble in his motions, in
taking down, opening Goods to Chapmen, etc. that some gave him, the name of
Spirit. And in making his Bargain, his Words and Address were so pleasing, and
respectful; that after some time, the Customers rather chose to deal with
Thomas, than with the Master of the Shop: or if a Bargain stuck between a
Customer and his Master, he would decide the difference to the liking of both.

He met however with one rub, in the course of his Service; for the elder
Apprentice interverted five pounds of his Masters money, and laid it to the
charge of Tom Firmin. I know not whether the Imputation was believed, probably
it was not; but it pleased God himself to judge in the case. For the elder
Servant was, shortly after, taken with a mortal Sickness; and before he died
made confession, that he took and spent his Masters money, Tho. Firmin not being
in the least privy to it. Thus he that made all things, the very least, does
not disdain or neglect to judge all things, even little things, in the properest
time. Many Crimes are suffered to rest, or are not presently called to
judgment; because the delay of Justice ordinarily hurts no body: but when the
Innocent and Virtuous lie under imputations, by occasion of the guilt of
others; the detection of Offenders, and the execution of wrath is but seldom
(if ever) respited.

So soon as he was made free, he began to trade for himself, tho his first
Stock was but about 100 l. By the opinion he had raised of himself among the
Merchants and others, and the love he had gained among his Master's Customers,
the Neighborhood, and a great number of incidental Acquaintance, he overcame
the difficulties of so weak and incompetent a beginning; so that in the year
1660 he married a Citizens Daughter with 500 l. Portion.

From his first setting up (as they speak) for himself, he would be acquainted
with all persons that seemed to be worthy, Foreigners as well as English, more
especially Ministers: he seldom dined without some such at his Table; which,
tho somewhat chargeable to his (then) slender abilities, was of great use to
him afterward, both in relation to the Poor, and the Public. For out of his
large Acquanitance and multitude of Friends, he engaged the (powerful) Interest
of some, and the (weighty) Purses of others; in some of those great designs of
Charity, or other Services to the Public, for which I shall hereafter account.

Now also it was, that he happened on Mr. Bidle, who much confirmed him in his
Arminian Tenants, and carried him a great deal further. Mr. Bidle persuaded
him, that the Unity of God is a Unity of Person as well as of Nature; that the
Holy Spirit is indeed a Person, but not God. He had a great and just esteem of
Mr. Bidle's Piety, Exemplariness and Learning; and is that Friend (mentioned in
Mr. Bidle's Life) who gave Mr. Bidle his Bed and Board till he was sent
Prisoner by Protector Oliv. Cromwell to the Isle of Scilly; and when there, Mr.
Firmin with another Friend, procured for him a yearly Pension of 100 Crowns
from the Protector, besides what he obtained from other Friends, or gave
himself.

Mr. Firmin's Diversion, in this part of his Life, was Gardening; for which
purpose he cultivated a piece of ground at Hoxton, not a mile from London;
where he raised Flowers, and (in time) attained no small skill in the art of
Gardening, in the culture of Flowers, Herbs, Greens, and Fruit Trees of all
sorts. I have often born him company to his Garden; but either going or coming
back he used often to visit the Poor and Sick: this was one of Mr. Bidle's
Lessons, that it is a duty not only to relieve, but to visit the Sick and Poor;
because they are hereby encouraged and comforted, and we come to know of what
nature and degree their straits are; and that some are more worthy of
assistance than others: and their condition being known, sometimes we are able
to assist them by our Counsel, or our Interest, much more effectually than by
the Charity we do or can bestow upon them.

Before I pass to the next Scene of Mr. Firmin's Life, I am obliged to take
notice, that by his first Wife he had a Son and a Daughter; the former lived to
man's estate, but died (a Bachelor) about seven years before his Father. The
Mother of these two Children died while Mr. Firmin was (occasionally) at
Cambridg, managing there some affairs of his Trade: her death was accompanied
with this remarkable Circumstance. Mr. Firmin dreamt at Cambridg, that he saw
his Wife breathing her last: whereupon early in the morning he took Horse for
London; but on the way thither he met the Messenger who was sent to give him
notice of her decease.

Another (necessary) Remark belonging to this part of his Life is, that tho
hitherto his wealth was no more than a competence, considering his liberal
humor, and the multitude of his Acquaintance; yet he was even then a most kind
Brother, Uncle and Kinsman: Of which the Reader may take account in this
following Transcript, being the Copy of a Paper written by one of his nearest
Relations, and who has lived with him above thirty years, and was (a great
part of that time) his Partner; being a Person of great Sobriety, Diligence,
Integrity and Prudence. He had many Relations, of several degrees, who stood in
need of his care and help; to whom he was a very kind Brother, Uncle and
Kinsman: besides the great pains he took to promote them, as it lay in his way
or power: his loss by some of them, for whom he advanced money, and his
disbursments for others of them, amounted to very considerable sums; a good
part of which was not long after his first beginning in the World; which was
the greater prejudice to him, because then his own circumstances required money
to carry on his Trade with ease and advantage. Be sure he had then more
occasion for his money, than when he was arrived to a very considerable Estate,
which he did not till about seventeen years before his death. His Estate at
(about) seventeen years before his decease, was three times greater than when
he died, tho then considerable. He might easily have increased it as much as he
diminished it, had he set his heart on Riches; but those he never valued in
comparison of doing good: and I have often heard him say, he would not die
worth more than Five Thousand Pound.

Of his Liberalities to the Poor, and the Deserving, and the motives to them, I
may say enough hereafter. But for his beneficence to his Kindred, it proceeded
not merely from the benignity of his Nature, or natural Affection; which
(however) to cherish and improve is a great virtue; but from his reverence to
the Christian Religion. For as he would frequently say, that Passage of St.
Paul to Timothy is to be read as it stands in the Margin of our Bibles, He that
provides not for his own KINDRED, is worse than an Infidel: so he was wont to
give that Text as the reason of his Bounties to his Relations. So far was he
from that Deism, of which some have been so overforward to suspect him.

During the Imprisonment of Mr. Bidle at Scilly, Mr. Firmin was settled in
Lombardstreet, where first Mr. Jacomb, then Dr. Outram, was Minister: With
these two, being excellent Preachers, and learned men, he maintained a
respectful and kind Friendship; which was answered as affectionately and
cordially on their parts. Now also he grew into intimacy with Dr. Whichcot, Dr.
Worthington, Dr. Wilkins, Mr. Tillotson: Dr. Wilkins was afterward Bishop of
Chester, Mr. Tillotson (for he was not yet made Doctor) Archbishop of
Canterbury; but in their Dignity, and to the very last, Mr. Firmin had the same
place and degree in their esteem and friendship, that at any time formerly he
had. While Dr. Tillotson preached the Tuesdays Lecture at St. Lawrence, so much
frequented by all the Divines of the Town, and by a great many Persons of
Quality and Distinction: when the Doctor was obliged to be at Canterbury, where
he was Dean, or was out of Town, either for diversion or health; he generally
left it to Mr. Firmin to provide Preachers for his Lecture, and Mr. Firmin
never failed to supply his place with some very eminent Preacher; so that there
never was any complaint on the account of Dr. Tillotson's absence. And this Mr.
Firmin could easily do, for now there was hardly a Divine of Note, (whether in
London, or in the Country that frequented London) but Mr. Firmin was come
acquainted with him. Which thing helped him much to serve the Interests of many
(hopeful) young Preachers and Scholars; Candidates for Lectures, Schools,
Cures, or Rectories; for whom he would solicit with as much affection and
diligence as other men do for their Sons, or near Relations.

See here a Trader, who knew no Latin or Greek, no Logic or Philosophy;
compast about by an incredible number of learned Friends, who differed so
widely in opinion from him, and were continually attacking him for his
(supposed) Errors; yet could they never remove him from the belief of the Unity
of God, nor did their Importunities, or his Resistance, break off (or so much
as lessen) the friendship between 'em; certain arguments of the extraordinary
wit and good address of our Friend.

Her late Majesty (Queen Mary) of most happy memory, having heard much of Mr.
Firmin's usefulness in all public Designs, especially those of Charity; and
that he was heterodox in the Articles of the Trinity, the Divinity of our
Savior, and the Satisfaction; She spoke to Archbishop Tillotson, and earnestly
recommended it to him, to set Mr. Firmin right in those weighty and necessary
points. The Archbishop answered, that he had often endeavored it; but Mr.
Firmin having so early and long imbibed the Socinian Doctrine, was not now
capable of a contrary impression. However his Grace published his Sermons
(formerly preached at St. Lawrence's) concerning those Questions, and sent Mr.
Firmin one of the first Copies from the Press. Mr. Firmin not convinced by his
Grace's Reasonings, or his Arguments from Holy Scripture, caused a respectful
Answer (although some have stretched one Expression too far) entitled,
Considerations on the Explications and Defenses of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
to be drawn up and published, himself giving to his Grace a Copy of it. I must
not omit to do the Archbishop right against those who pretend, that the
Archbishop, notwithstanding those Sermons, was in his heart a Unitarian. For
Mr. Firmin himself told me, shortly after the Archbishop had published those
Sermons, that going to Lambeth, and the Archbishop happening to dine in private,
he sent for Mr. Firmin to him, and said to this effect, That the Calumnies of
people had obliged him to publish his Sermons, some time since preached at St.
Laurence's against the Tenants of Socinus; that he had sincerely preached, as
he then thought, and continued still to think of those Points; that however no
bodies false imputations should provoke him to give ill Language to persons who
dissented conscientiously, and for weighty reasons. That he knew well this was
the case of the Socinians, for whose learning and dexterity he should always
have a respect, as well as for their sincerity and exemplariness. Afterward,
when Mr. Firmin gave him a Copy of the Considerations; after he had read it, he
only said, My Lord of Sarum shall humble your Writers. Nor did he afterward at
any time express the least coldness on the account of the Answer made to him,
but used Mr. Firmin as formerly, enquiring as he was wonted, How does my Son
Giles? so he called Mr. Firmins Son by his second Wife.

About the time the (Great and Good) Archbishop died, the Controversy
concerning the Trinity and the depending Questions, received an unexpected
Turn. The Unitarians took notice from D. Petavius, Dr. R. Cudworth, S.
Curcellaeus, the Oxford Heads, Dr. S -- th and others, that their Opposers
agreed indeed in contending for a Trinity of Divine Persons, but differed from
one another, even as much as from the Unitarians, concerning what is to be
meant by the term Persons. Some of them say, three Divine Persons are three
(Eternal Infinite) Minds, Spirits, Substances and Beings; but others reject
this as Heresy, Blasphemy, and Tritheism. These latter affirm, that GOD is one
(Infinite, Eternal, All-perfect) Mind and Spirit; and the Trinity of Persons is
the Godhead, Divine Essence, or Divine Substance, considered as Unbegotten,
Begotten, and Proceeding: which Modes or Properties they (further) explain by
Original Wisdom, Unbegotten, and therefore named the Father; the reflex Wisdom,
Logos, or WORD, which being generated or begotten, is called the Son; and the
eternal Spiration of Divine Love, that has therefore the name of Holy Spirit.
The Unitarians never intended to oppose any other Trinity, but a Trinity of
(infinite) Minds or Spirits; grant to 'em, that GOD is one Infinite Spirit or
Mind, not two or three, they demand no more. They applied themselves therefore
to enquire, which of these Trinities, a Trinity of Spirits or of Properties, is
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church: they could not miss of a ready
satisfaction; all Systems, Catechisms, Books of Controversy, Councils, Writers
that have been esteemed Catholic, more especially since the (General) Lateran
Council, Anno 1215. and the Reformation, have defined GOD to be one Infinite
All-perfect Spirit; and the Divine Persons to be nothing else but the Divine
Essence or Godhead, with the three relative Properties, Unbegotten, and
Begotten, and Proceeding. They saw therefore plainly, that the difference
between the Church and the Unitarians had arose from a mere mistake of one
another meaning: a mistake occasioned (chiefly) by the unscriptural terms
Trinity, Persons, and such like. They resolved, that it became them, as good
Christians, to seek the Peace of the Catholic Church, and not to litigate about
Terms, (tho never so unproper, or implying only Trifles) when the things
intended by those Terms, are not unsound or heterodox. These (Honest, Pacific)
Inclinations of men, who drove no design in their dissent from the Church, gave
birth to the Agreement between the Unitarians and the Catholic Church; a Book
written at the instance (chiefly) of Mr. Firmin, in Answer to Mr. Edwards, the
Bishops of Worcester, Sarum and Chichester, and Monsieur de Luzanzy. I need not
to say, what will be owned by every (Ingenuous) Learned Person, without
hesitance, that the Agreement is as well the Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
as of the Unitarians; and that in all the points, so long and fiercely debated
and controverted by the Writers of this and of former Ages. It must be confessed,
the hands of a great many excellent Persons did concur to this Reunion of
Parties that seemed so widely and unreconcilably divided, and did encourage the
Author of the Agreement in his (disinteressed laborious) searches into
Antiquity, and other parts of Learning; and several learned men, some of them
Authors in the Socinian (or Unitarian) way, examined the Work with the Candor
and Ingenuity, that is as necessary in such cases, as Learning or Judgment are.
Mr. Firmin published it when examined and corrected, with more satisfaction than
he had before given forth so many Eristic Writings. I did not wonder however,
that our Friend was so ready to embrace a reconciliation with the Church: for
he was ever a lover of Peace, and always conformed as far as he could,
according to that direction of the Apostle, Whereunto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule. Which with the best Interpreters he understood
thus, Conform to the Doctrines, Terms and Usages that are commonly received, as
far as you can; if in some things you differ from the Church, yet agree with
her, and walk by her Rule to the utmost that in Conscience you may; or as the
Apostle himself words it, so far as (or whereunto) you have attained. From this
Principle it was, that our Friend never approved of those who separate from the
communion of the Church on the account of Ceremonies, Habits, form of
Government, or other mere Circumstantials of Religion. He was wont to tell
such, that seeing 'twas undeniable, they might communicate with the Church
without either sin or scandal, and did communicate on some occasions; it is
therefore both scandal and sin to separate and divide. With this he silenced
many, and reclaimed diverse.

In the Year 1658. the Unitarians were banished out of Poland, the occasion
this; Poland had been long harassed with most dangerous Civil, and Foreign
Wars, insomuch that at one time there were in Arms in Poland, Lithuania and the
Vkrain, One hundred and fourscore thousand Poles, as many Tartars, and two
hundred thousand Cossacks, besides powerful Bodies of Austrians, and
Transilvanians, which attacked Poland on the West and South. The ravages and
desolations committed, and caused so by many great Armies in a Country that has
but few fortified Places, were unexpressible: Poland therefore was reduced to
such a feeble and desperate condition, that their King himself withdrew; and
the King of Swedes took the advantage of their confusion and low estate, to
invade them with Forty thousand men, regular Troops. He took the Cities of
Warsaw and Cracow, and with them almost all Poland: he constrained the
Polanders to take an Oath of Subjection and Allegiance to him; which Oath was
first submitted unto, and taken by the Roman-Catholies, then by the
Protestants, and not till last of all by the Unitarians. But the Swedish King
engaging himself in other Wars, particularly with Denmark, and in Germany, John
Casimire, King of Poland, appeared again; and the Poles generally joining their
King, at length drove the Swedes out of Poland: the Swedish King found himself
obliged to condescend to a (reasonable) Peace with King Casimire. As the
Unitarians were the last that submitted to the obedience of Swedeland, so being
bound thereto by an Oath, they did not concur with the other Polanders in
rebelling against him: they consiered the Swedish King as a fair Conqueror, and
a Protestant Prince, and themselves as tied to him by Oath; therefore they even
opposed in some places, the revolt from him. This was interpreted a desertion
of their natural Prince, and native Country; and (tho all the Part-takers with
the Swedish King were included in the Peace made with him) was avenged in the
very next Diet after the Peace, by a Decree and Edict, the sum of which was as
follows. The Toleration granted by the Laws, and Coronation-Oaths of the Kings
to Dissenters from the Church, does not legally extend to the Unitarians, (whom
they called Arians, or Anabaptists) this being a new Heresy, since the
granting that Indulgence or Toleration; therefore all Unitarians, who within
such a limited time, will not embrace the Roman-Catholic Religion, shall be
banished out of Poland, allowing however two years (in effect but one) to sell
their Estates, whether real or personal. Hereupon the Unitarians left Poland,
and settled some in Transylvania, where diverse Provinces and Cities are
Unitarian; some in Ducal Prussia, and Brandenburg, where they enjoy like
Privileges with his Electoral Highnesses other Subjects; some (few) in Holland.
These Unitarians were (in my opinion) unhappy, that they had not a man among
them, who could discern it, and show 'em, that neither in the Article of the
Trinity, nor of the Divinity of our Savior, they had any real difference with
the Catholic Church: and that the Terms used by the Church, imply nothing that
is contrary to the Unity of God, as it is held by the learned men. Their
Confession, which they published upon their Banishment, ascribes as much to our
Savior, as is intended by the Catholic-terms Incarnation, God-man, God the
Son, Hypostatical (or personal) Union, and the rest: therefore seeing the
Church will not dismiss those (unscriptural) Terms, but (for certain reasons)
contents her self to interpret them to a sound sense, it had been well if the
Polish Unitarians had been so dextrous, as to distinguish between an unsound
Sense, and improper Terms; disclaiming only the former, and submitting to the
latter. The Unitarian Congregations in Poland had many poor persons, therefore
the Nobility and Gentry prayed a Contribution for them, from all Unitarian
Churches of foreign parts: and tho they knew there were but few Unitarian
Families in England, they sent a Letter to us to entreat our help. Mr. Firmin
procured for 'em some assistances from private persons: and tho without a
Brief, some collections in Churches; both these in the Year 1662. But I mention
this for the sake of what happened Anno 1681. for then King Charles granted a
Brief for another sort of Polonian Sufferers, Protestants also: these were they
who had suffered the Unitarians to be banished about twenty years before, when
it was in their power to have prevented it, if so much as one of their Deputies
had protested against it in the Diet. They willingly permitted, nay they
promoted the Violation of the Liberty of Dissenters not twenty years before;
and now weakened by the loss of the whole Unitarian Interest, it came to their
own turns to be the Sufferers: they had never lost either Country, or Liberty,
if they had not voted themselves out of both, by their (former) Votes against
the Unitarians. A Toleration or Liberty of Religion, once tapped, will soon run
all out; for break it but in one Instance, or Party, and you have disannulled
the whole Reason of it, and all the Pleas for it. The malice of any whomsoever
against the English Unitarians, comes now too late; they less dissent from the
Church (if they are at all Dissenters) than any other denomination of
Dissenters: therefore let those Dissenters look to it, who have promoted a
Bill, in name and pretext, against Immorality, and Blasphemy; in truth and real
design against the Unitarians. I said King Charles granted a Brief for the
Polonian Protestants, who had assisted in banishing the Polonian Unitarians;
this Brief Mr. Firmin promoted as much as in him lay: I find he received of
Nine Dissenting Congregations, 110 l. 16 s. 10 d. And in another Book I find
the sum of 568 l. 16 s. o. collected on the same account.

We are now come to another part of Mr. Firmin's Life, his second Marriage: in
the Year 1664. he married to a Daughter of a Justice of Peace in the County of
Essex, and had with her, besides all the qualifications of a good Wife, a
considerable Portion. God was pleased to lend to 'em several Children; but one
Son, Giles Firmin, lived to man's estate. He was like to be an eminent
Merchant, his Father giving him the whole Portion he had received with his
Mother: and the young Gentleman going into Portugal, to manage there his own
business; he was called by the Heavenly Father to Eternal Mercies.

In the Year 1665. was a great Plague, of which there died in that one year, in
London only, near One hundred thousand persons: most of the wealthier Citizens
removed themselves and Children into the Country; so did Mr. Firmin, but left a
Kinsman in his House, with order to relieve some Poor weekly, and to give out
Stuff to employ them in making such Commodities as they were wont. He foresaw
that he should be hard put to it, to dispose of such an abundance of
Commodities as these poor people would work off, in so long time, for him only:
but when he returned to London, a wealthy Chapman (who was greatly pleased with
his adventurous Charity) bought an extraordinary quantity of those Goods; so
that he incurred no loss, at that time, by employing the Poor.

The year after the Sickness came the Fire, by which the City of London
sustained the damage of Ten millions of Pounds sterling. Mr. Firmin, with his
Neighbors, suffered the loss of his House in Lombard Street, and took
(thereupon) a House and Warehouse in Leaden-hall-street. But now his fine
Spirit, and generous way of Trading were so well known, that in a few years he
so improved his Stock, that he rebuilt his House, and built also the whole
Court (excepting two or three Houses) in which he lived. And having now
provided sufficiently for himself and Family, he began to consider the Poor.

His first service to them, or rather to God in their persons, was the building
a Warehouse by the Waterside, for the laying up Corn and Coals, to be sold to
the Poor in scarce and dear times at moderate and reasonable rates, at the
rates they had been purchased, allowing only for loss (if any should happen) by
damage of the Goods while kept.

He went on with his Trade in Lombardstreet till the Year 1676. at which time I
estimate he was worth about Nine thousand Pounds. If we consider, that this
Estate was raised from a beginning of about One hundred Pounds, in an ordinary
way of Trade, and in about twenty years time; to what a mighty wealth would it
have grown, in the hands of such a Manager, in his remaining twenty or one and
twenty years? Had not his ingenit Liberality, great Mind and Zeal of serving
the Divine Majesty, turned his endeavors a contrary way; to support, and to
raise others, while he lessened and impaired himself. For this year he erected
his Warehouse in Little Britain for the employment of the Poor in the Linen
Manufacture. Let us hear what Archbishop Tillotson (then but Dean Tillotson)
says of this Design of Mr. Firmin, in his Funeral Sermon on Mr. Gouge, Anno
1681. He (Mr. Gouge) set the Poor of St. Sepulchers Parish (where he was
Minister) to work, at his own charge. He bought Flax and Hemp for them to spin;
when spun, he paid them for their Work, and caused it to be wrought into Cloth,
which he sold as he could, himself bearing the whole loss. This was a very wise
and wellchosen way of Charity; and in the good effect of it a much greater
Charity, than if he had given to those very persons (freely and for nothing) so
much as he made them to earn by their work: because by this means he rescued
'em from two most dangerous Temptations, Idleness and Poverty. This course so
happily devised, and begun by Mr. Gouge, gave, it may be, the first hint to
that useful and worthy Citizen, Mr. Tho. Firmin, of a much larger Design; which
has been managed by him, some years in this City, with that vigor and good
success, that many hundreds of poor Children, and others who lived idle before,
unprofitable both to themselves and the Public, now maintain themselves, and
are also some advantage to the Community. By the Assistance and Charity of many
excellent and well-disposed persons, Mr. Firmin is enabled to bear the
unavoidable loss and charge of so vast an Undertaking; and by his own forward
inclination to Charity, and unwearied diligence and activity, is fitted to
sustain, and go through the incredible pains of it. Sermon. on Mr. Gouge, p. 62,
63, 64.

It Is of this Project and Warehouse, that Mr. Firmin himself speaks in a Book
of his, entitled, Proposals for the employment of the Poor, in these words:
It Is now above four years since I set up my Workhouse in Little Britain, for
the employment of the Poor, in the Linen Manufacture; which has afforded so
great help and Relief to many hundreds of poor Families; that I never did, and
I fear never shall do an Action more to my own satisfaction, or to the good and
benefit of the Poor. He employed in this Manufacture, some times 1600, some
times 1700 Spinners, besides Dressers of Flax, Weavers and others.

Because he found that his Poor must work sixteen hours in the day to earn
sixpence, and thought that their necessities and labor were not sufficiently
supplied or recompensed by those earnings; therefore he was wont to distribute
Charity among them, as he saw their need, especially at Christmas, and in hard
weather. Without which Charity, some of them had perished for want, when either
they or their Children fell ill. He used also to lay in vast quantities of
Coals, which he gave out by a Peck at a time: whoever of the Spinners brought
in two pound of Yarn, might take away with 'em a Peck of Coals, besides what
Coals were given to such as were ancient, had many Children, or any sick in
their Family. But because they soiled themselves by carrying away Coals in
their Aprons or Skirts; to obviate that inconvenience, and damage to 'em, he
gave 'em Canvass Bags. Cleanliness contributing much to health, he distributed
among 'em Shifting made of the coarser and stronger sort of Cloth, that had
been spun by themselves, and of the same among their Children. Much of this
Shifting he begged for them; for he found among his Acquaintance and Friends,
diverse charitable persons, who would rather buy the Cloth that had been wrought
by our Home-Poor, than purchase it, tho at somewhat cheaper rates, from
Merchants or Shops, that sell scarce any but foreign Cloth. By the assistance
and order of his Friends, he gave to Men, Women and Children, sometime 3000
Shirts and Shifts in two years. But still further to encourage and help his
Poor, he would invite persons of Ability to come to his Workhouse, on days the
Spinners brought their Yarn; that seeing their Poverty and Diligence, he might
the more easily persuade 'em to give, or subscribe something for their relief.
Some would work, but knew not the art of Spinning, or were not able to purchase
Wheels and Reels; for these he hired Teachers, and freely gave 'em their Reels
and Wheels: He often took up poor Children as they were begging in the Streets,
whom he caused to be taught at his own charge, and provided for 'em their Reels
and Wheels, which were never deducted out of their Work.

In his Book of Proposals he takes notice, that In above 4000 l. laid out the
last Year, reckning House-rent, Servants wages, Loss by Learners, with the
Interest of the Money, there was not above 200 l. lost. One chief reason of
which, was the Kindness of several Persons; who took off good Quantities of
Commodities, at the Price they cost me to spin and weave: And in particular,
the East India and Guinea Companies gave me Encouragement, to make their
Allabas Cloths, and coarse Canvas for Pepper Bags; which before they bought
from foreign Countries.

He published that Book of Proposals, to engage others, to set the Poor on
work, at a Public Charge; or at least to assist him, and two or three Friends,
in what he had now carried on, for above Five Years, at the loss of above One
Thousand Pounds. But finding that my Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, were not
persuaded by what he had offered in his Book, and by Discourse with them, and
other Wealthy Citizens; he began to lessen the Spinning Trade: For I find that
in the Year 1682, the whole Disbursment was only 2337 l. 3 s. and yet the Loss
thereby that Year, was 214 l.

It should seem he met not so many Charitable Persons, who would buy his
Manufacture at the Price it cost him, as in some former Years: Nay from this
time, the Loss increased yearly upon him: For seven or eight Years together he
lost two Pence in the Shilling, by all the Work of his Poor; but he was
content, for he would say, Two Pence given them by Loss in their Work, was
twice so much saved to the Public, in that it took them off from Beggary, or
Theft. But his Loss some Years was extraordinary. In the Year 83. the Trade
increasing again, his own Disbursments, beside his Friends, were not less than
2000 l. the Loss for that Year was 400 l. Continuing thus, in the Year 84. the
Balance of Loss not then received, amounted to 763 l. And in the Year 85. it
increased to 900:11:3. toward which Loss, an eminent Citizen, who had 500 l. in
that Stock, quitted the whole Principal, and required no Interest. In the Years
86, 87, 88, and 89, the Trade declined for want of more such Benefactors. The
Loss now remaining being 413:11:3. the value of the Goods then in hand, and
Debts standing out, computed at 372 l. 3. s. 1. d. I find of the whole no more
received than 279:0:1. which falling short 93:3:0. added to the former Loss of
413:11:3. makes 506:14:3. This whole Sum I find not any way made good, but
stands still as due to Mr. Firmin, though never reckoned by him as any part of
his Estate.

Anno 1690. The Design was taken up by the Patentees of the Linen Manufacture;
who made the Poor and others, whom they employed, to work cheaper; yet, that
was not sufficient, to encourage them to continue the Manufacture. The
Patentees agreed with Mr. Firmin, to give him 100 l. a Year, to Oversee and
Govern their Manufacture: But seeing their Undertaking had not answered their,
or his Expectations, he never received the promised Salary, nor discounted it
to 'em; and if he had, he would certainly have given it (in Money, Linen, and
Coals) among the Spinners. Which I the rather adventure to say, because when he
drew some Prizes in one of Mr. Neal's Lotteries, to the Value of 180 l. he
reserved to himself, only the Money he had adventured: The Money gained he gave,
partly to some Relations, and partly to the Poor.

But the poor Spinners, being thus deserted, Mr. Firmin returned to 'em again;
and managed that Trade as he was wont: But so, that he made it bear almost its
own Charges. But that their smaller Wages might be comfortable to them, he was
more Charitable to 'em in his distributions, than in any former Years; and
begged for 'em, of almost all Persons of Rank, with whom he had intimacy, or so
much as Friendship. He would also carry his Cloth to diverse, with whom he
scarce had any Acquaintance; telling 'em, it was the Poor's Cloth, which in
conscience they ought to buy at the Price it could be afforded: If the Buyers
were very Wealthy, they must also give some of the Cloth they had bought, in
Shirting; and he would quickly send for the Money, that was due for the Cloth.
But without these Ways, it had been impossible for him, to employ such a
multitude of People; who could not stay a minute for their Money. This continued
to be his chief business, and care, to the day of his Death: Saving that about
Two Years since, when the calling in the Clipped Money, occasioned such a
Scarcity of Current Coin, that it was hard with many Rich to get Money enough to
go to Market; he was forced to dismiss some of his Spinners, for mere want of
Money to pay 'em. I heard his Partner and Kinsman Mr. James, tell him; He had
taken about 700 l. out of their Cash already, for the Spinners: And that he
should take out no more, as yet. Not that Mr. James was not always an
Encourager and Promoter of the Workhouse Charity; for he never took any
Interest-mony, for his Share in that Stock: but their whole common Trade going
through the hands of Mr. James, and being managed by him; he was more sensible
than Mr. Firmin, that more ready Money could not be spared to that use, without
great Disadvantage to their Trade.

Flax and Tow being Goods very combustible, Mr. Firmin was always a little
uneasy, lest by some Accident the Workhouse, being in the keeping only of
Servants, should take fire: And I remember, the Boys in one of their licentious
times of throwing Squibs, flung one into the Workhouse Cellar, where the Tow
and Flax was stowed; but Providence did not permit, it should do any hurt.

Before I dismiss this Workhouse, I must take notice, that at his death our
Friend told Dr. L. that he did not regret his Dying, only he could have been
willing (had God so pleased) to have continued two Months longer, to put his
Workhouse and Spinners into another Method. That Method is now settled, by Mr.
James; and the poor Spinners employed as formerly.

Concerning this Workhouse, and the Spinners, Mr. Firmin would often say,
that, To pay the Spinners, to relieve 'em with Money begged for 'em, with Coals,
and Shirting, was to him such a Pleasure; as magnificent Buildings, pleasant
Walks, well cultivated Orchards and Gardens, the Jollity of Music and Wine, or
the Charms of Love or Study, are to others. I am persuaded, he said no more
than the Truth; for Mr. James, who was his Apprentice, Journey-man and Partner
upwards of thirty Years, gives this Account of his Uncle's Expense on this, and
other Charities; [Comparing and balancing his Expenses and Losses with his
Gains, he might have left an Estate behind him of at least 20000 l. if he had
not given and spent it in public and private Charities, Buildings, and other
good Works; whereas now his Estate amounts to no more than a sixth part of that
Sum.] But it was his settled Resolution not to be Richer: He told me, but
little before he died, that were he now worth Forty Thousand Pounds, he would
die but very little richer, than he then was. I incline to think, he would have
died much Poorer: For such a Sum would have engaged him in such vast Designs
for his Province, the Poor; that (probably) he would have gone beyond the
Expense he intended at first for them. I have heard his Physician blame him
sometimes, that he did not allow himself competent time for his Dinner; but
hastened to Garraway's Coffee-House, about his Affairs. But those Affairs were
seldom, if ever, his own; he was to solicit for the Poor, or in the business
of some Friend who wanted Mr. Firmin's Interest: Or he was to meet on some
design relating to the Public Good. In these matters his Friends, that were
not quick in their Dispatches, had reason oftentimes to complain of him, as not
giving them sufficient time, to dispatch Business with him: For he was nimble
above most Men, in Apprehension, in Speech, Judgment, Resolution, and Action.

He was persuaded by some, to make trial of the Woolen Manufacture; because at
this, the Poor might make better Wages, than at Linen-Work. For this, he took a
House in Artillery-Lane: But the Price of Wool advancing very much, and the
London-Spinsters being almost wholly unskilful at Drawing a Woolen-Thread,
after a considerable Loss by 'em, and 29 Months trial, he gave off the Project.

He labored with a particular Zeal and Activity, in redeeming poor Debtors out
of Prison; not only as it was Charity to the Persons, but out of regard to
their (in the mean time) distressed and starved Families: He would say, The
Release of one Man out of Prison, is a Relief bestowed on his whole Family. I
have sure grounds to believe, that it was himself of whom he spoke, in his Book
of Proposals, p. 83. I know one Man, who, in a few Years last past, with the
Charity of some Worthy Persons, has delivered some Hundreds of poor People out
of Prison; who lay there, either only for Jailors Fees, or for very small
Debts: I have reason to believe that, many more have been delivered by others;
and yet one shall find the Prisons very full of Prisoners at this time.

As he discharged great Numbers of Prisoners, he took care for the better and
easier Subsistence of others, while in Prison: For he would examine the
Prisoners, concerning their Usage by their Keepers; and sometimes prosecuted
Jailors, before the Judges, for extorting unlawful Fees, and other exorbitant
Practices. I remember, one of the Jailors prosecuted by Mr. Firmin, made a
Rope, and hanged himself before the matter was determined: A strong
Presumption, that he was conscious to himself, of great Faultiness; and a
demonstrative Proof, of the great need of such Prosecutions, and of the Virtue
of him that undertook 'em.

He continued these Endeavors for poor Debtors, from before the Year 1681. to
his last Breath: but being grieved, that he could do nothing for Debtors, laid
up for great Sums; therefore, on behalf of such he always vigorously promoted
Acts of Grace by Parliament, whereby Insolvent Debtors were discharged. Though he
never was a Parliament man, he had a mighty Interest in both Houses; and was the
Cause that many Bills were quashed, and others passed: insomuch that once, when
an Act of Grace for poor Prisoners, that was liable to have, and had an ill use
made of it by unconscionable or knavish People, passed the Houses and Royal
Assent; he was upbraided with it by some of the Creditors, and told, that it
was his Act.

Mr. Firmin was not insensible, that sometimes people come into Prisons, or
otherwise become poor, more by their own Negligence, Idleness, Riot, and Pride,
than by Mishap and Misadventure; yet he could not join with those, who say
hereupon, they hate, the Poor; and that such well deserve the Straits, and
Miseries, that they bring on themselves. He was wont to answer, to such
Reasonings, that; It would be a miserable World indeed, if the Divine
Providence should act by that Rule: if God should show no Favor, grant no
Help, or Deliverance, to us, in those Straits or Calamities, that are the
effects of our Sins. If the universal Lord seeks to reclame, and to better us,
by Favors, and Graces; do we dare to argue against the Example set by Him; and
against a Method, without which, no Man living may ask any thing of God?

There is no place whatsoever, but of necessity it must have diverse Poor, more
especially London: where every House having one or more Servants, who are
obliged to spend their whole Wages in Clothes; when these Servants marry, every
little Mishap in the World reduces 'em to Beggary; their small, or rather no
Beginnings are crushed, by every Accident. Mr. Firmin had so full a Sense of
this, that (in some Years of his Life) he begged about 500 l. a Year; which he
distributed to the Poor, at their Houses, or at his own, by the Sums of 2 s. 6
d. or 5 s. or 10 s. or 15 s. as he saw (or was well informed of) the
Necessities of the Persons. The way he took, for the better effecting this
Charitable Distribution, was; he would enquire of the most noted Persons for
Honesty and Charity, in the several Parishes, who were the most Necessitous and
best Deserving Poor in that Neighborhood: He went then to their Houses, that
he might judge farther by their meagre Looks, number of Children, sorry
Furniture, and other Circumstances, in what proportion it might be fit to
assist 'em. He always took their Names and Numbers into a Book; and sent a Copy
of so much of his Book, to the Persons who had entrusted him with Charity, as
answered to the Money trusted to him by every such Person: That if he so minded,
he might make enquiry, by himself, or any other, concerning the Truth of the
Account given in. But Mr. Firmin's Fidelity grew to be so well known, that
after a few years, diverse of his Contributors would not receive his Accounts. I
know a certain Person, whose hand was with Mr. Firmin in all his Charities; I
should not exceed (I believe) if I said, that in Twenty One Years time he has
given by Mr. Firmin's hand, or at his Recommendation, Five or Six Thousand
Pounds: this Person has himself told me, that Mr. Firmin was wont to bring him
the Accounts of his Disbursments, till he was even weary of 'em, and (because
he was so well assured of him) he desired him, not to bring him any more.
Sometimes the Sums brought, or sent in, to Mr. Firmin, for the Poor, were such,
as did enable him to spare some part to some whom he knew to be charitably
disposed like himself: In that case, he would send small Sums, such as 40 s. or
3 l. sometimes more, to those his Acquaintance, which Sums they were to divide,
among the Poor of their Vicinage; whose Names and Case those Friends were to
return to him. He has sent to me, and diverse others that I know of, many such
Sums; in Christmas Time, in Hard Weather, and Times of Scarcity.

In these Distributions, Mr. Firmin sometime considered others, besides the
mere Poor; particularly the poorer sort of Ministers: I doubt not he has made
use of many hands besides mine; but by me he has sent (of his own proper
motion) diverse times the Sum of 40 s. sometimes two Guineas, to Ministers that
were good Preachers, and Exemplary, but their Vicarige, Curacy, or Lecture
small. I have known that he has sent no less than 10 l. to a Clergyman in Debt,
or oppressed with many Children; when he has been well assured, that the Person
was a Man of Probity and Merit. He asked me once, concerning Mr. P. of Gr. Chapter
what sort of Man he was? I answered; his Mind was much above his Purse; He was
Charitable, Curious, Learned; a Father among young Scholars, who were promising
Men; but his Living not above 80 l. or 90 l. a Year. Mr. Firmin said; I have
done considerable for that man: I answered, as I thought my self obliged; You
may take it on my Word, that your Liberality was never better placed.
Afterward I met the Widow of Mr. P. in London; I desired her to accept half a
Pint of Wine, at the next Tavern: While we were together, I asked her, Whether
there had not been some Acquaintance between her Husband and Mr. Firmin. She
said, The Acquaintance was not much; but the Friendship great. She said, Her
Husband was acquainted with many Persons of Quality, that he had experienced
their Liberality through the whole course of his Life: because his Address, as
well as his Merit, was so remarkable. She said; that of so many Benefactors to
Mr. P. Mr. Firmin had done most for him, both in Life and Death. When her
Husband died, his Estate would not pay his Debts; she was advised hereupon, by
a Clergyman, to propose a Composition with the Creditors: that seeing every one
could not be fully paid, yet all of 'em might receive part of their Debt. She
consulted Mr. Firmin, by Letter, about this; he approved the Advice, and was
one of the first that subscribed the Composition: but withal, sent her a
Letter, wherein he remitted his whole Debt; and desired to see her, when her
Affair was cleared, and she at quiet. When she came to him, he said, He had
missed in his aim, in what he designed to procure for her, but he would do
something himself: Shortly after, he sent her a good Norwich Stuff, that very
well clothed her, and her Four Children. She told me this, with many Tears; to
which I had the more regard, because I had long known her to be a Virtuous, and
very Prudent Woman.

As Mr. Firmin's Pains, and Care in giving forth these Charities, were not
small; so neither were they little, in procuring them: Not only because many
Persons are hardly persuaded, to give the Bread of themselves and Families to
others; but because it is much more difficult to beg for others, than to give
ones self. He that begs for others, must be Master of a great deal of Prudence,
as well as Wit, and Address: He must know, how to choose the Mollia tempora
fandi, the fittest opportunity of speaking; and when he speaks, he must apply
himself to those passions of the Person, by which only he can be wrought on. I
remember Mr. Firmin told me, of his applying to a Citizen of the highest rank,
for his Charity in rebuilding St. Thomas's Hospital: Of whom he demanded no
less than 100 l. The Person had been some way disobliged by the Governors of
that Hospital; so he refused to subscribe any thing: But our Friend seeing him
one day among some Friends whom he respected, and by whom he was willing to be
respected; and that also he was in a very good Humor; he pushed on his Request
for the Hospital, and prevailed with him so far, as to subscribe the whole 100
l. But to his personal Solicitations, he was forced sometimes to add Letters;
and sometimes succeeded by the Arguments in his Letters, better than by the
Authority of his personal Mediation. I find in one of his Books, in the Year
1679. the Sum of 520 l. 6 s. received of seventy two Persons; in a Book of the
Year 1681. the Sum of 531 l. 19 s. 6 d. received of forty three Persons. All
these were to be treated with, privately, and opportunely; which required much
Time, Caution, Industry, and Discretion: which laid out on his own Business,
what great Effects would it have produced? Mr. Firmin might, much more easily,
have been one of the great Men of the World, than Almoner General for the Poor,
and the Hospitals. I observe in the same Book of 1681. that the Disbursments
against the Sum 531 l. 19 s. 6 d. do amount to 594:15:11. the Balance over paid
is 62:15:5. which over-paid Balance is to be found in many of his Accounts, and
I believe it came out of his own Purse. I must note also, that the Sums were
not given for the Poor alone, or for the Spinners alone; but of 50 l. given, 30
of it is for the Spinners, and 20 for the Poor, sometimes 20 for the Spinners
and 30 for the Poor: Elsewhere 100 l. is given, 50 for the Poor, and 50 for
Spinners; Another gives 50 l. for Cloth, to be divided to the Poor; Another 100
l. for the same use.

Mr. Firmin having set his heart so much on Charity, could not but esteem and
love Mr. Gouge; a Man of the same Spirit: whom, while he was in London, he got
to table with him. It Is not to be doubted, that 'twas the intimate Friendship
of these two Persons, that gave occasion to that (remarkable) passage, in Dr.
Tillotson's Funeral Sermon on Mr. Gouge, p. 82. Mr. Gouge was of a disposition,
ready to embrace and oblige all Men; allowing others to differ from him, even
in Opinions that were very Dear to him. Provided, Men did but fear God, and
work Righteousness; he loved them heartily, how distant soever from him in
Judgment about less Necessary things: in which he is worthy to be propounded as
an Example, to Men of all Persuasions. And till the Example is followed, the
World will never have Peace.

That great Preacher has given us an account, of Mr. Gouges Religious Charity
in printing diverse good Books, in the Welsh and English Tongues; to be given to
those that were Poor, and sold to such as could buy them: the Chief of those
Prints, and the most Expensive, was an Edition of the Bible and Liturgy in the
Welsh Tongue; no fewer than Eight Thousand Copies, of this Work, were printed
together. One cannot question, that Mr. Firmin contributed to, and procured
diverse Sums for this excellent Undertaking of his Friend; though all is
attributed to Mr. Gouge, who was Chief in that great and good Work. After Mr.
Gouge's Death, I find the Sum of 419 l. 9 s. given to buy a Number of those
Bibles; whereof Dr. Tillotson (then Dean of St. Paul's) gave 50 l. Mr. Morris
67 l. other Persons the rest: but there wants in the Receipts 26 l. 13 s. to
balance the Disbursment; and that, I judge, was Mr. Firmin's money.

Now that we are speaking of Books, I ought not to forget, that Mr. Firmin
often printed Ten thousand Copies of the Scripture-Catechism; which some think
was written by Dr. Worthington: But I have cause to believe, that the Author
was Dr. Fowler, now Bishop of Gloucester; who in compiling it, followed the
Method of Dr. Worthington. These Mr. Firmin gave to his Spinners, and their
Children; and to the Children of the Hospital: engaging them to get it by
heart; and giving something to those that did. He lodged also great Numbers of
them with Booksellers, at cheaper rates than they were printed, that they might
be sold also cheaper; and thereby, be dispersed all over England. His
Acquaintance might, at all times, have of them what Numbers they would, gratis.
He valued this Catechism, because it is wholly in the Words of Scripture;
favors no particular Party or Persuasion, and therefore is of general Use: the
Aim of the Judicious Author being to instruct the Youth, and the Ignorant, in
what all Parties agree is necessary to be believed, and done; leaving it to
others, to engage 'em in Controversies and Debates.

In the Year 1680. and 1681. came over the French Protestants; new work for Mr.
Firmin's Charity and Zeal: for of all the Objects of Charity, he thought those
the most Deserving, who were undone for Conscience toward God; whether such
Conscience be a well-inform'd Conscience, or an erroneous and mistaken. It Is
not the truth or falsehood of the Opinion, but the Zeal for God, and the
sincerity to the dictates of Conscience, that makes the Martyr. Therefore now
our Elemosinary General had to beg, not only for the Spinners, the Poor of the
out-Parishes of London, the Redemption of Debtors from Prison, for Coals, and
Shirting; but for a vast number of Religious Refugees, whose Wants required not
only a great, but an immediate Succor. The first, and one of the most
difficult Cares for them, was, how to provide Lodgings for such multitudes, in
a City where Lodgings are as costly as Diet? But Mr. Firmin bethought him of
the Pesthouse, then empty of Patients: the Motion was approved by the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen; and some Hundreds of these Strangers were
accommodated in that spacious and convenient Place. As for Relief in Money, they
made their first application to the French Church: therefore I find in Mr.
Firmin's Books, Delivered to the Deacons of the French Church 50 l. to J. S. 10
l. to an old Man at Ipswich 20 l. This was immediately upon their coming over.
In 1681 and 1682, I find the Sum of 2363 l. 10 s. 1 d. issued forth for the use
of the French through his hands; and in 1683, for the French Children at Ware 443
l. 18 s. 9 d. For their Meeting House at Rye 20 l. I find upon his Books these
following Sums, before a Brief was granted to them, 100 l. then 155 l. in the
next page 70 l. 15 s. To answer these Receipts, the Books say, Sept. 15.
Delivered to Mr. Carbonel, etc. in 16 pieces of Cloth, 50 l. Sept. 24. To the
Deacons at the Savoy, in Cloth, 20 l. Oct. 7. To Carbon, etc. in 32 pieces of
Cloth, 100 l. 14 s. The balance is 27 l. 8 s. which ('it is likely) was his own
money.

In the Year 1682. he set up a Linen Manufacture for the French at Ipswich, to
which himself gave 100 l. which was all sunk in their Service, saving that at
last he received 8 l. 2 s. 6 d. He paid also for their Meeting House at Ipswich
13 l. In the same Year also he disbursed for them for Coals 60 l. 10 s. whereof
he received only 20 l. 10 s. There have been Four Briefs granted to the French,
one by K. Charles in 1681. a second by K. James in 1686. another by K. James in
1687. the fourth by K. William in 1693. Besides which, K. William gave to 'em
1000 l. per Month for 39 Months. It was Mr. Firmin that was chiefly concerned
in the distribution of all this Money; especially of the Thirty Nine Thousand
Pounds, which was committed to two Bishops, two Knights, and a Gentleman; but
almost the whole Distribution was left to Mr. Firmin, sometimes with, but more
commonly without their Inspection. I see I have omitted, before I was aware,
the following Sums, paid to the French Protestants at Ipswich, before their
Brief was collected; 45 l. 10 s. and 42 l. and 45 l. 9 s. another 42 l. to 21
Families at Ipswich.

He had a principal hand in the special Collections, that are now made every
Winter, about Christmas time, in Churches, for the Poor in and about London. He
was the man that solicited the King's Letter for making those Collections; he
took care of printing and distributing the King's and Bishop of London's
Letters to the several Rectors, and other Ministers, of Churches in London, to
be by them read in their respective Churches. He waited on the Lords of the
Treasury for the King's part of that Charity: And when the Money, as well of the
King as the Parishes, was collected, and paid into the Chamber of London, and
was then to be divided, among the Poor of the several Parishes, by my Lords the
Bishop and Mayor of London; no man could so well proportion their Dividends as
Mr. Firmin. This was well known to their Lordships, who, therefore, seldom made
any alteration in his Distributions. In these matters, all the Churchwardens
made their applications to Mr. Firmin; and when the Dividend was settled,
received their Warrants from him: For which purpose, the Bishop of London would
many times entrust him with Blanks, and my Lord Mayor was always ready to give
his Hand. The whole of this Charity was so constantly, and so many years,
managed by Mr. Firmin, that, he dying some days before Christmas last, the
King's Letter, for the Collection, was not given till the 12th of January: And
when the Collection was brought in from the several Parishes, they were at a
loss for the Distribution, and were glad to take direction from Mr. Firmin's
Pattern.

There has been occasion in my last Section, to mention the Bishop of London,
(Dr. Henry Compton) I ought not to omit, that Mr. Firmin could never speak of
this Bishop, without a particular respect and deference: He admired the Candor,
Moderation, Wisdom, and Dexterity, accompanied and tempered by Caution and
Vigor; which (said he often) are so eminent in his Lordship, and so constantly
appear upon all occasions, proper to any of those Virtues, that I wish it were
as easy to be like, as it is impossible not to esteem him. I return to Mr.
Firmin.

During the last 23 or 24 years of his Life, he was one of the Governors of
Christ-Church Hospital in London. It Is known to every body almost in London,
that Mr. Firmin procured a great number, and very considerable Donations to
this Hospital; but I cannot specify many particulars, because he kept not
exact accounts of 'em; but those that have come to my knowledge, are remarkable;
of one of which give me leave to give the Reader this account. The Honorable
Sir Robert Clayton, having had it in his thoughts to make a provision for a
Mathematical Master in that Hospital, became the hapy Proposer, and (by his
interest in the then Lord Treasurer Clifford, and Sir Robert Howard) the
successful Procurer of the establishment of a Mathematical School in that
Hospital, for the constant breeding of the number of 40 Boys, skilled in the
Latin Tongue, to a perfect knowledge in the Art of Navigation. The occasion
thus. There was 7000 l. given to this Hospital, by a Citizen, (payable out of
Weavers-Hall) for the maintenance of 40 Boys: Upon the Restoration, the Fund,
out of which this issued, reverting to the Crown, King Charles the 2d. upon the
said Proposal and Petition to that purpose, was graciously pleased to grant to
the Hospital the said 7000 l. to be paid them by 1000 l. per Annum for 7 years;
upon which the Hospital was obliged to maintain the said 40 Boys, successively
to be so educated for ever. Sir Robert Clayton being greatly pleased that he
had been an Instrument in so charitable and beneficial a Constitution, did
afterward meditate a Donation from himself to this Hospital, and so to take it
into his special Care and Beneficence. And that which instigated him to these
thoughts, was, he had labored under a very grievous sickness, even to despair
of recovery; but it pleased the Almighty Governor that he did recover, and Mr.
Firmin was very instrumental in it, both by his personal ministry, and giving
quick notices to Physicians of several symptoms. Hereupon, Sir Robert advises
with Mr. Firmin about the building and adding a Ward for Girls to this
Hospital, as a testimony of his gratitude to God; and determined that Mr.
Firmin should have the management of that Affair. Accordingly he went about it,
you may be sure with great Alacrity and Diligence; but at whose charge he
erected this large Building was a secret, not known to any of the Family but
John Morris Esquire Sir Robert's Partner in this Work also; and perhaps to my Lady:
In this was laid out near 4000 l. but it was not yet finished, when upon
occasion of the unhappy Difference between the Passive-Obedience Men and the
Law-Obedience Men, the former having the power on their side, turned out the
latter both out of the Government of the City and of that Hospital, among whom
Sir Robert (though eminent) was ejected, together with his faithful Agent and
Friend Mr. Firmin, another Governor as I have said. Then it was that Mr.
Firmin broke silence, and upbraided those excluding Governors with depriving
the Hospital of such a Benefactor as the Builder of that Ward. For Sir Robert
was now alone, Mr. Morris being deceased, and having left him the residue of
his Estate. Mr. Firmin also built a Ward for the Sick, to prevent infecting the
Healthy and Sound; if the small Pox, or other contagious distemper, should
happen among the Children, as it often does. This Ward cost 426 l. 4 s. besides
6 l. 5 s. for a Press; but the Gentleman that gave the money for both, would not
then be known; and continues still of the same mind. I find, however, an
account in Mr. Firmin's Books of 1537 l. (the Sick Ward included) received, and
laid out by Mr. Firmin: And another account of 704 l. 10 d. received, with the
names of the Persons who gave it, and the uses for which it was given. In the
Year of our Lord 1675, our Friend built two Houses for the two Beadles, or
other Officers of the Hospital, at his own charge; of which I have a
Certificate, under the Clerk's hand, in these words. At his own proper cost and
charges, Mr. Firmin set up a Clock and Dial, for the use of the Hospital, at
the top of the North-end of the great Hall. The said Mr. Firmin built two new
brick Houses in the Town-ditch, one at the South-West end, the other at the
North-East, to be disposed to such Officers, as the Government of the Hospital
should think fit. Farther, at his own cost and charge, a Shed, or little Room,
at the East End of the late Bowling-Ally; and a new brick Wall: he repaired all
the Walls, and levelled the Ground.

At the charge of a Friend of his, a Citizen, he laid Leaden Pipes to convey
the Water to the several Offices of the Hospital; and bought them a large
Cistern; which in all cost about 200 l. these were great Conveniences to the
House, and the Orphans, who before fetched up the water they used on their
backs; which agreed not well with their strength, kept the House foul, and
prejudiced their Clothes. Out of Town he built a School, with all conveniences
to it, for the Hospital Children; this he set up at Hartford, where many of the
Hospital Children are Boarded: the School cost 544 l. 13 s. of which he
received, by the Charity of ten persons, the sum of 488 l. the balance is 56 l.
13 s. which lies upon himself for any thing that appears. He was wont every
Lord's Day, at five in the evening, to see the Orphans of the Hospital at their
Evening service; at what time they prayed, and sung an Anthem by select Voices,
the Chorus by all the Boys. After this, they sat down to Supper at the several
Tables, under the care of their Matrons: here Mr. Firmin viewed them in their
Provisions, and in the Behavior both of them and their Officers and
Attendents, commending, or admonishing, as there was occasion. To this Sight he
invited, one time or other, all his Friends, whether of the Town or Country;
and at last led 'em to the Orphans Box, into which they would put somewhat,
more or less, as they were charitably disposed. A Countryman was very
remarkable: for having seen the Order, and Methods of the Hospital; when he
came home, he made his Will, and gave very considerably to the place. I was
once with our Friend at the Hospital, when looking over the Childrens Supper,
which was Pudding-pies, he took notice of a Pie that seemed not of due bigness;
he took it immediately into the Kitchen, and weighed it himself; but it proved
down-weight.

These Cares did not so wholly employ this active man, but that he was also a
great and good Common-wealths-man. He was always mindful of those who suffered
for Conscience, or for Asserting the Rights and Liberties of the Nation: And he
printed a great many Sheets, and some Books, of that tendency and nature; great
numbers of which he himself dispersed. When King James commanded the reading
his Declaration (for Toleration and Indulgence in Religion) in the Churches; a
great number of well-wrote Pamphlets were printed and dispersed, to convince
people of the bad design of that specious Declaration; Mr. Firmin was a
principal encourager and promoter of those Prints, which cost him considerable
sums, as well for their publication as otherways. He furthered, as much as in
him lay, the Heroical Attempt of the Prince of Orange, to rescue this Nation
from Slavery and Popery: And since His Majesty has been seated on the Throne,
our Friend has been particularly diligent in promoting the Manufacture of the
Lustring Company; because it is highly Beneficial to this Nation, and as
Prejudicial to our (then) Enemy. He had the greatest hand, and used the most
effectual endeavors, for procuring Acts of Parliament, and Rules of Court, in
that behalf.

He and Mr. Renew took great pains, and were at much expense, to prevent
Correspondence with France, and the Importation of Silks, and other Commodities
from thence: For this, they ran the hazard of their lives, from the revenge of
Merchants and others, whom they prosecuted to Execution. A Merchant was so
desperately angry at his Detection, and the great Damage he should unavoidably
sustain thereby, that he went into a room alone, in a Tavern, and ended his
Life by shooting himself into the head. The Agents of Mr. Renew and Mr. Firmin
gave either the first, or very early intelligence of the French Invasion; which
was to have followed the Assassination of the King.

But he was not more a Friend to the Liberties of the Nation, and to the
present Establishment, than he was an Enemy to Licentiousness. He was from the
first a Member of the Society for the Reformation of Manners; he contributed to
it by his Advice, Assistance, Solicitations, as much as his leisure from the
cares and endeavors (before mentioned and exemplified) would permit him: but
his Purse was always with them. He had such a zeal against needless Swearing,
whereby the Religion of an Oath grows vile and contemptible, and False-swearing
becomes almost as common as idle and unnecessary Swearing, to the indelible
scandal of the Christian name, and the great danger (even as far as Life and
Estate) of particular persons: I say his Zeal against common needless Swearing,
in what form soever, was so great, that in Coffee-Houses, or other places,
where he overheard such Swearing, he would immediately challenge the
Forfeiture (appointed by Law) for the use of the Poor; so that in Companies,
where he was frequent, an Oath was seldom heard. But he raised the forfeiture
according to the quality of the person; if a Nobleman, or other person of
distinction, or a Clergyman swore, they came not off at the ordinary
forfeiture, appointed in the Law, it was doubled or trebled upon them;
especially, if any such were very common Swearers, or their Oaths of a profane
or impious sort. If any person refused to pay the forfeiture required; our
Friend would tell 'em, the forfeiture was to the Poor, whose Collector and
Steward he was: if still they refused to pay, their punishment (he told them)
was, to be set down, by him, in the list of his Incorrigible Swearers; and
that, for the future, he would not own them as his Acquaintance, or speak to
'em as such. Diverse Noble Persons would not endure this last; but would
immediately condescend to pay the forfeiture, or promise payment, the which he
seldom remitted; chiefly if they were often in that fault. As for himself, I
never heard an Oath from him in 44 years (almost daily) Conversation with him;
though his temper was naturally quick and warm; and he had often great
provocations to Anger, one of the principal causes of rash and intemperate
Swearing.

But let us return to Mr. Firmin's Charities. No body can have forgot the great
number of Irish Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, and others of all qualities, and both
Sexes, who fled into England from the Persecution, and Proscriptions of K.
James. A Brief was granted to 'em, of which Mr. Firmin was one of the
Commissioners; but besides that, the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Collectors
of every Parish in England, were to give account by Letter to Mr. Firmin, what
Sums they had collected, and paid to the Archdeacons. Therefore, on many
Post-days, several hundred Letters came to his hand, for a long time: and many
of the collected Sums were sent to him, and by him paid into the Chamber of
London; the Money given by the King and Queen was wholly, in a manner, Solicited
and Received by him. The Numbers and Necessities of these Refugees required a
second Brief; the Sum Total (paid to these two Briefs) that went through Mr.
Firmin's hands, was Fifty six thousand five hundred sixty six Pounds, Seven
Shillings and Six Pence. The distribution of the Money, gathered on these
Briefs, was by such a number of the Commissioners; but Mr. Firmin was the most
constant Man at their meetings: sometimes he attended the Distribution from
Morning to Night, without intermission for food. But besides the Sums paid into
the Chamber, and distributed as aforesaid, I am assured our Friend solicited,
and gave many private Sums to particular Persons, whose Quality made 'em
ashamed to take of the common Stock, or whose Necessities required more than
(without giving offense) could be allowed out of it. When by the Mercy of GOD,
and the Magnanimity of the King, Ireland was reduced, and the Protestants might
now return to their Houses, Employs, and Estates; Mr. Firmin doubled his
Industry and Diligence to furnish them for their Journey; because thereby he
not only served them, but eased the Nation, especially the better (that is, the
Charitable) part of it. He obtained great Sums for this purpose; Sir Tho. Cook
(to whom I think it a debt to name him) gave 1500 l. to this Service,
apprehending it a Charity to England, as well as to the poor Sufferers. See
here a Letter from the most Reverend the Archbishop of Tuam, and Seven others;
all of them, I think, Bishops of that Kingdom; I am sure most of them are.

To Mr. THO. FIRMIN.
SIR,
BEing occasionally met together at Dublin, on a Public Account; and often
discoursing of the great Relief, which the Protestants of this Kingdom found
among their Brethren in England, in the time of our late Miseries: We cannot
treat that Subject without as frequent mention of your Name, who so cheerfully
and entirely devoted your self to that Ministry. We consider, with all
thankfulness, how much the public Charity was improved by your Industry; and we
are Witnesses of your Indefatigable Pains and Faithfulness in the Distribution;
by which, many Thousands were preserved from Perishing. We know also, that some
who refused to take out of the Common Stock, as being desirous to cut off
occasion of Murmurs, were however, by your Mediation, comfortably subsisted by
private Benevolences. We doubt not, but you and they have the earnest of your
Reward in the peace of your minds; which, we pray God to sill with Comforts,
and Illuminate with His Truths; making His Grace to abound in them, who have
abounded in their Charity to others. And we entreat, that you, and all such as
you know to have had their parts in this Service, would believe, that we shall
ever retain a grateful remembrance of it; as some Testimony whereof, we desire
you, for your self in particular, to receive this Acknowledgment of your
Kindness to our Brethren, and therein to

Your much Obliged, and most Humble Servants, Jo. Tuam, W. Clonfert, Bar.
Fernleigh, S. Elpin, Edw. Cork and Ross, N. Waterford, R. Clogher, W. Raploe.



Certainly, a Letter very worthy of their Episcopal Character; and which I have
inserted into these Memoirs, as much out of Regard and Reverence to them, as
for the sake of Mr. Firmin.

I shall not, I believe, displease the Reader, if I add a Poem, addressed to
Mr. Firmin by a Clergyman of that Kingdom, and (unless I much mistake) a Dean
there.

On the incomparable Charity, and generous Industry, of Mr. Tho. Firmin, in
Relieving the Irish Refugees.
WHen the late James from King to Tyrant fell,
And for damned Stratagems did ransack hell,
His lawless Claim, by his unlawful Tricks,
He forfeits, and himself from the Throne he kicks.
His perjured Power he put in Irish hands,
Cutting Truth's throat, and ours, to retrieve their Lands;
Shepherd and Sheep were chased by Beasts of prey,
Or Men more greedy after Blood than they:
For these first slaughter Souls, and then they say,
For the good of them, they must the Bodies slay;
Lest turning into Heretics again,
They transubstantiate into worser Men.
To shun these Meritorious Acts we fled,
Quitting our Land, on Water to beg Bread;
To shun the Storm, we did embrace the Waves
And Winds, less cruel than the breath of Slaves;
Finding that faithless Element more kind,
For we were saved, some drowned we left behind.
Sea Monsters are not half such thirsty Foes
For English Blood, as are the Mac's and Oo's.
And when on Board we still feared Teaguish Traps,
Because they are called the Irish Seas in Maps:
Except good Conscience we came stripped of all,
Which we our Naked Truth may truly call.
With glad yet heavy hearts we saw this Shore;
So many Tears never swelled the Tides before.
This Weeping Scene soon moved the Royal Pair,
To recommend us to the Kingdom's Care.
A select number, both of Good and Great,
Did give, and portion out, our Monthly Treat.
But our vast Numbers, and the various Sums,
The clamorous Poor (which hither daily comes)
Wearied the Managers, who soon let all
On Indefatigable Firmin fall.
FIRMIN, our Prop, and our Foundation too,
Who Raised and Built up our Hopes anew;
Like generous Wine, he seemed by Age to grow
Stronger, not Sowrer; and he never ran low.
But let the Brazen Leaves of his fresh Fame,
Ring through the World the Praises of his Name:
And let the Eccho's of his Virtues run,
To Regions far beyond the Setting Sun.
May his loud Morals gloriously resound,
Where either Men or Angels may be found.
May he the Things above never beg in vain,
Who fed of Beggars such a numerous Train.
He 'spous'd our Wants to such a high degree,
As if we'd all been his own Family;
His hand, stretched forth, gave course unto our blood,
There is no Circulation without Food:
But all his Dividends did Unions prove,
Tying us faster in the Bonds of Love.
His Tongue so feelingly our Wants declared,
As if with us in Misery he shared;
If Preachers moved their Congregations, he
Moved Preachers more, that they would fervent be.
Pity so fast into his heart distilled,
'Twas like to burst the Vessel which it filled.
As Ministering Spirits fly about, so he
In Works like theirs, seems all Activity:
But if the Chariot thus Ethereal prove;
How Rarified the Soul which does it move!
And thus breaks forth from its too narrow station,
To animate the body of a whole Nation;
And is so full of Charitable Fire,
That like Elias sure it must retire.
Till then, he acts the Guardian-Angel's Charge,
Afflicted Men to Succor and Enlarge;
And daily does that Heavenly Lesson learn,
To Act for others without Self-concern;
S' entirely making our Interest his own,
As if he had been born for us alone.
Though great and many were his own Affairs,
He lays them by; for us were all his Cares;
And that he might the more with us agree,
He seemed to have lost all things as well as we.
If we were Banished from all Worldly Wealth,
He his Estate did Banish from himself.
Who Will then call that Faith bad, that does so well?
Without Works to Believe, belongs to Hell.
And if by Faith Works live, we may him style,
The Father of the Faithful of our Isle.
Scripture is Creed; for Christians went to Bliss
By the light of that, before compiling this.
Go on in Acting, for Faith moves by Love;
They Are Twins, that labor here, and live above.
Wisdom and Power were Terrible in God,
Were It not for the Attribute of being Good:
So Christians not for Thoughts or Speculation
Are saved, but by Acts of Regeneration;
Goodness attempers all, in Man and Maker,
And may (for ought I know) even save a Quaker.
Faith the true Life of the Just is said to be;
But the Life of Faith consists in Charity.
Thus his Faith is no single Star or Notion,
But the chain of Graces in a Constellation,
Which Irish Bodies most respects; for we
Were all eclipsed till'ts Influence set us free.
His Moral Faith for us so current went,
It past for Thousands when the Briefs were spent:
Ours could not go so far. He to raise more,
Did make his Charity to run on Score;
Contracting for Chance Money certain Debt:
So we enjoyed what he perhaps wants yet.
His Love so great, that like us he would be,
Trusting to Providence as well as we.
I am no Poet; but these Lines have writ
To show the World my Gratitude, not Wit.
Unthankfulness would Disingenuous be,
Beyond the want of Ingenuity.
Therefore let all who are obliged, and can,
Bring some small Offering to this God-like Man:
That our Resentments may to after-Ages,
Embalm his Merits in a few kind Pages.
In April 1693. Mr. Firmin entered upon part of the care of another Hospital,
that of St. Thomas, in Southwark: a Foundation intended for the Relief of all
sorts of Lame, or wounded, or Sick Persons, till they are recovered by the
application of proper Medicines, and other means, and by the service of the
Physicians and Chyrurgeons of the Hospital. Sir Rob. Clayton, (now Father of
the City of London) being, upon the Decease of Sir John Lawrence, chosen
President of this Hospital, thought fit to accept of that Province: but upon
view of it, he took notice that it was greatly gone to Ruin, the Ground about
the Lodgings in a long tract of time raised so high, that the Patients lay as
it were in a Cellar, without the benefit of Air or good Scent, but close and
noisome: And the Roof and Walls so out of Repair, that the poor Patients
oft-times could not lie dry in their Beds. He saw the greater part of it must
be Rebuilt, it could not be Repaired; and that the Rebuilding could not be
delayed without great Danger and Damage to the place, whereof some part
prevented the Workmens pulling it down, by falling of it self: Therefore,
knowing well his Friend Mr. Firmin's Activity, and good Address in Works of
that nature, he caused him to be chosen one of the Governors of that Hospital.
He was chose in April; and finding that the Revenues of the Hospital would go
but a little way in the Rebuildings or Repairs, and besides could not be well
spared from the Supply of the Wounded and Sick; in July he got him three round
Boxes, in each of them a Parchment, one for Subscriptions of 100 l. the second
for Subscriptions of 50 l. the third for 25 or 20 Pound Subscriptions. The
President was pleased to subscribe 300 l. and other Governors were liberal; so
were diverse Merchants, and other rich Traders; that the whole Subscription was
not much short of Four thousand Pounds. Without doubt, the most of this Money
would have been subscribed, though Mr. Firmin had not been the Solicitor for it:
yet I reckon, and am supported in my computation by knowing and equal Judges,
that the Subscription was greater by a Thousand Pounds, than it would have been
if Mr. Firmin had not been concerned in procuring and improving the
Subscriptions. A prospect of the Charge being taken, and some Money (near 4000
l.) toward it procured; Materials must also be provided; and Workmen consulted
and agreed with. Mr. Firmin was constant in the Committee appointed for that
matter: I took notice, that the Master Builders made their most frequent
application to him; and he was as careful to oversee their Proceedings. Several
of the Wards for the Patients are now finished; besides a spacious Hall,
supported by Pillars, which make a very handsome Piazza. It troubled the
Governors very much, that they were obliged to rebuild the Church of that
Parish, which would cost some Thousands of Pounds, that could not be taken out
of the revenue of the Hospital, without great prejudice to the House and
Patients. It happened that the Parliament were then about settling a Tax for
finishing St. Paul's Church in London; so the Governors of St. Thomas Hospital
petitioned the House of Commons to have some share in that Tax toward the
Rebuilding their Church: but because many other Parishes prayed the like
assistance at the same time, the House, upon a debate in a Grand Committee,
resolved, that only St. Paul's and Westminster-Abby Churches should have any
such provision allowed to them. Mr. Firmin hereupon came home, not a little
heavy: but he, and another of the Governors, put into Writing (that very
night) some reasons, why St. Thomas his Church might better claim some favor
of the Honorable House, than other ordinary Churches. They used such diligence
as to get their Paper printed against the next morning: Mr. Firmin and his
Associate gave copies of it to the Members as they entered the House; telling
them, they must not expect to have any sick or wounded Seamen cured, if they
did not grant something toward the Rebuilding of that Church: The effect was,
that the House took the matter again into consideration, and allowed 3000 l. to
the Hospital for the use desired: On which our Friend came home with more
pleasure and satisfaction, than if an Estate of that value had fallen to
himself.

Among his other Charities, he was not unmindful of those that suffered by
Fire, but would immediately apply himself to 'em for their present Relief:
afterward he assisted 'em in soliciting their Briefs, and to manage their
Briefs (when obtained) to the best advantage. He often lent money to honest
persons, to answer sudden emergences or distresses; but he lost so much this
way, that he was forced at last, resolutely to forbear lending: but, instead of
lending, he would many times give some part of what they desired to borrow.

He put very many Boys to Apprentiships, and contributed to setting them up, if
they had served their Apprentiships faithfully and diligently. He has told me
that the Clergy of London, and other dignified Persons in the Church, often
enabled him in this kind of Charity: He said, he had put many Boys out with the
money of some of the richer Clergy; who considered this (he thought) as a sort
of Charity that extends to the person's whole life, and might be the ground of
many Charities in time to come.

It deserves, in my opinion, to be reckoned among his Charities, that when
(some two or three years since) there was a great Scarcity of current Coin, all
the money in England being either clipped, or debased by mixture of coarse
metals; he lessened his expense by laying down his Coach, that he might be the
more able to continue his former Charities, at a time when they were more
needful than ever.

I have now accounted for the general Endeavors and Performances of Mr.
Firmin's Life: the particulars, to each general Head, were too numerous to be
reckoned up, without tiring the Reader, if not also the Writer. But we have
taken, though but a short, view of a Person, of middle Extraction and slender
Beginnings, who raised himself to the honor of a very great number of
Illustrious Friendships, and to an affluence of Worldly Wealth. To which when
he had attained, by Industry, Integrity, and Worth, like our Savior, He went
about doing good. Nay, like the same our Savior, He became Poor, that through
his Poverty others might be Rich. A Person, who in respect of his endeavors in
all kinds of Charity, may deservedly be called the Father of the Poor; in
respect of the Irish and French Resugees, the Almoner of England. The Divine
Hand had qualified him to do much Good; himself sought out the Objects and
Occasions for it, and delighted in the doing. He did it with so much diligence
and application, that he might even have said, with our Savior, My meat is to
do the will of him that sent me; and to finish his Works, i. e. the Works that
he has commanded. John 4.34.

The Jesuit that assisted the late famous Marshal Luxemburgh, in his last
hours, thought he might put this question to him: Well, Sir, tell me, had you
not rather now to have given one Alms to a poor Man, in his distress, for God's
sake, than to have won so many Victories in the Field of Battle? The Marshal
confessed he should now choose the former; seeing nothing will avail any man,
in the Eternal World, but only the Actions of Charity; or of Justice and Piety.
The Confessor does not seem to have been impertinent in the question; for in
our serious last hours, we shall all be sensible, and forward to confess, that
we were Wise only in that part of our life, that was laid out in the duties
either of Humanity to Men, or Piety to God. The Crassi and Craesi, the
Hannibals and Luxemburghs, the most conspicuous for Wealth, or Military Glory,
how gladly would they now give all that Tinsel, for some part of our Firmin's
Sweat and Drudgeries for the Poor, and for the Deserving? Is it for want of
FAITH, or of CONSIDERATION, that we so much more delight to read the Acts of
the Alexanders, the Charlemains, and other false Heroes, than of Persons that
have been exemplary for Justice, Beneficence, or Devotion; and are now
Triumphant in Heaven, on the account of those Services to God, and to Men? But
so it is, either because we are not Christians, or because we are Fools; we are
(commonly speaking) better pleased with the Sons of Earth, than of Heaven.

I have read somewhere, but so long since, that I forget the Author's Name, and
the Subject of his Book; that the Punishment of Judas, who betrayed our
Savior, is, that he stands on the surface of a swelling dreadful Sea, with his
Feet somewhat below the water, as if he were about to sink. The Writer says,
besides his continual horror and fear of going to the bottom, a most terrible
Tempest of Hail and Wind always beats on the Traitors naked body and head: he
suffers as much by Cold, and the smart of the impetuous Hail, as it is possible
to imagine, that he could suffer by the Fire of Purgatory, or of Hell. But,
says my Author further, in this so great distress, Judas has one very great
Comfort and Relief; for whereas the Tempest would be importable, if it beat
always upon him from all sides; at a little distance from him, and somewhat
above him, there is stretched out a sheet of strong coarse Linen-cloth; which
sheet intercepts a great part of the Tempest. Judas regales himself by turning
sometimes one side, sometimes another side of his head and body, to the shelter
of this sheet. In short, the sheet is such a Protection to him, that it defends
him from the one half of his Punishment. But by what meritorious Action, or
Actions, did Judas deserve so great a Favor? Our Author answers, He gave just
the same quantity of Linen-cloth to a certain poor Family, for Shirting. It had
been impossible that this Gentleman should hit on such a conceit as this; but
from our Natural Opinion of the value and merit of Charity; it seems to us a
Virtue so Excellent, that it may excuse even Judas from some part of his
Punishment. I can hardly afford to ask the Reader's pardon for this Tale; I
incline to think, that diverse others may be as well pleased with the Wit of it,
and the Moral employed in it, as I have been, who remember it after above 40
years reading, without remembering either the Author, or Argument of the Book.

I return once more to our dear Firmin, to take leave of him forever. He had
very much weakened his (otherwise) strong and firm Constitution, by his manifold
Charitable Employments, etc. having been sometimes liable to Jaundies, often
afflicted with Colicks, and scarce ever without a Cough; his Lungs had long
been Ptysical. He would often return home so tired and depressed in his
Spirits, that his Pulse was scarce to be felt, or very languid: he would then
take a little rest in his Chair, and start up out of it, and appear very
vigorous in Company, especially where any good was to be done. The more
immediate cause of his death was a Fever which seized his Spirits, beginning
with a chilness and shivering, and then a heat ensued. He was at the same time
afflicted both in his Lungs with a great shortness of breath, not having
strength to expectorate, and also with such terrible pains in his Bowels, that
for many hours nothing could be made to pass him. He had for many years been
troubled with a large Rupture. All which made his Sickness very short. He had
wished in his lifetime, that he might not lie above two days on his last
Sickbed; God granted to him his desire; he lay not so long by eight hours: And
December. 20. about two of the Clock in the morning, Anno 1697. he died.

During his decumbiture, he was visited by his most dear Friend the Bishop of
Gloucester: What passed between em his Lordship has made me to know, under his
own hand, in these words. Mr. Firmin told me he was now going: and I trust,
said he, God will not condemn me to worse Company than I have loved, and used,
in the present Life. I replied, That he had been an extraordinary Example of
Charity; the Poor had a wonderful Blessing in you: I doubt not, these works
will follow you; if you have no expectation from the merit of them; but rely on
the infinite Goodness of God, and the Merits of our Savior. Here he answered,
I do so: and I say, in the words of my Savior, When I have done all, I am but
an unprofitable Servant. He was in such an Agony of body, for want of breath,
that I did not think fit to speak more to him, but only give him assurance of
my earnest Prayers for him, while he remained in this World. Then I took solemn
and affectionate farewell of him; and he of me.

It is usual to conclude Lives with a character of the Persons, both as to
their Bodies, and the qualities of their Minds: Therefore I must further add.
Mr. Firmin was of a lower Stature, well proportioned; his Complexion fair and
bright; his Eye and Countenance lively; his Aspect manly, and promising
somewhat extraordinary; you would readily take him for a Man of good Sense,
Worth, and Dignity. Walking or Sitting he appeared more comely than standing
still; for his Mein and Action gave a gracefulness to his Person.

The endowments, inclinations, and qualities of his Mind, may be best judged by
the account we have given of his Life. It appears, he was quick of
apprehension, and dispatch, and yet almost indefatigably Industrious;
properties that very rarely meet in the same Man. He was, besides, Inquisitive
and very Ingenious; that is, he had a thirst of knowing much; and his fine and
mercurial Wit enabled him to acquire a large Knowledge, with little labor, but
he was utterly against subtilties in Religion. He could not dissemble; on the
contrary, you might easily perceive his love or anger, his liking or dislike:
methoughts, in both these respects he was rather too open; but both are the
effects of sincerity, and arguments of an honest mind. He never affected
proudly the respects of others, whether above or below him: with which I was
the better satisfied, because it follows, that his Charities proceeded not from
any affectation of Honor, or Glory among Men; but from the love of God and his
afflicted Brother. He was Facetious enough, but without affecting it; for he
valued (what indeed himself excelled in) Judgment, rather than Wit. He was
neither presuming or overbold, nor yet timorous; a little prone to Anger, but
never excessive in it, either as to measure or time: which Acrasies, whether
you say of the Body or Mind, occasion great Uneasiness, and sometimes great
Calamities and Mischiefs, to Persons who are ridden by those Passions. If the
mind is turbulent by strong Passions of any sort, the life is seldom serene and
calm; but vexed with great Griefs and Misadventure. His manner of Conversing
was agreeable; so that seldom any broke friendship with him. Being well assured
in himself of his own Integrity, he could even unconcernedly hear that this or
that Man spoke ill of him. When I told him of that infamous Story of the
impudent Coffee-Man, which had been broached 6 or 7 years before, had he not
been over persuaded, he would not have taken any notice of him: Yet was more
concerned at Mr. B's printing it, than at the other fellow's inventing it; not
from the least consciousness of guilt, but that he should be so unchristianly
used by a Minister of the Gospel, who too rashly took up the Story against him.
Which shows what strange things may be done under pretense of a Zeal for
Religion.

My Lady Clayton has so great a Respect for his Memory, that she has (with the
concurrence of Sir Robert) since his death, erected a handsome Monument in their
Garden at Marden in Surry, in a Walk there, called Mr. Firmin's Walk, by reason
of his Contrivance and Activity in it. This Monument is a Marble-pillar, about
eight foot high, with an Urn, and Flowers growing out of the top of it, with
this Motto, Florescit funere virtus, an Emblem you may conceive of Death and
Resurrection. There is also a Marble-table fixed to one side of this Pillar,
with the Inscription following.

To perpetuate (as far as Marble and Love can do it) the Memory of Thomas
Firmin, Citizen of London.
NONE ever passed the several periods of Human Life more irreprochably, or
performed the common Duties of Society with greater Sincerity and Approbation.
Though it appears, by his public Spirit, that he thought himself born rather
for the Benefit of others, than his own private Advantage; yet the satisfaction
of doing Good, and the universal Esteem of honest men, made him the happiest
Person in the World. But his Charity (which was not confined to any Nation,
Sect, or Party) is most worthy thy Imitation, at least in some degree, O
Reader. He was as Liberal of his own, as Faithful in Distributing the pious
Donations of others, whom he succesfully persuaded to relieve the distressed,
particularly the laborious Poor; for of vagrant, idle, and insolent Beggars, he
was no Advocate nor Encourager. His agreeable Temper rendering him an
extraordinary lover of Gardens, he contrived this Walk, which bears his Name,
and where his improving Conversation and Example are still remembered. But since
Heaven has better disposed of him, this Pillar is erected to Charity and
Friendship by Sir Robert Clayton, and Martha his Lady, who first builded and
planted in Marden.

Born at Ipswich, in Suffolk. Buried in Christ-Church Hospital, London.
I have now answered the Demand of diverse, as well Strangers as Friends, of
writing and publishing some account of Mr. Firmin's Life and Death: I hope the
well-minded Reader will find much in it, that may both confirm and strengthen
him in the best Ways, especially in Humanity and Charity. He may see here, how
much beneficence a good Man, of but indifferent Estate, is capable of
exercising, by means of Acquaintance and Conversation with well-chose Friends;
whom he may excite, by his Example and Solicitations, to be highly useful in
their Generation; and thereby, be himself incomparably more useful, than
otherwise he could be. But if I am less succesful in that part of my Design,
than I wish to be; yet I have much eased my own mind, by paying some part of
the debt that I owe to the Memory of our Friend. The rest I shall be always
paying, by a Grateful and Mournful Sense of the Public and my own Loss and
Benefit by him, when present, and as now deceased.

I cannot better end than in the words of a Letter, written to the Author of
the ensuing Sermon, by a Person of great Worth; and who, from the time that
they came acquainted, enabled Mr. Firmin to do many of those great Services to
the Public, the Deserving, and the Poor, for which he was so highly commendable.

Sir, I received your Letter of Febr. 16. and therewith the Parentation to our
valuable Friend Mr. Tho. Firmin; that Man, of so extraordinary Affections, and
Abilities, for the great Works of Charity and Piety. May it please the Divine
Providence, to raise up to us adequate Successors. In the mean time, what an
Abatement of sorrow is it to us, that He, who alone is Absolutely good, and
All-powerful, lives forever?

-- I am your aff^ctionate and assured Friend, Br. Br.


He had often signified his desire to be buried in Christ-Church Hospital, when
dead, the Care of which had been so much upon his heart while living. In
compliance with which desire, his Relatives have interred him in the Cloisters
there; and placed in the Wall adjoining a Marble to his memory, with this
Inscription, viz. Under that Stone, near this place, lies the Body of Thomas
Firmin, late Citizen of London, a Governor of this and Saint Thomas's
Hospital; who, by the Grace of God, was created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, wherein he was indefatigably Industrious, and succesfully provoked many
others thereto; becoming also their Almoner, visiting and relieving the Poor at
their Houses; and in Prisons, whence also he redeemed many. He set many
Hundreds of them at work, to the expending of great Stocks: He rebuilt,
repaired, and added Conveniences to Hospitals, weekly over-seeing the Orphans.
The Refugees from France, and from Ireland, have partaken largely the effects
of his Charity, Pains, and earnest Solicitations for them. He was wonderfully
Zealous in every good Work, beyond the Example of any in our Age. Thus showed
he his Faith by his Works, and cannot reasonably be reproched for that which
brought forth such plenty of Good Fruits.

He Died Dec. xx. 1697. and in the 66th year of his Age.



The End of the Life.

