THE SYSTEM OF Grace, and Free Will; As it is held in the Catholic Church, and
the Church of England; proposed, and vindicated.

IN A Visitation Sermon.

By STEPHEN NIGH.

LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and A. Bell at the Cross Keys and Bible in Cornhil. 1700.

The System of Grace, and Free Will; as it is held in the Catholic Church, and
the Church of England.
1 Cor. xv. 10. Not I, but the Grace of God, which was with me.


THE liberty, or necessity of Human Actions, has been a warm Controversy; a
very doubtful, and perplexed Inquiry; as well among Divines, as Philosophers.

The Philosophers that said, all our Actions are necessitated, offered for
their Opinion; chiefly that, as the Understanding always, and necessarily
imbraceth (seeming) Truth; so the Will chooses, and cannot but choose, what
seems good, and best. In short, the Will ever follows the present Dictate
of the Understanding: what to the Understanding (for the present) seems
Truth, or good; the Will cannot but approve, and practice. From these Maxims,
it follows that, all Errors are involuntary, and all our Choices necessary.

But more generally the Philosophers denied this fatality of Truth and Error,
of Good and Evil; and some of them with a particular Zeal. They are the words
of Alexander Aphrodisiensis, in his excellent Book de fato to the Emperors
Antonini. Si fatum, tum non sunt laudationes and vituperationes; at si istae
non sunt, non est bonum vel malum morale: and si ista non sunt, profecto nec
Dii. i. e. If there be Fate, then there is neither Praise nor Dispraise; but if
these are not, neither can there be moral Good or Evil: and if not these,
neither truly are there Gods, or a Divine Nature. Therefore these Philosophers
denied, that the Understanding always affects, or necessarily submits to TRUTH:
and much more that the Will necessarily embraces apparent GOOD, or what seems
BEST. It is too well known, said they, that; we are so far from always seeking,
or necessarily submitting to Truth; that we are even afraid ordinarily, and
very shie, of being convinced of some (unconvenient) Truths. And hence it is,
that it is seen in daily Experience, that; Men as readily and easily shut the
Eye of the Understanding against (unwelcome) Truths; as they can shut the
bodily Eye against Light; and thereby exclude it. I may add, not only
particular Men, but whole Nations do this. Can there be a more bright Truth
than, that; a piece of Bread is not a human Body? And yet against this, so many
Nations have shut the Eye of the Understanding; believing that a (consecrated)
Wafer is the real Body of Christ. In short, Interest, or even only
Prepossession, often disposes Men to reject the very clearest Truths.

As to the other, that; the Will always, and necessarily embraces apparent
GOOD, and what seems BEST: the Philosophers opposed it by diverse Arguments.
Wherever there is Prudence, say they, and Reason; there is also a Power of
deliberating: and where Deliberation is, there can be no Constraint, no
Necessity of any sort; if there were, there would be no deliberating. And
whereas some urge, that, after deliberating, we always and also necessarily
choose what seems GOOD, or BEST. That we always choose it, if it were true, yet
were not to the purpose: For I may always choose a thing, and yet I may choose
it freely, and not as constrained or fatally. But it is not true, that we
always choose what is Good or Best; for sometimes, only to show that we are
free, and not determined fatally by the Goodness or Excellence of an Object or
Choice, but by an (...), an arbitrary or self-movement; or out of mere
Wantonness, and Game; we choose, or do, not what is Good or Best, but what has
some unconvenience.

And, if it were necessary to the Will, to choose what (for the present)
appears to the Understanding to be Good, or Best; we could never advise,
consult, or deliberate at all: for the Understanding sees at first view, a
Goodness in some things, and in others that they are best in some respects. It
tarrieth for all that, it suspends its Action and Choice; it advises, whether
there be not something still better: it may be the Consideration and Election
is laid by, for days, or weeks, or even for years; which shows that the
Goodness or even the Excellence of things, does not necessarily and inevitably
dispose us to Choice, or Action. It seems impertinent, to renew here the
Exception, that, let the Consideration or Election be delayed never so long, we
shall at last necessarily choose what shall seem Good, and Best: for I demand,
why now, more than before? what seemed Good and Best, did not before
necessarily determine me, therefore neither can it now, merely because it is
Good or Best.

Again, the most perfect Being of all, GOD; who judges what is Good, and Best,
unerringly; does not always choose the Best. He could have made the World, and
every Creature in it, more perfect than they are: he could have made the World
bigger, Mankind more numerous, and morally better: He could have made us all
impeccable, as the Saints in Heaven are: He could have provided that there
should neither be Sin nor Misery in the World. That he has not chose these
best things; best as well to himself, as to the Creature; was from the Freedom
of his Will. And if thus the Will of the most perfect Mind, is free to choose;
is not obliged necessarily, by the Light in his Understanding; much less are
our less perfect Minds: because, having less Light in our Understanding; our
Understanding can but feebly influence our Will: so far will it be, from
necessarily determining it.

As Philosophy has been always studied together with Divinity, it is obvious to
observe that many Divines, and very potent Parties of Christians, have followed
in the Question now before us, the sense of the particular Philosophers, or
Sects of Philosophy, whom they admired. For some have contended for it, that we
have a (...), an (...); an absolute, and arbitrary Freedom of Will, to choose
Evil or Good, and to refuse. While others have said, on the contrary, that all
Men are under some such natural, or (if you will) moral Impotence; that we
cannot choose or will Good, without the Grace of God, exciting us, and
assisting us, by irresistible Acts. The first of these is Pelagianism; the
other has had several Names, but since the Reformation, it has been called
Calvinism, now (more commonly) Jansenism. What I take to be the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, and of the Church of England (and is a middle, between the
Extremes of Jansenism and Pelagianism) but is not very commonly observed, or
not so dexterously proposed; I shall represent and vindicate by and by. At
present, I observe only in general, that the Catholic Church disapproves the
Conclusions of the Philosophers, as well of the one, as the other side. The
Church does not think, the ordinary (the civil) Choices or Actions are in any
degree necessitated; but that there is a liberty of Action, and Choice: A
liberty, that is grounded on the Prudence, and Reasonableness of our Natures,
and the (consequent) Power of deliberating. And yet, neither does she believe,
that the Human Reason, Understanding, or Will, is sincere and sound: the
Depravation by original Sin is such, that we cannot choose Spiritual Good, or
affect Divine Truths; by the natural strength of our (corrupted) Wills, and
Understandings; but by the Power and Assistance of Grace only.

The Dispute concerning Grace, and the Powers of the Human Will, began shortly
after the year 400. and was first managed by St. Jerome, and St. Austin, on the
one side; and on the other, by Pelagius, Caelestius and Julianus. In the same
Age, tho much later in the Century, it was argued on the one hand, by Joannes
Cassianus, Vincentius Lirinensis, and Faustus of Rhiez: on the other by
Prosper, and Fulgentius; besides others of less note. In the next, and the
following Ages, there were on the Pelagian side (softened by J. Cassianus into
Semi-pelagianism) Hilary and Leontius, Archbishops of Arles; Rabanus,
Hincmarus, J. Scotus; and diverse Councils. On the contrary side, were Remigius,
Lupus, Ratramnus, Godeschalcus; besides not a few Councils. Of the Divines of
the Schools, St. Thomas; of the Orders of the Church, the Dominicans; were
great Asserters of Grace: allowing scarce any thing, if any thing, to
Free Will, and our natural Powers. But the Franciscans, and it may be the
greater number of the School-Divines, tho they believed the Grace of God is
necessary; yet they could not agree to it, that nothing is to be done, or can
be done, by the Human Will and Endeavor. Shortly after the Reformation, this
Question was disputed afresh, by the Jesuits, Socinians, and Remonstrants,
against the Dominicans, Calvinists, and Jansenists.

I am not aware, that there is any enquiry, that more deserves a careful and
heedful Discussion, than this concerning Grace, and Free Will. If, either we
our selves do not rightly understand it, or our People do not apprehend, what
is our meaning; it is impossible they should make sense of what they hear in
this place. They can neither understand the Public Prayers, especially the
Collects; nor our Sermons, and Exhortations to them. For sometimes they are
told they must forsake Sin, and must follow after Righteousness; or it is not
possible they should be saved. It Is well, but they are told also, they
themselves can do nothing of all this: it must be Grace, if perhaps God will
grant it to them, whereby only they can leave Sin, or can follow Righteousness.
But what sense do we suppose can they make of these two Sayings; and what
Troubles must these Doctrines raise in the Mind; when we consider them with any
heed? I must forgo every Sin, I must always do the thing that is right and
good: and yet I cannot do it, but only by God's Grace given to me; nor is that
Grace in my Power to procure it: It Is the free Gift of God, to whomsoever he
gives it; and alas, how many have it not; or rather, how (very) few have it?

And what follows from this? Why, that, all our Exhortations and Reproofs, are
to no purpose: unless we could also (at the same time) give to the Persons
reproved and exhorted Grace; to comply. It seems also to follow, that; it
became not the Wisdom of God, to give any Laws, or Rule of holy Living; to
Persons who are utterly incapable of obeying: without that Grace which is
bestowed, but on some, and but sometimes. It should seem, we can as little
defend the Sincerity of God; in professing that, He wills not that any should
perish; and that he wills, that all may be saved. For the condition of
Salvation, being Obedience; and that Condition, not practicable but by Grace:
it must needs be understood, that God wills those Persons should perish, to
whom he does not give his Grace.

There is no saying, in the case; let 'em pray for God's Grace. For all, that
assert the necessity of Grace to every good Action, and Disposition, are
obliged to maintain, and do maintain that; the Affectus Orandi, the hearty
Disposition to pray for Grace or other spiritual Good, can arise only, from
Grace, aforehand given to the Person so praying. Or will you send them for
Grace to the holy Sacrament? But our Books seem all to agree in it, that; I
know not how many Graces are pre-required; that one may so receive the
Sacrament of the Altar, as not to be damned thereby. It might have been said,
however: an honest Intention, and reverent Performance, are sufficient
Preparation, and Qualification for that Sacrament, or other Gospel-Ordinance.

The Subject we are upon will not admit of further prefacing. As I said
therefore, I shall now propound a Middle, between the two Extremes, of
Pelagianism and Jansenism. The Doctrine, I take it, of the Catholic Church: a
System concerning Grace, and the Human Will, which is clear of all the
Difficulties, whether Theological or Philosophical, hitherto mentioned. It may
be coucht in these (few) Articles; and Texts, and Arguments, that support them.

1. Whatsoever Good we will, or do, is neither done nor willed, without God's
Grace; his Grace moving us thereto, and assisting us therein. This Article is
directly against the Pelagians, that hold the absolute Freedom, and arbitrary
Power of Man's Will. And it seems very plainly expressed, or clearly implied,
in these (following) Texts.

Out of the Old Testament. Psalm. 119.35, 36. Incline my Heart, O Lord, to thy
Testimonies. Make me to go in the way of thy Commandments. Jer. 31.33. says
GOD there: I will put my Law into their inward Parts; I will write it on their
Hearts. Ezekiel. 36.26. A new Heart will I give them, a new Spirit will I put into
them. Lam. 5.21. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord; and we shall be turned.

Out of the New Testament. John 6.44. No Man can come unto me, says our
Savior there, except the Father, who sent me, draw him. Acts 16.14. The Lord
opened the Heart of Lydia, that she attended to the things, which were spoken
by Paul. 2 Timothy 2 25. If peradventure, God will give to them Repentance. 2 Cor.
3.5. We are not sufficient, as of our selves, to think any thing; our
sufficiency is of God. Phil. 3.13. It is God that works in you, both to will
and to do, of his own good Pleasure. Heb. 13.21. The Lord make you perfect, in
every good Work; working in you, that which is well-pleasing in his sight. 1
Cor. 15.10. (being the words of our present Text) Not I, but the Grace of God
which was with me.

These Texts, as I said, either express, or imply, these two things. That, we
are under a Disability, however it has happened, to do, or so much as to will
that which is good; by our own Strength, or Endeavor of any sort: And that
it is by the Grace of God, given to us, that we are disposed to do, or even to
will Good.

But for the right, and full apprehending this first Article; it is to be noted,
that: By the Grace of God, is sometimes meant, the Act; and sometimes, the
Habit of Grace.

The Act of Grace, is any Operation, or Motion of the Divine Spirit, upon our
Spirits; whereby it exciteth us to Good, or enables us therein. The Habit of
Grace, is the gracious, or good frame of Mind; that is begot in us, by the many
former good purposes and Acts; that had been caused in us, by the particular
Motions, or Actings of the Divine Spirit.

If the Pelagians, or Semipelagians, had observed this; they would not have
alleged, the purpose of King David, to build a Temple to God: nor St. Paul's
essaying to preach the Gospel in Bithynia. They would not have pleaded, that
God forbad David; and forbad that Apostle to execute their Purposes: and that
therefore, tho they were indeed good purposes; of necessity, they proceeded not
from a motion of God's Spirit. That God forbad them, shows indeed; those
Purposes came not, from what we have called, the Act of Grace; namely, a
particular Motion of the Divine Spirit. But they might, and did proceed, from
the Habit of Grace: from the gracious, or holy Frame of their Minds, that had
been wrought in 'em, by former Motions, and Operations of the Spirit. In short,
I say; every good Purpose, as well as good Action, is from Grace: either from
that Grace, which is a particular Motion of the holy Spirit: Or, from the Habit
of Grace; that arises from the many former Motions of the Divine Spirit; and
disposes us to well-doing, in the general.

It Is very plain, I think, that this Reflection fully and clearly answers to
that Exception; raised from David's, and Paul's holy Purposes, which God
forbad. For we do not say, that; all good Intentions, and Actions, are from the
Act of Grace: which is a particular Motion of God's Spirit. No, many good
Actions, as well as Purposes, are from the Habit of Grace; even that good Frame
of Mind, that was generated by some former Actings of God's Spirit.

I need only to add here, that; tho the Instances of David, and of Paul, do not
prove that, we can design Good, much less can do it, without Divine Grace: Yet
they prove, with certainty, the Doctrine of the Church, that; good Actions, or
Designs may proceed from the mere Habit of Grace; from a reformed, renewed,
regenerate Heart or Mind, without a particular Motion of the Spirit of God. For
had those good Purposes of David and Paul issued from an immediate and
particular Motion of the Divine Spirit, called the Act of Grace; it is not
imaginable they would have been forbid, as we see they were, 2 Samuel 7.5. Acts
16.17. I am persuaded also, this is our Savior's meaning, in those words, Mat.
12.35. A good Man, out of the good Treasure of his Heart, brings forth good
things: q. d. the renewed, reformed Frame of the Heart, does as easily and
naturally yield suitable Actions; as an ill Man from his vitiated corrupt Heart,
vomiteth evil Actions, Designs, and Words.

2. What ought to be chiefly observed and insisted on, but is commonly
overlooked, by the Managers of the Dispute concerning Grace and Free Will: I
say, what is most material in this Dispute, is. The Grace of God, sufficient to
Conversion; and such a Frame of the Heart, as we have just now described; is
common to all: Is so given to all, that no Person does miscarry, but by a
wilful neglect or dis-use of the Grace given to him. Let us briefly, but
effectually prove this Article; it will dissolve most of the Difficulties, that
are objected, by contending Parties, through this whole Question.

For a general Proof of it, we may observe, that: As so many Texts do aver the
necessity of God's Grace, to enable us to do, or to will that which is good.
Many more (express) Texts require of ALL, Repentance and Well-doing: and other
Texts declare, it is much against the Will of God, that any should perish.
Therefore these latter Texts plainly suppose an universal Grace of God, a
general, common Grace, given to all. For it were a most wretched Impertinence,
or a manifest Mockery, to command all Men, every where, to repent; which are
the express words of holy Scripture: Or to blame, and upbraid them for want of
Faith, or of Righteousness. And yet much more to damn them for the lack of
these things; professing in the mean time, that God wills not that any should
perish, but that all should be saved. I say, this were an open Mockery, or an
Impertinence, if there were not a common and general Grace of God: in the use
of which, we can do, as is required of us; can believe, repent, and do
Righteousness.

I take this to be a very solid Proof of universal Grace; namely that,
universal Grace is supposed, and is implied in the Commands, and Reproofs of
the Divine Word. In the Exhortations used to All at present; and in the
Judgment that God will pass at last on all impenitent, unreformed Persons. And
finally, in the repeated Professions, made by God, that; he wills not that
any should perish, but that all should be saved. 1 Timothy 2.4. He wills all Men
should be saved. 2 Pet. 3.9. Not willing, that any should perish; but that all
should come to Repentance. He even confirms this with an Oath, passed to us.
Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord; I have no pleasure in the death of the
wieked; but that the wicked turn from his way, and live.

Nor does there want particular Proof of universal Grace; or that, sufficient,
saving Grace is given to all. John 1.16. Of his Fullness we have all received
(...) Grace upon Grace, or abundant Grace, or (as Grotius here) Grace gratis.
Ephesians. 4.7. Unto every one of us is Grace given, according to the measure of
the Gift of Christ. Titus 2.11. The Grace of God, that brings Salvation,
(...) illuxit omnibus hominibus; has shone out unto all Men. So that, the
Grace of God (that Grace which brings Salvation) whatsoever we take it to be,
or whereinsoever we imagine it does consist; it has appeared, has shone out
unto all Men. Some critical Interpreters render this Text, rather more to our
present purpose, thus: The Grace of God, that brings Salvation to all Men,
has appeared. And this rendering more nearly follows the order of the words in
the Original Greek.

It is true, some of these Texts may be taken in a sense different from what we
have pretended to: it will be found notwithstanding, that, however taken, they
do not less favor the Doctrine we are proving. For instance, admitting that,
the words of St. Paul; The Grace of God, that brings Salvation unto all, has
appeared; may be understood of the Gospel, which is here called the Grace of
God, in the opinion of diverse. The Gospel, say they; the external or outward
Grace of God, is here meant; not the inward Grace, of which our present
Question is. I say, admitting that, the Gospel is here meant; yet this Text
supposes an universal, inward Grace of God. For even in the opinion of those
who understand this Text of the Gospel, the mere outward Gospel does not bring
Salvation to any; but the Gospel, as accompanied by the internal Grace, that
makes it effectual: So that, if it be true, what the Apostle says; That the
Gospel, that brings Salvation to all, has appeared: it must be true, that,
an universal (internal) Grace goes along with it. And this indeed was the
Opinion of the ancient Doctors; who all believed, that: the internal Grace of
God does always accompany the holy Word, Ordinances, or Gospel, to make it
effectual to all such, as resist not the offered Grace; the Grace that follows
the Word, and other Divine Institutions.

The Arguments we have alleged, may serve, I think, to caution us against a
common Mistake, in our way of speaking. For when we see, or hear of some very
ill Action, or course of Life, by any Person or Persons; we say ordinarily
thereupon, yes, for want of Grace: Implying that such Sinner had not Grace. But
the particular, and especially the general Proof that we have given, of the
universality of Grace, ought (as I said) to caution us against that vulgar
Error, in Speech. When others sin, let us say, according to the Truth; not, he
wanted Grace; but, he used not, or he neglected the Grace common to all: Even
as we say of Prodigals, or Illhusbands; not, that they have not Reason, or
cannot consider; but, as the truth is, they use not their Reason, and use not
the power of Consideration common to all Men.

3. It has appeared, I suppose, that; the Grace of God is necessary to all,
and has shone out unto all: but we must now add further, that: This Grace does
not operate in an unresistible manner, but in a way suitable to our Reasonable
Natures; that is to say, in the way of moral Suasion. Let us again, in few
words, prove the former; and explain the other, even Moral Suasion.

I said, the Grace of God does not operate in us in an irresistible manner: it
will gently and sweetly move; not constrain and force, in a physical way. The
Divine Grace moves us, so agreeably, and in a way so soft, and natural; that We
cannot distinguish its Motions upon our Minds, from our own Thoughts, and the
proper Movements of our own Spirits. We may resist, reject, and refuse the
Grace; by which we should be either converted, or bettered; as we may, and
often do, the different Thoughts, and various Counsels, of our own Minds. That
we can refuse the Grace, and Spirit of God, striving with us, for our good, is
clear in a great many Texts: I shall need to instance but in some, that are
particularly remarkable. Ezekiel. 12.2. They have Ears to hear, and hear not; they
have Eyes to see, and see not; because they are a rebellious House. Acts 7.51.
Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in Heart; ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost. It even appears that, all Grace, both external and internal, is used to
some, who notwithstanding so reject it, as not to be bettered in the least by
it. Isa. 5.8. What could I have done more, says the Lord, to my Vineyard (the
House of Israel) that I have not done? Wherefore then, when I expected it
should bring forth Grapes, has it brought forth wild Grapes?

As to the other, that; the Grace and Spirit of God, do work in the way of
moral Suasion. The meaning hereof is; we are excited to Good, by the Spirit's
representing to our Minds such Arguments, and in such seasonable Opportunities,
as are sufficient to persuade, and to dispose us, to choose this good way, and
to refuse the contrary evil. The Divine Spirit first suggests good Thoughts,
and then, proper Arguments and Motives: it brightens also those Arguments, to
give to them the greater force. What we hear, what we read, the Mercies of God,
and his Judgments: the Spirit represents all these in the fittest time, and
best manner; in a more effectual manner, than Human Wit and Endeavor can. If
we should say also, the Spirit sometimes elevates our Minds; clears 'em, and
(as it were) enlightens 'em, by an extraordinary Act: we should thereby speak,
not disagreeably to not a few Expressions of holy Scripture. Briefly, moral
Suasion is no other thing, but reasonable Persuasion. I say, reasonable
Persuasion; by the Word taught, by holy Readings, by Heavenly Suggestions; by
Favors, by Chastisements: and by that Long-sufferance, and Patience of the
Lord; that subdues, and wins ingenuous Minds. All these, and all such like,
represented to our Minds; after a Divine manner, by the Spirit of God, which
always accompanies them; are what is called, moral Suasion, or reasonable
Persuasion; or God's Spirit, or Grace, acting by moral Suasion.

It was thus, that the Lord opened the Heart of Lydia, to hearken to Paul. The
Discourse, and Reasonings of Paul, were (as I said) brightned upon her Mind;
and her Mind it self was cleared, and elevated by the Divine Spirit. There is
no Hearer but often experiences this Power of the Spirit, on his Mind; and it
may be, diverse times, during one reading or hearing.

Let us see to it, that we resist not the Holy Ghost; as the Apostle has said,
that we quench not the Spirit; but comply with, and be led by, those his
blessed Motions. Which brings me to another Article; very necessary to a right
Apprehension, of this (much litigated) Enquiry concerning Grace, and the Powers
of the Human Will.

4. It Is necessary toward well-doing, and toward Conversion to Good, that; we
receive, and embrace the Motions and Strivings of Grace, and of the Divine
Spirit, with our Spirits. It Is necessary that, our Wills do accept offered
Grace; that we will and endeavor to be good. For our Wills ( excited, and
quickened by Grace) can will Good, and endeavor it: in a word, can comply with
the Intention of the Divine Spirit; moving us to Good.

There is an opening of the Heart, on our part; as well as on the part of God;
says that Text, Rev. 3.20. I stand at the door, and knock; says our Savior
there to the Churches; if any Man will open unto me, I will come in. Some other
Texts speak more plainly. Jer. 4.4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord; take
away the foreskin of your Hearts. Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away, from you, your
Transgressions; make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit. When these Texts bid
us, to open the door of the Heart, to put away the foreskin of the Heart; nay,
to make us a new Heart, and a new Spirit: they evidently suppose our Free Will;
and Power of cooperating, with Grace. That is to say, as our Will is made free,
and is enabled to cooperate; by that Grace that is given, and is continued to
All.

I said, and is continued, to All. For our present Life having been given to
us, in order to our Salvation: it is reasonable to think, that; The term of
Life, and the day of Grace, are co-extended. The Grace of God, I say, is not
withdrawn; while our Life is indulged to us: and least of all, from such as are
in fear, that they have outsinned the (supposed) term of Grace; for such a Fear
implies many Graces, as particularly Repentance and Faith. I confess however,
this Point has considerable Difficulties; and we need not, to affirm it. That
Text before quoted; If peradventure God will give to them, Repentance; may seem
to imply, that. Some Persons may have sinned so obstinately; that is to say, so
long, and so audaciously: that it will please God, to withdraw from them that
Grace, which is sufficient to convert, and change them.

And this, at length, is that System; Scheme, or Account, concerning Grace and
Free Will: that, as I said, at first, is free of all the Encumbrances; that so
much distress the other two Schemes. The Scheme, I mean, of the Pelagians; who
maintain an arbitrary and absolute Free Will, to Good as well as Evil: which
has been condemned, as Heresy; by the Catholic Church. And the Scheme of the
Jansenists, who admit only of an unresistible Grace: a Grace, that never
operates but by an Omnipotent Act; and which, they say, is given but to few.
What we have advanced, to the contrary of both these, may be abridg'd; into
these two Propositions. The Human Will; made free by Acts, or by the Habit, of
Grace; can will, and do GOOD. And, this Grace is given to all; if also it be
not continued, while their Life is.

This Scheme provides, for the Honor of God; by ascribing to his Grace, (as
Jansenius, and Mr. Calvin do) our whole Power of doing, or willing that which
is Good. It provides also with the other Party, or Freewillers, for the safety
of every Person: by supposing, what the Pelagians knew not; an universal,
sufficient Grace of God, given to All. A Grace, that accompanies all the holy
Ordinances; and all other means, of reclaiming Sinners.

Our Scheme justifies also the Wisdom of God; in giving Laws, to Persons
disabled by original Sin: it clears the sincerity, of the eternal King; in
professing, that he desires the Salvation of all. For his sincerity, as well
as his Wisdom, is manifested beyond contradiction: by that Grace, which (we
have proved) he bestows on All; and that goes along with all the Invitations to
Good. It shows, that we may exhort one another, and be exhorted by our
Teachers; to all the Duties, required in the Divine Law. For tho it be most
true, that; without Grace we can do nothing: this System informs us (in the
words of holy Scripture;) that. Of his Fullness, we have ALL received Grace,
gratis. That, to every one of us is Grace given. That, the Grace of God; that
Grace which brings Salvation to ALL; has appeared.

But this once more. Take away this Supposition, of universal Grace; and see
what follows. All Reproofs are impertinent, all Exhortations to no purpose; all
Punishment is both lost and undeserved. Because the Persons for lack of Grace,
can act no otherwise than they do. The Divine Majesty has mocked us; by Laws,
that we cannot obey: and by proposal of Rewards, that we cannot obtain; for
want of his Grace. All our Sins, the very worst of them; together, with our
Damnation; are to be imputed, not to the wilful neglect of the Sinner. But to a
defect, of Divine Mercy; and Sincerity: in withholding necessary Grace; and yet
professing, that God wills All should be saved. I ought to think, this
learned Assembly abhors these Confequences; and no less sees their immediate
Connection, with the Doctrine of partial Grace; or Grace that is given but to a
few.

The Opinion of only partial Grace, is grounded on two Distinctions: the most
surprising (to give them no worse Name;) that ever were advanced, by Men
speaking of GOD. For when we urge the Declarations of God, in the Divine Word;
that he WILLS the Conversion, and Salvation of ALL.

As to the WILLING, they answer by the famous Distinction; voluntas signi, and
beneplaciti. Of which, the English is this. God indeed makes show, by external
signs; such as exhorting, and reproving; that he wills the Salvation of those
Persons. But we are not to judge of his real meaning, by those Signs: for tho he
exhorts, reproves, and even swears to them; after all, it is his secret
Pleasure, and absolute Purpose, that they shall be damned.

As to the ALL; or that, God wills All should be saved: they answer again,
with the Distinction; singuli generum, and genera singulorum. In English thus.
Not all Persons, but Persons of all Orders. That is to say, High and Low, Old
and Young, Men and Women; some of all these Orders and Ranks. If now, we should
suppose. The King publishes an Act of Grace, to all his Subjects; saying
therein: it is our Will, that they be All indemnified; and not any of them be
punished for past Faults. But the Judges, in their executing this Act,
interpret it thus. Some Persons, of all Ranks and Orders, shall be indemnified;
shall be restored to Estate, and Name: some, I say, of every sort, and degree,
among them. Women, as well as Men; old, as well as young; rich, as well as
poor; some FEW of all these. I cannot but think, every body would say; such
Expounders of the King's Indulgence, do very much abuse and pervert their
Master's gracious, and general Intentions.

And let us see, what it is that has occasioned the Jansenists, and other
learned Men, to betake 'em to such remote, and unsufficient Defenses. For all
that I remember, it is only this. If God indeed wills, that ALL should be
saved; then, ALL shall be saved: for what God wills, he has all Wisdom, and
Power, to effect it. But it is certain, ALL shall not be saved; therefore,
neither does God really will that they should be saved. I shall grant, this
were home to the purpose; if our Scheme said, God wills absolutely and
positively that; ALL shall be saved: without any Conditions, to be performed on
their part. But we say only, God wills that, ALL may be saved; unless
themselves will not: that is, unless they will not perform the Conditions. God
wills, that ALL be saved; How does he will it? Why, on the Conditions or
Terms, proposed in his Word; on the Conditions of Faith, Repentance, and
newness of Life. Unto which, ALL are called, by his Ordinances; and ALL are
enabled, by his Grace, if they will use it. The Grace, we mean, that
accompanies the holy Ordinances; and all other means of reclaiming, or
perfecting us.

In a word, it was never said, as is supposed in the Objection; that GOD
wills the Salvation, of ALL; or of Any, absolutely, and unconditionately: but
only, on this Supposition; that they use the Grace, whereby he enables 'em to
obey him.

And thus, as fully as the Time would allow: I have proposed, as I undertook,
and vindicated; what, I take, to be the Doctrine of the Church; concerning
GRACE, and FREE WILL. I hope, it has appeared, with some clearness, that, as
Pelagius mistook: in maintaining the present Freedom, and absolute Power of the
Human Will; without Grace. So others mistake, as dangerously; as his Error has
been judged presumptuous: while they deny, either the Universality of God's
Grace; or the Cooperation of the Human Will, and Endeavor.

FINIS.

