THE Nations Agrievance, (By way of Address from Loyal Subjects) Presented to
his MAJESTY, THE King of Great Britain.
For his Favor, Countenance and Regard, relating to the Countries Election of
their Representatives in Parliament; and the due Execution of Justice, how they
may be duly promoted according to the Regularity of Privileges, of both Prince
and People.
HUMBLY SHOWS,
1. THat for as much as we, your Majesty's Loyal Subjects have been, and are,
marvelously delivered and preserved from evitable danger of destruction that
did attend us, and hang^ over our Heads, by means of the most desperate subtle
Designs, Plots, and Con^^ivances againt your Royal Person, Crown and Digni^ies
thereunto belonging; to the subversion of the p^^ien Government as now
established, in these your Majesty's Dominions: and to the bringing in upon us
(as a Flood) all the Consequenses of mischief and miseries, the most
unavoidable have ensued such Designs (of ho^^id Je^uitrical and Papistical
affected persons) we undern^^he consideration hereof, do look on our selves
obliged, for the Kingdoms safety and hanour (depending on your Majesty) thus to
apply our Supplications and Address to your Princely favor for a speedy Remedy
and Redress of the Nations Grievance.

2. That the Consequences attending the Hel^ish Designs of those Plotters and
Contrivers of Evil and mischief un^o a Nations Ruin and destruction are by the
deposing of their Loyal Prince, and usurping of his Authority to themselves; to
have brought in Popery, Tyranny, and a Tirannical power over your Majesty's
free born Sub^ects (in the room and ^ea^ of Government they sought to change
and ^ervert) which as it is contrary to the Constitution of a free People,
could not be borne or impose: on them without Slaughter and great effusion of
Blood.

3. that notwithstanding (by a timely prevention of a^ger in those evil and
mischievous Designs) the Egg was Crush^ before the Bird of Pray was hatched,
upon wh^m ^a^e the Plotters and Designners of this contrived Evil and mischief;
yet we look not on our selves so safe and secure from the same, or dangers of
the like kind; but that we have just Reason and occasion of Jealousy and fear
that hidden sparks of the same Fire may yet break fo^^h into a worse and more
furious Flame than ever, if any ways should be raked together in its Ashes that
which covets Fuel (or a combustible matter) to feed its Hunger and Thirst after
a Nations Blood and misery.

4. That we your most loyal Subjects, for the future safety of your Royal
Person, Crown and Dignities (and the preserva^ion of all Bites thereunto
belonging) are resolved, as looking on our selves thus obliged, to give your
Majesty our Assistance; that all Plotters and Contrivers of evil and mischief
against such your Royal Person, and to the subversion of the present Government
(in these your Majesty's Dominions estab^ished) may be brought to a speedy and
condign punishment, (after a fair Trial at Law) answerable to the merit of
their horrid Fact and Deserts.

5. That we are resolved (as loyal Subjects to such your Majesty) to endeavor
the finding out all those the Plotters and Contrivers of such Evil and mischief
(against your Person, Honor, Crown and dignities thereunto belonging, and to
present them, together with other the Na^ions Grievances, (by our
Representatives) before your Majesty; in Order to the bringing such Offenders
to a fair Trial.

6. That we your Majesty's Li^^e people conceiving ourselves no ways Vassals of
Tyranny, of to a Tirannical power, but Free Subjects to a Noble Prince and his
Pr^ncely Government (upon which Tyranny and violent Assaulters have been so apt
(in all Ages) to usurp) for these and many other Reasons (we say) especially
considering your Majesty's wisdom to be such, as to affect and choose all those
ways and means for the firm establishing of the Crown and Dignities of the
Government (so in Peace and perfect Tranquillity) that may absolutely unite your
Subjects hearty affections to serve you, in such the Government, subjecting with
Delight, to the Yoke thereof; we on these Considerations, do think and believe
we may justly expect from so Just and merciful a Prince, the Countenance of
Justice upon your own and the Nations Enemies.

7. That as Loyal Subjects (ready to serve their Prince and Country) we are as
confident as infallible in our Resolutions) to pursue un^o Justice all
occasions of Evil and mischief in the Case before mentioned; and because a
peoples disaffection to the present State of Government established (in these
your Majesty's Dominions, are hence made discoverable (when Climbers after
Dignities are at highest under the Disguise of wrong, abuse, and injuries)
which has been and dayll are done to Justice in these Cases, reflecting upon
ill occasions taken to heighten ill affected persons to such the present State
of Government, by your Princely favors, we are bold of our acceptance, and
because furthermore, whilst to them (who nevertheless they have been and are
highly promoted and advanced unto Offices and great places of Trust, is no self
security of holding and enjoying what they have climbed up unto, or are crept
into; without a subversion and change in the Face of such that Government,
which has power to call them to Account for misapplying and mispending
oppertunities put into their hands to have done both their Country and
themselves good service.

8. Thot we are resolved in all Duty to our Liege Prince, to pursue your
Majesty's Order and Command relating to our Election o^ Choice of Members for
the chief and great Counsel (to be holden by privilege of Parliament) v z to
choose as the Kingdoms Representatives, Men fearing God, and having
Covetousness, etc. And that may be no ways partial in their Counsel and advice
to your Majesty, to present before you, the Common peoples Grievances; for the
remiding of which, and whatever else is or may be amiss, we implore their Zeal
and fervency, under your Majesty's Countenance, to be managed with an
Impartial hand toward all Offenders of what Degree or Quality soever.

9. That all Court-Officers, Militia-Officers, Pentioners, and other Indigent
Officers, of what Degree or Quality soever, are not in the apprehension of the
Common people and your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, accounted compitent in their
Judgments for your Majesty's great Counsel and Advisors about such mighty
matters and Cases wherein Pa^liaments ought to be employed and concerned, but
upon Trial many of them have been found the Imbezelers of your Majesty's and
the Nations Treasure, the exhausters of things, against which we are seeking a
Remedy and Redress, the cause of grievances and daily complaints, the
Countenancing of things attending to your Majesty's Indignity and the peoples
misery, so they also are made an inlet to future and further occasions of our
fears and Jealousies.

10. That our Reasons why the beforementioned persons are not esteemed
compitent in their Judgments for Counsel and a vice to your Majesty in State
Affairs, are, because these having particular pentions from, or dependence upon
your Majesty's favor and Charity, upon which account other places and Offices
of Trust also have been and are committed to them, in the ordering and dispose
of your Majesty's and the Kingdoms Treasure, lest they should be called to
astrict account, therefore they have found ways and means to evadean impartial
and due Representation of things as they are, namely, the Nations Grievance;
and to this end, do endeavor every one according to that wherein lies and
depends his own particular concern and Interest, to put a stop to all due
Execution of Justice (in these cases) whereby, as the cause by such is
augmented, both your Majesty and good Subjects are wronged and abused, and
complaints thereof daily multiplied and increased, the Consequences of which
must of necessity end in a Nations Destruction and Ruin; while the dirt of
their dishonorable Actions, by many disaffected to the present Government, is
so apt to be flung in and upon the Face of your Princely favor.

11. That notwithstanding, we have made our exceptions (upon good Grounds and
Reasons beforementioned, against some unfit Members for your chief and general
Counsel in so great a work, especially such as go under the Denomination of
Papists; yet we neither crave or except in these Cases, any limitation to be
put upon the Countries Choice, other ways than is expressed in your Majesty's
Writs to them directed, which they ought to pursue in obedience to your
Princely favors and Command therein, but we only offer these things unto your
Majesty's favor and Countenance and to the Country, as matters reasonable and
equal, and that for such Reason (according to Justice) we may expect will be
heard and pursued by the Voters.

12. That as a free people, we request in all humble duty and submission to
your Majesty's Royal Command, we may have our free Votes, in the Election and
choice of a free Parliament, for our Representatives, and that those your most
loyal Subjects shall be no ways overawed, threatened or bribed, to pleasure the
Wills and humors of such whose Interest (though it be to Compliment and flatter
your Majesty) runs Counter against ^ll true Service to their King and Country;
and it being contrary to the Constitution of the Government, under which we
live, and privileges that a free people may expect to enjoy, under so noble a
Prince, to have any thing unequal or unjust, and violently imposed or forced on
them, as to their free choice of a ^i^e Parliament if any such thing be
perceive endavoured, so as to make another Club of Voters in the House of
Commons; we think and believe, from so wise and just a Prince, we may justly
expect what we herein humbly pray and beseech.

These things premised, may it please your Majesty, we humbly offer by way of
supplication, and do in all Duty to your Commands,
Humbly pray,
1. That in tender Consideration of the Nations grievances, your Majesty will
be pleased, not only to take notice thereof, and of our humble Adress to your
Majesty's favors, for the remeding and redress of these things, and all others
amiss, in State Affairs, but in Order thereto you also will be further pleased
in your Princely Care of your own and the Kingdoms safety, and for the
preservation of your Crown and Dignities thereunto belonging, in a right line,
to show and extend your Princely Favor and Countenance to the grieved, at the
beforementioned miscarriages, by which our Ears are filled with the Cries and
daily Complants of the burdened and oppressed, proceeding from Causes of a
Nations misery.

2. Than your severity toward Incorridgable, and obstinate Offenders, for whom
all just Laws were made and provided, unto which, in and according to Justice,
they are appointed, together with your Clemency and favor, in Mercy shown
toward the penitent, may run parallel with the occasions for a due
Administration of either justice or mercy, and that you would be pleased to
extend your mercy and favor toward penitents, who under any Remorse of Guilt
are to apt to make an ingenious Confession and acknowledgment of their Crimes
and Fact, acquittable, on these very terms and no other; and that then the
Evidence and testimony of such may not be discountenansed, or made Invalued,
for any Cause or sake, in any of your Majesty's Courts of Judicature.

3. That in your discountenance of the one by the Countenance of the other,
your Majesty will be pleased according to such your Princely care, by the
advice of your chief and great Counsel of Parliament, and your loyal Subjects
Representatives, to appoint how shall be provided, the way and mean by which
all these things man be speedily remedied and redressed, that are amiss; and
that your favor and countenance for the future, may be no ways evil spoken of,
misapprehended, and thus abused, your Majesty will be pleased to make a true
distinction, as between Subjects of your pleasure and favor, or displeasure
and frown, so also between obstinately guilty, and penitent Offenders against
known Laws upon which the breach has been made.

4. That in your Princely Care to prevent Conspiracies, Seditions, and
seditious plots and plotters Contrivances and Co^trivers, to subvert the
present Government, as in these your Dominions established, with all other
incendiaries to evil and mischief of this kind, against a Nation, Prince and
his Authority; your Majesty will please to appoint and make provision of a way
and means, how your displeasure and discountenance to such persons and
practisers, may safely be distinguished from your favor and Countenance
toward those that cleave close to you in the encounter against the same and
that have been and are willing to labor and take pains for making a true
discovery of these things as they are.

5. That as the only way truly to unite the hearts of your Subjects unto your
Majesty for such your Princely favors, in Justice to these your Subjects, and
that in these beforementioned causes of abuse unto the Countries Choice in your
princely Wisdom and Care over your peoples Rites and privileges, under an equal
dependence with your own, upon the Royalty of your prerogarive, your Majesty
will be pleased to take notice thereof, so as to check, discountenance, and put
a stop to all growing evils, the ill consequenses of this distemper; and hence
may you expect your Name famous in Generations to come.

6. That by taking notice of your Loyal Subjects Grievances, to the putting a
check and restraint upon the occasion and occasioners thereof, and by allowing
your Subjects just Rites and privileges as a free people, your Majesty will be
pleased to manifest your tender care to maintain such the Rites between Prince
and people, as may so^mly establish your own Royal prerogative that as one man,
with one consent, the hearty affections of your people and Subjects may be so
kni^ to you, and ready to serve you, that like a Bullwork, or City walled with
B^ass, nothing that is hurthul may be able to pass or enter you^ fortress, or
make a breach upon so happy a League, under which your Crown and Dignites
thereunto belonging, may be defended and prese^ved from Injuries of the like
kind; as these lately attending us.

7. Th^^ not only as our Physician, but as a healing Balm to our wounded minds
with distractions your Majesty will be pleased to testity your Simpathy
therewith, and a Ready Compliance with what ever may make for your own and
Subjects safety, toward our Amendments and Recovery to our desired Health: and
that in O^^er thereto, you will be pleased so to take Care, that a means may be
provided to purge and take away from your privy Counsel, and ou^^f all Offices
of Trust in these your Majesty's Dominions, the disaffected to Government, under
what name or of what Degree and Quality soever, that your Majesty's integrity,
as a Father to his Country may appear, in such Splendour and Brightness, that
may dazel the Eyes of the Malignant-spiritted, and stop the Mouth of all
Gainsayers, and make Tyrants, or Usurpers upon your power, Crown and Dignities,
to tremble and be ashamed of their Enterprises.

8. That in your Discountenance to your own and the Nations Enemies, your
Majesty will be pleased to Countenance your loyal Subjects in every Act that
attends to the making glorious and flourishing your Throne, Crown and Dignities
thereto belonging; and to that end may be pleased to extend your Princely
favor toward those that cannot connive and wink at things attending to the
Nations Ruin, but are therefore Zealous to call to account the Exhausters and
Imbezellers of your Majesty's and your Countries Treasure, and other misdeeds,
that they the Offenders do rest and reflect upon such your Majesty's favor
under which, as ill affected persons to the present State of Government, many
are unto such the Nations Grievance, climbed up high, and have crept into
Dignities or Offices and places of great Trust who when thus promoted, do show
their Venom and Sting, against what ever should check or put a stop to their
extravigant Fancy.

9. That of the wrong, abuse and injuries done to your Princely Favors, Crown
and Dignities, by ill Members of such your Countenance and of a Realm or
Commonwealth, you in your Princely Wisdom will be pleased to take notice, and
that these things are occasioned by such who endeavor to palliate and disguise
all their Designs under the Habit of Ministers of State, and who under the wing
and protection of that Government (unto whom they are utter Enemies) do Labor
to sow the seditious seed before mentioned; because under the same they are
thus Liable to be called to account for such the abuse of your Majesty's favor
and power into their hands put and committed; which they have no ways to remedy
or evade, and hold themselves secure in these Offices and great places of
Trust, but by plotting and contriving the subversion or Change of such the
present Government: And also we humbly pray and beseech, that your Majesty will
be pleased to take Notice of the Reasons why your people and most Loyal
Subjects do think they ought hereat to be concerned.

10. That not only allowing the Ancient privileges and Customs in these Cases
provided of the peoples Representatives, called Parliaments, but also their
Authority, for the questioning of such miscarriages, before mentioned, wherein
are not pursued the very express words directed by your Writs to all Voters in
the Election (of such their Representatives) your Majesty will please to take
notice of a way and means to prevent the abuse of such your Princely favor, by
any that may covertly bandon themselves against the same (to the casting back
on your Majesty the Reflection of their misdeeds) that by putting themselves to
a Charge and expense (for the purchasing the favor of a Countries Votes in
their behalf, is not that they may be in a Capasity to serve their King and
Country; but rather is a means (by them contrived) that they may be the better
able to serve themselves, by thus casting the Reflection of such their misdeeds
on your Princely favors; and that unto a Nations Ruin^) while they are making
an absolute Gain and Prey on your good subjects, who may not presently have
their Eyes open to see the Evil attendancy of such Covert Bribery, who by
perverting the prime and main end of an Election (for your Majesty's chief and
great Counsel and the Countries Representatives) do in the main hereof, pursue
a way whereby a stop is put to the very Current of Justice so perverted by
Bribery) namely Gifts and Rewards; that end it most unavoidably in a Nations
Ruin, unless timely prevented.

11. That to prevent these miscarriages before mentioned, together with all
false Returns which may be otherways made or the E^^ctors or Elections, upon
your Writs for the purpose directed to the Sherifs and other Officers of
Counties, Cities, or Buroughs, etc. which also is a way to prevent the abuse
of your Majesty's and your Countries favor and trust relating to their
Election of fit persons for their Representatives in Parliament that Kings
chief and great Counsel; your Majesty will be pleased that such Returns be made
unto the Countries your good Subjects satisfaction certified under the hand of
the Voters or Electors, in whom Rests the Right or privilege of choosing the
makers of such Laws unto whom they are contented to submit, and by the same in
all Cases to be tried, and that thereby, such abuses as has been both to your
Princely favor toward Parliaments and of Parliaments themselves the Countries
Representatives may be rectified and amended to the praise of your Majesty's
fraternal Care and Regard over such your own and good Subjects Rites and
privileges.

That the before mentioned vast Charge of maintaining Feastings and Riottings
(in the several Counties of the Country of the Voters and Electors, coming
under the consideration of gifts and rewards (from these expective voted,
bestowed upon the Voters) to purchase the favor of such their Votes, seeing
Gifts and Rewards are said to blind the eyes of the wise (may it please your
Majesty) and as are all Gifts and Rewards for the purchase of Justice (in the
strictest sense of things) deemed and accounted Bribery; so in like manner
Briberies (unto the Laws Executioners) as they are made, by Gifts and Rewards,
are by those that strive to be Law makers Briberies of the like kind; and is
such a sort of Bribery, that perverts Justice as well as the due Execution
thereof, in its very Root; Bribery being held and deemed the only means to
pervert the due ordination, and put a stop to the right Execution of Justice in
a Realm or Commonwealth.

FINIS.

