THE Trinitarian Scheme OF RELIGION, CONCERNING Almighty God; And MANKIND,
Considered both before and after the (pretended) Fall: With NOTES thereupon;
which Notes contain also the Unitarian Scheme.

London, Printed in the Year, 1692.

The Trinitarian Scheme of Religion concerning Almighty God; and Mankind,
considered both before and after the (pretended) Fall: with Notes thereupon;
which Notes contain also the Unitarian Scheme.
Of the Blessed Trinity.
THERE are Three Divine Persons, an Almighty Father, an Almighty Son, an
Almighty Spirit distinct from both, who are jointly Creators of all other, both
Persons and Things. They are so many distinct Minds and Spirits, endued each of
them with his own Proper and Personal Understanding, Will, and Power of Action.
Each of them is an absolutely Perfect and All-sufficient Being; and singly and
by himself a God. Yet all of them together are but one God.

The Notes.
There is a most Holy, most Wise, most Good and Almighty Person, who is over
all, from everlasting to everlasting; the Maker of the Universe; the Fountain
of Good to all other Beings, every where present. Who with respect to the
Creation of the World, and his Adoption of all Good Men, is pleased to permit
himself to be called the Father. But with respect to his Sovereign Dominion and
Power above all, He is usually designed by the Name or Word GOD.

There neither is nor can be more than one such Person.

Because He is All-sufficient for himself, and for whatsoever He shall please
to make; He had (thereby) within himself a most Determining and Certain Cause
why he should neither beget nor make another or others equal to Himself, but
only Subordinate and Dependent Beings, for Objects and Exercises of his
Goodness. More such Persons or Beings as Himself, He knew must be as needless
and useless, as himself is absolutely and indispensably necessary. For if He is
truly All-sufficient, they must (for that reason) be altogether superfluous,
both to him and to his Creatures.

Nor can we suppose more than one such Person, without supposing an Infinity of
them. For whatsoever, either Rational Motive, or Natural and Necessary Cause,
may be feigned; why the Universal Father should beget or make another, or
others, equal to Himself; the same (whether Motive or Cause) must also dispose
that other, or those other Persons, to beget or make their Equal or Equals, and
so onwards till there were an Infinity of Divine Persons.

The Nature therefore of the thing demonstratively shows, that a stop is
necessarily made at one Divine* that is, one Infinite and All-sufficient Person.

Of the Eternity of the Trinity.
AS to the Duration, Eternity or Life of the Blessed Trinity, the Trinity
possesses Eternal Life all at once.

To all other Beings, Time is a Flux or Succession; that of it which was, now
is not; and that which now is, shall immediately give place to what is coming.
It was once true of all other Beings but the Trinity, that they were, are and
shall be; but to the Trinity there is neither past, nor to come, but whole Time
or all Eternity is now. To the Trinity from everlasting to everlasting, is but
one undivided Instant or Moment; for the Trinity is, we may not say it was, or
it shall be.

The Notes.
This Divinity is wholly borrowed from the Platonists; from whom the Modern
Doctrines of the Trinity, and of the Mystical Properties and Attributes
thereof, have been learned by those, who among themselves go by the Names of
Orthodox and Catholic. The Trinity, or God, say they, possesses Eternal Life
all at once; He is, we may not say He was, or He shall be. In direct opposition
to this whimsical Paradox, St. John has defined God to be Him which WAS, which
IS, and which SHALL BE, or is to come, Rev. 1.4.

We say therefore, it is one of the Divine Perfections (not an Imperfection)
that God IS, WAS and SHALL BE. He has carried, and shall carry all Perfections
into all the Successions and Periods of Time: when He WAS, he was no less
perfect than now that he IS; nor is He now less perfect than he shall be when
he SHALL BE.

They tell us, we must not say, God WAS; that is, to please them, we must turn
Atheists, by saying he WAS NOT; for of necessity we must say one of the two,
either that He was, or that He was not; there being no middle between these
two, no more than there is between He is, and He is not.

Of the Omnipresence and Infinity of the Trinity.
NOR are we to conceive of the Infinity, Immensity or Omnipresence of the
Trinity after a vulgar manner. For tho the Trinity is truly Infinite and
Omnipresent, yet it is whole and all in any the least Point of Space.

The Trinity has no Extension, and yet it comprehends all Distances. The
Trinity is three such Persons, as that each of them reaches over and through
all the the World; and yet all Three are laxly and largely accommodated on the
Point of a Needle. Not only so, but the right Faith is, the Trinity is no
where, and yet it is everywhere.

The Notes.
This is another Article of the new Platonic Divinity: God, or the Trinity,
say they, is whole and all in the least point of Space; and tho he is no where,
yet he is everywhere. We say on the contrary (with St. Austin) what is no
where, is nothing: therefore to speak as they do of God, is in words to affirm
him, and in sense to deny him.

That God is everywhere we are ready to demonstrate to them, from the Order
and Conservation of his Works, and from the Effects of his Providence, and from
an hundred Passages of Holy Scripture. That he is no where, is incumbent on
them to prove; which we are sure they can do by no Reason, nor by any
Authority, but that of their Masters the Platonists.

Everywhere and nowhere are contradictory Terms; therefore if God is
everywhere, it must needs be false that he is nowhere: else we cannot
distinguish between Affirming and Denying; that is, between express
Contradictions.

Of the Simplicity of the Trinity.
THere is no less Mystery in the other Properties and Attributes of the
Trinity. For God is one most simple uncompounded Being; yet He consists, or is
made up of Three really distinct Minds, Beings, or Spirits; so really distinct
and diverse, that one of them is not the other; nay, one is the Father, another
his Son, the third a Spirit, as distinct from both, as they are from each
other.

The Notes.
There is no Mystery at all in any of the Properties or Attributes of God. They
are no less clear in themselves, than they are evidently deduced from the
Excellence of his Works, and the Methods of his Providence. The Mystery never
lies in the Attribute or Property, but in the Addition made to it by fanciful
Men. As to that vulgar Aphorism, that God is a most simple and uncompounded
Being, (from whence they have hammered the Property or Attribute of God's
Simplicity, as they affect to speak) it is not only not true, but
self-contradictory in the sense they use it. For, how is God most simple and
uncompounded, if he consists or is made up (which is the very English of the
word compounded) of distinct Beings, and diverse and several Persons, none of
which is the other? They may with the same Exactness of Grammar, and Propriety
of Speech, say, a Common Council, or a Common Hall, is one most simple
uncompounded Being; one is no more ridiculous than the other: for the Propriety
of Speech, and Exactness of Truth, is as verily lost in three, as in three
hundred, or three thousand.

What is in God, is God.
FOR the other Properties, it is the Orthodox and true Belief, that whatsoever
is in God, is God. Not only the Father is God, and the Son is God, and the Holy
Spirit is God; but whatsoever else is in God by way of Immanence, that also is
God. So the Justice of God, is God; the Power of God, is God; the Wisdom of
God, is God; and so too is the Goodness of God.

Yet we make not hereby, so many several Gods; because these and all other
Properties of God, are not only the same with him, but the same also with one
another. The Justice (for instance) of God differs not really from his Power
and Mercy: and his Power and Mercy differ not, or are not really distinguished
from his Wisdom, but are verily and identically the same with it, their
distinction is only in our Conceit.

The Notes.
See here another brace of Mysteries; whatsoever is in God, is God; and the
Divine Properties or Attributes differ not, but are the same with one another.

The Reader may perhaps suspect, that when they speak after this wild fashion,
they have some secret and reserved meaning, contrary to the usual Import of the
Words, or a learned Sense contrary to the vulgar Signification of the Terms:
but it is not so, they mean as they speak, and whole Volumes are written in
Defense of these Follies.

But let us consider what they say; Whatsoever is in God, is God; the Justice
(for instance) of God is God; and so also the other Properties and Attributes.
As who should say, every Property of a Being or Nature is that very Being or
Nature, of which it is only a Property. This is more monstrous than to say, a
Part is the Whole, that very Whole of which it is only a Part. For a Property
being somewhat less than an Integrating Part, because it may be away, or at
least be dormant and unactive, without destruction of the Specific Nature, or
of the Person, an Integrating Part cannot; therefore it is more absurd to say, a
Property, or Attribute is that very Being or Nature to which it belongs, than
to say, an Integrating Part is the Whole. Thus Body and Soul are Integrating
Parts of Man; take away one of them, and he is no longer a Man, but a naked
Spirit; and Risibility is an acknowledged Property of the Human Nature, and yet
it may be dormant, or wholly away, and the Human Nature not be destroyed, but
remain.

But they add, the Properties or Attributes of God are the same with one
another, they differ only in our Conceit.

But why do they not tell us too, that God pardons Sinners by his Justice, and
punishes them by his Mercy; that he made the World by his Eternity, and will
judge it by his Immensity? For if Mercy and Justice, if Wisdom and Power, if
Eternity and Omnipresence are the same, and differ only in our Conceit; then
the Effects of any one of these Properties are not to be appropriated to that
Attribute or Property, but must be equally and indifferently ascribed to all,
or to any of the rest.

Thus unlucky are our Opposers, both at dividing and compounding; they divide
what is most intimately the same, and they compound, unite and identify what
are and ever must be diverse and different. That Unity of God (or that God is
one) which should have been as carefully guarded as the very Belief of a God,
they have divided, by introducing a Trinity of three equally All-mighty and
All-sufficient Persons. And the Properties of the Divine Nature, to whose
Distinction and Variety we must heedfully attend, if we will have any adequate
Notion of God, or right Understanding of his Works and Providence, these they
confound, by affirming they are the same. But let us go on to what remains.

What we are to understand by the Son and Holy Ghost.
GOD is one substantial and most simple Act; yet we say also God is two
substantial and really distinct Acts. The two substantial and immanent Acts in
God, are Understanding and Will. For God most perfectly understands himself,
and also wills (that is, loves) himself in the most perfect manner.

But whatsoever understands, does understand by conceiving an Image of the
thing understood. Therefore God (as has been said) understanding himself from
all Eternity, conceived within himself from all Eternity a most perfect Image
of himself. Which Image thus conceived, and (as it were) generated or begotten
by him, is called the Son. And this Image being in God, and a perfect Image of
God, and Eternal, is God no less than the Father, by whom it was conceived or
generated in the manner aforesaid; namely, by his understanding or apprehending
himself, and his own Perfections.

But God also wills, and that is another of the substantial immanent Acts
that concur to the essentiating the Trinity. He wills or loves himself, and
the most perfect Image of himself; and the Image wills or loves him. This
Mutual Love of the Father, and the Image (or Son) is what is named the Holy
Ghost. So that what things in Men are Faculties, Actions and Properties, in God
we must understand them to be Persons and Spirits.

Which is also farther both cleared and proved, by this Observation. The second
Person, or Son, is the Understanding or Wisdom of God; not Original Wisdom, or
Understanding, for that is the Father; but a reflex Wisdom, that is, the Wisdom
which resulteth from the Father's understanding himself, and his own
Perfections. The Holy Spirit (as has been said) is the mutual, willing, Love
and Power of Original Wisdom, and of the Reflex Wisdom.

The Notes.
This they pretend is that Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, but now made
manifest to the Disciples of Athanasius. There is no Parallel for it in all
either History or Nature, but the Mysteries of the Egyptians. For as the
Egyptians were at prodigious Cost, in making and setting up a great number of
Images in and about their Temples, by which Hieroglyphics, or sacred Images,
they pretended to teach Men the Secrets of Natural Philosophy, and the Precepts
of Morality; but when they were asked to explain the meaning of these
Hieroglyphics, they gave a very mean and trifling Sense, or a Sense very
absurd and false. So after Trinitarians have long amused their Disciples with
Terms as Mystical as the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, such as Trinity, Eternal
Generation, Eternal Procession, three Infinite Persons and but one God: Ask
them, How can these things be, and what do you mean? They answer, our meaning
only is, God understands himself, and wills (that is, esteems and loves)
himself. This is a very mean and despicable Sense, to be couched in such
mysterious and surprising Terms: Why do they affect to speak fantastically,
when they might speak soberly and plainly?

But we would easily forgive them the Folly of their Mysteries, if their
Hieroglyphick Language were not as false and contradictory as it is vain and
trifling. For after they have told us, that by Son and Spirit, they mean
nothing but God's Knowledge and Love of himself; that the Eternal Generation (so
much talked of) is only God's conceiving, understanding, or apprehending his
own Perfections, and the Procession (which we are so carefully to distinguish
from the Eternal Generation) is only the Love which proceeds from God toward
himself: after (I say) they have thus unriddled their Mystery, and of a
Mystery, made it a very vulgar and ordinary piece of Knowledge; how absurd and
monstrous is it to tell us, that this Reflex Knowledge which God has of
himself, and his Love or Esteem of himself, are Persons and Spirits really
distinct from him?

One while the Second and Third Persons (so called) are only God's knowing
himself, and loving himself; that is, they are only two Acts of his
Understanding and Will. At the next turn, these two Acts, God's Apprehending
himself, and Esteeming himself, are metamorphosed into Two several Spirits and
Persons; whereof one you must call the Son, and the other the Holy Ghost: Of
one you must say, on pain of Damnation, He was Conceived, Generated or
Begotten; of the other you must believe and say, under the same Penalty, He
proceeded.

I say now, this is Egyptian all over; it is the very Genius and Spirit of the
old Mystical Hieroglyphics, that is to say, partly Foolish, and partly False.
And to prove it, I need go no farther, than the Understandings and Consciences
of all Reasonable Men; or even of every Individual Man, who has not as much
given up his Reason to Mother- Church, as the Good Man who would not believe
his Eyes against his Dear Wife, had given up to her his Senses. To tell Men,
that to apprehend one's self is a Person; and to love one's self, is another
Person and Spirit; is (in effect) to ridicule Religion, and to scare from it
all Men of free Sense.

I know not why the profane Wit was esteemed an Atheist, for his saying, God
by his Almighty Power can turn a Tree into a Syllogism; more than such may be
justly suspected of Atheism, who say, an Action of the Divine Understanding, is
an Infinite and Almighty Person, whom under pain of Damnation we must call the
Son of God: And again, an Action of the Divine Will is another such Person, and
him we must name the Holy Ghost? For the Wit only turned a Substance into a
Thought; and Trinitarians turn Thoughts into Substances and Persons. Did they
alledg for these Mysteries, but the least color of Reason or Revelation, we
would hold our Tongues; but to be obliged to believe such things, without any
pretense of Revelation, and contrary to all Reason and common Sense, this (I
think) is what we owe to no sort of Men, of what color soever they dye their
Coats.

For my part I never think of these, whether Dotages or Impostures, without
such an Inclination as I very hardly resist, of applying to our Athanasian
Doctors, what Cato said of the Roman Augures and Aurispices. I wonder, says
Cato, that an Augur or Aruspex, can meet another of the same Profession,
without their Laughing in one another's Faces. He knew their (pretended)
Learning and Discipline, was the Religion established by Law; warranted by
Custom and Prescription; and authorized by the Consent of Nations. For all
that, 'twas a Cheat so gross and palpable, that he could not but admire, that
the Augurs were such stark Fools, or such perfect Knaves, that (meeting) they
could carry a grave Look upon one another.

Of the Creation.
IN the Fullness of Time, the before-described Trinity Created the World, and
all things therein. Yet we are not to imagine, that the Three Divine Persons
divided the Work among them, each of them taking a Part. Nor could every one of
them Create the same things, because a thing can be created but once. But
according to that Economy, as Divines speak (that is, the Domestic Order, or
Houshold-Government) that is between the Three Persons, it must be said and
held, that the Father is most properly the Creator, the Son the Redeemer, and
the Spirit the Sanctifier, of all Persons and Things. So that when we say, the
Trinity Created Heaven and Earth, and all Things, this is thereby intended; The
Father Created all things, by the Son, through the Holy Ghost.

The Notes.
The Father created all things by the Son, through the Holy Ghost.

I wish the Sages of the Party had thought fit plainly to tell us what they
mean, by such an odd way of expressing themselves. But they have long since let
the World know that all their care is to get Words; and for Meaning, they never
think of it.

But the Father it seems is the Creator; nay, it is he that is properly the
Creator: but then it is by the Son, and through the Holy Ghost. That is to say,
the Father is not the Creator, much less is He properly the Creator, but the
Son and Holy Ghost; and these two are jointly Creators. For if the Father
created the World by the Son, and through the Holy Ghost; then the Father
himself had no immediate Efficiency, or Hand in the Work, but only the Son and
Holy Ghost: these were the true Creators of the World, and of all things. And
besides that, the old Difficulty returns; namely, that the Son and Spirit
divided the Work between them, each taking his part; or the same things must be
created twice.

I know not how better to explain their Notion, of the Father's being most
properly the Creator, than by saying, he was just so (according to them) the
Creator of the World, as King Charles I. built the Royal Sovereign, or was the
Builder of the Royal Sovereign. For we say that King built the Royal Sovereign,
by the Master Builder, through the Ship-Carpenter; that is, he built it not, he
only ordered it to be built, the Master-Shipwright (or Master Builder) and the
Ship-Carpenters were the Builders.

But if this be so, we are strangely misled by the Apostles Creed, which
instructs us to say, that the Almighty Father is the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, and is wholly silent of the great Mystery, that it was by the Son, and
through the Holy Ghost. And the Scriptures do yet worse impose on us by an
unheard of Solecism and Impropriety, while they speak of these two (or three)
pretended creating Persons, by the singular Pronouns I, HE, THOU, HIM, which in
no Language are used, but only of one singular and particular Person.

They confound us yet more, if more can be, by telling us only (and so often)
of the Creator, never of Creators, as Trinitarians would have us to speak. Genesis
6.7. Jebovah said, I will destroy Man, whom I have made. Isa. 42.5. HE that
created the Heavens, -- HE that spread out the Earth, HE that gives Breath
unto the People. Nehem. 9.6. THOU have made the Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens,
with all their Host; the Earth, and all things therein; the Sea, and all that
is therein; and THOU preservest them all; and the Host of Heaven worshippeth
THEE. This Text assures us there was no dividing the work between two, or more
Persons. It was one THOU who both created and preserves all things: and THEE,
says the Text, the the Host of Heaven worshippeth, not YE, not THEM, not more
Persons, but one only. Isa. 4.28. The CREATOR of the Ends of the Earth faints
not. Romans 1.25. Served the Creature more than (Gr. besides) the CREATOR.

But what is not (really) found in Scripture for their purpose, Trinitarians
know how to discover that it is there; which, with respect to the case before
us, they do these two ways. First, by interpreting the Texts, which by
Confession of their ablest Critics, speak of the new Creation, (or Renovation
of the World from Idolatry, to the Knowledge of the one true God) which was by
Christ, concerning the old Creation, (or the making of Heaven and Earth) which
was by God. Secondly, They oft-times honestly add the word or words that were
wanting on their behalf, which they have done in abundance of Contexts. But for
both these Artifices (their Detection and their Confutation) I refer to the
brief History of the Unitarians.

Of Original Sin.
SOon after the Creation, Adam, the first Man, transgressing the Law given to
him of not eating the forbidden Fruit; he thereby incurred the Penalty of
Death, that was the Penalty annexed to the Law, which he had violated. But,
first, he incurred this Penalty, not only for himself, who was the actual and
real Offender, but for his whole Posterity: God impating to them, or reckoning
to them his Offense, as if they had been the Doers of it. Secondly, We are to
know, that in the word Death there is implied, not only what is naturally and
commonly meant thereby, even the Separation of the Soul from the Body, and the
Body's returning to Dust; but, first, such a Corruption and Depravation of our
Faculties, that we are all born naturally averse from every good Word and Work,
and inclined to Evil only, and to all kinds of Evil. Then all Temporal
Calamities and Evils, to which human Life is subject; and finally, Eternal
Damnation. All these are implied in the words of the Sanction, The day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall die; and they are by Divines commonly called the
three Deaths, or the threefold Death, Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal.

But we mean not to say, that the word Death does in its first or proper
Signification, import all the abovesaid Evils. But it pleased God when He
passed Sentence on Adam, to extend the Signification of that Word, which
expressed and contained the Penalty of his Law.

It Is true, 'twould be cried out on, as most unjust among Men, to reckon or
impute the Transgression of a Father to his Children, and other Posterity; and
much more, if they were punished for it in a far more extreme manner than is
truly and indeed implied in the Penalty annexed to the Law that was violated;
that is, if the Word or Words of the Penalty were extended and strained beyond
their proper and natural meaning. Yet these things cannot be unjust with God,
because He can do no Unjustice; and the reason of that is, because Things or
Actions are not just or unjust in themselves, or in their own Natures, but only
as God, who has all Authority and Power, either wills and commands them,
or (on the contrary) nilleth and forbids them.

The Notes.
This Postulatum, that Things or Actions are not just or unjust in themselves,
or in their own Natures, but only as the Supreme Authority and Power (that is
to say, GOD) shall please to will or nill them, to command or forbid them, is
indeed necessary to the Defense of such Doctrines as these, that God does
arbitrarily impute the Sin of one Man to all Men; and that in punishing those
whom he has made guilty by his mere Will, he infinitely exceeds the true
proper and natural Signification of the Words in the Sanction, that is, of the
words of that part of his Law, which contain the Penalty of transgressing it.
That Postulatum is so necessary to this Doctrine of Original Sin, that it must
be owned, that the Calvinists have judged better, and spoke more consistently
than their Opposers of some other Sects and Churches, who hold Original Sin as
it is before described, and yet seem unwilling to allow of that only Basis on
which ( Calvinists have rightly seen) it will stand; namely this, that Just and
Unjust, Good and Evil, are only the Will and Prohibition of him that has
Supreme Power. But as the Postulatum is necessary to the Doctrine for which it
was devised; so it as much destroys the Eternal Rectitude and Holiness of God,
as the Doctrines in the foregoing Paragraphs, which have been already
considered, overthrow the Unity, the Omnipresence, and other his Essential
Perfections and Attributes.

It is horrible but to think that these Imputations on the most Holy God, are
such, as would make up the just Character of an Almighty Devil. For if the
Devil had Supreme Power, what worse could he do, than they feign is done, by
the Fountain it self of Rectitude and Holiness? Could he do worse than impute
the Sin of one Man to all Men, and punish them for it, ( besides and beyond his
own Sanction) with an utter Inability to all that is good, then punish
Inability (which was neither their Act nor Desert, and of which himself was the
only cause) with Eternal Damnation?

Here many to help themselves a little, say, God saves some from this Ruin; he
rescues his Elect, tho not from Sin and Temporal Death and Calamity, yet from
Eternal Damnation; nay, bestows on them the unspeakable and everlasting
Beatitudes of Heaven.

But this is no better than the other: For the highest Injustice to the
far-greater number, is so far from being excused, by an ungrounded Partiality
for a very few, that this latter may be truly called a new and fresh Instance
of sort of Unjustice. Is it not Partiality and Injustice too, to make a great
number of Creatures of the same kind; and tho one deserves no more than another
of them, either for Good or Evil; cherish one with whatsoever Omnipotence can
do for him, and burn against the other with Wrath eternal and insupportable?

But they say, God having all Authority and Power, what He wills must needs
be Law, that is to say, Justice; and what He nills, or forbids, must be
Transgression, that is to say, Evil, Sin and Injustice. But from thence, it
unavoidably follows, that the Devil wants nothing but Supreme Power to
legitimate all his Wickedness, and to change the nature of it from Wickedness
to Goodness. If that Spirit had Supreme Power, we must call him, as we now do,
GOD, most Holy, most Just, most Righteous. And seeing God has all Power and
Authority, it would (on this Hypothesis) be in him Righteous, Good and
Praiseworthy, if He were pleased to damn his most faithful Servants, to break
the Covenant, and disappoint the Hopes of Life and Happiness, which he has
confirmed by his Oath; and (on the contrary) should think fit to save not only
the most Godless and Impious Men, but the very Devils. These Consequences are
unavoidable on the before-said Hypothesis, or Doctrine, that Things and Actions
are not Good or Evil in themselves, but only by the Will of Supreme Power; and
they that admit of such Consequences, or cannot decline them, how can they be
disputed with? But let us see what is the Doctrine of the Unitarians concerning
the first Sin, or (pretended) Fall of Adam, and the Consequences thereof.

What Unitarians teach concerning the Sin of Adam, and the Consequences thereon.
WE say, when Almighty God had formed the Protoplasts, Adam and Eve, He
forthwith declared them Proprietors and Lords of whatsoever is in the Earth or
Seas. Genesis 1.28. Have Dominion, says God there to them, over the Fish of the
Sea, over the Fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that moves on the
Earth. And I have given you every Herb, -- and every Tree. Adam having thus
received from his unspeakable Maker, such Marks of his Favor, was admonished
withal, that he must remember he is a Creature, and has received of another
whatsoever he is, or has. Notwithstanding thou have to deal with such a
Sovereign, as will not require of thee unreasonable or troublesome Testimonies
of thy Regards and Respects to him. See, the whole World is before thee, and it
is all given to thee; only in this Paradise there is one Fruit, the Fruit of
the Tree of Knowledge, of that thou art not to eat. It Is the Obedience that thy
Maker requires of thee; it is the only Trial his Goodness is pleased to make of
thy Love and Duty to him. If thou breakest this Charge, the Penalty is, that
thy Life presently departs from thee; the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
die; that is, shall return to Dust, from whence as much of thee as is visible,
and as thou art yet aware of, was taken.

It cannot be denied that this was the most proper of all Trials, the most
prudent of all Commands. Adam could not be forbid to commit Adultery or
Fornication, there being but one Woman, and she also his Wife; or Murder,
because he had too much occasion for Evt, and she for him, to entertain such
Thoughts; or Theft, for all the World was theirs. But he was thoroughly tried by
the Prohibition of the Tree of Knowledge, because of our natural Thirst of
Knowledge, and the Ambition all have to be wise.

It is not necessary however to determine, whether the forbidden Fruit had
indeed a Power to sharpen the Faculties of the Mind, Understanding and Memory?
'Twas sufficient for the Trial God designed to make of Adam's Obedience, only
to name or call that Fruit, the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge.

There was nothing more just, than that Adam should be satisfied with the great
Advantages he already possessed; for all the Creatures, whether Animate, or
Inanimate, were his; and he could not but be sensible, that his present
Knowledge or Understanding was sufficient, both for himself and them. But Adam
was persuaded by Satan to endeavor himself to make himself more like to
Elohim, i. e. to the Angels and Spirits of Heaven, by the use of the forbidden
Fruit. Thou shall know, says the Tempter, if thou follow my Counsel, Good and
Evil; the meaning seems to be, Thou shall know whatsoever Good and Evil is in
every thing, by the use of this happy Fruit. He that forbids thee this Fruit,
has confessed its Virtue, in the Name he was given to it; why therefore has he
forbad it to thee, but because he is envious, jealous or morose? Ye shall not
surely die by eating this Fruit: for how should it be more mortal to you, than
to the Serpent, and to so many other Beasts and Birds as daily gather it up?

Adam hearkens to these, and such like Reasonings, eats the forbidden Fruit,
and thereby becomes obnoxious to the Penalty, even present Death.

But it pleased God to defer the threatened Punishment or Penalty, he deferred
it for upwards of nine hundred Years, which seem to be Lunar Years, that is
Months, notwithstanding what Dr. Lightfoot and others have urged, for such kind
of Years as are now in use. Their Arguments are partly Mistakes, partly
Inadvertences, partly groundless Conjectures.

But tho the threatened Punishment was not presently executed on Adam and Eve;
yet the Wisdom of God did not think fit to encourage Sin, by wholly passing
over this beginning of it. He punished Adam, and cautioned his Posterity, by
cursing the Earth; that is, by causing it to bring forth Thorns and Thistles,
etc. as well as profitable Seeds and Plants: so that Adam and his Descendents
must now Manure and Till the Ground, if they would have a regular Harvest of
Seeds and Fruits. Against Eve he pronounced, that whereas Conceiving and
Childbearing are naturally and necessarily both sickly and painful in some
degree; yet both these should be more troublesome to her, than usual or
natural. I will GREATLY multiply thy Sorrows in thy Conception; and with Sorrow
shall thou bring forth, says the Angel who represented God, Genesis 3.16.

The Holy Scriptures go no farther than this, in the account they give of the
Sin of Adam, and the Punishment and Consequences thereof, saving that they
expressly contradict the Doctrine of Trinitarians, concerning a threefold Death,
Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, which was inflicted (they say) on Adam, and on
all his Descendents for his Sin.

Where shall we look for the true Explication or Meaning of the Penalty or
Punishment annexed to a Law, but in the Sentence which the Judge and Lawgiver
himself passes on the Offender? The Law was this, The day thou eatest thereof
(of the forbidden Fruit) thou shall die, Genesis 2.17. that is, say the
Unitarians, Thou shall return to Dust; thy Life and Spirit shall leave thy
Body, and be disposed of as shall seem good to thy Maker, who in Judgment
always remembers Mercy. Let us now see in the Sentence, whether this was not
indeed the whole meaning of these words of the Law, Thou shall die?

Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return. Here is the evident
Declaration from the Mouth of the Judge and Lawgiver giving Sentence, what was
meant by the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall DIE. And this Penalty,
Punishment and Sentence was at length executed on Adam, tho he had the favor
of a long Reprieve, a Reprieve of about Eighty Years.

Our Opposers can show no Context of Holy Scripture, in which their threefold
Death (for this Sin) is contained; or in which the Posterity of Adam are said
to have his Sin imputed to them, and that they are punished for it.

The only Offer they make is, from Romans, Chap. 5. the Apostle there (at v.
19.) says, As by one Man's Disobedience, many are made Sinners; so by the
Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous.

By one Man's Disobedience, say they, that is, by God's Imputation of one Man's
Disobedience to them, (even Adam's in Paradise) so many have been made Sinners.
How much more dexterously, and agreeably to the Justice and Wisdom of God,
Pelagius and the Unitarians? By one Man's Disobedience, that is, says
Pelagius, not as Austin has newly fancied, by God's Imputation, but by our
Imitation of one Man's Disobedience, so many have been made Sinners: and on the
other hand, by the Obedience of one; that is, by Imitation (not by Imputation)
of one Man's Obedience, even the Lord Christ's, many shall be made Righteous.

Trinitarians make the same Blunder at ver. 18. As by the Offense of one,
Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation: even so by the Righteousness of
one, the free Gift came (or shall come) upon all Men to Justification and Life.
Here again they see not, that by the Offense of one Man, and again, by the
Righteousness of one Man, are not as much as to say, by the Imputation of one
Man's Offense, and of one Man's Righteousness; but by Imitation of one Man's
Righteousness, and of another Man's Offense, Justification and Condemnation
have come upon all Men. We die for imitating the Disobedience of Adam; and we
shall be justified and saved for and by imitating the Righteousness of the Lord
Christ.

And thus it is, that St. Paul himself explains himself in this very Chapter,
v. 12. As by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin: so also Death
has passed upon all Men; for that (or, because) all have sinned. He says not,
as Trinitarians do, because Adam sinned; but because all have sinned, therefore
Death has passed on all; that is, all of us have deserved the Death we must
undergo, or have undergone, by our own Sins.

But they say Infants die, and what Sin have they, unless you allow the
Imputation of Adam's Sin to all his Descendents?

But why do they not consider too, that Beasts die; is Adam's Sin Imputed also
to them? They ought therefore to know, that Holy Paul in that Context is
speaking only of Adult and Grown Persons: as for Infants, Beasts, and such
like, that have not Sin; because they have not Understanding of Good and Evil,
of Moral and Immoral; such die, because they have Mortal Bodies, liable to
Diseases and Accidents. From which (Accidents and Diseases) to deliver and
rescue them, it does not please God to Interpose, by an Extraordinary and
Miraculous Power. For which sort of Providence toward them, diverse Probable
Reasons might be given: but being not Necessary or Proper to be here inserted,
I omit them.

Of Partial Redemption.
THE Transgression of Adam in Paradise, or his eating the Forbidden Fruit, was
in Him Actual Sin; in his Descendents it is called Original Sin: but the Effects
of it, are the same in Both; namely, the beforementioned threefold Death, or
three Deaths. Death Temporal, which is the separation of the Soul from the
Body, and all temporal Calamities and Evils. Death Spiritual, which is the
Corruption of the Faculties, that we are averse to all Good, and inclined to
all Evil. Death Eternal, which is the everlasting Suffering of Body and Soul in
Hellfire. These Deaths are the Consequences and Desert of Adam's Sin; to
himself, as the Actual Offender; to us, as his Sin is Imputed to us by the
Justice of God.

But the Mercy of God, and his Wisdom, have found out a most Gracious and
Glorious Expedient, by which to deliver Mankind, though not from Temporal
Death, yet (in part) from Spiritual Death, and (wholly and altogether) from
Death Eternal.

But before we speak more particularly of the Expedient; it is necessary to
caution Learners, that they fall not into this Error; that God designed the
Benefit of the Expedient, for All Men and Women. For when we say, Mankind, or
all Men have been Redeemed, from the beforementioned Deaths; our meaning is,
that the Elect, (or as that most considered and weighed 17th Article of the
English Church speaks) Those whom God has chosen out of Mankind, are (as that
Article farther says) brought to everlasting Salvation, as Vessels of Honor.
These are called, according to God's purpose, in due Season; his Spirit working
in them. And they, through Grace, obey that Calling. These Elect are a
definite, certain, and unalterable Number, that can neither be increased, nor
diminished; as is Expressly, and in words declared, by the Suffrage of the
Divines of Great Britain, at the Synod of Dort; Suffrage, p. 9. It is (says
the same Suffrage at p. 43.) for the Elect that Christ died; that He might
Effectually obtain for them, and Infallibly bestow on them, both Remission of
Sins, and Salvation.

If the Unskilful ask here; How this Doctrine agrees with those Declarations
of Holy Scripture, so often repeated; which seem to say, that Christ died for
the Sins of the World, or for All Men? The Divines (above said) answer at p.
47. Here it is, that the secret Decree of Election shows it self: inasmuch as
the Price was indeed paid for All, yet is not Beneficial to All; because All
have not the Gist of fulfilling the Condition of the Covenant. They mean; All
have not Saving Grace given to them, whereby to Believe, and to Obey the
Gospel. They rightly add, at p. 55. We no where meet in Scripture any Promise,
by which God has bound himself to impart his Grace to All and every One.

Farthermore, the same excellent Suffrage teaches, at p. 27. that it is a
Supposition without any good ground, that all Infants are saved. It says, that
those Infants who are saved, are saved by virtue of their Election; which
respects not the Age of Persons, but only looks upon the common heap of
Fallen Mankind, out of which it chooses.

And concerning such Choosing or Election, it teaches, at p. 34. that Grace
does find some whom it Adopteth, out of the most Wicked, and at their last End;
while Many who seem less Guilty, have no part in this Gift.

Therefore when All are said to be Redeemed; or when it is said, Christ died for
All, or such like Expressions are used; this is to be understood of All sorts,
or orders of Men and Women. He died for High and Low, for Old Men and Infants,
for Youth and Middle-age, for Rich and Poor, for Wise and Unwise; for all these
sorts, for some particular Persons of all these; for such of all these sorts as
are Elected.

And those whoever they be, who extend any farther than this, the Redemption
purchased by Christ, are Arminians.

But Arminianism is only a Limb of Socinianism; as a Map of a Province or
Kingdom, is but a Limb of a Quarter-map, or of a Map of the whole World. For
Arminians have borrowed, all they have, both Doctrine and Argument, from the
Socinians or Unitarians. And for that reason, it must be farther said, that
Such as extend the Redemption by Christ, beyond what is above declared, are (so
farforth) Socinianiz'd, have departed from the Articles of the English Church,
and from the Suffrage of the British Divines at Dort.

The Notes.
They tell us, that God so Imputed the single Transgression of one Man, to all
Men, as to make all Men thereupon obnoxious to the Three Deaths, Temporal,
Spiritual and Eternal: but that soon Repenting him of this Rigor, he took up a
Contrary Resolution, even to Redeem all Men. Well, do they hold of that Mind?
For if they do, it is no very Hurtful Tragi-comedy; because however Unjustly all
Men were Condemned, yet if they are all Pardoned, they have been more Scared
than Hurt. But the Matter (it seems) is otherways; for when God resolves to
Redeem all Men, the meaning is, he intends to Redeem Some; and farther in
Electing or Choosing those Some, his Election oft-times is from the most
wicked; and those also, at their last End, or when they have sinned as long as
they can. In a word, of those Few whom God is pleased to Redeem from that
Ruin, which his Imputation of Adam's Sin to them brought on them; he chooses,
They say, the least Worthy for Objects of the Highest Mercy, and exercises the
uttermost Unjustice and Cruelty, on those that are Better, or however not so
bad.

Let us consider these two Notable pieces of Orthodox Doctrine.

1. God has Elected to Salvation, and has Redeemed only Some of those Many,
who were undone by his Imputation of another Man's Transgression to them.

Now though Unitarians deny there was any need of a Redeemer, to rescue us from
Adam's Transgression, or the Punishment thereof; because neither could that
Transgression be Imputed to us, nor could we be justly Punished for it; yet, on
other accounts, we own there was need of a Redeemer. As, to reconcile the World
to the one True God, from whom they were departed by an Universal Idolatry; and
to reconcile God to the World, for that, and Other Actual Sins, and diverse
other Reasons. But we say also, that whatsoever was done or suffered by Christ
the Redeemer or Savior, was equally done for all Men and Women, none excepted.

We deny not that Holy Scripture speaks of the Elect; but we say, it means
not thereby, some few certain Persons chosen out of the rest of Mankind, to
Eternal Life, while all others are doomed to Damnation, or lest in an
incapacity of Salvation. But the Elect are all Such as turn to God: all such
are by him Elected, that is, chosen and designed for Salvation; and he would
have all Men and Women to be of that number; if they are not, it proceeds from
their own Negligence or Wilfulness, not from Adam, much less from God.

This is most clearly the Doctrine taught in Holy Scripture; even, that the
Redemption by Christ, is intended for All; John 6.51. The Bread which I give,
says our Savior, is my Flesh: which I give for the Life of the WORLD. The
beloved Disciple says, the Lord Christ was a Propitiation for our Sins; and
not for ours only, but for the Sins of the WHOLE World, 1 John 2.2. St. Paul to
the Romans says; By the righteousness of one (even the Lord Christ) the free
Gist is come upon ALL Men, to Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. The Author to
the Hebrews says; By the Grace of God, Jesus Christ has tasted death for
EVERY Man, Heb. 2.9. Or if they want a Text, wherein the very word Imputed is
found; St. Paul says, God by Christ reconciled the WORLD to himself, not
Imputing their Transgressions to them, 2 Cor. 5.29.

To tell us Here, as our Opposers do, that the WORLD, the WHOLE World, ALL Men,
EVERY Man, are only some Men; and those also a very Few: what is it, but to
give us a Flat denial of Scripture; instead of an Interpretation thereof? And I
will Here leave it, with the unprejudiced Considerer; whether these Texts do
not sufficiently prove this part of the Damnable Socinian Heresy. But they say
farther.

2. In choosing or electing out of the heap of fallen Mankind; God's Election
or Choice is sometimes from among the most wicked, and those also at their last
end, or after they have sinned as long as they can.

The next thing that we may expect from some Men, is, that they will write a
Panegyric in Praise of the Devil.

If they had said, that the Election for which they contend, is made by the
Devil, or falls upon Persons by chance of the Dice, it had been credible, that
Redemption and Salvation is the chance of the most wicked, and at their last
end. But to say People are elected to Salvation, and that by God; and yet that
they are the most wicked, and at their last end, who are elected and saved, is
not said without such manifest Impiety, that I will not now stand to dispute
against it, but leave it with every sincere Lover of God, to judge betwixt us
and our Opposers.

But this one thing I will observe, that when they were loading their Maker
with such scandalous Imputations; they should have so contrived their
Calumnies, as to be self-consistent, and not contradictory to one another, as
they are in this Article. For of what worse or worst Men and Women elected to
Salvation do they dream, when themselves have before assured us, that the
Imputation of Adam's Sin to us makes All averse to all Good, and inclined to
all Evil? Of such Persons there is neither worse nor worst, but all are bad
alike: so bad, that Satan himself neither is nor can be worse. If we all have
such an Inclination to Evil only, and to every kind of Evil, as is neither
restrained nor corrected, but by an extraordinary and particular Grace of God;
it unavoidably follows, that all are bad alike; and that it is a Contradiction
to say, the worst or the most wicked are chosen to be Subjects of the Grace of
Redemption, and of a Pre-eternal Election.

It Is no manner of Evasion here to say, that the Restraining Grace which God
bestows (more or less) on every Person, even on the Reprobate, has several
degrees: and from hence it comes to pass, that some are not so bad as the rest.
For seeing it is not their own Choice or Act, but merely the Momentary Grace
blown into them, that restrains any from any sort of Wickedness; it can no more
be said of such, that one is better, or less bad than another, than a chained
Lion can be said to be tamer, or less fierce, than a Lion who is loose, and at
full liberty.

Of the Satisfaction.
WHen the Divine Wisdom and Goodness had determined to redeem all Men; that is,
some of all sorts, and of every Order of Men, from the damning Imputation of
Adam's Transgression to them: to this end, it was nenecessary that a full
Reparation should be first made to the Blessed Trinity for that Transgression
of Adam; and that a Punishment, equivalent to the Punishment or threefold
Death, which Adam had drawn on himself and on his Posterity, should be
undergone by some Person or Persons, in the stead and place of Adam, and his
Descendents.

It is true, there is no such Vindictive Justice in God, that He could not by
his Mercy forgive this Transgression, or any other: but in the case before us,
God is to be considered as a Righteous Governor, who would not suffer his Law
to be despised and violated, without a full Satisfaction to his Honor and
Justice by the Offenders, or some other on behalf of the Offenders. For this
reason it was, that 'twas necessary to find out a Person or Persons, who should
undergo the threefold Death for Mankind, or other ways make an Equivalent to
the Justice of God.

The Person undergoing the Punishment, or the Equivalent, must be a Righteous
Person, else he would need one to satisfy for himself. Nay, he must be a Person
of Infinite both Merit and Dignity, else he could not merit Heaven for so many;
nor could his Sufferings be accepted instead of so many as were obnoxious, and
obliged to undergo the threefold Death.

The Expedient therefore at length resolved on by the Blessed Trinity, for the
Redemption of Mankind, was this, That a Righteous Person, of Infinite Dignity
and Merit, should be substituted to the Punishment deserved by Sinners, in the
room, stead and place of Sinners.

This was judged more agreeable to the Majesty of God, as Governor of the
World, than either to forgive to Adam his Transgression, and to his Descendents
God's Imputation of it to them; or than to inflict on him or them any less
Punishment (as suppose some Temporal Calamity) than the threefold Death. Which
thing God might have done, either by his Mercy, as a Maker and Father, or by
his Authority and Prerogative, as a Sovereign and Governor.

It Is true, there is a wonderful depth of Mystery, never to be fathomed by
Human Understanding, in this manner of proceeding. And Human Wisdom would
(without doubt) have chose, either to forgive the Sin, or to abate somewhat of
the Punishment, rather than have substituted in the room of the Wicked and
Worthless, a Person infinitely Righteous and Worthy, even tho such Person
should be supposed to have offered himself to the Punishment. But my Thoughts
are not your Thoughts, neither are your Ways my Ways, says the Lord. Isa.
55.8.

The Notes.
In their Doctrine of Original Sin, our Opposers feign, that Almighty God
imputes the one Sin of one Man to all Men, and concludes them thereupon under
the threesold Death, or three Deaths: but in this Doctrine of the Satisfaction,
they tell us of a contrary Prodigy, that he imputes all the Sins of all Men to
one Man; and what is yet a greater Monster, says on him alone a Punishment
equivalent to the three Deaths (Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal) of all Mankind.

We might call this the Trinitarians Fetch-back, if it were not, that the
Interpretation they give of this Doctrine, is contrary to the Doctrine it self.
One would think, if we might judge of their meaning by what they say, that the
Doctrine of the Satisfaction made a complete Amends for the Doctrine of
Original Sin; that is, that the (supposed) Satisfaction by Christ did (as it
were) fetch-back the Damage and Losses occasioned (they say) by the Sin of
Adam. But it is not so: for tho (they say) the Redeemer was able to suffer, and
did actually suffer an Equivalent to the three Deaths of all Mankind; yet (say
they farther) neither his Merit nor his Sufferings do any good but only to a
few, that is, to the Elect.

As to the Unitarians, they most thankfully and devoutly own, profess and
publish, that the Lord Christ underwent the greatest of Labors and Sufferings
for poor wretched Apostate Mankind. He made himself an Oblation, an Expiatory
Sacrifice on the Altar of the Gross for our Sins, to reconcile us to God, and
(in some respects) God to us. But we say, that his Labors and Sufferings on
our behalf were not (as Trinitarians teach) designed as a Punishment laid on
him in our stead, because Punishment is the Evil of Suffering, inflicted for
the Evil of doing; and the Lord Christ having done no Sin, as the Holy
Scriptures expressly teach, 1 Pet. 2.^3. it necessarily follows, that what he
underwent, were purely Labors and Sufferings, not Punishment. And for those
Sufferings we say further; it has pleased God by way of Recompense, highly to
exalt him, and give him a Name above every Name, Phil. 2.9.

Nor was the Oblation or Sacrifice which the Lord Christ made of himself, on
our behalf, an Oblation made (as our Opposers contend) to the Justice of God,
or by way of full Reparation to God's Justice; but, as all other Sacrifices
formerly were, an Oblation or Application to the Mercy of God.

For this Doctrine of ours, we judge the following Reasons to be such Proofs as
must needs be allowed, by every one that considers them freely and impartially.

1. One Man could not possibly be judged an Equivalent, for such an immense
number of Sinners as were all of them obliged to be as righteous as he; and
because they were not so, were liable to Punishment; therefore it was not to
the Justice of God, that the Lord Christ offered himself for those Sinners as
an Equivalent, but to God's Mercy, by way of humble suit.

2. If one Man can be conceived to be an Equivalent for all Men; yet if the
Sufferings (or as our Opposers speak, the Punishment) he underwent, was not
equivalent to the Punishment due to them; then it must not be said, he tendered
himself to the Justice of God, but only to his Mercy, on behalf of the
Offenders, and instead of their Punishment. The Punishment, as well as the
Person suffering, must be equivalent, else Justice will refuse it; but Goodness
or Mercy may admit of it. But now, who sees not that the Temporal Sufferings
and three days Death of the Lord Christ, were far from being equivalent to the
Death Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, of so much as one Man.

3. Uniratians will never detract from the Dignity of our Savior's Person;
they acknowledge with the Scriptures, that God was with him; nay, God (by his
Spirit) was in him. But if they could also add, as Trinitarians do, that the
Humanity of Christ was one Person with God; yet seeing only the Humanity could
suffer or die; and seeing no Union of a Man with God, can exalt Humanity to be
Divinity, or make that to be Infinite which of its own nature is Finite;
therefore the Temporal Sufferings and three days Death of a mere Human Nature,
cannot be equivalent to the Death Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, which is an
Infinite Punishment, of all Mankind, no nor of one Man.

4. But if it were admitted that one Man was so dignified, by the Inhabitation
of God in him, as to be an Equivalent for all Men; admitting also, that the
three days Temporal Death of such a Man, amounts to as much as the Deaths
Temporal and Spiritual, and the Eternal Damnation of all Mankind: What will
follow hereupon? It will follow, that God is obliged in Equity, to release all
Mankind from all the three Deaths, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal; else He
has received an Equivalent on behalf of Mankind, without discharging those for
whom He received it; which is contrary to Equity, nay, to Justice. For in
Equity an Equivalent ought to discharge the Person, whether he be Offender or
Debtor: but if the Equivalent be not only tendered, but accepted also on behalf
of the Debtor or Offender, the Offender has Wrong done him, if he is not
immediately discharged of his Punishment, and the Debtor of his Debt. But do
Trinitarians pretend, or dare they, that God does discharge Mankind from the
three Deaths, on the Oblation and Sacrifice of himself, made by the Lord Christ
on their behalf? By no means, they own we are not at all discharged from Death
Temporal, but in some part from Death Spiritual, and only a few Persons from
Death Eternal. It follows, that the Sufferings and Death of our Savior were
not in deed an Equivalent to the three Deaths of Mankind.

5. To add now no more. The Unitarian Doctrine is consistent, nay, is the very
same with what the Scriptures everywhere say; namely, that Almighty God of his
Grace, the Riches and Abundance of his Grace and Love, has pardoned Offenders
for Christ's sake, on the Conditions on their part, of Faith, Repentance and
Newness of Life. But the Trinitarian Doctrine, which says, the Punishment laid
on the Lord Christ, was truly equivalent to the Punishment due to all Mankind;
does deprive God our Maker and Father, of the Glory of his Pardoning Grace and
Mercy. Nay, it says in effect, that we are not beholden to God our Father on
that account. It says, he has been harsh, nay, has been apparently unjust,
in that he has received more than an Equivalent for our discharge from the
three Deaths; and yet he has not wholly released any, and but very few are at
all released.

I will only add; Whereas Trinitarians call the Sufferings of the Lord Christ a
Punishment, and will have that Punishment to be equivalent to the Infinite
Punishment due (they say) to Mankind for Sin Original and Actual; and whereas
they call this Doctrine, the Doctrine of the SATISFACTION by the Lord Christ;
they have mistaken in the Name, as well as in the Thing. It Is the Unitarians
who, in proper speaking, hold that the Lord Christ made Satisfaction to God for
Sin, not Trinitarians. We say, that the Sufferings of the Lord Christ not being
equivalent in the exact Scales of Justice, for what all Mankind have deserved,
yet God was satisfied with them; that is, was graciously pleased to accept
them, as an Intercession on our behalf; and this is the proper Notion of a
Satisfaction. But Trinitarians, in saying the Sufferings of Christ were
equivalent to the Demerit of our Sins, were a full Payment to the Justice of
God for them, do not hold a Satisfaction, but a Reparation, or Plenary Amends.
The more elegant Latinists call Confession, Deprecation, and such like
imperfect and partial Reparations and Payments, by the Name of Satisfactions.

Of the Incarnation.
BEcause no other but a Person of Infinite Merit and Dignity could satisfy the
Divine Justice for Adam's Transgression; therefore the second Person of the
Blessed Trinity, called the Son, offered himself to undergo the Equivalent to
that Punishment, or threefold Death, which belonged to Adam and his
Descendents: and this Offer was accepted by the other two Persons of the
Trinity. It was agreed that the Son should become incarnate in an Human Nature,
should be Whole and All united to a Finite Man, even the Man Christ Jesus, and
be one Person with him. By this means the Man Christ Jesus became of that
unspeakable Merit and Dignity, that one drop of his Blood was an Equivalent to
the Eternal Punishment of all Mankind in Hellfire; and his Holiness, and the
Merit thereof, was infinitely more than enough for himself, it was meritorious
of Heaven for never so many Sinners.

The Son was so incarnate in a particular Human Nature, as to be personally
thereto united in the very Womb of the Virgin Mary: so that Mary (as General
Councils of the Orthodox have rightly defined) was not only (...), or Mother of
Christ; but (...), Mother of God.

This Incarnation of the Son in the Man Christ Jesus, begets also such a
Communication of Idioms (that is, of Properties and Attributes) between the
Divinity and the Humanity of the Lord Christ; that we must say on the one hand,
God was born, God suffered, God died; as we must say also (on the other hand)
the Man Christ Jesus is Eternal, Omnipotent, Omnipresent, Creator of Heaven and
Earth. As all Learned Divines acknowledge, and Cardinal Bellarmine in
particular, has largely proved from Fathers and Councils of the Orthodox.
Bellar. de Christo, l. 3. c. 9.

The Notes.
The Doctrine of the Incarnation claims the place of all the Trinitarian
Doctrines, even of the Trinity it self, in regard of its Seniority. For while
our Opposers were only Homo-ousians; that is, believed and professed only two
Eternal and Consubstantial Persons, not having yet dreamt that the Holy Spirit
is God; in the days of the first Nicene Council, even then they held the
Incarnation of the second of those Persons. Neither does this Doctrine come
behind any of their Doctrines, either in the Number, or the Rarity and
Strangeness of its Wonders and Mysteries: but of these, three are more
remarkable than the rest. I will make a short Reflection on each of them.

The first Wonder is, that an Infinite Person is whole and all incarnate in a
Finite Nature.

Which amounts to this, That Infinite is less than Finite; for else how should
Infinite be incarnate, that is, cased in the Finite? But make the greatest
Allowances possible, yet the Infinite which is whole and all incarnate in the
Finite, can (at most) but be commensurate to the Finite; that is, but equal to
it. Now these are two such Paradoxes, that till our Opposers can separate them
from their Doctrine of the Incarnation, they will never persuade that Doctrine
to any who make use of their Reason and Consideration.

The second great Mystery or Wonder of this Doctrine is, that the particular
Human Nature, in which a Person of the Trinity vouchsafed to be incarnate,
became thereby of Infinite Dignity and Merit, (for 'twas an Equivalent for an
Infinite number of Men, and for the Infinite Punishment due to them) and yet
still remained and continued a mere and bare Human Nature.

Which is to say, a mere Human Nature continuing and abiding a bare and mere
Human Nature, is a Divine Nature. For in affirming it has Infinite Dignity and
Merit; how much soever they may say in words, it is a bare and mere Human
Nature; they have in sense affirmed it is a Divine Nature. For what is Divine,
but as much as to say, of Infinite Dignity, and Infinite Excellence or Merit?

The third Wonder is, That by Virtue of the Incarnation of a Divine Person in
an Human Nature, the Divine Person (or God) must be said to have been born in
Time, to have suffered and died; and on the contrary, the Humanity, or Man
Christ Jesus, must be said to have been from all Eternity, to be Omnipotent,
Omnipresent, Creator of all things, and whatsoever else is said of God.

But that our Opposers may not complain that they are misrepresented, I must
own, this is only the fore part of the Prodigy; the other end, or hinder part,
is of a contrary Nature. For tho you must say God was born, God suffered, God
died; yet (says their Doctrine farther) you are not really to think God can be
born in Time, can suffer, or can die: and on the other hand, you must say, the
Man Christ Jesus was from all Eternity, created the World, is Omnipresent and
Omnipotent; but you are not so to think. The reason is, because the
Communication of the Properties of the Divinity to the Humanity, and of the
Humanity to the Divinity, is not real, but only nominal, or in words.

Now Unitarians being but plain Fellows, and having Country Consciences, like
not this juggling, that we must say one thing, and must think or mean another.
Yet because we ought to yield to hard things for Peace sake: if our Opposers
are content that we may do so also in the other Articles; that is, if they are
content that we only say as is said in those Articles, and may declare at the
same time that we think the contrary; and if Trinitarians will also so do in
those Articles, we will comply with them in this third Wonder (or Mystery) of
the Incarnation.

And this is the only Composition that can possibly be agreed to in these
Controversies, without renouncing our Christianity, our reasonable Faculties
and our Senses.

Of Grace.
IT is true, the Lord Christ (God and Man in one Person) paid down a more than
sufficient Ransom for the Actual Deliverance of a thousand Worlds, from the
Imputation of Adam's Sin, and the Consequences of that Imputation, even the
three Deaths; yet the Ransom was not accepted for all, but only for the Elect;
nor yet was it accepted for Deliverance from the whole Punishment, but only
from part of it, For no Man is thereby delivered from such a share of Spiritual
Death, as to be able to do a good Action, or think a good Thought, without an
immediate and particular Assistance or GRACE of God's Spirit, beginning,
continuing and perfecting such good Action or Thought in him, and by him. As
has been often defined and concluded in the Councils of the Orthodox, in
opposition to the Heresy of Pelagius, revived by Unitarians and Arminians.

The Notes.
After they have tried their Skill in misrepresenting and deforming the true
Idea we ought to have of God, and of his Perfections and Attributes: our
Opposers proceed to calumniate Human Nature, the Image of God, and will have it
to be the Image of the Devil.

They tell us, we come into the World so depraved in all our Faculties and
Powers, that we cannot do any good Action, no, nor think a good Thought,
without a particular and extraordinary Grace of God, beginning, continuing and
perfecting such good Action or Thought in us, and by us.

In sober sadness, is this the Character of that sort of Creature, of whom the
Apostle says, be is made in the similitude of God? James 3.9. Or is it the
very Description of the Devil himself, if at least it be not a Calumny even of
him? Will God own such a Creature as his Similitude, as has a natural Impotence
to all that is holy and good, and a violent and perpetual Biass to Evil only,
and to every kind of Evil?

Yes, they say our Likeness to God consists not in a Capacity to Holiness, or
ought that good is; but in the Dominion we have over some Creatures in this
lower World. But by this account of our Likeness to God, he that is most of all
unlike to God, is much more the Similitude and Image of God, than Man is; the
Dominion and Power of Satan is incomparably greater and larger than Man's is;
therefore in their Hypothesis he is more the Similitude of God than Man is.

But as absurd as these things are, I will not now insist on them, but content
my self to acquaint the Reader with some of the principal Reasons of the
Unitarians, why they hold that Man is a free Agent, as capable of doing Good as
Evil; nay, more capable of the former, because he has more reason for it, than
of the latter; not the Slave to only one of the Contraries, but at absolute
liberty toward both.

1. Our Blushes and Remorses for having acted at any time otherways than we
ought, are Testimonies and Witnesses of our certain and internal Consciousness,
that we could have done, as Religion and Duty require of us; that is, could
have forbore that Evil, and have done the contrary Good.

2. Deliberation and Consultation, what and how we are to act, argue also, not
only that we are free, but that we are sensible we are so.

3. We experience that our Piety and Virtue are our own Work, by the Difficulty
we feel, and the slow Progress we are able to make in attaining those Habits,
and in subduing the contrary Habits.

4. If Men are good, not by a spontaneous Choice or Power of their own, but
only by an extraordinary and immediate Aid: no tolerable reason can be given,
why we should not always be acted to Good, or why we are but partially and
imperfectly Good? Is it credible that God should do his own Work in us, after a
desultory, inconstant and impersect manner?

5. What Piety or Virtue is it; or how can God love or esteem any Person,
whether Him or Her, for that well-doing, or that abstinence from Evil, which
was not their own Choice, Will, or Discretion, but the Work and Effect solely
of God's Grace, acting by them, or in them?

6. That every good Thought and Action, is not an Inspiration, or the Gift or
Grace of God, is confirmed by this; that God does sometimes disallow and forbid
some good Intentions and Actions of his Servants. Thus, 'twas a good Thought
and Intention in David, that he would build an House for the Lord, a Temple for
God's public Worship and Service: 'twas so good a Thought and Purpose, that it
was rewarded with a Promise from God, that God would build David 's House, i.
e. would establish and confirm his Family on the Throne of Judah and Israel.
But as good a Thought as that of David was, it came solely from David, not from
God; for in that very Context, (2 Samuel Chapter 7.) God disallowed and forbad it;
declaring withal, that He had reserved that Work for Solomon the Son of David.
No one will be so unchristian, as to deny, that 'twas a good Thought and Action
in St. Paul, and his Company, that they attempted to preach the Gospel in
Bithynia: but it came from themselves, not from God; for the Text says, God
suffered them not so to do, Acts 16.7.

7. If our Case were such, with respect to Good and Evil, as our Opposers
pretend; that is, if all the Good we do, and all the Evil we forbear, is only
by a daily, hourly and momentary Grace, (for so they affect to speak) inspired,
infused, or blown into us: The Words of the Divine Law should be directed to
God's Grace in us, not to us. But now this is not only not so, but the Phrase
and Expression used in the Law or Commandment plainly supposes, that we can
obey by our own proper Powers. Such (in particular) is that remarkable Text, at
Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit; for why will ye die, O
House of Israel? I have no pleasure in the Death of him that dies; wherefore
turn your selves, and live ye.

8. Our Ability to Good as well as Evil, is evinced also by this, that God
declares he will punish the neglect of Duty, and every evil Doer, after a most
terrible and condign manner. This would be too apparently unjust and
tyrannical, if himself has so made us, that we cannot do that Duty, or forbear
that Evil, without a particular and extraordinary Grace and Aid, which is in
the Gift and Power of God only, and which he refuses or omitteth to bestow on
us. Our Opposers deny, that we can so much as pray for that Grace or Aid of
God, by which to do Good and forbear Evil: for they say, the very Affectus
orandi, the Inclination or Intent to pray, is purely the Gift of God. As for
the Word and Sacraments, another means for obtaining God's Grace, we shall see
hereafter, that our Opposers make the outward Word of no Efficacy, ascribing
all to the inward Word, which is not at all in our Power; and in order to any
Benefit by the Sacraments so called, they require a great many previous Graces
which are only in the Hand of God.

So that after all their Subterfuges, Evasions and Shifts, their Doctrine
concerning Grace amounts to this; God will punish Men eternally in Hellfire
for not doing, and for not forbearing what 'twas not in them to do or forbear,
without such an extraordinary Grace of God, as was wholly in him to give, and
not at all in them to attain or get.

As to the Texts by them alleged to prove that all is done by the Grace of
God, and that we are impotent, and averse also to all Good: They have been
often told by the Socinians and Remonstrants, and in the Annotations of the
excellent Grotius, how those Texts are to be understood. To them therefore I
refer, without engaging in so long and tedious a Digression.

Of the Word and Sacraments.
NOW that the Elect may obtain the before mentioned Grace of God, by which to
believe aright, and to do that which Good is, the Trinity have appointed the
Word and Sacraments.

A Sacrament consists of two Parts, an outward visible Sign, and an inward
invisible Grace or Energy.

The visible Sign of the Sacrament of Baptism is Water; the inward Grace is New
Birth, unto Faith and Righteousness. By this Sacrament even Infants are
regenerated or born again by the Spirit cooperating; that is to say, Faith,
Obedience, and other saving Graces are conferred in this Sacrament on (Elect)
Infants.

In the Sacrament of the Supper, the outward Sign is Bread and Wine; the inward
Energy, or Grace accompanying it, is, first Remission of Sins; next, the
refreshing and strengthening our Souls in Faith and other Graces. These things
are amply and often taught us by the English Church, both in the public
Catechism, and in the Offices or Forms of administering Baptism and the
Lord's Supper.

The Word is another appointed means of Grace; but no one is to think that it is
by Arguments used by a Preacher, or by the Rewards or Punishments held forth in
the Word, whether written or preached; or suchlike external and human means,
that our Minds are savingly convinced, or our Wills and Affections rightly
disposed. No, no, the inward and ineffable Word which God himself speaks to the
Heart, and which toward the Elect accompanies the Word preached or read, when
and as often as God pleases; this is that only Word which begets Faith, works
Obedience, and (in one word) that whole Renovation or Change, which
denominateth a Man or Woman, the Child or Servant of God.

And thus much is plainly and undeniably intimated in the Collects, and other
Prayers and Offices of our English Service Book, and is the known Doctrine of
all the Orthodox, of all indeed but Socinians, and such as are (more or less)
Socinianiz'd.

The English Service Book and the Articles are so clearly for these Doctrines,
that it has occasioned this Declaration of what may be meant when Men
subscribe to the Articles, Homilies and Service Book, to be favorably
received, even this, that Men subscribe (not to the Truth, but) to the use of
the Service Book; and again, they subscribe to the Articles, as to Articles of
Peace and Communion, (which they will not publicly impugn in the station of
Preachers) not as to Articles of Faith, or of absolute and undoubted Verity.
This is the sense in which (perhaps) most Men now subscribe to the Homilies,
Articles and Service Book, and which (upon occasion) they declare to be the
meaning of their Subscription. But all such are reformed, according to the
Model, not of our first Reformers, but of Socinus, Arminius and Episcopius,
whatsoever the Station may be that they hold in the Church.

The Notes.
The Sum of this Doctrine is; tho we are so made by God, as to be by Nature
impotent to all Good, and disposed to all Evil; yet to cure the Elect (tho not
wholly, yet in part) of this corrupt and depraved Condition of our Minds and
Souls, God has appointed the Word and Sacraments. Which are a sort of means,
that work not by any natural Energy of their own, nor by any Harmony,
Sutableness or Agreeableness to our Powers, Faculties or Natures; but by a
Theurgical, Telestick and Mystical Operation. Which is to say, they work on our
Minds as Spells, Charms and Incantations (and such like) obtain their
(pretended) Effects; namely, by a Praeternatural Power, extraordinarily given
to them by God, or by those Spirits that preside over such Affairs.

Let a Man in black sprinkle you with some of the Church's Water, or give you a
bit of Bread, or a sup of Wine, over which he has pronounced the Wonder-working
Words, prescribed in Mother- Church's Ritual; tho by Nature you are as bad as
the Devil, you shall presently be inclined to as much Good, as will save you
from Hell, and qualify you for Heaven. And this no less certainly, if you are
one of the Elect, for else the Churches Incantation produces only a Momentary
Effect, and a false Appearance of Good: no less certainly, I say, than by tying
the Norman Knot, you may gain the Love of the Person you desire, or by other
Devices recorded in the learned Books (so Fools esteem them) of Magic, you may
cause Hatred, raise Winds, and do a thousand other Feats, which have no more
natural or real Agreement with those Causes that are said to produce them, than
Faith and Obedience have with a bit of Bread, or with a sprinkling of Water.
Therefore when St. Austin defined a Sacrament to be the outward visible Sign of
an inward invisible Grace or Energy: the good Father should have considered,
that this is the Definition of a Charm, not of a Gospel-Sacrament. For a Charm
is a bare outward visible Sign, that has no natural or real Agreement with the
Effect; and if the Effect prove for the good of the Person concerned, it may be
called the inward invisible Grace of such Sign or Charm; as when the Effect is
to beget Love, or such like. But if the Effect of the Charm be hurtful, as to
kill, or such like, then it must be called the Energy, not the Grace of the
Charm; as that damning Quality or Power which our Opposers impute to the
Sacrament of the Supper, when not received aright, cannot be called the Grace
of that Sacrament, but only the Energy. So that let them turn themselves which
way soever they can, they have turned the Gospel-Sacraments (as I said before)
into Charms and Spells.

Now on the contrary, Unitarians think of the Sacraments reverently, not
extravagantly or superstitiously.

They like not indeed the word Sacraments, because it is no Scripture-word; and
because the Critics have noted, that it is a very improper Term or Name, to
denote the Ceremonies of Baptism, and of commemorating the Passion and Death of
our Savior. But they will not quarrel about words, if the Things signified be
agreeable to Reason or Holy Scripture.

We think that Baptism was a Ceremony or Rite appointed by our Savior, for
diverse most weighty Reasons; whereof this was the chief, to initiate or enter
Jews and Heathens into the Christian Church. It was a very proper and
significant Rite and Ceremony: for the washing and cleansing the Body in Water,
does very aptly signify that Repentance, and those Purposes of Holiness and
Purity, which such as enter themselves into the Christian Church, or are born
in that Church, should profess and practice. He that comes to be baptized, that
is, to be washed in Water, does thereby profess, he will in like manner purge
his Mind and Conscience, and his whole Conversation from Impurity and
Wickednesses of all sorts, by delivering himself up to the Institution and
Guidance of that Gospel, which was given by the Father (or God) as its Author,
was brought by the Son (our Lord Christ) as the Messenger, and confirmed by the
Holy Spirit (or the Power and Inspiration of God) by abundance of Signs,
Miracles and Wonders.

Therefore according to the Unitarians, it is not this Sacrament that works
ought in us, much less renews, regenerates and changes our Natures; but the
Person who receives this Sacrament, is to resolve and purpose Renovation,
Regeneration or Newness of Life. This Doctrine we learn form St. Peter, 1 Pet.
3.21. The like Figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us; not the
putting away the Filth of the Flesh, ( i. e. not the mere Ceremony of Baptism,
that is, of dipping and washing in Water) but the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God. That is, if as our Bodies are baptized, or washed in Water, so
also we purify our Consciences of all Disobedience toward God.

From this Explication of Baptism some have drawn these two Corollaries or
Consequences.

1. That Baptism should be administered by dipping in Water; for by that,
cleansing of the Body is effected, at least is intended and signified: but
sprinkling does neither cleanse, nor signify cleansing the Body, and so is very
improper to signify the Answer of a good Conscience, that is, the cleansing the
Heart and Conscience from Evil.

2. That no Person is capable of this Rite, but such as can profess and intend,
the thing signified by Baptism, even a clean Conscience, and a new Life.

As to the Lord's Supper, every one knows the mighty Wonders ascribed by our
Opposers to this Sacrament. Papists say, the Substances of Bread and Wine are
changed into the Substance of Christ's Body. Lutherans say, they are
consubstantiated with his Body. The Church of England goes beyond the Papists;
for she says (in the Catechism) that the Body and Blood of Christ are VERILY
and INDEED taken and received by the Faithful (not by others) in the
Lord's Supper. This implies such a Real and Universal Presence of our Lord's
Body in the Sacrament, as far exceeds the Popish Transubstantiation; for that
limits the Presence to only the Substance of Christ's Body, and excludes the
Accidents; but this takes in both.

The Unitarian Doctrine concerning this Sacrament, is plain and simple. We say,
our Savior has told us the meaning of this Sacrament in those words, Luke
22.19. This do in remembrance of me. And St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death. That is, you
commemorate and represent the shedding the Lord's Blood, and the breaking his
Body for Mankind.

But for the miraculous Effects and Consequences ascribed to the right
partaking of this Sacrament, Unitarians can find them nowhere, but in the Books
and Sermons of the superstitious Admirers (I might have said Idolaters) of
External Things. It Is true, the Apostle blames the Corinthians for receiving
unworthily. But the Unworthiness was their Drunkenness in the very Act of
communicating, that is, of commemorating the Death of our Savior; and it is of
this and the like Disorders in the Act of communicating, that he there bids
them to examine themselves, before they presume to take the Memorials of their
Lord's Death.

As for those words of our Savior at John 6.53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you, and diverse suchlike
Expressions in that Chapter, especially toward the latter end of it: it is
certain, and agreed by the most Learned Interpreters, ( Papists and
Protestants, as well as Socinians) that our Savior is not there speaking of
the Sacrament of the Supper, which (when he made those Discourses) was not yet
instituted, but of believing in him, and imitating his Example. H. Grotius has
very judiciously and learnedly, and very amply also proved this to be the
meaning of that Context; and I believe has satisfied as many as have carefully
read and considered that part of his Annotations. Wherefore I refer to him, and
the English Reader to the Paraphrase of the late Learned and Pious Dr. Claget.

Our Opposers delight in marvelous Doctrines; therefore, as they pretend, that
Faith and Newness of Life are effected by God in us, by Means so unsuitable to
the Qualities produced, and to the Nature of our Souls, as Water, Bread and
Wine: so they assure us farther, that the written Word and Word preached have
no Efficacy toward begetting those Effects; but it is (say they) the inward
Word, which ( sometimes, to some, and in some measure) accompanying the Word
written or preached, first convinces, and then reclaims Sinners.

For my part, I would gladly know what kind of thing an inward Word is; I had
thought all Words had been outward Words, and that otherways they could not
have been called Words. But be that as it will, Unitarians are well satisfied
that the outward Word (as our Opposers are pleased to Nickname the Holy
Scriptures, and the Word preached) is sufficient and effectual (by the Reasons
it suggesteth, and the Rewards and Penalties it proposes) to convince and
reform our Reasonable Natures, and that otherways they were not Reasonable (but
Brutish) Natures. This is not ours, but the Doctrine of Holy Scripture, and
that in as express and clear Terms as can be devised. First, as to the Efficacy
of the written Word, 2 Timothy 3.15. Thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee wise unto Salvation. Then for the Word taught, after St.
Paul had said, Romans 10.14. How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? He makes this Conclusion at
ver. 17. So then Faith comes by Hearing.

And is it not indeed a very strange Paradox of these Gentlemen, that the
Wisdom of God should make use of a Means that produces (they say) no Effect?
If the outward Word produces no Effect in him that hears or reads, we might as
well have been bid to tell twenty, in order to the getting Faith, and subduing
our Lusts, as to hear and meditate of God's Word. And if that be indeed the
case, it is very surprising, that God should expostulate after such an angry
manner with lazy and negligent Pastors, and should so heartily rouse up others,
as it is undeniable he does. Isa. 56.10. They are dumb Dogs, that cannot bark,
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Isa. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift
up thy Voice like a Trumpet; show my People their Transgressions, and the House
of Israel their Sins. 1 Cor. 9.16. Necessity is laid upon me; and woe unto me if
I preach not the Gospel. What needed any thing of all this, if the outward Word
is nothing; and it is only the inward Word (which is not in the least tied to
the other) that only can and does produce the desired Effect?

About interpreting Holy Scripture.
IF it be asked, how it comes to pass that we differ so widely from the
Heretics about the Doctrines specified in the foregoing Paragraphs, while both
we and they pretend Holy Scripture to be our Rule, and the sole Judge of
Controversies and Questions about Religion? The Answer is at hand, even this,
That Heretics being Men of some Wit and Learning, and withal carnal, are
hereupon puffed up, are too proud to submit themselves to God's Revelation, but
only as bowed and subdued to their Reason. But it is all Men's Duty in a Clash
between Revelation and Reason, whether real or only seeming, to submit Reason
to Revelation, and not subject Divine Revelation to Human Reason. It Is
unpardonable Boldness in any, to dislike the express words, or evident sense of
Holy Scripture, because our Reason cannot fathom the depths of that Divine
Book. If I would believe the Doctrine there set down, were it not for the
Contradiction made to it by Human Reason; I am not a Christian otherways than
in Name, if I do not receive such Doctrine with an implicit Faith, without
seeking to elude, or to correct it by Reason.

And it is upon this Hinge that all our Controversies with these Heretics do
turn, whether we are to follow the express words and obvious natural sense of
Holy Scripture; or, whether we are to interpret Scripture by Reason, so as to
fly to a Figurative Sense, or even to a Catachrestical ( i. e. somewhat harsh)
Construction or Interpretation, rather than admit any Doctrine that is contrary
to Reason?

The Notes.
Unitarians think that a real Clash between Revelation and Reason is an absurd
Supposition; but if we must put that impossible case, we think it is clear, that
Human Reason must needs be subjected to Divine Revelation. But where the Clash
is only seeming, that is, where there are ways of reconciling them, as by so
interpreting the Revelation, as to make it agree with Reason: we think it is as
absurd to oppose (as Trinitarians do) these two Lights to one another; we think
in that case we ought to use the Expedient of Interpretation. If the
Interpretation must be made either by a Figurative Sense, or by somewhat
Catachrestical (harsh) Construction, yet it is always better to strain Words
than Things; and there are particular Reasons why we ought so to do, in
interpreting Holy Scripture, and all Interpreters (of all Persuasions) do it
with Approbation of All. Yet this is a thing on which I will not here insist,
tho it deserves great Consideration; because this is not, as Trinitarians
pretend, our Case or Quarrel with them; or the Hinge on which these
Controversies turn. For we utterly deny, that the express Words, or the obvious
natural Sense of Holy Scripture, are on the Trinitarian side: we never fly (in
these Controversies) to a Catachrestical, or harsh sense; no, nor have at any
time need of a Figurative Sense, as has been sufficiently shown in the brief
History of the Unitarians. Trinitarians indeed are forced to those Expedients.
I do not call them Shifts, because it is plain, they must be sometimes allowed
not only in interpreting Holy Scripture, but in all other Writers and Writings.
But seeing themselves are forced to use very often those ways of interpreting;
especially in interpreting the Gospel of St. John, and the most part of St.
Paul's Epistles, they have no right to object such kind of interpreting to
Unitarians, if indeed we had occasion for it.

The CONCLUSION.
THese things have not been said, God is Witness, to challenge, much less to
affront other Sects and Denominations of Christians, and least of all the
Church of England. From which Church the Unitarians have not separated, as
other Dissenters, for small and inconsiderable Causes, have done.

We place not Religion in worshipping God by our selves, or after a particular
Form or Manner, but in a right Faith, and a just and charitable Conversation:
We approve of known Forms of praising, and praying to God; as also in
administering Baptism, the Lord's Supper, Marriage, and the other Religious
Offices; we like well of the Discipline of the Church by Bishops and Parochial
Ministers; we have an Esteem for the eminent Learning, and exemplary Piety of
the Conforming Clergy. For these Reasons we communicate with that Church as far
as we can, and contribute our Interest to favor her against all others who
would take the Chair.

We would not therefore be understood to be Enemies to the Church, or as
seeking to undermine her. Our whole Pretense is this, to reform our FAITH by
the Rule of Holy Scripture, in consistence with evident REASON. And the design
of this Pretense or Endeavor of ours, next to approving our own Souls to God
our Judge, is, to vindicate the common Christianity from the Insults of
Atheists, or other profane Persons; to take from such all just Exception
against the most holy and wise Body of Laws, that the World ever had or can
have, even the Christian Religion. By making it appear to be a most rational
and consistent System, as well in the Credenda, the Things to be believed, as
in the Ag^^^a, or Things to be done. We think this (...) such a Design as ought
not to be enterta^^^^ with those Jealousies, and aspersed (...) those Calumnies
and Clamours, that are every day raised against us, both by the Pulpit and
Pr^ss.

We hope that the Reasons of our Dissent from the Church in these Doctrines,
being once known, and well considered, and the Honesty of our Design in
publishing them apparent; our Fellow Christians will less regret our Difference
with them about these Questions, and will at length acknowledge, that however we
are mistaken, yet we are well-meaning Brethren.

Thou Father, who governest in the Kingdoms of the Children of Men, continue to
us All, the Means of rightly knowing Thee, and of living up to the Precepts of
the Gospel; that we may All at length receive of thee, the Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us.

FINIS.

