A NARRATIVE OF THE Proceedings in Ireland ABOUT Mr. EDWARD BAGSHAW Anno 1662.
THere having been many, and most of them false, Reports raised concerning Mr.
Edward Bagshaw's Demeanor in Ireland; I being at that time upon the Place, and
privy to all that passed, thought good to make this Brief, but True and
Impartial Account of all that happened, so far as Mr. Bagshaw, during his stay
there, was concerned.

On July 27, 1662. Mr. Bagshaw landed at Hill Hoth in Ireland, and from thence
repaired to Capt. Jones his House upon the College Green in Dublin, where the
Right Honorable the Earl of Anglesey (upon whom he did attend as his Domestic
Chaplain) had provided him a Lodging. After he had spent some few days to
refresh himself, and to enquire into the state of Affairs, especially those
that concerned the Church, he thought himself obliged in Conscience n^^ ^o
b^^^le; but since most of the Ministers, who had any Gift in Preaching, were
silenced he conceived he could not do God better Service, then once every Lords
Day to spend his ^ains that way; which he supposed none could take offense at,
since he was himself Episcopally Ordained, and thereby freed from that
Exception which was taken against the silenced Ministers, who still owned and
adhered unto their former Ordination by Presbytery: And besides being Chaplain
to a Person of so great Worth and Eminence, as the Earl of Anglesey was known
to be, he had reason to think, that his Relation would facilitate his design,
and open those Churches to him, which were shut to others, that wanted those
Qualifications.

Accordingly he did on July 31. by means of a Friend, address himself to one
Mr. Huson, Minister of the Parish Church of St. Warbours, in the Confines of
which Parish M. Bagshaw lodged; and desited leave that sometimes he might assist
and ease him in his Preaching: which Motion was readily embraced and assented
to by Mr. Huson, who did appoint the next Lords Day following in the Morning,
to be the time wherein Mr. Bagshaw should begin. But on the Saturday, Mr.
Bagshaw was somewhat amazed, when he had News from Mr. Huson, that one Dr. Scile
had commanded him to the Bishops Name, to let no Stranger preach, unless he
brought with him the Archbishop of Dublins License. Though under the Civil Term
of prohibiting a Stranger, Mr. Bagshaw had reason to think himself particularly
meant, yet because he did not know what he had done to deserve such an
Exclusion, he made his Case known to the Right Honorable the Earl of Anglesey,
who on the Lords Day about 7 in the Morning sent his Servant to wait upon the
Archbishop of Dublin with this Letter.

May it please your Grace,
My Chaplain Mr Bagshaw, being willing to take pains whilst he stayed to
Dublin, got leave of Mr. Huson, to supply his place for him this Morning: But
your Grace having given Order, that no Stranger should preach without your
License; I do desire it on his behalf, as for one that not only is Episcopally
Ordained, but likewise is very Sober, Orthodox, and Inoffensive in his
Preaching. Your Graces Permission at this time will be very acceptable to many,
and particularly to Mr. Huson, who in confidence of my Chaplains Assistance,
has omitted to provide himself. In ease hereafter you think fit to examine
him, I shall some day the next Week send him to wait upon your Grace, and doubt
not but he will give you all manner of Satisfaction. I rest,

Augu^^ ^. 166^. Your Graces Humble Servant, Anglesey.


This Letter so civil in it self, and coming from a Person of so great
Eminence, might have prevailed for a much greater Favor; but after two Hours
stay, the Messenger returned with this short and Insignificant Answer;

My Lord,
Your Chaplain came not to me, according to your Lordships Directions; and
before I speak with him, I cannot dispense with his Preaching in my Diocese;
who am otherwise very ready to approve my self,

St. S^, Aug 3. 62. My Lord, Your Most Affectionate Servant, Ja. Dublin


Two things in this short Letter were somewhat admirable; one was, the wilful
Mistake, which the Bishop made, in taking Exception at Mr. Bagshaw's not
waiting upon him, according to the Earl of Anglesey's Direction; whereas that
Honorable Person mentioned it only for some day in the following Week, but for
that day desired he might preach without using that Ceremony. And the other
was, the little Reason the Bishop had to subscribe himself my Lords Most
Affectionate Servant, since in a thing of so Trivial and Facile a Nature, he
had, not only unjustly, but, as some think, uncivilly, refused that Noble
Earls Express and Earnest Desire. But however, Mr. Bagshaw submitted to the
Bishops Pleasure, and did not only forbear Preaching in public, but came
himself in the Afternoon unto the very place where he had designed to preach;
to show that though he had Reason to ^e dissatisfied, yet he was no Separatist.

On the Tuesday following, Mr. Bagshaw waited upon the Archbishop, and was much
surprised, when for a Salutation, he was told, that he came to set the Nation
in a Flame; and when Mr. Bagshaw desired the Bishop to have Nobler, or, at
least Cooler Thoughts of him; the Bishop asked him in great heat, whether he
were not the Author of the Letter against the Bishop of Worcester? To which Mr.
Bagshaw answered, That he did not remember, that his Name was subscribed to any
such Letter: Whereupon, the Bishop presently demanded, whether he would deny
it? and when M. Bagshaw i^sisted, that he thought himself not bound, either to
affirm, or, how Innocent soever he was, to deny any such thing, until he was
Legally charged with it; the Bishop forthwith told him that unless he would
expressly deny he had any hand in writing that Letter, he did forbid him
Preaching in his Diocese. Which whether it were a sufficient Reason, upon
Supposition that Mr. Bagshaw had been the Author, must be left to others to
judge: For how could the writing a Letter in England, disable a man a Year
after, from Preaching a Sermon in Ireland? Or why should the Archbishop of
Dublin be more fierce for Vindicating the Bishop of Worcesters Honor, in case
Mr. Bagshaw had injured him, than either the Bishop of Worcester himself, or
all the Bishops in England were; who either thought Mr. Bagshaw Innocent, or
else that so petty a Fact did not deserve so sharp a Sentence? for though Mr.
Bagshaw often preached publicly, yet he was never so much as once questioned
for it.

But though Mr. Bagshaw was thus prohibited by the Bishop, yet he could not
look upon himself so discharged from that Duty he owed to God, as to forbear
the Exercise of his Ministry, and therefore he did constantly in private, in
his own Lodgings, Preach every Lords day in the morning, and gave strict order,
that none who were willing to come should be excluded: which occasioned the
resort of many, and those of as great Quality as any were then in Dublin, who
could not imagine that any Law was broken, in their assembling to hear one, who
by Law was qualified to preach, and was always ready in Person to defend both
his Fact and Doctrine.

Three Lords days past thus without any disturbance, when the Archbishop,
being much enraged that any should care to contest with his Sovereignty; under
pretense of suppressing M^sse (which at that time was very frequent in Dublin)
got the Mayor to send Soldiers up and down the Town; who having it seems their
Errand what to do, came only to Mr. Bagshaw's Lodgings, and there, contrary to
their Instructions (as the Mayor afterward affirmed) forcibly broke open the
doors, and for some hours detained Mr. Bagshaw and all the Company, to the
number of above one hundred and twenty Prisoners; though Mr. Bagshaw did very
often and earnestly entreat that either he himself might answer for all, or at
least, that the Women, whose Health might be much prejudiced by the Alarums of
rude soldiers, might be dismissed, but could prevail in neither.

About one a clock the City Marshall came and dismissed the Guard, to the no
little grief of the Soldiers, whose Commander expected great sums for
Ransom; though such was the Resolution and Courage of all there present, that
none did so much as conceal their Names, but freely offered themselves to
appear any where, and to justify the Action.

About four in the afternoon Mr. Bagshaw and the greatest part of his Company,
with many others, met again, and performed the remaining duty of the day
without any impediment.

Hitherto Mr. Bagshaw had acted upon his own account, without ever acquainting
the Right Honorable the Earl of Anglesey with what he had done; whose Name be
was resolved never to use in any thing, where the issue might be hazardous; and
therefore he concealed from that Noble Person, not only the Archbishops
Silencing him, but likewise his own Resolution of continuing to preach in as
public a manner as he could. But now the disturbance he had met with, being so
notorious, he presently addressed himself unto that Honorable Person, to beg
leave of him, that since there was no Liberty either for Public or Private
preaching, though he had attempted both, he might be dismissed unto his Native
Country; for however his Lordships service was dear to him, yet he found he
could not continue any further attendance, without creating jealousies of
himself, which at last would reflect upon his Lordship; and therefore he prayed
a discharge, to which that Prudent and Excellent Person readily assented; and
an opportunity shortly after presenting it self in the Right Honorable the
Vicountess of Valentia's and her Daughters coming for England, M. Bagshaw went
to Sea in their Company, to wait upon them, and so came for England: But before
he left Ireland, to stop those many slanderous Reports, which were raised about
him, he made this Brief Declaration; which he left to be conveyed unto the
Hands of his Grace, James Duke of Ormond, by whose Mild and Temperate
Government he does suppose it came to pass, that he was so long Protected.

The Declaration was as follows,

Understanding that I lie under the Censure of some, and the Calumny of others,
as if I were a Person Heretical in my Judgment, Schismatical in my Practice,
and Scandalous in my Life; though as to my self, I ought to rejoice in these
Reproaches, (which are no other than our Savior and his Apostles underwent
before me) yet for the sake of others, who possibly may suffer for their more
favorable opinion of me; and for the sake of Truth, which I ought to clear
from all Mistakes and Prejudices; and lest the Gospel should suffer for my
sake, who am, as I hear, condemned as an unworthy Minister of it, I thought fit
to make this ensuing Declaration.

First, As to my Faith and Judgment in Points of Doctrine, I do in general
firmly believe whatever is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament; and more particularly, that Collection of Articles, which the Church
of England has made; and so far as by the Act of Q. Elizabeth they are
enjoined, I am ready to subscribe my real Assent unto them: And accordingly I
have already, by several Treatises in Print, declared my utter Abhorrence of
all Popish, Socinian, and Arminian Tenets, which are expressly condemned in
those Articles. In which Judgment I am much confirmed, since I have read the
Articles of Ireland, every Clause and Circumstance of which I do hereby
acknowledge and own to be Sound and Orthodox.

Secondly, As to Church Government and Ceremony, the Scripture being more
silent about them (as things of leffer Moment) I think I ought not to be
blamed, if herein I assume a greater Latitude, than possibly some others do:
Yet because the Peace of the Church is much concerned in a right Stating of
those Matters, I do declare;

1. That I am so far from being against the Order of Bishops, that when my
Interest did altogether dispose me to an utter renouncing of them, yet then did
I choose to be Ordained by the Learned Bishop Brownrigge; and at the time of my
Ordination (which was then when the Commonwealth-Parliament had newly assumed
the Government) I had a Testimonial from that worthy Person, in Terms so
expressive of his Candid Opinion of me, that I am ashamed to repeat, because I
am hopeless of ever deserving it.

2. As for Ceremonies, I hold them to be things, in their own Nature,
Indifferent; and were they left so, I should make no scruple sometimes to use
them; but because they are now imposed, and made (at least as to the Outward
Practice of them) Necessary, and a Condition of Preaching the Gospel, whereby
their Indifferent Use pro hic and nunc, is utterly taken away. I therefore now
think it my Duty to forbear them: and that, upon this single Reason, because,
to fix and establish any thing as a necessary Outward Part of Religious
Worship, which God has no where commanded, is, so far as I yet see, an
Entrenchment upon Christ's Kingly Office, by which he is the sole Legislator of
his Church: and which ought to be preserved Inviolable by us, as well as his
Sacerdotal and Prophetical; which two last, our Church, in opposition to the
Church of Rome, has worthily Asserted.

I know very well, that many Learned and Pious men, whom I very much honor,
have been, and are of a quite different Judgment; who conceive, that the
Imposing of such Indifferent things, does not only make them Lawful, but
likewise does oblige the Consciences of all to an outward Observance of them:
Which Assertion, I should readily grant, could it once be cleared to me, that
God had given such power to any, as to make those things Necessary in his
Worship, which he has left Indifferent and Free: But because I am for the
present unsatisfied in the Lawfulness of such Imposing, I ought in Conscience
to forbear the Practice and Observance of the Imposition.

This being the only thing, that I know of, wherein I differ from those, who
are most devotedly for the Church of England, I cannot but wonder, why the
Reverend the Bishop of Dublin should think fit to Silence me; since I never yet
did make it my Business, to vent that Opinion in the Pulpit, not ever used any
Reflections to alienate men's minds from the Established Forms; for in such
things as these, that are not of absolute Necessity to Salvation, I think as
none ought to be compelled unto, so neither ought they to be dehorted from the
Usage of them.

It was merely my being Silenced, and thereby hindered from preaching in the
Public places of Worship, which made me in Private, and to that Family I had
the charge of, to exercise my Ministry: which Duty I conceive in Law
(considering my Qualification) none ought without just cause to debar me from.
And though it is possible I may be charged with a love of Separation, yet not
only my Practice, but my Preaching does sufficiently evidence, that I have not,
nor ever shall decline Communion with the Church of England. It being one of
the Points, which I was handling at the very instant when I was interrupted, to
prove, That Errors in Doctrine, and some false mixtures in Worship, if not
imposed, are not sufficient grounds to divide and separate from the Public
Assembly, if therein the Essentials be retained: And this I cleared, both from
the practice of our Savior, who did not withdraw himself from the Jewish
Worship, though it was then very corrupt; and likewise the Corinthians, though
very faulty in many things, are exhorted by the Apostle to amend their Errors,
without any intimation that it was their Duty to Separate.

Having thus given an Account of my Faith, I must add, that as for my Life and
Conversation, it is, though far from being exact according to the Rule, yet
such, that as my own Conscience does not, so neither can any, who have observed
my walking, justly upbraid me therewith. To say more, were to be guilty of that
Folly, as if I either courted, or thought I deserved Commendation for a bare
doing of my Duty.

Did I think it needful, I would conclude with testifying my Loyalty to his
Majesty, but my Actions hitherto, my Writings, and my constant Prayers for him,
do it much more than my present Words can: And whether or no, such an one, that
is thus qualified, according to the foregoing Declaration, who is not charged
with any Error in Doctrine, with any Vice in his Life, or with Unpeaceableness
in his Conversation, even as to those very things wherein he differs; whether
such an one may not be allowed to Preach publicly, or at least not be
disturbed in private, is humbly left to the Consideration of the Supreme Civil
Magistrate in this Nation; to whom the Peace of the Nation, and in that the
Peace of the Church, does solely and properly of Light belong.

Sept. ^. 1662. Subscribed, Edw. Bagshaw.


T^^ Paper* As I am Informed, was delivered into the Hand^ of the Duke of
Ormond; and what the Thoughts of that ^ble Person were upon it, is left to
every Indifferent and I^^artial Reader to Judge.

FINIS.

