A NARRATIVE Of the Great and Bloody Fight BETVVEEN THE Prince of Orange AND
THE Duke of Orleans The King of Frances General, NEAR THE City of St. Omers,

On Sunday the first of April 1677. with the Numbers of the Killed and Wounded
Men. BEING AN Impartial Account.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for T. M. 1677.

A Narrative of the Great and Bloody Fight between the Prince of Orange and the
Duke of Orleans, the King of France's General, near the City of St. Omers on
Sunday the first of April, 1677.
THE disapointment the Prince of Orange met with at Maestricht the Last year,
occasioned by the Duke de Villa Hermosa, not impeding the Count Schomberg from
Relieving the said place, which he had brought to such extremity, that they
were not able to defend the Town much longer without relief, and not having
then the Sole Command, and other Confederate Princes being joined with him,
made him resolve upon something that might vindicate his Honor and Courage,
(and afterward to act distinctly) in order to which the last Winter he
recruited his Army, not only taking care to furnish them with all necessaries
and increase their numbers, but like a discreet General well disciplined them.
And therefore with all diligence brought them into the Field to prevent the
progress of the French, and so to that purpose at Ipres on the 8 Instant
Newstile, drew his Army up in Battalia, from whence the next day he marched to
the first oposition which was at the River Peene, which was posted by the
French, whereupon the Prince Commanded an Attack upon them which proved with
good success, and made the French retreat, and give way to the Dutch after some
hours dispute, after which the Prince caused several Bridges to be throne over
the River for his Army to pass, using all means to get to the relief of St.
Omers before the Detachement arrived there from Cambray for the Enemies
reinforcement, but the ways proving very deep and heavy, much Retarded his
Highness March. On the 11. ditto. his Highness came in view of the French Army
commanded by the Duke of Orleans being strength'd the Evening before by the
Duke of Luxemburghs Army from Cambray; the Prince notwithstanding the odds and
the want of Count Nassaus Presence, on Sunday about nine a Clock in the Morning
engaged the Enemy till Evening with great Courage and Gallantry, beating down
the left-wing of the French Army for some hours, but continual supplies, and
the Courage of the Valliant Duke of Orleans turned the Seals and made the
Dutch Retreat in some disorder.

Till such time as they Retreated to a narrow Pass and a graft, where the
Princes Artillery and Baggage was placed, who disputed it till it was quite
dark, and where the Prince was Resolved to maintain the fight the next day, but
his Scouts bringing intelligence the Count de Nassaw was not come in, nor any
hopes in Reasonable time, made him take a Resolution to march off with as much
Honor as the exigence of the business would allow, which was excellent well
performed, for though the French were far Superior to him in Horse, his
Highness taking the advantage of the ground which was most Enclosures and
Ditches, made his retreat more easy by lineing the Hedges and maintaining the
Passes, which cost the French much Pains and blood, but the French pressing
very vigorously upon the Dutch, and their want of Cavalry made it impossible
for them to bring off their Guns and Baggage, and therefore were forced to
leave them behind; the Prince between this and Ipre the next day marched in good
order, having the night before taken care of all the wounded men, so that if
the French had over taken them, they would run the hazard of another Battle,
but they were more intent upon the taking in of St. Omers as is supposed, in
this dispute there was much Resolutions on both sides, the Dutch, though
worsted, was much to be commended, and it is thought had not the badness of the
ways Prevented them, had carried off their Guns and Artillery.

We have not as yet an exact Account of what Persons of Quallity are Killed or
taken on either side, but what is uncertain, and therefore think it not
prudence to declare it, though Letters say people of Eminence on both sides.

The French having defeated the Prince, remained Masters of the field. In this
encounter, by the best computation, the Dutch have lost 4000 men and 2000
wounded, which were carried off, besides others that were able to March off;
The French loss supposed not so considerable by some hundreds, however the
Gentlemen at Arms and the Kings Musketeers suffered so much upon this
occasion, as being the people that opposed the fury of the Enemy most, Charged
the Princes Guards and choicest of his Infantry, who were at Push of Pike and
Swords Point for nere an hour together, before either gave way, neither were
the Courage and endeavors of the besieged wanting who made several brisk and
Resolute Sallies upon the Forts, which the Duke had ordered to be filled with
men, to prevent any mischief from the Town upon the Rear of his Army, whilst
the Enemy was in the Van, and had certainly carried des Vaches had not a
Regement of Horse and Dragoons come into the relief of the Fort, who made the
besieged return twice as fast as they came out, Leaving behind them several
Dead bodies and some Prisoners. The Garrison in St. Omers are full of Courage
and Resolution beyond any of the Spanish Garrisons, the French have sat down
before as yet, but how long they shall be able to withstand the French after
the Princes retreat, without further supplies, a little time will produce.

FINIS.

