A NARRATIVE of the Proceedings at the Sessions, HELD IN Iustice-Hall AT THE
OLD-BALY.

SHOWING The Several Crimes of the Mallefactors; VIZ.

Treasons, Murders, Robberies, Burglaries, and Fellonies.
There were Sixteen burned in the hand, Three Men, and Three Women Condemned,
but two of them pleaded their Bellies, and were Reprieved by the Court, there
were four to be transported, and one to stand in the Pillory.

With Allowance;

Roger L'Estrange.



Printed for John Millet. 1676.

A Narrative of the Proceedings at the Sessions, etc.
EVery Age, nay, every Sessions brings forth new Crimes, and many times more
Prodigious then the former, of which I shall give you a Cursery: the first
account of such as were tried this Sessions in the Old-Bayly, was a Murder
committed by a Boy, aged thirteen years and a Month: in Christmas time he
unhappily quarreled with another Boy, being his Fellow-Apprentice, about their
Aprons: the Prisoner cut the others Apronstrings, and the other attempting to
cut his, the Prisoner took a Three-penny Knife, and stabbed him in the Belly:
then he run out, and cried, Lord Jesus Receive my Soul, Daniel has Killed me:
The Young Youth was committed to the Gate House, he living near Westminster,
and from thence brought to Newgate, and Tried at the Old-Bayly: he had been
taught how to excuse the Fact, but his Memory was as much Corrupted as his
mind, so that he made an imperfect excuse, pretending that he had the Knife in
his hand, and the other came running toward him, and stumbled upon the point
of his Knife, but it appeared to be otherwise to the Jury, and they brought him
in, Guilty of Manslaughter.

The next Fact appeared to be much more Barbarous then the former, a man living
in White-chappel, was Arrested by a Marshal's-man, and as soon as the Officer
told him of the Arrest, he with a bloody hand, and barbarous mind, thrust a
very strange Weapon into his Belly, that being done, with as much vigor and as
little sense and grace, he thrust at another, but his nimble body escaped his
malicious purpose, and an unexpected Multitude surprised him, and took him
Prisoner: when the danger of his further mischief was over, they begun to
parley with him, and asked why he would do so Barbarous an act? he replied,
That if he had not Killed the Bailiff, he should have gone to the Marshalsey on
foot, but now he was to go to Newgate in a Coach: but though he seemed to be of
a resolute mind, and of an undaunted courage, yet by a serious consideration,
he pleaded eagerly to excuse the Fact. but all in vain, for he was found,
Guilty of Murder.

After these, another was brought to the Bar for Murder, it appeared that he
was making a joynt-stool in Clarendin-house, and one that seemed to have some
interest there, told him that he should not do it there, the other replied, he
would: then the other struck him, and his strokes were answered with a blow
with a Miller, upon his arm: the other that was Killed challenged him to fight,
which he refused to do, then he went to lock him in, but the other frustrated
his defigns: the slain struck at him three or four times, and he then smote him
on the head with his Saw, and his Hat being off, he pierced his Scull, and the
wound reached very near his Brains, upon which, within less then two days he
Dyed, the Provocations being considered by the Jury, he was only found, Guilty
of Manslaughter.

Then succeeded the Trial of a very Young Youth, who was Indicted for Stealing
one quarter of a Yard of Silk-Lutestring, and a quarter of a yard of Mascarade
from a Tailor, to whom he was a Probationary Apprentice: upon his Indictment he
Childishly and Innocently pleaded Guilty to the Felony: but the Court, by
reason of his Youth, ordered him to be brought back to the Bar to plead to his
Bill, and he pleaded not Guilty, and was quitted.

There was like-wise an Irishman Tried, for Stealing two hundred pounds from
his Master, but though several Circumstances seemed to stick as close to him as
the Chain to his Leg; yet nothing could be fully proved against him, and
therefore he was acquitted.

There was another arraigned for Felony and Burglary, but would not Plead till
his Wife, who was accused with him might be released; The Court urged him in
vain, and told him the Press was ready: he confidently replied, that he was as
ready for the Press: but the Court having enough to do that day, did let him
alone till another, and ere that time was expired, possibly he would alter his
Resolution.

After this a Youth was tried for a burglary committed in a house at Finchley:
the man said, his house was broke open, a Napkin, a Neats, and some silver
spoons were taken away, but he knew not by whom; then another Witness was
called, and he said that he was in the Robbery with the Prisoner, the other
denied it; then the Evidence said that he was in that, and in at least twenty
other Robberies with him, and if that would not do his business, the rest
should; be pleased to know that this his accuser was a very great Criminal, and
said with others, to the end they should make a Candid Discovery: but the Jury
acquitted the young man, being satisfied that such fellows often prove lame in
their prosecution, for a reward it is supposed they spare some that are Guilty,
and often lay the burden upon those that least deserve it.

There was likewise one in the Habit of a Gentlewoman, that took a Trial for
stealing a Silver Tankard, and a considerable parcel of Money from a Citizen;
the manner was thus; she pretendly went to provide a Lodging for a person of
Honor; Stewart and another Irish Gentleman; and when she had accomplished her
Designs, the Gentlemen came, and were wellcomly entertained; and it being
Christmas time, at night they went to Cards with the Landlord, the Landlady
being gone a visiting; in a little time they wanted some Double beer, and there
was none to fetch it but the Master of the house; he therefore went to the next
door and ordered the Maid to bring them in a quart or two; afterward they
wanted some Wine, he went the same way to work to supply their wants, but not
long after they desired him to fetch them some double bear himself; he readily
obeyed the commands of his noble, and as he thought profitable guests, and was
no sooner gone, but they marched up stairs to seek out his treasures, and
breaking open a closet they found a silver Tankard, and a considerable parcel
of money, which they took, and left him to pay for the double ale, and not long
after they met with this woman, and brought her to a Trial, who said that one
of the Gentlemen was her Husband, and produced a Certifficate to affirm it, but
the Jury then brought her in guilty of the fact.

There was another woman tried for high treason; the cause was this. She came
to a shop at Ludgate Hill, and desired them to change her a shilling, they
perceiving it clipped told her that she deserved to be questioned how she came by
it, she thereupon run away, but they being too nimble overtook her, and
suspecting her guilt, carried her before a Magistrate, who committed her to
prison, her lodging was searched, and Pots, shears, and clippings found in it,
but the Jury presumed to think it was her Husbands handiwork rather than hers,
therefore acquitted her.

There were two men drinking, and there arose a dispute between them concerning
a Spanish word, one affirmed that it was not properly expressed, the other gave
him provoking language for saying so, he replied, Sir I know not how to bear
that affront; then said the other if you like it not follow me out; then he
seemed willing, but was prevented by the rest of the company, who labored
afterward to compose their differences, and they seeming well reconciled; the
company left them, about an hour after they fell to quarrelling again, and
being out of doors he that gave the unseemly language bid the other draw or
else he would run him through; he thereupon unsheathed his Rapier, and in the
quarrel run the challenger into the arm, the neighbors soon put a period to
their fighting, and parted them. But the wound proved mortal, and the other was
therefore accused for the murder, but the Jury perceiving by the evidence that
he was compelled to draw to secure his life, brought in their verdict, Se
Defendendo.

There was a man and a Woman tried for a Burglary, but the house being broken
open in the day time, it was esteemed a felony, the man was found guilty, the
other acquitted being his wife.

There was one tried for breaking open a house at High-gate, taking away a
brass clock, and a Virginy-Nightingale, but though he was seen that day with
the clock, yet the evidence could not swear those things were theirs therefore
he was acquitted.

There was one inuicted for cutting a Gentlewomans pocket, and taking from her
a box and five shilings, and three groats, she being apprehended upon
suspicion, and search being made they found a box like hers, and the same sum
was in it, but she would not swear that was her box, nor that her money, every
like not being the same, therefore she was in like manner acquitted.

There was a man that came to a Watch-maker, accompanied with a footman, who
desired to see some Watches for his Master; after he had seen many, he made
choice of two of the best, one gold, the other filver, and the Apprentice was
sent with him to bring the Watch or money for them, but when he got into the
Temple, he pretended to go up stairs to his master, and so gave the young man
the slip, for which he was ordered to stand in the pillory.

There were 16 burned in the hand, 3 men and 3 women condemned; 2 of the women
pleaded they were with Child, and therefore reprieved for a time by the Court;
4 ordered to be transported, and 1 to the Pillory.

FINIS.

