THE NATIONS ADDRESS TO THE Committee of Grievances in Parliament, For the
Taking Off the CORPORATION OATH, IN Behalf of all Cities, Towns-Corporate,
Aldermen, Bailiffs, Burgesses; as also of Sheriffs, Lord Lieutenants, and
Deputy Lieutenants of Counties, Ministers, and all others concerned for the
Repealing those Acts, which impose the Oath following.
The OATH.
I A. B. do swear, That it is not Lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take
Arms against the King. And that I do abhor that Traitorous position, of taking
Arms by his Authority, against his Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by Him, in pursuance of such Commissions. And that I will not,
at any time endeavor any Alteration of Government, either in Church or State.

IN this Oath, we have the Matter, and the Form of Words, that is the
Substance, and Composure: And there are Three Parts of it. The first Part is
not consistent with Judgment: The Second with Truth: The Third with
Righteousness.

I will take up the Last part First. And I will not endeavor any Alteration of
Government. There is no Government on Earth so perfect, that it has need of
Laws, like the Medes and Persians. Government may be considered in the
Administration, (according to Politics) or the Constitution. The Word
Government is set down here indefinitely, without Distinction. Alteration of
Laws, and so Government in the Adminestration, is as necessary many times upon
emergent occasions, to the Body Politic, as the fresh Air is to the Natural.
This Oath was once brought in to the Parliament, to have been made common. It
were a thing not Righteous, a destructire thing, to have such an Engagement
laid on persons in such a capacity: It were injurious, to have it laid on any
Freeholders, or Free-Subjects, as we are. The Constitution of our Nation, as
Parliamentary, is such, that no Law can be Established or Repealed, but it must
pass the House of Commons; and so the whole Body concur in their
Representatives to every Alteration of (or in) the Government which is made, if
it be Legal: No House of Commons, but is Chosen by the People. Every
Englishman is intended to be here present, either in Person, or by
Procuration; and the Consent of the Parliament is taken to be every Man's
Consent, says Sir Thomas Smith, De Rep. Angl. l. 2. c. 2. Nay, while the King,
Consilio and Consensu Baronum Leges olim imposuit Universo Regno, by the
Counsel and Assent of his Barons, did give Laws to his whole Realm, Consentire
inferior quisque visus est in persona Domini sui Capitalis pro ut hodie per
Procuratores Comitatus, every Inferior seemed to consent in the person of his
Chief Lord; as now they do by their Burgesses, and Knights of the Shires, says
Sir Henry Spelman. This is so true, that in this sense it is, that the Laws are
said to be Quas vulgus elegerit, Which the People shall choose. Now, then, if
every Free Subject has a Fundamental Liberty to Choose Knights, and Burgesses;
and accordingly to inform them of their Grievances, and Petition them for
Redress, and in them, as their Representatives, do consent to the Alteration of
Government and Laws, (if there be any pass) as profitable to the Nation: How
can such an Oath be imposed on him, That he will not endeavor any Alteration,
as this? Is not Choosing Burgesses; informing them, Petitioning them, Acting and
Legally Consenting in them, to this end, An Endeavor; and that as much as can
be in their Place and Calling? And no more than an Endeavor in their Place and
Calling, was Sworn in the Covenant. It is true, that New Laws was made, and Old
Repealed, without Alteration of the Constitution, but not without Alteration of
Government, because Government takes in both the Administration and
Constitution. Let us suppose the word Government confined only the
Constitution. This is the Constitution of the Government in the State, which is
a Legal Monarchy; and this indeed we are so far bound from endeavoring to
Alter, (now we are constituted a Commonwealth) that I think it not alterable
by the King himself, and Parliament (though it might be so little a while
since, when they were a Convention) because the Supreme Power, for the
Administration, must be supposed, in all Communities, to be derived from, and
held by the Constitution. But as for Government in the Church; We are to know,
and to acknowledge the Constitution it self hereof, is but a Law of the
Administration, in Reference to the State. And consequently, when all Laws for
the Administration are liable to the Regulations of Parliaments; the great
Question will remain, How these men, who are Presbyterian, or Independent, in
their Judgment, and think Episcopacy against the Scripture, can be denied the
Endeavor only before mentioned (which consists but in Choosing
Representatives, and doing no more than the Constitution allows) in order to
the Prosecution of what they think themselves obliged to in Conscience, both by
Oath and the Word of God? Is not the Foundation Liberty of the whole People,
and our selves with them, here in danger? Judge ye, that are Wise; and what an
Anointed Plot (...) had here in the Nation, that an Allegiance in effect,
should be Sworn to the Bishops, as well as to the King, by such Impositions?

For the Words then (or Form,) I wonder at this Rigor in the Compiler, that a
man must Swear, Not to endeavor any Alteration. Had it not been enough to be
Engaged, not to endea- any Alteration of the Substance of our Government,
Episcopacy in the Church, and Monarchy in the State; but it must be, Not Any
Alteration? It were well, that we were so absolutely perfect. And again, must
we not at any time endeavor any Alteration? What if times should turn, and we
be in a Confusion, as in Cromwell's time, and immediately after? What if any
such like chance, or changes come? Must these Men be bound up, that they cannot
endeavor to render back this Government, that we have? No, not the King, and
the Bishops, if the Iniquity of the Times should put them out; for they have
Sworn, they will not at any time endeavor any Alteration of Government, in
Church or State. Sirs! The Matter of this Obligation, being against the
Fundamental Freedom of the Subject and Parliament, and the Words you see, so
ensnaring, and that against the Duty all owe to the public good; I offer it to
you to consider, in the first place, whether this last Part be according to
Righteousness?

For the Middle part of the Oath. Here is a Position of Taking Arms by the
Kings Authority, against any Commissionated by him, which must be Sworn to, as
Abhor and Traiterous. There is a Case, that has been always in the Mouths of
the Understanding, Refusers of this Oath and Subscription. Suppose some Writ
Sued out, and comes to the Sheriffs Hands, and suppose persons come to oppose
the Execution, by the Kings personal Command or Commission, and he thereupon
raises the Posse Comitatus upon them; I will ask here, Whether the Sheriff act
not herein by the King's Authority? I think it cannot be denied. By the Kings
Authority is all one, as by the Laws; and if he can Act so Justificially
against any, for all their Commission, and the Law will bear him out; How is
this Position in this Case Traitorous, and to be Abhorred? It were hardly now
to be imagined, that it could be the intent of any Parliament in England, to
advance the Personal Will, or Commission of the King above Law, which is to
make his power Despotical, and not Royal, Non est Rex (says Bracton) ubi
Dominatur voluntas non Lex: He is no King, that Governs by his Will, and not by
Law. And how it should come to pass therefore, that he should enjoin this
Po^ition indefinitely (without exception of this Case at least) to be Sworn to,
as altogether Traitorous, I can never methinks wonder enough.

What if any Soldiers should come with a Commission under the Seal, to raise
Money without an Act of Parliament; and by virtue of such Commissions, Seize
our Goods, Rifle our Houses, and Ravish our Wives? May not the People, or our
inferior Magistrates, or the Sheriff for the County, withstand such Violence?
May not the Constable alone, from the Justice to keep the Peace, raise the
Neigbourhood, and do it? If he may, or the Sheriff may, it must be in the Name
of the King, or by Authority of the Law, and then there is some Case or Cases,
where Arms or Force may be raised by the Authority of the King, against such as
are Comssionated by him, though not against his Sacred Person. Nay, what if a
Prince should go to ravish a Virgin, and she catches up the next Weapon, or
Instrument that is at hand, to defend her Chastity; would such a Sacredness as
that, make this Act of hers to be sinful, that is so Virtuous in it self?
Suppose again, that Papists or Fanatics should either by Power or Surprise at
any time; get, a King in their Hand (as the Duke of Guise once dealt with the
French King) and prevail with him, for fear of his Life to grant Commissions
under his Hand and Seal, destructive to the Church and State; must the Nation
be Remediless in this Case, and the King and Kingdom ruined by these
Commissions? Nay, What security has the Nation, that a Lord Keeper may not
prove Traitor to his King and Country, and under the Broad-Seal grant
Commissions to Disband his Majesty's Lifeguard, deliver up the Navy, or
Seaport Towns, seize on the Tower, and all places of Strength? In what a
Condition were the King and Kingdom brought, if the Subjects Hands be bound up
by an Oath not to resist, or take Arms against the Executiers of such
Commissions, suppose but so long as till they understand his design, seeing by
that time the Nation be past recovery? And who is there now, that will not be
offended at the Sense, and turned at the Horror of these sad Consequences, into
which such Tests and Injunctions (if not now seasonably Retrenched) may lead
our Posterity?

As for the Form thereof, the Words, I abhor this Traitorous Position, they are
Harsh. The word Abhor especially was a Word of interest and passion, a cooler
word as I disown, or disallow, might have served. Some of the most Gravel of
the Nonconformists were much scandaized at that Word. A Man may say a thing is
unlawful in his Conscience, when he cannot say, according to Truth, I abhor it.
Well Sirs! When these words, Abhor and Traitorous, are so harsh in the
Composure, and when such Cases as abovementioned, and others may be put as to
the Position in the Matter of it: I offer it in the next place, to
Consideration, whether the Middle part of the Oath be according to Truth?

For the First Part, we have a large Assertion roundly Sworn. The Oath runs not
only, that it is not lawful to take Arms against the King, and that it is not
lawful on any pretense, but on any Pretense (or Cause) whatsoever. The
Grammatical literal Construction of that Word seems to insinuate no less, than
that this Proposition must be held without Restraint or Limitation. Among the
most eminent Authors, which have wrote of the Power of Princes, and Established
it against Resistance in their Writings on this Subject: I suppose they are few
or none to be leveled above these Three, Barclay, Grotius, Arnisaeus; and we
shall find, that they have all their restrictions or Cases of Exception, in the
maintenance of this Tenet. And how could any learned Justice formerly be very
earnest in punishing a Refusor, when if the matter was but scanned, the ^eason
why he refused, would be found only, because he ha^ Read more than some others
that yielded their Submiss^on. (...) begin with Barclay, that is, William
Barclay, a Scot and Coun^elolr to the French King: who writes against Buehanan,
Boucher and other Monarchomachists, as he calls them. This learne^ Man
endeavors to make his Prince to be above the who^^ People; that consequently
no Arms can be taken against him: Nevertheless, when he comes to put some
pressing Cases, he thus limits him. Quid ergo nulline casus insidere possunt,
quibus populo in Regem arma capere jure suo liceat? Nulli certe quam diu Rex
manet. What then? Can there no Cases happen wherein* It is lawful for the
People to take Arms against the King by right? None certainly, so long as he
remains a King. There are Cases indeed he accounts, in which a King does,
exuere personum Regis, or Dominatu se exuere, put off the Person of a King; and
particularly ( l. 3. chapter 16.) he mentions two: Si regnum alienet: si
Rem-publicam evertere conetur. If he go to Alienate his Kingdom: If he go to
overthrow the Commonwealth. Let us come to a Grotius, and first quote him in
his Judgment of Barclay, lest you may think else I mistake him. Barclaius
(says he) Regis imperii licet Assertor fortissimus huc tamen descendit, ut
populo, and insigni ejus parti jus concedit se tuendi adversus immanem
sevitiam. Barclay, though the most strong Assertor of Kingly Government, does
come to this, that he Grants a right to the People, or an Eminent part of, them
of defending themfelves against intolerable Oppression. For himself therefore,
after he has asserted this Tenet, Summum imperium tenentibus jure resisti non
posse, That the Higher Powers may not lawfully be resisted from Scripture,
Antiquity, Authority, and Example, to as much purpose perhaps as any, he
descends to put Seven Cases; wherein he does, Leorem monere, warn his Reader,
Ne punet in hanc legem delinquere eos qui revera non delinquunt, Lest he
mistake some for Delinquents in this matter, that are none. It will be too
long, and needless to mention, those Cases. For Arnisaeus, he has wrote three
Learned Books of Politics; De jure Majestatus. De Doctrina Politica. De
Authoritate Principum in Populum semper inviolabili, seu, Quod nulla ex causa
subditis fas sit contra legitimum Principem arma sumere. That the Authority of
Princes over the People ought to be inviolable; or, That it is lawful for no
cause to take up Arms against our lawful Prince. Here then we have our Tenet;
but as to the stating it, he is forced to distinguish. There is Rex, and there
is Tyrannus; a King, and a Tyrant: And there is Tyrannus in Titulo, and
Tyrannus in Exerictio; A Tyrant in Title, and a Tyrant in Practice: And this he
comes to in the issue, that Tyraunus in Exercitio, as Tyrant in Practice does,
Exeidere de jure, and si Hereditario, fall from his Right, though Heredita^y.
Truditur Resublica Principi in cum finem (says he) ut illi profit in salutem
omnium, a quo si prorses disciverit, etiam de potestate cadit, quam non alio
sine sibi commissam habebat. The Commonwealth is delivered to the Prince, that
he should rule over it for the common Safety; from which if he depart
altogether, he falls even from the Power it self, which was committed to him
only for this End. By such Testimonies as these, I would convince the Compilers
of such Declarations, if they be alive, and any others that are yet of the same
Spirit, with some Resentment and Shame, that when a temperare Sense and Meaning
of them is such, as some good men have not stuck at; yet are they so Composed
in termiis, as renders them not to be endured.

For the Form then yet of the Words. I A. B. do Swear, That it is not lawful,
etc. Here is an Oath to the Matter of a Proposition questioned, to the
Determination of a point of Conscience, and that diversely decided. An Oath
should he to a Matter of Fact, and cannot be taken but to that whereof we are
certain. To require of Men therefore to Swear to the Verity of a Doctrine, is
not according to Judgment, being a thing im^ossible, because no man is
infallible. Now then, Sirs! When here is such an Erratum in the Composure, as
the want of the Words, I believe, or the like, I Swear that I hold, or believe
that it is not lawful, etc. and so material an Exception, as the Judgment of
the most Learned comes to, against the Substance in Terminis, of the first part
of the Oath, which yet has gone down ordinarily, without Chewing; I humbly
offer it, in the third place, to be considered, how this Oath can be taken in
Truth o^ in Judgment.

An Oath must be taken in Judgment, Truth, and in Righteousness. The First part
is not according to Judgment; The Second not according to Truth; The Third not
according to Righteousness.

London: Printed for R. Hayhurst in Little-Britain, 1689.


