THE NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the SESSIONS For London and Middlesex,
Begun at the Old-Bailey, on Wednesday the 10th of December, 1679. GIVING An
Account of all the material Trials there, etc. With the Number and Names of the
several persons condemned to die, and their particular Crimes. As also how many
burnt in the hand, etc.
THe Sessions beginning at the Time and Place abovementioned, where were
present the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the Lord Chief Justice of England,
Sir Robert Atkins, Mr. Recorder, etc. After the Jury were Impannell'd and
Sworn, they proceeded to the Trial of several Malefactors; the most remarkable
are these that follow.

A Fellow for stealing of a Silver-Tankard from the Adam and Eve, a
Victualling-house in Jewen-street, on the Monday before the Lord Major's day,
the manner thus: In the Evening he came in and called for Drink; but seeming to
hide his Face, the Maidservant of the house had some mistrust of him, and gave
an Item thereof to her Master: but bringing the Drink in a Silver-Tankard, took
more particular notice of him, which it is supposed he perceived, and therefore
resolved to hasten his Exploits: For pulling a paper of Tobacco out of his
Pocket, he bid her fetch Pipes, and as soon as she was gone, poured out the
Drink, and with the Tankard got out of the Window; but made more haste than
good speed: for he forgot and left his Tobacco on the Table, and the Paper it
was in was a Petition to a Person of Quality, for some Pay due to him in such a
Captains Troop, whereby his Name and those Circumstances being discovered, upon
enquiry they found him out in the Strand. He stoutly denied that he was ever in
the house, or so much as in Jewen-street these six years; and as to the Paper,
that six weeks before this Theft he lost his Almanac, wherein was this
Petition, and that some Rogue had found it, and stealing the Tankard, left it
there to bring him into trouble. But the Maid swearing positively that he was
the man, he was found guilty, and burnt in the hand.

Two women were indicted for stealing a Coat out of a shop, where she pretended
to buy, and being pursued and taken, charged the next Woman she saw, that she
had it from her, who thereupon had the trouble of a Trial, as being supposed
her Confederate: but appearing now to be a stranger, she was acquitted; and the
other found guilty not only of this, but another Indictment likewise, for
stealing a Gown.

A Young woman was prosecuted by, one she had formerly lived with, for stealing
a Gold-Ring set with a Ruby, value 14 l. a Silver Plate, and some other things.
The Prosecutor and his Witnesses were Jews, and so were sworn on the
Pentateuch; the things were taken on the Prisoner, who to excuse her self from
being a Thief, acknowledged her self to be a Whore, and told a scandalous
story, that the things were privately given her upon a Debauch, etc. Which not
being regardable, she was found Guilty.

A Man of a very suspicious conversation was taxed for Clipping of Money, and
there were not a few violent presumptions against him; a Vintners man swore,
that he had often exchanged clipped Money for broad, and that once he gave him 4
l. 4 s. for 4 l. for twelve pence in the pound he would allow at any time. And
that he saw him rubbing the edges of a new-clipt Half-Crown: Others had
received much Clipt-money of him, and he had desired them to let him have large
pieces for small, etc. But all this not amounting to any positive Proof, he got
off.

The matter of greatest value in question this Forenoon, was a late Servant to
Squire Hooker, who by false Keys had at several times stolen many Hundred
Pounds from his Master; and not content therewith, descended to steal Napkins,
and at last a Posket-Handkerchief, which being found out by the marks, he was
charged with all the rest, though before not suspected, and at last above 1000
l. found* where he had hid it. He could not but in effect confess the Fact, and
so without examining further circumstances was Convicted.

Two Men for stealing of Brandy out of a Cellar were Indicted; some of it was
found in one of their houses; so he was found Guilty, but the other Acquitted.

On Wednesday in the afternoon, there was only one fellow tried, but upon two
Indictments, both for stealing Tankards out of several Victualling-houses about
Covent Garden. The first he took away after the old method, calling for Drink,
and whilst the peoples backs were turned, slip away with it. But as for the
second he had a cunninger sham: For coming into Company where one at least knew
him, their Tankard being almost out, he tasted, and seemed to be in a rage,
because they had not drawn him all Ale, which he swore was his only Drink; and
so snatched up the Tankard and went away with it down stairs, as pretending to
give order for such Liquor as he loved, but went away with the Tankard; but it
being by chance missed very soon after, the rest of the Company several ways
pursued him, and took him. He was found guilty, and seemed to be in so weak and
sickly a condition, that he was scarce able to go or stand.

A Servant-maid was found guilty for stealing a Diamond-Ring and a Locket, and
other things of value, which she ran away with; but being afterward
apprehended, confessed the Fact, and acquainted her Master where she had sold
them.

A Watch-maker was convicted of High Treason, for Counterfeiting of Guineys;
which was positively proved against him by one that had been of his Gang, and
swore that he had diverse times seen him do it. He had likewise drove a Trade in
forging of Duckatoons, and other Foreign Money; but that being none of the
Kings Coin, he was not charged therewith at present, but only for the false
Guineys which he had made, offered, and put off, to the great abuse and
defraudment of his Majesty's Subjects. He made a very resolute and subtle
defense for himself; but the matter was evident. Another person was indicted
with him, but not much material proved against him, only that he tendered to
put off two naughty Guineys, which he alleged he had of the other Prisoner
(who did not disown the same:) So that he was acquitted.

Then followed a famous Trial of a Country man, living at Edgher in Middlesex,
charged with the Murder of his Wife. There were many strong presumptions
against him; as, that they lived untowardly together; that he had threatened her
of late, in case she did not comply with his humor to part with some Estate
which he could not dispose of without her. Nor was the manner of her death less
suspicious: For he takes her with him on horseback to Barnet, under some
pretenses, and in the evening, as they came back, in a lonesome place by a
Wood-side, she was killed. He pretends that three Thieves came to rob him, and
that she skream'd out; which so incensed the Robbers, that one of them knocked
her down with so violent a blow, that he then believed it mortal, as afterward
he found: And besides, that they made at her with their Swords. That thereupon
he did fight with the Thieves, who cut him, at least his Clothes; for he
produced his Hat and Coat, which had several gashes, so also had his Stick,
which was found by the Body, though many suspected these might be made on
purpose; for himself had no considerable wounds, only one small hurt on the
head, and another on the arm. He further told his Story, that having so
destroyed his Wife, and mastered him, two of them forced him into the Wood, and
that he saw the third drag his Wife such a way: that they turned his Horse into
the Field, and took from himself seven or eight shillings in money, all that he
had, and then bound his legs with a string, and his arms behind him with a
piece of the Reyns of his Bridle, and so left him: That with much struggling he
got his feet at liberty, but with his hands so bound, went to an house about
half a mile off and got them to loose him, though the man that did swore it was
so indifferently done, that he believed he might have got them open himself.
Whilst this horrid Act was done, there was a man doing some business in a field
near the place, who testifies that he did hear one sudden violent Shriek, and
no more noise; upon which, fearing some mischief might be done, he hollowed
five or six times, but received no Answer: And this very man happening to be
employed to drive the Cart that carried the Body home, the Prisoner
understanding that he was the person that had so been in the said Field, asked
him the same Question six times in driving that two or three miles, though he
returned him a plain Answer; which some attributed to the guilty apprehensions
and terror of mind, that the Prisoner was then under. When he raised the
Country, as aforesaid, to seek his Wife, they found her drowned, as well as
otherwise Murdered, for she lay in a very obscure place (which was observed he
directed them unto) near water, in which her Head had been, for her Hoods and
upper part of her clothes were wet; she had a Wound in her Head, but many that
saw it were apt to believe that it was made with a pair of Sizzars, etc. On a
full scanning of the matter, there was nothing but Circumstances could be
proved, so the Jury acquitted him; we wish his Conscience may give in the same
Verdict. Another was Indicted with him, as being his great Companion, and
absent at that time, without being able to give any good or true Account where,
etc. but this no man thought sufficient Evidence to Convict him, so that
without any difficulty he was discharged.

The next day the same persons, by name John Dell and Richard Dean, were tried
for another Murder committed on Daniel Ball, his late Wives Father, a person
of Eighty years of age. 'Twas proved, that when the old man went thither to
live, he expressed his fears that Dell would do him some mischief; that Dell
had prevailed with him to make over all his Estate to him; and frighting him
with danger of Arrests, though he owed no man, persuaded him to go to lie at
Dean's, where he dies (as they say) without any body being by, and so is put
into a Coffin, bespoke by Dell before he was dead; who also hired a Coach for
thirty shillings to come about midnight and bring him to London, where
privately they interred him at the Savoy; and all this secrecy, to prevent the
Corpse being, forsooth, arrested: But when at the Inn, where the Coach put in
at in the Strand, they were told they must have the Searchers, Dell was very
unwilling, saying to the Coachman, there was Blood settled in his face, etc.
and perhaps they might make a great business; and therefore he had a good mind
to carry it back again: but at last he admitted the Searchers, who slightly
looking on him, returned, That he died of an Impostume, with diverse other odd
things, and contradictions of the two Prisoners in their several Tales. Yet all
being still but Circumstances, they were acquitted of this too, as they had
also been about a year ago for the Murder of Mrs. Dell's own Brother, a Tanner,
whose body was found in Red-lion-fields.

But now comes an Indictment against the same two Companions for stealing a
Mare. The owner swore she was stolen such a time from him in Hartfordshire; a
man and his wife swore, and proved by a Copy of the Toll-book, that soon after
they bought the same Mare of Dean at such a Fair for twenty six shillings, and
that afterward Dean being questioned, his great friend Mr. Dell owned and
declared that it was his Mare, and that he employed him to sell her: And
therefore it appearing that they were such bad people, and Confederates, they
were both on this found guilty; God ordering it, that however they brazened out
other Crimes, yet they should not at last escape Divine Vengeance.

One Benjamin Penry, a notorious Highway man, was found guilty of a Felony for
stealing a Pistol and two Holland-shirts: the same being found in his Lodging,
and it appearing that it was a Robbery on the Highway on Bagshot heath, (where
four of them rifled a Coach, and endangered the Passengers Lives by shooting at
them) he was likewise Condemned to die.

A Gentleman belonging to the Lifeguard, took a Trial for killing one in
Gray's Inn. 'Twas on a fray and sudden heat, they were just before good friends,
so it was only Manslaughter.

A wench living at Islington confessing herself with Child seven Months, being
put out of her service for that reason, going to her Mothers at Chiswick for
about ten or twelve days, returns and offers her service again: whereupon being
questioned, owned she had had a Child, and that her Mother had buried it, etc.
For which she and her Mother were Indicted for Murder, but acquitted.

There were in all Eleven persons, six men and five women, that received
Sentence of Death, whose Names and Crimes are as follow.

John Parker, to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, being Convicted of
High Treason for Coining. John Dell, and Richard Dean, to be hanged for Felony,
for stealing a Mare of twenty six shillings price. These were they that were
likewise Tried for several horrid Murders, as aforesaid. James Rawlins, for
stealing a Guelding. Benjamin Penry, a brave stout Overseer of the Highways,
and Companion with French hanged the last Sessions. William Atkins, For several
Felonies, being old Offenders. Sarah Bonnifeild, For several Felonies, being
old Offenders. Jane Cragg, For several Felonies, being old Offenders. Anne
Sith, For several Felonies, being old Offenders. Susan White, For several
Felonies, being old Offenders. Deborah Rogers, For several Felonies, being old
Offenders.
There were also Thirteen burnt in the hand, amongst which was Wood, who robbed
his Master of near 1500 l. And Five ordered to be transported.

FINIS.

