A Narrative, OR JOURNAL Of the Proceedings of their Excellencies, the Right
Honorable the Lord HOLLES, AND THE Lord COVENTRY, Appointed by His Majesty of
Great Britain to be his Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries for
the Treaty held at BREDA, With the Ambassadors of the French King, the King of
Denmark, and the States General of the United Provinces.

By a Person of Quality, concerned in this Ambassy.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, and are to be sold by Robert Pawlet at
the Bible in Chariety-lane, near Serjeants-Inne, 1667.

A Narrative, or Journal of the Proceedings of their Excellencies, the Right
Honorable the Lord Holles, and the Lord Coventry, appointed by his Majesty of
Great Britain, to be his Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries for
the Treaty held at Breda, with the Ambassadors of the French King, the King of
Denmark, and the States General of the United Provinces.
BEing Monday, April 29. 1667.
their Excellencies the English Ambassadors weighed Anchor from the Hope. His
Excellency the Lord Holles in the Kent Fregat, commanded by Captain Silver; His
Excellency the Lord Coventry on board the Amity, commanded by Captain Poyn;
both Ships carrying white Flags in the Main top. From the Hope they fell down
to the Bnoy in the Nore, and so to the Gunfleet; from whence they weighed again
on Thursday Following, being the second of May, about two in the morning,
having a very excellent Passage.

May 2. About eight in the evening, their Excellencies arrived before Flushing,
about five leagues off the Coast, and there made up to them a Dogger-boat, sent
out by order of the States to attend their Excellencies approach, and to give
notice of the same, which the Dogger-boat did by shooting of several Guns: Upon
which signal there presently hafted out six noble Yachts or Pleasure-boats, two
belonging unto Holland, two unto Zealand, one to the States General, and one to
the East India Company; which met their Excellencies a league from shore, and
at their, first meeting there passed great Acclamations of joy; The Yachts
lowred their Topsails, their Trumpets sounded, and the first salute of their
Trumpets we observed to be the Tune of The King shall enjoy his own again.
Presently after, there came on board their Excellencies two Gentlemen, sent by
Monsieur Seneschy, a Colonel, and belonging to Zealand, the chief person
appointed by the States, to complement and conduct their Excellencies to Breda;
which two Gentlemen did in the name of the States, and particularly of those of
the Province of Zealand, and of the Deputies of Middleburg, congratulate their
Excellencies safe arrival, and further acquainted their Excellencies that there
were several persons of Quality on board those Yachts who came to wait upon
their Excellencies, and were ready to receive them into the Yachts if their
Excellencies so pleased. Their Excellencies returned answer, That it was so
late, it would be inconvenient for them to remove that night, and therefore
they-thought better to deferr it until nine or ten of the Clock next morning.
In this conference those Gentlemen taking some further occasion to express the
particular respects of the States of Zealand to the Person and Interest of his
Majesty of Great Britain, His Excellency the Lord Holles replied, That His
Majesty also particularly desired to satisfy and assure those of Zealand, that
he highly owned their Respects, and would be also ready to express a
sensibleness and suitable good will to them when any occasion should present it
self: After which those Gentlemen abundantly satisfied, departed with much
cheerfulness.

May 3. Colonel Seneschy, attended by about a dozen Gentlemen, came on board
their Excellencies, and did in the name of the States, and the rest,
congratulate their safe arrival, and acquainted them, That he was commanded to
wait on their Excellencies to Breda: and about two of the Clock in the
Afternoon their Excellencies went on board the Yachts, and anchored that night
before the Rammekins.

At their going off in their Yachts from before Flushing, they were very
respectfully saluted by the Great Guns from the Town, and from all the Ships of
Note in the Road, and also by all the Forts and Block-houses on the Riverside.

May 4. Saturday, At night their Excellencies arrived at Terheyd, a small Fort,
half a league from Breda.

Their Excellencies were treated very honorably all the way, etc. Monsieur
Seneschy declaring that the States had allowed Eighteen hundred pounds sterling
for their Entertainment.

May 5. Being Sunday, Monsieur Courtin, one of the French Ambassadors, sent a
Gentleman to congratulate their Excellencies safe arrival.

May 6. In the morning, Monsieur Courtin came himself, incognito, to give their
Excellencies a visit; After which, his Excellency the Lord Coventry departed
incognito to Breda.

At Breda there were two houses adjoining together, taken up for their
Excellencies and their Families, and the walls broak through from one house
unto the other for their mutual Intercourse.

May 7. In the morning, a Gentleman came from Monsieur Courtin with his Coach,
unto his Excellency the Lord Holles (his Excellencies own Coach being not yet
ready) to bring him incognito to Breda; But his Excellency with a return of
much respect excused himself from making use of it.

On the same day his Excellency the Lord Holles, upon the invitation of the
Governor of Terheyd, removed on shore to lie in the Fort.

May 8. His Excellency was Treated by Monsieur Seneschy on board the Yachts; and

May 9. His Excellency entertained Monsieur Seneschy, and the Gentlemen with
him on shore in the Fort.

May 10. His Excellencies House in Breda being in some measure fitted for his
Reception, he removed incognito to Breda.

After their Excellencies arrival at Breda, there were already arrived Monsieur
D' Estrade, and Monsieur Courtin, Ambassadors for France; Monsieur Clinenberg
and Monsieur Charisius, Plenipotentiaries for Denmark; and Monsieur Beverningk,
Monsieur D' Huybert, and Monsieur Jongestal, Plenipotentiaries for the States.

May 11. Monsieur D' Estrade gave their Excellencies a private visit; after
which, their Excellencies prepared for their public Entry: In order to which,

May 14. On Tuesday, Their Excellencies, with their retinue, went incognito out
of Breda to the Speele-house, a pleasant summer house in the Prince of Oranges
Park, some distance from the Town; and there spending some time till Monsieur
Valkenhaen Lieutenant Governor of the Town came to wait upon their
Excellencies; Sir George Charnock the Knight Martial immediately by their
Excellencies Commands, disposed the train into this Order. First rode eight
Grooms on Horseback, after them eight Pages, all in the Ambassadors rich
Livery; then four of his Majesty's Trumpeters, next rode their Excellencies two
Gentlemen of the Horse, then immediately next before their Excellencies own
Coach, rode the Knight-Marshal to the Ambassie, bearing in his hand a Richly
gilded Batton or Staff, the Ensign of his Office; his Horse attended on each
side with Footmen in the Ambassadors Liveries, then followed his Excellency
the Lord Holles his first Coach which was both in it self, and all the
Furniture of the Horses exceeding Rich and Royal. In this Coach rode their
Excellencies, accompanied with Monsieur the Marquess of Hauterive Governor of
Breda, and Monsieur Seneschy, and several others, who are Sons and Brothers to
some of the Nobility, also Nicholas Morris Esquire Son to the Right Honorable Sir
William Morris Principal Secretary of State, who was by his Majesty's special
appointment Secretary unto the Ambassie, a Gentleman of eminent Desert,
particularly for the diligent and prudent discharge of his employment in this
Affair. The said Coach was attended on each side by the gross of the Footmen,
being near Fifty in number, in very costly and rich Liveries.

Next followed his Excellency the Lord Coventries first Coach, which was also
of a suitable Magnificence.

Next followed the Lord Holles his second Coach, and then the Lord Coventries
second Coach, in all which Coaches their Excellencies were also attended by
diverse other persons of Honor and Quality.

After that went the Governors of the Town, then the Coaches of the several
Nobility and Gentry about the Town.

There were drawn up in the Park three Troops of Horse to attend their
Excellencies: The first of which upon their Excellencies moving by (after
having very respectfully saluted them) advanced and led the way at the head of
all out of the Park.

The other two Troops stood still while the whole Train passed by, all of which
they with like respect saluting, closed in after and brought up the rear. At
the head of these was Monsieur Ouderkirk Captain of one of the Troops, and
Gentleman of the Horse to the Prince of Orange, a brave young Cavalier, and
Brother to the Right Honorable the Lord Arlingtons Lady.

At their Excellencies entrance into the Town, they were received by Monsieur
the Marquess d'Hauterive the Governor, with all possible demonstrations of
Kindness and Respects, to which their Excellencies having made suitable
Returns, invited him into their own Coach, which he accepted accordingly.

There was all the Soldiery in the Town amounting to about Two thousand Foot
besides the rest of the Horse disposed at the ends of all Streets they passed
by. And the whole great Market being the principal place for Beauty and
Largeness in the Town, was filled with Horse and Foot, leaving only room for
the Coaches to pass. At this place appeared the greatest State and Splendour of
the Solemnity: during the whole time of which the great Guns from all sides of
the Town liberally discharged, what contribution they owed to so joyful an
appearance.

It is not conceivable how the spectators, (who in throngs filled all Windows
and Streets) were transported with admiration and content, insomuch that from
the unanimous Content of all their expressions; it may be truly affirmed that
nothing of this nature has ever been performed with more advantage to the
Honor of the English Nation.

Being arrived at their own House, they found a very splendid Entertainment
provided for their Excellencies and their Retinue by the States appointment,
where Monsieur the Marquess d'Hanterive, Monsieur Valkenhaen, Monsieur Ouder
kirk and Monsieur Seneschy with the Noble persons that accompanied their
Excellencies, and those who attended them in the several Coaches did all Dine
in their Excellencies Presence.

May 15. The French Ambassadors did in the morning give their Excellencies a
public visit, and in the afternoon the Danish Plenipotentiaries gave their
Excellencies a visit.

May. 16. The French Ambassadors did again in the morning give their
Excellencies a public visit, and in the afternoon their Excellencies gave the
French Ambassadors a public visit.

May. 17. The Swedish Ambassadors (having not yet made their public Entry)
gave their Excellencies a visit incognite. And after them the Ministers of the
Town gave a visit, and the same morning their Excellencies visited the Danish
Plenipotentiaries. In the afternoon the States Plenipotentiaries visited their
Excellencies.

May 18. The Burgomasters of the Town waited upon the Ambassadors. The same
morning their Excellencies visited the States Plenipotentiaries. In the
afternoon their Excellencies visited Monsiour d'Hanterive the Governor.

May 19. Their Excellencies visited the Swedish Ambassadors, and some of the
following days were likewise spent in visits.

The place appointed for the Treaty was at the Castle.

In the Castle there was a large Room next unto the great Hall richly hung with
Tapestry, and in the middle of the Room was a round Table covered over with
green Velvet, over which hung a Canopie of green Velvet, over-shadowing all the
Table, about which were placed many Chairs and Cushions suitable; the floor of
the Room under the Table and round about the same was covered also with green
Velvet.

To this Room there were three doors, one opening into the great Hall, at the
other end of the Room was another door, and the third door was on the side of
the Room next to the Gallerie.

However, the Ambassadors not finding it convenient to make use of this Room
for their ordinary meeting together, made choice of several distinct
appartments; the the Swedish Mediators passing betwixt from one to the other as
there was occasion communicated their several Proposals, Objections, and all of
that Nature relating to the Negotiation; which manner of proceeding was
observed during the whole Treaty.

May 25. Being Saturday, The respective Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries,
according to appointment came to their several appartments in the Castle; and
the Treaty was begun in the method aforesaid.

During their whole residence at Breda, there passed not at any time any
disrespect between the persons interessed in the Treaty, nor any of their
followers or Retinue, but every thing carried on with all mutual civilities and
kindness.

After the first general meeting on the 25th of May, there was a discontinuance
of all Treaty and Transactions until the three and twentieth day of June, and
during the said time very few, if any visits were made.

June 23. In the morning their Excellencies the English Ambassadors, visited
the Swedish Ambassadors.

June 25. The French Ambassadors visited their Excellencies, and were in
conference with them above three hours. And in the afternoon of the same day
the Swedish Ambassadors visited their Excellencies, and were in conference with
them above three hours.

June 26. Their Excellencies visited the French and Swedish Ambassadors, and
were with them all the Afternoon.

June 27. All the Respective Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries came to their
several appartments in the Castle about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, and
continued their Treaty till about nine in the evening, in manner as before.

June 28. The Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries came to their several
appartments in the Castle about five a Clock, and continued their Treaty till
about nine in the Everning, in manner as before.

June 29. The Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries came again to their several
appartments in the Castle at nine in the morning, and continued on their Treaty
till about one of the Clock in manner as before; and they came again in the
Afternoon about four, and continued the Treaty till about nine.

Sunday, June 30. The several Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries came again to
their several appartments about five of the Clock in the Afternoon, and
continued their Treaty till about nine at night; In which time they concluded
upon the generality of the Articles of the Peace: Only some particulars yet
remaining, in which it was fit his Majesty's pleasure should be farther known
before the absolute completing of them. It was unanimously defired by all the
Ambassadors, that his Excellency the Lord Coventry would take the pains upon
himself of a journey to England for that purpose, as also to present His
Majesty with the account of what was already by all their Consents completed.
Upon which earnest desire of theirs, his Excellency the Lord Coventry did
accordingly undertake the journey, which he set out upon the second of July,
and returned with His Majesty's Resolution and Approbation the 17th of the same
Month.

During this Treaty at the Castle, the French and Danish Ambassadors came some
times to the appartment of their Excellencies the English Ambassadors, but the
Dutch Ambassadors came not till the said close of the Treaty.

July 18. All the respective Ambassadors came to visit their Excellencies,
after the return of his Excellency the Lord Coventry.

July 19. All the respective Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries came to their
several appartments in the Castle at nine in the morning, and stayed there till
twelve at noon.

July 20. They came likewise to their several appartments in the Castle about
five in the Afternoon, and continued there till eight.

Sunday, July 21. They came again to their several appartments in the Castle at
five, and continued till past nine, and then signed and sealed in their several
appartments the Articles of Peace; and presently after came together into one
room, and mutually enterchanged the same. Immediately hereupon, some signal
being given, all the Cannon of the Castle were discharged, and so from Fort to
Fort round the Town; After which, the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries
adjourned any further meeting until such time as the Ratifications from the
several Princes might in all probability be returned.

At their going out of the Castle, this night there were several Troops of
Horse, and several Foot Companies placed in the Highstreet; through which the
Ambassadors Coaches returning, there were great expressions of joy, the Drums
beating, Colors flying, Trumpets sounding, and Discharging their Pistols and
Muskets.

July 23. The Honorable Sir John Coventry, Knight of the Bath, Nephew to his
Excellency the Lord Coventry, had all along attended the Ambassy, and omitted
no expense to add to the Grandeur and honor of the Ambassy, being very noble
in Equipage, suitable to his quality; He was after dispatched for England by
their Excellencies, unto his Majesty for his Majesty's Ratification of the
Peace.

July 24. Their Excellencies the English Ambassadors dined with the Danish
Plenipotentiaries.

July 25. The Danish Plenipotentiaries and the Governor of Breda dined with
their Excellencies.

During this Recess, the Swedes and Danish Ambassadors went unto the Hague, and
so did Monsieur Beverningk, and Monsieur. Huybert, two of the Dutch
Ambassadors, Monsieur Jongestal remaining at Breda.

Aug. 2. The Honorable Sir John Coventry arrived at Breda; being returned from
England with great dispatch.

After the return of Sir John Coventrie to Breda, the French, Swedish and
Dauish Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries returned also to Breda; and there
also returned Monsieut Beverningk and Monsieur d'Huybert, two of the Dutch
Plenipotentiaries, and with them came two other deputed for the Signing with
more Solemnity, so that there were five of the Dutch Plenipotentiaries to
attend and receive the exchange of the Ratifications of the Peace.

Aug. 11. The French Ambassadors gave their Excellencies a visit.

Aug. 13. All the respective Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries went to their
several Appartments in the Castle about five of the clock in the afternoon, and
remained there until seven, and advised one the other respectively with the
Returns of the Ratifications from the respective Princes, and upon the
deliberation of the whole matter, appointed a meeting the next day for the
Exchange of the Ratifications.

Aug. 14. All the respective Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries went at Eleven
of the clock to the Castle, where they all met in one great Room, and after
many Congratulations of Joy and Respect, they Exchanged the Ratifications, and
thereupon all the Guns of the Castle were shot off, and so from Fort to Fort
round the Town; all the Forces of the Garrison being in Arms in the Streets,
the Drums beating, Trumpets founding, Colors flying, Guns shooting, and all
Declarations of Joy through the whole Town; there being a great confluence of
People from all parts of the Dutch Netherlands. And it was agreed by the
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries before they came out of the Castle, that at
four of the clock that afternoon the Peace should be proclaimed before the
Palaces of the respective Ambassadors and Plempotentiaries.

This day their Excellencies dined with Monfieur d'Estrade one of the French
Ambassadors.

At four of the clock in the afternoon, all the Gentlemen attending the
Ambassy, and all the Servants of their Excellencies were Marshalled by Sir
George Charnock Marshal to the Ambassy, and drawn out of the Gates of their
Excellencies Palace, with his Majesty's Trumpets sounding before them, and
walked the whole length of the ground before the Palace, and being brought
into a round and close Order before the middle windows of the Palace, their
Excellencies were seated at the Window in Chairs of State, with velvet Cushions
before them, and Tapestry hangings adorning the outside of the windows, and
multitudes of the Dutch Nation attending to see the Solemnity: The Peace was
proclaimed with France, Denmark and Holland, Doctor William Howel Doctor of the
Laws, who went over with their Excellencies, a Person in much Honor and Esteem
with them for his Learning and great Services in the Ambassy, reading the
Proclamations, and Mr. Lawrence Lo aloud pronouncing the same after him, and
at the end of every Proclamation the Trumpets sounding, several Flourishes and
great Rejoycings amongst all the People.

After the said Proclamations, all the Gentlemen returned into the Ambassadors
Palace where several hogsheads of Wine being let run at waste, the People with
a great Joy and Gladness received the same.

The French Ambassadors and Danes made the like Proclamations before their
Palaces respectively, and the Dutch Plenipotentiaries before the Stadthouse.

Night coming on, all the windows of the Palace of their Excellencies fronting
toward the street, were set with several rows of Candles lighted, in a very
great number,

About seven of the clock that evening, their Excellencies went to the
Stadthouse whither they were invited to a Banquet, and there met all the
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries: Also were present the Magistrates and chief
Persons of the Town, with many other Persons of Quality and their Ladies: In
the Room was placed a large round Table, where after a handsome Treat of all
Fowl the season afforded, they were entertained with a noble Banquet.

In the street before the said Stadthouse was erected a large Scaffold, on
which were several Figures serving to artificial Fireworks; all performed by an
excellent Engineer.

At each end of the Scaffold were erected four Structures in equal distances
from the Scaffold, about sixteen foot high, each Structure full of Arms with
burning Flambeaux.

The Fireworks continued, and the Flambeaux were burning; the streets full of
Horse and Foot, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, and Colors flying, for the
most part of the night; all the windows of the Houses full of People; great
acclamations and demonstrations of Joy through the whole Town.

Aug. 15. During the time of the Treaty, the Ambassadors had received very good
Testimony of the Pious endeavors used by Mr. Ernest, Mr. Halsins and Mr.
Planet; three Ministers in Breda, both in their Frayers in public and
otherwise for Gods blessing upon the Treaty for a Peace and happy Union betwixt
the two Nations. The said Mr. Ernest and Mr. Plance being also Professors in
the Schools at Breda; and themupon their Excellencies were pleased to signify
to the Lord Chancellor of the Universitie of Oxford their respective Merits,
and obtained of his Lordship three Diploma's from that University, whereby they
received as Rewards of their good affection the Degrees of Doctors in Divinity.
And on this day the Ambassadors being in a great Room of their Palace, and
seated in two Chairs at the upper end of a Table in the said Room; the
Gentlemen of the Ambassy attending about them in the Room; the said three
Ministers were introduced into the Room by Doctor Mew Doctor in Divinity, and
Fresident of St. John's College in Oxford; a person who has morated much by
the several good offices of Prudence, Industry and Piety, which he has
eminently discharged in the service of Chaplain to their Excellencies; and
after a concise and eloquent Latin Speech by him made for that occasion, the
Condition of the persons receiving that Honor, the Renown of the University
his Mother, and the Dignity of their Excellencies, and the said Ministers
return of thanks for the Honor; Doctor Mew delivered the said Diploma's unto
them respectively.

Aug. 27. Their Excellencies dispached Sir George Charnock, with expresses unto
his Majesty of the Exchange of the Ratifications, and of Proclaiming of the
Peace, and several publications of the same. And the said Sir George coming to
Middleburgh, was very civily treated by the President of the Admiralty, and had
a Warrant to one of the States Men of War, then at Tervere, who lay ready to
transport him for England, the Ship being by the States Order well furnished
with Provisions for his entertainment in his passage; and Sir George
embarquing, took into her also many English Prisoners, and came to the
North-foreland where were riding the Vice Admiral of North-Holland, with about
four Dutchmen of War.; to whom Sir George gave notice of the Proclamations of
the Peace: At which the Vice Admiral expressed much joy, and so did all the
Seamen with very great Shouts and Acclamations, and then shot off many Guns;
and immediately after hung up their blew Flag, weighed Anchor, and went away.

Sir George landed at Margett, and there took Post-horse immediately for London.

Aug. 23. Very early in the morning he came to Whitehall, and in discharge of
his Duty delivered his Expresses.

Aug. 24. By His Majesty's special Command, the Peace with the French, Dane and
Dutch was Proclaimed by three several Proclamations, at the Court Gate, and at
the usual places in the City of London, by the Heralds, Sergeants at Arms,
with the Trumpets, and other Officers attending. The Right Honorable the Lord
Major and Aldermen of the City of London, waiting also upon the publication of
the same from Temple Bar through the City unto Bishopsgate-street, to
Gresham-house the present Exchange, where the last Publications and
Proclamations were made.

During the time after the dispatch of the formentioned Publications, there
passed diverse Invitations and Entertainments betwixt the several Ambassadors,
while they remained, till His Majesty's Fregats, the Portland and the Reserve,
arriving at Flushing for their Excellencies reconveyance into England, they
took their journey from Breda thither accordingly, being by the way very
earnestly importuned to receive a Treat from the States at Middleburgh; which
in regard of the haste they desired to make in returning to his Majesty's
farther service, they excused themselves from staying to accept of, coming
after on board their Fregats. They set sail from before Flushing on Monday
morning September the 9th, and quitting the Fregats before Gravesend, they
entered there into Barges sent down express by His Majesty, and arrived at
Whitehall on Friday the 13th in the Afternoon, where they were most graciously
received by His Majesty.

FINIS.

