A NARRATIVE Wherein is faithfully set forth the sufferings of John Can,
Wentworth Day, John Clarke, John Belcher, John Ricard, Robert Boggis, Petter
Kidd, Richard Bryenton, and George Strange, called (as their News Book says)
FIFTH MONARCHY MEN.

THAT IS, How Eight of them were taken in Coleman street, Month second,
(called April) Day first, 1658. as they were in the Solemn Worship of God, and
by the Lord Mayor sent Prisoners to the Counter in the Poultrey.

ALSO, Of the Arraignment of Wentworth Day and John Clarke, at the Sessions in
the Old Bailey: And how the rest after three weeks Imprisonment and more were
Discharged in their COURT.

Published by a FRIEND to the Prisoners, and the GOOD OLD CAUSE, they suffered
for.

Acts 5. 38, 39. And now I say unto you, refrain from these men, and let them
alone: For if this Counsel (...)this work be of men, it will come to naught.
But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it least happily ye be sound even to
fight against God. London, Printed in the Year, 1658.

An Impartial Narrative, etc.
WHereas it is probable the late Imprisonment and public Trial, will be by
some misreported of our Brethren and Friends unto the Nation: And very many no
doubt do desire to have the passages of the business truly related. I have
thought it necessary (howsoever briefly) to set forth an impartial and faithful
Narrative of it; without any stretching of things, either for our selves, or
against our Persecutors. Neither shall I say more (our Enemies themselves being
Judges) than the plain Truth soberly and modestly, leaving every man to make
his own Application.

Upon the first day of the second month commonly called April, 1658. Many of
the Lords People being Assembled together in Swan Alley in Coleman street (a
public place where Saints have met many years) As they were there waiting upon
the Lord in Prayer and other holy duties, on a sudden the Marshall of the City,
with several other Officers, rushed in with great violence upon them. The
which sight for the suddenness and strangeness of it, occasioned some
amazement among the people; who were there peaceably worshipping God in spirit
and Truth: having no other weapons but Faith and Prayer.

Old Brother Cann was then in the Pulpit, and had read a place of Scripture but
spoken nothing to it, the Scripture was Numb. 16. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
Now he perceiving that they came in at both doors with their Halberts, Pikes,
Staves, etc. and fearing least there might be some hurt done to the Lords poor
and naked people: He desired the Brethren and Sisters to be all quiet, and to
make no stir: for his part he feared them not, but was assured the Lord would
eminently stand by them.

Whilst he was thus speaking to the people, exhorting them to patience, one of
the Officers (breaking through the crowd) came furiously upon him, and with
great violence plucked him out of the Pulpit, and when he had so done, hurled
him over the Benches or Forms, in a very barbarous manner. Some Brethren being
nigh endeavored to have saved Brother Cann from falling, but the rage of the
Officers was such, as they fell in upon him, although through mercy he had not
much hurt by it.

Having thus a while pulled and halled him, at last they brought him to the
Mayor of the City, who was without the door (with one of the Sheriffs on
horseback) waiting for the Brethren to be taken and brought to him. The
Brother asked the Mayor, What he had against him, telling him, withal, for his
part, he desired no more favor at his hands, than was allowed to Thieves and
Murderers, that is, to know what they had to charge him with, and who were his
accusers. To which the Mayor Answered, Mr. Cann (says he) I have nothing
against you, neither do I know any evil you have done; but think you are an
honest man, only you must appear before his Highness, and I will send you
thither presently. No says the Sheriff, keep him till tomorrow morning, and
then send him. And so the Mayor bid one of his Officers to carry our brother to
the Counter. Afterward they brought seven more to the Mayor, of which number,
five had never spoken in that Meeting place, but came only to hear: Now that
which occasioned their apprehending and sending to prison, it was because they
spoke against the cruelty and inhumane dealing exercised upon Brother Cann,
saying, aloud, He is an old man and do not use him so barbarously.

Having brought eight of them to the Counter with Halberts, Staves: here
presently begun a new trouble, for the Keeper having neither a Warrant for
their Commitment, nor knowing who they were; comes to enquire for their Names,
all refused to tell him their names except Brother Cann (whose name they knew
before) whereupon they were all seven thrust into the cold stinking hole, and
would not allow them any Beds to lie on* nor any other place in the prison,
though they offered them any reasonable content. In this noisome place, they
were kept all night, neither suffered the next day to come forth (though the
rest of the Prisoners did) till they were all sent for by the Mayor to come
before him, which was about 3, or 4. of the clock in the afternoon.

When they came to the Mayors house, he sent for them one by one into a private
room; some of the Brethren desired that they might be heard openly, and that
their friends might be witnesses to what was spoke: But this would not be
granted. The first that they called, was Brother Cann; The Mayor asked him,
What he thought of the present Government? his Answer was: For the present
Government, I am not (says he) satisfied with it. But this concerns not you:
Neither shall I speak now any thing to you about it: but if you send me to the
Protector, I shall tell him what I think concerning this Government. For I have
a great deal to say to his face, if in such a way as this, I may be brought
before him. But for you Sir, this is not our business now. Many words passed
too and fro, not worth the mentioning here: only I shall note a little,
concerning the Marshall. He had been a little before in Coleman street* and
having heard brother Cann exercise there* gave him thanks before the people,
for his good Sermon: He being now with the Mayor, Brother Cann told him what he
had said, his Answer was, I confess (says he) it was a good Sermon, but I
knew who you meant, even the Lord Protector: thus he acknowledged the matter to
be good, only the meaning of the brother, that he presumed to know, and could
tell how to apply it.

Having nothing to lay to the charge of* the first Prisoner, nor could ensuare
him in his words, they desired him to withdraw, and so he was brought into
another room. Then Brother Day was called in, and the same question put to him,
viz. What he thought of the present Government? Many words passed between the
Mayor and him, but nothing could they draw from him to serve their turn, till
he told them, that he would give it under his hand, To prove Oliver Cromwell a
Jugler by his own Confession: and so much he did leave with the Mayor in a
piece of Paper; which was the great Charge that he was afterward Arraigned for.

Having done with two, and putting them both aside, Brother Clark is called;
who is asked (as the former were) What he thought of the present Government? He
told them plainly, He thought it was not of God, and gave some scriptures why
he thought o, as Hos. 8. 3, 4, I Sam. 8. 6, 7. Am. 6. 13. He did acknowledge
this Government was of God permissive, but not by approbation. These words were
written down, and made the ground of his Indictment afterward: for till now
though they had imprisoned him, yet they had not so much as any show of matter
against him. This being done, they were all three brought before the Mayor, who
demanded Bail for their appearance at the next Sessions; they told him they
were not free to give him any Bail: Then he told them, they must go back from
whence they came, and so sent them again to the Counter, not charging them with
any guilt or crime. For the other five, they were likewise called one after
another, and the same question put to them, viz. What they thought of the
present Government? But our Friends said little to it: But asked the Mayor what
he had against them, and wherefore he had Committed them to prison? To which he
gave no Answer, but that they had been at the meeting in Coleman street. In
short, he asked whether they would give Bail, etc. They refusing it, were
likewise sent back to the Counter, after the other three. Only brother Ricard
was baild by his Master, not that he desired it, but his Master did it of his
own accord.

Among other Brethren which accompanied the prisoners to the Mayors house,
brother Belcher was one, now as he was returning back, the City Marshall met
him, and asked him if he were not one of their company; yes, says he (blessed
be God for it) I am one of them: Then said he, you must go with me, and so
brought him to the Mayor, who presently asked him, What he thought of the
present Government? I am not (said he, bound to accuse my self, yet I do
confess to be one that holds forth a public Testimony against the present
Apostasy* and came hither to stand with the Prisoners at their first Answer: Do
you so says the Mayor, then you shall keep them company in Prison, and so
committed him to the Counter with the rest; no Cause or Crime objected to him,
nor had he any thing to accuse him off.

Having kept them about three weeks in prison, upon the 22. of the second
month toward evening, Brother Day was sent for, and brought to their
Sessions, coming before them, with his Hat on, they caused it to be pulled off,
and commanded him to be put into the Goal among the Thieves and Murderers:
But the Keeper was more civil to him, and allowed him a better place: A little
while after* he was brought again to the Bar, and keeping his Hat on (as
before) they took it off: whereupon he told them, he was no Quaker, but could
very well give them civil respect: And therefore what he did now, in refusing
to put off his Hat, it was to show he could not own their Authority, and that
they had basely and unworthily betrayed a most glorious and noble Cause; yea
and the Rights and Liberties of the whole Nation.

Having thus spoken, they Read his Charge, which was to this effect; Having no
fear of God before his eyes, nor in his heart, he had maliciously and
devillishly with an open mouth, said that the Protector was a Jugler, and that
he would prove it: And that the Protector was a Traitor, and no lawful
Magistrate either by God or man, unless by the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, etc. And then they asked him, Guilty, or not guilty?

His Answer was that he did not well understand the quirts and punctilio's of
their Law; and in that respect being ignorant of their tricks, he knew not how
to Answer them; but by that light and grace which the Lord had given him in his
holy Word, he would Answer them; which Word* said he must judge both you and
me: You pretend your selves to be Christians, and will ye deny me that which
Heathens did grant unto Paul; then he produced Acts 23. 35. Whereupon they had
some debate about the Scriptures, which Judge Newdegate called Bibble, babble;
bibble* babble; and commanded him to be silent: But he would not* then he bid
them to Gag him two or three times, the Brother for* all that spoke boldly to
them, and told them he was not guilty* of any Treason (...) toward (...) men,
neither to his Country; nor had he betrayed his trust as they had done, and so
were not competent Judges to try him: For, says he, you are not such as Fear
God, men of truth, hating Coveteousnesse, according to Exodus 18. 21. For if you
were, you would not have betrayed so noble a Cause: for which thousands of Gods
children have laid down their lives, besides many thousands of our dear
countrymen have spilt their blood. And in this regard, he told them, that it
was more fit that they should come down from the Bench and stand at the Bar
where he was; and he and such as had been faithful to the Interest of Christ
and his People, sit there and Judge them.

Moreover, he told them, that he was not their match, being a very ignorant
creature as to the knowledge of their Laws; but Mr. Prin who is known to be an
able Lawyer (as most men in the Nation) has lately Query, Whether in point of
Law or Conscience Judge Glyn Recorder Long, or any of their Lawyers, could give
Sentence against Day and Clark, they well knowing that M Prin has pubblished
ten times more against the present Government, than ever was laid to their
Charge; See his Book Demophilos, the Appendex to the Premises.
written a Book, and set his name to it, Printed in this year 1658. In which
Book he says, that you and the Court are all Usurpers, have set up a new
Usurped Power, are Thieves and Robbers, have committed the highest Treason, and
do act against all laws both of God and the Land. And whereas you pretend to
charge me by Act of Parliament, he tells you in the same Book, it was but a
pretended Parliament and a mock Parliament, and by the Acts of Lawful
Parliaments they were all Traitors; withal he desired them* that he might read
some part of the Book to them (for he had the Book in his hand at the Bar) but
they would not suffer him: Moreover he told them, he was persuaded* that they
themselves did know in their Consciencies that Cromwell was a Jugler, but self
Interest had blinded them. In conclusion, he told them, if he knew his own
heart, he could freely be hanged upon a Gallows as high as Hamon was (the Lord
assisting him) for this glorious Cause which they had betrayed. But here they
put a stop, and did run with violence upon him, and one endeavored to stop his
mouth* Whereupon he was fain to give him a blow upon the breast, his name was
Brisco (as they say) one of the Jaylors: Then the Bench caused some to search
his Pockets, and took away M. Prins book; they asked him sundry questions, but
he told them he came not there to answer Questions: Nevertheless (says he)
seeing you are so full of questions: I pray answer me this Question: Whether
you that stand for a single Person, and own him in his Government: or I that am
against a single person, are by Acts of Parliament the greatest Traitors? But
instead of Answering this Question, they cried, take him away from the Bar,
away with him.

The next day in the morning called Friday, our Brother Day was brought again
to the Bar, the Charge being read, they asked him Guilty or not? He told them
(as before) he understood not their Punctilios in the law; and therefore knew
not whether it might be safe for him to Answer them in their way, because it
was so contrary to the Scriptures? Some of them replied, It was the manner and
custom of the Court to proceed in such away. To which he made answer, that
Customs and ways, contrary to the holy Scriptures, among Christians ought not
to stand: And I would rather (said he) loose my life, than own any of your
proceedings or laws, that are against the word of God; If the Lord stand by me.
Now when he perceived the Court to act so contrary and opposite to the Laws of
God; and seeing Alderman Titchbourn upon the Bench, he called him by name and
spoke to him; you are (says he) a Church member and one of the Bench, how
durst you deny me the way of Scriptures? To which he replied, You ought to own
the Powers, for all powers are of God: the other made answer out of Hosea 8. 4.
You set up Kings but not by me, and make Princes but I knew it not* Further he
told him of his new upstart Lordship, and what a fearful Apostasy he and
others were fallen into: Titchbourn told him there were fifteen sworn men to do
him right. Then, said he, I require that my Accusers may come face to face, and
I will Answer to my Charge, that is, prove Oliver Cromwell a Jugler by his own
confession. But they pressed him still to say guilty or not? and then he should
plead.

When he saw they would not bring forth any* Witnesses against him, he told
them he had much to say against the Mayor, for false imprisoning him; and how
he fetched him away from a Meeting* with Bills and Staves, being peaceably
together in worshipping the Lord; and so broke the Peace of the Nation, and not
he, nor the Brethren with him; for which he expected satisfaction. Besides, for
that Warrant whereby they kept him three weeks in prison, it had no more Law in
it than a Horse; and having the Warrant by him, he desired to read it in their
open Court; but they would not suffer him to read one word of it. Whereupon he
told them that they proceeded not only against him contrary to the Scriptures,
but also against the poor Prisoners, and that they sat there not like Judges,
but rather as Murderers; and to prove this, he desired that he might read some
Scriptures to them; For by the strength of God (said he) I will make this,
which I affirm most clear, by the word of God: But they would not suffer him to
read that Scripture in Exodus 22. 1, 2, 3. When he saw they would not endure to
have any thing mentioned to them from the Scriptures; he told them, he desired
to have nothing to do with them, seeing they would not take the word of God for
their rule and guide: And did wonder for what end they sat there? It was
Answered by some* they sat there to maintain the Laws of the Nation, and to do
Justice. If it be so, said he, will ye give me under your hands, if I prove
Oliver Cromwell a Jugler by substantial Witnesses, will ye bring him here to
the Bar, and do Justice upon him. He told them withal, he did wonder they were
not ashamed to read such a pack of lies against him: Then they bid take him
away.

His third and last trial was on the seventh day: At this time Brother Rogers
went with him and stood by him at the Bar: And because some friends had been
with him that morning, desiring him to plead, and that they would come in as
witnesses to prove Oliver Cromwell a Jugler by his own Confession: His purpose
was to join Issue with them as to the Indictment: Being at the Bar, he desired
that he might have liberty to read a Scripture to them* but it was denied* and
Judge Glyn told him, he might do that privately at home: Hereupon he asked what
was the name of that Gentleman which spoke to him. It was answered, the Lord
chief Justice Glyn. Then he desired to know how he came to sit there; For I can
(says he) Prove him a Traitor by a The Charge against him was June 14. 1647.
at Albons enquire after it.
Declaration, exhibited against him, by Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army; And
desired that he might read it; (for he had it in his hand) and he told him to
his face, that he ought to stand where he was, meaning at the Bar, for
betraying his Trust and Country, as it is in the Impeachment. But this would
not be born; and therefore they cried* take him away. Afterward he was brought
again to the Bar, and was about to read the Impeachment of high Treason against
Glyn; but they would not suffer him: Then he told them he had I believe there
are more than Twelve Witnesses yet living that will make good (at least can)
what Cornet Day said, as to the word Jugler; some were present at the Sessions,
and desired that they might be cah'd. There is Master Jesse, Mr. Lanfeere,
Eman, Middleton, Captain Palmer, Captain Sherman, Mr. N^s^. Mr. John's, George
Barrer, and several others.
Twelve Witnesses to prove Oliver Cromwell a Jugler; and desired some of them
might be called into the Court, they being there to give in their Evidence for
him upon Oath. But the Recorder presently pronounces Sentence against him,
which was, Five hundred pound Fine, and Twelve months imprisonment, without
Bail or Mainprise, and then not to come out without giving security for his
good Behavior. He told them it was very strange, that they would give judgment
against him, before they had heard him; neither suffer him to plead for
himself, nor admit that he should have the Copy of his Indictment. But they
commanded the Officers to take him away, and would not suffer him to speak any
more to them. It is observable in all their proceedings, they never produced
any one Witness against him, though he called often upon them for it; neither
was there a Jury that past upon his Cafe, but only gave Sentence upon him by
their own will and power.

For the other 7. Prisoners, which remained in the Counter, they were all sent
for to appear at the Sessions, upon the 23 day called Friday: These were
carried from the Counter to the three Cranes* a Tavern near the Sessions house:
They had not been there above one hour or two, but Brother Clark was sent for,
who coming into Court with his hat on* they caused it to be taken off; after a
little space, he was called to the Bar, and having his hat on again, it was
taken from him as before: Then they read his Charge, which was to this purpose;
Having not the fear of God before his eyes, nor in his heart, he had
devillishly and maliciously said that the present Government is not of God, and
that he was called of God to witness against it; and that he endeavored to
draw away the good affections of the people from the present Government, etc.
Then They asked him, guilty or not?

His Answer was, he knew not what they meant: They asked him again, Guilty or
not guilty? Then he replied, if I should say I am guilty, I should tell you a
lie: Again, if I should say I am not guilty (that is, have not spoken some
words which are in the Charge) I should also tell a lie: And therefore told
them plainly, if they would take out something, which was in the Indictment;
for the rest he would own, namely, That this present Power was not of God, and
that he is called of God to witness against it. Having so said, it was read,
for that time, apart from the rest; whereupon he tells them presently: Now says
he I will prove by Scripture what I have affirmed: Here the Recorder stops him,
and tells him he will save him that labor, unto which the prisoner replies, what
I say, you in your consciences know to be so? Then they bid him to stand by.
After a while, he was called again, and his Charge read again; and they asked
him (as before) guilty or not guilty? He told them according to several Acts
of Parliament, they were guilty of High Treason: He had the Acts in his hand,
and would have read them in the open Court: At this they seemd to be extremely
troubled* and turned about, and whispered one to another. But putting the best
face they could upon it, they come into their old way again, asking him Guilty
or not guilty? He kept still to his former Plea, namely, as for the bulk of the
Indictment he was not guilty; for through Grace he had the fear of God both
before his eyes and in his heart: But for the rest, what he had spoken, he would
stand to: Then they told him he should come to a Trial; and so for the present
dismissed him, and he was brought to the Presse-yard. He was no sooner come to
that prison, but immediately they sent for him again by the common Hangman*
and was brought to the Bar: Then they called forth their Witnesses to swear
against him, which was the Marshall of the City, whose name they say is
Marshall, and the other the Mayors Clerk as was reported: The cause being now
left with the Jury; The prisoner takes occasion to inform them how the matter
stood between his persecutors and him; and speaks to them to this purpose: I
was (says he) fetched away from Coleman street with Haldberts and Staves, where
we were peaceably met together, and solemnly calling upon the name of the Lord;
As for these words, which they now charge me with, they were spoken at the
Mayors house a day and a night after my imprisonment. I do confess when I was
brought before the Mayor, he asking me what I thought of the present
Government? I told him I might choose whether I would answer him in this
particular or no: yet this I would say to him, what their own Declarations do
speak out to the world, and their two Engagements do say, and what their Acts
of Parliaments do say, which I have here in my hands, that do I say and
Witness for. And further I told the Mayor, that this Power was not of Gods
approbation, and gave these scriptures for it, Hos. 8. 2, 4. 1 Samuel 8. 6, 7.
Am. 6. 13. After this he began to touch upon the rise of their Government, how
their Instrument was drawn up by 5. or 6. persons, and was he proclaimed
Protector unknown to the Nation; neither had the Army or people of God
knowledge of it, or consented to it. And for those which went to Westminster
hall at the same time, most of them knew nothing of the matter till they came
thither: Besides what was there done, was contrary to their own Oaths,
Declarations and Acts of Parliaments. At this the Recorder startled, and was
much troubled, that he touched upon the rise of their Government; but he went
on mentioning the words of Moses, who wished that all the Lords people were
Prophets: Now howsoever, said he, you are pleased to say, that I have not the
fear of God, yet through mercy I know otherwise; to wit, that I have in some
measure the Spirit of God in me* by which Spirit I am both allowed, and enabled
to bear my Witness against the great Wickedness and Abominations of this
Apostatising Generation.

Thus far he spoke without much interruption: Then begun the Recorder to speak
to the Jury, and told them howsoever the Prisoner had spoken so and so for
himself; yet they were to consider, that under a pretense of Conscience, a
great deal of wickedness is committed: To which the Prisoner replied, Let Baal
speak for himself: What do you say, said the Recorder? I say (said he) let Baal
plead for himself.

After this the Jury went aside, and in a very little time returned again, and
brought in their Verdict* which was, That they found not the Prisoner guilty of
the Indictment, but for two or three words* which he had spoken and brought
scripture for it, that they did not quit him off, for he had confessed them, and
stood to the justification of them. The Bench at this were much dissatisfied,
and a great stir there was, but the Jury stood to it; and some of them openly
said, If ye like not this Verdict, then look some where else, for we have no
more to say to you, nor any thing more against the Prisoner; and so broke up:
the Bench-men and the Jury seeming very much displeased each with other.

The next day being the 24 of the same month, he was brought again to the Bar:
And howsoever the night before he was quitted by the Jury, as to the
Indictment; yet the Recorder pronounced this Sentence against him, viz. A Fine
of two hundred Marks, and to lie six months in prison without Bail or
Mainprise, and afterward not to come forth without giving security for his good
Behavior. Something he would have spoken, but could not be suffered* as to
know how Mr. Glyn came to sit there, but they carried him away immediately to
prison.

The other six remained all Satturday in Newgate till about eight or nine of
the Clock at Night, and then they were all sent for to the Sessions, Brother
Feake, brother Goodgroom and several more of their Christian Friends, went
with the prisoners to the Court: Being there, they made Proclamation, that if
any man in City or Country had any thing against John Cann, and others then
named as either Treason, Murder, Felony (and several other things) should
appear, etc. No sooner had they read it, but presently, they cried out, ye are
discharged of the Court. Mr. Cann desired that he might have liberty to speak a
few words. The Mayor told him, he was quitted, and desired him to forbear. I
pray you Sir, said he, give me the liberty which the Heathen gave Paul, when he
was before them. But by no means would they suffer him to speak, though he
earnestly entreated them three or four several tunes: But still told him the
Court had discharged them; and so there was nothing more to be said.

One of the Prisoners seeing they would not suffer Mr. Cann to speak, asked of
the Mayor wherefore they had imprisoned them above three weeks, and now told
them they had nothing against them: If ye were men (said he) fearing God, and
hating Coveteousnesse, you would not have dealt so with us; but I see you are
corrupt and your courses too: For speaking thus, the Mayor commanded that he
should be stayed, and to carry him to the Baledock, where he was kept a while,
and having some of the Armies Declarations about him, (published at
Muscleborrow in Scotland) he dispersed them as he stood there: With this
Alderman Titchbourn was presently made acquainted, and calls for the Prisoner,
asking him how he durst disperse such Seditious Books? The other replied, how
Seditious! I am sure your self did once own them: but that is nothing now; they
are Seditious, and to prison he must go; and indeed was carried to Newgate,
where he is kept a prisoner to this day.

I had ended here the Narrative, but that the Weekly Pamphleteer occasions me
to speak a little more. In his Sessions News, he tells us of eight men which
were brought from the Counter, called Fifth Monarchy men: the chief of which
Faction were Wentworth Day and John Clarke, both which were Indicted for
speaking reproachful malicious and scandalous words against his Highness the
Lord Protector upon which they were found guilty, etc. Had there been any
Conscience or honesty in the man, he would not have abused the Nation as he
has done; but given a true Intelligence: As 1. have told us where they were
taken and how? but this he durst not do. 2. How they were cast into prison
without any offense or crime committed. 3. Why had he not set down what their
Reproachful and Malicious words were, and where they were spoken? 4. How durst
he say, they were found guilty, seeing the one was quitted by the Jury, and the
other had no Jury passed upon him, nor any witnesses produced? 5. Why had he
not put it into his News, how the Lord Mayor came with Halberts and Staves and
plucked a Minister out of the Pulpit, as he was in the worship of God, and
having kept him more than three weeks in prison, dismisseth him by Proclamation
in open Court, telling him that he had nothing against him.

But for this Needham Mr. John Goodwin has given a sufficient Character of
him. He is (says he) Faex hominum and faex Causarum, an infamous and unclean
person, next to the Trium Viri Preface Sect. 5.
Hangman; a man that curses whatsoever God blesses, and blesses whatsoever
God curses; this Witness is true: But a person the more fit for the
employment he has, and the Master he serves.

Thus Reader, thou have heard the Narrative; and as I told thee at first, so I
say again* I have dealt heartily and faithfully in it: It is true, I might have
been more large. As how Brother Cann was likewise Indicted, but the Grand Jury
found not the Bill exhibited against him. How the Mayor to excuse himself, told
some of our friends, he was threatened to do it, and could not be at rest till
he had done it: besides, whereas they were kept twenty four hours in Prison
without any Warrant, afterward they sent a Warrant to the Counter, and dated it
a day before it was made* All that they pretended in the Warrant was, The
Prisoners were disaffected to the present Government, and had reviled the same,
and wanted security for their good Behavior. So likewise, I have forborne to
speak any thing of Alderman Titchbourn, who was (as we have good ground to
report it) the greatest stickler to have this Persecution raised against the
Saints: And was one of the three (for there were but the Mayor and he, and
Alderman Atkins then on the Bench) which would not suffer old Father Cann to
speak a word at the Bar. But there is enough said to satisfy all such as
desire to know the Truth in the love of it. For others, who are malicious and
devise lies and falsehood, The Lord rebuke them.

FINIS.

