An Account of the Late PROPOSALS of the Archbishop of Canterbury, with some
other Bishops, to his Majesty: In a LETTER to M. B. Esquire
SIR,
I Am much surprised at the ill Constructions some people make of the Actions
of those Bishops, who have lately waited upon the King; especially considering
that most of Them are the very Men, who not many months ago appeared so
publicly and so courageously, even to the hazard of all the Interests they had
in this World, in defense of our Protestant Religion, and the Laws of the Land.

In order to the removing all groundless Jealousies, and unreasonable Surmises,
in an Affair of so great consequence, which our Popish Enemies will, I am sure,
be very ready to foment and keep up, I have here sent you the Heads of those
matters which were proposed by them to the King.

They waited upon Him no^ as a Party separate either from the Nobility or
Gentry, whom they could (I believe) have wished his Majesty would rather have
called for at this Juncture; or from the rest of the Bishops or Clergy of
England: but as persons whom the King was pleased, upon Reasons known only to
his Royal Breast, to command to attend upon him.

The Heads which I send you, are not taken from any Copy of the Paper which my
Lords the Bishops presented to the King. I understand that all their Lordships
have been extremely careful to prevent the publishing of any Copies, and that
they still refuse to communicate any, though they now lie under no Obligations
to the contrary. However, I do assure you with all faithfulness, that these
Heads which I am now sending you, are true Contents obtained by another method,
which in prudence you will imagine nor fit for me to disclose.

You have already been told from me, that every one of these Bishops were sent
for up out of their Diocesses by Expresses from his Majesty, whom they first
waited on in a Body, on Friday the 28th of September. I cannot, upon the
strictest inquiry, find that any thing passed betwixt the King and Them, at
that first attendance upon him, besides general Expressions of Favor and
Protection from his Majesty, and general returns of Duty and Loyalty from the
Bishops. This was matter of admiration to us all here, who could not believe
but that the King had other Intentions of a nearer, and more particular
concern, when he first resolved to send so far for some of these Bishops: but
these Alterations in Councils are things not fit for you or I to meddle with.

However, my Lords the Bishops were not satisfied herewith, concluding (as I
suppose) that his Majesty would not have sent for them so far, if he had not
intended to have advised with them in this Juncture, and to give them the
liberty of offering him such Counsels as they thought necessary at this time;
and therefore when his Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury waited on the
King alone the first time, on Sunday morning, Sept. 30th. being indisposed when
the other Bishops attended on Friday, their Lordships did, by my Lord of
Canterbury, intimate their thoughts about that Affair, and their readiness to
the King; who was pleased not only to permit them to give him the best and most
particular Advices, but to encourage them to do it with all the freedom that
was necessary for the present occasion.

Upon this Royal Invitation their Lordships assembled together next day at my
Lord of Canterbury's Palace, and prepared, upon the most mature deliberation,
such Matters as they judged necessary for his Majesty's knowledge and
consideration: and on the Wednesday after waited on the King in a Body, when
his Grace in his own, and in the name of the rest of the Bishops then present,
did in a most excellent Speech represent to his Majesty such things as were
thought by them absolutely necessary to the Settlement of the Nation, amidst
the present Distractions, and to the public Interest of Church and State.

I am assured that his Grace delivered himself upon this Critical Occasion, as
with all dutifulness to his Majesty, so with all the readiness and the courage
that did become such an Apostolical Archbishop as God has blessed our Church of
England with at this time.

You must not expect here his excellent Words, but an Abridgment of them,
according to my Talent, in a meaner style.

I. First, the Bishops thought fit to represent in general to his Majesty, That
it was necessary for Him to restore all things to the state in which He found
them when He came to the Crown, by committing all Offices and Places of Trust
in the Government, to such of the Nobility and Gentry, as were qualified for
them, according to the Laws of this Kingdom; and by Redressing and Removing
such Grievances as were generally complained of.

II. Particularly, That His Majesty would Dissolve the Ecclesiastical
Commission, and promise to His People never to Erect any such Court for the
future.

III. That He would not only put an effectual stop to the issuing forth of any
Dispensations, but would Call in, and Cancel all those which had since his
coming to the Crown been obtained from Him.

IV. That he would Restore the Universities to their Legal State, and to their
Statutes and Customs, and would particularly Restore the Master of Magdalen
College in Cambridge, to the Profits of his Mastership, which he had been so
long Deprived of, by an Illegal Suspension; and the Ejected President and
Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford, to their Properties in that College:
And, That He would not permit any Persons to enjoy any of the Preferments in
either University, but such as are qualified by the Statutes of the
Universities, the particular Statutes of their several Foundations, and the
Laws of the Land.

V. That He would suppress the Jesuits Schools opened in this City, or
elsewhere, and grant no more Licenses for such Schools as are apparently
against the Laws of this Nation, and His Majesty's True Interest.

VI. That He would send Inhibitions after those Four Romish Bishops, who under
the Title of Apostolic Vicars, did presume to Exercise within this Kingdom
such Jurisdictions as are by the Laws of the Land Invested in the Bishops of
the Church of England, and ought not to be Violated or Attempted by them.

VII. That He would suffer no more Quo Warranto's to be issued out against any
Corporations, but would restore to those Corporations which had been already
disturbed, their ancient Charters, Privileges, Grants, and Immunities, and
Condemn all those late Illegal Regulations of Corporations, by putting them
into their late Flourishing Condition, and Legal Establishment.

VIII. That He would fill up all the Vacant Bishoprics in England and Ireland,
with Persons duly qualified according to the Laws: and would especially take
into His Consideration the Sea of York, whose want of an Archbishop is very
prejudicial to that whole Province.

IX. That He would Act no more upon a Dispensing Power, nor insist upon it; but
permit that Affair at the first Session of a Parliament to be fairly Stated and
Debated, and Settled by Act of Parliament.

X. That upon the Restoration of Corporations to their Ancient Charters, and
Buroughs to their Prescriptive Rights, He would Order Writs to be issued out
for a fair and free Parliament, and suffer it to Sit to Redress all Grievances,
to Settle Matters in Church and State upon just and solid Foundations, and to
Establish a due Liberty of Conscience.

XI. Lastly, and above all, That His Majesty would permit some of His Bishops,
to lay such Motives and Arguments before him, as might by the Blessing of GOD,
bring back His Majesty unto the Communion of Our Holy Church of England, into
whose Catholic Faith. He had been Baptized, in which He had been Educated, and
to which it was their earnest and daily Prayer to Almighty GOD, that His
Majesty might be reunited.

All these Councels were concluded with a Prayer to GOD, in whose Hands the
Hearts of Kings are, for a good Effect upon them; especially the last, about
bringing the King back to the Protestant Religion.

And now, Sir, I cannot but ask you, What grounds there are for any Men's
Jealousies of the Bishops Proceedings? Pray show this Letter to all your
Friends, that some may lay down their Fears, and others may have this Antidote
against taking any up. I do assure you, and I am certain, I have the best
grounds in the World for my assurance, That the Bishops will never stir one Jot
from their PETITION; but that they will, whenever that happy Opportunity shall
offer itself, let the Protestant Dissenters find that they will be better than
their Word given in their Famous PETITION.

In the mean time let You and I, Commend the Prudence of these Excellent
Bishops, Admire their Courage, and Celebrate their just Praises, and never
forget to offer up most fervent Thanks to GOD, for his Adorning the Church of
England, at this Juncture, with such Eminent Apostolical Bishops. I am with all
Respect

Yours, N. N.


