An ACCURATE EXAMINATION OF THE Principal Texts Usually alleged for The
Divinity of our Savior; AND For the Satisfaction by him made to the Justice of
God, for the Sins of Men: Occasioned by a BOOK of Mr. L. Milbourn, CALLED,
Mysteries (in Religion) vindicated.

London, Printed in the Year, 1692.

THE PREFACE TO Mr. L. MILBOVRN.
SIR,
I Began to read your Book, with very close attention and regard; but when I
had gone over some part of it, I perceived you were not so qualified, that you
might (reasonably) undertake to intermeddle in these Questions, or deserve to
be heard concerning them. If, in defect of other necessary Endowments of a
Writer, you please your self however in the bulkiness of your Book; you may be
advised for the time to come, that on the contrary, every Trifle is so much the
better, by how much the shorter it is; and that a verbose Trifler is nauseous
even to Friends.

In your Dedication you say, the Bishops ought to use a just Severity against,
and to frown effectually upon such, whom the late Act of Toleration excludes
from all Benefit thereby: that is, they ought to fall to persecuting the
Socinians, for the (supposed) Errors of their Conscience. Truly (Sir) we are
beholden to you. But what if the Socinians, against whom you publicly excite
the Bishops, should write the Farce of your Life? They know very well the
several Scenes of it, and the Part you have acted at Pembr. Hall, at London,
and afterward at Yarmouth, from whence it is said you ran away: Are you not
aware, that it were easy for them to make you a Town-talk; as you have made
your self a Country-talk, and at best withdrew your self? Your Preface has two
Parts; The First is an Apology for your Book; the other is taken up in
conplementing T. F.

I will speak briefly to both.

I. That you have said but a little in a great deal, that the Parts of your
Book are ill put together, that you have been impertinent in diverting to
Matters, that were beside your Text and Undertaking; all these you confess: but
you excuse the Meanness of your Performance by your Poverty, and your Poverty
you lay to the Charge of the People of Yarmouth; who could not, you say, be
made sensible of your Learning and Worth; that is the meaning of what you have
said at Page 1. of your Preface.

But such as know Yarmouth, how populous and wealthy it is, will not be
persuaded out of it, but that a Person of no more Learning or Parts than L. M.
were he withal but Modest, Peaceable, and Exemplary, might live at Yarmouth in
quality of their Minister, very handsomely and comfortably, and besides be
esteemed and beloved. They tell us, that seeing your Sermons against us, have
been so little liked at their Majesty's good Town of Yarmouth; we ought to make
trial, how that discerning People will entertain our Pamphlets; they have
already refused the Evil, there is therefore reasonable hope, that they will
choose the Good, and will rejoice in it.

The second Part of your Preface is all Complement on T. F. Thus you begin,
calling him, pert Smatterer in Ignorance: so says the Reverend Mr. L. M. and
this was the best he could say, when he undertook to give a Character of T. F.

But I find that the most Reverend are in a very different Story concerning
this Gentleman: The Metropolitan of all England, thought fit to say of him,
That Worthy and Useful Citizen, Mr. T. F. Fun. Sermon on Mr. Gouge, p. 63. What
may be the Reason that T. F. is drawn in such different Colors? I think it is
not hard to find the Reason: Some, because they heartily love God, and
reverence Virtue and Well-doing, can think and speak respectfully, even of
those from whom they differ very widely in their Sentiments about the
controverted Points of Christianity: for God's sake they can cordially smile
upon a good Man, though they think him in an Error; and they are of Opinion,
because the Holy Scriptures have said it, that fervent Charity is greater than
Faith. But others, measuring all Persons and Things, by only the narrow
Interests of themselves and their Party, and wholly excluding God, and the
relation to him, rail against their Adversaries, giving all Men to the Devil
that are of a Belief contrary to theirs. Which brings to mind what Mr. Calvin
has observed: Vt quisque eorum pro ventre est maxim sollicitus, ita pro fide
sua deprehenditur Bellator acerrimus: i. e. As any of them are more concerned,
and afraid for their Bellies; so he is found to bawl and rail loudest, on
behalf of his own particular Faith and Party. Calv. Praef. ad Institut. p. 7.

Well, but what might be the very meaning of this Witticism on T. F. pert
Smatterer in Ignorance? I suppose the meaning is, T. F. has had his Education
at London, not at Cambridg or Oxford; he knows nothing of Predicables,
Predicaments and Syllogisms; nor has ever learned there to drink the third or
fourth Bottle for his own share. What an unhappy Education was this, that his
Friends took no care to make him a Fool and a Debauch; that the Gifts and
Impressions of God and Nature, have not been effaced by a sort of Institution,
which sometimes to make a Scholar, defaces both the Man and the Christian? T.
F. has only Reason and good Sense; how unlucky was it, that he should not
destroy them by Logic and Metaphysics? However, I am of Opinion, T. F. will
make his natural Talents go as far, and do him as much Service and Credit, as
Logic and Metaphysics, and skill of the Bottle, will do for L. M. or for his
Cause.

The next Charge upon him, is in these words; The Socinians Hawker, to disperse
their newfangled Divinity. Hawker! of all Men living, L. M. should have
forbore this word Hawker; unless he has forgot, because it is a good while
since, how unluckily the hawking off Books succeeded with himself, in a certain
place which at present I forbear to name. See, Sir, we can be affronted and
abused, without making haste to revenge our selves.

But why is our Divinity newfangled? It has two such Marks of Antiquity, by
confession of our very Opposers, that could they show either of them for their
Divinity, we would make little difficulty of coming over to their Party. For,
first, it is acknowledged by the most Learned of our Opposers, that the
Patriarchal Ages, and the Church of the Old Testament, never knew the Doctrine
of the Trinity: We are confessed (by our Adversaries) to believe concerning
God, as the Patriarchs and Prophets believed; namely, that there is but one who
is God, or that God is but one Person. Secondly, The Apostles Creed, the only
Monument of true Antiquity, besides the Bible, which the Christian Church has,
is owned (too) to be wholly Unitarian; for it gives the Appellation God, to
only the Almighty Father, Maker of Heaven and Earth: and speaks of our Savior
under no other Characters, but those of a Man, describing his Conception or
Generation (by the Holy Ghost, or Power of God) in the Womb of Holy Mary,
declaring that he died, was buried, rose again, and was exalted to the right
Hand of God, that is, to be next unto God; all which is a denying him to be
God. It says no more of the Holy Ghost, than it says of the Holy Catholic
Church: I believe in the Holy Ghost, I believe in the Holy Catholic Church; so
(all know) this Creed is read in the Original Greek.

Your last fling at T. F. is to this purpose, tho after a scurrilous fashion;
that the Socinians have made choice of him, to disperse their Pamphlets; That a
Person so much concerned and employed in the disposal of Charity, might keep
the Balance even, between Heaven and Hell; and while he supports Men's Bodies,
might pervert and poison their Souls.

It Is well, Sir; but what will your Wisdomship advise in the case? Shall we
turn this dangerous Man out of the gainful Employment of neglecting his own
Business, and losing his Time, to be an Instrument of Good to the Poor and
Necessitous? And let me ask you this Question, Do you really think, that this
Gentleman ever endeavored to proselyte to his particular Persuasion any of the
Objects of Charity, with whom he is concerned? Does he, think you, seek to
gather a Church out of the Hospitals, the Prisons, the Corners of Streets, or
of such Persons as are ready to perish for want of Bread or Clothes? If you
your self do not so think, as you are challenged, to give but one single
Instance of what you would insinuate: to your Head you are an ill Man, to make
that the subject of your Scurrility, which should have been of your Praises and
Commendations. Does the Age, Sir, so abound with Men, who make it any part of
their business to minister to the Wants of others, that it should be advisable
to discourage such Persons, by false and scandalous Innuendo's? But I am
withheld by a particular Charge, as I am told, from him, from doing him that
Right against your Reproaches, which I thought to be due to his Exemplary
Industry, and particular Dexterity in soliciting and managing the Cause and
Interests of the Poor: He says, if what he does in that matter will not defend
it self, he is content to be without a Defense.

You conclude with submitting ALL that you have written to the Censure and
Correction of Holy Mother Church.

I acknowledge the Language of Babylon; but was it convenient, that a Presbyter
of the Church of England (as you write your self) should thus publish to the
whole World, that he has neither Faith nor Religion; I mean of his own, but
only what Mother- Church shall prescribe to him, as the terms of Preferment? He
propounds here in a Book of 800 Pages, the Doctrines of the Trinity and the
Satisfaction, as Essential Articles of the Christian Religion; and such as must
be believed, or (if you will believe him) you shall without doubt perish
everlastingly: He pretends he has proved these Doctrines by Demonstrations of
Reason, and by Testimonies of Holy Scripture, and of all Antiquity: Well, does
he himself believe what he has written? Not a Tittle of it, he says, unless
Mother- Church approves of it; he submits ALL, Faith and Proofs, to the Censure
and Correction of his Holy Mother; let her hang or save, he submits.

This is the Man with whom we have to deal, without Faith and without
Conscience, unless as the Church directs; nay, and he dares profess too, to be
otherwise without either. Neither is L. M. alone, but there are many others
that believe their Paradoxes no more than we do, but they subdue first their
Consciences, and afterward their Minds to the Sophistries usually alleged to
prove them, so long as Holy Mother Church (which can dispose of their Fortunes
in the World) recommends this Belief as the condition of holding a Parsonage or
Vicarage, or of getting a Deanary or Prebend. On the same Conditions Mother
Shipton should be as sacred and infallible with them as Mother Church; and they
would believe the Kingdom of Oberon, and the Territories of Fairy-Land: and had
they been born Papists, Transubstantiation should have been reckoned among the
holy Mysteries, which Faith must embrace, tho Reason (crazed they say, since
the Fall of Adam) disclaims and renounces them.

But who is Holy Mother Church to whom they pay such Profound Submissions? I
meet with her in Story some hundreds of Years past; she seems to be such a one
as the Scots imagined Queen Elizabeth to be: I mean, as uncertain and
vivacious. The Scots thought their King should never succeed to the Crown of
England; for Queen Elizabeth, say they, is not a particular Woman: But the
Lords of the Council in England call an old Woman Queen Elizabeth; and so long
as there is an old Woman in England, they will never want a Queen Elizabeth.

But the worst thing, to my Fancy, in Holy Mother Church, is this, that she is
such an Individuum Vagum; in one place she is this thing, in another she is the
just contrary: she is not the same in England (for instance) that she is at
Rome, or at Geneva, or in Germany, and the two Northern Kingdoms, or in the
Provinces of the Levant; in all these places she is so different a Person, that
she mortally hates and furiously persecutes her own self.

I find just such another Fantasm haunting the chosen Nation, as is now meant
by Mother- Church; and it was in as much regard with two sorts of People, the
Designing and the Weak, as Mother- Church is now with the like sorts of Men and
Women. Jer. 7.4. Trust not in vain words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, The
Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord are these. By which they intended
what some now do, when they say Mother Church, Mother Church, Mother Church;
but the Prophet ventures to call them vain words, i. e. a lying and
unprofitable Pretense.

But after all that Reverence which any pretend to have for this Holy Mother:
it is certain there is nothing really meant by our Holy Mother the Church, but
only the strongest side, or the prevailing Party. And all the mighty
Complements Men use to this blessed Mother, are nothing else but their Wit or
their Fears. They find themselves the Slaves of an usurping Faction in the
Church, which is able to constrain them to profess any thing, tho never so
contradictory and absurd: therefore the Witty presently list themselves of the
Party, call themselves her Sons and Children and subscribe and swear to all she
propounds. In others, their Dread and Awe turns into real Reverence, or rather
Superstition; and they act and believe as they are commanded, without desiring
or caring to reflect upon the Causes which first biassed their Minds to this
Obedience; but those Causes were originally nothing else, but the Power and
Wealth of the Holy Mother, that is (as was said) of the strongest side.

But there is another sort of People, called Schismatics and Heretics, who
having free and discerning Minds, stout and brave Souls, finding themselves (in
some Particulars) either cheated or wronged by the strongest side; they
maintain, tho a dangerous and bazardous, yet a generous and perpetual War, for
the Natural Liberties of Mankind in Matters of Conscience and Religion. They
assert by all possible (and honest) means, the Kingdom of God; that is, they
admit of no Lords over Conscience, but only God; nor any Law of Faith, of
Worship or Manners, but only God's Word; no Canons or Articles, no humanly
devised Creeds or Catechisms, nothing but God's Word, the naked Gospel, without
any Interpretations or Interpreters, but only Reason and Good Sense. These have
the luck sometimes to baffle Mother Church, and to bear up against all her
Indignation.

But this, Sir, shall serve in Answer to your Dedication and Preface; only let
me advise you, as you would come off with more Credit, and do more Good in the
Parish of Great St. Hellens, than you did at Great Yarmouth, that you carry it
with more Modesty and Respect to all the Inhabitants, and to forbear such
smutty Lampoons as you made upon that Town. What follows is an Answer to your
Book, and I address it to Friend T. F.

An Accurate EXAMINATION of the principal Texts, usually alleged for the
Divinity of our Savior; and for the Satisfaction by him made to the Justice of
God, for the Sins of Men: Occasioned by a Book of Mr. Luke Milbourn, called,
Mysteries (in Religion) vindicated. To T. F.
CHAP. I. Containing an accurate Examination of 1 Timothy 3.16.
SIR,
YOUR (particular) Friend Mr. Milb. has begun his Attack on Socinianism, with a
Text of St. Paul; in the Explication and Vindication of which, he wastes no
fewer than 82 Pages; The Text is this, Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God
was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory. 1 Timothy
3.16. He says hereupon, that indeed some Translators read here, Great is the
Mystery of Godliness, WHICH (which Mystery) was manifested by Flesh: that is,
the Law was given by Angels, but the Gospel by the Ministry of Men, (even by
Jesus Christ, and his Apostles) called Flesh here, in opposition to Angels who
are Spirit; and because Flesh is the usual Scripture-Term for Man: but all the
Greek Copies (he says) agree in reading this Text, as we read it in our
English Bibles; as also does the famous Manuscript in the King of England's
Library, which is about 1300 Years old.

And if (says he) the Providence of God, as the Socinians contend, is
concerned to preserve his own holy Word from Corruptions and Falsifications;
it is reasonable to think, such Providence has been exercised rather about the
Original Greek, than about Translations. But neither, says he, do all the old
Translations read here, as the Socinians do; for the Arabic reads as we do,
GOD was manifested in the Flesh.

Further more, Macedonius, to whom the Socinians impute the Corruption of this
Text, was too late in time; for he lived in the Year 512. to attempt an
Innovation in Scripture: And besides, he could have no design in so doing;
because he had no peculiar Opinions about our Savior.

Finally, the word God in the first Clause of this Verse, makes that Clause to
accord with all that follow it; for all of them together will make this most
proper Sense. The Eternal Son of God, God equal with his Father, and Creator of
the World, took upon him, and was manifested in our weak and passible Nature,
being incarnate in the Man Christ Jesus: He was justified to be God,
notwithstanding his mean outward Appearance, by diverse glorious Actions and
Miracles, done on that behalf by the Holy Spirit: He was seen ( i. e. known) by
Angels, to be the Eternal Son of God, and God, tho covered with the Veil of
Flesh: He was preached as such, by the Apostles to the Gentiles; was believed
on generally in the World, wherever they came: and after his Resurrection He
was received up into the Glories of Heaven.

But if, says our Author, we read here, as the Socinians do; Great is the
Mystery of Godliness, WHICH Mystery was manifested by Flesh, that is, by Men;
what Sense shall we make of the other Clauses? Will it be Sense to say, The
Mystery of Godliness (the Gospel) was seen by Angels? Or will it be true, that
it was received up into the Glory of Heaven? The Socinians indeed here answer,
That instead of these words, received up into Glory, it should have been said
by our Translators, was gloriously extolled, was magnified and lifted up: but
this, says our Author, is false; for on the contrary, the Gospel was despised
and derided both by Jews and Gentiles.

This is the Sum and Force of what he has transcribed out of Authors, in behalf
of his Opinion, from the words of this Text. He might, if he had pleased, have
given us too the full and solid Answer, made by the Socinians, to these
Pretenses of his Party: for I see, he has quoted the Books, in which those
Answers are to be found: but that was not the way, he thought, to mend his
Fortunes in the World; which is what he aims at, and the cause of his writing
his Book.

I will (briefly) evince these two things. 1. This Text of St. Paul has been
falsified by those, who affirm the Ante-mundan Existence, and Divinity of our
Savior. 2. This Corruption has been so unskilfully performed, that the Attempt
serves, only to betray their Unfaithfulness and Partiality, but does not a whit
avail their Cause.

1. This Text, has been most certainly falsified, by substitution of the word
God, instead of Which, WHICH (Mystery) was manifested by Flesh.

The first time I meet with this Text, read with the word God, among the
Ancients, is in the Acts of the first Council of Nice; a Council of next
Authority to the Scriptures themselves, in the Opinion of our Opposers. In this
Council, a Person repeated the words of St. Paul, as they are now read by
Trinitarians; God was manifested in Flesh: the Person who made this Mistake,
probably from some Marginal Note, where he found the word God put as an
Explanation of the word Which in the Text, was answered by Macarius Bishop of
Jerusalem; that he mistook the reading, for St. Paul's words are, Great is the
Mystery of Godliness, WHICH was manifested by Flesh.

Mr. Milbourn will not say, that the Authors of the Old Translations, the
Latin, Syriac and Armenian, were Unitarians; be sure St. Jerome (Author of the
Latin) was a bigoted Trinitarian: yet they and he read with the Nicene
Council, WHICH was manifested by Flesh, not GOD was manifested in Flesh. I
appeal to any Man, of ordinary sense, whether he can think, those Translators
and Fathers would have corrupted the Bible in favor, and to the advantage of
their Adversaries the Unitarians, by saying (not GOD, but) WHICH was manifested
by Flesh: and whether their so translating (WHICH was manifested by Flesh) be
not a Demonstrative Proof, that the Greek Copies of those ancient Times did
read, as the Socinians now do?

But he says, the Arabic Version of Scripture is on his side. I am not now in
a place, where I have many Books; and particularly none of the Polyglots; but I
see, that Grotius and other Critics (in Mr. Pool's Collection) do all allow,
that the Arabic reads here, as the Syriac and Latin do, WHICH was manifested by
Flesh. Therefore I suppose, that our Author makes use of a Polyglot that has
been conformed ( i. e. corrupted) by the Publishers, to the present Greek
Editions: for not only the Arabic, but the Syriac and Latin have been so used
in diverse places, by later Publishers; as Father Simon often observes. Besides,
the question is, concerning the Old Translations, made before Trinitarians were
become absolute Masters of Christendom; such as the Latin, Armenian and Syriac:
the Arabic is much later; all the Arabic Versions having been made, but only
since the Conquest of the Eastern Provinces by the Turks. F. Simon Crit. Hist.
on the Old Test. l. 2. c. 16. p. 109, etc.

It Is by the Trinitarians themselves, that we are informed of diverse Editions
of the Greek Copies; in which the Publishers have corruptly, say they
themselves, put God for Which in this Text. Thus Grotius (in lib.) cites
Hincmarus, confessing, that the Nestorian Trinitarians corruptly substituted
God for Which in these words of St. Paul; so much the better to defend
themselves against the Eutychians. And Liberatus assures us, that Macedonius
(Patriarch of Constantinople) was deposed in a Council summoned by the Emperor
Anastasius, Anno 512. for publishing a Greek Edition of the Bible, in which he
corrupted this Text, by causing all the Copiers to write God in the place of
Which. Of these two Authors, Hincmarus was a Person of great Dignity, being
Archbishop of Rhemes, and (by Confession of our Opposers) not only altogether
Orthodox, but very Learned and Pious: the other, Liberatus, was Archdeacon of
Carthage; and besides the Qualities of Orthodox and Learned, was also
contemporary to the matter of which he writes, the Deposition of Macedonius for
corrupting this Text.

What now does Mr. Milbourn oppose to these Authentic Histories? He opposes
only two silly Conjectures. He says, he does not think, Macedonius would
attempt such a thing; because he had no peculiar Opinions of his own about our
Savior; and because he seems too late in Time, to hope reasonably that the
Forgery could pass unobserved.

But does not Mr. Milbourn know, that this Macedonius was a Trinitarian? Do not
all the Church-Historians call him Orthodox? And was not this cause enough,
with an ill Man, as the Council judged him to be, to adventure on such an
Undertaking? Nor was this Corruption so late in Time, but that it has been the
cause, that many Publishers have followed his Copies; and his pretense (without
doubt) was, that he found the word God in the Margins of some Bibles, which he
took to be a Correction, not an Explication (as indeed it was) of the word
Which in the Body of the Text.

But here, Sir, you your self will perhaps object, that these Corruptions being
thus noted by Learned Men, and even by Councils, would not have been followed
by all the Copiers and Publishers of the Bible: but we see, so Mr. Milb. says,
that all the Greek Copies, especially the famous one in the King's Library
(about 1300 Years old, and therefore older than Macedonius) read here, GOD was
manifested in the Flesh.

To this, I say, I believe all the Greek Copies that Mr. Milbourn has seen, may
so read; for he has seen ('it is likely) some one; but he ought to have consulted
Learned Men, before he was so confident, that all (absolutely All) Greek Copies
read as it is in his Book. Erasmus, somewhat learneder than our Author, says,
Multa vetera exemplaria, i. e. a great many of the ancient Copies read, WHICH
was manifested by Flesh: and says Erasmus further, I approve of that reading.
Our Author may see these words of Erasmus in Mr. Pool's Collection of Critics
in L. And if Mr. Milbourn had looked into the Margin of Curcellaeus his most
correct Edition of the Greek Testament, he would have seen there, that the
ancient Greek Copies used by that Critic, read WHICH was manifested by Flesh:
and so also Morinus, another famous Critic, acknowledges.

I know not how old the Copy in the King's Library may be, Mr. Milbourn is
positive, that it is about 1300 Years old, and older than Macedonius: when his
hand was in, he might have said, it is now precisely 1592. Years old; and is the
very Autographal Copy of St. John the Evangelist; he may say so, if he pleases;
for the Book has no Date, nor any certain Circumstance, by which we may judge
it is 1300 Years old, rather than 1000 or 1100, and therefore younger than
Macedonius.

But our Author says, we cannot make Sense and Truth of the other Clauses in
this Verse; if we read this governing Clause by, WHICH was manifested by Flesh;
for how was this Mystery of the Gospel seen by Angels, and how was it received
up into Glory?

He is a forward Man at censuring, but he should have had more Manners, when
the Writers of Holy Scripture were concerned. We affirm, that St. Paul does
here say, the Mystery of the Gospel was seen by Angels: Why should not this be
Truth and Sense; when another Apostle has expressly told us, that the Angels
desire to look into it? 1 Pet. 1.12.

Instead of received up into Glory, he knows, that we translate by was received
gloriously, was magnified, extolled, lifted up. But tho he dares not deny, that
the original words are capable of this Translation, he finds fault with it as a
false Sense; because (says he) on the contrary, the Gospel was derided and
despised, both by the Jews and Gentiles. We deny not, that wicked and
interessed Persons, both of the Jews and Gentiles, opposed the Gospel: but we
certainly know, it was so received in most places, if not in all; that St. Paul
had reason here to say, it was gloriously entertained and magnified. Himself
tells us, that having preached the Mystery of the Gospel, to the Galatian
Nation; they were so affected with it, that they would have given to him their
very Eyes; Gal. 4.15. St. Luke in his Acts of the Apostles, witnesses that
throughout all Asia, the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified; Acts 19.10, 17.
As concerning the Jews, it is said of them, at Acts 21.20. that many thousands
(in the Greek it is many ten thousands) of them believed: and what is more
mavelous, at Acts 6.7. A great Company (even) of the Priests were obedient to
the Faith.

Our Author therefore might have spared his false and impious Scurrility upon
the Gospel, when he says at Page 68. It was scorned and derided, both by Jews
and Gentiles. Had he no way to defend his Cause, but by an Insult on the Gospel
it self?

I know not, Sir, what stronger or clearer Proofs any Man can require, that
this Text was anciently read, by WHICH (which Mystery of Godliness) was
manifested by Flesh: i. e. by Man, as the Law had been by Angels? For you see,
we have for this reading, first all the ancient Translations, the Latin,
Armenian and Syriac; then the Council of Nice, so much extolled and reverenced
by our Opposers: besides these, the Testimony of Trinitarian Historians, Men of
Learning and Dignity, and contemporary to the Corruption of this Text; also a
vast number of the best and oldest Copies of the Original Greek, and the
Judgment of the ablest Critics upon them.

If all this does not amount to a Demonstration on our side, in the Judgment of
indifferent Persons; yet there is no Man of common Prudence and Caution, but
will allow, that the reading for which our Adversaries contend, (GOD was
manifested in Flesh) is too uncertain, doubtful and precarious, to build on it
(as the Trinitarians do) an Article of Faith; or to innovate in the Doctrine of
the Unity of God, dictated to us by Natural Light, and the principal Design of
both the Testaments.

2. But supposing now this Point were yielded to them, that we are to read
here, GOD was manifested in (or by) Flesh; it will nothing avail the
Trinitarian Cause. For by GOD here we may understand, as in diverse other Texts
the Trinitarians themselves do, not the Person, but the Will and Mind of God:
this was manifested to us by Flesh, that is, by Men, by Jesus Christ and his
Apostles.

It Is true, our Translators render the words by, was manifested IN Flesh; but
they will not deny, that they might have been rendered, Manifested BY Flesh: for
themselves so interpret the Greek Particle, in the very next Clause of this
Verse, was justified IN the Spirit; that is, say They, was Justified (or
Proved) by the Spirit, by Miracles done by the Spirit of God.

That the word God may be sometimes interpreted, not of the Person, but of the
Will or Mind of God; is not denied by the Trinitarian Interpreters; nay
themselves, as I said before, so interpret. Thus, for Example; when St. Paul
says, Gal. 1.10. Do I now persuade Men, or God? Our Opposers interpret it,
thus; Do I seek to persuade Human Inventions, the Devices and Figments of Men,
or the very Will and Commands of God? The like on diverse other Texts.

Therefore, Sir, if Mr. Milb. has prevailed with you, to read this first Clause
by, God was manifested; you may for all that, abide in your Sentiment about the
Unity of God; and interpret to him the whole Verse, after this manner.

Without Controversy, Great and Glorious is the Mystery of Godliness, even the
Gospel of the Blessed Jesus; for it is no less or other, than the Will and
Nature of God manifested to us, by the Agreeable and suitable Ministry of Men,
of Flesh and Blood like to our selves: not as the Law was, by the Amazing and
Terrible appearance of Flaming Ministers, even the Spirits and Angels of
Heaven. This Will of God (or this Revelation of his Nature and Will) has been
justified ( i. e. proved) by the Spirit; by Miracles done by the Spirit, Energy
or Power of God: it has been seen and admired by Angels, who desire to look
more accurately into this New Revelation, which (in part) supersedes the
Revelation of the Divine Will that was delivered by them: it has been Preached
to the Gentiles; and Believed on in the World. Did I say, it has been Believed
on? it has not been Barely Believed, but received (generally speaking) with
great Honor and Glory.

From P. 82. where our Author takes leave of this famous Text, to P. 309. He
mortifies his Reader, with a long Impertinence, concerning the Reasonableness
and Usefulness of Mysteries, in Religion: and that, 'twas Necessary the Messiah
should be the Son of God.

We are not concerned, in the Truth or Falsehood of either of these Affirmations
of our Author: be it, as He says; tho his Allegations (or any He can bring)
prove neither of them; What are they to his Purpose?

If Mysteries are indeed so useful in Religion, as he contends they are; it
will not follow from thence, that we must admit, as parts of our Religion, all
the Mysteries that fanciful or ignorant Men have devised; much less that we are
obliged, to let all the Nonsense and Contradictions, that Any may seek to
impose on our Faith, pass for Holy and Divine Mysteries.

That 'twas Necessary, that the Messiah should be the Son of God, I doubt very
much; and I think, our Author has offered nothing in proof of it, that is
Considerable or Material: but that de Facto it was so, that our Lord Christ was
indeed the Son of God, the Socinians have always Granted and Affirmed; because
he was begotten by the Divine Power on a pure Virgin.

Therefore overpassing so much useless. Scrible of this Author, I come to his
second Particular (as He calls it) at P. 309. That the Blessed Jesus was so the
Son of God, as to be God equal with his Father; or, was really and truly God,
as well as real Man.

CHAP. II.
THAT our Lord Jesus Christ was true God, Equal with his Father; our Author
undertakes to prove, 1. From Texts of the Old Testament. 2. From Texts of the
New Testament. 3. By the Actions and Miracles, done by the said our Lord Jesus.
4. From the Consent of the Primitive Church. 5. From the Common and (as he
says) on every hand Approved practice, of worshipping and praying to him.

His Proofs from the Old Testament, accurately examined.
He alleges, First, the History of the Three Angels, who at Genesis 18. appeared
to Abraham. One of these Angels is called Jehovah, both by Abraham and by the
Historian: but the Name Jehovah (which our Translators render LORD) is, says
our Author, communicable only to God; and that this Angel was indeed God,
appears f^rther by Abraham's calling him (at V. 18.) the Judge of the whole
Earth.

He says hereupon; that by this History we gain the Certainty, that our
Savior had a Being before he was born of the Virgin: and that the Title, Power
and Acknowledgments, belonging to the True God, are given to Christ.

But all this while, Mr. Milb. you forget the one thing Necessary; even to
prove to us that this Angel, or this Jehovah, is the same Person that
afterward (in Gospel Times) is called the Lord Jesus. When you evince that,
your Allegation of this History, will indeed be a Proof of the Pre-existence of
our Savior: till then, we remain in that (seemingly) rational Belief, that his
Mother was Older than He.

But neither can we grant to you, that this Angel was indeed God; because the
Name Jehovah is given to him: for that Name is bestowed (in Holy Scripture) on
Angels, when they are appointed to represent the Person of God; as we shall
(presently) see is confessed, by some of the principal Critics of the
Trinitarians themselves, and all the Jewish Interpreters. Nay, the Name Jehovah
is given to such Places and Things, as well as Persons; as God has honored
with his Presence, (...) with his particular Favor and Protection. See the Br.
History of the Unitarians, on Jerem. 23.5, 6. and on Zech. 3.2.

But He observes, that the Angel here is called the Judge of the whole E^^th;
therefore He could be no other than God.

But, first, he might have noted too, that there is an Ambiguity in the
Original Words; for they might have been rendered, the Judge of a whole Land: So
that the Sense will be; Shall not He who is sent by God, to be the Judge of a
whole Land, ( Sodom and its Territory) be careful to do right; seeing
otherways, such great numbers of People will receive extreme Damage and Injury?

Secondly, Allowing the ordinary Translation; there is no Necessity to
understand these words, concerning the Angel, but of God himself; so as to make
this sense: Will thou destroy the Righteous, with the Wicked? that be far from
thee. Shall not the Judge of the whole Earth, on whose Errand thou come, and
whose Delegat thou art, do right?

And finally, if the words are meant of the Angel himself; He is called the
Judge of the whole Earth, in the same regard that He is called Jehovah: even
because he Represented Jehovah the Judge of the whole Earth.

The Author to the Hebrews, refers to Abraham's entertaining these Angels, in
that Exhortation; Heb. 13.2. Forget not to entertain Strangers, for thereby
some have entertained Angels. How much more powerfully might this Holy Writer
have recommended Hospitality to us; if He had been of Opinion (with our Author
and his Party) that one of these Angels was God, or a Person of God? If he had
so believed, would He have falled to say; Forget not to entertain Strangers,
for some thereby have entertained God himself?

So much on this Text.

Next, He cites the History of the Angel that met Jacob at Peniel, Genesis 32.24.
An Angel met Jacob, wrestled with him, and was worsted by him; and when he
would have left him, Jacob would not suffer him to be gone, till he had Blessed
him. Our Author says, this Angel was God; for He would not tell his Name,
which Angels (he says) do not use to refuse: and Jacob prayed him to Bless
him: and, finally, Jacob called the place of their Congress, Peniel, or the
Face of God; because I have seen (El) God, face to face, Genesis 32.4.

I never before, I confess, saw this place alleged in this Cause: and our
Author has left us to Divine, what he would infer from it. But I suppose his
meaning is, as on the former Text; that it follows from hence, that our Lord
Christ had a Being, before he was born of his Mother: and that the Titles and
Acknowledgments, belonging to God, are given to the Lord Christ. Therefore I
answer too, as before; that He has again forget the main thing, even to prove,
that this Angel was (in process of Time) incarnate, and called Jesus Christ; of
which he says not a word: as if we ought to take that for granted, which is the
chief thing in question. I say also farther; that our Author's Allegations are
very far from proving, that this Angel was God. He is indeed here called El:
but El is a word used in Holy Scripture, indifferently of God, of Angels and of
Men; as the English word LORD is.

Yet we are willing, that El should be here rendered God: for some of the most
learned Interpreters and Critics, of the Trinitarian Persuasion, have
ingenuously owned; that the Angel is here called God, because He represented
God. So Menochius and Tirinus in Mr. Pool's Collection.

But should I grant to our Author; that this Angel was true God: He would gain
nothing by that Concession. For this Concertation between Jacob and the Angel,
(as that between the Angel and Balaam, recorded Numb. 22.22, etc.) was only
Spiritual, or in Vision; not Corporal and in Reality: as besides the Jewish
Interpreters, is owned by St. Jerome, the Interlineary Gloss, by St. Thomas and
Rupertus.

Jacob had this Vision to comfort and animate him, and to assure him of God's
Presence with him; when He should meet with his Brother Esau: but that He might
know, the Vision was really from God; he was made to Halt on that Leg, which in
the Vision had been touched by the Angel. This Interpretation is Rational;
because a Man could not really have prevailed, as the History says Jacob did,
against an Angel; much less (as our Author so oddly, that I say no worse,
supposes) against God.

His Third place, out of the Old Testament, is; Psalm. 45.6, 7. Thy Throne, O
God, is for ever and ever, etc. He notes, that these remarkable Words are
applied to our Savior, by the Author of the Hebrews, Heb. 1.8, 9. To the Son,
He says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, etc.

The Author of the Brief History of the Unitarians, answers, in short; that the
words both in the Hebrew and the Greek, both in the Psalm and in the Epistle,
might have been rendered, and interpreted after this manner: God is thy Throne (
i. e. thy Seat, resting Place, or thy Establishment) for ever and ever. And so
it is, that the Illustrious Grotius Translates, and understands both these
Texts.

But let us allow the Translation in our English Bibles, Thy Throne (O God) is
for ever and ever. For understanding this Passage, and indeed the whole Psalm;
some Learned Interpreters have well noted, that this Psalm is an Epithalamium,
or Marriage-Song to Solomon and Sulamitis Daughter of Pharaoh. It was sung by
the Bride-Maids, says Grotius, In honorens novi mariti Solomonis, and novae
Nuptiae Filiae Regis Aepypti; In Gratulation to the Bridegroom and Bride,
Solomon and the Daughter of Pharaoh. Dr. Patrick says, that most Interpreters
conclude, this Psalm was composed on occasion of the Marriage of Solomon with
Pharaoh's Daughter.

Any one that reads the Psalm without Prejudice, will plainly see, that the
Interpreters, of whom Dr. Patrick speaks, and whom he confesses to be the most,
have rightly conjectured concerning this Psalm; namely, that it is a
Marriage-Song to Solomon and his Egyptian Bride. It begins, I will speak of (or
I will rehearse) the things which I have made concerning the King. Then the
Poet proceeds to describe, and wish well to the King: Thou art fairer than the
Children of Men, Grace is poured on thy Lips; thy Garments smell of Myrrh,
Alloes and Cassia, out of the Ivory Palaces, or Boxes. He adds, Thy Throne, O
God, is for ever and ever; i. e. Thou fittest on the Throne of David, which is
to endure for ever; for some descended from him (so God has promised) shall sit
thereon, till it comes to the Messiah, or Christ; whose Kingdom shall be not
only universal, as to place, but shall last for ever and ever. After these
things said to Solomon, the Poem addresses to the Queen, Hear, O Daughter,
forget thy own People and thy Father's House, so shall the King greatly desire
thy Beauty. Instead of thy Fathers, shall be thy Children; whom thou may make
Princes in all the Earth, or rather in all this Land; q. d. Thou may make
them Governors of Tribes in all the Land of Canaan.

Our Opposers catch at the word God; thy Torone, O God, is for ever and ever:
as if because of that word, it were necessary to suppose, that both the
Psalmist and the Author to the Hebrews do speak of such a Person, as is really
and truly God. But why have they not noted, what our Savior tells them, that
those also are called Gods in Scripture, To whom the Word of God comes, Joh.
10.35. that is to say, Judges, Magistrates, and especially Princes are called
Gods, because they hold the Place of God, and act by his general Commission
granted to them in his Word. For Proof of which Observation, he alleges the
words of Psalm. 82.6. concerning the Magistracy and Princes of Israel, I have
said, Ye are Gods. In a word, Solomon is in this Psalm saluted by the Name of
God, according to the known Language of those Times and Countries, to
Magistrates and Princes: and what had been said to Solomon, is by St. Paul to
the Hebrews, applied or accommodated to the Great (Spiritual) King, the Messiah
or Christ; because it might (even) more properly be said of him than of
Solomon, even this saying, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. Nay, we may
allow, that he more than applies the words; we may say, he interprets them of
Christ; because the Psalm being composed by a Prophetical Poet, at the same
time that he courted and praised Solomon, he might prophesy of the Lord Christ.
This account of these words, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever, being so generally
approved by the more learned Critics of the Trinitarians; I cannot but wonder,
that this Text should be urged by any at this time of the day, as a Proof that
the Lord Christ is true God, equal to the Eternal and Almighty Father of all,
the dread Creator of Heaven and Earth. If it prooves the Lord Christ to be
such, it proves the same of Solomon, even in the Opinion of the most judicious
of our Opposers.

A fourth Proof of our Author, is, Heb. 1.6. When he (God) brings his
First-begotten into the World, he says, (or he commands) Let all the Angels
of God worship him. His Argument from hence, is this, the Charge so often
repeated in Scripture, of worshipping God only, obliges Angels as well as Men:
seeing therefore they are required to worship our Lord Christ, it follows that
he is true God.

But our Author is greatly mistaken, when he says that the words, Let all the
Angels of God worship him, are taken from Psalm. 97.7. they are taken from the
LXX Translation of Deuteronomy. 32.43. where the LXX (whose Translation is followed
generally by the Writers of the New Testament, and more especially by the
Author of this Epistle throughout) read (...), Let all the Angels of God
worship him; the very words of the Author to the Hebrews. But at Psalm. 97.7.
from whence Mr. Milbourn would fetch this Quotation, it is only said, Worship
him all ye Gods; and the words are by Interpreters commonly understood of the
Gods or Demons worshipped by the Heathen Nations. Furthermore, it has been
observed by some Trinitarian Critics, that Justin Martyr, Theodoret,
Epiphanius, and St. Austin (all very ancient) quote these words, Let all the
Angels of God worship him, as taken from the LXX Translation of Deuteronomy. 32.43.
tho the words are wanting in the present Hebrew Copies of the Bible, and
therefore also in our English Bibles, as are diverse other Passages of the Old
Testament, cited by the Writers of the New.

The words in that Text of Deuteronomy, are spoken of the Nation of Israel; the
Nations are there bid to rejoice with, and the Angels to worship Israel; that
is, to guard, serve and watch over him. But these words intended originally of
Israel, are, by the Author to the Hebrews, accommodated and applied likewise to
the Lord Christ; because the Angels had in charge to succor and minister to
him also. Yet not to him only, but to all his Brethren, Heb. 1.14. They are all
Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister to such as shall be Heirs of
Salvation.

We have just such another Accommodation, or Application of a Text to our
Savior, which was originally meant of the Nation of Israel, at Matthew. 2.15.
there the Evangelish says, that Jesus was brought by Joseph (his
Foster-Father) out of Egypt, into Judea; and so, says he, was fulfilled the
Word of God by the Prophet, Out of Egypt I have called my Son. But any one that
looks into the Context of the Prophet, will plainly see, that those words were
originally meant and designed of the People of Israel, whom God there
vouchsafes to call his Son. The words of the Prophet are these, Hosea 11.1.
When Israel was a Child, ( i. e. in the first Ages of that People) then I loved
him, and called my Son out of Egypt.

Therefore when such Texts are either interpreted of Christ, or accommodated
and applied to him, we are to understand it after this manner; that those Texts
were again fulfilled, or had a second Completion in the Person of our Lord
Christ.

But our Author urges, that the Precept of worshipping only God, obliges Angels
and Men; therefore how could the Angels be required to worship Christ, if he
were not true God?

It seems then, he has not observed what is said at 1 Chronicles. 29.20. The
Congregation blessed the Lord God of their Fathers; and bowing the Head, they
worshipped the Lord and the King. Nor has he noted, how often diverse Persons
worshipped our Savior while he was upon Earth. The meaning is not, that they
worshipped either David or our Savior with Divine Worship, but with a Civil
and Religious Worship, such as is due to Kings and to Prophets on the account
of him that sent them. The Lord Christ has an Office, that of King and Head of
the Church, higher than any Angel; nay, so high, that he may make use of the
Ministry of Angels in the Execution of his Office: therefore they are bid to
worship him, not with Divine Worship, (no more than they were to worship Israel
with such Worship) but with the Worship or Respect that is due to him in regard
of his Office; as the Congregation worshipped David, in the Text last quoted,
in regard of his Kingdom or Royal Dignity. But, as I observed before, the
Worship principally meant in the words, Let all the Angels of God worship him,
is to be understood of succouring and ministering to him, while he was upon
Earth, as they were to worship Israel.

CHAP. III. Continuation of the Examination of the Texts, objected from the Old
Testament.
OUR Author's fifth Objection is from Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. (words taken from
Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27.) And thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the
Foundation of the Earth; and the Heavens are the Works of thy Hands. They shall
perish, but thou remainest: they shall wax old as does a Garment; And as a
Vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but thou art the
same, and thy Years fail not. Let us add the next words, at ver. 13. But to
which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit at my Right Hand, until I make
thine enemies the Footstool?

He says, these words here cited, to v. 13. are intended of the Son our Lord
Christ; and that by ascribing to him the Creation of the Heavens and Earth,
they assure us, both of the Pre-eternity and the Divinity of the said our Lord
Christ.

We have seen before, that the Writers of the New Testament do accommodate
diverse Passages and Expressions of the Old Testament to our Savior; tho
originally, and in their primary Intention, they were meant of other Persons;
because such Passages and Expressions had another, and a second Completion, in
the Person of the Lord Christ. Thus, what was said of Solomon, Thy Throne, O
God, is for ever and ever, is applied to our Savior, because he also has an
everlasting Throne: and what was said of Israel, Out of Egypt I have called my
Son, is too accommodated to Christ; because he likewise was called out of
Egypt, after the Death of Herod. In like sort, in this Context to the Hebrews,
what had been said by the Psalmist, of God, and of the old or first Creation, (
Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the Works of thy Hands, etc.) is accommodated to the Lord Christ,
and to the new Creation which he has made, even the new Heavens and the new
Earth, in which (as St. Peter says of them) dwells Righteousness.

The Gospel-state and Times, or the Church in opposition to the Synagogue and
Jewish Economy, is described very often in Scripture, under the Names of the
New Heavens and New Earth. Isa. 65.17. Behold, I create new Heavens, and a new
Earth; and the former shall be remembered no more. Isa. 66.22. As the new
Heavens and the new Earth, which I will make, shall remain before me; so shall
your Seed and your Name remain. St. Peter, after he had described the fearful
Dissolution of the Jewish Economy and State, in terms much like those used by
our Savior on the same occasion and Subject, at Mat. 24. adds, 2 Pet. 3.13.
Nevertheless, according to his Promise, we look for new Heavens and a new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. That is, a new Economy and State, in
which not so much a Ceremonial, as a Moral and true Righteousness, shall be
taught and practiced. Rev. 21.1. I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth; for the
first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away. i. e. He saw the Church, or
Christian Economy begin; the Jewish or old Economy, or Law was abolished.

All the Trinitarian Interpreters do thus understand these Texts; namely, that
by the New Heavens and New Earth is meant the Gospel-state of things, in
opposition to the Jewish, which is antiquated and done away. This is the Earth,
and these the Heavens, of which the Lord Christ is the Maker, under God; partly
by Himself, partly by his Apostles and other true Ministers of the Gospel: and
these the Author to the Hebrews means, when he says here, of our Lord Christ;
Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the Foundations of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the Works of thy Hands: they shall be changed, (from their state of
Probation and Trial, to a state of Perfection and Enjoyment) but thou remainest
for ever the same.

The most Learned Grotius, whose Interpretation this is, rightly observes; that
the Hebrews, to whom this Epistle was written, did commonly speak of the Times
of the Messiah (or Christ) in these very terms here used: namely, that He
should make another World, New Heavens and Earth; meaning thereby, a Total
change of the face of things, in the Church and Religion. And those Forms of
speaking, they borrowed from the Prophet Isaiah; whose words I have before
quoted. Therefore in writing to them, it was no surprise to them; that this
Epistle should accommodate the words of the Prophetical Psalmist, used by him
concerning God and the first Creation, to the Messiah and the New Creation;
because in him they had Another, and Second Completion.

Others of our Party, give other Accounts of this Text; this for one; that the
words, Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the Foundations of the Earth,
etc. are not at all (in any sense) intended of our Savior; but are a devout
Apostrophe Conversion or Address to God, that is, to the Father; so as to make
this sense. And truly thou, Lord, who have thus anointed and exalted thy Son,
art the God who have laid the Foundations of the Earth; and the Heavens are the
Work of thy Hands: -- But to which of his Angels, has this Glorious and
Unchangeable Creator at any time said; as He does by the Inspired and
Prophetical Psalmist to the Son our Lord Christ; Sit on my right Hand, till I
make thy Enemies thy Footstool? Here we ought to note, that the words, Sit at
my right Hand, till I make thy Enemies thy Footstool, are originally and
primarily intended of David; as is owned by the Trinitarian Interpreters: but
they are applied to Christ in this Context to the Hebrews, because they are
also a Prophecy of him; and of what God would do for him. In a word, their
meaning, with respect to the Lord Christ, is this; God has (in his Decree)
said concerning the Messiah or Christ, who shall in due time be manifested, Sit
on my right hand, till I make thy Enemies thy Footstool: This is the Sense of
the words, as they stand in the Psalm. See the Learned Dr. Patrick's Paraphrase
and Notes, on Psalm. 110.1.

I do not wonder, Sir, that our Opposer took no notice of these two
Interpretations of these words, Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the
Foundation of the Earth, etc. they were too Rational and Probable, to be set in
the same Light and View with the Wild Construction, that He and his Party make
of this Context. For they make this Author to the Hebrews, to say; that the
Lord Christ is the Creator of the Visible Earth and Heavens: and yet that it is
Another Person,, that must subdue to him the Enemies of his Kingdom, and make
them his Footstool.

I had almost forgot, Sir, to tell you; that as Grotius is the Author of the
first Interpretation, which I have given of this Context; so it is Thomas
Aquinas, surnamed the Angelical Doctor, thus has observed and suggested the
other.

He alleges next (tho not out of the Old Testament, according to his proposed
Method) Heb. 1.1, 2. God who at sundry times -- spoke to the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last times spoken to us by his Son; by whom also He
made the Worlds. Our Author is not pleased to take notice, that Grotius renders
the last Clause by, For whom also He made the Worlds: i. e. the World was at
first made, with intention to subject it (in the fullness of Time) to the
Messiah and his Law. And the Author to the Hebrews, rather chose to say here,
The World was made for the Messiah; because it was a common Saying among the
Jews, a part of their Doctrine and Belief concerning the Messiah: there is
nothing more common in their Books, than this Saying, The World was made for
the Messih, who shall be.

Nor has our Opposer thought fit to observe, that some of the best Critics of
his own Party, have thus rendered the objected Text; By whom also he made the
AGES: and that they interpret the AGES to be the Gospel-Ages; which were made
by the Ministry of our Lord Christ. No, these were Interpretations, which 'twas
better for him to overlook, than to attempt, in vain, to refute them.

His seventh Proof is from Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is
given; -- his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

He says, this Text is universally applied to the Blessed Jesus; and that it is
strange, that he should be called the Mighty God, if He is not God at all. He
says farther, that Everlasting Father could not without Absurdity be applied
to the Lord Christ; if as the Socinians say of him, there was a time when He
was not.

To this, the Author of the Brief History has Answered, that this Text of the
Prophet is Never applied to our Savior, by any Writer of the New Testament:
tho Mr. Milb. is pleased here to say, it is universally applied to him. The
Historian shows the Reason, why the Writers of the New Testament have not
applied this Text to the Lord Christ; because it apparently speaks of one,
actually born at that time when the Prophet wrote; Unto us a Child IS born,
unto us a Son IS given; but the Prophet wrote about 700 Years before the Birth
of our Savior. He adds, that Grotius and diverse others (Christian and
Orthodox, as well as Jewish Interpreters) understand the Text, of Hezekiah,
afterward King of Judah; and that it has been Translated very extravagantly
into English.

The truth is, there are almost as many Translations of this Verse, as there
are Interpreters. Instead of the words, Counselor, the Mighty God; the LXX
Interpreters say, the Angel (or Messenger) of Great Counsel; i. e. the Wise
Messenger: they wholly omit the following words, even these, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, etc. those words (it should seem) have been added
since their time, to the Hebrew Copies of the Bible.

The Fathers generally follow this Translation of the LXX. M. Luther, who
understood the Hebrew very well, instead of Mighty God, says, the Mighty
Hero, or Warrior. Grotius says, the Consulter of the Mighty God; and
interprets thus, Hezekiah shall consult with God, not with the Idols of his
Father Ahaz, both in his Enterprises and his Troubles. For Everlasting Father,
St. Hierom and other Critics read, the Father of the Age; and for the Prince of
Peace, they read the Peaceable Prince: because Hezekiah would not enterprise
Needless Wars; but seek to maintain the Peace, Property and Plenty of his
People.

When the words in the Original (Hebrew or Greek) are of such doubtful and
ambiguous Construction; it is the manner of our Opposers, to take that Occasion,
to set up their Wonders: We, on the contrary, affect not Monstrosities; but are
governed by the obvious Reason and Possibilities of things. We think, it is
enough to determine us to some or other of the Reasonable and Possible Senses,
beforementioned; that the Writers of the New Testament never apply this Text
to our Savior; and because the Prophet so plainly speaks of a Child then born,
Unto us a Child IS born, unto us a Son IS given.

His eighth Text from the Old Testament, is, Jerem. 23.5, 6. The days come,
says the Lord, that I will raise up to David a Righteous Branch; -- in his
days, Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is the Name
whereby He shall be called, The LORD our Righteousness. This BRANCH, says our
Author, is by Rabbis and Fathers interpreted to be the Messiah or Christ: and
that He is God, appears by the Name here given to him, Jehovah Tsidkenn, or the
Lord our Righteousness. And agreeable to this Interpretation, the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 1.30. The Lord Christ is of God made to us, Wisdom and
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

Our Author's first and great Mistake here, is this; that on Supposition, that
it is the Lord Christ who is here called the Lord our Righteousness, He must
needs be true God. For let us hear another Text of this Prophet, Jerem. 33.16.
In those days Judah shall be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely; and this
is the Name wherewith SHE (Jerusalem) shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness. We see by this last Text, that the Lord our Righteousness in the
other Text, is not meant of the Branch, (whether that Branch be the Lord
Christ, as our Author thinks; or Zorobabel, as Grotius has proved) but Israel,
the Nation of Israel: So that we ought to understand the objected Text, after
this manner. In those days, I will raise up to David, a Righteous Branch; --
and in his time Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this
is the Name, wherewith He ( Israel, not the Branch) shall be called, The Lord
our Righteousness.

It Is promised here in these Texts, that Israel and Jerusalem shall be called,
the Lord our Righteousness; in the days of Zorobabel, who was their Governor
(Vice-King for the King of Babylon) immediately after the return from the
Captivity: because it would then please God, to pardon all the past Sins of
that People, and to deal with them as a Righteous People; notwithstanding their
former Transgressions, and National Revolts from him.

Others have observed, that the words in both Contexts, may be rendered the Lord
our Justifier; or the Lord is our Justifier: and so they make this Sense; In
the Days of the Branch, in the Government of Zorobabel of the House of David;
God will justify and deliver us, from all our Adversaries and Persecutors.

His last Old Testament Text, is Mich. 5.2. Thou Bethlehem, -- out of thee
shall come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in Israel; whose goings forth
have been from Old, from Everlasting; or, from the Days of Eternity. He notes,
that this Text is Interpreted of the Lord Christ; even by the chief Priests and
Scribes of the Jews, Matthew. 2.4, 5, 6.

Tho our Author had not Designed to take notice, what the Heterodox Socinians
Answer, in defense of their Doctrine of the Unity of God; or how They interpret
the Texts, objected to that Heresy of theirs: yet at least Mr. Calvin was
worthy to be heard. This famous Reformer owns, that the Prophet's meaning is
only this; the Goings forth of the Lord Christ have been Decreed by God, from
the Days of Eternity.

But Grotius instead of From Everlasting, or from the Days of Eternity, has
Translated here from ancient Days; and so (All know) the words may be rendered:
therefore he makes the Sense to be this; Whose Goings forth ( i. e. whose
Descent, Original, or Pedigree) is of Old, from Ancient Times. For Christ is
come of that most Ancient Stock of David, of the Town of Bethlehem.

Our Author may please, in his next, to try his Skill on these Solutions: in
the mean time, I pass to what He has objected from the New Testament.

CHAP. IV. On his Texts out of the Gospels.
THEY are not many Texts, Sir, on which our Author has insisted to prove his
Proposition, that our Lord Christ is true God; but He assures us (at P. 309.)
they are Choice Ones: We have considered those He alleges from the Old
Testament, let us now examine what He has urged out of the New.

On the Texts of St. Matthew.
He begins with Matthew. 1.22, 23. This was done, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the Lord, by the Prophet, saying, A Virgin shall Conceive,
and shall bring forth a Son; and they shall call his Name Immanuel; which being
interpreted, is, God with us.

He notes, that these words are spoken of the Lord Christ; and that the Name
Immanuel (or God with us) has been appropriated to him, by God: for we no where
find, that He has given this Name to any other. But where God gives a Name,
and the Spirit of God interprets it; it cannot be insignificant: from whence it
follows, that the Lord Christ is indeed God Eternal, and God with us.

To this, I say; tho the Consonants of the Hebrew Name Immanuel may be so
Pointed, that the Name may be Interpreted God with Him; which would turn the
Objection from this Text, upon our Opposers: yet that is not here to be
insisted on; because we shall see presently, that in giving that Name, it was
really intended, the Child should be called or named God with Us. The Text here
objected out of St. Matthew, is taken from Isa. 7. where that Prophet tells
Ahaz King of Judah, who was at that time invaded by the Confederate Kings of
Syria and Israel; that the Confederacy of these two Kings against Judah, should
in the end come to nothing: and that Israel should be destroyed from being any
longer a Nation, within the term of 65 Years. And for a Sign to you, says the
Prophet, that God will bring this to pass; a Virgin (one who at present is a
Virgin) shall forthwith Conceive by her Husband, and bring forth a Son, whom
God will have to be called Immanuel, or God with Us: because before this Child
is of Years of Discretion to know Good and Evil, God will indeed appear to be
on our Side; He will withdraw by Death the two Kings, who are Confederate
against us. There is no Learned Critic that doubts, that the Child here
promised by the Prophet to be a Sign of the Truth of what He had said, about
the Confederacy of the Two Kings, and the final Destruction of the Kingdom of
Israel, is Maher-Shalal-Hashbaz Son of this Prophet, by the Wise whom (it
should seem) He had lately taken: And They observe, that this is the Reason,
why he says in the next Chapter; I and the Children whom the Lord has given
me, are for Signs in Israel, from the Lord, Isa. 8.18. But whether the Child
Immanuel was the Son of the Prophet, or of some other; this is certain, that He
was to be a Sign to King Ahaz, and to the People of Israel and Judah. This
Child being to be such a Sign, the Sign of so favorable a Providence to Judah
and Ahaz, had an Answerable Name given to him by order from God; even Immanuel,
or God with Us. Therefore our Author's First Observation is certainly false;
that the Name Immanuel was Appropriated to the Lord Christ, and no where given
by God to any other Person. And so too is his other Note, that because God gave
to him the Name Immanuel, He must needs be true God; for God gave the same Name
to the Child that was to be a Sign to Ahaz and Judah, that God would be with
them (or for them) by destroying their Enemies, the Syrians and Israelites.

We see that the words of the Prophet were originally intended, of a Child that
was to be a Sign to Ahaz and Judah; and that there was a good reason why that
Name should be given to him. But St. Matthew accommodates and applies both the
Prophecy and the Name to our Lord Christ, because in him they had another and a
second Completion; we may say, a more perfect Completion. For the Lord Christ
was our Immanuel, or God with us; not only as he was a Sign that God would be
on our side, which was the only reason of the Name of the first Immanuel; but
because he did really conciliate God to us, and us to God; and because God was
with him, and in him, by an extraordinary Effusion of his Spirit upon him.

No one can be so blind or obstinate, as not to acknowledge, that this
Interpretation (which indeed is not ours, but advanced by diverse of the
principal Trinitarian Interpreters) is easy and rational, perfectly agreeable
to the scope of the Prophet; and also to the manner of writing observed by
this, and the other Evangelists; who very usually apply diverse Texts of the Old
Testament, intended originally of other Persons, to the Lord Christ; because in
him they had a second and (very often) a more perfect fulfilling. Therefore let
our Opposers show cause why we should depart from an Interpretation every way
reasonable, to embrace and adhere to theirs; which implies a Doctrine contrary
to the first Commandment, and to the whole Current of Scripture, even this,
that there is more than one Divine Person, or more than one who is true God.

His second Argument is from Mat. 28.19. Teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. He observes
here, that the Son and Spirit are set equally with the Father, as Objects of
our Baptismal Faith; which either proves their real Equality, or is of
dangerous Import, for it is apt to impress upon us false Notions of the Deity,
and to make us think those to be really equal, who are not so. He says
moreover, that in other Texts where God is joined with his Creatures; a
distinction is made, whereby to discern that one is God, and the other but
Creatures; but not so in this Text; we are bid here to be baptized, equally and
alike to the Father, Son and Spirit, without any Note of Dignity or Superiority
in one more than in another of them; therefore they must be understood to be
equal.

It may be our Author knows not, that some Learned Critics have given very
strong Reasons why they believe, that these words of the objected Text, In the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, were not spoke by our Savior, but
have been added to the Gospel of St. Matthew, from the common Form and Practice
of the Church in administering Baptism; as it is certain that these words, For
thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever, have been added to the
Lord's-Prayer in the same Gospel of St. Matthew, from the Greek Liturgies or
Forms of Common Prayer. These Critics observe, that Cardinal Bellarmine is
very angry with the Unitarians who maintained the Dispute at Alba; because they
said, those words were added to the Bible but only since the Nicene Council had
corrupted the Faith; all Antiquity, says the Cardinal, is witness against
them, that those words were always read in the Gospel of St. Matthew. But the
Learned Cardinal does not produce one Testimony, in Confirmation of what he
says, tho he uses to be very free in his Quotations of Fathers, and ancient
Ecclesiastical Historians. In short, we have nothing but Cardinal Bellarmine's
word for it, that the Ancients did read the words, In the Name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.

Whereas some pretend to find these words cited by St. Ignatius, as spoken by
our Savior, in the Epistle of the said Ignatius to the Philippians: that
Epistle is (all of it) a mere Forgery, by Confession of all the Critics who
have published the Works of Ignatius, or have written Notes upon them. They
observe, that Epistle is never quoted by any of the Ancients, nor was heard of
in the World before Ado Viennensis, who flourished about the Year 859.

Eusebius, the famous Ecclesiastical Historian, quotes the objected Text nine
times in several parts of his Works, but never with the words, In the Name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; he reads thus, Teach all Nations
in my Name, instructing them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you.

The constant Practice of the ancient Unitarians, was, to baptize only in the
Name of the Lord Christ; and therefore it was ordered by the Councils of Nice
and Laodicea, that the Paulinists ( i. e. the Unitarians) who came over to the
Church, should be rebaptized. Whether they or the Catholic Church (so called)
are in the right concerning the Form of Baptism, is best determined from the
Practice of the Apostles: for we cannot well suppose, that if the Form
prescribed by our Savior himself, was, In the Name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit, that the Apostles would depart from that Form; or that
'twas lawful for them so to do. But wherever there is mention in
Scripture-History, of the Administration of Baptism, either by the Apostles, or
by their Order, the Form of such Baptism was only, In the Name of the Lord
Christ; or, Unto the Lord Christ. Acts 2.38. Peter said unto them, Repent, and
be baptized every one of you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus. The same thing is
said at Acts 8.16. Acts 10.48. Acts 19.5. Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor. 1.13. Add
to this, that besides the Schoolmen and other Moderns, St. Basil, St. Hilary
and St. Ambrose, do expressly own, that the Apostles administered Baptism only in
the Name of the Lord Jesus. Finally, the other Evangelists mention the
Institution of Baptism by our Savior after his Resurrection; but they say not,
that he appointed it to be administered, In the Name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; which it is not likely they would have omitted, if our
Savior had injoined that Form of performing the Rite of Baptism. Nay, it
should seem, by what St. Luke says, that the Form of Baptism appointed by our
Savior, was only in his (Christ's) Name, not in the Name of more Persons. Luke
24.46, 47. Jesus said unto them, that Repentance, and Remission of Sins should
be preached in his Name, unto all Nations. Here Remission of Sins seems to be
no other thing but Baptism administered in Christ's Name, as a sign of the
Remission of Sins; and therefore it is, that elsewhere instead of Repentance
and Remission of Sins; the holy Writers say Repentance and Baptism: so St.
Peter speaks, Acts 2.38. Repent, and be baptized, in the Name of the Lord
Jesus. To this effect speak the forementioned Critics; and from hence they
infer, that we cannot make use of this Text to warrant the Church's Form of
Baptism, In the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, much less to prove
that the two latter are God (or Gods) equal with the Father.

I desire and resolve, Sir, to argue this great Question, concerning the
Divinity of our Savior; or, whether there is more than one Divine Person, with
all possible sincerity: Therefore I will ingenuously own to you, that tho the
beforementioned Exceptions to this Text, are not without their weight; yet I
have observed diverse things, which make me to think, that this Text is a
genuine part of Scripture, was spoken by our Savior, and written by St.
Matthew.

First, It Is found in all the Copies of the Bible, both Printed and Manuscript,
and in all the ancient Translations, which cannot be said of any other Text,
which is rejected by us or by our Opposers; all the doubtful and suspected
Texts are wanting in diverse Copies of the Original Greek, and of the Ancient
Translations. I conceive, we ought not to argue against the Truth of any Text
from only Negative Proofs, or from some possible Interpretations of other
Texts, tho those Texts are perhaps many. It ought to be shown, that either
Church-Historians or Fathers have said, that such Text was not read, or was
otherways read in the Copies of their Times.

Secondly, To the Allegations out of the Acts of the Apostles, and some
Epistles of St. Paul; it may be answered, That those Texts mention only the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and not the other two Names, the Father and the Holy
Ghost; because by the Name of the Lord Jesus, and unto the Lord Jesus, they
mean, to the Profession of the Lord Jesus, and of the Doctrine by him taught,
without at all intending to express by those words the Form of Baptism, which
every one knew to be In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. I like this Interpretation; because when St. Paul asked some Disciples
at Ephesus, whethey they had yet received the Holy Ghost? and they had
answered, that they had not heard whether there was an Holy Ghost: He replies,
Unto what then were ye baptized? Acts 19.3. This Reply of the Apostle seems to
suppose, that if they were baptized with Christian Baptism, (and not only with
the Baptism of John) they must needs have heard of the Holy Ghost, because the
Form was in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, The ancient Unitarians baptized only in the Name of the Lord Christ:
I think it is grounded only on the Report of Pope Innocent I. who might not
understand their Discipline, or designedly misreport it: and besides, his
Epistles are supposed to be forged by most learned Men; because they make
mention of Rites and Persons that were not in Being in Innocent's time.

Lastly; Whereas the Unitarians at Alba said, that this Text has been added to
St. Matthew since the first Nicene Council; tho Cardinal Bellarmine has only
denied this, he might most easily have proved the contrary. For Tertullian, who
flourished above 120 Years before the Nicene Council, often quotes this Text.
In his Book concerning Baptism, Chap. 13. he says, The Law of baptizing is
imposed, and the Form prescribed: Go, says he, teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. And again, in his Book
against Praxeas, Chap. 26. After his Resurrection, he commanded, that they
should baptize to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; not to one of them only.

It is true, none of the Ante-Nicene Fathers do ever alledg this Form of
Baptism, to prove the Divinity of the Son or Holy Spirit; but the reason of
that was, because tho they allowed that the Son might be called God, on account
of his perfect Conjunction (by Love, Unity of Will, and Subjection) with the
Father, who only is true God; yet they thought otherwise of the Holy Ghost:
some of them understanding him to be only the Energy, or Power of God; others
that he was a Creature of the Son, and only the chief of the ministering Spirits
or Angels. But to return to our Opposer.

He says, We are baptized alike and equally to the Father, Son and Spirit;
therefore the two latter are equal in all respects to the former, or, are God
no less than he; they are mentioned together in this Text, without any Note of
Dignity or Superiority in one more than in another, which were of dangerous
Consequence, and apt to lead Men into Error, if only one of these is true God.

But, 1. It Is not true, that here is no Note of Distinction or Superiority; for
the words at length are these; All Power is given to me, in Heaven and Earth;
go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit. I would know of our Opposer, what greater
Distinction could be made, than our Savior here makes between God and himself?
does he not here expressly profess and own, that his Power is given to him; that
he has received it from the Liberality of another, and not from himself? Can
any one be said to give Power to himself? And the Apostle has told us, how we
are to understand it, that all Power is given to the Lord Christ; in these
words to the Ephesians, God gave to him to be Head over all things, to the
Church: Ephesians. 1.22. As who should say, He is over all things, and has all
Power, with respect to the Church: it is He, and He only that must prescribe her
standing Laws and Rites; and appoint by what Persons, and what Means, the
Church shall be first gathered, and then preserved.

2. But supposing now there had been no Note of Superiority here made, or
Distinction of Dignity and Power; I see not what could be truly inferred from
thence to the advantage of our Author's Cause. For when God is joined in the
same form of Speech with any others; sure that needs not to be expressed, which
all Men know and acknowledge, even God's Superiority above all others. 1 Chronicles.
29.20. The Congregation bowed their Heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the
King. 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before God, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Elect Angels. Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. Will our Author
say upon these Texts, and upon that other (parallel) Text, 1 Samuel 12.18. All
the People greatly feared the Lord, and Samuel? Will he say, that Samuel and
David, the Angels and the Bride ( i. e. the Church) are equal with God or with
the Spirit, because they are mentioned together, without any Note of
Distinction, or of Dignity and Superiority in one more than in the other? The
Acts of Religion mentioned in those Texts, are no less solemn or important than
Baptism is; fearing the Lord, worshipping the Lord, adjuring by the Lord, are
the very highest Acts of Devotion and Religion; yet even in them God is joined
with Creatures, without any Mark of Distinction or Superiority; because (as I
said) when God is joined with any others, there is no need of such Note or Mark.

Therefore the more learned of our Opposers, especially the Ancients of the
first 400 Years, do not insist on this Text of St. Matthew, to prove the
Divinity or Personality of the Son or Spirit: by these words, In the Name of
the Father, Son and Spirit, they understand only, to the Profession, and to the
Obedience of the Father, Son and Spirit. According to these Critics, the Sense
of the objected Text is only this: Baptize the Nations into the Profession and
Obedience of the Father, or God, and of Jesus Christ, whom the Father has
commanded us to hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto us; and of the
other Teacher, even the Spirit or Inspiration of God, by which he advises and
comforts the Faithful in all extraordinary Exigences. Our Author may please to
consult. Mr. Pool's Collections on this Text, where he will see diverse such
Interpretations as this, all of them by the Critics of his own Party, and all
of them consistent with the Unity of God, as it is held by the Socinians.
Therefore all those Interpreters and Critics must be understood as giving up
to us this Text.

CHAP. V. On the first Verses of St. John's Gospel.
OUR Author's next Effort, is from that well-known Context, even the first
Verses of St. John's Gospel: The Clauses by him urged, are these; In the
Beginning was the WORD; and the WORD was with God, and the WORD was God. All
things were made by Him, namely by the WORD; and without Him was not any thing
made, that was made. -- He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and
the World knew him not. Others have added to these; And the WORD was made
Flesh, and dwelt among us. Also that Testimony of the Baptist, He that comes
after me, is preferred before me, for He was before me.

Our Author endeavors to Ridicule the common Socinian Interpretation of these
Verses, by Misrepresenting it; and by concealing the remarkable and probable
Proofs, which the Socinians add to every Clause of their Interpretation.

He recites also the Explication of this Context by Dr. Hammond; which, he
says, is a full Explication, and the Sense of the Catholic Church. Indeed Dr.
Hammond has given us the Belief of the Catholic Church, so called; and has set
it down as the Sense of this Context of St. John: but that is the very thing in
question, whether that Belief be the Sense of these Verses.

Our present Opposer has performed so Meanly, in the long Discourse he has made
on this Proem of St. John's Gospel, that I am not willing to be seen,
maintaining a Scuffle with him. Others of his Party have known, how to make a
vigorous Opposition, from this Context; the sum of what they say, is;

Every Clause here objected, is a several Argument against the Socinian Heresy:
The First declares the Real Divinity of our Savior, by asserting his Eternity;
in these words, In the Beginning (as who should say, from the very First, or
from all Eternity) was the WORD. The second Clause says, The WORD was with
God, to signify the continual and perpetual Generation of the WORD or Son; and
also the mutual Inexistence of these two Divine Persons in one another. The
next yet more Directly, and even Expressly, contradicts the Socinians; by
saying, the WORD was God: They say, He was a Man, and no more than a Man. It Is
true, they allow He may be called God, in such sense as Moses is called a God,
(and that by God himself) at Exodus 7.1. in that He was to represent the Person
of God, being to deliver God's Commands to Pharaob; to Israel, and to the
Egyptians: But our Evangelist has been careful to prevent these Evasions, by
telling us what kind of God the WORD was; All things (says he) were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made.

And lest Incredulous and Obstinate Men should interpret all things in these
words, to be only All things belonging to the Gospelstate; or the whole
Economy and Doctrine of the Gospel; as the Socinians would now wrest St.
John's words: To prevent (I say) this Elusion, he adds yet farther; He was in
the World, and the World was made by him. But this Holy Evangelist has not yet
done with them; He says, at V. 14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us:
'Twere Nonsense to speak so, of a Person who was only a Man; Who ever said,
Peter or James were made Flesh, and dwelt among us? Would it not be Ridiculous
so to speak? Therefore the Lord Jesus was more than a Man, He was God made
Flesh, that is to say, Man; for Flesh is a very usual Scripture-Term for Man.
He was made Man, by being Incarnate in an Human Nature, by an Hypostatical
Union to a Body of Flesh and a Rational Soul. This Evangelist has given us too,
the Testimony of the other John, even John the Baptist, concerning the
Prae-existence or Prae-eternity of our Savior; He that comes after me, is
preferred before me, for be was before me. We are expressly told by St. Luke,
that John Baptist was six Months older than our Lord Christ, as Man: Therefore
when St. John says, Christ was before him; it must be thus understood, that as
God He was before John, tho as Man He was younger than John.

It is true, the Socinians have strained their Wits, to give other Senses of
these Verses; or so to interpret them, as to make their Savior nothing but a
Man; not God, not a Creator, no not so much as an Angel, but a mere Man. Now
when Expressions may have diverse Senses, it sometimes happens, that there are
no Primitive Acts, to ascertain one of the Senses above, or rather than another
of them: but Providence has been watchful on behalf of the true Faith, and the
Catholic Interpretation of these Verses, by preserving to us Ancient Acts, and
such as must needs satisfy sincere and teachable Persons; the Church is in
possession of most certain Records, by which she indubitably proves the
Catholic Interpretation of this Context.

The Socinians are not the First Authors of this Heresy, that there is but one
Divine Person, (even the God and Father of our Lord Christ) and that the Lord
Christ was nothing else but a Prophet, and the Holy Spirit only the Power and
Inspiration of God. The Nazarens, and Cerinthus, and Ebion, immediately after
the Death of the Apostles, began to propagate this Heresy, to the great Offense
and Scandal of the Churches: And it so happened, that many hearkued to them;
insomuch that the Bishops and Churches of Asia importuned St. John, to write
somewhat more expressly concerning the Divinity of our Savior, than had been
yet done by any of the Apostles.

St. John was at length prevailed on, to do as they desired; only he requested,
that a General Fast might be held, to invoke the Aid of God on his Undertaking.
The Fast being ended, the Holy Ghost fell upon him; and He began his Gospel
with these words, which came to him from Heaven; In the Beginning was the WORD,
and the Word was with God, and the WORD was God; All things were made by Him,
and without Him was not any thing made, that was made. This Relation is made by
St. Jerome, Proem. Com. in Matthew. And he declares in the same place; that this
was no uncertain Rumor, nor a thing of Hearsay; Sed ita narrat Ecclesiastica
Historia, The Church History so tells us.

The Socinians therefore sweat to no purpose, in devising Comments or Elusions
on this Context, which was designedly written against them: it is in vain for
them to oppose their own Inventions to Primitive Acts, which tell us plainly;
that this Gospel was written on purpose against their Heresy; nay, that the
words of it, with which we pretend to confute them, came down from Heaven, or
were spoken against them from Heaven; St. John being only the Penman, not the
Author of them.

Thus it is, Sir, that the Socinians are Baffled, by false and Senseless
Translations, supported by Fictions and Legends. There never was a Greater
Flamm, than this Tale of St. Jerome out of an Ecclesiastical History, never seen
by any body but Himself. Irenaeus, two Hundred Years older than St. Jerome, and
therefore so much nearer to matter of Fact, could say nothing of St. John's
Gospel; but this: He published it at Ephesus, in Asia, Advers. Haeres. Lib. 3.
c. 1. Origin, who had made so diligent a search among all the Monuments of
Antiquity, that He might be able to give an exact Account of the Writers of
Holy Scriptures; says, Concerning the four Evangelists, we have received by
Tradition, as follows. St. Matthew, first a Publican, afterward an Apostle,
wrote his Gospel in Hebrew; for the sake of the Jews who believed. St. mark
wrote his Gospel, as St. Peter declared it to him. The third is the Gospel of
Luke, approved by St. Paul; and written for the sake of the Heathens. Lastly,
St. John's Gospel. Had St. Jerome seen an Ecclesiastical History that Origin
never saw: or would Origin have omitted such a Famous Occasion, and
Confirmation of St. John's Gospel, when he tells us the Occasions, and
Approvers of the other Gospels? The words of Origin, before quoted, were extant
in his Fourth Book of Comments on St. Matthew; they are preserved by Eusebius.
Hist. Lib. 6. c. 25. Eusebius spends a whole Chapter, concerning the Order of
the Evangelists; and declares the true Occasion and Cause of St. John's
Writing: which, according to him, was this. It being, says he, observed; that
the other Evangelists had wrote only that part of the Actions and Sayings of
our Savior, which he did and spoke after the Imprisonment of John the Baptist.
To supply this Defect, St. John was desired to commit to writing, what he
remembered of our Savior, before the Baptist was imprisoned. In a word, he
wrote his Gospel, to supply the Omissions of the other Three Evangelists.
Eusebius. Lib. 3. c. 24. Eusebius had read Hegesippus, and whatever Church History
St. Jerome could have read; and he has made it his Business, to make Extracts
out of all ancient Books, concerning the Writers and Writings of the New
Testament: the diligence and exactness of this Historian, is much admired and
praised by all Learned Men; nor will any such believe, that St. Jerome had seen
an Eccesiastical History, which Eusebius had not seen. St. Jerome says, St. John
wrote to oppose the Unitarian Heresy; and that the first words of his Gospel,
were pronounced to him from Heaven. Eusebius says, John had written his Gospel,
because the other Evangelists had omitted the Gests and Sayings of our Savior,
that were before the Imprisonment of the Baptist. St. Jerome refers, for what he
says, to an Ecclesiastical History, unknown to all the Ancients but Himself.
Eusebius proves the Account he gives, by solid and convincing Arguments. His
words, in the Chapter before quoted, are these. It is evident, that the other
three Evangelists have committed to writing, only the Gests of our Savior
during one Year's space; namely, after John the Baptist's being shut in Prison.
Matthew sets forth the time of his writing, in these words; When Jesus had
heard that John was put in Prison, He came into Galilee. In like manner, Mark
says; Now after that John was put in Prison, Jesus came into Galilee. Luke
also makes this Remark; Herod adding this to all the Evils he had done, shut
up John in Prison. Therefore they say, that the Apostle John, being for this
Cause thereto requested, has declared in a Gospel according to him, the time
that was passed over in silence by the other Evangelists, and what was done by
our Savior therein. This is a probable Account; that of St. Jerome is
Miraculous, and therefore pleases them who are taken with Mavelous things.

What shall we say then, that St. Jerome devised, or that he dreamt of an
Ecclesiastical History; which was never seen before nor since: neither of them;
for I doubt not, that his Tale is nothing else but an Improvement, and a
stretch of some words of Clemens Alexander, which he found recorded in the
Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, Lib. 6. c. 14. The words were taken by
Eusebius, out of the Institutions of Clemens Alexander, which Institutions are
now lost: but Photius (Cod. 105, and 111.) has left us this Character of them;
that they contained very many (...), Fabulous and Impious Tales. Of these
Tales, this is one; John, the last of the Evangelists, seeing that what
appertained to Christ's Humanity, was manifested in the other Gospels; being
thereto moved by his Acquaintance, and inspired by the Spirit, wrote a Gospel
concerning Christ's Divinity.

But to return to our Opposers; They commonly say, St. John wrote his Gospel
against Cerinthus and Ebion, and the Heresy of the Unitarians: We have seen,
they have no solid ground for this Pretense, in the History of the Church;
Irenaeus and Origon (the most Learned of the Ancients) knew nothing of it; and
Eusebius gives a contrary Account. But the Gospel it self, written by St. John,
will best decide this Question: if he has more confirmed this (pretended)
Heresy, than any other Writer of Holy Scripture; He did not, without doubt,
write his Gospel against it. Therefore let us (briefly) see, what the Unitarian
Doctrine is; and how St. John has delivered his Mind concerning it.

We say; that only the Father is true God, that the Lord Christ is his Prophet
and Messenger to Man; that therefore what the Lord Christ said, was not from
himself, or by his own Authority, but by particular Command and Charge from
God; that all the Miracles he did, were not properly done by him, but by the
Spirit or Power of the Father given to him, as to former Prophets. Let us hear,
how St. John in his Gospel, written designedly against us, confutes this
impious Heresy: John 17.1, 2, 3. Father, -- this is Life Eternal, to know thee
[the only true God] and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: Or Jesus Christ thy
Messenger. John 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. John
12.49. The Father which sent me, He gave me a Commandment what I should say.
John 14.31. As the Father gave me Commandment, so do I. John 5.30. I can do
nothing of my self. John 14.10 The Father that dwells in me, (by his Spirit,
Energy or Power) He does the Works.

I know not what could be said more effectually, to evince, that the Lord
Christ is not God, but the Ambassador only, and Messenger of God; speaking,
according to the Instructions and Charge given to him; and Acting by a Power
(not of his own, but) bestowed on him, as on former Prophets and Messengers of
God. If the Texts before cited were not the very words of Scripture; were they
found in any other Book, they should be Anathematized as most Gross
Socinianism, as the very Heresy of Cerinthus and Ebion, against whom (as says
St. Jerome's Ecclesiastical History) they were written.

And what wretched Subterfuges do our Opposers make use of, to decline these
plain Testimonies, that were suggested by the Holy Ghost against them: for we
dare not, like them, feign Ecclesiastical Histories, which say, they were
spoken against them from Heaven. First, They tell us; St. John does not say,
that only the Father is God, but the Father is the only true God. They say, the
Socinians have not had the Wit, to perceive the vast difference between those
two Expressions: It may be true, they say, and is true, that the Father is the
only true God, as St. John in the alleged Text says; and yet the Son too is
true God, nay the only true God; and the like of the Holy Ghost.

And when John says; neither the Doctrine nor the Actions of our Savior were
his own; but the Commandments of the Father given to him, and the Works of the
Father dwelling in him: By the Father in those Texts, they say, we are to
understand Three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Nay, when
our Savior says; Of that Day and Hour (the Excision of Jerusalem, and the
Dissolution of the Jewish Polity) none knows; not the Angels, neither the
Son, but the Father only; It Is not true for all that, that the Father only (or
only the Father) knows that Day and Hour, for then only the Father were true
God; but the Father only in those words, is not the Father only, but also the
Son, (who is there expressly denied to know that Day and Hour) and besides him
the Holy Ghost.

Well, but however these things are, St. John has paid us off (they say) in his
Proem, or first Verses of his Gospel, in those words which came to him from
Heaven.

But if the Heavenly Words were but honestly translated, the Socinians would
not fear any Inference that would be drawn from them. Our Protestant Opposers
value themselves very much on this account, that they have given to the People
the holy Bible in the Vulgar Languages: it may however be said, that they have
only been more crafty than the Papists in imposing upon the People. The Papists
have sillily raised against themselves a Clamor for withholding the Bible
from the People, and keeping it locked up in only the Learned Languages; and in
those Countries where they have been constrained to translate the Bible, they
have been so jealous, as to forbid the Commonalty of their Communion the use of
their own Translations. The Protestants have been wiser, tho not a whit more
sincere; for they have made Translations of the Bible into all Languages, and
so far have they been from forbidding the use of them, that they encourage it
with all their Might, well knowing the Benefit that must arise to themselves
thereby; for they know they have printed all the Bibles that are in the
Original Greek Tongue, from only such Manuscript Copies, as have been corrected
to speak the Language of the Church; and from Bibles so corrected and printed,
they have made their Translations: nor has the Fraud stopped here, for
wheresoever there is an Ambiguity in the Original Hebrew or Greek, they have
always so translated, as to confirm their own Doctrines. This was the right
method to establish their Opinions, not that unjudicious impolitick course
taken by the Papists, which begets suspicion of them, and has therefore been a
great means of their Overthrow: there has been nothing so plausibly and
effectually urged against them, as this, that they have been afraid to let the
People have the Word of God, and that their Opposers desire and endeavor
nothing more. But if those who boast so much of this Service done by them to
the People, had meant as well, or if they would be owned for Persons that have
bestowed the Word of God on their Flocks, they should have put into the Margin
of their Translations, those other Translations of which (they know) the
Original Greek and Hebrew Text is capable, and with those Translarions, the
other Readings in the Manuscript Copies. This had been plain dealing: but you
must excuse them, 'twould have have hazarded those Remains of Popery, (and
which indeed are the principal parts of Popery) that they thought fit still to
retain: those other Readings of the Manuscript Copies, and the other
Translations of famous Critics, would have enabled even the common People to
perfect the Reformation beyond the Standard intended by these Translators. The
People would have been questioning the Doctrines of the Trinity, the
Incarnation, Original Sin, the Servitude of our Wills to Evil only, and other
such like Doctrines, against which they cannot now so much as once open. The
Translators were aware, that such a Translation and Edition of our Bibles would
have made all Men Divines; because to understand, and to be able to judge, is
not peculiar to Men that know Greek or Latin, but is common and natural to all
Mankind, and to every Man, tho he understands but one Language. But it is time
to give the sense of this so much controverted Beginning of St. John's Gospel:
I must crave leave however to premise this one thing.

It Is a Rule of Criticism approved, and urged also by the Learnedest of our
Opposers; that the Writers of the New Testament have a particular regard to the
Notions and Opinious of the Jewish Church; as also to the Customs, and Forms of
Speech in use among that People; so that such as happen to be altogether
ignorant, either of the Doctrines current among the Jews, or of their Customs
and Forms of speaking; such will sometimes widely mistake in interpreting the
New Testament. To instance in only such Opinions and Forms of Speech as were
frequent among them concerning the Messiah, or Christ; it is certain, they
called him the WORD; this is seen in diverse places of their Chaldee
Paraphrases, which they used to read in their Synagogues; and in very many
places of Philo-Judaeus, who was contemporary to the Apostles. They said also
of the Messiah who was to come, that the World was made for him; meaning
thereby, that the World was at first made by God, with intention to subject it,
in the fullness of time, to the Messiah and his Law: See Grotius on Heb. 1.2.
and on Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. They added, as the same Grotius there observes, that
the Messiah should make a new and a better World. In what sense they meant
this, and how they proved it, I have shown before at Chap. 3. where I give an
account of Heb. 1.10, 11. Moreover, they used the words El and Elohim (which
the Greeks render by (...), the English by the word God) of Angels, Kings and
Magistrates, and of all such as are extraordinary Messengers and Ministers of
God: I need not to prove this, our Opposers confess it, and it is an Observation
made by our Savior himself, at John 10.35. These Keys will let us into the
sense of the Verses about which we are contending, without multiplying Divine
Persons, or Gods, as the Trinitarians do, or Creators, as is here done by the
Arians.

In the beginning. That is, say our Opposers, From the very first, from for
ever, or from all Eternity. But when Moses says, In the beginning God created
the Heavens and the Earth, does he mean from for ever, from the very first, or
from Eternity? Why do they not perceive, that both Moses and St. John must be
understood, as referring (in those words, In the beginning) to the Subjects of
which they are writing: John's Subject is the Gospel-state and Occonomy; the
Subject of Moses is the Creation and the first Ages of Mankind; therefore Moses
means only, in the beginning of the World; John means, in the beginning of the
Gospel-state.

In the beginning was the WORD. He intends here to say, In the beginning was
the Messiah, or Christ, whom the Jews, and from them we also have used to call
the WORD.

It Is not so easy to determine, with Certainty, why the Jews called the
Messiah, whom they expected, the WORD; but it is evident why St. John has been
willing to comply with them, in giving that Name to the Messiah: for as at ver.
7, 8, and 9. he calls our Savior the Light, because he was the Bringer of the
Gospel Light; so for the same reason he is content also to call him the WORD,
because he was the Messenger of Glad-Tidings, the Bringer of the Gospel-Word,
or of that new Revelation of the Divine Will, which is indifferently to be
called the Gospel, or the Word of God.

This reason of the Name the WORD, given to our Savior, is observed by Origin,
and after him by St. Chrysostom, and is approved by Maldonat, Beza, Gomarus,
Dr. Hammond, and other principal Interpreters among our Opposers.

The WORD was with God, and the WORD was God. Our Opposers themselves will not
deny, because every Novice in Grammar knows it, that the original words should
have been thus rendered, The WORD was with the God, and the WORD was a God. We
claim this Translation as absolutely necessary for clearing the meaning of the
Evangelist in this place. He says not, the Word was with God, but with the
God; because (...) (or the God) is always used to signify the true God, or him
who is God by way of Excellence and Appropriation, as Grammarians speak: but
(...) a God, is in Holy Scripture applied to Angels, to Kings, to Prophets, and
to all such as any way represent the Person of him who is indeed God. Thus
Moses is called and named a God, and that by God himself, Exodus 7.1. because he
was to represent the Person, and bring the Commands or Word of God to Pharaoh,
and to the People of Israel and Egypt. Moses being called (by Coufession of our
Opposers) a God, on the forementioned account; we ought not to be surprised,
that this Evangelist has called the WORD, or Messiah, a God, seeing he had the
very same reason to call him so, that there was for Moses his being so called;
for the Messiah was no less than Moses, the Ambassador and Representative of
God, and that also not to one or two Nations, but to all Mankind.

But whereas he is here said to be (or have been) with the God; the meaning is,
that before he entered on his Office, he was taken up into Heaven, to be fully
instructed and informed in the nature and quality of his Office, and of that
whole Charge which he was to deliver to Men. It Is in vain here, that our
present Opposer Mr. Milb. demands, after a scoffing manner, at what time this
Assumption into Heaven did happen; it is enough that we are told the thing by
this Evangelist, and by our Savior; we are not obliged to guess at the time,
which the Scriptures have thought sit to conceal. The thing it self is plainly
enough intimated in diverse Texts of this Evangelist, John 3.13. No Man has
ascended into Heaven, but he that is come down from Heaven; even the Son of
Man, who WAS in Heaven. So that Text is translated by Beza, Erasmus,
Camerarius, and other Critics. John 6.62. What if ye shall see the Son of Man
ascend up where be was before? John 8.38. I speak that which I have seen with
my Father. See also John 6.38, 51. It is true, the Evangelists have not
recorded the particular Time or History of our Savior's first Assumption unto
God, as they have of his Transfiguration, his second Assumption, and other
remarkable Passages of his Life: but the reason of that is, because they were
Eyewitnesses of the latter, but the other happened before they were called to
be Disciples, or to attend on him; and he himself never (as it should seem)
told them of it, but only hinted it in some Discourses and Defenses which he
made to his Opposers. You see, Sir, there is no need of a Chimerical and
imaginary, perpetual and continual Generation of the Son, nor yet of an
impossible mutual In-being of the Father and Son, for our understanding these
words, the WORD was with God: the Difficulty is solved, after a natural and
intelligible way; for the WORD was indeed with God, because he was taken up
into Heaven, to be informed of all thigns appertaining to the
Gospel Dispensation; as Moses was called up into the Mountain, to be instructed
in the Particulars of the Legal Dispensation; and as St. Paul was caught up
into the third Heaven, to have Revelations and Visions necessary for the
Apostle of the Gentiles.

Our Opposers do not find what to object to this Explication of the words, the
WORD was with God; but to the other Interpretation, that the WORD was called a
God, in the same sense only (or chiefly) that Moses was so called at Exodus 7.1.
they reply, this Evasion of the Socinians is set aside by the Description which
St. John here adds, for he describes the WORD to be God, or a God, not as Moses
was, by Representation and Mission, but because All things were made by him,
and without him was not any thing made that was made; and because the World was
made by him.

This was a bold Translation, they should at least have signified in the
Margin, that the words might have been rendered; For him were all things made,
and without respect to him there was nothing made that was made; the World was
made for him. They know very well, I make Challenge to them to deny it, that
the Greek Preposition which they have rendered by, might have been rendered for;
so as to make the sense beforesaid even this, For him were all things made, the
World was made for him. There is no Greek Lexicon but owns this Signification
of that Preposition, when it is put (as here) before a Genitive.

It Is enough to determine us which of the aforesaid Translations we ought to
follow; that we know 'twas the Belief of the Jews, and is a most certain and
undeniable Truth, that all things were made for the Messiah; that is, were at
first made with intention to subject them in the fullness of Time, to the
Messiah and his Law, both which God decreed before he actually made the World.
But we have besides for it this irrefragable Argument; that it is certain, there
is but one Creator, and the one Creator is no other but God: seeing therefore
the WORD is here distinguished from the God, (and thereby denied to be the God)
we are obliged to translate here, All things were made for him, the World was
made for him; not the World was made by him, or all things by him.

I say, we are obliged thus to translate, or this Translation is necessary, on
supposition that St. John speaks here of the old or first Creation, and the
visible or material World. But the Socinians have hitherto supposed, that he
speaks here of the new Creation and the Spiritual World; even that great Change
of Affairs in the World, which has been so considerable, that the Scriptures
have diverse times called it the New Heavens and the New Earth, as has been
shown on Heb. 1.10, 11. If these are the All things, and this the World
intended by St. John; we admit the Translation of our Opposers, that All things
were made by the WORD: for 'twas by his Ministry, that great Change of Affairs,
called by the Jews, the World of the Messiah, was effected. If to this
Interpretation, it be objected, that it is not very likely, that this Evangelist
would lay such an occasion of Error in our way, as to say, all things were made
by the WORD, and the World was made by him, if the WORD were not indeed the
Maker of the World: because very few would apprehend that he spoke of a new
Creation; and I know not what World of the Messiah. I confess the Objection is
weighty, but it may be (reasonably) answered, that the New Creation, the
Spiritual World, and the World of the Messiah, was so universally known to the
Jews, and also to the Christians of those Times, who were all converted by
Jewish Preachers, that St. John reasonably expected to be readily understood by
them. Especially considering, that but one God, and one only Creator, was then
so well known to be the Doctrine of Christianity and of Judaism; that no one,
who was at all acquainted with those Religions, would understand a Writer of
either of those Persuasions, of any other Creation or World, but the World of
the Messiah and the new Creation, when he attributed a Creation or World to any
Person but God. In a word, St. John supposed; that he spoke safely and
intelligibly, because writing his Gospel for the use of Jews and Christians,
who knew the Doctrines of the Jewish Church concerning the Messiah; such must
needs perfectly understand of what World he spoke, when he should say, the
World was made by the WORD.

The short is, either St. John speaks here of the old Creation, and the visible
World, and then we ought to render his words, All things were made for him, the
World was made for him; which is an Allusion to a known saying of the Jews,
that the World was made for the Messiah, namely, to subject it (in the fullness
of Time) to the Messiah and his Law, (...) great and certain Truth: Or, he
speaks of the new Creation, and the World which all Men expected the Messiah
should make; and if so, we understand him as saying, All things were made by
him, and the World was made by him.

The rest is easy; The WORD was made Flesh, and dwelt among us. And, He that
comes after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me.

It will not be denied, Sir, by any of our Opposers, that instead of The Word
was made Flesh, (that is, say they, was made Man) we may render the Greek by
the Word WAS Flesh, that is to say, was Man, or a Man. The Greek Word which, to
serve the present turn, they render here by was made, is by themselves in this
very Chapter rendered WAS, Ver. 6. There WAS a Man sent from God, whose Name was
John.

It Is plain enough, why our Opposers would take no notice, that St. John's
words might be rendered the Word WAS Flesh; or, was a Man, and dwelt among us:
for this Translation would have turned the whole Context against them. It would
have been perceived by All, that when the Word is before called a God, the
meaning must be, he is a God as he represented the true God; and because (like
Moses, who on the same Account is called a God, at Exodus 7.1.) he is the
Ambassador and Messenger of God, the bringer of the Commands and Word of God.
Men would have discerned too, that they must not interpret St. John, as saying
that the World (the Visible World) and All things were made by the WORD, but
only for the WORD: Nay, this Translation, the WORD was a Man, would have
contradicted them Directly and Expressly; for though they say Jesus Christ was a
Man, yet the WORD (to which He was personally united) was God, and not Man,
according to them.

But John Baptist has testified of the WORD; He is preferred before me, for He
was before me. Here again the Translators have favored themselves, by rendering
the Greek words WAS before me; they might have been rendered, IS before me: But
allowing their Translation, Was before me; Erasmus, Grotius, Beza, Maldonat,
and other Crities observe, that the words are to be understood, of a priority
of Dignity, not a priority of Time; so as to make this Sense, He is preferred
before me, tho in regard of Time I am before Him, because He was indeed before
me in Excellence of Merit, and Dignity of Person and Office.

It is a very common thing with our Opposers, to pretend, that the Socinians
cannot paraphrase this beginning of St. John's Gospel, without making such an
harsh sense, as is next to ridiculous: therefore let us put all that has been
said, into one view, in this following Paraphrase; and do you, Sir, and all Men
judge, whether it be Harsh or Uncouth. In the beginning of the Gospel-State, was
the Messiah; whom the Jews have used to call the WORD: and we also may so call
him, because He is the Great Messenger and Preacher of the Gospel-Word. This
WORD was assumed into Heaven, and was there with God; to be instructed in all
that he was to say and do, in the execution of the Office of the Messiah. He
was with the God; and He himself was a God, being to represent the Person of
God as his Ambassador, and to deliver his Commands and Word to Men: On which
account very Many, and particularly Moses, are called Gods in Holy Scripture.
The Messiah was decreed before the World was; nay, the World was at first made,
with intention to subject it, in the fullness of Time, to the Messiah and his
Law: So that the World, and all things may be said, to have been made for him;
and that without respect or regard had to him, nothing was made that was made.
Yet as Great a Person as the Messiah is, this is always to be remembered, that
He was Flesh, or Man, Man like to us, and that dwelt among us.

I will say no more of him, at this time, but this; that John the Baptist, whom
all Men took to be a Prophet, bore this Testimony of him: That tho the WORD
came after him, in respect of Time; yet the WORD was indeed before him, in the
Excellence of his Person, the Dignity of his Office, and the Miraculous Power
over Diseases and Devils, bestowed on him.

What is there, Sir, in all this Paraphrase, that is not intelligible and easy?
And for its Agreement with the Greek Text of St. John, we prove it by Rules of
Criticism, not only not deniable by our Opposers, but advanced and urged by
themselves.

It all depends upon these two Observations. First, Sometimes such as are mere
Men, are, on the account of their Deputation and Mission from God, honored
with the Name of God: which we prove by the Example of Moses, (the Lawgiver of
the Old Testament, as the Lord Christ is of the New) and from the Mouth of our
Savior himself, at Joh. 10.35. Secondly, That the Preposition (...), and the
Verb (...), may be rendered by the English words For and Was: which we show by
all the Greek Lexicons, and by their own Translations of other Texts of
Seripture.

Our Opposers alledg this Context, as the principal Evidence they have to
produce, that there is more than one Divine Person, and more than one who is
Creator of the World: We answer, we are taught in the First and Fourth
Commandments, that there is but one who is God, and but one Maker of the
Visible and Material World; and therefore this Context ought to be interpreted,
in consistence with those two Great Commandments spoken by God himself. Sure it
must be evident hereupon, that they ought not to rely on a dubious Context,
against two such Proofs as are those two Commandments. When Points of Faith are
turned into Commandments or Laws, it argues the great Importance of those
Articles of our Faith: And it must needs be very dangerous to advance a
contrary Faith, and very foolish to advance a contrary Faith on the Credit of a
Context, which at best is of doubtful and uncertain Construction; of so
doubtful Construction, that if it may be Translated and Interpreted, in favor
of their Opinion, yet it may be also so Rendered and Interpreted, as Flatly to
contradict it, and Perfectly destroy and overthrow it.

You will perhaps say, Sir; but in this Dispute concerning the Truth of
Translations, What can an Unlearned Man do; which side can he take? or rather,
How can he take any Side at all; being not able to judge between the contending
Parties? ought he not in prudence, wholly to suspend his Judgment?

I answer; He must consult his Reason, concerning the thing in Question. If he
consults his own Reason, he will find an absolute Impossibility in the
Trinitarian Doctrine; his Reason will assure him, that an Almighty Father, and
an Almighty Son, are most certainly Two Gods; and that two Creators can be no
other but two Gods: therefore he may, and he must infer; that the Explication
of this Context of St. John, which advances such a Doctrine, is certainly
false, and such a Mistake as subverts Christianity. God forbid, that our Faith
should depend, on the Quarrels and Debates of Learned Men; or on an uncertain
Criticism; or on the contrary Traditions of contending Parties: No no, Faith
has a certain Rule, even Holy Scripture interpreted in consistence with evident
Reason; this is the Infallible Rule, and of this the Unlearned are as competent
Judges, as he that has all the Learning in the World. That cannot be true,
which is contrary to clear Reason; for Clear Reason is nothing else but clear
Truth: Therefore if the Unitarians have made it appear, that the Doctrines
which they oppose, are Manifest Contradictions to Reason; and Unlearned Man is
as sure as the most Learned, that such Doctrines are not the meaning of Holy
Scripture, or of any Context therein.

Our Opposers tell the People, they are not to believe the Transubstantiation,
tho grounded on those express Words of Scripture, This is my Body; because that
Doctrine implies several Contradictions to clear Reason: Why do they not keep
to this Rule, to which they would oblige their People? Why do they not renounce
the Errors of the Trinity and Incarnation, which imply so many more
Contradictions to Reason, than can be pretended of the Transubstantiation?
While they argue against the Common Enemy the Papists, about Transubstantiaon;
or against the Lutherans, about Consubstantion; Reason is all in all with them,
and you can get nothing out of them, but Reason and the Judgment of Sense: But
when the Dispute is with the Socinians, the Tables are turned; then you hear
nothing from them, but the necessity of submitting Reason to Revelation; then
they give in their Catalogues of things, which (they say) are contradictory to
our Reason, and yet must be believed. Thus while they Argue against the
Papists, it is on Socinian Principles, that the Scripture must be interpreted in
consistence with Evident Reason; which is a yielding all the Controverted
Points to the Socinians: But when they think fit to fall foul on the Socinians,
it is on Popish Principles, that the Scripture must be interpreted by the
Determinations and Decisions of Holy Mother Church, as she is represented in
General Councils, which are directed by the Holy Ghost: Which implies the
yielding Transubstantiation, and many other Points, to the Papists, who can
show for them Councils as truly General, as any that can be alleged for the
Trinity or Incarnation.

In fine, such of our Opposers as are Protestants, must either come over to Us,
or revolt to Rome: If they will not be obliged to interpret Scripture by
Reason, they are obliged to turn Papists; for the Decisions of the Church in
Councils, and the mere Letter of Scripture, are against them: but if they admit
no Interpretation of Scripture, but what is consistent with Reason, both They
and the Papists must be Unitarians, because the Trinity and the Incarnation are
contrary to, and inconsistent with Reason, much more than the
Transubstantiation is.

CHAP. VI. On the other Texts of St. John.
NEXT, He takes notice of some words of our Savior, at John 10.30, 36, 38. I
and my Father are one. -- I am the Son of God. -- The Father is in me, and I in
him. He says; the Jews, from those words, I and my Father are one, did infer
after this manner; Thou being a Man, make thy self God. He adds; if the Jews
mistook in the Inference they made, from those words; nothing can excuse,
either our Savior or his Apostles, from extreme Unkindness; since they would
take no pains to rectify a Mistake, which in all appearance was Involuntary.

A little more Deference would have become our Author, in making a Judgment,
concerning what our Savior or his Apostles ought to have done, toward
rectifying the Mistakes of the Jews: And I think too, he needed not to be so
concerned, on behalf of the poor Innocent Lambs the Jews; who only mistook
(true Hearts,) and did not designedly pervert the words of our Savior. On the
contrary, I take it to be certain; that the Mistake of the Jews, was not
Involuntary, but Affected and Malicious; and however that be, yet our Savior
has said enough, both in that Context and elsewhere, to rectify the Mistakes
of any whomsoever, concerning his words, I and the Father are one; I am the Son
of God; the Father is in me, and I in him.

Our Opposers ordinarily object to us; that the Jews understood those
Expressions of our Savior, as themselves do: namely, as signifying, that he
professed himself to be God. But the Jews put a malicious Construction on our
Savior's words; that they might expose him to Hatred and Persecution. To be
satisfied of this, we need only to consider, that they came to him, with design
to ensnare him in his words; as they had done oft-times before, and did many
times afterward. Let us hear what they say, v. 24. Then came the Jews round
about him, and said to him; How long do thou make us to doubt? if thou be the
Christ, tell us plainly. To comprehend the true meaning of their putting this
Question, we must look back to the foregoing Chapter, where, at V. 22. we are
told, The Jews had agreed already, that if any Man should confess, that He
(Jesus) was the Christ, He should be put out of the Synagogue: i. e. He should
be Excommunicated. We may add to this Observation; that by the Constitutions of
that Church, every Person professing himself to be a Prophet, and not being
really so, was to be put to death; much more if he pretended to be the Great
Prophet of all, the Messiah or Christ. I say now, seeing they so perfectly
persuaded themselves, that Jesus was not the Christ; that they resolved to
Excommunicate any of their own Number, who should acknowledge him for the
Christ; it is evident enough, that their Question, Art thou the Christ? was
insidious, and designed only to get something from his own Mouth, on which they
might Excommunicate him; nay, and proceed against him as a false Pretender, to
be a Prophet and Christ. Can any one wonder, or reasonably doubt, that such
Persons put a malicious Interpretation, on the words of his Answer to them? And
is it for Christians, to draw Arguments, nay, build Articles of Faith on the
sense that such Persons made of our Savior's words? and yet this is the great
Argument of our Opposers, from this Context; The Jews, say they, understood our
Savior as saying, that He was God. Why do They not take notice, that the Jews
assembled about him for no other Purpose, but to find Occasion against him,
either by his own express Words, or by the Construction they could make of his
Words?

But they say farther; our Savior did not rectify the Mistake of the Jews. I
know not, how it would help the Cause of our Opposers; if indeed it were so,
that our Savior had left the Jews in the hands of their own Malice, without
caring to answer their groundless Cavils; provided He has been careful,
clearly to explain his Meaning to his Disciples, or others who in time to come
might (happily) mistake him. But the Truth is, He does in this very Context
deny the Calumny of the Jews, that He made Himself (so it is in the Original) a
God. For He answers them at Verse. 26. Say ye of him, whom the Father has
sanctified and sent into the World; Thou blasphemest, because I faid, I am the
Son of God? The Unicarians may argue as strongly, from this Answer of our
Savior, as their Opposers have argued weakly, from the malicious Construction
that his Adversaries made of his former words, I and my Father are one. It Is a
weak Argument, to say, The Lord Christ is true God, for his Inveterate
Adversaries (who sought his Life) charged him with making himself a God: But we
reason Unanswerably, when we say, the Lord Christ is the Messenger whom God has
sent into the World, and not God himself; because He replies to the Jews, that
God sanctified him indeed, and sent him into the World; and that He had never
said of himself any higher thing, than this which is true of every good Man, I
am the Son of God.

I will not now enter into a particular Discussion, what is the very Meaning of
that whole Defense, which our Savior hoar makes of himself in this Context; I
conceive, that neither the Trinitarians nor Unitarians have hitherto
comprehended all that our Savior intended to say: But it is not necessary to
inquire into a Matter, that will require a very long Discourse to clear it;
because elsewhere our Savior has interpreted all the Expressions, to which the
Jews excepted, and at which others have so dangerously stumbled. They are these
Three, I and my Father are one; I am the Son of God; the Father is in me, and I
in him.

I and my Father are one. He says as much of his Disciples; and explains to
us, what we are to understand by the words, Joh. 17.22. The Glory which thou
gave me, ( i. e. the Glory, or Honor of being the Ambassador of God to Men)
I have given to them, (to my Disciples) that they may be One, as we are One.
Here our Lord declares to us, these Three Points; that He is One with the
Father; that He has made his Disciples also, to be One with the Father, and
with himself; and in what regard it is, that He and They are one with the
Father; not by an Oneness, or Unity of Person, as the Sabellians held; nor by
an Oneness of Nature or Godhead, as the Trinitarians hold; but by such an Unity
or Oneness as is between the Sinder and the Sent, the Ambassador and his
Principal; namely, an Oneness of Design and Intention: For the sense of our
Savior there is plainly this; As thou have made me to be one with thy self,
even a Partner and Sharer in the same Design, the Design of reconcising Men to
God; so have I made my Disciples to be one with us both, and with one another,
by substituting them in my Place, and by employing and engaging them in the
same Design. Again, he says at Ver. 11. Keep those whom thou have given me,
that they may be out, as we are. As who should say, As thou Father and I are
one, by our Mutual Love; so keep Those whom thou have given me, in a like
Unity, both with Us and among Themselves.

Thus it is then, that our Savior is one with the Father (that is, with God)
by an Oneness of Affection and Love, and by an Oneness of Design and Intention:
and he reaches us at the same time, that there is the same Unity or Oneness,
not only between the Father and Himself on the one part, and all faithful
Disciples on the other part; but also among the Faithful themselves.

Our Savior having given us these Rational and Natural Senses of his words, I
and the Father are one; the Socinians acquiesce in them, without erecting
impossible and impious Schemes, such as an Unity of more Persons in one and the
same numerical Godhead; they leave those things to such as are not contented
with Scripture-Explications, or with a Faith which is Rational, Intelligible
and Plain, but must have Mysteries to amaze and confound their Understandings,
as if Faith were nothing but Ignorance, or Brutality, whereas the Apostle (on
the contrary) defines or describes it to be Evidence.

The Father is in me, and I in him. It is true, but he prays that all the
Faithful may have the same Privilege, John 17.21, 22. I pray -- that they all
may be one, at thou, Father, art in me, and I in there; that they may be one in
us. And the Critics have observed this following reading in ancient Copies, at
John 6.56. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and
I in him; as the Father is in me, and I in the Father. Why and in what sense
our Savior says, He was in the Father, and the Father in Him; and in what
regard and respect, He desires and prays; that all such as believe in his Name,
may be one in Him and in the Father, is explained by this Evangelist, in his
first Epistle, 1 John 3.24. He that keeps his (God's) Commandments, dwells
in Him; and He in him. 1 John 4.16. He that dwells in Love, dwells in God,
and God in him.

Our Savior therefore, and all the Faithful, are said to be in the Father or
God, by their Obedlinet and Love, and God is in them, by his mutual Love to
them. This is the Interpretation which the Scripture gives of it self; we ought
not to heed the Dreams or Fancies of Mystical Divines, who think nothing is
Religion, but what no body understands, and what contradicts Reason and good
Sense.

Last of all, our Savior also said, I am the Son of God. Every one confesses
that he was so, because he was generated by the Divine Power, on a Virgin,
without the Concurrence of any other Father but God; yet even this, as great a
matter as it is, is not so great a Glory to him, as that he was the Son of God
in such sense, as all the Faithful are called God's Children, Sons and
Daughters of God, begotten of God; namely, because of their Similitude and
Likeness to God in Holiness or Purity, to which they have been begotten by him,
by his Word, and other Means suitable and adapted to their Rational Natures.
Mat. 5.45. That ye may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven. 1
John 5.18. Whosoever is born of God, sins not; he that is begotten of God,
keeps himself.

Whereas therefore the Lord Christ is sometimes called the only begotten of the
Father, it is to be understood, as when Isaac is called the only Son, and the
only begotten Son of Abraham, at Genesis 22.2, 12. Heb. 11.17. Abraham had other
Sons begotten by himself, yet Isaac is called his only begotten in regard of
his Father's particular and especial Love to him, even such as Parents
ususually have for an only Child. And in this sense the Greek word (used
concerning our Savior) which we render only begotten, is frequently used in
Greek Authors, and not only of such Person or Persons, as are strictly and in
proper speaking only begotten.

In these Interpretations of the objected Clauses, I and the Father are one; I
am the Son of God; the Father is in me, and I in him; we have the concurring
Judgment of the principal Critics and Interpreters among the Trinitarians:
some of them do blame the Fathers for urging such Scripture-Expressions as
these, against the Arians and Photinians; and they call the Interpretations of
the Fathers, and of some Modern Writers of Controversies, Violent Glosses.

Our present Opposer was aware of this, and therefore is forced to say at P.
354. We are not bound to regard what some Men of great Names say, or boldly
assert: It is true, but the Authority of such Men whose Names are (deservedly)
great in Critical Learning, and especially in the sacred Criticism, does at
least evince thus much, that the Texts which They give up to their Opposers,
ought to be placed in a Class by themselves, they ought to be reckoned among
the Proofs that are brought for show, and Ostentation of Number, or to fill up
the spare Pages of a Book, or in a popular Sermon, not in such a Book, wherein
the Author professes to deal only with the Learned, and to urge no other Text
but what is indeed an Argument on his behalf.

The short is, our Opposers litigate with us concerning the sense of these
Expressions, I and the Father are one; God is my Father; I am in the Father,
and the Father in me: We show hereupon, from express Scriptures, that all these
things are true of all the Faithful, and are said of them, no less than of our
Savior: We show farther, that they are interpreted in Holy Scripture, to be an
Oneness of Design and Love, an In-Being by Obedience and Love on the part of
the Lord Christ and Believers, and of Protection and Love on the part of God;
and that the Lord Christ may be so the Son of God, and his only Begotten, as
that still he is but a Man, and not God: We show that all this is confessed, tho
not by the wrangling Pulpit, and trifling Systematicks and Catechists; yet by
the chief Interpreters and Critics, and first Reformers, even among our
Opposers themselves. On the contrary, those that interpret the beforementioned
Expressions of our Savior, as if in them he meant to say, that he is God; such
do advance an Interpretation that destroys the Unity of God, contradicts
manifest Reason, and has no Vouchers but the Jews; I say, none but the Jews;
for Trinitarians can produce no Text of Scripture, nor any Profane Author that
can possibly be understood to mean by such Expressions what they mean, namely,
a numerical Oneness of Nature, an In-being by Mixture of Persons, and a Natural
Generation out of the very Essence of God. Upon these Texts therefore we have
as much advantage against them, as possibly we can have, even Reason, the
Current of Scripture, the Authority of their own Critics, and of all Profane
Writers.

The next Trouble he gives us out of the New Testament, is, from John 20.28.
Thomas answered, and said unto him (unto Jesus) My Lord, and my God.

Socinus himself, Wolzogenius and Slichtingius, learned Unitarians, do not only
grant, but they contend, that it was indeed the Intention of Thomas, to call
our Savior his Lord, and his God; but it is in no other sense than the Author
of the 45th Psalm, calls Solomon God; Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever:
To which he adds, speaking to the Queen concerning her Husband Solomon,
Hearken, O Daughter, forget thy own People, and thy Father's House: So shall
the King greatly desire thy Beauty; for he is thy Lord God, and worship thou
him. So it is in the Version of the Psalms, in the Book of Common Prayer; which
Translation, I judge, our Author will not disclaim. And so also St. Jerome
translates, Ipse est Dominus Deus taus, and adorabunt eum: but the Translators
employed by King James, have left out the word God, from those words to the
Queen, He is the Lord thy God. But seeing Solomon had before been called God,
Thy Throne, O God, is for ever; it is undeniable that in this Psalm he is called
both Lord and God; and his Queen is bid to worship him, that is, to honor him;
for such was the Language of the Eastern Nations to their Kings, and Persons in
Eminent Dignity. The Prophets Moses and Samuel are called Elobim, or God, Exodus
7.1. 1 Samuel 28.11, 13, 14. In that last Context, King Saul ordered the Woman to
call up Samuel; and Samuel appearing, she called to Saul and told him, that now
she saw Elohim (God) ascending up. Saul thereupon asks her, What form is he of?
the Woman replies, He is an old Man. It appears by this, that besides their
Kings and Magistrates, the Jews gave also the Name Elohim to the Prophets. But
that was the very word used by the Apostle Thomas to our Savior; the Greeks
translate it by (...), the English by the word God. Therefore when it is used of
a Man, we are not to suppose, that the Speaker intends to call such Man God; or
that he owns him for a Person who is true God; but he uses it in such sense, as
the Jews and other Eastern Nations used it; for a Person of Eminent Dignity, or
worth. The Woman said of Samuel, then rising out of the Earth, I see Elohim,
God: Thomas says of our Savior, newly also risen, Eloi, Eloi, my God, my God;
they both use the same word, and one no more than the other intended to call
the Person of whom he spoke, the true God, but only a venerable, or dignified
Person. To be short, the Hebrew words El and Elohim, the Syriac and Chaldaic
Elohi, Eloi, and the Greek (...), all which we render by the English God, are
words of just such a Latitude in Holy Scripture, and among the Jews and other
Oriental Nations, as the word LORD, is with us; for we use that word
indifferently, sometimes of God, sometimes of Persons in Dignity, and leave our
meaning to be judged by the true and known Quality of the Person to whom we
speak. We do not think or fear we shall be understood, as making a Man to be
God, because we call him by a Name by which also we call God. This is the very
case before us, Thomas says to our Savior Eloi, a Name used of God and of
Persons in Dignity; and he expected not to be mistaken, because the Person to
whom he spoke was known to be a Man, and not God.

It Is likely the beforementioned is the true Interpretation of the objected
Texts; and it is certainly so, if Thomas meant those words to our Savior: But
diverse Learned Persons, even among our Opposers, have been of Opinion, that My
Lord, and my God (or, O my Lord! O my God!) are only words of Admiration and
Thanks directed (not to our Savior, but) to God; they are an Exclamation,
expressing the Apostle's Wonder and Amazement to find that his Master was
indeed risen. Of this Opinion was Nestorius Archbishop of Constantinople, and
that most Learned Person Theodorus of Mopsuest. It Is true, the Evangelist
says, Thomas answered, and said unto him, (unto Christ) My Lord, and my God!
or, O my Lord! O my God! but this hinders not, but that the Exclamation was
addressed to God as its Object, tho it was also an Answer to our Savior, and
to what he had said at ver. 27. See the Brief History of the Unitarians, on
John 20.28.

CHAP. VII. On the Texts out of the Epistles.
HE thinks much weight may be laid on Romans 9.5. Of whom, as concerning the
Flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Like to which Text
is Romans 1.3. Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the Seed of David,
according to the Flesh.

He says hereupon, that these words, According to the Flesh, and, as
concerning the Flesh, intimate plainly, that according to something else the
Lord Christ had another Original, and was not wholly of the Jews. This
something else is the (supposed) Divine Nature of our Savior; according to
which, say they, he is derived from God; as according to the Flesh, he is from
the Jews.

Our present Author notes farther, that the Lord Christ in the former of the
beforequoted Texts, is not only expressly called God, but God over all, blessed
for evermore; so all the Original Greek Copies read. And as for Translations,
if there are any which favor the Socinians, they are not however much to be
regarded. I answer,

1. As to the words, As concerning the Flesh, and According to the Flesh, they
never signify, as Trinitarians would here interpret, according to the Human
Nature, as if Christ had also a Divine Nature. We shall easily find the meaning
of those Phrases, by some other Texts of Scripture, in which there is no
Ambiguity: Romans 9.3. My Kinsmen according to the Flesh. Romans 4.1. Abraham our
Father, as pertaining to the Flesh. Col. 3.22. Servants, obey in all things
your Masters according to the Flesh. Will our Opposers say here, that Abraham,
or Paul's Kinsmen, or Masters, must be supposed to have a Divine Nature,
because of these words, According to the Flesh, and As concerning the Flesh?
It Is easy to see, that these Expressions are only as much as to say, According
to the Body; and that they signify to us, that Abraham is the Father of the
Jews, according to their Bodies, as God is the Father of their Souls and
Spirits; and the Jews were Paul's Kinsmen, according to the Body, but not of
Kin to him in respect of Likeness in Faith or Manners: also that Masters are
Masters over our Bodies, not of our Spirits and Minds. Therefore in the other
Texts also, where Christ is said to be the Seed of Abraham, of Israel and of
David, according to the Flesh: the real and whole meaning is this, That
according to his Body or outward Man, he descended of the House of David, and
of the Stock of Israel and Abraham, as had been promised concerning him in the
Prophets, but his Spirit or Soul was from God. Here again we interpret
Scripture by it self: let our Opposers show a Reason why they decline an
Interpretation which the Scripture it self affords to us, and how it comes to
be Heresy, to understand the meaning of one Text, by the help of such other
Texts as are confessed to be clear and evident?

2. He says, the former of these Texts expressly calls the Lord Christ God, and
God over all, blessed for ever; and that all Greek Copies agree in this
reading. But he might have taken notice out of Grotius, that the Greek Copies
used by the Author of the Syriac, had not the word God; they only say of our
Savior here, the Blessed, over all. The same illustrious Interpreter observes,
that Erasmus had noted, that the Copies of St. Cyprian, St. Hilary, and St.
Chrysostom, had only the Blessed over all, or above all, without the word God.
These are Observations which destroy our Author's Argument from this Text; but
because he knew not what to say to them, he took no notice of them: But it is
an impious thing for a Writer, to endeavor to cheat his Reader in such
Questions as these. When it appears by so great Authorities, that the Ancient
Reading was other ways than we read in our present Copies; or that the reading
was then various and uncertain; how can such Texts, or such Expressions be
admitted as Proofs, in so great a Question as this before us? Is it advisable
or safe, to argue against the Unity of God, or to build Articles of Faith on
suspected Texts? the Reading ought to be indubitable, else the Inference drawn
from it, will also be uncertain. An Article of Faith must have a sure
Foundation, else it is not Faith, but a precarious Conjecture.

3. But allowing now, that the Word God is rightly read in this Text; two of
the most eminent Critics, and principal Masters in the Greek Tongue, have
observed, that St. Paul's words should have been pointed, and read after this
manner: Of whom as concerning the Flesh, Christ is come; The God over all be
blessed for ever. Amen. So Curcellaeus and Erasmus translate here. According to
this Rendering, our Savior is not here called God over all; but the Apostle
gives Thanks to God over all, for his unspeakable Gift, our Lord Christ.

Our Author says, that if there be any Translations of this Text, which favor
the Socinians, they are not much to be regarded: But this is an Answer, fitter
for an Old Woman to make, than for a Writer in these Questions. Seeing He
undertakes to confute the Socinians, he ought to have shown, that the
Translation which confirms their Doctrine, is some-way faulty: He should have
answered the Critical Reason, which Erasmus and Curcellaeus give of their
Translation. They observe, that if the words [God over all] had been intended
of our Lord Christ; the Apostle should have said in the Greek, (...), not
(...): and I doubt not that our Author was aware that those Critics were in the
right; and therefore he willingly overlooked both the Translation, and the
Reason of it.

If you, Sir, say to me, this being a Critical Dispute, how should an Unlearned
Man be able to judge, which of the two Senses was intended by the Apostle? What
Ground can such a one have to say, the Trinitarian Translation is not Good?
Yes, he is as much qualified to judge, as the most Learned. For seeing the words
may be (confessedly by both Parcies) rendered two ways, he may be sure, that is
the true Reading and Rendering, which agrees with Evident Reason, and with the
rest of Scripture: both which allow of but one Person, who is God over all; and
if there were more such Persons, there must of necessity be more Gods. This
Reasoning directs him, which Side he is to take; not only in this Question, but
in all other Questions: Whatsoever the Question is, if a Text or Texts be
alleged, that may be translated several ways; that is the true Translation,
which is firmed by evident Reason, and other clear Texts; and that is a false
Translation, which would introduce an Opinion contrary to Reason, or to other
indisputable Texts. Therefore the Faith of the Unlearned, may be as certain and
well-grounded, as the Faith of the greatest Critic: for either other clear and
indisputable Texts, or a demonstrative Reason, presents it self, and dissolves
the Difficulties.

And if this were not so, it would not be the Duty of the Unlearned; nay,
'twould be contrary to their Duty, to be of any Persuasion or Party at all;
such must neither be Protestants nor Papists, Socinians nor Trinitarians,
Remonstrants nor Calvinists, nor of any other Sect, because of this Pretense,
that they cannot make a critical Judgment of different Translations. But no
Party will dare to say this: therefore say I, the Unlearned may, and have a
right to be of a particular Side and Persuasion; on this Account, that by help
of clear Texts, or of evident Reason, they may in all Questions easily discern,
which side they ought to take. I will add, that oft-times the Vnprejudiced and
Judicious unlearned Person, sees farther and clearer, than the Interessed,
Prejudiced and Vnjudicious Critic, or other Learned Person. But of this I have
said enough, in that General Preface to some of our Pamphlets; which has this
Title, An Exhortation to a Serious and Impartial Enquiry: where I show, that
this is the very Principle on which the Reformation proceeded; and that in
taking it away, the Reformation must fall, and we must all return to Rome.

His last Scripture-Allegation is from Phil. 2.5, etc. Let this Mind be in you,
which was in Christ Jesus: who being in the Form of God, thought it not robbery
to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took on him the
Form of a Servant; and was made in the Likeness of Man; and being found in
fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the
Death of the Cross. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name
above every Name.

Mr. Misb. has said but very little on this Context; Others of his Parcy have
made advantage of almost every Clause thereof. The Lord Christ, say they, was
in the Form of God: What can that mean, but that He was God? for the Form of a
thing, is the very Nature of it. And that this is a true Interpretation, we
certainly know by the next words, which say; He thought it not robbery to be
equal with God: Had He not been God, it had been the greatest Robbery and
Sacrilege possible, to think himself equal with God. It Is true, He humbled
himself, and took on him the Form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of
Men, and was found in fashion as a Man, and became obedient to the Death of the
Cross. But even these very Expressions are such, as plainly intimate, that all
this was nothing else but his Condescension; He sloop'd to these things, only
because for great and weighty Reasons He was pleased so to do. Of those Reasons
(or Ends) the Apostle here mentions one, to set us an Example: Let that Mind
(says he) be in you, which was in Christ Jesus; who being so Great a Person,
yet humbled himself to take the Form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness
of Man.

I will here, Sir, tell you a Story. A certain Countryman that happened to live
in a Parish, where the Minister used to insist very often on these Questions,
about the Divinity and the Incarnation of our Savior, turned down in his Bible
the Proofs alleged by his Minister; and being a Man, though of no Learning,
yet of a Good Capacity, he found at length how to satisfy himself of the
Insufficiency of all the Minister's Proofs, on be half of the Divinity of our
Savior: only he was puzzled with this Context out of the Philippians, that
Christ was in the Form of God, and thought it not robbery to be equal with God,
etc. After much thinking, he imagined that he could give a reasonable Account
even of this Context, all but that one Expression, He thought it not robbery to
be equal with God. Here he stuck; for if Christ be equal with God, sure he is
(as the Church says) a Person of God, or of the Deity, and the Trinitarian
Doctrine must be true. At length, it came into his mind, that there might be
some Error in the Translation; and therefore he asked his Minister, Whether the
words were altogether so in the true Bible, (so he called the Original Greek)
as they are in the English. Bible: I suspect, says he, that the word It (in
this Clause, he thought it not robbery to be equal with God) is not in what you
use to call the Original, and out of which you often correct our way of reading
in the English Bibles; I judge that the Apostle said only, He (Christ) thought
not robbery to be equal with God. The Minister was forced to confess, that It
was not in the Greek; and that it should have been printed, as the words of
Supplement usually are, in a different Character from the rest of the Verse.
But then, Sir, says the Countryman; If the Apostle says, that Christ thought
not robbery to be equal with God, it should feem, it would indeed have been
robbery, if he had thought himself equal with God: So that the Apostle's
meaning will be this; Jesus Christ conceived not this thing (this Robbery and
Sacrilege, in his mind, to be equal with God, or that he was equal with God.

This is my Tale; I assure you, Sir, I do not make it, I had it from a Friend
of Yours, whose Veracity you will not question: So true is it, that after all
the wretched Disguisings of Holy Scripture, by Translations grossly false, an
industrious and sagacious Enquirer, though Unlearned, may by himself enquire
out the great Truth of Christianity, the Unity of God. I confess, such have an
hard Task, because our Opposers have never owned in their Margin, any other
Reading or Rendering in the Texts controverted between them and us, but only
that which they have contrived to serve their own Turns: But by the Story I
have told you, it appears not to be impossible to find Truth, even without the
help of a better Translation.

Mr. Milbourn says, at Page 374. that this Context of the Apostle to the
Philippians, is so clear for the Divinity of our Savior, that Trinitarians may
refer themselves concerning this Matter, to the meerest Stranger to
Christianity, that has but read this Context. For what can be more plain? He
was in the Form of God, He thought it not robbery to be Equal with God; He
humbled himself to take the Form of a Servant, and the Likeness and Fashion of
a Man. In short, a Heathen would say, that the Person of whom these things are
spoken, must undoubtedly be more than Man or Creature.

This (he thinks) is a home Charge on the Socinians; but our Countryman would
have made our Author to abate a great deal of his Assurance: He would tell him,
it is true, Sir, the Lord Christ was in the Form of God; but so also are all
other Men; the Holy Scriptures inform us, that Adam and all other Men, are made
in the Similitude, Form or Likeness of God. Which is so far from proving, that
Adam, or Christ, are God, or a Person of God, that it demonstratively proves,
that neither of them is God; because what are like, are never the same. It Is
true, our Blessed Savior was more in the Form, Fashion, or Likeness of God,
than any other Man: for besides all that Resemblance that we have to God, by
our Reason, our Superiority over the Creatures, the immortal undying Nature of
our Souls; besides all this, He had a more perfect Holiness, and a Power and
Authority over Devils, Diseases, the Winds and Seas; and this Form of God was
given to the Lord Christ, that he might confirm by his Miracles that Holy
Doctrine which he was to deliver from God to Men. Thus the Countryman would
inlighten Mr. Milbourn's Heathen; concerning the first Expression, He was in
the Form (or Likeness) of God.

But then the Heathen would say farther; He (Christ) thought it not robbery to
be Equal to God.

You are mistaken, good Sir, says the Countryman, for our Apostle's words are,
He thought not robbery to be Equal with God: Of which, the plain meaning is; He
was not so Sacrilegious, as to think in his Mind, that because he had some
likeness to God, a far greater than any Man, or (perhaps) Angels, therefore He
was Equal with God. Because though He was so highly in the Form of God, yet he
remembers what he says elsewhere, All Power is GIVEN to me, Matthew. 28.18. But
on the contrary, the Power of him who is true God, is not given, but is
originally his own, the result of his own Eternal Nature.

As for those Expressions, He made himself of no Reputation, and took on him
the Form (or Likeness) of a Servant; they are thus to be understood: He
deelined the Esteem and Reputation of this World, by concealing the Miracles
which he did; charging (oft-times) those that were healed, not to divulge the
Matter: Nay, He took on him the Form of a Servant, by suffering Injury and
Reproach, without answering again; When he was reviled, he reviled not again.

The Apostle adds, That being in the likeness of Men, and found in fashion as a
Man, he humbled himself to the Death of the Cross. At these words begins a new
sense, neither is the word [And] prefixed to them in the Greek; their meaning
is this. Farther, tho Christ was in the Likeness or Form of God, by the
extraordinary Power and Authority granted to him; yet because he remembered,
that he was made in every respect in the common Likeness and Fashion of all
other Men, Like to his Brethren in all things, Sin excepted; therefore upon all
occasions he readily humbled himself; He even submitted himself to be taken,
and crucified by the Jewish and Roman Magistracy, tho He could most easily have
delivered himself from them, because He knew that by that kind of Death God
should be greatly glorified, and the Gospel confirmed. On this account, as well
as on some others, God has highly exalted him, and given to him the Name above
every Name, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Rev. 19.16.

Mr. Milb. craftily supposes, that his Heathen should conclude for the Divinity
of our Savior, from this only Context to the Philippians, without being before
acquainted with Christianity, or with Scripture: but why is He afraid to let
his Heathen be acquainted with Christianity and with Scripture, but only with
this Text? is it not because the Christian Profession of but one God, and the
express words of our Savior, My Father is greater than I; and again, I ascend
to my Father and you Father, to my God and your God: Is it not (I say) because
the knowledge of these other Texts, and very many the like, would make his
Heathen to interpret this place to the Philippians, as the Countryman did? But
he knows besides, that some of the principal Interpreters and Critics of his
own Party, have given up to the Unitarians this Context of St. Paul to the
Philippians; they ingenuously own, that this whole Discourse of the Apostle was
by him intended of our Lord Christ, as Man, and not as God: He may see a
considerable Collection of Authors, Fathers as well as Moderns, who make this
honest Confession: In Chr. Sandius his Interpret. Paradox, p. 359, 360. Among
the rest there cited, M. Luther (de dupl. Justitia) is very express and clear.

Let us, if you please, Sir, lay the whole Interpretation before given into one
view, that the Reader may more easily make a Judgment of it. Let such a Mind be
in you, O Philippians! as was in the glorious Head and Captain of our
Salvation, the Lord Christ. For He being in the Likeness or Form of God, by an
extraordinary Sanctity, and a miraculous Power over Diseases and Devils,
conferred on him by God; He did not (like Lucifer) conceive in his Mind that
Impiety and Robbery to be equal with God: but (on the contrary) He made himself
of no Reputation, and took the Likeness of a Man of Servile Condition, by
concealing the great Miracles which he did, and by bearing Injuries and
Reproaches, without answering again. Being made in the Likeness of all other
Men, and found in the common Fashion of a Man; He submitted to be taken by the
Jews, and to undergo the Death of the Cross, for the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of Men. And because He was thus affected toward God's Honor, and
the Good of Men; therefore has God highly exalted him, making him Head of the
Church, both that in Heaven, and that on Earth; and giving to him that Name
above every Name, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. But hitherto of the
Concertation between Mr. Milbourn's Heathen and our Country man; I submit to
the Reader, which of them has best understood St. Paul.

But I desire you, Sir, to consider, what wild Work our Opposers make with
these Words and this Context of St. Paul; and how they make no scruple to
render him guilty of the most palpable Self-Contradictions in one and the same
Breath. The Lord Christ, says this Apostle, was in the Form of God; that is,
say our Opposers, he had the very Nature of God, or was truly and really God;
and He thought it not Robbery (so They make the Apostle to speak) to be equal
with God. Now, if He was God, how could He be equal with God? for nothing is
ever said to be equal with it self: Equality and Likeness must be between
several and diverse things.

Well, He was God, and was equal with God, and yet made himself of no
Reputation, took on him the Form of a Servant, was made in the likeness and
fashion of Men; nay, humbled himself to Death, even the Death of the Cross. But
it is both Morally and Physically, or naturally impossible, that God should do
any of these things, undergo any of these Changes. Why do they not perceive,
that. He who is true God, cannot make himself of no Reputation; or take the
Form of a Servant, the Likeness and Fashion of Men; or submit himself to Death?

The Apostle goes on, Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him
a Name which is above every Name. O strange! God exalts God, and gives to him
(which implies that He had it not before) a Name above every Name. I would
know, what Name could be given to him above the Name he had before?

I do not pretend, Sir, that they own this Interpretation in the very terms I
have here set it down: but this I say, that admitting their Hypothesis, that
the Lord Christ is true God; this and no other was, I must not say the
Apostle's Sense, but his meaning it was. You may please, Sir, to compare it
with that easy and natural Paraphrase of the Socinians, which was before
mentioned, and then tell me, which of them would be chosen even by a (sensible)
Heathen, to whom our Opposer has thought fit to make his Appeal.

CHAP. VIII. On what he objects from the Actions or Miracles of our Savior.
AFter he has done with particular Texts, our Author (from P. 381.) spends some
Sheets in recounting certain Actions of our Savior, by which it may appear
that he was true God, that one true God whom the Scriptures every where
propound to us, as the only legitimate Object of Faith and Worship. He says,
for instance, our Savior did many wonderful Miracles, and that too in his own
Name, not as the Minister or Instrument of another, but in a commanding way; as
when he rebuked the Winds and Waves, and cast out Devils. He healed Diseases by
a Virtue issuing from himself; as appears by the Woman who was cured by only
touching his Garment, and by his own words thereupon, Virtue is gone out of me.
Nor did he cure only the Distempers of the Body, but those of the Mind and
Soul; for he invited to him the weary and heavy-laden, promising that he would
give them Rest; which is a sort of Language never used by any Prophet, or mere
Man: nay, he forgave to diverse their Sins, which ('it is certain) only God can do.

As a farther Display of his Divinity, it is said of him, He knew what was in
Man; and he says of himself, I am He which searches the Reins and Heart.
There can be no greater Omniscience than this, nor can Omniscience belong to
any but God.

After his Resurrection, He openid the Understandings of his Disciples.

He breathed on them, and thereby conferred the Holy Spirit, which being God's
Inspiration, even in the Opinion of the Socinians, How can it be given by any
but God?

Afterward He himself shed on them the same Holy Spirit in a miraculous
manner, when he caused the Spirit to descend on them, in the likeness of cloven
Tongues: but if he were not God, how should he give the Spirit of God to others?

They are his own words to his Disciples, As my Father sent me, so send I you;
but that could not be said by him, if he had not the same Authority (or were
not equal) with the Father.

After his Ascension his Disciples did their Miracles in his Name, or only by
Faith in him; but no mere Man can enable another to do Miracles; nor can Faith
in a mere Man avail to that purpose.

Lastly, He sent St. Paul to be a Minister to the Gentiles, to convert them to
God; that so, says he, they may have Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance
among those who are sanctified by Faith in me; or by believing in me. And in
doing all this, says he farther to that Apostle, I will deliver thee from the
People, and the Gentiles, to whom I send thee; Acts 26.16, 17, 18. Mr. Milb.
seems to think there is a great Force in these Allegations, toward the
evincing that the Lord Christ was indeed God; and with these Proofs he
concludes his present Argument from Scripture. Let us examine what he has
said, part by part.

He says, first, our Savior did Miracles, in his own Name, not as the
Minister or Instrument of another. But this is not the Language of Scripture;
the express words of our Savior, and the whole current of Scripture are
against it. John 17.28. I am not come of my self. John 5.43. I am come in my
Father's Name. John 5.30. I can do nothing of my self. Mat. 12.28. I cast out
Devils by the Spirit of God. John 14.10. The Father that dwilleth in me (to
wit, by his Spirit) be does the Works. Acts 2.22. Jesus of Nazareth, a Man
approved of God among you, by Miracles, Wonders and Signs which God did by him
in the midst of you. Assuredly these Texts declare as evidently as in words can
be done, that the Lord Christ was no more than the Instrument and Minister of
God, and of his Spirit, in working Miracles; and that it was in the Father's
Name, not in his own, that he appeared and acted.

But he healed Diseases by a Virtue issuing from himself; for he said, Virtue
is gone out of me. That there was a Balsamic and Sanative Virtue in the Body
of our Savior, I will not deny; but neither can it be denied, that the like
Virtue was also given by God to the Bodies of some of the Apostles: for
Handkerchiefs from their Bodies, and their Shadows healed many, Acts 5.15. and
19.12.

Nor is there any more Force in that, that the Lord Christ invites to him the
Heavy-laden, promising to give them Rest to their Souls. For he gave Rest to
Souls sensible of the Guilt and Burden of Sin, by his Doctrine; which every
Gospel-Preacher may do, nay, ought to do. A Gospel-Preacher is to declare to
the Sensible and Penitent, the Forgiveness and Absolution of God, and thereby
gives them Rest and Peace.

But it is mavelous that this Author should urge it as a Proof of our
Savior's Divinity, that He declared to some Persons, whose Faith appeared in
visible Acts of Piety and Trust in God, that their Sins were forgiven; for sure
he knows what is said to the Apostles at John 20.23. Whose Sins ye remit, they
are remitted; and whose Sins ye retain, they are retained. Let him show, if he
can, that our Savior ever claimed any higher Authority or Power than the
Apostles are here vested with, by Command from God. But I think it were not
hard to prove, that in all these Texts, the word Sins is put for the Effect of
Sins, even Diseases, so as to make this sense; that our Savior and his
Apostles had Authority and Power, either to loose Men from their Infirmities
and Ails, or to leave them in them, as they should see reason and cause, either
for the Spiritual Benefit of the Person, or for Confirmation of the Gospel, by
such Signs and Wonders.

Our Lord Christ knew what was in Man, says the Evangelist St. John. But he
does not say, that he knew it of himself, by a Natural Omniscience, without
Revelation from God.

The Prophet Ahijah knew what was in the Mind of the Queen of Israel, 1 Kings
14.6. Elisha knew what his Servant Gehazi had done, and what he purposed, 2
Kings 5.22. The same Prophet knew the Counsels that the King of Syria took
against the King of Israel, 2 Kings 6.9, 12. He told Hazael, not only what was
in his Heart, but what should be there in time to come, 2 Kings 8.12. The Holy
Scriptures do not expressly say, that the Knowledge which these Prophets had of
what was in Man; or, what is the same thing, the secret Thoughts of their
Hearts, was only derivative, or by God's Revelation: They supposed there was no
need to instruct or warn the Reader concerning a matter that was self-evident.
But, as if foreseeing the monstrous Doctrine that some would advance concerning
the great Minister and Prophet of the New Testament, the Lord Christ; and
designing to arm the Faithful against it; they have been careful to tell us
directly and explicitly, that the Prophetic Knowledge that was in him, was
derivative, or by Revelation from God, not from himself, or by a Natural
Omniscience of his own. Rev. 1.1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God
gave to him, to show unto his Servants things that must shortly come to pass.
And He (Christ) sent and signified it by his Angel (or, by his Messenger) to
his Servant John. How can a considering Man doubt, that if our Savior knew the
things which must very shortly come to pass, only by God's Revelation of them
to him; that his Knowledge too of what was in the Hearts and Minds of Men, must
be also by God's Revelation, or the Inhabitation of the Spirit of God in him?

But our Author urges, that the Lord Christ says, I am He which searches the
Reins and Hearts: Rev. 2.23.

He ought to know, that to search the Heart and Reins, is an Hebrew and
Scripture Phrase and form of speaking, and signifies no more but this, to know
the most secret Thoughts and Purposes of the Mind and Heart. This is a Property
that can belong only to God, to know (or, as the Hebrew speaks, to search) the
Hearts and Thoughts, if you mean thereby, originally, or of himself, or by his
own natural and proper Omniscience: but the Prophets, and more especially the
Lord Christ, know the Hearts and Reins by God's Revelation to them, and search
the Thoughts by the inhabiting Spirit of God in them. When therefore our
Savior says here, I search the Hearts, he meant this, I know the Thoughts of
the Heart, by God's Revelation to me, or by his Inhabiting Spirit in me. In a
word, God only knows the Thoughts of the Heart, and what is in Man,
originally, of himself, or by his own proper and natural Omniscience: But
Prophets search or know the Hearts, and what is in Man, secondarily,
derivatively, by God's Revelation to them, by his inhabiting Spirit in them. We
are assured that this last only was our Savior's meaning, in these words, I
search the Hearts; by the first words of this Book of Revelation, before
quoted, even these, The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him.
There could be no need that God should make a Revelation to him, if he himself
knew the Reins and Hearts by a natural Omniscience of his own.

We are not therefore to stick at the meet words, I search the Heart, but to
consider the Import or Sense of that Phrase in the Scripture Language; which
signifying only this, to know the Thoughts of the Heart or Mind; they do not
prove the Person of whom they are spoken, to be Omniscient, or God, unless it
had been said He searches (or He knows) the Hearts by his own Omniscience,
and not (as it is said of our Savior) by Revelation from God, or God's
inhabiting Spirit.

When the Lord Christ opened the Understandings of the two Disciples, that they
might understand the Scriptures; this was not an Act of his Power, but the
Effect of the Discourse he made to them: He opened their Understandings, to
understand the Prophetic Scriptures, by explaining those Scriptures to them.

He conferred a Measure of the Holy Spirit, by the External Sign of breathing
on the Disciples. We can no more infer from hence that he was God, than that
the Apostles also were so many Gods, because they gave the Spirit by the
External Sign of laying on their Hands, Acts 19.6. The latter was as great a
Miracle as the former, and both of them the effect of God's Power, not of Man's.

But it is false, what our Author here adds; that our Lord Christ did Himself
shed on them the Holy Spirit, when he caused the Spirit to descend on them in
the form of Cloven Tongues. The Apostle indeed says, He (Christ) has shed
forth this (this miraculous Participation of the Spirit) which ye now see and
hear: But he says not, as our Author reports his words, He himself has shed
forth this which ye now see and hear; for it was not He himself, but He by the
Gift of God, that shed forth the Spirit on them. Let us hear the whole Verse,
Acts 2.23. Therefore He (Christ) being by the right Hand of God exalted; and
having received (or obtained) of the Father, his Promise of the Holy Ghost; He
has shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. Here indeed the Spirit is said
to be shed forth by the Lord Christ on the Apostles, but not by Him himself;
but He shed it forth, having (says the Text) received it of the Father. As who
should say, having received this Power from the Father, which afterward the
Apostles also received of the Father, even the Power of conferring the Spirit:
He now shed it forth on them; not He himself, by his own Authority or Power,
but by the Warrant, Order, Grant or Commission of the Father. If our Savior
had conferred the Spirit on his Disciples, by his own Power or Authority, it
would not have been said; that having received of the Father his Promise of the
Holy Ghost, he shed it abroad on his Followers.

Let our Opposers show, that the Lord Christ was more than the Instrument,
Minister and Mediator, by Whom, and at whose Instance, God shed forth the
Spirit: neither this, nor any other Context ascribes more to him; and as much
as is elsewhere ascribed to the Apostles, Acts 10.44. Acts 19.6.

They are words which our Savior speaks to his Disciples; As my Father has
sent me, even so send I you. But it follows not from hence, that the Authority
and Power of Christ, was equal to the Power and Authority of the Father: nay,
the contrary rather follows; for the Messenger is but the Minister and Servant
of the Sender.

After Jesus was ascended into Heaven, his Disciples did their Miracles in his
Name; and by Faith in him. Acts 3.6. In the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, rise up
and walk. Ver. 16. His Name, through Faith in his Name, has made this Man
strong.

We confess hereupon, that Miracles were done by the Name, or in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and through Faith in his Name: But how does this prove that he
was God? Such Miracles prove indeed, that the Person in whose Name they are
done, is a most Powerful and Effectual Mediator with God, but not that He
himself is God; they prove, that he is acceptable to God; and that what he
desires, that also God wills; but not that he is the true and proper Author
of those Miracles. It Is a particular Honor that God is pleased to do to the
Lord Christ, that in his Name Wonders should be done; and that some who
believed in his Name, should on that account be enabled to do Miracles: But
when our Opposers infer from hence, therefore Christ is God, this is no
Necessary or Natural Consequence; because nothing hinders but that God may
confer the same Honor on any other Person or Thing. Nor, secondly, is it a
true Consequence; because we are assured, by innumerable express and clear
Testimonies, that the Lord Christ is not God. As, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God,
and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Jesus Christ.

Finally; Our Lord promised, that he would deliver his Apostle from the People,
and from the Gentiles; and declares, that we are sanctified by Faith in his
Name, or by believing in him, Acts 26.17, 18, etc. He delivered indeed that
Apostle, from very many Machinations of the Jews, and Conspiracies of the
Gentiles; but all this as Mediator, not as God: by his Intercession, which (as
this Apostle says) he ever lives to make, on behalf of all the Faithful; and
more especially of such as are extraordinarily commissioned to the Work of
propagating the Gospel in Heathen Nations, as St. Paul was.

As to our being sanctified ( i. e. made Holy) by Faith in Christ, or by
believing in him, it was never questioned, I think, by any; but the meaning of
the Expression is only this, that such as sincerely believe the Lord Christ,
and the Gospel or Doctrine by him delivered, do sanctify themselves; they
refrain from every Evil Work and Word; their Faith does dispose and incline
them, of its own Nature and Tendency, to Sanctification and Holiness; this is
the only meaning of our being sanctified by Faith in Christ.

CHAP. IX. On what is alleged from the Fathers.
OUR Author passes from sacred Authorities, to Ecclesiastical and Profane, for
proving the Doctrines of the Trinity, and the Divinity and Incarnation of our
Savior.

He quotes the Account which Pliny gives to the Emperor Trajan, concerning the
Christians; that they were wont to meet before Day, Et Carmen Christo canere ut
Deo, To sing Psalms to Christ as if he were a God.

He cites also a Dialogue, supposed to be Lucian's, in which that Author jeers
the God who is Three and One. These two Authors were very Ancient, within about
100 Years after Christ; and their words (before quoted) show, How early the
belief of the Trinity, and of the Divinity of our Savior was found among
Christians.

For Ecclesiastical Writers, he brings some Fragments out of Justin, Ignatius,
Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Tertullian, Arnobius, Cyprian,
Lactantius, Gregory Thaumaturgus, Faelix; also out of the Councils of Nice,
Antioch, and Constantinople.

He says; the Socinians are apt to appeal in these Questions, to the
Ante-Nicen Fathers before-named; and that several great Men, such as Erasmus,
Grotius, Petavius, and others, yield this Point to Us.

I will make no Advantage of our Author's Ignorance in this Matter; I will
freely own to you, Sir, that the Socinians never Appeal (in these Questions) to
the Fathers, whether Ante-Nicen, or others, who are now extant. We grant, they
were in Sentiments very different from ours, all the Ante-Nicen Fathers, I
mean, whose works have been suffered to come down to our Times, were in the
Opinion (concerning God and the Lord Christ) afterward called Arrianism;
except (perhaps) Clemens Alexandrinus, who seems to have held the same with
Savellius.

Nor do Erasmus, Petavius, Grotius, and other Critics grant to us, as he
supposes, that the Ante-Nicen Fathers were of our Opinion; they have granted
those Fathers, not to us, but to the Arrians. They grant, those Fathers did not
hold the Doctrine of the Trinity, or of the Divinity of our Savior, in such
manner as it is now held by the Church; for the Church holds a Trinity of Three
Coequal and Coeternal Persons, all of them jointly and equally Creators, none
of them Creatures: but those Fathers held a Trinity, in which only the First
Person is truly God, or the most high God; the Second and Third are Creatures,
though also they were the Creators (according to these Fathets) of the other
Creatures. They say inded sometimes, that the Son is Coeternal, and a Creator:
but by Coeternal they mean only, that he was not made in Time, but in that
Eternity which did precede Time, and the Creation of the World. They call that
Duration, Time, which began with the World, and which is both Made and Measured
by the Motion of the Sun, and other Heavenly Bodies; and that Duration is by
them called Eternity, which preceded those Bodies, and the Motions which make
Time. Therefore when they call the Son, Coeternal; which (I think) is not found
in all their Writings above once or twice; they do not mean, that He was Really
and Actually Coexistent with the Father from all Eternity: But it is their
Intention to say, He was made by the Father in that Duration which Philosophy
calls Eternity, some space before the World was made, that he might be the
Father's Instrument and Minister in creating all things. Hereby they
acknowledge, that the Son was in some sense a Creator, and God; but it was only
as He was the Father's Minister, Instrument and Servant (those are the Terms
they use) in making all things: He was a Creator and God, with respect to all
other Creatures, but with respect (say they) to the true and most high God, He
is only a Servant and a Creature.

In a word, the Ante-Nicen Fathers ( i. e. those of the first 325 Years) whose
Works have been suffered to be extant, neither held as the Unitarians do, that
the Lord Christ began to have a Being, when He was born of the Virgin; nor as
the Church now does, that He was true God, and always actually Coexistent with
God: but they held with the Arrians, that He was Created, Begotten, or Made,
(for these are, with them, equivalent Terms) in that Tract or Duration which is
called, not Time, but Eternity; and that He was the Father's Servant and
Instrument, in making first the Holy Ghost, then the rest of the Creation.

This is that which is granted by Petavius, Huetius, Mornay, Erasmus, Grotius,
and other Critics on the Fathers; not (as our Author supposes) that those
Fathers held the Doctrine concerning God, and our Lord Christ, that is now
called Socinianism.

But though this be so, yet we doubt not that we are able to prove, that the
general Body of Christians, and an incomp^^able majority of their Learned Men,
believed as the Unitarians now do, till about the Times of Victor and Zephi^in.
Bishops of Rome; that is, till toward the Year of our Lord 180.

It has not availed our Opposers, that they have suppressed the works of those
most Ancient Fathers, who are known and confessed to have been Unitarians, such
as Aquila, Symmachus, and Theadotion, who so excellently translated the Hebrew
Bible into Greek; and Lucianus, who restored the Greek Copiet to their first
Integrity: Artemas and Theodorus, Men (noted by their Adversaries to have been)
incomparably Learned, and ancienter than any of the Orthodox Fathers, as we now
call them. Paul also Patriarch of Antioch, Photinus Archbishop of Sirmium,
Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra: I say, it has not advantaged our Opposers, that
they have destroyed the Writings of these Fathers; for the Fathers that are
still extant, give us an account of the Opinion of those other Fathers, tho
concealing their Arguments. Moreover, they confess, that those first Unitarians
claimed to be the true Successors and Descendents of the Apostles, and that
they derived their Doctrine from them. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 28.

Besides this, the only Creed of all the Churches till the Council of Nice, and
which is called the Aposties Creed (because it contains the true Apostolic
Tradition) is confessed on all hands to be wholly Unitarian. That Creed
acknowledges but one God, the Father Almighty; and but one only Son of God;
even him (says this Creed) who was conceived, generated or begotten by the
Holy Ghost on the Virgin Mary; not (as our Opposers feign) an Eternal Son,
begotten of the Essence of God his Father. But I will not, Sir, now dilate on
these things, it shall be done in a Treatise by it self, if it please God to
give me Leisure and Opportunity: in the mean time I appeal to those Learned
Critics, Petavius and others before mentioned, that the ordinary pretense of
such Scriblers and Sciolists as our Author, is utterly false and ungrounded,
even this, that the Ante-nicen Fathers held the Doctrine of the Trinity, as the
Church now does.

As for the Scoffs of Lucian on the God who is Three and One, One and Three,
not having the Book by me, I cannot tell, whether he meant to jeer the Trinity
of the Platonic Philosophers, or of the Christians; I conjecture he means the
former.

Neither was he so ancient as some give out; the best Critics make him to have
flourished about the Year of our Lord 176, when the new Doctrines were grown
very rise and common.

The Account that Pliny gives of the Christians to the Emperor Trajan, is
ancient; but (in the particular objected to us) very uncertain. The Copies of
Pliny in Tertullian's Time, expressed the matter thus, Ad canendum Christo and
Deo, They sang Psalms of Praise to Christ and to God; not (ut Deo) to Christ as
God. The very words of Tertullian are these; Pliny in his Letter to Trajan,
objects nothing else to them, but that they were obstinate in refusing to
sactifice: and that they held (caetus ante lucanos, ad canendam Christo and
Dio) Meetings before day, to sing to Christ and to God. Tertul. Apol. adv.
Gentes, c. 3. I make use of an Edition of Tertullian, with the Notes of all the
Critics, published by Rigaltius at Paris; yet none of them dislikes the
Reading by Tertullian, or prefers to it the Modern Reading.

But admitting now, that we were to read ut Deo, as to a God: Pliny in these
words might speak only his own Opinion, not the Opinion of the Christians: He
might conjecture, that because the Christians sang certain Compositions in
Praise of the Lord Christ in their Meetings, therefore they held him to be a
God. Or, ut Deo, may be translated, as if he were a God; so as to make this
sense: They sing Psalms and Hymns to Christ, as if he were a God, whom
themselves confess to have been a Man; for Hymns are not usually sung but only
to the Gods. However it be, this Citation makes not much to the purpose; at
most, it only proves, that even in Pliny's time, some began to corrupt the
Evangelical Doctrine concerning the Unity of God.

CHPA. X. On diverse Passages out of the Evangelists and Epistles.
FRom the Fathers, our Author returns again to the Scriptures, and advances an
Argument to prove our Savior's Divinity from those Texts which seem to
intimate, that the Lord Christ is to be prayed unto; and also from others, in
which it is said, that even while he was upon Earth, he was worshipped by some,
and did not refuse the worship paid to him.

He says, no Person can be the proper Object of Divine Worship, such as Prayer
is, but He who is Omniscient, Omnipotent, and Omnipresent; and that if the
Socinians ascribe these Properties to our Savior, they make him to be true God.

That Jesus Christ was worshipped, and that he ought to be worshipped, he
proves from these Texts; Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. God has highly exalted him, and
given to him a Name above every Name: That at the Name of Jesus every Knee
should bow, of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and things under the
Earth; And that every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. Mat.
28.16, 17. The eleven Disciples went away into Galilee, into a Mountain where
Jesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they worshipped him. With
others the like.

Then for praying to him, there are these Texts: Mat. 8.25. Lord, save us, or
we perish. Luke 17.5. Lord, increase our Faith. Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus, receive
my Spirit. 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart
from me: but he said to me, My Grace is sufficient for thee. -- Therefore I
will rather glory in my Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest upon me.
1 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12. God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
direct our way to you. 1 Cor. 1.2. To all that (in every place) call upon the
Name of the Lord Jesus. To which last there are several other Texts which are
Parallels.

Of the Invocation of Christ.
That we are to pray not only to God, but also to the Lord Christ, is held by
very many of the Unitarians themselves; from the time that G. Blandrata and F.
Socinus carried this Point against their Opposers in the Conferences and Synods
of Poland.

Socinus and his Party urged, as Mr. Milb. here does, that the Apostle says,
To all who in every place call on the Name of the Lord Christ. It was answered,
that the words of this, and other the like Texts, should have been rendered, To
all who in every place are called by the Name of the Lord Christ; i. e. who
from Christ are called Christians. It was said further, that admitting the
Vulgar Translation, yet to call on the Name of Christ, imports no more but
this, even to call on his Name in Prayer; that is, to go to God in the Name of
Christ, calling on his Name, as that only Name by which we can be heard.

Socinus alleged the words of the same Apostle, God himself even our Father,
and the Lord Christ, direct our way to you. It was answered, that this, and
what follows, is not a formal Prayer; but the Apostle desires and wishes that
his Journey to Thessalonica may be directed and prospered by God, as the
Fountain of all good and favorable Providence, and by the Lord Christ as the
Mediator who cantinually interceeds for all necessary Benefits for the
Faithful, both Temporal Benefits and Spiritual. It Is in the same manner that we
are to interpret the next words, The Lord make you to abound and increase in
Love: for the Efficiency of the Lord Christ (if he be the Person here meant) in
conferring Grace of any kind, is only by his Mediation, the general Mediation
he makes for all the Faithful.

Socinus went on; The Apostle says concerning the Thorn (or Temptation) in his
Flesh, that he besought the Lord thrice concerning it: who answered, My Grace
is sufficient for thee from whence the Apostle concludes, that he will glory in
his Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest on him. But it was said, the
Lord to whom the Apostle prayed, is the Lord God, not the Lord Christ; and by
those words, I will glory in my Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest
on me; He means, he will even boast and rejoice in his Infirmities, seeing they
are the occasion of manifesting the Power of Christ; namely, the Virtue and
Power of Christ's Mediation with God, the Effects of which do rest on him, and
on all the Faithful.

Socinus alleged St. Stephen's dying words, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit.
They replied, every one may see in the Original, that it should have been
translated, O Lord of Jesus, ( i. e. O God) receive my Spirit.

There was good reason why St. Stephen should use this Form, O Lord of Jesus,
rather than barely O my God, or any such like: for being tried and condemned
for his Faith in Christ Jesus, it was proper to make mention of him, and to
bear Testimony to him with his very last and dying words. It were enough for
another to say, O Lord God, receive my Spirit: But a Martyr for Christ, and the
first Martyr very properly said, O thou Lord of Jesus, for whose Name and
Profession I suffer, receive my Spirit.

I know not whether Socinus urged the words of the Apostles to our Savior,
Lord, increase our Faith; and again, Lord, save us, or we perish: I judge he was
more judicious than to trifle after such a manner. For when they say, Increase
our Faith, and save us from sinking in this Storm: they undoubtedly meant, that
he should increase their Faith, by his Prayers to God for them; and that he
should save them from sinking, by that miraculous Power which Prophets have
over the Works of Nature: as when Elisha made Iron to swim; when he blinded the
Host of the Syrians; when Moses divided the Red Sea, and Joshua broke down the
Walls of Jericho. That this is a true Interpretation, we learn from the words
of the Apostles, when the Storm ceased, and the Danger was over; What manner of
MAN, say they, is this, that even the Winds and Sea obey him? They cried not
our, as Mr. Milbourn and his Fellow Lycaonians do, The Gods are come down to us
in the likness of Men: but as sober Men bred up in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and to the acknowledgment of one only God; What manner of MAN is
this? How great a Prophet, whom both the Sea and Winds obey?

The first Unitarians, who contended that we ought to pray only to God, thought
that they very much confirmed the beforementioned Answers, by urging first,
that our Savior being consulted about the Object and the Matter of Prayers,
answered; When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven. As who should say,
God is the only Object of Prayer, you can address to no other but to Him: but
go to him as to your Father, with the ingenuous Assurance of Children, not the
Dread and Awe of mere Creatures and Vassals. Secondly, Speaking also of the
time of his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, he says, John 16.23. In
that day ye shall ask me nothing: -- Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
Name (calling on my Name) be will give it you. Elsewhere he says, I will give
it you; meaning, by his Intercession with God. It Is plainly as much as to say;
Hitherto you have asked many things of me, because I am present with you to
intercede for you; but the time is coming, when ye can ask me nothing, because
I shall be taken from you; but be comforted, and ask immediately of the Father,
calling on my Name, he will give you whatsoever you shall ask, if it be good
for you. Thirdly; To make Christ himself the Object to which we pray, is to
destroy his Mediatory Office: For if he hears our Prayers, and both can and
does (by a Power constantly vested in him, as Socinus supposes) relieve our
Wants; to what purpose is he appointed to be our Advocate and Intercessor with
God?

How unlike, and utterly inconsistent, are these two Sayings; this of Socinus,
We may and ought to pray to the Lord Christ as He who can himself help us; and
this (contrary) saying of the Apostle, He (Christ) it able to save to the
uttermost All that come unto God by him, ( i. e. that pray to God, calling on
his Name, or for his sake) seeing He ever lives to make Intercession for them.
What can be more evident, than that here Christ's saving us from the Evils,
which we either fear or labor under, is ascribed not to his own Inherent
Power, but to the Power of his Intercession or Mediation with God? Which
Mediation is not to be understood of a Verbal or Personal Mediation, proceeding
from a particular knowledge of our Wants or Prayers; but of a general Mediation
for All, by his Merits; that is, by the perfect Obedience, and most acceptable
Services that he has performed to God.

The truth is, Socinus, and the Socinians properly so called, do not own the
Mediatory Office of Christ: But they make him to be a Mediator, not that He
intercedes for us, but because He is Medius inter Deum and Homines, between God
and Men; being vested with a Power from God, to bestow on the Faithful, all
necessary and convenient Things; in a word, He is not an Intercessor for Us,
but a King to protect and help us.

Thus Volkelius (as he has been published, perhaps corrected, by Crellius)
says, Etiam s^^nunc, etc. i. e. Although Christ did now pray for us, which yet
we do not grant, it will not follow that He himself may not be prayed unto; for
nothing hinders, but that he who prays to another, may also be prayed to. De
vera Relig. Lib. 5. c. 30. p. 618.

For my own part, I do not affirm any thing upon this Question; but I have
mentioned these Arguments and Replies, that it may appear, that if our present
Opposer (Mr. Milb.) does indeed say true, that Person must needs be God, who
may be prayed unto; yet it will not follow, therefore the Lord Christ is God;
because it cannot be demonstratively proved, that there is any real
Scripture-ground for praying unto him.

But he will still urge* that at least those Unitarians who contend for the
Invocation of the Lord Christ, are within danger and reach of his Objection;
even this, that they must ascribe to Christ an Omniscience, Omnipotence, and
Omnipresence; which are the very Attributes, the essential Attributes of the
One true God.

I do not think this is a necessary Consequence; they do not make another God
by their praying to the Lord Christ: it does not follow, that He is
Omnipresent, Omniscient and Omnipotent, because it is supposed and held, that He
may be prayed unto, and also can supply all our Wants.

First, For Omniscience. It Is the General Opinion of all Sects and Parties of
Christians, that the glorified Saints have more than a Prophetic Knowledge, by
what which the Schools have called the Beatifick Vision; or, as the Apostle
speaks, by seeing God as he is. The Benefit of the Beatifick Vision, shall be
to Persons, in proportion to their Labor of Duty and Love, which they have
showed to the Service of God: Therefore our Lord Christ in his present
Glorified State, may have such a perfect sight of God, as to see in him, the
Desires and Prayers, the Distresses, Defects and Perfections of such as call
upon God in his Name. The Fathers and Schools do suppose, that the Saints in
Heaven know very many things, both past and to come, by the Beatifick Vision;
and that the Conversation in Heaven is not by Speech or Words, but by Intuition
or Vision, or some the like way: It Is not therefore irrational, or bordering on
Idolatry, or on Polytheism; if we suppose, that by the same Beatifick Vision,
our Prayers are known to the Lord Christ, especially considering, that He is
the Appointed Mediator for us.

Next for Omnipotence and Omnipresence; the Lord Christ may be able to succors
us in Wants, both Temporal and Spiritual, without our supposing either that He
is Omnipresent or Omnipotent: For the Omnipotence of God can confer even on
things Insensible, a miraculous Power; nay such a Power as can effect Miracles
at the greatest distance. Thus the Bones of the Prophet had Power to restore a
dead Man to Life: The Brazen Serpent healed such as did but look toward it from
a distant Place. But if such Virtue as this could be given to inanimate Things;
the Divine Wisdom may have Reasons, and the Divine Omnipotence has an Ability
to enable the Lord Christ to do Miracles, as far as from Heaven to Earth; and
such Miracles too, as reach the Minds as well as the Bodies of Men.

We know not the Philosophy, or the Manner of the thing: but as it is
(undeniable) not impossible; so it is an Hypothesis more rational, and
infinitely more safe and pious, than to multiply Gods; or what is the same
thing, (only in other words) Divine Persons, as our Trinitarian Opposers do.

I shall only add farther, upon this Subject of the Invocation of Christ; that
whereas it is a Question, that has very much divided the Unitarians, Whether the
Lord Christ may be prayed unto? There is no cause why the should not bear with
one another, notwithstanding their dissent about this Question. For we have
seen, that He may be the Object of Prayer, without making him God, or a Person
of God; and without ascribing to him the Properties of the Divine Nature,
Omnipresence, Omniscience and Omnipotence. Nor (on the other hand) do such as
refuse to pray to any but God, dishonor the Lord Christ; even tho it be
supposed that He may be prayed to; because in refusing to pray to him, they
only refuse what they suppose that He himself has forbidden; which makes
their Error, if it be an Error, to be pure and mere Error, not Malice, not
Neglect or Contempt, which are the only things that are punishable by a just
Judge, whether such Judge be God or a Man. Which one thing, were it but
considered (as, I think, it is consest) by such as are Legislators, or Judges;
the Account they must give at last to God, would be much more comfortable and
tolerable for them, than now it is like to be.

Of the Adoration, or Worship of Christ.
That our Lord Christ is to be worshipped, was never made a Question by the
Unitarians; we doubt not, that the Angels of Heaven do worship him: the
Question is concerning the kind or sort of Worship. Trinitarians say, He is to
be worshipped as God: we say, He is to be worshipped, as one (that I may use
the Apostle's words) whom God has exalted to be a Prince and a Savior; or as
another Apostle speaks, as one whom God has given to be Head over all things
to the Church, Acts 5.31. Ephesians. 1.22.

There are three sorts of Worship; the first is Civil Honor or Worship; which
is given to Others on account of Civil Dignity, or Natural Endowments, or the
worthiness of the Rational Nature common to us all. This kind of Worship is due
more especially from Inferiors to Superiors; but is not to be neglected by
Superiors to Inferiors. Next there is Religious Worship, which we give to
others on account of their Holiness, or of their Relation to God: And it is more
or less, as their Sanctity or their Relation to God is greater or less; this
sort of Worship is due to holy Men and Women, to the Ministers of God and holy
Things, more yet to Prophets, above them to glorified Spirits and Angels. We
see in the Bible, that Religious Worship was expressed by Terms of great
deference and respect; such as My Father, and My Lord; and for outward Acts,
sometimes by Kneeling, sometimes by Prostration, sometimes other ways; as on
the other hand, they were sometimes accepted, sometimes refused. Lastly, There
is Divine Worship, which belongs only to God. It consists in a Resignation of
our Understandings to what God shall say or reveal; a Resignation of our Wills
and Desires to what he does or decrees; it is a giving up our Affections to love
him more than all things besides: It consists moreover in such external Acts
and Significations of Reverence and of Love toward him, as we reserve only for
him, and never give to any other.

I say now, the Texts cited and urged by our Opposer, do not prove, that the
Lord Christ ought to be worshipped with more than a Civil and Religious
Worship: there are no Acts of Worship ever required to be paid to him, but such
as may be paid to a Civil Power, to a Person in high Dignity and Office, or to
Prophets and holy Men, or to such as are actually possessed of the Heavenly
Beatitudes. What if it is said the Apostles worshipped (that is, kneeled to)
him, Mat. 28.17. and that to him every Knee both in Heaven and Earth shall bow?
Phil. 2.11. Let our Opposers show that the Apostles worshipped him, not as
their Master, but as their God; or that every Knee is to bow to him, not as to
a Superior Lord, but as to a Person who is true and most High God: till they
prove this, they prove nothing to the present purpose. We are well assured that
we can prove the contrary; because we can prove the Lord Christ was a Man, a
Person who for his holy Life and Death was exaited by God, which is
inconsistent with his being God, or a Person of God; and whatsoever Name he
has, that Name was gives to him by God; and whatsoever Worship is paid to him,
is paid to him for the Sake, by the Command, and to the Glory (that I may use
St. Paul's words) of God, the Father of all; Phil. 2.11.

CHAP. XI. Of the Satisfaction.
AFter having proved, as he thinks, the Divinity of our Savior, our Author
undertakes to prove too the vulgar Doctrine of the Satisfaction. He says, P.
683, 684. The Infinite Justice of God necessarily requires, that every Sinner,
nay, that every Transgression be punished. Therefore, says he farther, that
Mankind is pardoned, is an Effect of the Justice of God; to which Justice a
full Satisfaction being paid, by the Sufferings of the Lord Christ in our
stead; God could not evidence his Justice otherways than by granting Pardon and
Salvation to us. If God could pardon us freely, without a Satisfaction to his
Justice, why are not the fallen Angels pardoned?

At P. 706. he has contrived a Tale, or Romance, concerning a certain King, who
taking Pity of his Rebels, declared that they should be pardoned, if any Person
would be so kind to them, as to suffer in their stead: He tells us, the King's
only Son offered to suffer for them; and his Offer being accepted by his
Father, who dearly loved him, the Son died, and the Rebels were saved. And
this, he says, is exactly our case with God.

He pretends also to answer to some Objections made by the Socinians, against
the (pretended) Satisfaction to God's Justice by the Lord Christ for our Sins.
They object, that the Doctrine of a full Satisfaction to God's Justice on our
behalf, destroys the free Grace of God (so much magnified in holy Scripture) in
the gratuitous Pardon of our Sins: for if God received an Equivalent on our
behalf, he has not pardoned us, but only discharged or acquitted us, because
our Debt to his Justice has been paid for us by another. To this he answers,
Yes, the Grace and Pardon of God to us was most free: because tho our Debt to
God's Justice has been paid, yet not by us, but by a Person whom God himself
found out for us. Besides, the Satisfaction made for us by the Sufferings of
the Lord Christ, being a refusable Payment, because God might have required the
Satisfaction of our selves, or from us; therefore he is rightly said to have
pardoned us, and to have shown most free Grace and Favor to us, even tho an
Equivalent, and Satisfaction was made to his Justice on our behalf.

Again; They object, that God could not in Justice substitute a most worthy and
righteous Person to undergo Punishment, properly so called, in the place and
stead of unrighteous and worthless Persons; that were to pervert the Nature and
whole Design of that sort of Justice which is exercised about Rewards and
Punishments. He answers, God might punish the Lord Christ for us; First,
Because under the Law the innocent Beast was substituted to Death and
Punishment, by being made a Sacrifice for the Sin, and instead of the offending
Owner and Master: then, because the Lord Christ freely offered himself to
suffer in our room and stead.

Farther, they object, that the three days Death of the Lord Christ cannot be
equivalent, and therefore not a Satisfaction to the Justice of God for the
eternal Death and Damnation of one Sinner, much less of all Mankind. For,
supposing that the Value of Sufferings or Punishment is increased even to
Infinity, by the infinite Dignity of the Person that suffers; and supposing
again, that the Lord Christ being God as well as Man, was indeed a Person of
Infinite Dignity; yet seeing his Divinity could suffer nothing at all, but only
his Humanity; therefore his Sufferings were but human and finite, and
consequently no way commensurate to the infinite Punishment due to one Sinner,
much less to that of all Sinners. He replies, First, that to the account of the
Sufferings or Punishment of the Lord Christ, we must reckon all the Sufferings
of his Life, and especially his Agony in the Garden; which (our Author says)
was so great, that it was equivalent to that eternal Punishment prepared by God
for all impenitent Sinners, p. 749.

But lest the Agony in the Garden and on the Cross, should seem to any, to have
been too much short in time, to be laid in the Balance against the eternal
Damnation of all Mankind: Therefore he subjoins. 2. As our Sins are made
infinite, by their being committed against the Infinite Majesty of God: So the
Satisfaction of the Lord Christ for us by his Death and other Punishments was
also Infinite, on the account of God's Greatness to which that Satisfaction was
made, p. 662. That is, the Punishment of the Lord Christ was Infinite, because
he offered it to an Infinite God. He adds in the same place, God would never
have accepted the Sufferings of the Lord Christ instead of ours, if he had not
certainly known, that they were equivalent to the Punishments due to us for
Sin. 3. The Person that suffered for us was both God and Man, and thereby his
Sufferings were of an Infinite Value, and so equivalent to the Infinite
Punishment due to us: for tho the true God could neither die nor suffer; yet he
who was true God did both suffer and die, p. 663.

And because he understands not the true state of the Question and Difference
between the Unitarians and the Church, concerning the Satisfaction by our
Savior; he has objected to us a great number of Texts, which are no way
contrary to our Doctrine. He tells us from holy Scripture, that the Lord Christ
was wounded for our Transgressions, was bruised for our Iniquities; that we are
healed by his Stripes; that God has laid on him the Iniquity of us all; that
he made his Soul an Offering for Sin; that he was delivered for our Offenses;
that he bore our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, or Cross. To these he adds,
Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption which is
in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation for eur Sins; --
to declare his (God's) Righteousness, that he may be just, and the Justifier of
him that believes on Jesus.

This, Sir, is the Sum and Force of what our Author has discoursed at large
concerning the Satisfaction. He is so well assured of the Truth of his
Doctrine, that he ends his Book with twice imprecating on himself a Curse, if
he shall ever write or teach other ways than he has taught his Reader in this
present Book.

I will take a short view of all that he has said.

He says, first; The Infinite Justice of God requires, that every Sinner, nay,
that every Transgression be punished; and that when God pardons and saves
Sinners, this is an Act of his Justice; to which Justice a full Satisfaction
having been paid by the Lord Christ, God cannot be just other ways than by
pardoning and saving us. And if God can pardon^ without a Satisfaction to his
Justice, why are not the Devils forgiven?

This was argued like a Novice in these Questions: the more Learned of his own
Party know that the Cause is lost, if in the Question of the Satisfaction,
Almighty God be not considered as a Governor, who indeed can forgive the
Offenders, but for Prudential Reasons he will not forgive without a
Satisfaction to his Honor and Justice.

Our Author stands in it, that God cannot forgive any Offender, or Offense,
without Satisfaction by the Offender himself, or another in his stead. Why,
what is the reason that the King and Proprietor of the whole World cannot
forgive? He answers, It Is contrary to his Justice. But is it contrary to
Justice to show Mercy, or to remit of my own Rights and Dues? Am I unjust if I
do not exact the whole of what is due to me? I may certainly do what I will
with my own, else it is not truly and wholly my own. He that cannot forgive,
neither can he give; for Forgiveness is nothing else, but giving my Right (to
Debt or Punishment) to the Person who is indebted, or has offended me. It Is
contrary (he says) to the Justice of God, to forgive either the Transgression,
or the Transgressor: but if it be contrary to Justice, it is essentially and
morally evil: I ask therefore, How can God command us to forgive to one another
our Transgressions and Offenses? Can God command us what is morally and
essentially evil, or what is contrary to the eternal Laws of Justice, by which
he himself is obliged? O mavelous Scheme of Justice! it is contrary (they say)
to Justice, to pardon without a full Satisfaction; but not contrary to Justice
to lay my Guilt, and the Punishment due to it, on a Person wholly innocent and
perfectly righteous: it is unjust to forgive the real Offender, or to abate of
the Punishment due to him; but not unjust to substitute a well-deserving Person
to the Punishment that belonged to the other. In a word, to show Mercy by
pardoning Offenses is Unjustice; but to misplace Punishment is none at all, but
worthy of the Holiness and of the Wisdom of God.

But he faith, if God can forgive without an Equivalent, or Satisfaction to his
Justice by the Offender, or another for him, why are not the Devils forgiven?
And I ask, seeing an infinite Satisfaction has been made in the Opinion of our
Author and his Party, for Sinners, why are not the Devils comprehended in it?
The same Infinite Satisfaction which our Opposers teach, was abundantly enough
for the fallen Angels as well as for Men: let them tell us, how so much
precious Merit comes to be lost? This Question can never be answered on the
Hypothesis of our Opposers; but on the Unitarian Hypothesis there is no
difficulty at all in the case of the fallen Angels; for we answer, they are not
forgiven, because they repent not, nor amend. Almighty God, as King and
Proprietor of all Persons and Things, can forgive any Offense, or all Offenses,
even without Repentance or Amendment; nor is it contrary to his Justice so to
do: but it is inconsistent with his Wisdom, because to forgive without
Repentance or Amendment, is to encourage Sin and Disorder in the World: It Is
also contrary to the Holiness of God, that the Incorrigible and Impenitent
should escape unpunished. Our Opposers mistake too in thinking that it is the
Justice of God by which he is prompted to punish Sinners; it is his Holiness and
Wisdom: Justice has no other share or interest in Punishment, but only to see
that Punishment be not misplaced, and that it do not exceed the Offense.

As to his Tale about the (mad) old King, and his (foolish) Son, it is perfectly
ridiculous. He has imagined, a King that promises to pardon his Rebels, if any
other will be so kind as to suffer for them. It Is a mad Proposition, in the
highest degree unreasonable and unjust; because if it was necessary that their
Offenses should be punished; Justice and Reason require, that the Offenders
themselves, and not an innocent Person or Persons should suffer. Well, but as
mad as the old King was, his Son was as foolish; for (our Author assures us)
the Son offered to save the Rebels by dying in their stead: nor did the Folly
of the Father and the Son stop here; for when the Father heard his Son say that
he would die for the Rebels, he approved his Son's Extravagance, put his Son to
Death, and pardoned his Rebels. Nor does our Author forbear to publish his own
proper Folly, by telling us, that the old King dearly loved his Son, tho he put
him to Death for other Men's Faults: He adds, that this is our very case, with
respect to God Almighty and the Lord. Christ. It Is so, I acknowledge, in the
Hypothesis of our Opposers; but let them see to it, whether they do not expose
themselves to just Scorn; while they can no ways defend their Hypothesis of the
Satisfaction, but by comparing Almighty God and our Lord Christ to two such
Prodigies of Folly, as never really were (or could be) in Nature, but only in
the Fiction and Fancy of the Poetaster of Yarmouth.

I demand, would our Poet himself, as odd-conceited as he is, put his Son to
death, or consent that he should be put to Death, to save his Maligners and
Adversaries from a Punishment highly due to their Crimes? He has been a great
Enemy in his time to Rebellion, and at this day is writing Books against Rebels
who are dead forty Years ago: Would he give one of his Children to Death, to
save any of the surviving Rebels, as suppose Friend Ludlow? If he is neither so
silly, nor so wicked to his Child, how has he dared to say, this is our case
with respect to Almighty God and the Lord Christ? Why did not the Comparison
and Instance that he himself devised, open his Eyes to discern the Folly and
Inconsistency of his Doctrine?

The Socinians object to their Opposers in these Questions, That if an
Equivalent (which Trinitarians call a Satisfaction) has been given to God's
Justice, on our behalf, by the Sufferings of the Lord Christ, then God has not
truly pardoned us, which the Scriptures every where affirm, but only discharged
and acquitted us, because (our Debt being paid) he could do no less.

Our Author answers; Tho God's Justice has been satisfied, yet it was who found
out the Person, who was able and willing to pay our Debt: Besides, the
Sufferings of our Lord Christ, tho they were equivalent to the Punishment due
to Sinners, were a refusable Payment; for God might have required, that the
Sinners should suffer in their own Persons, not in the Person of a Redeemer,
Mediator or Undertaker.

I will be so liberal, as to grant to our Author both these Answers; but I must
insist upon it, that they are no Answers to the Objection proposed. For God
does not pardon his Debt or Offense, because he finds out a third Person that
will pay or suffer for the Debtor or Offender; these two differ just as much as
Payment and Forgiveness; that is to say, they are Contraries. But our Author
adds, the Sufferings of the Lord Christ were a refusable Payment: it is well,
but he says, they were an equivalent Payment; how then can God be said to
pardon us? does He forgive who receives an Equivalent to the Debt due to him?
Yes, he says, it is Forgiveness with respect to us, for we have paid nothing,
whatever our Friend, whom God found out, has paid for us. But why does he not
consider that the Scriptures not only say, that Sinners are pardoned, but they
say, God has pardoned them? You may call their Discharge a Pardon, with
respect to them; but you can never say, God has pardoned them, if they are
only discharged upon an Equivalent given for them, or paid by another on their
behalf. To say, God has pardoned us, supposes that he has received no
Equivalent on our behalf; for if he had, however we might be said to be
pardoned, yet it could not be said that God pardoned us; for the Pardon must
(in that case) be imputed to the Person or Persons, who made the Satisfaction
or the Equivalent, not to God. To avoid this, our Opposers say, he that made
the Satisfaction, was God: the Son of God, who is also himself true God, that
very true God to whom the Satisfaction was made, he made for us the
Satisfaction. But this is Jargon, and we expected Reason from them: The one
true God, they say, made for us the Satisfaction to the one true God; we deny
that it is Sense, or intelligible. There is but one true God, and he is to
receive the Satisfaction for our Sins against his Infinite Majesty, and not to
give Satisfaction: How then can they say, but that they are accustomed to say
any thing, the one true God made for us the Satisfaction? And if it could be
true what they say, that God himself paid for us the Equivalent or
Satisfaction; this is indeed no other but forgiving us without a Satisfaction,
which is the very thing they deny: For if I pay to my self the Debt of my
Debtor, or undergo the Punishment of my Offender; this is but a
mock-Satisfaction, and I indeed forgive him without a Satisfaction. Which is so
plain, that I wonder that so many Learned Persons as have written on the one
and the other side of this Question, have not observed it.

Another Objection of the Socinians against the (pretended) Satisfaction, is;
God could not (justly or wisely) substitute an innocent and well-deserving
Person, to undergo Punishment, properly so called, in the place and stead of
the Unrighteous and Worthless; because it is of the Nature of Justice, not to
misplace Punishment. Our Author's Answers are; The Innocent Beast was
sacrificed for the Sin of the Owner; and the Lord Christ freely offered himself
to suffer for us, though we were Worthless and Wicked.

His instance of Beasts offered in Sacrifice, on occasion of the Sin of their
Owners, is not a whit to the purpose; for the Owners having an absolute
Dominion over, and a complete Right to the Service, Use, and very Life of their
Beasts; therefore it was no Unjustice, when the Life of the Beast was given for
the Offense of the Master or Owner. The Owner might kill his Beast for Food;
therefore much more might he offer him to God, in lieu and exchange of his own
Life, forfeited to God by Sin. And in this case, the Worthless was offered to
the Mercy and gracious Acceptance of God, for the Worthy: so that there was no
Offense committed, either against Justice or Wisdom. But all things are
contrary, in the Lord Christ and Us, especially in the Hypothesis of our
Opposers; for he was a Person, according to them, of Infinite Dignity and
Merit; and we had no right in him, or dominion over him, as the Sacrificer had
over his Beast, that we should offer his Life or his Sufferings to God instead
of our own.

As to that, the Lord Christ freely offered himself for Us, to undergo
Punishment due to us: Neither could he do it, nor could God accept of it or
allow it. An Innocent and Righteous Person may not, an Holy and Just Judge must
not pervert the due Course of Justice. A just Governor may pardon Offenders, of
his Mercy, but he cannot inflict their Punishment on the Innocent and
Righteous; for it is of the very Essence of Justice, nay, is the first thing
belonging to Justice, not to misplace Punishment. Not to misplace Punishment,
and not to exceed the desert of the Offense, are the two things that constitute
the Nature of Punitive Justice.

The last Objection, of which our Author thinks fit to take notice, is this;
That the Three-days Death, and other Sufferings of the Lord Christ, could not
be equivalent to the Eternal Damnation of so much as one Man, much less of all
Mankind. He answers three ways.

1. Our Savior's Agony in the Garden was, without doubt, such a weight of
Sorrow and Pain, as was equivalent even to the eternal Damnation of all Men;
else we must say, He was far less valiant in suffering, than many Martyrs have
been; nay, was a very Dastard and Coward. Our Author pursues this Calumny upon
his Savior in several Pages; see (Reader) from p. 739, to p. 749.

He makes Calanus the Indian (not a Christian neither, but an Heathen) a very
Herot, in comparison of that poor dispirited pretender Jesus of Nazareth. He
has this Passage, at p. 739. Nothing seems more mean, among the various
Accounts of Sufferers for Truth, than the Carriage of our Savior. He says
farther, That our Savior prayed most earnestly to be delivered from Death; and
that he sweat Drops, like Drops of Blood; but the Martyrs even offered
themselves to the most cruel Deaths, and sang in the midst of Torments.

It is true, that the great Passion of our Savior in the Garden, has made many
to think, not without cause, that it proceeded from some higher Reason, than
the apprehension of the Death of the Cross, which He was shortly to undergo. It
may be (very probably) supposed, that He conflicted then with great
Temprations; that the Devil was very busy to fill his Mind with horrid Idea's
and Representations; and that this was the Cause of his Agony, and that an
Angel was sent to strengthen him. The Martyrs (on the contrary) had influences
and Assistances from the Divine Spirit; and the Tempter was withheld from
venting his Malice on them.

But to suppose, with our present Author, that our Savior underwent (in the
Garden) the very Torments of Hell; nay, such Torments as are infinitely greater
than Hell Torments; because they were equivalent to the eternal Torments of all
the Damned; this is said without any ground, nay, contrary to all good Reason.
We must suppose, on our Author's Hypothesis, First, That Christ underwent in
the space of an hour, such an acute Pain, as answers fully to the whole Pain of
a Damned Person in all Eternity. Secondly, That this Pain was so multiplied, as
to be equal to all the Tortures of all the Damned in whole Eternity: And yet,
Thirdly, he was only exceeding sorrowful, and had a very great Sweat: Surely
such a Pain would have made him to cry out, much more earnestly than on the
Cross; and how could an Angel strengthen him under such a Pain, of which no
Angel in Heaven could himself have bore the thousandth part?

But I would know too, why an Angel from Heaven should be sent to strengthen
him, as is expressly said at Luke 22.43? Why not rather the Divine Person, which
(our Opposers say) was in him, and with which he was personally united, and
personally one? It had been far more natural, that his own Divinity should have
strengthened his Humanity, than that the Angel shall be sent to support that
Man, who was (they say) God-Man. I know not what Relishes other Men's
Understandings may have, but it will never go down with me, that God-Man could
want to be strengthened by an Angel; and I look upon this to be an unanswerable
Argument, that our Lord Christ was only a Prophet, and not God, or any such
super-eminent Spirit, as the Arians believe him to be.

But that our Savior's Sufferings may not want Weight, to be laid in the
Balance against all the Sufferings of all the Damned, our Author says, 2. As
the Guilt and Demerit of Sin is made Infinite, by being committed against the
Infinite Majesty of God; so the Merit of Christ's Sufferings on our behalf
becomes Infinite too, by being offered to an Infinite God.

I confess, when I read this, and his Story of the old King and his Son, I gave
our Author over: for there never was any Man so silly but this Author, as to
conceit, that a thing is made better or greater by the Greatness or Excellence
of the Person to whom it is oftered; tho it be true that an Offense may be the
greater, for some Qualifications of the Person against whom it is done.

If what he says were true, that the Infiniteness of God makes that Suffering
which is presented to him to be also Infinite; what needed our Savior to have
undergone so much as our Author conceits; the Pain of the Cross: nay, the least
Pain in his Finger had been sufficient, without the horrible Agony in the
Garden, which he supposes to have been equal to all the Pains of all the
Damned, and that for ever. And if it be true, that Christ's Sufferings are made
Infinite, by his Infinity to whom they are offered, then so also would the
Sufferings of any other Man. This strange reasoning of our Author, makes the
Punishment of Christ to be wholly needless; the Sinners themselves might have
sully satisfied God's Justice, and that too by the slightest Sufferings, if
suffering receives its nature and degree from the Infinity of that Majesty to
whom it is tendered.

He says, thirdly, He that suffered for us was God and Man in one Person: and
tho ('it is true) the true God could not die or suffer; yet He who was true God,
did both suffer and die. The Sufferings of such a Person must needs be esteemed
of Infinite Value, tho they were not Infinite in their Intension, or in their
Duration.

In think this to be almost as weak as the former Answer. For seeing they dare
not pretend, that God could suffer any thing, but only the Humanity, which
(They say) was united to him; such Sufferings were but Human Sufferings, the
Sufferings of a Man, not of God, and therefore in no sense Infinite. Their
Conceit, that the Humanity of Christ's is united to the Divine Person of the
Son, helps them not in this case; for God dwells in all the Faithful, nay, is
united to them, and one with them; they are so joined (that I may use the
Apostle's words) to the Lord, as to be one Spirit with him; 1 Cor. 6.17. John
17.21. but neither their Righteousness, nor their Sufferings have any more
value on that account, but are rated only according to their intrinsic, proper
and real Worth.

CHAP. XII. On the Texts alleged for the Satisfaction; with a Conclusion of
the whole.
THE last thing we are to consider, is the Collection of Texts that our Author
has here made; he urges, First, That He (Christ) was wounded for our
Transgressions, was bruised for our Iniquities; that we are healed by his
Stripes; that God has laid on him the Iniquity of us all; that He has made
his Soul an Offering for Sin. All this is taken out of the 53d Chapter of
Isaiah, which Chapter is by some taken to be a Prophecy, concerning the Prophet
Jeremiah; by others, concerning the Messiah, or Christ. I do not think it to be
any Prophecy at all, except in some few Passages of it; but especially not a
Prophecy concerning a Person who was then to be born: I conceive the words are
to be understood of the Prophet Isaiah himself, who speaking of himself,
modestly speaks in the third Person, and the sense begins at ver. 7. of the
foregoing Chapter.

I wonder very much, that so many Learned Men as have commented on this
Prophet, have not discerned that the whole Discourse perfectly suits to the
Prophet himself, and that he speaks of a Person actually in being, not of one
who was yet to be born. But because it would take up a great deal of room to
make a Paraphrase on the two Chapters, and to show the Reason of it; I will be
content to set down the Explication by Grotius and Socinus, of the particular
Expressions here objected by our Author. Grotius is of opinion, that from ver.
7. of the foregoing Chapter, Isaiah prophesies of the Sufferings of the Prophet
Jeremiah; yet so, that the whole Prophecy, and all the Expressions of the 53d
Chapter, had a second Completion in the Person, Actions and Sufferings of the
Lord Christ: and therefore some of the Expressions, tho originally intended of
Jeremiah, are by the Writers of the New Testament accommodated also, and
applied to the Lord Christ. Let us see what he says.

Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our Transgressions, and was bruised for our
Iniquities. But in the Original it is, he has been wounded by our Wickedness,
and bruised by our Iniquity; that is, we have wickedly and unjustly afflicted
and persecuted him.

The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him; and by his Stripes we are healed.
No, the Original says, The Reproofs of our Peace were with him: that is, the
Reproofs that would have made our Peace with God, if we had hearkened to them,
were truly with this Prophet; he reproved us justly, and for our saving Good,
if we would have hearkened: and by those his Stripes we might have been healed,
i. e. by those sharp and home-Reproofs, by those Stripes of his Mouth, we might
have been amended and reformed, and thereby reconciled to God, and healed.

Ver. 6. All we, like Sheep, have gone astray; we have turned every one to his
own way; and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all. In the Hebrew,
the Lord has by him met with the Iniquity of us all: q. d. has reproved all
our Wickedness by him.

Ver. 10. When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for Sin, he shall see his
Seed, he shall prolong his days. But in the Hebrew thus; If he (the Prophet)
shall submit his Soul to Punishment, he shall see his Seed, and prolong his
days: or, Tho he submit his Soul to Punishment, etc. Punishment, says Grotius
here, is properly for Sin; but the Hebrews (says he) call all Affliction by or
from others, tho unjust and underserved, by the Name of Punishment.

But our Author objects again, that the Apostle says, Romans 4.25. He (Christ)
was delivered for our Offenses. And 1 Pet 2.24. Who himself bore our Sins in
his own Body on the Tree, or Cross. Romans 3.24. Him has God set forth to be a
Propitiation for our Sins, to declare his (God's) Righteousness. Heb. 9.26. Now
once in the end of the World he has appeared, to put away Sin by the Sacrifice
of himself.

Therefore it is to be noted, that very few of those that have undertaken to
write against us, have really understood what we affirm or deny, concerning the
Causes, or the Effects of our Savior's Death. They trouble themselves with
citing a great many Texts to evince that 'twas for our Sins (as one Cause) that
Christ died; that he was a Sacrifice and Oblation for the Sins of the World;
that he was a Ransom, a Price of Redemption for us. We deny none of these
things, taken in a sober and possible sense: the Question is only this, Whether
the Lord Christ offered himself as such a Sacrifice, Oblation or Price as might
be made to the Justice of God, by way of Equivalent for what we should have
suffered; or was an Oblation and Application, as all former Sacrifices under
the Law were, to the Mercy of God, by way of humble suit and deprecation? We
affirm the latter of these, that the Lord Christ, besides other Ends of his
Death, tendered himself (in the nature of a Sacrifice) on the Altar of the
Cross, to the Mercy and Benignity of God, by way of Supplication; not to the
Divine Justice, as an Equivalent for so great a Debt as the Eternal Punishment
of all Mankind in Hellfire. We judge it better thus to speak, than as our
Opposers do, because the Abolition of our Sins, and our Discharge from
Punishment, is always in Holy Scripture attributed to the great Mercy and
Goodness of God; it is called Pardon, Remission, Grace, Freeness of Grace,
Riches of Grace; all which were false, if indeed the Lord Christ gave a just
Equivalent (they say, more than an Equivalent) to God's Justice for us.

In a word, our Opposers and We agree, that the Lord Christ, being to die upon
other accounts, did withal tender his Person in Quality of an Expiatory
Sacrifice, for the Sins of Mankind; himself was the Offerer, and also the
Victim, and his Cross the Altar; he was a Ransom, and a Price of Redemption for
us: but in this we differ, Whether he was an Adequate Price, or a Sacrifice to
the Justice of God? We cannot comprehend that one Man could be an Equivalent
for all Men; or his short Sufferings equal to the Eternal Damnation of an
Infinite Multitude; or that God can be said to pardon, if he has been
over-paid for our Debt to him: therefore we content our selves to teach, that
our Blessed Savior being to confirm his Gospel by his Death, and to be made
perfect by Sufferings, as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, did also offer
himself as a Sacrifice, and as a sort of Ransom and Price for us, to that Mercy
and Benignity of God, by which he was wont to accept the Oblation of Beasts,
the Blood of Goats and Lambs, for his repenting and returning People. This
Hypothesis leaves to God the entire Glory of forgiving us; to our Savior, the
Honor of being the Means, Motive and Procurer of our Pardon and Salvation; and
fully answers all Scripture-Expressions concerning our Savior's Death,
objected to us by our Opposers in this Question. But they (our Opposers) after
all their Subterfuges, are forced by their Hypothesis, to this monstrous
Conclusion; that God freely pardons to Sinners their whole Debt of Sin and
Punishment; and yet has been infinitely over-paid for both, in the Death and
other Sufferings of the Lord Christ: than which, there can be no greater, or
more apparent Contradiction.

As to our Author's Conclusion, that he wishes himself accursed, and again
accursed, if ever he deliver other Doctrine than what he has defended in this
Book: I shall only say this, that as wise as he have lived to alter their
Minds. Nor can he defend his Rashness by the Example of the Apostle; for when
St. Paul curses himself or any other for preaching or teaching otherways, he
speaks not of doubtful and uncertain Questions; but If we preach any other
GOSPEL to you, let us be accursed; Gal. 1.8, 9. And the reason of our Apostle's
Confidence was very different from our Author's: the latter grounds himself on
a few ambiguous and uncertain Texts, capable of contrary Translations and
Senses; and when taken in his Sense of them, are contrary to Reason and common
Sense, and to the general Current of Holy Scripture: but the Apostle speaks of
a matter which he had received by express Revelation from Jesus Christ, and
even from God the Father of All.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately printed by the Socinians.
THE Brief History of the Unitarians, vulgarly called Socinians, in four
Letters. The first Letter, besides the History of the Socinians, proves the
Unity of God: the other three answer the (pretended) Proofs of the Doctrine of
the Trinity. Second Edition. The Acts of Athanasius, with brief Notes on his
Creed, and Observations on Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of the Doctrine of the
Trinity, opposed by him to the Brief History and Brief Notes. Observations on
Dr. Wallis his Letters, written in Vindication and Explication of the
Athanasian Creed. Some Thoughts on Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of the Doctrine
of the Trinity. A Defense of the brief History, against the Vindication by Dr.
Sherlock. An Exhortation to a Free and Impartial Inquiry into the Doctrines of
Religion. A Letter of Resolution concerning the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation; giving the general Reasons of the Unitarians against those
Doctrines. Two Letters touching the Trinity and Incarnation; the first urges
the Belief of the Athanasian Creed, the other is an Answer thereto. An accurate
Examination or Judgment on the principal Texts relating to the Questions
concerning the Divinity of our Savior, and his Satisfaction; occasioned by a
Book of Mr. L. Milbourn's, called by him, Mysteries (in Religion) vindicated.

