AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. Firmin's RELIGION; AND OF The Present State OF THE UNITARIAN
CONTROVERSY.

London, Printed in the Year School.

AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. Firmin's RELIGION.
MR. Firmin was remarkable, above almost any private Man of this Nation and
Age, for his care and agency on behalf of the Poor; and his zeal and activity
for his way (or Sect) of Religion. I shall say nothing of the former; we have
an account of his diligence, and methods for the Poor, from some friends of
his, that knew him longer, and with the nearest intimacy. But concerning lib
Religion, I may claim to know as much of it, as any other. It was the same in
general with that of all Protestants, that is, the H. Bible; and the Apostles
Creed, as the abridgment of the Christian Faith contained in that Book. But as
for the Explication of Articles controverted, it was that which he and his
party call Unitarian; but others Socinian. Mr. Firmin, and the English
Unitarians, never were entirely in the sentiments of F. Socinus; they embraced,
the opinions of Mr. J. Bidle.

Mr. Bidle differed from Socinus, and the foreign Unitarians, as in some other
points, so in that, he believed the H. Spirit is, though not God, yet a Person in
the vulgar sense of that word.

Mr. Firmn was a very discerning but not a learned Man. Some others of his
party have all the qualities, for which the foreign Socinians have been so much
esteemed; that is to say, besides an acuteness and dexterity of Thought, they
are excellently Learned, especially in the sacred Criticism. But that which, in
my opinion, most commends him and them, is the freedom and sincerity, which
they have all along practiced, in judging of the controverted Articles of
Religion. They followed indeed, an first, Mr. Bidle (as he espoused the Tenets
of Socinus) but so, that as soon as there appeared better light, (to use a
Scripture Phrase) they rejoiced in it.

From the time that F. Socinus, and his Doctrines, began to be taken notice of;
the Churches, of all denominations, were persuaded, the difference between
Socinianism, and the doctrine of the Catholic Church, was Real, Great, and even
Unreconcilable. Many learned Men have thought, some such degree of accord
between the Church, and other Dissenters, might be devised, that they might
bear with one another, and hold occasional Communion: But Socinianism was
supposed to be a departure from the Churches Doctrine, so far, and in so many
points, that no Coalition, in Communion, much less in Doctrine, might ever be
hoped. And of this mind were the English Socinians, as well as the Foreign; and
both of them no less earnestly than the Church. But, as I said, the English
Unitarians (or Socinians) being Men of ingenuous and free Minds and Principles;
and therefore always ready to entertain farther light: after 8 or 9 years late
contest, in print, with the principal Divines of this Nation, they have been so
dextrous and happy, that, instead of farther embroiling the points in question,
which is the usual effect of the Paper-war, they seem to have accommodated
whatsoever differences depending between the Church and them.

A greater Service, or any equal to it, was perhaps never done, to the Catholic
Church. For as on the one side the Socinians. being so much the Jesser Party,
flood exposed to all the poenal Laws in any Nation, that had ever been enacted
against any fort of Heretics: So the Church was more dangerously threatened, by
this Cloud, of the bigness of a man's hand, than by all other Dissenters, or
Opposers whatsoever. The opinions of the Socinians, had that appearance of
Reason; such an agreement with all the yielded Principles of Philosophy,
whether Natural or Metaphysied: that if they had been fostered by the helps,
under the cover and shelter of which, other denominations of Religion have made
shift to subsist; Socinianism would have flourisht and spread like that Tree in
the Prophet Daniel; the hight whereof reached to Heaven, and the sight thereof
to the ends of all the Earth. Other Sects, by the favor of Princes, or the
quality of the times, have obtained an exemption, from Mulcts, and Penalties of
the Laws: and thus, their course not being impeded by any dams or banks; they
have overspread sometimes considerable parts of particular Countries. If
Socinianism had any where enjoyed those Halcyon-days, its sudden, irresistible
Progress would have been (that I may again borrow one of the sacred
Comparisons) as Lightning, that rusheth out of the East, and shines even to
the West. Alas, on equal Ground, and with equal Circumstances, the combat
between (unintelligible) Mystery, and (clear) Reason; between (seeming)
Contradictions, Absurdities and Impossibilities, and (a rational, obvious,
accountable) Faith, would soon have been ended.

But it is better ended: The Divine Providence and Goodness, in mercy to both
Parties, has granted a Peace, instead of a Victory. It has pleased God to favor
the suffering side with an unexpected Light; he has shown 'em what may seem
incredible, that their Opposers think, as they (the Unitarians) speak; that
their difference is not in the ideas or notions, but only in the terms or
words. To manifest this, Mr. Firmin caused the following Scheme of Agreement,
offered to him by a Person long conversant in these questions, to be considered
by some of the principal Unitarians in England: And being approved by him and
them, it was published about a year since.

The Scheme of Agreement.
Mr. Edwards, after having published diverse good Books, and one that may
deserve the epithet of Excellent, his Demonstration of the Existence and
Providence of God, found an inclination in himself, that he could not (it
should seem) resist of contriving a New Religion, or rather Impiety; and of
imputing it to the Socinians. By whom he means (it appears) the Unitarians.

Those in England, who call themselves Unitarians, never were entirely in the
sentiments of Socinus, or the Socinians. Notwithstanding, as our Opposers have
pleased themselves in calling us Socinians, we have not always declined the
name; because in interpreting many texts of Scripture, we cannot but approve
and follow the judgment of those Writers; who are confessed by all to be
excellent Critics, and very Judicious. As particularly, and chiefly, H.
Grotius, who, it must be granted, was Socinian all over: And D. Erasmus, who,
though he lived considerably before Socinus, commonly interprets that way; and
therefore is charged, by Card. Bellarmine, as a downright Arian. Non poterat,
says the Cardinal, Arianam causam manifestius propugnare. Erasmus could not
more openly espouse the Arian Cause, than he has done; in his Notes on the
Fathers, and on the principal Texts of H. Scripture. Praef. ad libros 5. de
Christo. But tho, as I said, we are not Socinians, nor yet Arians; seeing Mr.
Edwards has contrived a Creed for us, under the name of Socinians, I will
answer both directly and sincerely concerning the several Articles of the
Creed, which he says is ours.

As to the References unto places in particular Authors, where Mr. Edwards
would have it thought, the Articles of that Creed are affirmed: I have examined
some of his principal References, and can say of 'em, they are either
Perversions, or downright Falsifications, of what the Authors referred to did
intend. Dr. Wallis, whose dishonest Quotations out of the Socinians, have been
detested by every body, is hardly more blamable in that kind than Mr. Edwards;
saving that the Doctor being, as one rightly tells him, somewhat more than a
Socinian, did but foul his own Nest by his Forgeries: but we cannot certainly
say what is the opinion of Mr. Edwards in the great Article, in question among
us.

But come we to the Creed, which he says is ours: as I promised, I will answer
to every Article of it, sincerely and directly.

I. I believe, concerning the Scriptures, that there are Errors, Mistakes, and
Contradictions in some places of it: That the Authority of some whole books of
it is questionable; yea, that the whole Bible has been tampered with, and may
be suspected to be corrupted.

That there are Errors, Mistakes, and Contradictions in the H. Bible, was never
said by any person, pretending to be a Christian: if by the Bible, you mean the
Bible, as it came out of the hands of the inspired Authors of it. As on the
other side, that there are Errors, Mistakes, or Contradictions in the vulgar
Copies of the Bible, used by the Church of Rome (for instance) or the English
Church, was never questioned by any learned Man, of whatsoever Sect or way: and
least of all can Mr. Edwards question it. He has published a book concerning
the Excellence and Perfection of H. Scripture; in which book, he finds great
fault with our English Bible. He says, in the Title of his 13th chapter; It is
faulty, and defective, in many places of the Old and New Testaments; and I
offer all along in this chapter particular Emendations, in order to render it
more exact and complete.

As to the Hebrew and Greek copies of the Bible; it is well known, some are more
perfect, and some less: They differ very much; for in the Old Testament, the
Hebrew Critics have noted 800 various readings; in the New there are many more.
Mr. Gregory of Oxford, so much esteemed, and even venerated, for his admirable
Learning, says hereupon; and says it, cum Licentia Superiorum: There is no book
in the World, that has suffered so much, by the hand of Time, as the Bible.
Pref. p. 4. He judged, and judged truly, that though the first Authors of the
Bible were Divinely Instructed Men; yet the Copiers, Printers, and Publishers,
in following Ages, were all of them Fallible Men, and some of them
ill-designing Men. He knew that all the Church Historians, and Critics, have
confessed, or rather have warned us, that some copies of the Bible, have been
very much vitiated by the hands as well of the Orthodox, as of Heretics: and
that it is matter of great difficulty, at this distance of time from the
Apostolic Age, to assertain the true reading of H. Scripture, in all places of
it.

Yet we do not say hereupon, as Mr. Edwards charges us, that the Bible, much
less the whole Bible, is corrupted. For as to the faulty readings in the common
Bibles of some Churches, and in some Manuscript Copies; the Providence of God
has so watched over this sacred Book, that we know (what by information of the
ancient Church-Historians, and the writings of the Fathers, what by the early
Translations of the Bible into Greek, Latin, and Syriac, and the concurrent
Testimony of the more ancient Manuscript copies) both who they were that
introduced the corrupt readings, and what is the true Reading in all Texts of
weight and consequence. In short, as to this matter, we agree with the Critics
of other Sects and Denominations; that though ill Men have often attempted, they
could never effect the corruption of H. Scripture: the ancient Manuscripts, the
first Translations, the Fathers, and Historians of the Church, are sufficient
directors, concerning the authentic and genuine Reading of doubtful places of
H. Scripture.

Farther, whereas Mr. Edwards would intimate, that we reject diverse Books of H.
Scripture: On the contrary we receive into our Canon all those Books of
Scripture that are received or owned by the Church of England; and we reject
the Books rejected by the Church of England. We know well that some Books and
parts of Books, reckoned to be wrote by the Apostles or Apostolical Men, were
questioned, nay were refused by some of the Ancients; but we concur with the
opinion of the present Catholic Church concerning them, for the reasons given
by the Catholic Church, and which I mention in the Reply to my Lord the Bp. of
Chichester.

If Mr. Edwards would have truly represented the opinion of the Socinians
concerning the Scriptures, he knew where to find it, and so expressed as would
have satisfied every body. He knows that in the Brief Notes on the Creed of
Athanasius, they have declared what is their sense in very unexceptionable
words: The Holy Scriptures, say they, are a divine, an infallible, and complete
Rule, both of Faith and Manners. Br. Notes, p. 1. The Church neither requires
nor desires that they should say more.

II. I believe concerning God, That he is not a Spirit, properly speaking; but
a sort of Body, such as Air or Ether is. That he is not immense, infinite, or
every where present, but confined to certain places. That he has no knowledge
of such future Events, as depend on the Free Will of Man: and That it is
impossible such things should be foreseen by him. That there is a Succession in
God's eternal duration, as well as in time, which is the measure of the
duration that belong to finite Beings.

That Almighty God is Incorporeal, Omnipresent and Omniscient, has not only
been confessed, but proved by the Unitarians of this Nation in diverse of their
late Prints. As to the other, that all Duration, that of God as well as of
Creatures, consists in a Succession, is affirmed by some Learned Men of all
Persuasions and Ways, as well as by the Unitarians. It should seem Mr. Edwards
holds, that God possesses eternal Lite all at once: that to God, Eternity is
one standing permanent Moment. St. John is of another mind, for he describes
the duration of God by a Succession; by was, is, and is to come. Grace be to
you, and Peace, says he, from him which is, was, and is to come, Rev. 1.4. It Is
undeniable by any, but affected Wranglers, that here the duration of God, his
continuance in being, is distinguished by the threefold Succession ( was, is,
and shall be) which is common to all Beings. Eternal life possessed all at
once, is one of the monstrous Paradoxes which our Opposers maintain; for all
that I can see, merely from a spirit of contradiction; for it has no manner of
ground, either in Reason or Holy Scripture. I desire to know of 'em how the
duration of God, is the less perfect; because it is said to consist in a
Succession, or what is the same, to be distinguished by was, is, and shall be:
seeing it is confessed on all hands, that he carries all Perfections into every
Succession of his Duration.

But is it not a Scandal that some Unitarians of foreign Parts, have denied the
Spirituality or Incorporeity of God; his Omnipresence and Omniscience: saying
and contending for it, that he is a Body, with such Configuration of Parts as
Men have; consequently that he is in Heaven, inspecting indeed and governing
all things, but by the ministry of the several Orders of Angels; and that he
does not foresee contingent Events, but only such Events as are necessarily
(not arbitrarily) produced by their Causes? Doubtless; but no more a scandal to
the Unitarians, than to their Opposers: for they are Errors which some of the
Fathers (even the most: ancient, learned and pious of 'em) have defended as
Truths. Nay it should seem, they were some time the prevaling Opinions in some
places: namely, when the Anthropomorphite Doctrine was so zealously espoused;
that the Hermits and Cenobites would not endure their Bishops, if they but
suspected 'em of Origen's Doctrine, that God is a Spirit, without Parts or
Passions. And in denying the Spirituality and Omnipresence of God, they must
needs be understood not to believe his (certain and absolute) Prescience of
contingent Events. About the year 400, when almost every body concerned
themselves in condemning, and departing (as far as possible) from the opinions
of Origin; the Anthropomorphite Doctrine, and its consequences, were the
Standard Orthodoxy of many places, and were Heresy no where. Even St. John
Chrysostom at Constantinople hardly defended the Fratres Longi from the
Prosecutions of Theophilus, Archbishop and Patriarch of Alexandria; who was a
professed Anthropomorphite, and had expelled the Fratres Longi, for adhering to
Origen's Doctrine of the Spirituality and Omnipresence of God.

But as I said, we not only dislike, but utterly reject the dangerous Doctrine,
That God has a Body, is like to Man; toge-with its consequences, That he is
neither Omnipresent, nor Omniscient. It may as well be said, he is not at all;
nay this latter, tho the Anthropornorphites see it not, seems to be implied and
included in the former. But we condemn not the Schechina or glorious Appearance
of God in Heaven, which many Learned Men hold; nor the spiritual Body of Christ.

III. I believe farther concerning God, That there is no distinction of Persons
or Subsistences in God: And that the Son and Holy Ghost are not God: The former
of them being only a Man; the latter no other than the Power or Operation of
God. That there was nothing of Merit in what Christ did or suffered; and that
therefore he could not make satisfaction for the Sins of the World.

But Mr. Edwards too much mistakes. The question is not at all concerning three
Persons, or three Subsistences in God: but whether there are three infinite
Subsistences; three eternal Minds and Spirits? We deny the latter with the
whole Catholic Church, against the Tritheists: We never questioned the former,
Persons or Subsistences; but only as Persons are used or taken for Spirits,
Minds and Beings. I shall explain this matter however more fully, in my Answer
to the Bishops of Worcester, Sarum and Chichester, annexed to this Agreement;
or any one may see what is our sense, in the Judgment of a disinterested
Person, concerning the Controversy between Dr. S -- th, and Dr. Sherlock: By a
Divine of the Church of England. What that Author makes to be the Doctrine of
the Nominals, and of the Church, concerning the Blessed Trinity, the Divinity
of our Savior, and the Satisfaction, is and ever was the belief of the
Unitarians, as well as of the Catholic Church.

But we say, the Lord Christ is only a Man, and the Holy Spirit only the Power
of God. No, we say, our Lord Christ is God and Man. He is Man, in respect of
his reasonable Soul, and human Body; God, in respect of God in him. Or more
scholastically, in respect of the Hypostatical (or Personal) Union, of the
Humanity of Christ with the Divinity. By which the Catholic Church means, and
we mean, the Divinity was not only occasionally assisting to, but was (and is
always) in Christ, illuminating, conducting and actuating him. More than this,
is the Heresy of Entyches, and less we never held: tho we confess that careless
and less accurate Expressions, may have been used by both Parties; of which
neither ought to take advantage against the other, when it appears there is no
heterodox Intention.

That by the Spirit of God is sometimes meant (in Holy Scripture) the Power of
God, cannot be denied: but concerning the Three Divine Persons, we believe as
the Catholic Church believes, That they are relative Subsistences, internal
Relations of the Deity to it self. Or as the Schools, after St. Austin, explain
this; Original unbegotten Wisdom or Mind, reflex or begotten Wisdom, called; in
Holy Scripture the Logos, and the eternal spiration of Divine Love.

But do you not say, There was no Merit in what Christ did or suffered: and
that he could riot make satisfaction for our Sins? He may for, our parts be
Anathema, that teaches or believes that Doctrine. We believe that the Lord
Christ by what he did and what he suffered, was by the gracious acceptance of
God, a true and perfect Propitiation for Sinners that repent, and turn to the
good ways.

IV. In the next Article he makes us to believe a great many things; as that,
The first Man was not created in a state of Vprightness. As if it were possible
that men in their right senses should think the first Man was created a Sinner.

That By his Fall Adam did not lose Righteousness and Holiness, which are part
of the Image of God. As who should say, that by being a Sinner, he did not sin,
or become unlike to God.

That Adam's Posterity have received no hurt nor stain by his Apostasy. As if
you should say, that neither his bad Example, nor the Curse that made the Earth
so much less fruitful, was any hurt; and that the Rebellion of an Ancestor, no
not against God, is not any blot in his Family. I shall grow quite out of
conceit with these Unitarians, if they say many more such weak things. But in
very deed I imagine Mr. Edwards had a mind to have charged 'em more home; when
he does, we shall consider what to answer. I am of opinion that in this part of
the Article he was somewhat ashamed of his own Doctrine; and that he feared to
make himself and Party ridiculous, by a clear and distinct Representation of
their opinion.

That Mankind, notwithstanding Adam's fall, have by nature an ability to desire
and embrace all spiritual Good; and to avoid all that is sinful or vicious.
They are bold Britains. What, embrace all the Gospel-precepts by mere nature,
when it is not possible so much as to know diverse of them, but by Revelation
Divine. And can they avoid too all that is vicious at all times, only by
nature? In good truth, they are better and stronger by nature, than I ever hope
to be in this Life, by the (superadded) Grace of God. But here again he did not
strike home; he intended more than he durst say: and he durst. not say it, lest
we should ask him, whether he believes the just contrary?

That, There is no need of the Spirit to repent, to believe, or to obey the
Gospel, and perform religious Acts. It Is a serious point. We answer, with St.
Paul, the Spirit HELPS our Infirmities, Romans 8.26. But we judge for all that,
the Holy Scripture gives no occasion to any to turn Enthusiasts; and to resolve
the whole duty we owe and must perform to God and to our Neighbor, into
preternatural Impulses, as if we were Machines and not men; or Puppets, moved
by invisible Wires, not Men that act by their own Reason and Choice.

That Men are righteous before God, not by the merit of Christ, but by their
own good works. We answer, with all but Antinomians, and the more rigid
Calvinists: the Merit of Christ is not reckoned to us, without Faith, and good
Works of our own. But I am not certain, that the Calvinists, or the
Antinomists, would not assent to that Proposition, or not allow it to be
orthodox: I incline to think those People have no real difference with the
Church, nor the Church with them; but that they mistake one another meaning.

V. Another branch of our Creed, according to Mr. Edwards, runs thus: I believe
concerning a future State, That the Souls of the Deceased have no knowledge or
perception of any thing, they are not sensible of any Rewards or Pains: and
that their very Nature is absorpt.

That at death, the Soul, as well as Body sleeps, was an error of some of the
most ancient Fathers, as well as of some Unitarians. But neither of 'em said,
as Mr. Edwards pretends, that in death the very Nature of the Soul is absorpt,
which is to say extinct: they both of them held, that there is a Resurrection
of the Soul, as well as Body. But why dos Mr. Edwards impute that opinion to
us, when he has read, for he quotes the book, in the first Part of the
Considerations on the Explications of the Trinity, what is our sense of that
matter? The words at p. 33. are these. This Error was common to Socinus, and
some of the Fathers. The Learned Mr. Du Pinn, in his Abridgment of the Fathers,
has noted; that Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Minutius Faelix, and Arnobius, were in
this Sentiment. There was no reason to object this to Socinus; as if it were a
peculiar opinion of his: much less to the English Unitarians, who never
defended it, nor (that I know of) do any of 'em hold it.

VI. He says next; I believe we shall not rise with the same Bodies, but that
another Matter or Substance shall be substituted in their place. I see most of
our Opposers have affected to mistake our meaning concerning the resurrection
of the Body: We hold nothing that is singular in the case; we differ not from
the Catholic Church about it. We say with St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.35. How are the
dead raised, and with what Bodies do they come? -- Thou sowest not the body
that shall be. The Body that is raised, is not in all respects the same that
was committed to the earth: in diverse, perhaps in the most, it is. We rise not
Infants, or decrepit old Men, or lame, or deaf, or any way distorted; though many
so lived, and so died. Nay, as to the Passions resulting from the present
complexion of the body, and therefore to be reckoned the Modifications (and as
it were parts) of the body; we rise not with them; it is not the same Body, in
respect of those Passions that it here lived. For instance, some are (by
complexion) very cowardly, or pensive, or choleric, or jealous; the Body that
shall be will not be such: It will be conformed to the likeness of the glorious
Body of our Lord Christ; that is, be freed from all (both external and
internal) Imperfections. Farthermore, our present body (Physicians and
Philosophers say) is in a continual Flux; all the parts of it, internal as well
as external, continually decay, and are continually also renewed. They decay by
the Perspiration, that is continually caused by the internal heat; and are
continually renewed by the Nourishment taken in, and converted into Blood,
Spirits, Flesh, and Bones. It Is said, by the Learned in these matters, that no
man's body is the very same, as to the matter and substance of it, this present
year, that it was the last year, and will be the next year: It Is wholly new by
the nourishment of the present year. We say therefore, there shall be a
Resurrection of the Body; and, as some of the Ancient Creeds spoke, of the same
Body; as truly and as properly as N.N. is the same Man this year that he was
one, or seven, or twenty years ago. If Mr. Edwards requires us to say more, he
exacts more than the Church believes: For by the Resurrection of the same Body,
the Church intends only, that it is as truly the same, as a Man (notwithstanding
the Flux of his parts) is now the same N. N. or J. B. that he was seven or ten
years past. Yet not altogether the same; because inconceivably better: That is,
without any external or internal Deformities or Weaknesses.

VII. I believe that at the Day of Judgment, Men shall not be required to give
an account of their Actions; the most flagitious Sinners shall not be examined
concerning any thing of their past Life: Only they shall be punished; and their
Punishment is this, to utterly cease or perish for ever. The unquenchable Fire
is nothing but Annihilation.

I do not know that the Scriptures or the Catholic Church, do require any to
believe, that Sinners shall be examined concerning their past Life, at the day
of the general Judgment. To what purpose, I pray, does the All-knowing Judge
need to be informed concerning the particulars of their Gui^^^ If every person
is to be severally ex^^^^ed, concerning the particulars of his ^^ansacted.
Life; the Day of Judgment will extend it self to many Millions of Ages more,
and farther than the whole duration of the World, from its beginning to its
consummation. It should seem Mr. Edwards thinks, that because the Scriptures
speak of the great Judgment by God, in the language of Men, and of Human
Judicatures, such as Trumpets, the Throne of the Judge, a formal Sentence, the
Pleadings of the Guilty, the Answers of the Judge; that therefore in very deed,
we are to expect such a Scene at the Judgment by God, as at a common Assize. I
conceive, on the contrary, that all such expressions and words, wherever they
are found in Scripture, are not intended as real Descriptions; but as
Comparisons, or Resemblances, by which the capacities of the Vulgar may he
assisted, and their affections wrought upon. All that is intended by such
expressions, is only this; that every one shall be so recompensed at the
Resurrection, as is worthy of the holy Judge and compassionate Father of the
World.

But we hold, he says, that the Punishment of the Wicked is only Extinction:
Their life shall be destroyed for ever by the unquenchable Fire, into which
they are cast. Which opinion, that it may look ridiculous, he words for us
thus; the unquenchable Fire is nothing but Annihilation. What the Scriptures
have said concerning the Punishment of the Wicked, after the Resurrection, is
not so clear, but that the opinions of Learned Men, Fathers and Moderns, have
been very different about it. Some (of which number is Origin, the most
considerable of the Ante-nicens) held, that not only wicked Men, but the very
Devils, will repent, and reform under the Punishments they endure: that
therefore, they will be pardoned, be admitted to a new trial of their
Behavior, and may attain to Blessedness. These say, that Man being a
reasonable, is therefore a docile or teachable Creature: and it not looking
probable, that the Wisdom of God will lose any part of his Creation, but will
bring it to the Perfection, and upon that to the Blessedness, of which it is
capable; therefore, what by Instructions, what by Punishments, and
Encouragements, God will reclame the Bad, will perfect and confirm the Good;
and so in the long-run of things, be acclamed the Savior of all.

Others, among whom have been some (it may be the most) of the Foreign
Unitarians, have thought, that the Righteous are rewarded with an everlasting
Life of Blessedness; and the impenitent Wicked punished by that unquenchable
Fire, that will wholly destroy their being. They believe this is the reason,
why the Punishment by Hellfire is called Eternal Death in Holy Scripture. But
the more current opinion among all denominations of Christians is, that the
Punishment of the Impenitent in Hellfire, is called Death; not because it
utterly destroys the life of the Sufferer, but because it is a continual and
endless dying. The extreme pains of Hell may well be called an everlasting
dying, or an eternal Death; though the Sufferer is never extinct.

I do not find any thing in the Books of the English Unitarians, concerning
these opinions; they may hold as variously concerning them as the Christians of
other denominations. But if I may answer for them, by what I judge of them by
conversation with them, I would say, we approve the doctrine delivered by
Archbishop J. Tillotson, in a Sermon before her late Majesty of happy memory,
March 7.1689. on Matthew. 25.46. which Sermon was printed by their Majesty's
special Command.

VIII. I believe, as to Christianity it self, every thing in it is to be
submitted to the dictates of Human Reason: and that there are no Doctrines in
it, that are mysterious.

Neither of these was ever said by any Unitarian; and all our Prints, more
especially those in the English Tongue, are express, that there are many
things, as well in Religion, as Nature, that are far above the capacity of
human Reason, to declare or understand the manner of 'em; or how they should be
what we either see, or are infallibly taught they are. We never pretended that
the Human Reason is the measure of Truth; as Mr. Edwards, and Mr. Norris charge
us; so that what our reason does not comprehend, we will not believe on any
other evidence whatsoever. We never said it, or thought it; we reject no
Doctrines but such as are contrary to Reason, and of that I speak fully in the
answer to Mr. De Luzancy, hereto annexed.

IX. As to Divine Worship, I believe it may be given to another besides God; to
Christ, who is but a Creature.

But we have disavowed nothing more, in all our Prints, than giving Divine
Worship to any, but only God: that it is a marvel to me, that Mr. Edwards should
impute to us such a doctrine; we have scarce any English Print where we do not
expressly oppose it. Nor do we reckon of the Lord Christ as but a Creature; I
have said before, he is God and Man. The Divinity did so inhabit in the
Humanity of Christ; does so exert in it the most glorious effects of
Omnipotence and Omniscience; that if others have been called God, because they
represented God, Christ is to be so called, because he exhibits God.

X. I believe, Prayer was not required under the Old Testament. The Lord's Day
is a ceremonious Observance, abolished by the Gospel. There is no spiritual
Blessing conferred in the use of the Sacraments. Baptism is an useless Rite;
and the Baptism of Children altogether vain. There is no distinct function, or
office of Ministers, in the Christian Church; the very Lord's Supper it self
may be administered by a private person.

I think Mr. Edwards is in the right against those (if any such there were) who
denied that Prayer was a duty or precept of the Old Testament and the Law; when
he says, It is included in the general precepts of fearing, serving,
worshipping God. But he is as much out in the next Article, that some have
said, the Lordsday is abolished by the Gospel: for it was never said by any. He
meant, I suppose, that the Seventh-day, or Sabbath, is abolisht: and I take it
to be the doctrine of the Catholic Church, that the Seventh-day Sabbath was
ceremonial, and is abolisht. It may better, however, be said, that the Sabbath
is transferred from the seventh to the first day; than that it is absolutely
abolisht, or taken away. In short, the English Unitarians hold no private
opinion about either the Sabbath, or Lord's day; but, as well in principle as
practice, concur with the Catholic Church.

It is too loosly said, That there is no spiritual Blessing conferred in the
use of the Sacraments. For there is no ordinance of God, but the serious and
devout performance of it draws a blessing on the doer. For all that, many
exceed in ascribing to the Sacraments certain Powers and Energies, without
competent warrant from the Word of God. I do not know that Baptism is any thing
more than a federal Rite, by which we are initiated into the Christian
Religion: or the Holy Supper any thing more than a commemoration of the
Sacrifice of Christ, offering himself to God as an atonement for repenting
sinners. I know not to what purpose so many superstitious Books are written, to
teach people how to prepare themselves for the Memorial Supper; when an honest
Intention, and a reverent Performance, are sufficient, both preparations and
qualifications, for and in all Gospel Ordinances. The Apostle says, He that
eats that Bread unworthily, or unworthily drinks of that Cup, is guilty of
the blood of Christ; nay, eats and drinks Judgment to himself. But he also
warns them, what he means by unworthy partaking, namely, their not tarrying for
one another; and withal, eating and drinking with so little regard to God or
Men, that some of them made themselves drunk with the Sacramental Wine, while
others could not so much as taste of it. Briefly, their assembling to this
solemn commemorative Sacrifice, was more like to a Carousal, than to a
celebration of the Holy and Blessed memory of a dying Savior. These were the
Disorders and Irregularities concerning which they were to examine themselves;
and thereby avoid an unworthy Communicating, and the consequences thereof.

We do not say, Baptism is an useless Rite; or that the Baptism of Children is
altogether vain. What the Wisdom of God has appointed to all Nations, is not to
be esteemed useless; though we our selves knew not the uses of it: and it is use
enough that this Sacrament is an initiating Rite.

Nor is it a good Exception against this Sacrament's being continued still;
that now people are Christians by Education: Seeing there is the same reason
for its continuance as for its institution, namely, a solemn, public, and
formal Initiation into the Religion of Jesus. And this may, in some sense, be
done in Infancy, by the intervention of Undertakers, commonly called
Godfathers; and how it can be done without 'em I see not. But it is without
all reason, that Parents should not be admitted to be Undertakers, when others
cannot, or cannot easily be had. It were well, methinks, if the Minister and
Churchwardens (together with the Parents) were obliged to be Undertakers ex
Officio, or ratione Officii, by their Place and Office; and it were yet better,
if the whole Church undertook for the Infants. Moreover, where Infant Baptism
is the custom of the Church, Confirmation (or the person's taking upon himself
the Covenant and Promises that were made in his name by his Undertakers) ought
to be as little neglected as Baptism: nay, the person cannot be said to be a
complete Christian, or to be Christianly baptized, till he is consumed; that
is, has publicly taken upon himself his Baptismal Engagements.

Paedo-baptism, or Infant Baptism, and sprinkling instead of dipping, have
occasioned an unnecessary Seism from the Church; for neither of these are
Doctrines of the Church, or imposed on any. The Church requires dipping, except
in case of Necessity or Danger. The words of the Rubric, in the Office of
Baptism, are these. If they (the Godfathers) certify, that the Child may well
endure it: He (the Minister) shall dip it, dip the Child, in the Water; saying,
I baptize thee, etc. -- But if they certify that the Child is weak; it shall
suffice to pour Water upon it. Neither of these is sprinkling, they are both of
them Baptism (or Washing) in the strictest sense of the word. As to
Infant Baptism, it does not certainly appear, that it was not practiced by the
Apostles; rather it seems, that when the Parents were baptized, so also were
the Children: for such was the custom of the Jews toward their Proselites, from
whom Baptism, the Sacramental Supper, and in a word, all the ancient
Ecclesiastical Rites, and Church Discipline (Hierarchy or Church Government)
was taken by our Savior and the Apostles. Notwithstanding, for satisfaction of
such as do not approve Infant Baptism; the Church has an Office, called in the
Liturgy, the Baptism of such as are of riper years. That as I said, the seism
of the People and Churches, that are vulgarly called Baptists, or Anabaptists,
seems not well grounded.

Lastly, as to that, I believe there is no distinct Function or Office of
Ministers: and that the very Lord's Supper may be administered by a private
Christian.

I answer for my self, and most other (if not all) Unitarians. There is a
threefold distinction of Church Officers, by themselves modestly called
Ministers: namely, Bishops, Presbyters, or Priests and Deacons. The two former
seem to be of Divine Right: the other of Apostolical Institution only; and that
too (as appears from Acts 6.3, 4.) not by any particular Inspiration, but
merely on Motives of Prudence and Charity. These three Orders, Bishop, Priest
and Deacon, are of that Antiquity, and Universality, that as soon as, and
wheresoever Christianity was professed, the Churches were governed after this
form. A form received among all the Sects of Christians, as well as by the
sounder part of 'em, called commonly the Church: till Mr. Calvin in a case of
Necessity, introduced a new sort of Church-Administration. These are they to
whom only (except in case of necessity, such as the Reformation was) it belongs
to administer the Sacraments; and to instruct and exhort publicly. But what
makes a case of necessity, is a question by it self, on which I do not here
enter: I wish the Church had not given, or may never give cause to the
Unitarians, either by Exclusion or Persecution, or unlawful or over-harsh Terms
of' Communion, to have recourse to Mr. Calvin's Expedient.

XI. As to moral Points, I believe that officious Lies are lawful; the motions
of Concupiscence not vicious; idle or obscene words, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Riot, Luxury, and impure Desires and Lusts, were not forbidden till Christ's
time. By officious Lies are meant those Falsities that do good to some, without
doing hurt to others; as the Lie of the Hebrew Midwives to Pharaoh; the Tale of
Michal to her Father Saul, when she suffered David to escape; and Jonathan's
feigned excuse for David, when he hid David from his Father's Anger, Exodus
1.19. 1 Samuel 19.17. and 20.6. To officious Lies belong also Compliments, very
low Bowings, and respectful Carriage toward Persons for whom we have not the
kindness or regard of which we make flow, by those external and false
Significations. I think it may excuse Volkelius, whom Mr. Edwards cites for
this part of his Charge; that the officious Lies of the Midwives, of Michal,
and of Jonathan, are related in Scripture without blaming them: they are not
censured by the Inspired Writers; they are told by the Prophets Moses and
Samuel, without the least signification that they were Sins. Volkelius might
infer from hence that the Texts which forbid lying and falseness, are intended
of such lying as is hurtful or prejudicial to others; and that what dos no
hurt, can be the Subject of no forbidding Law. To forbid what helps some, even
to the saving of Life or Goods, without any hurt or wrong to another: why
should any Lawgiver, who respects at all the good of his People, so enact?

Notwithstanding, I think Mr. Edwards says well. If once such Doctrine is
commonly taught, all Lies will be reckned some way or other officious; and
Truth and Sincerity will be banished from the Earth.

The motions of Concupiscence are not vicious or sinful. By Concupiscence is
meant some unlawful Desire or Inclination, arising in the mind; but not
consented to, or put into practice. Methinks, so far forth as such Motions in
the mind are involuntary, they should rather be called Frailties than Sins; and
the disapproving and resisting them shall be rewarded by God. Concerning
obscene Words, Riot, Gluttony, Drunkenness, impure Desires, not forbidden by
the Law; and not strictly unlawful, till prohibited by the Gospel: We are not
much concerned in such a Dispute; it being granted on all hands, that they are
forbid in the Writings of the New Testament. Notwithstanding, I wonder that any
should say, they are not prohibited in the Mosaic Law. Some of them were
punishable with death by that Law: as Gluttony and Drunkenness, by the Law at
Deuteronomy. 21.20. Luxury, Riot, Lust, and such like, are contrary to the good of a
Man's Children, and of himself; or of his Neighbor and the Commonwealth; and
therefore are implicitly forbid by that Commandment, at Lev. 19.18. which
requires that a man should love his Neighbor as himself. I do not love my
Neighbor as my self, if I am guilty of Luxury or Riot, by which my Heir, and
the Poor are defrauded; or if I am guilty of Ambition, Covetousness, or Lust,
by which I spoil, or grind, or wrong my Neighbor. Nay, Lust, Riot, Excess,
Covetousness, do unfit us, and that very much for the service of God, and for
the honest and honorable discharge of our station, whatsoever that be in the
Commonwealth: therefore we may say, they are implicitly forbidden, by all
those Commandments of the Law, that require either the Fear, Regard, and
Service of God; or the welfare and esteem of our Neighbor or Selves.

XII. Concerning Magistrates, I believe it is not lawful for them, under the
Gospel, to inflict Capital Punishment (Death) on any Offenders; no not on
Murderers.

This was the Doctrine of diverse of the Fathers of the three first Ages; scarce
any of 'em believed otherwise. Nay they added, it is not lawful to go to the
Wars, as a Soldier or Officer; or to assist at Executions; or even to defend a
Man's own Life, by any such resistance as will take away the Life of the
injurious Aggressor. The reason they gave for this last was, that by killing a
Person who attempts to murder me, he is dispatched out of the world without
Repentance, and therefore is certainly damned: but the Christian, by being
killed, loses only his Life, and enters upon a blessed Immortality. Some
Unitarians have been of this mind, while others have written against the whole
Doctrine. In short, it is not their Doctrine, as Unitarians; for some of them
have held it, while others (I believe, the most) disallow it.

XIII. Concerning some other points, I believe as the Church of Rome believes;
for we agree with them in several points of Doctrine. What these points are, he
tells us at Chap. 9. from p. 201. Namely, that somethings were said by our
Savior, by way only of monition or counsel, not of command. That we merit by a
good Life, and may be perfect. That all Sins are not damnable. That the prayers
of the living may help the dead. Nay the Author of the Considerations on the
Explitions of the Trinity, speaks favorably of the Transubstantiation.

Let us begin at the foot of this account. The Author of the Considerations, is
no otherwise favorable to the Doctrine of the Transubstantiation, than by
saying of it, It Is only a Philosophical Error or Folly; not an Impiety, p. 21.
And again, p. 22. It Is a Mistake into which the Papists have been cozened by
the Philosophy of Aristotle. Would Mr. Edwards think a man favored the
Doctrines in his Books, if he gave them no better Names than Mistakes, Errors
and Follies? Mr. Edwards finds Impiety, Irreligion, Atheism, and what not, in
all Doctrines, and all Authors he dislikes: We are no so dextrous. We sometimes
think that we spy an Error or Mistake; and sometimes it seems so gross as to
deserve the name of a Folly: but to call it Impiety, Irreligion, Abnegation of
Christianity; how much soever Mr. Edwards delights in it, and makes it his
constant Practice as well in preaching as writing; we cannot approve the
Example, it being always contrary to Charity, good Manners, and Truth.

The Prayers of this Living may help the Dead. Mr. Edwards quotes for this but
one Socinian Writer; nor is that Author positive in the case. He only says;
Those who believe a middle state or place for the Dead, do well to pray for
them: That is, in case you suppose, beside Heaven and Hell, some middle place
where Souls may repent and reform, or are any otherwise capable of mercy, or
where they have not yet received their last Doom: It is Charity to interceed by
our Prayers for them, as much as we would for the Living. I believe he is the
only Writer of his Sect, that can be charged with any such thing: but we have
it in print, concerning a late Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Sheldon; that he
prayed for the Dead in his daily Prayers. But what one particular Man dos or
says, is not to be imputed to his whole Party, and reported to the whole world
as an Article of their Creed.

All Sins are not damnable. A Christian may merit by his good works, and may be
perfect. Merit and Perfection may be truly or falsely said of the works and life
of a Christian man; according as you interpret the terms Merit and Perfection.
Taking 'em in the sense that Protestants use them; no Man can merit of God, the
infinite Recompenses of Heaven, and of Blessedness everlasting: nor was any Man
perfect, or without Sin; but only that Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of
the world. But Merit and Perfection are sometimes used in a popular sense;
namely for that, tho imperfect, yet sincere Obedience to God's Commandments, to
which God has graciously appointed the recompense of everlasting Blessedness in
Heaven: and for universal Obedience, as it is opposed (not to Oversights and
Frailties, but) a wilful indulging our selves in particular Sins. In this sense
every sincere Christian both merits and is perfect. Yet, I own that diverse
Unitarian Writers have spoke either too loosly, or too incorrectly on the point
of Perfection; but they have been as much opposed, by some of their own number.
The same cannot be said, concerning the distinction of Sin into mortal and
venial; for our People are positive and unanimous, that as St. John words this
matter, there is a Sin which is not unto death, 1 John 5.16. God Almighty, they
say, has not appointed Hellfire to our Frailties and Inadvertences; but to our
Contempts and advised Breach of his Laws.

Some things said by our Savior, are Counsels to such as would be perfect; not
absolute indispensible Commands to all the Faithful without exception. He
quotes for this, an obscure passage of one single Socinian Writer, who never
was espoused in that matter by any of his Party. We judge that the distinction
of Counsels and Commands, is a great and very dangerous Presumption; a
backdoor by which to escape from almost a man's whole Duty. The two Doctrines
of Counsels for the perfect and probable Opinions, will furnish the most
profligate Wretch in the world, with defenses and excuses for his very greatest
Enormities.

Lastly, after all, I believe, Tho the aforesaid Articles are all of 'em
necessary to make a Man a Socinian: yet the belief of only one of them, is
enough to make a Man a Christian; and that one Article is, that Jesus is the
Messiah: In which it is not included, whether he be God or Man, or whether he
satisfied Divine Justice for our Sins by his Death; but only that a Man of
Nazareth was ordained, and sent by God to be a Savior.

I see all Mr. Edwards his Colts-teeth are not yet out of his head; he cannot
forbear dealing sometimes in Railery and Wit: but I must seriously desire him
to name me any Socinian or Unitarian Writer that ever said, no more is required
to make a Christian, but only that he believe Jesus is the Messiah. The truth
of the matter is this; Mr. Edwards has been lately very much foiled, first by a
Learned Gentleman, then by a Divine of the Church of England, upon this
Question; Whether it be of the essence of a Christian as a Christian, to assent
to more than this one Article, that Jesus is the Messiah, sent by God to
instruct and save the World? They do not doubt that it is a Christians duty to
learn (by degrees) all the other Articles of the Christian Creed, and to
believe them; but if he has attained, or (by occasion of whatsoever
Impediments, that were not caused by his own Negligence or Perverseness) he can
attain to more either Knowledge or Faith; yet this one Article does make him a
Christian. It does not satisfy Mr. Edwards, that upon all the points in
question, they have declared themselves to be Anti-Socinians: he resolves for
all that they shall be Socinians; and this opinion which they maintain against
him, a new Article of the Socinian Creed. It may be one way he thinks to reduce
'em to silence, if he calls their opinion Socinianism: and if after that they
will not pull in their Horns, it shall be Irreligion or downright Atheism, or
at least abnegation of Christianity or Popery; his other Compliments to those
whom he is pleased to attack.

I have now answered concerning all the Articles of our Religion with
sincerity, without any the least disguise; or reserved or unusual meaning or
meanings. And I am not sorry that Mr. Edwards almost constrained us to explain
our selves concerning these points. For as unsincere and untrue as his
Imputations are, and as scurrilous as his manner of representing them and
discoursing upon them sometimes is: the Retortion or Answer here made, will be
judged by indifferent and discerning Persons, to be home and satisfactory.

As to the man himself, Mr. Edwards has been serviceable to the common
Christianity, by diverse learned Books: therefore I wish to him whatsoever good,
himself desires to himself, these Concertations between us notwithstanding.

THIS Scheme as it expresses the real Sentiments of the Socinians; so it
perfectly agrees with the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and of the Church
of England: saving that in the fourth Article, concerning Original Sin,
Freewill and Grace, the Answer is not so explicit and direct as it would have
been if Mr. Edwards had not affectedly declined to declare and express the
Doctrine of the Church concerning those matters. In their first Rise, the
Unitarians followed the Doctrine of St. Austin, and Mr. Calvin, in the Article
of Original Sin; and the depending Articles, Free Will and the Grace of God:
but F. Socinus coming into Transylvania, and then into Poland, revived among
'em the Pelagian Doctrine; so that for about an Age they were Pelagians, in the
question of Original Sin, and its Dependents. In this last Century, as they
speak, or Age, being the seventeenth from the birth of our Savior, those
Questions have received a new turn in all the Western Churches: that is to say,
among the Roman Catholics; and the Protestants of all denominations. A kind of
Semipelagianism is grown into repute in most places, being a temper or
expedient of Peace, both Parties yielding somewhat; and yet both retaining
enough to make their Doctrine consistent with our natural Notions of the
Justice and Mercy of God. And to this I think the Unitarians now rather
incline; but not generally, that is, not universally, or not all of them.

In short, the above-recited Scheme is direct and clear: except only in the
fourth Article concerning Original Sin; and the Points thereon depending. But
those Questions being now variously held in all Churches, and among all
Parties: the Socinians are no more Dissenters on the account of what some, or
most of them believe concerning that Article; than Bishop Jer. Tailor (for
instance) and Dr. Hammond, and the Remonstrant Party, supposed to be the
greater part of the Church of England, are. So that upon the whole we may say,
There is now no Sociniun Controversy. The misunderstanding that was common to
both Parties, the Church and the Unitarians, is annihilated: and Mr. Firmin, by
approving and publishing the Scheme of Agreement, professed himself of the same
mind with the Catholic Church, and the Church of England.

Mr. Firmin was sensible of this; notwithstanding as Curator of the Unitarian
an Religion, he resolved to have continued his endeavors, that no false Notion
o^ the Trinity should corrupt the sincere Faith of the Unity. He was persuaded
that the Faith of the Unity is the first Article of Christianity; the Article
that distinguishes Christians from Pagans: as the belief of the Messiah already
come, distinguishes us from Jews. He judged that tho the unscriptural terms
Trinity, three Divine Persons, and such like, in the sense they are intended by
the Church, contain a Doctrine which is true; yet taken in the sense they bear
in common familiar Speech, in which sense the greater number of men (almost all
the unlearned) must needs understand them; they imply a more gross and absurd
Polytheism, than any of the old Heathens were guilty of. He that understands
three Divine Persons to be three (distinct, infinite, all-perfect) Spirits or
Beings or Minds, three Creators, three several Objects of Worship, is more
guilty of Polytheism, than the Greeks or Romans ever were before their
conversion to Christianity: for tho they and other Nations were Heathens, that
is, Polytheists, Asserters of more Gods; yet they never believed more than one
Infinite All-perfect Spirit, the Father and King of the lesser Deities. Mr.
Firmin knew well that the Majority of vulgar Christians, and not a few Learned
Men, have a Tritheistick Notion or Conception of the Trinity, or three Divine
Persons, each of which is God: namely, that they are three distinct Infinite
All-perfect Minds or Spirits. Meeting this every day in Conversation as well as
in Books; he was not less zealous for the Doctrine of the Unity, after the
Publication of the Scheme of Agreement, than before. And therefore he purposed,
besides the continuation of all his former Efforts, to hold Assemblies for
Divine Worship, distinct from the Assemblies of any other denomination of
Christians. But he did not intend these Assemblies or Congregations by way of
scism or separation from the Church; but only as Fraternities in the Church,
who would undertake a more especial care of that Article, for the sake of which
it is certain both the Testaments were written. The great design and scope of
both Testaments, and the reason that they were given by God, was to regain
Mankind to the belief and acknowledgment of but one God: to destroy Polytheism
of all sorts. Mr. Firmin intended to recommend it to the Unitarian
Congregations, as the very reason of their distinct assembling; to be
particularly mindful of, and zealous for, the Article of the Unity; to cause it
to be so explained in their Assemblies, Catechisms and Books (without denying,
or so much as suppressing the Catholic Doctrine of the Trinity) that all men
might easily and readily know in what sense the Unity of God is to be believed,
and the Mystery of a Trinity of Divine Persons (each of them God) is to be
interpreted. Mr. Firmin feared, that without such Assemblies, the continual use
of terms, which in their ordinary signification are confessed by all to imply
three Gods, would paganize in some time the whole Christian Church; which is
Heathen already in the majority of its Members, by occasion of those terms: and
that no sufficient care is taken to interpret them to the people.

I though to have ended here: but the Dean of St. Paul's having published a
large Book in Quarto, to which he gives the title of the present state of the
Socinian Controversy: I think my self obliged to take notice of it, and make a
fit Answer to it. In order whereunto, it will be even necessary to consider
also, briefly, his former Books: indeed my Answer will be little more than a
comparing the Doctrine of these Books with this last; in which, as to his
Notions, (tho proposed commonly in somewhat improper, unconvenient, and
dangerous expressions) he has given satisfaction to Dr. S -- th, and the Oxford
Heads; in other words, he is become truly Catholic, and perfectly Unitarian.

Mr. Firmin had caused to be written a brief History of the Unitarians, and
brief Notes on the Creed of Athanasius, in the years 1689 and 1690. Dr.
Sherlock was then more at leisure than he desired; so he answered in a wrathful
Book, entitled, A Vindication of the Doctrine of the H. Trinity. In this
Vindication he lays about him for that sort of Trinity, that had been opposed
in the aforesaid History and Notes: a Trinity of (Infinite, Eternal,
All-perfect) Minds, Beings, and Spirits. The Doctrine of his Book, may be
summed into this following short Abstract.

The H. Trinity is three such Persons as are substantially distinct; or are
three distinct Spiritual Substances. Being distinct Persons, they must needs be
distinct Substances; Persons and intelligent Substances, being reciprocal
terms, or signifying the same thing. The Divine Persons are three Beings, three
Spirits, three Minds, as distinct as three human Persons, as distinct as Peter,
James, and John. Each of these Minds or Spirits has a distinct Understanding,
Wisdom, and Will, of his own; a distinct absolutely-perfect Wisdom, Goodness,
and Power; for these perfections may be, and are, in more than one. And as each
of them is an all-perfect Spirit; each of them also is a God. Yet are they not
three Gods; because being internally conscious to each others thoughts and
actions: by means of this mutual consciousness, tho they are three all-perfect
Spirits, and each of them a God, they are but one God.

If we will say truth, Dr. Sherlock was no more overseen in this explication of
the Trinity, than the principal Divines and Preachers at London, and both
Universities. To my knowledge, they upbraided Mr. Firmin with this Book of Dr.
Sherlock's: and some of them told him; If Dr. Sherlock's Book did not reclame
him from his Heresy, it would rise up in Judgment against him. It came forth
cum licentia superiorum: and shortly after, the Doctor was restored to all his
Preferments, which he had forfeited by refusing the Oaths to the Government;
with the addition of the Deanary of St. Paul's.

But neither the Canonical License, nor the new and great Preferment, nor the
approbations and applauses from so many (and so considerable) Fautors, could
prevent a most terrible after-clap. For to say nothing of the Answer, first by
the Socinians, and then by Dr. S -- th; the Heads of Colleges at Oxford, Nov.
25. 1695, made and ordered the publication of this Censure and Decree. These
words, there are three distinct Minds and Substances in the Trinity; and these
words, the three Persons in the Trinity, are three distinct infinite Minds or
Spirits, and three individual Substances; are Erroneous, Heretical, and
Impious. And we require all persons, who are committed to our institution or
care, that they affirm no such Doctrine, either by preaching or otherwise.

When this Decree came abroad, Dr. Sherlock's former Abettors deserted him in
whole troops: and now they said, Universities speak but seldom, and by way of
Authority, without giving the reasons of their Decrees; but as they interpose
but rarely, and in important Cases, it is always with certainty. In short, from
this time, Doctor Sherlock was left almost alone. That I know of, the same
Doctors, Dignitaries, Deans, Bishops, who had boasted of his Book (not only as
orthodox, but) as unanswerable; now tackt about, and as much approved the
Oxford-Decree. The most now said, it was even necessary to make and publish the
Decree: Tritheism being so much worse than Sabellianism or Socinianism, as
Paganism or Heathenism is worse than mere Judaism; there is no body but will
prefer the faith of the Jews, though so unperfect, before the many Gods of the
Heathens. Dr. Sherlock was often told of these murmurs, and that they were
grown general: his answer was, that he was sure that he was in the right. And
accordingly he shortly published his Examination of the Oxford- Decree. In this
Examination he often repeats his former doctrine. He says, for instance, P. 46.
These Decreeing and Heresy-making Heads of Colleges, have condemned the true
Catholic Faith, the Nicene Faith, and the Faith of the Church of England. He
adds in the same page, Three Divine Persons, who are not three distinct Minds
and Substances, is not greater Heresy, than it is Nonsense.

P. 31. The present dispute is about three distinct infinite Minds and
Substances in the Trinity; whether this be Catholic doctrine, and Catholic
language? If it appears that they (the Fathers) owned three distinct
Substances, both name and thing; there can be no dispute about three Minds.

P. 23. If God begets no substance, he begets nothing that is real; -- And
then, neither is God a real Father, nor the Son a real Son.

P. 22. If a Divine Person, as a Person, and as a distinct Person from the
other two Persons, be not an infinite Mind; there is an end of the Christian
Trinity.

P. 18. The three Persons must be as distinct Minds, Spirits, and Substances,
as they are distinct Persons.

Every body disliked this Answer to the Oxford Heads; it was owned to be
Heresy, in excelsis: Dr. Sherlock's more warm Opposers called out for the
sitting of a Convocation, to censure such a manifest subversion of the Catholic
Faith, in the first and chief Article of it. The Doctor however was still
constant to his Doctrine; he persevered in his former I am sure that I am in
the right.

Shortly after came forth the judgment of a disinterested Person, concerning
the Controversy between Dr. S -- TH and Dr. SHERLOCK. This Author states the
Doctrines of the Trinity, and the Incarnation or Divinity of our Savior, as
they have been for many Ages held in the Catholic Church: and proves his
explication of them, by a great number of incontestable Authorities, especially
of General Councils. He evinces by diverse clear (both Theological and
Philosophical) Reasons: that three infinite spiritual Substances, three eternal
all-perfect Beings, Minds, or Spirits, are most certainly three Gods. He
concludes that Dr. S -- th and the Oxford Heads are undoubtedly in the right,
in censuring the Doctrine of three infinite all-perfect spiritual Substances,
Spirits, Minds or Beings, as Tritheism; yet that Dr. Sherlock had no ill
meaning; for he only proposed to himself to defend the received Doctrines of
the Trinity and Incarnation, tho he unhappily mistook in the explication of
those Doctrines. One may say this Book is perfectly well written, the Catholic
Doctrine is truly stated and asserted by the very Authorities and Reasons on
which it has been so long and so generally received: and tho the Author is
constrained by the evidence of the proofs which he alleges, to assent to the
Oxford-Heads, and to Dr. S -- th; yet he always speaks of Dr. Sherlock, not
only with much tenderness, but with a great deal of respect and deference.

Dr. Sherlock on the contrary, answers with so much virulence, as if the Author
had done to him some personal irreparable, or even mortal Injury: and with so
much self-conceit and confidence, as if himself had obtained the monopolies of
Learning and good sense.

He intitles his answer to the disinterested, The Doctrine of a real Trinity
vindicated, in answer to a Socinian Pamphlet. As if it were Socinianism to
oppose Tritheism.

He begins his Book with these words. This Author calls himself a Presbyter of
the Church of England: I pray God to preserve the Church from such Presbyters,
who eat her Bread, and betray her Faith. His other Sippets are, Socinian
Heretic, bantering Socinian, and such like Sweets, with which this Doctor's
dishes are always enchaced.

But to let those matters pass, in this Answer he recites the Authorities and
Reasons urged by the disinterested; and in a Paragraph or two bestowed on each
of them, he triumphs at last gloriously over all of them. But what is very
surprising; tho he confutes all the Reasons, and baffles all the Authorities in
the whole Book, yet it is in this very Answer that he begins to bethink him, and
retracts all his Heterodoxies; nay becomes altogether of the same mind with the
Author against whom he writes. Let us hear what he says.

Page 12. The Nominals ( i. e. Dr. S -- th and the Oxford Heads) and the
Socinians differ in some forms of Speech, but there is no considerable
difference in their Faith.

P. 6. These Phrases, three Minds, three Spirits, three Substances, ought to be
used very cautiously, and not without great necessity.

P. 14. They are Expressions liable to a very heretical sense, to Arianism and
Tritheism.

P. 30. In the common acceptance of the word, the Divine Persons are not three
Substances; but one Substance actually and really subsisting thrice. He meant
to say, three manner of ways; subsisting thrice is nonsense.

P. 35. The Trinity is one supreme Being; this is the Doctrine of St. Austin,
the Schools and Fathers. Can any one say Dr. Sherlock has not given
satisfaction to the Oxford-Heads, and Dr. S -- th? Were F. Socinus, Smalcius,
Crellius, and Ruarus to judge of this Doctrine, they would be content it should
be inserted into their Racovian Catechism, they would embrace the Author as an
absolute Unitarian.

P. 36. Father, Son and Spirit are (...), one and the same Substance; they are
(...), the unity, of Sameness or Identity: This is true Catholic Doctrine, and
the Language of the Nicene Fathers: And of all the Socinians, from F. Sacinus
to Mr. T. F. But we shall hear by and by he will confess that also.

P. 61. Three infinite Persons, each of which is Mind and Spirit, are but one
and the same infinite and eternal Spirit. Catholic again, and Unitarian all
over: For when the Church says, each Divine Person is Mind and Spirit; the
meaning is, the Divine Persons are internal relative Properties, of the same
infinite Mind and Spirit: and being so, each of them indeed is Mind and Spirit,
but not a Mind or a Spirit. Had Dr. Sherlock but known this in time, he had
never wrote against the Unitarians, nor fallen under the Oxford-Censure.

P. 65. The Socinians will grant that one Divinity is but one God: and the
reason why they assert that one God is but one Person, is, because they think
it impossible the same undivided Divinity should subsist distinctly in three
Persons. But then before they had charged the Faith of the Trinity with
Tritheism, they should have remembered, that the Persons of the Trinity are not
three such Persons as their one Person is, whom they call one God: and
therefore tho three such Persons, three such Minds, Spirits and Substances, as
their one Person and one Spirit is, (who is the whole Divinity confined to one
single Person) would indeed be three Gods; yet three such Persons as the
Catholic Church owns, who are all the same One Substance, are not three Gods.
The short of this is, the Church does not mean by three Persons, what the
Socinians mean; if she did, they would rightly accuse her of Tritheism; three
such Persons as the Socinians oppose are indeed three Gods. He repeats the same
thing, p. 67, in these words: The three Divine Persons as we have now explained
them, are not three such Persons; as the Socinians must confess three Persons
must be who are three Gods. Right, for you have now acknowledged that what you
call three Persons is indeed (...), one self-same spiritual Substance, (...),
the Unity of Indentity, one supreme Being, one and the same infinite and
eternal Spirit: which in all your former Books, was Nonsense and Heresy, and
not greater Nonsense than Heresy; as they who please may see in the places I
have quoted, and in above forty other places of your Writings. I shall tell you
not only the Oxford-Heads, or Dr. S -- th, but F. Socinus or T. F. would never
have required you to say more than you now say: it was not the Trinity held by
the Catholic Church, that Socinus or T. F. rejected; but only a Trinity of such
Divine Persons, as are distinct Substances, Spirits and Minds, which (at
length) you also expressly disown: but which too many in the Church, misled by
the dangerous unscriptural terms, now so much contended for, did and do hold.
There can never be a sincere Peace, till those terms are discarded. For tho
after eight years Disputation, a Doctor of Divinity and a Dean has been hardly
persuaded out of the Heresy of three Spirits, Minds or Substances: yet the
continuance of these unscriptural Terms, without an exact Explication of them
in Sermons and Catechisms, heathenizes all the common People, nay and great
numbers of not unlearned persons.

It Is evident now I suppose to every body, that the Disinterested was not
concerned to reply to such an Answer as this. Dr. Sherlock indeed confuted most
plainly all his Reasons, and trampled upon his Authorities: but kindly granted
him the Doctrine for which he contended.

I was in hope therefore all the dust and noise had been at an end; but Dr.
Sherlock, who has no mercy on a conquered Enemy, thought fit to make a new
Onset. He published a Sermon, concerning the danger of corrupting the Faith by
Philosophy: in which with a great deal of bitterness, and many Invectives
against the Unitarians, he declares, that, The Unitarian (and all other
Heresies) have their rise and strength from Philosophy and Reason. He pretends
that Religion must be learned, and taught only from Holy Scripture; not indeed
from the mere Letter or Phrase of Holy Scripture, without allowance for
Metaphors, and such like Schemes of Speech; but from the obvious and natural
senfe of the words of Scripture; without presuming to mollify or change in the
least, what seems to be the proper sense of the words, on the account of any
Opposition thereto by Reason or Philosophy. He takes occasion here to declame
against Reason and Philosophy, as most dangerous Deceits and Impostures, the
true Originals and Causes of all Heresies and Errors in Religion. His topics
of Argument for these things, are the same that have been always advanced by
the maintainers of Transubstantiation, and other such like Doctrines; which
have been rejected by the Protestant Churches, on the account that they are
flatly contrary to Reason and Philosophy. This Sermon had been out but a little
time, when Mr. Firmin published Remarks on it. The Author of the Remarks, first
makes an Abstract or Summary of the Sermon; and then examins part by part, the
said Summary or Abstract. He proves, that the use of Philosophy and Reason is
even necessary for the right understanding of Holy Scripture, or of any other
Book or Speech whatsoever; and that it is by Reason, which is no other thing but
common sense, and by Philosophy, which is nothing but experimental Knowledge,
that we can judge when a Book (confessed on all hands to be true and certain)
speaks figuratively and popularly, and when strictly, grammatically and
literally. In a word, it is by Reason and Philosophy chiefly, that the true
meaning and intention of any Book, which Book or Writing is granted to be
certainly true, can be found.

The Remarks are so written, that Dr. Sherlock thinks fit to deny, that his
Sermon is truly represented; he says in his Vindication of the Sermon, The
Author of the Remarks, gives the sense of my Sermon in his own words, and
directly contrary to my meaning. -- I who made the Sermon knew nothing of it
but by mere guess, as it lays in his Abstract. Vind. p. 4. He adds again, at p.
28. The Author of the Remarks has not opposed the Doctrine of my Sermon; but
his own Chimeras and Follies. In short, the Doctor complains, that his whole
Sermon is misreported by the Author of the Remarks; and that it was not at all
his Intention in the Sermon, to speak against Philosophy or Reason, but only
against what some men call Philosophy and Reason; and against vain pretenses to
Reason and Philosophy, Vind. p. 5. He quotes two or three mincing passages of
his Sermon, which speak not of philosophy and Reason, but of Pretenders and
Pretenses to Reason and Philosophy; and these two or three Passages he offers
as the true and whole intention of his Sermon. But,

It is certain, himself had other thoughts of the intention of his Sermon, when
he published it, and before he law it confuted: for he gives it this Title, The
danger of corrupting Religion by Philosophy; not by Pretender, or Pretenses to
Philosophy.

It Is certain, also, that the Arguments he alleges are directed against
Philosophy it self, and Reason it self; as every one sees in the Sermon, and in
the Vindication of it. He has (for instance) this passage, laughed at by so
many. If a. Contradiction to fallible Sense, be not a good objection against
the truth of any thing; how comes a Contradiction to much more fallible Reason,
to be an unanswerable objection? Vind. p. 14.

Farther, when he is explaining his Text, he says. Beware, lest any spoil you
through Philosophy and vain Deceit; that is, through the vain deceit of Philosophy:
Philosophy cheats men with a flattering but false appearance. It may unsettle
weak minds, but cannot lay a sure or solid foundation for Faith; it may cheat
men out of their Faith, but, when that is done, can give nothing in the room of
it. Sermon. p. 2. He has diverse such passages, addressed directly against Reason
and Philosophy: but after the Remarks on those passages came abroad, he thought
(it should seem) that, seeing what he had so hastily said could no ways be
defended, his best way would be to deny that ever he said or intended it. He
thought, perhaps, it would be a less loss of Reputation, if two or three prying
malicious Fellows will read the Sermon again, and thereby discover either that
the Doctor had forgot himself, or would venture (in a straight) on an apparent
falsity; than to make himself contemptible to learned and discerning Men, by
pertinacy in Opinions that had been so clearly refuted. I leave it to others to
judge whether this were an exact Computation.

But, I think, I had not mentioned this Sermon, or its Vindication, but that
here again the Doctor calls in his Heterodoxies concerning the Trinity. He
disowns here the expression three infinite Minds and Spirits, as very
inconvenient, and liable to an heretical Interpretation: it ought not to be
used, he says, in the absolute; but only in a qualified and restrained Sense.
His words are, I freely acknowledge, that three infinite Minds and Spirits, is
liable to a very Heretical and Tritheistic Sense, if understood absolutely.
Sermon. p. 3. But this was never acknowledged till the Judgment by the
Disinterested, and the Remarks, had extorted it from him.

I come now to his third and last book of Retractations, his present state of
the Socinian Controversy; which, as it is much larger than any of the rest, so
it is more express and direct against the Heresy of three infinite eternal
Minds, Spirits, Beings, or Substances. It Is also written so much more calmly,
than any former piece by the same hand; that I could scarce believe it was
Doctor Sherlock's. Abating a little grumbling of the gizard against Dr. S -- th
and the Oxford Heads, for former harshness and irreverence; and a small aching
of the teeth against the unpardonable Socinians, the Causers (or however the
Occasioners) of all our Misfortunes: the book is wrote in a reasonable and
pacific manner; the only book of a great many, so written by this Author. I
will present the Reader with the Doctrine of this remarkable and useful Book,
under distinct heads; that every one may see he has entirely changed his
opinions, that were censured by the Oxford Heads, and refuted by the Unitarians.

First, concerning God; what is the definition of God, and of what sort is the
Divine Unity? He answers;

P. 25. This is the notion that all mankind have of one God, one infinite
eternal Being, or Nature.

P. 35. God is an eternal infinite Mind. So all, as well Christians as
Philosophers, hold.

P. 49. What is the natural Notion we have of God? But one eternal Being, the
cause of all other Beings.

P. 309. They (the Divine Persons) are as perfectly One, as a created Mind is.

P. 319. A Perichoresis, Union, or mutual Inbeing of minds, can never make
three complete absolute Minds to be essentially one.

P. 343. Three (absolute, whole, individual) Divine Natures, is Tritheism.

P. 371. The Divine Persons cannot properly be called three infinite Minds or
Spirits. For Mind, as well as God, is not the name of their persons; but of
their nature, which is identically the same in all three.

We see here, he propounds the Doctrine of the Church, and of the Unitarians,
both Affirmatively and Negatively, and both ways makes it his own. In defining
or describing God, he says, one God is one infinite BEING, one eternal and
infinite MIND: And though we say three Divine Persons, yet (whatever is thereby
meant, and he will tell us by and by what is meant) they are as perfectly one
MIND, as a created mind is one. Then Negatively he says, The Divine Persons are
not three Minds or Spirits: and as to what some say, and himself had often said
in former Books of the Perichoresis, he now owns no mutual Inbeing of three
Spirits or Minds, can ever make them to be one.

In accounting for the nature of the Divine Persons, he speaks the very
language of the Disinterested, of the Author of the Remarks; and of the
Agreement that was wrote in answer to Mr. Edwards, to my Lords the Bishops of
Sarum, Chichester, Worcester, and to Monsieur de Luzanzy. His words are these.

P. 256. We acknowledge one God, distinguished only by these personal
Properties, Paternity, Filiation, Procession, as each of them has a complete
Hypostasis, distinguished only by MODES of subsistence.

P. 258. The Divine Nature subsists distinctly in three; according to their
distinct characters of Unbegotten, Begotten, and Procee^ing. And these we call
Persons, because they have some Analogy (or likeness) to individuals in created
Beings; which, in an I^telligent nature, are called Persons. P. 197. We must
use such words as we have; and qualify their sense, as we can.

P. 259. When we distinguish between Person and Essence; and say there are
three Persons and one Essence: By one Essence, we mean one Divinity; by Persons
we mean the Divine Essence as unbegotten, and as communicated by Generation and
Procession.

P. 280. Tho each Divine Person is the Divine Nature and Essence; yet three
Divine Persons are not three Natures or Essences, but three Relations in one
singular absolute Nature.

P. 297. That one Nature is but one Person, and one Person but one Nature; that
individual Natures and Persons must always be multiplied with each other, is
the fundamental Principle of all Heresies, relating either to the Trinity or
the Incarnation.

Sure this last effort was a very hard and grievous strain to him; for 'twas
the very principle that misled him into the Heresy of three spiritual infinite
Substances, Minds and Beings. He took it for his foundation, that Persons and
intelligent Natures or Substances, are convertible, or are the same: and this
error made him obstinate in it, even after the Oxford Decree, that the Divine
Persons ye so many distinct spiritual Substances, distinct Spirits and Minds.

Well, but let us put together this whole reformed Doctrine, about the Divine
Persons. They are not distinct Beings, Natures, Substances, Minds, or Spirits;
but only personal Properties, or distinct Relations in the same singular
nature. Would you know the Mystery more particularly, what you are to
understand by personal Properties, and distinct Relations, in the same singular
Nature or Essence? The Doctor will not be difficult or reserved in the matter;
he answers. The Persons, personal Properties, or distinct Relations, are the
Divine Essence (or Substance) unbegotten, and communicated by Generation and
Procession; that is, Begotten and Proceeding. Do you except against it, or make
doubt, that Relations, personal Properties, Unbegotten, Begotten, and
Proceeding, are properly called Persons, or may have the names of Father, Son,
and Spirit? He will deliver you from your scruples; he wisely minds you, that
we must of necessity use such words as we have; and regulate or qualify their
sense, as well as we can. In two words, he says: The Divine Persons are so
called, because we must use such words as we have; and because they have some
likeness to Persons of the created Nature: but in truth they are only personal
Properties, or distinct Relations, of the same singular nature, namely, of the
Divinity. Or if you had rather, they are the Divine Essence, or Divinity,
considered as Unbegotten, Begotten, and Proceeding. This is a true and an exact
Abridgment of his large Book. I will not think he has so little conscience as
to pretend; that the Unitarians have in their late Contests opposed this
Trinity: it is the account that themselves give of it, and profess to believe;
in that part of the Agreement, which is in answer to my Lords the Bishops of
Worcester and Chichester. It Is the account also given by Dr. S -- th, in his
Animadversions, and his Tritheism charged; by the Disinterested, by the Bishops
of Worcester and of Sarum. In eight years time, this fierce Opposer of the
Unitarians has (with much to do) learned, that the Trinity is not three Minds,
Spirits, or Substances, but three internal Relations, three personal Properties
of the Divinity: In eight more, it may be, he will understand, that those are
good Catholics, and orthodox Christians, who reject no other Trinity, but of
distinct Substances, Spirits, or Minds.

We are all agreed in the Faith it self; and even as to the ordinary terms, the
more learned Trinitarians wish, as the Unitarians do, that they were abolisht:
but as to some other less usual terms, that occur in the debating these
questions, there is some disagreement among Divines; I take notice that, as to
these, Dr. Sherlock is always on the worse side, and for the weaker Reasons.

For Instances. It Is a question, whether we may not say three Divine
Substances, as well as three Persons? They that put the question, or that so
speak, grant that in very deed there is but one Divine Substance, in the
absolute sense of the word: yet may we not say (with Sr. Hilary) three
Substances, in a restrained limited and relative sense? That is, meaning
thereby, the one real Divine Substance, considered in its distinct: Relations
or Properties: for hereby the Substance, tho it is not multiplied, yet it is
thrice numbered; and in that respect, it should seem, may be, called three
relative Substances. This is a very slight Reasoning, and never misled any body
but St. Hilary. For men never say THREE, on the account that a thing is
considered three manner of ways; with three Modes, three Properties, or three
Relations. Why therefore should we introduce such an improper, as well as
dangerous form of speaking concerning God: a form of speaking that in its
natural and immediate sense, destroys the divine Unity; and introduces, by
their own confession, three Gods? Notwithstanding, Dr. Sherlock is pleased to
approve of that form; he says,

P. 379. We must not say three Substances in the Trinity, for fear of saying
three Gods. Yet we must own that each Divine Person is true and perfect
substance; and three in substance are three Substances: not indeed three
absolute, but three relative Substances. -- In the Trinity there is one
absolute, and three relative Substances.

P. 287. An absolute Substance is one entire, perfect, individual Whole:
Relative Substances are internal subsisting Relations, in the same one whole
individual substance.

The meaning is Orthodox; the words Heterodox, and Fantastical. He grants that
to affirm three Divine Substances, is to affirm three Gods: but then, meaning
by Substances, what no body means, the same one absolute individual Substance
numbered three times, or numbered with its three Properties, or Relations, we may
affirm three Divine relative Substances.

Again. Those that grant, it must not be said in any sense whatsoever, that
there are three Divine Substances; yet they make it a question, Whether the one
only Divine Substance is one numerical Substance, and one singular Substance?
They own the Divine Substance is really but one, identically one; it is one
self-same Substance, not two or three, in whatsoever sense. For all that, they
are not willing to say; the substance of God is numerically one, is one
numerical, or one solitary, or singular Substance: their wise Reason is this.
Though the Divine Substance is one in Nature, and in the thing numbered, as the
School-Doctors, speak; yet being thrice numbered, for it is numbered distinctly
to (or with) its three Properties, or Relations: therefore we deny it to be
numerically one; tho it is really, naturally, and identically one. Now we grant
to these Anti-Grammarians, that the thing they intend, is true: but they should
not deny propositions, that are true in their Grammatical and immediate Sense;
because they are not true in a sense, that no man ever was so wild as to impose
it upon them. It Is something worse than trifling, to deny orthodox and
necessary Propositions, on a pretense that mad men may take them in a sense
contrary to their direct, immediate and constant meaning. When we say, the
divine (or any other) Substance is numerically one; or is one numerical, one
singular, one solitary Substance: every body knows that the words solitary,
singular and numerical, are used only in opposition to plural, more, or many;
so that one solitary, singular, or numerically one Substance, is intended only
as a denial of this heretical Proposition, three Substances. If the reason
given by Dr. Sherlock, and some few others, why they will not say, one
singular, or solitary, or numerically one Substance, were good; they must never
say one numerical, one solitary or singular Earth or Sun, or other body or
thing whatsoever. Nay, they must not dare to say, numerically one GOD, one
singular or solitary GOD; which yet are forms, that (I presume) they will own
as orthodox, nay as necessary. There is no thing or being whatsoever, but must
be at least thrice numbered; namely to the three Properties of every Being,
Verum, bonum unum: therefore if we must not say, one numerical, or one singular
or solitary Divine Substance, because this Substance is thrice numbered, viz.
with or to its three Relations or Properties; neither may we say one numerical,
or one solitary or singular Earth, or Sun, because they are thrice numbered, are
distinctly numbered to the three Properties of Verum, bonum, unum. But this
impertinent niceness, Dr. Sherlock every where takes up, and contends for it,
as an important truth: unless we exclude the terms solitary, singular and
numerical, he is positive that we shall lose the three Divine Persons.

P. 195. The singularity of the Divine Substance is a Sabellian Notion, and
destroys the faith of a real Trinity.

P. 213. An individual Substance; but not one solitary, or singular Substance.

P. 246. The Unity of the Divine Substance or Nature is not an unity of number,
but of sameness, and identity.

P. 249. It Is not a singular Nature or Substance, with the singularity of
solitude, but of identity or sameness.

I imagine Dr. Sherlock's best Friends will not deny, it is an odd melancholy
humor of his, to espouse and affect: Terms and Phrases, that have been
rejected by all Learned Men, as improper, dangerous, and tending to Tritheism;
merely that he may amuse Novices in these Questions, and may afterward explain
his Riddles, to the admiration of the weak or unlearned, and the sleight of the
learned and discerning.

He concludes his Book, with an Address to the Unitarians, to this effect. They
were not best to concern themselves, with him, or against his Book; for if they
do, they shall certainly be called to account for it in this World, as well as
in the World to come. I take this to be another melancholy Fit: for the
Orthodox will but laugh at the threatenings of a Man under public Censure, for
the very worst Heterodoxy. What! three relative substances, call to account
honest, orthodox one absolute Substance? Believe me, Doctor, they despise the
menace. They send you word, Physician heal thy self. Mr. Informer, purge your
own Books, even this last, of the many Heterodoxies in it. As,

Page 191. The Son is nothing else but the whole, entire, immediate
participation of the Father's Substance; and therefore is as perfectly one with
the Father, as the Father is one. It Is Sabellian. The Son is not so one with
the Father, as the Father is one; for the Father is numerically one, as all
confess: but Father and Son are numerically two, with all but Sabellians.

P. 198. Each of them (Father, Son and Spirit) is perfect God; and therefore an
infinite Mind, and an infinite Spirit. It Is Tritheism: For if each of the
Divine Persons is an infinite Mind, or an infinite Spirit; then there are three
infinite Minds and Spirits: which is the Heresy you have been retracting
throughout this whole Book. I supoose however, he meant to say, each Divine
Person is infinite Mind and Spirit; which is Catholic, and Unitarian.

P. 247. To have asserted one singular Divine Substance, which is but one in
number, had given up the cause to the Sabellians. One singular Divine
Substance, and one in number, is the Language of the Catholic Church, and is
refused by none but Arians and Tritheists.

P 369. The name God does not originally, absolutely, and immediately belong to
the Son or Spirit; but only relatively.

P. 373. Only the Father is absolutely and simply God. It Is absolute Heresy.
Taking Father, Son and Spirit in the personal senfe; the Son and Spirit are no
less absolutely and simply GOD than the Father is. When the Unitarians say,
only the Father is God in the absolute sense; they do not take the word Father
personally: but by Father they mean the Deity. Father, Son and Spirit, as
Persons of the Deity (taking Persons in the Ecclesiastical sense, or sense of
the Church) are equally God: neither is before or after other, neither greater
or less than the other, as Athanasius rightly teaches.

In short, this perpetual Litigant understands not well, either the Doctrine of
the Church, or the Party he opposes; these are not Questions, in which he might
concern himself: they require an attention and subtilty of thought, which
either he seems not to have had, or to have lost. He has concerned himself in
the supposed Controversy between the Church and the Socinians, with like
prudence, dexterity and success, as the present Archbishop, of Paris has
intermedled between the Jansenists and Molinists. The Archbishop published an
Ordinance, against a Book entitled, An Exposition of the Catholic Faith,
touching Grace and Predestination. Father Quesnel, a Priest of the Oratory, and
Mr, du Gue, a Learned Person, but who has laid aside the habit, have severally
written upon this Ordinance. They agree that what is proposed as Catholic
Doctrine in the second Part of the Archbishop's Ordinance, is really the same
with what is censured in the first Part as the Heresy of the Jansenists: but in
another point these two Critics differ. For Mr. du Gue thinks the Archbishop
may be pardoned the Errors in the first Part, in consideration of his second
Part: but Father Quesnel does not approve this Indulgence of Mr. du Gue; he
maintains that the Archbishop cannot make satisfaction but only by a
Recantation. It Is well for Dr. Sherlock, that he dos not write among or to the
Wits of France: for his Books concerning these Questions, in truth are nothing
but heaps of Contradictions. A Person well versed in the Controversy may spell
out his meaning, and find what is the Writer's aim; but he must pardon a
thousand Improprieties and Blunders, and as many Contradictions, some of them
in the very stress, turn, or (as they speak) nicety of the Controversy.

FINIS.

