A NARRATIVE Of the DREYNING of the Great Level of the FENNS, EXTENDING Into
the Counties of Northampton, Norfolk, Suffolky, Lincoln, Cambridge and
Huntington, and the lsle of Ely, containing above Three hundred thousand Acres.
BY a Law of Sewers then made for dreyning of the said Level, King FAMES was
declared to be the Undertaker of that Work, and to have for His recompense One
hundred and twenty thousand Acres. This Dreyning was without effect.

(...) another Law of Sewers, Francis late Earl of Bedford, at the request of
the Country, undertook to dreyn (...) Level, and the Country gave him for his
recompense Ninety five thousand Acres only, whereof (...)King CHARLES was to
have 12000. Acres.

(...) said Earl took to his assistance diverse Participants, expended great
sums of money, performed the (...) had Judgment, and the 95000. Acres set out
by the Commissioners of Sewers, and by agreement (...) themselves the lot and
share of such as paid not their Taxes was to be sold.

(...) ^n complaint that the said Level was not perfectly dreyned, the late
King CHARLES, by a Law of Sew^ (...) declared to be Undertaker to dreyn the
same ( inter alia) and was to have for His recompense not only (...) 95000.
Acres set out unto the said late Earl, but also 57000. Acres more out of the
same places and Pa^ ^hin the same Level, and the said late Earl and his
Participant's were to have had 40000. Acres of the (...) Acres freed of Taxes
for their charges expanded, which had been of more advantage than the 95000
(...) 1649

(...) ^suance of this Law His late Majesty did enter upon the Work of
dreyning, but before any considera(...) ^ter done, the Work was declined, and
the Country entered upon the said 95000. Acres.

(...) said late Earl and his Participant's made application to the then
Parliament, and had their Cafe com^ (...) but the Wars happening, the Works
made as well by the said late Earl as by the King, fell to decay, and (...)
ruinous and useless.

(...) ^m now Earl of Bedford and the Participants of his late Father, did
constantly continue the prosecution (...)right, and 29 May 1649. procured a
pretended Act of Parliament to dreyn the said Level, and to have (...) ^ir
recompense the said 95000. Acres only, as set out in 13 Car. with power to
sell the shares of such as (...) ^ot their Taxes.

(...) he said Earl and his Participants proceeded in the said Work, and
perfected the same, expended above (...) ^ooo l had Judgment and were put into
possession.

In the carrying on of that Work the shares of some Adventurers were sold for
non-payment of Taxes to such persons as would pay the Taxes arere only, and
without any advantage to the said Earl and his Participants, and not any one
Adventurer but might have been admitted to his share upon payment of Taxes.

The charges of dreyning expended are much more than the Lands are worth to be
sold, besides there will be a constant yearly charge of about 8000 l, for the
maintenance of the Works.

1. In this Work the Adventurers have gained a great improvement to the
Kingdom, in recovering so much Land from the Waters. 2. The Kings Customs by
cole-seed Grain and other Commodities much increased. 3. Great increase of all
sorts of Grain, Cattle, Butter and Cheese; the Level planted and built upon,
and the subsistence of thousands of Families depend upon the preservation of
this Work. 4. In the prosecution of this Work the Adventurers have exhausted
their Estates, some to their ruin, but all to very great loss, and in equity
ought to have a further recompense and encouragement, the Country being the
only gainers.

