A NARRATIVE Of the most deplorable Death and Burial of that never to be
forgotten pattern of Love, to his Country, Capt. William Bedlow, Who deceased
the 20th. day of August, 1680. With his Attestations that he left in Writing
for the good of this Nation, concerning the late Damnable PLOT contrived by the
Papists to Destroy the King, and Subvert the Government. With the Text Preached
at his Funeral.

Romans 14. v. 12, 13. So then every one of us shall give an Account of himself
to God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this rather,
that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way.

Also a True account of the Murder committed by the Earl of Pembrook, on the
Watch belonging to Chiswick, where there was Two Killed, and One Wounded, but
some hopes of his Recovery: The Jury upon Debate not finding him Guilty, it
being not positively to be found whether he did it in his own defense, or in
presumption of his own strength, and Attestation of the Kings Watch.

With the whole Relation of The Two PROPHETS at Tholouze, in France.

Showing how they were Imprisoned, and that they could not be detained, their
Chains dropping off; And so by the Magistrates they were set free to follow
their usual Progress in the Teaching of Godliness, and the preparation for the
Day of Judgment, which, they say, will be in the Year 1690.

With their Nine PROPHECIES.

Printed for P. Brooksby at the Hospital-gate in West-smithfield.

A Narrative of Three Remarkable Stories, etc.
MY Desire of securing Truth from the Outrages of ill Men, especially when the
public is concerned, have prevailed with me to give a short Account of the
Sickness and Death of Captain Bedlow. On Monday the 9th. Day of this Instant,
he came very ill from London, having the Headache, and an extreme Looseness
most part of that Day; the next Day after he came home, he was seized with a
most violent Vomiting and Looseness; Physicians were sent for, who attended him
three days, but his Distemper increasing, on Thursday Two other Physicians were
joined in Consultation about him; his Disease still grew upon him, and he being
very Apprehensive that it would issue in his Death, and understanding that the
Lord Chief Justice North would be there to hold the Assizes the 16th. Instant,
expressed a very great desire to speak with his Lordship for discharging of his
conscience, in deposing some what which he had not before disclosed; with which
his Lordship being made acquainted, was pleased that night at his Request to go
to him; before whom he did by many repeated Asseverations, upon the Words of a
Dying Man, declare, That in all the great business of the Plot he spoke nothing
against any Person upon Oath, or otherwise by way of Accusation, but what was
true; and only complained that he had been too timorous, and rather lessened
his Evidence in some particulars.

After some short time, the Company were desired to withdraw; and none being
left with him but the Lord Chief Justice, Capt. Bedlow's Wife, and the Judges
Clerk; My Lord gave the said Mr. Bedlow his Oath, and his Clerk took a pretty
long Deposition in Writing, the Contents whereof are yet (...) thus fer we know
he made Oath, That whatsoever he had declared to the King and Council, and the
Secret Committee, and at the several Trials upon Oath, were all true, upon the
word of a dying man. He told the Judge he expected no Crown of Martyrdom for
Lying, as the Papists did, but what he said was sincerely true, as he was
shortly to appear before the great Jehovah, the maker of all flesh where he
should stand with a clear Conscience as to all matters of the Plot, wherein he
had given Evidence. He said morever to the Judge: My Lord, some will not
believe the Plot, or pretend it at least. My Lord, I speak the more, because I
know not but that I may dye this night. He very often said to my Lord Chief
Justice with great earnestness, My Lord! I pity the King! I pity the King!
His life is in danger! they will Poison, or cut him off! they are going toward
it! they are carrying on the Plot! the Papists will Kill Him! when my Lord was
going away, he called him back again, took him by the hand, and begged him to
present his most Humble Duty to the King, and to tell him he was His most loyal
and dutiful Subject, and to beseech Him to take care of Himself.

Tuesday the 17th. of August, toward the Evening, he appeared worse than he
had been all his sickness before; some about him asking him several Questions
about his Dedosition; he replied, He was a very weak man, and would talk no
more of Temporal things.

Wednesday he had a severe Fit, through the violence of which, he spoke not for
the space of 14 hours, or thereabouts. Thursday in the Evening his speech
returned to him, and he took some refreshment, and asked those about him what
day of the Month it was? and what hour of the day, exactly? One standing by,
asked him if he were satisfied in his Conscience as to what he had sworn and
acted in the public business he had been involved in? His Answer was, That as
he hoped for Salvation, all that he had sworn about the Plot was just and true,
and that he had rather omitted, than augmented any thing he had given in
Evidence. This he spoke the night before he dyed, and after he had been in a
Trance several hours.

Friday the 20th. of August Instant, his Speech failed him again, and returned
no more; and about Two of the Clock that Afternoon he expired.

Yesterday being Sunday, after he had been publicly exposed in
Merchant-Taylors Hall, in this City, to the view of all Spectators, his Corpse
was carried thence about Six of the Clock in the Evening, and buried in the
Mayors Chapel, called the Gaunts; the Funeral was attended with a very
numerous Company of Citizens, both Men and Women. Mr. Mayor, and others of the
best Quality being present, several Gentlemen of the Council, and others
bearing up the Pall. Church was hung with Black. Mr. Palmer, a-Reverend and
Learned Divine of the City, Preached an excellent Sermon at his Funeral, on
Romans 14. v. 12, 13. So then every one of us shall give an account of himself to
God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this rather,
that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way.
There were Escutcheons fixed to the Hearse, with this Inscription in black
letters in a Field-Argent.

Testimonium quod vivens Exhibuit

PHillip Earl Pembrook and Mountgomery, with several other of his Retinue,
having been abroad at Dinner at a Person of Qualities, on Wednesday being the
11th. of this Instant August, 1680; where drinking till it was late, and then,
as it is said, being somewhat High flown with Wine, they returned homewards in
a Hackney-Coach, till at last crossing over Turnham-Green, they were stopped by
the Watch belonging to the Parish of Chiswick, the Constable of the said Watch
being then with one Mr. Smeethe, a Gentleman belonging to the Court, and one
Mr. Halfpenny, another Constable of the said Parish, who just came from London
with the former Constable, and went to drink at the Cock and Half Moon, who
upon notice of a Coach being stopped, came out of the House, and coming close
up to the side of it, demanded who the persons were, and whether they were
designed, not knowinst it to be my Lord of Pembrook, nor that they had such
dangerous persons to deal withal; but being sharply answered, they made the
like Return, whereupon, as it is creditably related, his Lorship opening the
other side of the Coach, came out, and whilst the parties beforementioned were
talking to the rest, not dreaming of such a Fate, he came upon them unawares,
and with his Sword run Smeethe first into the Belly quite through, the weapon
passing out, and then wheeling about, made at Halfpenny, and with a pass run
him quite through the Body, in on one side, and out of the other; and
afterward through the Rist, so furious was he to destruction bent; and had
done greater mischief, had not Mr. Smeethe feeling himself wounded, cried out,
I will not be thus killed like a Dog, and thereupon caught a Staff out of one
of the Watchmens hands, he having none before, and with the same knocked his
Lordship down, who then began to cry for Quarter, upon which his Servants came
and fell upon him to save him from Blows, which Smeethe seeing, said, My Lord,
you have given me my Deaths-wound, and I could Kill you not having you thus at
my mercy, if I pleased, but that I scorn so foul and base a Deed, and thereupon
seized him as his Prisoner, whilst the rest of his Retinue which were about six
in number, were obliged to submit; several of the Watchmen having broke their
Staves in desending themselves, and making a stout Resistance: after his
Lordship was taken, he was by the Order of the Constable of the Watch, conveyed
to the Cock and Half Moon, strongly Guarded, for upon the Brunt of the
Skirmish, all the people in the Green were Alarmed, where they, after he was
disarmed, put him into a Chamber, and the Constable went in and discoursed with
his Lordship of the heinousness of the Affront and Violence he had done to the
Kings Watch, at which he seemed little concerned.

During the Uproar and Tumult, a person of Quality as it is said, came by, who
understanding what the cause of it was, and how his Lordship was taken, went to
visit him, and after a long conference with the Constable of the watch, his
Lordship was suffered to depart, unknown to most of the Company; they being
given to understand that he was asleep, and that none must disturb him, etc.
This Exploit was done about twelve of the Clock in the Evening, and after his
Lordship was let go, which was about One, it is said he made all speed for
London: He being gone, the Wounded men were looked after, and Chirurgions
immediately sent for, who no sooner came, but found two wounds to be Mortal,
one, viz. Halfpenny having bled so excessively, that he fainted away; and the
other, viz. Smeethe, in a short time afterward dyed, he being a Man of a
considerable Estate, and so stout, that it is believed, had he not been
surprised at unawares and unarmed as he was, none could have wronged him either
with Sword or Staff; and a person so far from offering an abuse to any, that he
abhorred the Company of such as he knew to be Guilty of the same. Mr. Halfpenny
being carried home, the Chirurgions upon sight of his Wound, durst not venture
to search the wound to any deepness, for fear that his Lungs should be pierced,
or some other of his Vital parts; so that they despair of his ever recovering,
and look every day that he will dye; there was likewise a third person hurt,
viz. a poor Fellow who was lately discharged from a Farmers Service of that
place, but his wounds were but slight. On Friday the Coroner and his Jury sat
upon the deceased, but could not agree in giving in their Verdict.

A Letter from Tholouze, in France.
A Few Days since arrived in this City Two very Ancient Men who call themselves
Apostles, and they say they have the Spirit of Truth: No person at any time
ever saw them enter into this City: They go in such an extraordinary strange
Habit as never was seen before in any Country in the World. They walk about the
Streets Preaching and Exhorting the people to Repent, and do Penance, and to
quit their evil lives, because they say that God is angry against the Romans;
They say that this City is as another Sodom, and that the Iniquity of this
People is mounted up to Heaven, and that within Three Months (if they Repent
not, and amend their Lives) this City shall be Destroyed by Fire as Sodom was.
They have continued still in this City Preaching from Day to Day; they go with
their Feet bare, and their Hands and Eyes always lifted up to Heaven; They have
not been known to sleep ever since they came hither; they have been often
forbidden by the Magistrates to preach; but they answered, they were sent on
the behalf of God, to move the people to Repent and do penance; whereupon they
were caused to be put into prison, where several Jesuits and Learned Men went
to visit them, and Disputed with them in the Lutin, Greek, Hebrew, and Chaldean
Languages. They certainly know those that live a Wicked Life; And when any such
come before them, they particularly Exhort them to Repent, and amend their
Lives. Their Food is nothing but Bread and Water; they lift up their Hands and
Eyes continually toward Heaven, and are continually exhorting the people to
Repentance; They precisely nominate the Day that our Savior shall come to
Judgment in: And when they were asked how long time shall yet pass before the
general day of Judgment? they answered, That the World shall have an end in
the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety; But about two or three Years
before that time, all the Christian World should be troubled with Wars; they
say they are much above a Thousand Years of Age; And being asked from whence
they came, they answered, they came from Damascus a City in Gallilea, and were
sent by God to preach Repentance to the World. The Jesuits have obtained of our
Magistrates, that these Men should be sent to ROME to the POPE; But these
(Apostles as they call themselves) Answered, That they knew very well all that
must happen unto them; And that it was altogether unnecessary to force them,
for they had a great Desire to go voluntarily to ROME: their Chains were made
of strong and heavy Iron: And when they were in the Streets, and their Chains
very strongly fastened on their Legs, they brake them in pieces before the
people.

They Prophesied that In the Year 1681,shall be Wars over all. In the Year
1682, shall be no Pope, and Rome shall have no Head. In the Year 1683, they
shall Preach throughout the World. In the Year 1684, shall Jesus Christ be
known to M^^^^^^. In the Year 1685, a great Man shall rise. In the Year 1686, a
great Earthquake shall happen. In the Year 1687, All Africa shall burn. In the
Year 1688, The four parts of the World shall be greatly Astonished. And. In the
Year 1689, shall be the time when God shall Judge the World.



