A NARRATIVE OF THE Excommunication OF Sir John Pettus of the County of
Suffolk, Knight.

Obtained against him by his Lady, a Roman Catholic.

AND The true state of the Case between (...) WITH His faithful Answers to
several Aspersions raised against him by her, to the prepossessing the
Judgments of some Honorable Persons, and Others.

Printed in the Year, 1674.

To the READER.
THat he may make the more facile use of these following Discourses, to
satisfy his Curiosity or Judgment in any part, (if his leisure will not serve
him to peruse the whole) I have abstracted them under these distinct Heads.

First, Concerning my Wives twice deserting me, and twice purloyning my Goods
from me, and placing her self in a Nunnery beyond the Seas.

Secondly, Concerning my Ladies return from thence, after she had lived from me
there 5. years; and 5. years before incognita, and of her proceedings toward
me above 5. years since her return, to Aug. 72. and of her then unjust gaining
an Excommunication against me.

Thirdly, Concerning my Answers to her several Scandals in her Petitions and
Libels against me; viz.

1. To her pretended great Fortunes which she brought to me. 2. To my owning
her Fortunes to be such. 3. To my false entry of Debts into the Accounts of Sir
Richard Gurney's Estate, which were not his debts. 4. To the imperfection of
her Jointure, pretended also to be bought with her money. 5. To the
misrepresentations of my Fortunes and Disposition. 6. To my Compliance with
several Persons in the late Usurped Times. 7. To my breach of promise to the
King and Council, in not paying her 104 l. per annum.
Fourthly, Concerning her next proceedings against me from Aug. 72. at the
Council Table, and then at Doctors Commons, where her Excommunication of me is
once more gained; and once more, viz. in June 74. caused to be published in the
Church.

Fifthly, And so I conclude with the public Injuries she has done, in
diverting me so many years from some Eminent Services, some of which are
particularized.

Concerning my Wives first Separation from me, and her first purloyning of my
Goods.
AFter we had lived about 18 years very Sociably and contentedly through all
the Accidents of those Times, She (about 15 years last past) went away from me
(without any just cause given on my part,) but possibly she being guilty of the
changing her Religion, or some other disobligations on her part, did think fit
to desert me, and so continued incognita full 5. years of the 15. When she
first went from me, it was privately and unsuspected of me, so as by her
Confederacy with a Servant of her Fathers, whom I kept in Suffolk, (I being in
London) he conveyed away by her directions several Horse-Loads of Goods in the
Nights, of a considerable Value, which I could never Retrieve. Soon after this
her first separation, I imparted my Misfortunes to Bishop Duppa ( after Bishop
of Winchester, and Tutor to his Majesty when Prince) with whom she had lived
in her younger years, and I must ever acknowledge the great pains he took by
often coming from Richmond to London to her; but at last she absented her self
from him also, and then he employed other Reverend Divines to her, and writes
to me thus, viz. I have sent her word that I have heard and seen many Proposals
of yours to her, but I could never hear of any of hers to you, but I have
desired this Religious Peacemaker Dr. T. to press her in this particular. In
another thus, viz. My former Letters to your Lady being rejected, I have no
other Shrine to address my self to but to God, etc. And in another (a little
before his Majesty's Return) thus, viz. I dare not ask you any thing concerning
your Lady, for I fear her unflexible disposition has not yet relented, but I
persuade my self that you keep the same preparation of mind to receive her,
when she shall so soften her heart as to defire it. And these Personal and
Literal Applications from several Worthy Divines, and from her nearest
Relations, continued full 5. years, but could not batter down her obstinacy.

Of her second Separation, and second purloyning from me.
IN 1662. my only Son (returning out of France a very accomplished and
endearing Person) did work upon her to Return to me (being then a solitary
Housekeeper in Westminster) to which she consented, so as I would pay her
Debts amounting to 6. or 700 l. which I yielded to, so as my Jewels might be
restored, which was performed on both sides; but her debts amounted to more
then 800 l. which I paid, and upon her Return I presented her again with my
Jewels above the value of 900 l. (however her abettors undervalue them) barely
upon her and my Lord Richardson's promise that she should restore them, when
ever I demanded them, (most of them being only lent me by my Mother.)

But soon after my only Son fell sick (upon breaking a Vein) and I do believe
his days were shortened by her demeanor toward me, after my so kind reception
of her) and with that distemper and grief in his passage into Suffolk, (where
desirous to be buried) he dyed.

After I had performed his Funerals, I writ to her several Consolatory Letters,
and when I thought those might have made some kind impressions, I writ some
Proposals for our more contented living for the future; which Letter and
Proposals she sent back to me with this only Answer writ and subscribed with
her own hand, That she would consent to none of them; upon which I writ again
to her, That the Lease of my house being near expired, that she might take care
for some convenient house of a less rate, and furnish it with some Goods, and
send the rest into Suffolk: But instead of removing part of them to another
house, in the Night times she rifled the whole house, and sent away Pictures
(pawned to me for a considerable sum) to one place, my Books, Goods, Rarities
and other Pictures to other places, and this done so suddenly, that I had no
notice till the most valuable were disposed of; and so soon as she had thus
twice made those purloynings and disposed of them this second time, she went
again from me, and to a Nunnery beyond Sea, without my privity, consent, or the
least allowance; and she had not been there long, but a Person of quality of
her Religion (yet my very good friend) acquainted me with it, and told me
'twere better for me to allow her something there, then that she should return
again, and that if I would, the Pope would grant us a Divorce; I answered, That
I knew no cause of Divorce on my part, and if there were, it might be done by
our own Laws; but when I perceived from his discourse no likelihood of the
restitution of my Goods and Jewels, I was content she should have the Rent of
her Fathers house in Cheapside so long as the Lease continued, which being 100
l. per annum, was duly paid her for 5. years whilst she continued in the
Nunnery.

Concerning her Return from the Nunnery after she had been there 5. years
instructed.
AFter her 5. years continuance in the Nunnery, upon some encouragement (as I
conceive) she comes over into England, and demands no less than 200 l. per
annum for Alimony, yet no restitution of my Jewels or Goods to be had: But the
Lease of the house in Cheapside was newly expired, and my Fortunes thus and
otherwise exhausted, I declared that I could not spare such an annual Rent, nor
any thing near it, and that my Fortunes being uncertain, I could not agree to
any other certainty, then that what Incomes did come monthly or quarterly in,
she should have such a proportion of them as should be agreed on; but this
liked her not, so she Petitions to the King for Alimony, and therein boasting
of her great Fortunes, his Majesty refers it to the Lord Keeper Bridgman, who
reported that he could not Compose the matter.

Then she attended the House of Commons door for near a month together with a
most scandalous Petition, which she showed to several Members of Parliament as
they passed by, not with intent to have it read in the House, but to defame and
lessen my esteem there as a Member; but at last upon my importunity to some of
my fellow Members, she could not refuse to deliver it into the hands of one of
that House, who (notwithstanding my pressing to have it read) did not put it
forward, which occasioned me to speak that in the House concerning her and her
party, which made her forbear any furthar attendance that Sessions, or any
reply.

After that Sessions she preferrs a Libel far more scandalous into the
Spiritual Court, where alleging my cruel usage of her to be the Motive of her
going from me, and that allegation more then 10. years after her first
separation, and more than 5. after her second separation from me, and made no
Proof thereof in Court, nor produced so much as one Witness to confirm it, (nor
ever can) without admitting any allegation on my part, either whether Alimony
were due to her or not, and that though by the Ecclesiastical Laws Goods and
Jewels so taken, ought to be allowed in the Alymony, yet the Court not only
denied to admit of my allegations, but denied so much as to admit that she
should answer to what Goods, and to what value they were of, which were taken
from me (which might have been dispatched in 2. days, if she had pleased) so as
I was sentenced to pay (merely upon her false suggestions) 4 l. per week, from
October 1673. (when she first put in her Libel) without hearing of any thing I
had to say in my defense; upon which I appealed to the Delegates, who abated 20
s. a week of their rigor.

And though in all this time I could not be personally present as I desired, to
adjust my Estate and what she had taken from me (which ought to have been the
ground of Alymony) in respect I was employed as Deputy Lieutenant, Colonel of a
Regiment of the Traind-Band, Justice of Peace, and Deputy to the Vice Admiral,
for that part of the County of Suffolk (where all the Engagements were with the
Dutch; and had got so great a hurt in my Leg (of which I am not yet fully
Cured) occasioned by going a Board the Duke for Orders) of all which full
Notice was given the Court; yet almost at the very time of the Engagement, I
alone was thought fit (right or wrong) to be Excommunicated, only by 3.
Doctors, 5. being present, whereof 2. excepted against it, as not done to the
meanest Seaman or Soldier upon producing of a Certificate: And accordingly it
was Published in the Church, when I was also in great Employments in disposing
prisoners, etc.

And this is the substance of the Case between my Lady and me to August, 1672.
But before I acquaint the Reader with any further Proceedings in this Court, I
think fit to give my Answers to most of the material Scandalls, which she has
vented in her Petitions, Libells, and common Discourses. And though I have
observed, that sometimes it is better to let Scandalls and Libells dye in their
own ashes, than by defenses to give them further flames by publication or
exasperations; Yet having for many years groaned under the Clamours of several
persons, which I find by my long silence has done me injury, some having
imputed it to a conceession (which was only either my modesty or prudence not
to oppose); I am at last covinced by some of my worthy Friends of the necessity
of Publishing my own Justification, which I shall do with as much cleerness and
integrity as is possible for my Pen to perform.

The Spring from whence all my Misfortunes herein arise is, from the Lady Eliz.
Pettus, who calls her self my Wife, That she was so, whilst she lived
contentedly with me about 18. years; I own, that she is so; Now is a doubt in
our Laws, which I desire may be fairly decided, (she having gone from me about
16. years, since the said 18.) before I give her any other Title than my Lady;
Nor would I have set Pen to Paper to satisfy the vulgar tatling Brains; but my
Business having been before the King, the Councel-Table, Parliament House,
Civil and Ecclesiastical-Courts, Cities, Buroughs and Counties, wherein I have
had signal Transactions as well in this, as other matters, I thought my self
obliged at last, to give the Reader such a just Account of my self as by
undeniable Proofs may render me (I hope) blameless, in these matters whereof I
am accused, and which have occasioned the grounds of those Aspersions, which
have most evidently injured me, in that clear Reputation, which I conceive
nothing could have shaken, but Malice and Credulity to believe what ever she
reports.

Now to satisfy such persons, I shall proceed in my Answers, and I hope so
convincingly, as may once more obtain their just Esteems, and free me from her
unjust Aspersions.

The First
Aspersion (and of greatest weight to guide the Judgments of others in point of
Pity and Alimony) she has toss d about in her Petitions to the King and
Council very modestly, that she brought 12000 l. Portion to me; but in her
Petition pretended for the Parliament she affirms more: To the Ecclesiastical
Court, 40, 30, or 20000 l. and in her common discourse 29000 l. at least.

To which I answer, That if any of those were true, I should show a very
ungrateful Nature not to give her a Subsistence suitable; or if it be spent, I
should show much unworthiness not to acknowledge it: And to convince any, in
this may seem a difficult task. But I shall thus attempt it; In short, I have
regained (by good fortune) Sir Richard Gurney's Year-Book, which now I have to
produce of every Years Inventory of his Estate and Debts (all writ with his own
hand, and his Name subscribed to every page) (with a Prayer into bargain): The
first begins the 28th of December. 1629. and then the sum of his Estate real and
personal set down in particulars amounted to 27058 l. 12 s. 11 d. his Debts
then 2431 l. 8 s. 5 d. So as his remaining Estate was then cast up at 24627 l.
4 s. 6 d. and so the Books continue till 1642. upon several increases and
decreases. But I shall not trouble the Reader with the Sums of every successive
year, (which are writ all with his own hand) but only come to his last Account,
viz. 12. October. 1642. when he was a Prisoner in the Tower, so that during his
life there, which ended October. 3d. 1647. his Estate being at that time
Sequestered, and many years after his death, no man can imagine that he could
increase it, and by that last Inventory, and that only of all the rest is writ
by his Casheere (yet living) and by that it appears his Estate amounted then to
46903 l. 12 s. 4 d. which was the highest of all his Inventories from the Year
1629. to that time, and the Debts which he owed on the other side were 10607 l.
18 s. 1 d.

So that the balance of his Estate was then, but 36295 14 3 Now at his death
there was but 25 l. left in money. So that the 46903 l. 12 s. 4 d. is thus
clearly and shortly accounted for: 46903 12 4 l. s. d. Imprimis, his Funeral
cost as appears by a just Account, all borrowed 0562 19 1 The Lady Gurney his
second Wife his Relict had a Statute on the whole Estate, so that we were
forced by Decree of Chancery, (of which we borrowed the greatest part) to pay
her down 8220 00 0 Haberdashers Hall had (besides charges) part borrowed 1248
00 0 The Lord Richardson had for his Portion, part borrowed 6200 00 00 And He
and his Lady in Composition for the remaining Estate hereafter mentioned, had
part also borrowed 3556 00 00 The Debts due upon the Inventory aforesaid made
in 1642. were duly paid, viz. part also borrowed 10607 18 01 Other Debts
contracted in his Imprisonment and paid by us, and part borrowed 1860 13 09
Legacies paid by us 0896 00 00 So the Debts which were actually contracted by
Sir Rich. Gurney and paid ut supra, amounted to 33151 10 11 And the Estate yet
remaining in Securities, is 13356 12 06 Total 46508 02 05 l. s. d. Now the
utmost of his Estate being never above 46903 12 4 And the undeniable
Disbursements without any Addition of Charges with the Remainder being 46508 11
4 The Whole Account is balanced with 395 1 0

So that where was the 40 30 29 or, 12 thousand pounds, or 2 pence to be had
(as is pretended by her Allegations) for can any one fancy (but a Woman) that
395 l. 1 s. 0 d. could manage an Estate so encumbered when he died, in 13.
Committees, in Statutes, Judgments, Mortgages, Accounts, of great and various
natures, and perplexed Suits, which are scarce yet determined, besides the
troubles of 5000 l. which the then Powers would have had out of that Estate;
the Contests about which lasting above 9. years after his death.) And after I
had been Sequestered 4. years upon the general Account, I stood sequestered one
year and a half more to preserve the Lord Richardson (joint Executor with me in
right of his Lady) from the moiety of that 5000 l. which he had contentedly
secured to Goldsmiths-hall, rather than stand it out, as I did; at last after 6
years in his life time, and 9 years after his death I was freed from this
unspeakable trouble and charge about the 5000 l. and the Lord Richardson from
the Security which he had given so tamely for the moyetie: by the kind and just
assistance of Charles Fleetwood then Lieutenant General; but I could never
retreive the 700 l. which the Committees took from me of my own Money, by
Seisures, and Rents.

Which made the Lord Richardson then so sensible of my cane and trouble, and
charge, that by the advice of Sir Thomas Beding-feild, and Sir Thomas Runt
(both of our standing Council) he and his Lady with my Lady; did under their
hands and seals make over the most considerable part of the remainder of Sir
Richards Estate to me, for my Reimbursement and Satisfaction: But my Lady not
having that advantage by it, which she expected, (I being not obliged to it by
any such Conditions) she protested and continues in that mind, that she was
forced and inveigled into it, whereupon from that time to this in regret to
that part of her ungrateful nature (after all my endeavors to preserve the
repute of her Father) I thought fit eversince not to concern my self in the
advantages of it, although I might Legally have done it, as well for my
recompense as for my reimbursement of very considerable sums which I have
expended, and to which I am still subject by the continuing troubles of that
Estate: So that from the death of Sir Richard Gurney to this time, I hope it
does Clearly appear to any rational man, that I have had no profit out of that
Estate, and as evident to their Judgments, that besides what has been
received, that my disbursements must necessarily be very great, as in truth
they are.

Now from the time of my Marriage to his Death, I never received more then 4000
l. for his Portion, which summer my then Estate might justly expect, according
to the strictest Rules of City Matches, her Brother was then living; and I had
then possibility on my side from my Father and Mothers Relations, greater than
could be expected from hers; so that 4000 l. I had, and no more during her
Fathers life.

And I am sure when she went from me the first and second time, viz. in 57. and
62. she purloined and received much more from me that sum; so that I conceive
every small accountant may be satisfied that I have lost much, but got nothing
by her, from first to last, and if any one out of Justice to her or me shall
desire to be satisfied in any of these allegations, I will truly and
thankfully produce the Books and Accounts for their satisfaction, and my own
vindication herein.

Secondly, Next she says, That she can prove, that when some did allege to
me, That she had brought me a great Fortune, that I never denied it.

To which I Answer, That it had been a weakness in me, if I had, nor should I
have now done it but upon this occasion, for that estimation of her Fortunes
possibly did carry me through her Fathers and other great concerns.

Thirdly, She says, I have put into the Account of Sir Richard Gurneys Estate
several Debts, which were not Sir Richards.

To which I Answer, That I do acknowledge it, but do also affirm, that that
they were Moneys borrowed to pay Sir Richards Debts as aforesaid, for we could
not pay the Lady Gurney, nor the Lord Richardson, etc. so great sums without
borrowing considerable sums, and so there is no injury done thereby, for it
was equal whether we paid Interest to the Lady Gurney, etc. or to strangers,
only by changing hands we had some advantages, in changing real securities into
our personal securities

Fourthly, Next, That her Jointure falls short of 500 l. per annum, according
to my Covenant, and that, that Estate was bought with her Portion.

To which I Answer and Affirm, That this is only her mistake, for I bought
Cheston in Suffolk, (which is her Jointure) and paid for it with my own Money
before Marriage, but the Manor of Winhaston, which is within 2. miles of
Cheston of about 300 l. per annum I bought with her Portion, with some addition
of my own, as also a Farm of 130 l. per annum not far from Cheston (but both
that Farm and Winhaston being then about 400 l. per annum) I sold again soon
after Sir Richard Gurneys death with her consent, to pay the Money which I had
taken up for my Composition, and clearing of my Debts contracted in the last
Kings Wars; which surely I had not done (lying so commodious for me, that they
are Eye-sores to me every morning I look out, but not to my Heart in its
Loyalty) if I had not a clear prospect that Sir Richards Estate would afford me
nothing, or not any thing till the great Encumbrances and Debts on his Estate
were first discharged; So that if Cheston which is her remaining Jointure (free
from any praeincumbrance, as she also asperseth) does fall short of her
expectation (as to value) she may impute something to the times, or may sue my
Executors, and not now do what she can to obstruct me in any Capacities that
may make good my intentions by addition or improvement, if either she, or her
fortunes had deserved such from my Industry.

The next is, Her public misrepresentation of my Fortunes and Estate, and as
if I denying to allow such Allimony as she thinks fit, were out of a cruel and
niggerly disposition, and withal publishes, what great Fortunes I have
acquired by the late death of my Mother; and by my services to his Majesty and
his blessed Father; and what other great sums I have in other men's hands.

To which I answer, That if my disposition had been cruel as she alleges in
her Libel, or niggardly, it would ere this have been seen by some others, as
well as her self, for as yet there is nothing appears but her single
affirmation, and my positive denial to own such base tempers; and I am sure
this aspersion cannot hurt me with any who will be so kind as to enquire of my
whole Life and Conversation: But as to the other part of her Charge, she has
done me an unspeakable injury; because the Creditors (to whom I am engaged for
several other persons (more responsible than my self) who hitherto have been
patient) upon these suggestions have fallen on me with great severity; and
therefore to undeceive and reduce them into a better temper, I do really and
truly declare, That I never had any thing from the last King, nor his present
Majesty ever since 1639. when I first entered into their Military and Civil
Employments; and yet I must ingeniously confess, their respects have been such
to me, that they never denied me what ever I asked, but I must as truly say,
that I never enjoyed what ever they granted me.

Next as to the advantage by my Mothers death, It is quite contrary (for
besides the loss of so good a one) I lost the benefit of above 400 l. per
annum, part of which being the Jointure from her second Husband, she enjoying
it near 50. years, and I receiving the benefit of it for many years, 'twas
looked upon as an access, when in truth it was but a decease of so much of my
Fortunes, and I must acknowledge to the Repute of her Memory, that by her great
assistance, and by the Sale of all the Lands I could sell, and by getting in
such of my Debts, as I could fairly persuade my Creditors to pay, I have within
Ten years last past freed my self from above 28000 l. Debts and Engagements, by
which my disposition may be seen, how justly I intend toward all men, whether
the Debts were properly mine or not, and yet there are remaining engagements,
and but very few of which I can properly call my own, to satisfy all which, I
am and shall be industrious as they themselves can be, and I hope there is
sufficient left for Us both, especially if my Debtors be as just to me, as I
shall endeavor to be to my Creditors.

Then in her Petitions to his Majesty, the Parliament House, and in her Libels
in the Spiritual Court, she was pleased to intimate my Relations to some men of
Power in the late usurping Times, touching upon generals, but not particulars,
only Col. Fleetwood.

Concerning whom, I return this Answer, That I had some Opportunities to
vindicate my self at the Councel-Board the First of October. 1672. (being
summoned thither upon her Petition) where his Majesty was present) and amongst
other things, to that part of her Petition which she intended as a blemish to
me, I spoke in these words to His Majesty, as near as I can remember what I had
writ.

Sir, I do acknowledge I received Civilities from many who were in considerable
Employments in the time of your Exile, but especially from Charles Fleetwood
Esquire (then Lieut. General,) whose first Wives name was Smith, and she was of Kin
to me by 4. several Families, viz, the Lord Hoptons, Sir Edmund Mundiford, Sir
Owen Smith, and her Father Smith, and from them she inherited a considerable
Estate, and when she lay on her Deathbed, she foreseeing the probability of
his marrying again, and of other greater Employments, she (as I was informed)
desired him, that in his absence I might have the Inspection of his Childrens
concerns by her; which I accepted, proposing only, That he would please to
settle the Estate that came by her, upon them; which he freely did, reserving
but a small pittance for himself; which worthy act of his did much oblige my
Care.

But this was not the ground of our Acquaintance, for I was taken Prisoner at
Laystaffe in 1642. by Cromwell, and after when Bristol was surrendered to
Fairfax, both my self and Wife wanting Accommodations to march away, we
received several Civilities from him; and after all this, he saved both my Life
(as I could at large demonstrate) as also my own Estate, and Sir Richard
Gurney's, and my Lord Richardsons, so that my Lady, nor any else had any reason
to accuse me for my Respects to him: And though he was a Person not to be
tempted to unfaithfulness to his Party, yet there are many of the Chief
Nobility of England who did, and are ready to Justify what great Civilities
and Kindnesses he did in the preservation of their Persons and Estates, (and I
could boast how instrumental by his Favors I was therein); and though I had
always a generous kindness from him, yet I never accepted of Place, Office or
Employment, or any advantage more then my own preservation by him and by his
Kindness, (which I esteemed greatest of all) I was preserved from the pressures
of Oaths or Renunciations, and by his assistance I did Courtesies to many,
never any injury to any; and though in the highest of his power my Lady did run
from me, yet I never made use of into reduce her, or revenge my self on those
who perverted, and inveigled her from me; though tempted to it.

And that I may stand right in your Majesty's Esteem, and free others of the
least doubt of my Fidelity, I freely offer, That if she or any else have any
matter to charge me with, I desire they may proceed in the charge, and I do
protest, that although her Scandalous Petitions here and else where are
contrary to, and thereby an affront to your Majesty's Act of Oblivion, granted
soon after your Return, yet in this case I will decline it, or any Privileges
I have by being a Member of Parliament, and stand wholly upon the Justification
of my Integrity, and being well assured in my self that my Principles would not
suffer me to be ensnared into any act or pretense of Disloyalty, (more then a
quiet submission to the present Power over me) and I wish all men would as I
do, discover their Principles, and you would be more safe in your Subjects.

Sir, I do without wavering own my self a true Protestant and Professor of the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, being the best Reformed
Church in Europe in its Foundations, though it may be not at this time in its
Practice. Doctor Hammond was my Tutor as to the Doctrinal part; Admired Hooker
to the Discipline, and I doubt not but I shall always adhere to the Principles
of being dutiful both to God and the King; and though Coll. Fleetwood and I did
not agree to all the Fundamentals of this Church, yet no man can persuade me
from my gratitude toward him, for I do own (as I said) the former part of my
Life and Fortunes to him; and what I can do with safety to your Crown, to
preserve him, I shall do it: And I hope my Reasons being thus grounded and
known, it will give no offense to your Majesty or any else.

And I have this Satisfaction in my self, that your Majesty would not have
committed so many weighty Trusts to me, if you had the least doubt of me; and
therefore setting aside these groundless tattles of my Ladies, I shall go on in
my Continued Obedience to your Commands, and Care of your Majesty's Affairs,
without regard to this undeserved Aspersion.

She accuses me of breach of Promise to the King and Counsel, In not paying
her 104 l. per annum.

This has made a great noise about the Court, where I would gladly preserve my
just Interest, and therefore I shall be the clearer in my Answer, That after
she had got the Excommunication in 72. as aforesaid, lest she should (as I
suppose) offend his Majesty in further proceeding, it being gained as a
Contempt to his Majesty's Prerogative, by the Act of Edw 2. cap. 9. she
Petitions the King and Council to confirm the same; so I attended the Board 31.
of October. 72. where I represented the Proceedings of the Spiritual Court, and
prayed it might be honorably discharged; that my Goods and Jewels might be
restored, and her Scandalous Petitions and Libels taken off their Files, etc.
But the Board (being kinder than the Spiritual Court) insisted to have me pay
40 s. per Week: But I acquainted them with the present condition of my Real
Estate, out of which nothing could be paid to her; But gave in a Particular in
writing of the several great Debts owing to me, and by whom, and told the
Reasons why I could not get them in without her and other assistances; and out
of that personal Estate I was contented to allow any Weekly sum they should
think fit.

This with other Discourses to the Board, occasioned one of them (my Honored
Friend) to rise from his Seat, and came and advised me not to Capitulate with
his Majesty (who was then present); which advice being from a Friend, I could
not but apprehend, but his Majesty would some way or other assist me (though he
thought it not proper to declare it publicly); So I did yield to pay her 40 s.
per Week, and did pay her accordingly for 25. weeks. But finding that she would
not concur with me in any thing, to get in her Fathers Debts or others, and
that no consideration was taken of my Reputation, or Encouragements, and the
Points about Alimony still lying undecided, I did stop my hand from paying any
more to her.

Since which I was again summoned to the Board, viz. in Apr. 74. where I did
attend, and she also present, and the Board not taking upon them any compulsive
power, but finding that I was not altered from my resolutions, they dismissed us
both.

Since which an honored Lord interceded for her, to whom I gave in writing
several Proposals on my part and hers, which his Lordship thought reasonable;
and upon her refusal has not any further interceded for her, and for brevity
sake, I shall only recite what she was therein to perform, being but the
substance of part of what I did, and do still insist on, as both just and
reasonable.

1. That she should make a Submisse Petition to the King and Council, That the
Excommunication may be honorably discharged, (it being contrived at a time
when I was in immediate Commands to His Majesty) and that she also desire that
her Scandalous Petitions to the Board, and Orders thereupon, may be honorably
vacated; and that by order of the Board, the Scandalous Libels in the Spiritual
Court may be also taken off their Files. 2. That she give in writing where and
to whom her Jewels were pawned or sold, and for what sums, and what remains. 3.
What Pictures, Books or other Rarities were delivered to E. M. C. F. M. S. M.
C. all persons which I know, but think not fit to nominate them at present; or
what of the like nature to any other persons unknown to me.
Notwithstanding which fair and just Proposals both for her and my self, so
soon as I was once more fixed to the Affairs of the Country, she again revives
the Excommunication, and in June last caused it to be published once more in the
Church.

And now what I did lately, and intended to do for his Majesty, the Kingdom and
Country, I shall briefly declare.

My House is within 6. miles of Dunwich and Sowthold Bay, where the great
Transactions between us and the Dutch in 72. and 73. gave Trouble enough to
those who were in Employments, and having mentioned mine before, I shall only
say, That I hope his Majesty and the Country are well satisfied of my demeanor
therein, and I am sure I have had the thanks from some of the Chief Officers of
Prince Rupert's Dragoons, the Earl of Oxford's Horse, and many of Scombergs
Army, for composing many differences, which might otherwise have risen between
them in the Country: and I dare be confident, that the other Deputy Lieutenants
appointed for that Division being diverted by sickness or other Justifiable
Accidents, will testify my Care in supplying of theirs when they could not
possibly attend; And all these without any return or recompense to my great
Trouble, Charges and diversions from my private Concerns, from his Majesty, the
Country, or any else.

So soon as those two years were over, I betook my self to the review of our
Laws for the Militia, so as by some additional Act, it might be put into a
better posture, with more safety to the King and Country, and less fear on
either side.

I had also digested all the Laws for Highways. intending to reduce them
into one, with an additional Method which might be more applicable to each
County, then any general Law can be.

I did also give in a Proposal to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty in
May last, for the mending a Lane called Christmas Lane, and the Haven at
Dunwich and Sowthold, very beneficial to the County, without any Charge to the
King, or Imposition on the County: But being diverted by this Lady, so many
years together, It has been as great a perplexity to my thoughts (that I could
not pursue them to maturity) as the many fomented Vexations from her and others.

The Conclusion.
HAving stated her proceedings toward me, (there being many more which for
brevity sake I omit) and the Encouragements which she has received from
others, (grounded I presume upon her many false Accusations. which I have
truly, really and as succinctly as I can answered) as also shown the public
Injuries which she has done thereby;

I do affirm as a Conclusion, That I never yet refused Cohabitation, so as it
may be safe to my Person, and my remaining Estate, and a mutual contentment in
our future Conversations. But that being thought difficult, I also affirm, That
I never denied Allimony, but I think fit ( as useful to other Families, and
consequently to the Nation) to be resolved, whether in respect of her long
absente: and refidence beyond the Seas, in places Prohibited, she be capable of
Alimony. Then if she be, Whether my Goods and Jewels ought not to be
proportioned in the allowance, or restored: If not, then the the Condition of
her Forumes, or mine, are to be considered (wherein I think my self a more
Competent Judge, then what can be Collected by any Judges barely and merely
from her Suggestions, and shall endeavor to put a better certainty upon it,
then they with Justice can impose upon me

Nor do I think it prudent to move further, till some public Submission and
publication by some Order of Council or otherwise be obtained for the
Vindication of her Ungrateful and Scandalous Aspersions on me, which I presumel
are been the ground of the Excominunication, intrencoing (as I humbly conative)
on his Majesty's Honor, and I am sure on my Reputation, which I ever valued as
my Life.

FINIS.

