A NARRATIVE OF THE Demon of Spraiton. In a LETTER from a Person of Quality in
the COUNTY of DEVON, To a Gentleman in LONDON, WITH A RELATION OF AN Apparition
or Spectrum OF An ancient GENTLEMAN of Devon, who often Appeared to his Sons
Servant. With the strange Actions and Discourses happening between them at
diverse times.

AS LIKEWISE The DEMON of an ancient WOMAN, Wife of the Gentleman aforesaid.
With Unparalleled Varieties of strange Exploits performed by her: Attested
under the Hands of the said Person of Quality, and likewise a Reverend Divine
of the said County.

With REFLECTIONS on Drollery and Atheism: And a Word to those that Deny the
Existence of SPIRITS.

London, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black-Swan, without Temple Bar, and
Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey, 1683.

A NARRATIVE OF The Demon of Spraiton, In a LETTER from a Person of Quality in
the County of Devon, To A Gentleman in LONDON. WITH A Relation of an APPARITION
or SPECTRUM of an ancient Gentleman of Devon, etc.
HEar ye Sons of the Atheistical Leviathan, and let the Impenetrable Offspring
of Chance and Atoms, give attention! How long shall your Impious Incredulity
Brave the Power of the Almighty, and shamefully shut your Eyes against the
evident demonstrations of an Omnipotent Creator?

Where are your HOBBS's, your SCOTS, your WEBSTERS, with their Blaspemous
denyals of the Existence of Spirits, or an Eternal (...) ^ome? Or how can they
that deny the Being (...) there is such a thing in the World as a God? (...)
Ac^ ^ore of Matter of Fact, to those which the Learned (...) Moore, the
^genious Dr. Glanvill (with diverse others, the Assertors of a Divine
Providence, and an Eternal State) have Printed, in Confutation of your Brutish
Stupidity; which one would think were enough for ever to Silence and Confound
the Advocates of Debauchery, and Sadducism, and reduce their Arguments into
that Nullity, they so Contend for.

Notwithstanding all which, some there are that will still act the Brute, and
would fain be of the opinion that Man dies like a Beast, that they might with
more security Live so: Indulging themselves in those Bestial Sensualities, that
dare not admit the Consideration of an after-reckoning, or the thoughts of a
future Life.

The Founder of this Order of men (or rather Brutes amongst us) is the DEVIL,
the Father of Lies, and First Apostate from the Eternal Glory; who (being
sensible that the right Notion of a Deity, and the Immortality of the Soul,
would be great Restraints to the Depravity and Licenciousness of humane Race,
and naturally excite in them such thoughts as might have a tendency to make
some provision against the great day of Account;) has ever been solicitous to
cast men into a state of Security by a dis-belief of any Life after this: That
so they might with greater freedom, and unconcernedness, give themselves over
to a living in all manner of Licenciousness, and drop into an irrevocable state
of Perdition, before they have ever entertained one serious thought of Death or
Judgment: For how should they concern themselves about a Futurity, who believe
not a Resurrection? The tendency of whose Philosophy, and Carousing Sonnets, is
to banish all apprehensions of a Second life: Who lull themselves into a
Lethargick Stupidity with their Ede, Bibe, Lude, Post mortem nulia voluptas, As
if their Heaven-born-Souls were capable of no higher enjoyments than the sickly
pleasures of a sensual Life; whilst with Torrents of Intempaerte and Libidinous
Debauches, they overwhelm their Pampered and deluded selves in an Eternal Gulf
of Inextricable Misery.

The Wise Heathens would never have a Belief so repugnant to common sense, and
the dictates of Natural Reason, imposed ^on them; though they had not the
knowledge of the True God, (...) they owned a Deity, Worshipped an Eternal
Power, and believed Rewards and Punishments, after this life. Hence the Poet
Hesiod begins with a Fear the Everlasting Gods, etc. And Homer has a Divine
Invocation, in the Entrance of his Illiads: Most the best of their Poets (whom
they, not unaptly, called Vates, because they were to them in the nature of
Priests, or Prophets; and from their Philosophy, the Gentiles imbibed the
Doctrine of a Deity, and the Sentiments of an Elysium, on the other side of the
River Styx) this life (with most of the other Notions relating to a future
life) these I say, assert a Condition of Happiness and Misery after the
Expiration of the Temporal Life.

How may those then (that assume the Name of Christians, and Live under the
evident Discoveries of an Eternity, by the unerring attestation of the Gospel
of Life and Salvation, blush and hide themselves in their own confusions, when
they reflect how far the poor Heathens have outdone them in point of Religion,
as well as Morality. Shall those baffled fallacies of The Wicked One, which
hardly obtained amongst the Heathens; be so prevalent (the Divine Revelations
to the contrary) as to gain Champions amongst pretended Christians, and that
amongst such as pretend to the Highest Form of Sagacity and Learning? What will
become of the Execrable Atheist, who employs his Faculties and Reason, to fight
against that God that gave them to him? But if the great Deceiver (for the
security of his Dominions) keep the resolute Debauchees, and obstinate Hobbians
in Incredulity of Relations of this Nature; we have no reason but to believe,
that it will have other impressions on the more rational part of mankind; who
by the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture, and many other undeniable instances of
this kind, may be induced to believe that they have Souls to provide for; and
that they ought not to deride well Attested Relations, that put them in mind of
a future and Eternal State.

We have not room in this place, to enter into a Disquisition of the Nature of
the Apparitions hereafter mentioned; but shall for that refer the judicious
Reader to the Learned Discourses of the reverend Dr. Henry Moore, and the
ingenious Dr. Glanvill, before mentioned, who (...) ^eated o^ the Nature of
Spirits and Demons, and with undeny^le Arguments proved the Existence of such:
But shall proceed to give an Account of the matter of fact as it is attested
under the Hand of a Person of Quality and a Reverend Divine of unquestionable
Reputation and Credit, of the County of Devon. But having no Authority to
insert their Names, we have in civility omitted that in this Paper; not
doubting but that if any scruple the truth of what is herein contained, upon
inquiry they may be assured of the Truth of it, it being not only Notorious to
them in particular, but to many the Inhabitants of the parts adjacent.

The Relation follows.

About the Month of November last, in the Parish of Spraiton, in the County of
Devon, one Francis Fey, (Servant to Mr. Philip Furze) being in a Field near the
dwelling house of his said Master, there appeared unto him, the resemblance of
an aged Gentleman, like his Masters Father, with a Pole or Staff in his hand,
like that he was wont to carry, when living, to kill the Moles withal: The
Spectrum approached near the young man, who you may imagine, not a little
surprised at the Appearance of one that he knew to be dead; but the Spectrum
bid him not be afraid of him, but to tell his Master (who was his Son) That
several Legacies, which by his Testament he had bequeathed, were unpaid, naming
Ten Shillings to One, and Ten shillings to another, both which he named. the
young man replied, That the party last named was dead, and so it could not be
paid to him: The Ghost answered, He knew that, but it must be paid to the next
Relation, whom he also named; The Spectrum likewise ordered him to carry Twenty
shillings to a Gentlewoman, Sister to the deceased, living near Totness in the
said County, and promised if these things were performed, to trouble him no
further; but at the same time the Spectrum speaking of his second wife (who was
also dead) called her wicked woman; though the Relator knew her; and esteemed
her a very good woman: and (having thus related him his mind) the Spectrum left
the young man: He according to the direction of the Spirit, took care to see
the small Legacies satisfied; and carried the Twenty shillings, that was
appointed to be paid the Gentlewoman near Totnes, but she utterly refused to
receive it, being sent her (as she said) from the Devil: The same night the
young man lodging at her house, the aforesaid Spectrum appeared to him again,
whereupon the young man challenged his promise not to trouble him again; saying
he had performed all according to his appointment; but that the Gentlewoman
(his Sister) would not receive the money: To which the Spectrum replied, That
was true indeed; but withal ordered the Young man, to ride to Totnes, and buy a
Ring of that Value, which the Spirit said she would take: which being provided
accordingly, she received. This is a true Account of the First Part of the
Relation, as it came in a Letter from a neighbor Justice of Peace, and we have
no farther notice of any trouble occasioned by the Appearance of the
Resemblance of the old Gentleman, who seemed on the performance of these his
orders, to be at Rest.

But we must continue this Relation with the subsequent Discourse of a
Spectrum, or Demon, much more tremendous, and the like of which (in all
circumstances) has hardly been known; and it is taken from the same Letter,
attested by the same hand.

The next day after buying and delivering the Ring, the Young Man was Riding
home to his Masters house, accompanied by a Servant of the Gentlewomans near
Totnes, and near about the time of their entrance (or a little before they
came) into the Parish of Spraiton aforesaid, there appeared to be upon the
Horse, behind the young man, a person or Spectrum resembling the before
mentioned wife of the old Gentleman, spoken of before. This Demon often threw
the young man off his Horse, and cast him with such Violence to the ground, as
was great astonishment, not only to the Gentlewomans servant (with him) but to
diverse others who were spectators of the dreadful Action, his body being cast
with incredible Force to the ground, which resounded with mighty noise at every
fall. At his coming into his Masters Yard, the Horse which the young man rid,
though very poor, and out of case, leaped at once Twenty five foot at one
spring, to the amazement of all that saw it. Soon after the She Spectrum showed
her self to several in the house, viz. The aforesaid young man, Mrs. Thomasin
Gidly, Anne Langdon, born in that Parish, and a little Child, which by reason
of the troublesomeness of the Spirit, they were forced to remove from that
House. She Appeared sometimes in her own shape, sometimes in forms very horrid,
now and then, like a monstrous Dog, belching out fire. At another time it flew
out at the Window in the Shape of a Horse, carrying with it only one pane of
glass and a small piece of Iron.

One time the Young Man's head was thrust into a very Strait place betwixt a
Beds-head, and a wall, and forced by the Strength of diverse men to be removed
thence, and that not without being much hurt and bruised, so that much Blood
appeared about it: upon this it was advised he should be bleeded, to prevent
any ill accident that might come of the bruise. After bleeding, the Ligature or
binder of his Arm was removed from thence, and conveyed about his middle, where
it was strained with such violence that the girding had almost stopped his
breath and killed him; and being cut in sunder it made a strange and dismal
noise, so that the standers by were affrighted at it.

At diverse other times he has been in danger to be strangled with Cravats, and
handkerchiefs that he has worn about his Neck, which have been drawn so close,
that with the sudden violence he has near been choked, and hardly escaped
Death.

The Spectre has showed great Offense at the Perukes the young man used to
wear, for they are often torn from his head after a very strange manner; one
that he esteemed above the rest he put in a small box, and placed that in
another, which he set against the wall of his Chamber setting a Joint stool
with other weight on the top of it, but in shorttime the boxes were broken in
sunder, and the Peruke rended into many small parts and tatters. Another time
lying in his Masters Chamber, with his Peruke on his head to secure it from
danger, within a little time it was torn from him, and reduced into very small
fragments.

Another time one of his shoo-strings was observed (without the assistance of
any hand) to come of its own accord out of his shoe, and fling it self to the
other side of the room; the other was crawling after it, but a maid espying
that, with her hand drew it out, and it strangely clasped and curled about her
hand like a living Eel or Serpent; this is Testified by a Lady of considerable
Quality, too great for exception, who was an eyewitness. The same Gentlewoman
showed the Relator one of the young man's gloves, which was torn in his pocket,
whilst she was by; which is so dexterously tattered, and so Artificially torn
that it is conceived a Cutler could not have contrived an Instrument to have
laid it abroad so accurately; and all this done in the pocket in the compass of
one minute.

It is farther observable, that if the aforesaid young man, or another person
who is a servant maid in the House, do wear their own Clothes; they are
certainly torn in pieces on their backs, but if the Clothes belong to any
other, they are not injured after that manner. Diverse other strange and
fantastical Freaks have been done by the said Demon or Spirit in the view of
diverse persons: A Barrel of Salt of a considerable quantity, has been observed
to march from one room to another, without any humane assistance. An hand-iron
has seemed to lay it self cross overthwart a pan of milk, that has been
scalding over the Fire, and two Flicthes of Bacon have of their own accord
descended from the Chimney, where they were hung, and placed themselves upon
the Hand-iron.

When the Spectrum appears in resemblance of her own person, she seems to be
habited in the same clothes and dress which the Gentlewoman of the house (her
daughter in Law) has on at the same time. Diverse times the feet and legs of
the young man aforesaid have been so entangled about his neck, that he has
been loosed with great Difficulty: Sometimes they have been so twisted about
the frames of chairs and stools that they have hardly been set at Liberty.

But one of the most Considerable Instances of the Malice of the Spirit against
the young man happened on Easter-Eve, when the Relator was passing by the door
of the House; which happened thus;

When the young man was returning from his labor, he was taken up by the skirt
of his doublet, by this Female Demon, and carried a height i^to the Air: He
was soon missed by his Master, and other Servants that been at labor, and
after diligent inquiry, no news could be heard of him, until at length, (near
half an hour after) he was heard Singing and whistling in a Bogg or Quagmire,
where they found him in a kind of Trance, or Extatick Fit, to which he has
sometimes been accustomed (but whether before the affliction he met with from
this Spirit, I am not certain) he was affected much after such sort as at that
time of those Fits; so that the people did not give that Attention and Regard
to what he said as at other times, but when he returned again to himself (which
was about an hour after) he solemnly protested to them, That the Demon had
carried him so high, that his Masters House seemed to him to be but as a
hey-cock; and that during all that time he was in perfect sense, and prayed to
Almighty God, not to suffer the Devil to destroy him, and that he was suddenly
set down in that quagmire.

The workmen found one shoe on one side of his Masters house, and the other on
the other side, and in the morning espied his Peruke hanging on the top of a
Tree: By which it appears, he had been carried a considerable height, and that
what he told them was no Fiction. After this it was observed that that part of
the young man's body which had been on the mud in the quagmire was somewhat
benumbed and seemingly deader than the other; whereupon the following Saturday,
which was the day before Low-Sunday, he was carried to Crediton, alias Kirton
to be bleeded, which being done accordingly, and the Company having left him
for some little space: At their return they found him in one of his fits, with
his forehead much bruised, and swollen to a great bigness, none being able to
guess how it happened, until he was recovered from that fit: When upon inquiry,
he gave them this Account of it; That a Bird had with great swiftness and force
flown in at the Window, with a stone in its beak, which it had dashed directly
against his forehead. The people much wondering at the strangeness of this
Accident, earnestly sought the stone, and under the place where he sat they
found, not such a stone as they expected, but a weight of Brass or Copper,
which it seems the Demon had made use of on that occasion, to give the poor
young man that hurt in his forehead. The persons present were at the trouble to
break it in pieces, every one taking a part, and preserving it in memory of so
strange an Accident.

The Relator goes no further, only gives account that he heard the Spirit had
handled him very Ill the next day being Sunday. This is a Faithful Account of
the Contents of a Letter from a Person of Quality in Devon, to a Gentleman his
friend in London, with relation to the Spectrums at Spraiton, and Dated the 11
th. of this instant May, 1683. The Truth of which will be attested not only by
diverse persons of Quality in this City; but upon inquiry in the adjacent County
will be confirmed beyond all exception.

I will not trouble the Reader with any descant on the particulars above
mentioned, but only add, that the young man will be of the Age of Twenty one
years, if he live till August next.

I have done with the Relation, and only beg the intelligent Reader, to
consider, what sort of People these deriders of Spirits and Witches are, who
perhaps will not believe that the Sun shines in Devonshire, because they are
not there to see it. But too much has already been said to such Scoffers, or
at least more than the narrow limits of this Paper will well bear. Here is
plain matter of fact, with the name of the County, and place, where any that
are unsatisfied, may make enquiry, and as was before suggested, the Persons
names have been forborne, lest (without their leave) it might give offense. If
it conduce to the Conviction of any one of the adverse Party, or move in others
(more sober) Resolutions to Walk seriously, and with an Awful Frame before the
Omnipotent Creator of all things; and to take heed of Satanical Delusions, I
have my Aim; and let GOD have the Glory.

FINIS.

