Advertisement.
THe Copy of this Treatise was Given out to be Printed a Year and half ago; but
by Accident or Negligence, was laid by, and could not be Retrieved till very
lately, which may, I hope, serve to Excuse this Delay in Publishing it.

THE Blatant Beast Muzzl'd: OR, REFLECTIONS ON A Late Libel, Entitled, The
Secret History OF THE REIGNS OF K. CHARLES II. AND K. JAMES II.

-- Pudet haec Opprobria --
Vel dici potuisse --
Printed in the Year, 1691.

TO THE READER.
TITLES, which at first sight look Odd and Fantastical, are apt to draw some
Prejudice upon the following Book. To meet with which, I must avow, That it was
impossible for me to invent any other that was half so Proper. Yet, because it
may not perhaps have light in the way of every Reader to discover this, I stand
obliged to be something large in giving thee the True Reason and Meaning of it.
Our Ingenious Countryman, Spencer, in his Excellent Poem, called, The Fairy
Queen, shadows the Moral Virtues under the fictitious Names of Gallant Heroes;
and some of the Worst Vices, (in regard they are most Opposite to Rational
Nature) under the Counterfeit Names of certain Monstrous Brutes: Particularly,
he represents that pernicious Vice of Calumny or Slander, by a deformed
Creature, which he calls The Blatant Beast; whose property it was to Defame all
States and Sorts of Mankind, not sparing even Princes, nor leaving the Clearest
Honor untainted, that came within the steam of it is Contagious Breath. Had
that Poet lived in the time of this Libeller, his Fiction might have been
History: He needed not to have used a Poetical Disguise, nor to have borrowed
Imaginary Natures to make a lively Idea of that Vice. The Author of this Libel
had furnished him with a Real Exemplar of it; equalling, if not out-doing all
he could have fancyed or invented. And therefore, since Shame makes him put on
a Mask (for he can fear nothing from the Times, in which the Foulest Calumnies
are most in Fashion): I knew not by what. Name more properly to call him, as
that more Exactly Suites with his Genius, than that of The Blatant Beast.

How justly that Title is his due, will be best learned from the Poets
Description of that Hideous Animal; who, speaking of his Mouth, has these
Words; In which there was a thousand Tongues empight,
Of sundry Kinds and sundry Qualities:
Some were of Dogs that barked day and night;
Some were of Cats, that wrawling still did cry;
Some were of Bears, that groin'd continually;
And some of Tigers, that did seem to grin,
And snarl at all that ever passed by.
But most of them were Tongues of Mortal Men,
Which spoke reproachfully, not caring where nor when.
And them among were mingled here and there
The tongues of Serpents with three-forked stings,
That spit out Poison and Gore-bloody-gear,
At all that came within his Ravenings,
And spoke Licentious Words and Hateful Things
Of Good and Bad alike, of Low and High,
Nor CAESAR spared be a whit, nor KINGS,
But either blotted them with Infamy.
Or bit them with his baneful Teeth of Injury.


The Reader needs but Reflect on this Description, as he peruses this Libel,
and he will all the way discover that the Poets Idea of Calumny, is the perfect
Pourtraicture of this Contumelious Scribler; for he will observe how he plays
upon all the Keys of Satyr that can be imagined; and, according as his Passion
tunes his Fancy, he either wrawls discontentedly, or grunts churlishly, or
grins and snarls angrily, or rails licentiously, or barks currishly, or stings
venomously; and this indifferently both High and Low, Kings and all sorts of
Subjects that are not of his own Blatant Kind; either blotting their Names
infamously, or biting them injuriously.

The Reasons which induced me to Write and Publish these Reflections, were,
First, The Reverence I owed to the Sacredness of Christianity, and to our
Blessed Savior's excellent Law of Charity toward our Neighbor, so often
repeated, and so earnestly recommended by Himself and His Followers; which
makes it an Obligatory Duty in us not to suffer him to be traduc't in such a
heinous Manner, but to Vindicate his Credit in what we judge him innocent. And
I took my self to be the rather obliged to maintain and stand up for that
Divine Precept, because I saw that, of late, it seems not only to be neglected
or forgotten, but to be quite contemned and vilify'd here in England. Another
Motive, was the Common Regard every Honest Man ought to have for Truth; which
is here Violated and Affronted in the highest Degree, by Multitudes of Wilful
and most Notorious Falsehoods. Nor shall I be afraid heartily to own that I had
a dutiful Respect, very particularly to the Honor of those two Excellent
Princes, whom he so Injuriously and Barbarously traduces, as the Blackest
Monsters that ever lived, and little less than Devils Incarnate. Nor is it
fitting that the Honor of the Present Governors should lie under a Disgrace
so Scandalous to all Good Christians. It Is well known how sensibly even many
Indifferent and Good Persons are offended at it, as Unnatural, Undutiful and
Unchristian, that Infamous and Nasty Slanders against their Royal Relations,
whom God's Law commands them to Honor, are suffered to be Printed, bawled
about the streets, and Sold Publicly, as very Current Ware, in every
Bookseller's Shop; without the least Diligence used (say they) or Care taken to
search after the Authors or Printers. Now from these kind of Aspersions,
Governors will have a Fair Occasion to Clear themselves, by letting the World
see they allow those Princes Credits to be Vindicated as far as may consist
with Truth, or be without Injury to any, which is all I attempt or aim at. It
will appear, I say, by their not discountenancing these, but letting them have,
at least, the same Privilege of passing currently, and being sold openly, which
was indulged to those slanderous Pamphlets, that it is below their Thoughts, Ex
aliena infamia sibi famam captare, To borrow a Luster to themselves by
blackening their Relations: Which is the avowed scope of this Libeller, who has
done them, as far as lay in his Power, the greatest Dishonor imaginable, by
breeding a Conceit in his Readers, that their Authority in it self, or their
Credit with the People, do stand in need of such Crooked Supports; and that
they are well pleased, and esteem it Meritorious to them, that such Impudent
Slanders should pass up on the World. Besides, I saw plainly, both by the
Contents, the Manner of it, and the Timing it, that this Pamphlet, was
calculated merely for the Common wealthish Meridian, and directly levelled at
the bespattering all Kings alike (as far as he durst) and the representing them
(as himself calls one of them) The Greatest Knaves in Nature, out of his Hatred
to Royalty and Monarchical Government; which by insinuating thus an Odium of
them into the People, he studies to undermine.

None will blame me, nor do I value it if he does, that I treat this Libeller
as he deserves, without showing any Respect to him, who has not shown the least
toward Princes, or toward Truth. In the rest of my Book I have born my self
as impartially and unoffensively toward all sorts, as I could possibly,
without forfeiting my own Credit, as a Lover of Truth, and a true-bred
Englishman. Nor ought it to be interpreted as a Design to undervalue any man,
or reflect upon his Just Repute, that I lay open on occasion this Libeller's
Folly, in fawningly and ridiculously over-praising him. There is nothing, next
to virulent Calumnies, my Nature more abhorrs than such fulsome Flatteries as
are utterly disproportioned to the subject, which, like shining Paint daubed
too thick upon matter unfit to receive it, never stick to them, but fall off as
soon as laid on, and always leave some Blemish, or at least, some Tarnish
behind them.

Nor was it one of the least Motives I had, to write and print my Reflections
upon this Libel, that I saw plainly, not only by the spreading it so
industriously, and reprinting it so often, but much more by the manifold
Attempts of the same scurrilous Strain; that there was a formed Design laid, to
pursue and carry on resolutely those Wicked Calumnies, and to make them pass in
the World for Certain Truths. I found that they began to gain a kind of
Authority with the ordinary sort of People, by this uncheck'd Currency, and
with many others were deemed unanswerable, because the Crimes were of such a
high nature, and charged so confidently, and yet none stepped forth to contradict
them in the least. This made me see it was absolutely necessary, and a most
precise Duty, to put a stop to that wild Career of Slander, which by so many
sly steps was insinuating it self into the Belief of the Credulous, who make up
a considerable part of the Generality. I insist not on those lesser squirting
Papers, handed about by Malicious Tops, such as is that villainous Piece of
Ribaldry, entitled, A Letter from Lewis the Great, to James the Less; with
Reflections upon it; taken up as it dropped from the Pocket of a Justice of Peace
at Hicks's-Hall, and yet reserved in Lavender for his Worship's sake: Nor of
such other little Squibs of Satyr; but of other greater and more bulky Pieces,
which our Godly Times, luxuriantly fruitful of such immodest Productions, do
frequently teem with. And first, there comes out a brisk Romance, bearing for
its Title, The Royal Wanton; or The Amors of Messalina; in no fewer than Five
Parts, maliciously penned and contrived to recommend those abusive Forgeries to
young Gentlemen and Ladies, who are addicted to such kind of Foolish Toys, and
framed with as much lewd Art as was possible, to debauch them into the bargain,
by the lively Expressions of its Bawdy Contents. I shall do the Author a
greater Kindness than he deserves, by not naming him at present, though he is
known to more than he dreams of, and may justly fear that his second
Recantation will not be so easily prevalent to procure his Pardon, as was his
first. His Character is best drawn by himself; for the whole Mien of his Books
do amply acknowledge, that he is a wild Debauchee, who has wholly devoted his
Life to Sensuality and Amorous Intrigues with his Misses; whence his Heart
being full of Affection for those Darling Pleasures, his Fancy could not be at
ease till it was delivered of them, by venting them after a very pathetical
manner; and, hoping the better to ennoble his own Beastly Conceptions, he
applies (without regarding whether there be the least shadow of Ground for it)
his own Immodest Pranks to Kings and Queens, at his pleasure, to humor the
Times, and gain the noble Repute of the State-Romancer. But alas! What a most
improper Subject has this poor unfortunate Ribald made choice of, to fix that
Disgraceful Character upon! A Princess, whose Incomparable Worth and
Vnblemish'd Virtue is such, that it never permitted any occasion to the least
sinister Imagination in any that knew her. Nor durst Malice it self ever be so
bold, as to taint her Unspotted Life so much as with a Suspicion of deviating
from the severest Rules of Modesty, till we came to fall into such Times, in
which to be Infamously Traduced, is the surest Token of the Clearest Honor,
and to be free from Obloquy is a most certain Argument of deserving it. A
Princess, whose Goodness alone, unassisted by any Abetter or Compurgator, has
set her Honor so high above the reach of Calumny, that it has daunted all
Attempt of Proof from appearing barefaced, and has made it, when it was to have
come to the Trial, retreat with as much Shame as it attacked with Impudence.

Next comes out Blatant; and, to make the Romance seem True, with a History,
containing matter enough to furnish out many Volumes of such Fantastic Stuff:
But the mischief is, it is so full of Forgery, that it disgraces History by
being named such, having scarce as much Truth in it as is generally found in
Romances. Cassandra, the Grand Cyrus, and The Illustrious Bassa, compared with
it, are good tolerable Histories. The Arcadia and Argenis, by the help of a
Clavis, may have much Truth covered under those Poetical Veils: But Blatant's
History is barred of that Plea, by professing to contain nothing but Real
Verities. How well he comes off, these Reflections will inform the Reader.

After this, to Second the Two other Invectives, comes out a Tragi-Comedy,
called, The Abdicated Prince; as full fraught with venomous Slanders as either
of his Brother Blatants, and he delivers them too with as ill a Grace as was
possible: Knavish Conceptions use to be varnisht over, and recommended with
some kind of glossy Wit, to hide their odious Deformity, or divert the Reader's
Eye from attending to it: But the Author of that Piece of Foppery seems to be
of no higher a pitch than those pitiful Hackney-Poetasters, that use to set off
Merry Andrew's Drolls: Yet the poor man has a mighty Ambition to gain the
Repute of a Wit of the Times. For, as those Boys in the Universities used to be
most cried up who durst with Scurrilous Iokes most abuse the Doctors and their
Superiors, so now adays he is held the Greatest Wit, and The-Man for-my-Money,
who can most slander Princes. But it is pleasant to remark with what Solemnity
this Ridiculous Farce was introduced and welcomed into the World. First, comes
out a Printed Paper, which was posted up in Coffee houses, to give notice, by
way of Prediction, when this admirable Mouse was to be born. Next, my L.
Mayor's Old-Baily-Book must acquaint us with this material Piece of News, where
the Puny Monster was to be seen for our Money, Which is a very ill Omen,
signifying, That this Libelling Malefactor may come in due time to have his
Name and Crime registered there against his Will. However, this
double-diligence gives Light enough to pull out by the Ears the seulking
Printer, and the Author. And lastly, it is handed about very sedulously by the
Blatant Gang, as if they were afraid that short lived Mortals should dye in
Ignorance of the Sacred Truths it contains. Now, since it is evident, that this
Poetaster (and his Fellow Romancer) aims to have his Ribaldry pass for true
History, he stands obliged to justify the Truth of those many Idle Stories on
which he builds it; Otherwise all his Achievements (and the same may be said
of the Romancer too) are no more, but a running of Voluntaries or Fiddling
Division upon no Ground; for at the bottom, it is no more but Blatant's way
transvers'd; which how empty it is of Solidity and full-stuft with Forgery, the
Reader will see. Nor can any sober man be brought to believe, that any of them
can make out the Truth of those things, which the stickling Party in one of our
late Parliaments, though zealously bent to do it, were forced to wave, being in
utter despair of compassing it. Which Consideration alone is enough both to
confute the better half of this shameless Libel, and withal, to render both the
Romance and the Farce perfectly ridiculous, and utterly insignificant; for if
their Historian be convicted of Lying* no wise man can expect any Truth from
their Romancer or their Poet.

Lastly, to crown the Work, and to top Blatant's part, they have published a
bold piece of Ribaldry, entitled, The Great Bastard, the Protector of the
Lesser one; of which all England may come to repent at leisure. It Is well known
how dear the printing Ridiculous Pictures of Crowned Heads did, within our
Memory, cost the Common Wealth of Holland, though that Affront was far
inferior to this, and the States did not order, nor long suffer, such an
unmannerly Action, but only permitted it for some time. And may we not fear,
that such Infamous Slanders as we are daily spreading of that great Monarch,
will so highly provoke him, as to neglect his other Enemies, or make Peace with
them, and bend all his Forces against our rude and barbarous Nation: And should
he, in that Case (as the chance of War is uncertain prevail upon us, many
Thousands may come to lose their Lives to revenge this and such like Libels. I
insist nor here on the Clownishness and Injuriousness of it, (these are Nuts to
the depraved Palate of our Age) but I would know what Good this Libeller could
in Prudence propose to himself, by writing and publishing such a piece of
Ribaldry. Did he hope, that his Bawling would (as to the one part of it)
outweigh, with Men of Honor and Reason, the unblemisht Virtue of that
Princess; or the Attestations of Multitudes of sworn Witnesses, most of which
were Personages of the highest Repute, and very many of them Protestants? Or,
Does he fancy, that the Railing of a sculking Fellow, that dares not appear to
justify a tittle of what he says, when he is secure of Impunity, and, perhaps,
sure of a good Reward roo for doing so, will ever pass for Proof? Or, as to the
other part of it, Does he think he has done a great Kindness to England, by
setting such a Base Character upon so Potent a Prince, which could he prove,
would avail us nothing? Had we already conquered the French King, or brought
him under us, though even then Civility and Generosity would not allow the
insulting over him, with shameless Lies, yet there might, in that case, be some
kind of Prudence in such an Action pretended, because it might be done safely.
But, as things stand now, it is mere Foolhardiness to exasperate so powerful an
Enemy to no end. Even Kings do not take upon them to give such Affrontive
Language to other Kings, with whom they have War, though they be of the same
Dignity, and their Equals, but content themselves, when their Honor or
Interest is concerned, to send them a Manly and Generous Defiance: But in
England every petty Coxcomb is Hail fellow well met with a King. What a
Dishonor this is to our Country, the whole World that is acquainted with our
Methods and Actions, discern with Scorn, and laugh at us for Madmen; being so
sober, as to see, that there is no Nation under the Cope of Heaven so
barbarously Rude, and so sillily addicted to forge or believe spiteful and
infamous Lies, as England has been of late years, and this (as was said)
without any Prospect of the least Good, but merely to please their Rustic
Humor of Malicious Railing I beseech God, that our Repentance may avert the
Judgments due to the Connivence and Complaisance with which we have entertained
and applauded these Blatancies. Let us remember Shimei's Cursing, and reflect
in time, That Despightful and Opprobrious Language to Kings never passed
without some severe Punishment, sooner or later.

REFLECTIONS ON A Late Libel, etc.
In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
YOU ask my Judgment of the BOOK you sent me. Your own may discern at the first
Blush, that it carries in its Forehead all the proper Brands of a plain Libel.
No Author's, Printer's, or Licenser's Name to it; no, not so much as the Name
of the Place where it was Printed. Which, when the Contents are grateful to the
Times, (as we have too much Reason to fear these are) use to be the Notorious
Ear-Marks of a Libelling Pamphlet. Next, I doubt not but any unbyast
Understanding, though never so weak, will at the first glance discover, that
there is scarce a Line in it, where he Charges any thing upon those Two
Princes, but betrays it very evidently to be the mere Product of a High-flown
Passion and Extravagant Malice: The Author places a peculiar Felicity in
expressing every thing waspishly; and no Ragoust of Eloquence pleases his
Palate, but that of Satyr and Invective. Never was Man in a higher Salivation
with Rage, or drivell'd more Foam. I should take him to be possessed with Fits of
Madness, but that he has no Lucid Interval. Kings had best take heed how they
come in this Man's Debt; for it will be difficult ever to get his Acquittance. I
should advise them to give him a Pension (as it is said, some did to Aretine) to
bribe him off from bespattering them; for, otherwise, he will make them all
Rogues and Rascals, and scarce leave an Heir to any Crown that came Honestly by
it, in all Christendom. It Is his Gallantry, I do assure you, to Trample upon
Majesty like Dirt, and then to Strut and Crow over it most unmercifully. To
tell us that King Charles the Second (the most Mild Prince then living) had
nothing in his Thoughts but Bloody Designs (p. 32.) that He had not a Grain of
Common Humanity in his Adamantine Heart (p. 124.); or that he Committed Incest
with his own Sisters (p. 22.50.) These, I say, are his Common, but Course
Complements to that Prince: And we may be sure it is Resolved on, that his Royal
Brother and Successor must be far worse than he. He is Bloody and a Murderer
every bit of him, even of his own Brother; Cruel as Nero, and the very
Dioclesian of all the Protestants; though he struggled even beyond his
strength, to give Liberty of Conscience to them all. What a Scandal is it to
the Age we live in, what an indelible Disgrace to the Government, that such a
Jack Pudding should be let loose to libel Kings, and scribble with such a
Magisterial Impudence, against Personages which filled some of the highest
Places in the Universe, and had been his own Sovereigns!

E're I leave to Reflect on his manner of Writing, or give you the Character of
it my self, I desire you to Note how heartily this Libeller tells you what you
may expect from him in that kind, and how plainly he not only confesses, but
excellently proves himself to be an Insulting Barbarian, and this by his own
Discourse and his own Words, ( p. 197.) where, speaking of the Late
Chancellor's Domineering Carriage, he descants upon it thus; [ To tell a Peer
of England, and the Bishop of London, so much his Superior, only that he sat
upon the Throne of his Commission.] He that was not to be mentioned with the
Bishop in the same day, was such a foul piece of Exuberance of his Guildhall
Eloquence, which only could have dropped from the Lips of insulting Barbarism.
Now a Modest Man, or indeed any one in his Right Wits, would verily judge that
there is far more distance betwixt this fellow's Pitch, and that of Kings, than
there was between the Bishop of London, and a Lord Chancellor; and that, if
these Two were not to be mentioned in the same Day, such a Puny Wretch as this
and Sovereign Princes, are not to be mentioned in the same Age: Which if it be
true, then this inconsiderate Fop, has, by a far better Consequence than any in
his Book, most learnedly proved himself an Insulting Barbarian. All that can be
said, why even himself should not judge so, is, That his proud and exaggerating
Genius does, in his haughty Imagination, print himself in such a Noble
Character, that he judges his own Quality, far Superior to that of poor
Monarchs, or (to pursue his Phrase) fit to be mentioned with them in the same
Minute. In which I most humbly beg his little Grandeur's Pardon, I am something
afraid he is mistaken; and that, (to use his own Words a little altered) as Men
commit Absurdities when laden with Wine, so this was his Extravagancy, when he
was Drunk with Pride and Malice; the Potent Charms which so intoxicate him,
that (as will be amply proved hereafter) he thinks himself some kind of
Peerless Thing, and Paramount to the whole World. Thus has our Libeller
buffeted himself, while he strikes at Kings; and so, since he has evinc't it so
evidently, an Insulting BARBARIAN let him be.

Nor must I forget how accurate he is in picking out, and pencilling to the
Life all the immodest Stories he could either hear, or invent; and how he hugs
his own Harlotry Pleasure in Expressing them pathetically. Oh, how his Fancy is
tickled with that nasty Idea of the expanded Nakedness of a Harlot, (p. 85.)
which he is not ashamed to show his Reader! This, and such as this, I must
confess, are foul pieces of an exuberant Eloquence, beyond Guild Hall pitch;
and such as more becomes an Academy of Whores in a Bawdy House; whence, in all
likelihood our honest Libeller transcribed it into his Fancy, and hoped that
what was so pleasing to himself, would mightily gratify his sort of Readers.

Nor must I forget the strong Reason he gives, why he became obliged to write
and publish this Hotchpotch of Ribaldry. The French King (as he tells us in his
Preface) had published a most scandalous Libel, entitled, The True
Pourtraicture of William Henry of Nassau, etc. Now, says he, though I do
undertake to Vindicate him here, I will not so much as Answer to any one
particular objected in that Libel, for fear of Proving and Fending; but let all
the Dirt stick upon that Prince still, and let him wipe it off that will; but
I Will do that which is better: And what is that? Is there any better way to clear
a Man's Credit, than to confute the Calumny? What is then this better way?
Marry, says he, I Will show that his nearest Relations are as ill Men as he can
be for his heart, and so let them, for me, pass in the World for a pack of
abominable Monsters together. And this he calls his more Concise Way of
Defending that Prince's Credit: Has this Fellow Common Sense in him, to think
that the leaving all unanswered which was Objected, and instead of doing so,
falling foul upon his Relations, is the more concise way of clearing the
Reputation of him whom he had taken upon him to defend? Or, that any Man's
Credit is Vindicated merely by Recriminating other Men? Yet this Trifler tells
us there ( p. 2. l. 1.) that he has Vindicated that Prince, by this New and
more concise Method of not-answering: And this Piece of most refined Nonsense,
is the Apology he makes, Why he published to the World such a saucy and
scurrilous Invective. Nay, which is worse, by this Carriage of his, he leaves
that Prince's Credit in the Lurch, and, in some manner, takes the French Kings
Part against him; for the Zeal he expresses for him, shows evidently he had a
good Will to Vindicate him particularly; which since he did not, in a Book, as
he confesses intended to Vindicate, it is enough to make indifferent men
suspect, and his Maligners say, that it lay not in his Power to do it. Had such
a Prevarication, in a like Case, happened in the Plot-time, People would have
sworn the French King had hired him off for Money.

Who is the Author of this Libel, was for some time uncertain. But, since I had
begun to write, and was near finishing these Reflections, I am given to
understand for Certain, That this Gallimawfry of Scurrility, was writ by an
Atheistical, Damning, Swearing, Drunken Fellow of the Fraternity of
Blackfriars, who gets his Living by Scribbling for Money. The
Inconsiderableness of the Man made it below me, and too Honorable for him, to
meddle with him, had not more powerful Motives, lately mentioned in my Preface,
won me to publish what I had already finished, e're I had certain Knowledge of
the Name or Quality of the Author: Besides, his Libel being the Groundwork
both of the Romance and the Farce, I could no way better Confute those Pieces,
than by exposing to the World, the shallow Vanity and ridiculous Lies of
Blatant's History, the Foundation on which they were in part built.

Lastly, though this mean Fellow was thought the fittest Penman for the
Blatant Party; yet it is not to be doubted, but that the Materials were given
him by some of the Heads of that Gang; who spread, and abet by word of Mouth,
what this perilu Libeller prints; whose Calumnies therefore to Confute, I
judged might not misbecome me; though this Fop, singly Considered, was below
Contempt.

I am not of your mind in the least, that Higher Powers incited him to this
senseless Barbarity, or that they will long connive at it. No certainly, it too
much misbecomes any Man who has the least Sense of Piety toward such near
Relations, or of Generosity toward Personages of so high a Station, and who
have born so great a Figure in the World (even although they may be thought to
have been subject to some Failings) to be willing they should be thus publicly
branded for Monsters, by the licentious and intemperate railing of every petty
Buffoon; whence I hope you will suspend that rash Judgment, till you see
whether his Book passes currently (after it is exposed) without some severe
Animadversion. Nay, were that Unlikely Supposition of yours True, yet it is
incredible, that Persons even of any Ordinary Prudence, (much less such as
they) would not have been chary to abuse Princes so nearly Allied to them, with
such Foul and Contumelious Language; but would rather have made Choice of some
sober and grave Writer, who knew what good Manners and Decency meant, to lay
open the plain Naked Truth, (had Necessity so required) in a Style full of
charitable and respectful Expressions toward their Persons, and with a
sensible regret that he was forced to expose their Faults; and not to have
employed such a Foul-mouthed Thersites, whose whole Book is woven quite through
with such rancorous Invectiveness, that, could a Mad Dog speak, he could scarce
vent his Cerberean Foam with more Venom. All Wise Men, who have a good Opinion
of the Present Governors, fear this Libeller has gained a fair Title to a
Pillory or the Gallows, for such impudent Slanders against their Relations,
notwithstandding his glavering Flatteries to curry Favor with them; even the
highest Encomiums from such a dirty Pen, are at the best, but scurvy
Commendations.

Thus much for the Manner of his Writing. As for the Matter of it, you may
please to observe that the Title of his Libel, is, The Secret History, etc. In
the Name of Wonder, how comes this inconsiderable Wretch to be better
acquainted with the Secrets of State, than all the Heard of Mankind besides.
There have not wanted Times of late, in which there was Impunity enough for
Factious Men to speak such Truths as could be proved, or had any degree of
Likelihood in them, even against Majesty it self; there wanted not Politicians
who had Wit enough to know them, had they been real Vertties, nor Boldness and
Malice to detect them: Yet we never heard of such a Complicated Series of
Bloody Contrivances, till Blatant, in whose Breast these Horrid Secrets lay hid
from the Worlds dull Eyes, bolted out this Unexspected Discovery of them. But
how comes he then, and none but he, to know these Secrets? Was he ever
Secretary to any of those several Princes or Popes, that he should be so well
Vers't in their most private Transactions, and pronounce upon them with such a
Confidence? Yet, he must be more than that; he must be of their Cabinet-Council
too. Nor, will even such an intimate Familiarity with their Persons and Outward
Transactions, justify the abominable Suggestions that are delivered as so many
Certain and Evident Truths in this Libel of his. He assumes to himself yet a
far greater Privilege, than the knowing all the Arcana Imperii. This is too
superficial an Object for his reaching Brain. He Fancies himself a little God
Almighty, and dives into their very Thoughts; and (which is a Prerogative
peculiar to the Divinity) searches their very Hearts and most retruse
Intentions; and when he has done, he turns their Consciences inside-outwards:
For, otherwise, the Particulars he huddles up together, will fall short of
inferring what is still the Burden of his Song, The Design of introducing
Popery and Slavery. He keeps a huge Pother about the French King, and King Chapter
his siding with him, and seconding his Intentions; whereas, every wise Man
knows that there is no True Friendship betwixt Kings: They all do what they
think is best for their Interest, and strive to circumvent one another by
Policy. They commonly look one way and row another. The French may make
Proposals, and our Kings, if they see it expedient, may in Out-ward Show, admit
their Pretenses; and in their Treaties, give way seemingly to their Intentions
(so they can but gain the Point they aim at) though they never meant them, nor
had the same Motives the others had. Sometimes too, Kings may tell the
Parliament what was really then their Intention, yet change of Circumstances
intervening, may show the complying with them in that particular, to be, hic
and nunc, Imprudent and highly Inconvenient. The Common Good is their proper
Object, and it is hard for any, to know what is such so well as themselves, by
reason of their High Station, and Universal Intelligence, both at home from
their Ministers, and abroad by their Ambassadors: Yet the subtle Wit of
Blatant can penetrate into their inmost Breasts, and tell their Thoughts to an
Hairs breadth: He thinks Solomon, for all his Wisdom, was but a Fool, and the
Scripture much to blame in saying, That Cor Regum inscrutabile, The Hearts of
Kings are unsearchable: Their most dark and opacous Meanings are to his Lynx's
Eyes as transparent as Crystal: However, we poor undiscerning Mortals be of
opinion, that his leaden Skull and short Line of Reason, are utterly unable to
fathom such depths. Nay, he knows of all Secret Letters between Party and
Party, as well as if he had writ them with his own Hand; though now and then,
if he fears them unauthentick, he is put to make them current with an [ If.]
But of his Proofs and Arguments hereafter.

Indeed he tells us heartily, in his Preface, That he will not apologize for
the Truth of what is contained in his Libel. Now, the Crimes charged in it, are
of the highest nature, and against Personages of the highest Dignity, which the
Scripture forbids us to speak evil of. Wherefore one would think such an Action
as this, of all things in the World, should need an Apology, and such an
Apology too as carries with it the clearest Evidence and strongest Conviction;
and that otherwise our Blatant will gain to himself the Repute of an Apostate
from all Common Honesty, Civility, Charity and Christianity: Nay, he is to show
us too the Necessity of publishing to the open World such horrid Crimes of such
Personages, even though True; since all secret Truths, especially such
scandalous ones, are not (as himself confesses in his Preface) to be trumpeted
about at all times, if at all. And lastly, he needs a good lusty Apology, why
he delivered those supposed Truths in such a scurrilous manner. How comes it
then, that he so kindly indulges himself the heavy and most necessary Task of
Apologizing? Because (says he) as for what was more publicly carried, there
are the loud and general Complaints of the Kingdom to confirm it. By the word [
Kingdom] he means, we are to think, Himself, and his own factious Party, and
especially the Traitors and their Adherents: By the same Figure of his kind of
Rhetoric, as by making the Dissenters (or rather the most bigoted and furious
part of them) the only Protestants, he, by consequence, ever and anon Christens
those of the true Church of England by the Name of Papists. I cannot but note
here how this poor man quite forgets what he is about. The Title of his
Pamphlet is, The Secret History, etc. And he stuffs out his Book with Matters
publicly carried, and which (as he says) a whole Kingdom loudly complained of.
These are some of honest Blatant's SECRETS, which made such a noise, that every
one must needs hear of them, whether they would or no, especially his Factious
Crew, who were the persons that made that Noise; for their Mouth and their Ears
are not far asunder. Unless he will maintain, (for he does as great Feats as
this in his Book) that a whole Kingdom complained loudly of they knew not what,
and that he is the only man (forsooth) that has ferreted out these Public
Secrets. But to the point.

The Kingdom, notwithstanding some Taxes, (which were inconsiderable, if we
compare them with K. Chapter the Second's long Reign) lived in Peace and Plenty,
and for all his ill Husbandry, and his being addicted to his Pleasures,
(Faults, though no way excusable, yet incident to many Princes) he was beloved
generally by his People, and his Death much lamented. Again, under the Reign of
K. James, there were no Taxes at all: And as for some forward Proceedings,
which disgusted many, he acted by the Advice of his Judges, assuring him, that
his Prerogative (of which every King is tenacious) did warrant the Legality of
his Actions. Indeed, I must join with Mr. Blatant in this, That he had the
Misfortune to have had an haughty Chancellor, whose Humor led him to carry all
things with huffing and a braggadochio height of Arbitrary Authority; which did
not a little contribute to lose his Prince the Love of many; and that King's
different Religion made the People easily susceptible of sinister Impressions;
which disgusted men made it their Business to improve and heighten with
ridiculous Lies and groundless Jealousies.

But why does not he apologize for the Truth of the more secret Transactions? A
man would think that the more secret they are, the more clear the Proofs ought
to be, since the Blacker the Objects are, the more Light is requisite to make
them perfectly Visible. Why no Apology then for the Truth of those private
Concerns, wrapped up in the mysterious Veil of Cabinet-Counsels and State Policy?
The Reason why he gives none, is, because The Consequences and Events are his
Testimonies. But this poor Babbler is mightily out in his Logic; for, we ought
to see his Premises are true, e're any Truth can follow from them: Since, if
this be not first made good, let his Consequences be as well knit to them as he
pleases, his Conclusions may all be false. Now the Consequences he draws, rely
upon some pretended Papers, Letters, and Treaties, and an innumerable company
of wild Stories, babbled up and down by the Factious Party that forged them
themselves. These therefore a solid man would have made it his first care to
prove, that they could not be Forgeries or Mistakes. But never was Writer so
slight in that main Performance: He barely puts down, That such a thing was
printed, such a thing written or talked, and so lets it shift as well as it can
for its own authentickness, and appuys himself on the hope he has of his
Reader's Bias toward his side; or on his good-natured Credulity; and if these
fail him, goodnight to Blatant's whole Libel. At least, if the Reader must
trust his Word or Judgment, it would have been some glimmering of Satisfaction
to him, had he told him what Means he had (above other men) to know such
Passages to be true, where he had seen the Records, in whose Hands they are or
were, and suchlike, and not to leave his Reader in an Amusement, how he came
to be so particularly enlightened, as to know that what was thus printed or
written, or said, was a Certain Truth, and to be firmly relied on.

Thus much for his Premises, on the Truth of which all depends. Next, even
supposing some of his Premises were Certainly True, yet his pretended
Consequences can never be a perfect Apology, unless he shows the necessary
Connection of the one to the other: For, if the thing might possibly spring from
another Cause than what he assigns, viz. [ the Design of introducing Popery and
Slavery,] then it is far from being an Apology for the Truth of that for which
he brings it. To examine this then a little more narrowly, I affirm, That either
these Consequences, which are to testify the Truth of those more secret
Transactions, do follow naturally from the more public one; or they require
some Skill to deduce them. If the former, then every man of an ordinary pitch
of Reason would be able to see them, as well as this Owl-ey'd fellow, and his
Party; and then he might have spared his Pains, it being to no purpose; for, in
that case, he would have told us no News but what we knew before. If the later,
we ought to be satisfied of Blatant's Skill in drawing his Consequences, and
partly on his unbyast Sincerity. His Passion too visibly manifests his want of
the later; and as for the former, he must pardon us if we cannot admire him;
for, it is visible through his whole Libel, that his Malice so transports him,
that (as shall be seen) he makes any thing follow out of any thing: Nay, should
a sober man deduce them, they do far more naturally bear another shape; and can
fright no man, unless such weak Souls, whom Blatant's Bugbear Stories have made
believe that every Bush is a Spright.

Take an Instance or two, how, though this Libeller may be gifted in other
Performances, yet his Skill in drawing Consequences is very untoward and even
ridiculous. The Dutch War is levelled by him ( p. 42.) at the mere bringing in
of Popery and Slavery. Whereas, they being our known Competitors in Shipping
and Trade, and daily encroaching upon us (not to speak of their owing us
satisfaction for old Injuries, recounted in the Book entitled, Amboina) a War
once in Seven or (at farthest) Ten Years was ever held by our wisest Statesmen,
in former times, (for I meddle not with what is our Interest now) as seasonable
and necessary, as is the lopping off the under-growing Suckers, that intercept
the Sap from the Tree, which gave them Life and Nourishment: And it has ever
been imputed to K. James the First, as the most impolitick Act he ever did, and
of the most dangerous Consequence to the Interest of England, that, out of his
too great love of Peace, he did not curb the Growth of Holland, but let them
rise to such a height of Power, as to be our Equals at Sea; in which the Wisdom
of Q. Elizabeth, and her Council, thought fit severely to restrain them. Yet
this babbling Libeller can see no reason in the World for a War with Holland,
(how long soever it had been intermitted) but merely the introducing of Popery
and Slavery, upon no other account, (says he, p. 42.) but because they
sheltered and protected those whom K. Chapter and the French King persecuted for
their Religion. He has forgot, that the long Parliament made War with them upon
the score of Interest, without any design sure of introducing Popery by that
means. He has forgot too, that the Persecution of the French Hugunots, and
their running hither for shelter, was long after that War, which he makes to be
the Cause of it. He has forgot how many of them sheltered themselves lately
here in England, even under K. James the Second, who not only afforded them
Refuge, but also recommended the Relieving them, and to that degree, that it
invited Swarms of them to follow, till they grew fat and rich, and fared better
than ever they did in their own Country, to the great impoverishment of our
English Tradesmen, and ruin of innumerable poor Families, by intercepting their
Gain, and under working them. Lastly, He has quite forgot what kind of
Christians they were whom chiefly K. Chapter the Second persecuted, (that is,
permitted Q Elizabeth's Laws against them to be executed) viz. The most
violent-humour'd Fanatics, who were ever and anon raising Disturbance both in
Church and State; the rest of the more quiet Dissenters suffered for their
sakes, it being impracticable to separate them.

The reason then of that War with Holland, is obvious to every Eye but
Blatant's; and that it was held then the true Interest of England: Nor would
any King in the World, though he had been of the same Religion with them,
disaccept the Assistance of another King, if offered, let him be of what
Religion he will, for then the Work would both be the easier, and the burden
of it lie more light upon England. But let our Blatant take the business in
hand, with his special Gift of drawing Consequences, the whole Action, and
every Step that was taken in it, shall clearly demonstrate an arrant Design of
introducing Slavery and Popery, however remote and impertinent the Premises
are from the Conclusion; and no more hang together than the building of
Tenterdon's Steeple does with the stopping of Goodwin's Sands. But, alas! This
is one of his stoutest and most Achillean Arguments; K. Chapter the Second could
not keep a Miss for his Pleasure, but, have-at him with a Consequence, cries
Blatant, ( p. 26.) ergo, it was a mere Plot of his to debauch the Nation, and
so to introduce Popery and Slavery. The then D. of York took an innocent Nap at
Sea. A clear Case, says our man of Consequences, ( p. 160.) that it was a mere
treacherous Plot, to let the Dutch beat the English, and make 'em destroy one
another to bring in Slavery and Popery. Our all-seeing Blatant could peep into
his Fancy, though the Windows of his Senses were shut up, and craftily spy out
his very Dreams, and there read plainly, that he was still plotting Slavery and
Popery, even in his Sleep. Nay more, he makes him to be a man of such a
Chimerical Composition, ( p. 161.) that he both procured the firing the Dutch
Ships in their Harbors, and also procured the firing of our Ships at Chatham;
and to mend the Jest, our implacable Blatant, whose ambi-sinistrous Humor
nothing can please, is very angry with him for doing both the one and the
other: Most Unhappy they that offend this man, or come under his Clutches; for,
let them do things quite contradictory to one another, they shall still be sure
to do wrong. Yet to do the Libeller Right, he has once in his life drawn a very
clear Consequence, if we will out of kindness grant his Principle, which is the
sure Basis of his whole Book, viz. That [Whatever K. Chapter the Second, or K.
James the Second either did, or can be said or pretended to do, must needs be
Wicked, Bloody, Treacherous, etc. because it is done, or said to be done by
Them] or, as Hudibras has it, Though there were nothing to forbid it,
It Is Impious yet, because They did it.
His skewing and screwed Deductions of this kind are innumerable; which show
our Libeller, to give him his due, no mean Artist, to clutter so many of them
together in so little a room, and to tack them to one another, to make his Tale
tell smoothly, with such a dexterous Confidence; for it requires no small Skill
to make a Rope of Sand, which is Blatant's Master piece: Yet upon my word, he
crowns the Work, and fortifies his Redoubts beyond all possibility of Attack (
p. 28.) by assuring the Reader (and who dares disbelieve him?) that his
pretended Proofs are Geometrical Demonstrations. Is not this a pleasant Fellow,
to expose himself thus to the Scorn and Laughter of Learned men, by venting
such Stuff as this for Demonstration? Indeed, in one sense his Discourse may be
called Geometrical; for, abating his own numberless Fictions, which give a
loose kind of Contexture to the whole, the Thrums-ends of his Tittle-tattle
hang together by Geometry; as will more amply appear hereafter.

This then is the Success of his Consequences, which were to apologize for the
Truth of his Libel. The other thing he alleges in his Preface, to bear
Testimony to the Truth of what he writes, is, The Events: But these can do him
no Service at all; for no such Events as he feared have happened; nor have
either Popery or Slavery been introduced, much less forced upon England. Kings
may possibly, in some particulars, be misled by flattering Judges, or other ill
Counsel, to extend their Prerogative; and Subjects may take Shadow at some
Actions of theirs, and, giving way to groundless Jealousies, be as much
mistaken in cramping and retrenching their Just Power; and yet neither the
former have the least Intention tyrannically to enslave the People, nor the
later have any thought of being Traitors to their King: Both are Men, and so
both may err in such cases, without pushing every thing to such lewd
Extremities as this Incendiary does. K. Chapter the Second might endeavor to get
the Roman Catholics some Ease, and Security for the Private Exercise of their
Religion, (or perhaps now and then put some person, whom he held to be faithful
to him, and fit for the Place, into an Office) without incurring a just
imputation of a Design of introducing Popery. To let some men say their Prayers
after their own way, is not to bid or force others to join with them, or become
of their Persuasion; nay, he was in some sort bound to be thus Civil to them
both in Equity and Conscience: For, how ungrateful had it been in him, when he
was restored to his Crown, to have, by a public Act, indemnified all his
Enemies, and at the same time, to have persecuted those who were, and had ever
been, his constant and faithful Friends? Many of them had assisted toward his
Maintenance when he was beyond Sea, had forfeited their Estates, and lost their
Lives, for him and his Father in England: Could any Good man then do less in
Honor, than protect such Loyal Persons, such faithful Friends, and such kind
Benefactors? King James the Second (besides the former Motives) took himself to
be yet more particularly obliged in Honor and Conscience to do the same,
having publicly professed himself to be of that Persuasion: Nor would any Prince
living, in his case, do other; nor, indeed, could he do less, without declaring
himself, at the same time, to be an Hypocrite, as not valuing the Religion he
professed, or thinking it ought to be protected; whereas yet the Sincerity of his
Conscience was manifest to the whole World, by his going so plainly against his
Interest, as to hazard the loss of Three Kingdoms, rather than quit the
Persuasion he had embraced. And, for the same reason, it was but decent for a
Prince of that Communion to send an Ambassador to Rome, (though Blatant, after
his usual manner, belies his Errand) to receive a Nuntio thence, and to make
some Ecclesiastical Superiors here to preserve Discipline and Good Life amongst
Roman Catholics. But, that either of these two Princes (though they might
intend that Party a kind of Freedom, and some Favors) could aim at the
introducing Popery, or forcing it upon their English Subjects, or, by means of
that Party, Slavery, is as wild a Conceit as ever entered into a raving Head.
The Papists, it is well known, are but an handful to all England; but a
Breakfast, should all the rest rise up to devour them. Add, That an Army, of
which seven parts of eight were Protestants, (and the Militia of England were
all of them the same) was the most unlikely Means in the World to compass such
an End, or rather it was such a Remora, as made it impossible to be ever
compassed: Nor wants it weight, that a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience to
all (so displeasing of late ( p. 202.) to our angry Blatant, who is resolved,
that nothing shall pacify his Indignation) was most solemnly promised, and
even too zealously endeavored to be put in execution, and to be made a firm
and unalterable Law of the Land: Which, as it was the best Expedient imaginable
to secure the Consciences of all the English Subjects, by making it the Common
Interest of the whole Nation, and engaging all Parties to stand up as one man
against the Papists, had they ever attempted to violate such a Sanction; so it
is no less an irrefragable Evidence of that King's sincere Intention never to
use any Force or Coercion upon any man's Conscience, and a perfect Confutation
of that ridiculous Sham, which is made to pass upon the Vulgar, that we must in
that case have all turned Papists. This is the true state of that Affair,
testified by Common Reason, and abetted by as many Pregnant Evidences, and
known Matters of Fact, as a thing of such a nature can possibly bear; which yet
our Libeller paints in the most hideous and monstrous form that his disordered
Passion could invent, or his squinting Fancy could delineate.

Yet I will not make my self so great a Politician, as to contend but there
might have been some Miscarriages, (and, in what Government in the World are
there not some?) the Sense of which being improved by disgusted men, and noised
abroad till they reached the Generality, the Nature (as it were) of England
conceived it self aggrieved; and Nature (as all Histories testify) will at
length work out its way by one means or other, to compass its Real or Imaginary
Satisfaction, though perhaps the Remedy, resolved upon in an hurry, sometimes
haps to be worse than the Disease. Particularly, to show how far I am from
justifying any Action which is indeed Blameable, I must confess, That the
shutting up of the Exchequer by K. Chapter the Second, was a very ill business:
Blatant charges it in the foulest Language, p. 62. yet he might have been so
just to that Prince, as to let his Reader know, That this was done by the
advice of the Earl of Shaftsbury, to render that King odious; and that K. Chapter
was so sensible of that Injury done to his Subjects, that he settled, by Patent
under the Great Seal of England, the Interest of that Money at 6 per Cent. to
be paid out of the Hereditary Excise, till the Principal could be discharged;
which Settlement all the great Lawyers in England did agree to be a Legal and
Good Security: So that it was far from being such a notorious Robbery as our
Blatant represents it. Indeed, the not paying the Interest afterward though so
legally due, was a very high Injustice. But, as he charges it not, so it is not
my Office, or pertinent to my Business in hand, to determine where the Fault
lay; only I must say, That the Complaints of Thousands, who are undone by the
detaining it, cry aloud to Heaven, till that Oppression be redrest, and
Satisfaction be made for their Sufferings. He might have told us too, (for it
is true) That K. James the Second, then D. of York, did with his own Hands
bring a Bill into the House of Lords, to have that Settlement confirmed by Act
of Parliament, and never desisted till it had past that House, in the year 78.
But that Parliament being prorogued, that business, though well intended,
failed of success.

His other Arts are to give an ill turn to every Transaction, and lay hold of
it by the wrong Handle. A method, by which it is easy for any babbling fellow,
endowed with a pretty Tantum of Wit, to travesty all the most Sacred Actions,
and traduce the Intentions of the most Innocent Persons in the World. He builds
much upon little tattling Court-Stories, gossip'd amongst the Ladies, which
never wanted in any Reign, nor do they at present: Yet till our Blatant, for
want of better Stuff, thought fit to make use of them, no wise man ever held
them worth the bringing upon the Tapis, or indeed worth heeding, much less
judged them to be a competent Ground to bear such heavy Charges against Kings
and Princes. He picks up all the abominable Fictions invented and spread in the
Plot-time by the factious Sticklers, though every one of them that was of
moment, was a confuted Lie, either proved by plain Experience, or by Legal
Evidences sworn openly in Court; or, at least, branded for Untruths by the
Recorded Perjury of the Testimony on which solely they were built: And then,
lest those Prejudices against his Stories should be of any weight, he arraigns
all the Judges and Juries as Popishly affected, though they were all of them,
to a man, Protestants. If any of his own Party do but hold up his Hand at the
Bar, it is made a flat Condemnation of the whole Court, and a Geometrical
Demonstration with him, that they were all of them most abominable Papists. His
Topics* of this sort make up near one Third of his Libel.

He traduces even the Devotions of K. Chapter the Second, ( p. 21.) for that Prince
might have intended Liberty of Conscience to all at that time, which, after he
came into England, the Necessity of Affairs, or the Treasonable Demerits of
diverse of the Fanatic Party, might show him to be hic and nunc against the
Common Good, and therefore in these Circumstances imprudent. Or he might have
intended it still, though he did not then execute it: And, indeed, it is manifest
he did so, by his attempting to introduce it afterward; but, by the opposition
made against it, he found it impracticable. However, he made it evident, that
the not giving Liberty of Conscience then, stuck not at him.

His Confident Sayings, without any Proof, are numberless, and make up above
half his Book. Take a few Instances: He would almost make his Reader believe (
p. 27.) that he had seen the King write a Letter to the Pope, in the year 62,
for not the least Proof does he offer for it, nor do any of his pretended
Apologies reach to excuse him, for laying such a Scandal. He affirms, as
stoutly ( p. 29.) as if he had been present, That all who had been abroad with
that King (except three) had bound themselves by Oaths and Promises to assist
in the Design of extirpating the Protestant Religion; and othing but one
hotheaded Presbyterian, (whose Name too we must ot know, for fear of catching
him in a Lie) quoted for it, who was laughed at, I fear, by the Parliament for
a Madman. But I am afraid our Blatant is pleased to tell us an egregious Tale
in this his Rant of Calumny. What thinks he of my Lord Chancellor Hyde, who was
one of those abroad with that King, and one of the Three excepted? Was he too
sworn to extirpate Protestant Religion? Certainly that noble Peer had the worst
Luck of any man living, to be looked upon by Roman Catholics as one who, out
of zealous Affection to the Protestant Religion, was their great Adversary; and
yet, if we may believe Blatant, was by Oath bound to extirpate Protestants to
set up Popery.

He relies ( p. 52.) upon a Libel printed at Paris, which he confesses, p. 50,
was done by the French King, to make King Chapter despair of ever being trusted or
forgiven by his People; that is, it was done by him to set England in
Confusion. Now, had it made for his purpose, he would in another Circumstance
have sworn it was a Politic Invention, contrived by that King to do a Mischief
to England; but his Design here was to disgrace K. Chapter and therefore it must
necessarily be a most Certain Truth. Nay, our kind Blatant co-operates with the
French King's pretended Design, or rather out-does him: For, the French King
ever asserted the Truth of that Libel, but stifled it, and punished the Author;
whereas our Blatant vouches the Truth of it, and (unless he will be ungrateful)
must acknowledge an high Obligation to the man who counterfeited and printed it,
since he has afforded him such a precious Lie to lay load on that King, which
is his Darling Design.

That the French King was supplied by K. Chapter with Arms and Ammunition, to take
(his own) the English Ships, is so senceless a Calumny, that it would honor it
too much to go about to confute it: For, it depends on his bare word, or
rather, it is against his own words; for, he confesses, p. 89, That K. Chapter sent
to expostulate and require Satisfaction for the Injuries done to the English;
but yet, he turns it off to another business, and assures his Reader this was
but a pretense; and then who dares disbelieve a Person of that high Honor, who
creates and annihilates Truths at his pleasure, by virtue of his special Gift
of diving into Men's Intentions?

He takes the part of all the Traitors, against our Kings and Government; he
licks up all the venomed Stuff that the Salamanca Dr. had vomited, and
magnifies his unblushing Impudence and his pregnant Reasons, ( p. 94.) I
suppose he means his many and palpable self-contradictions; as is shown
evidently, beyond confute, in the Treatise entitled, Titus against Oats. Nor
do I wonder he should retain such a special Kindness for that Gentleman, for
standing as he does, perjured upon Record; he is the honester man for it in
Blatant's Judgment; only, he should be a little startled, had he the least
Grain of Indifferency left him, to see, That that Ignominious Brand is so
perpetually and unremoveably fixed upon him, that the stickling of all his best
Friends, in a late House of Commons, could not, (even in that most favorable
juncture) procure him to be unstigmatiz'd and re-qualify'd for a Witness. No
truer is his Assertion ( p. 95.) That Coleman confessed there was a Plot against
our Laws, Liberties, and Religion, and that it was advanced so far, and
seconded by Persons of that Quality in the Nation, and Figure in the
Government, that there was no possibility to give a Let or Disappointment to
it. Which is a Fardle of Lies packed up together, without either Proof or
Shame; as are also the Messages between Coleman and the Duke, so impudently
asserted in the next Page.

He confesses, ( p. 115.) that Dangerfield was a Miscreant and a Rascal, yet
takes his bare Word against the King and his Royal Brother, that they hugged,
caressed, and fee'd him privately: But now, let Common Sense beware, and stand
out of the way, for Blatant is going to bring his Argument, which will, we may
be sure, knock down all the Reason of Mankind, that dares stand against it. P.
165. he tells us, That it is a most convincing Proof of the Truth of Dangerfield
's Examination, that the Duke hated him for it after the Discovery. Very good:
But, in case he belied the Duke when examined, why might not his Resentment
against him afterward arise from thence? And, if so, how is the Duke's Anger a
convincing Proof he spoke Truth, when the same Anger was more justly deserved
by him for witnessing Lies? So that we must have recourse to Dangerfield's
Personal Credit for the Truth of his Testimony; and, how great that was,
Blatant himself tells us, p. 115. viz. That he was a needy Profligate, a
Miscreant, an Impostor, a Rascal, an unpardoned Coiner, and a Common Cheat.
This is to be meant (we must understand) what Dangerfield was in puris
naturalibus, before he became Regenerate, by doing Service to the Faction; but
as soon as ever, following the vogue of the Times, he took the Boldness to
abuse and belly the King and his Brother, This Man for my Money, cries Blatant,
I Will warrant him an Honest man, and a Sincere Witness. This, this alone attones
for all his past Misdemeanors, and sanctifies him immediately into a Babe of
Grace. Such another Jobb he affords us, p. 129. Fitzharris, he confesses, said
backwards and forwards: Score him up then for another irrefragable Witness
against the King and the Duke, says honest Blatant.

It were easy to refute all his Cavils concerning Argyle, Russel, Essex, etc.
but that it has been done over and over by better Pens: Had he heartily
informed the Reader with what was alleged and proved concerning them or their
Cause, he might have had some Light what to think of it; but our Libeller
conceals all that was objected and evidenced, and tells Stories of his own
Factious Copartners, which he seconds with multitudes of his own Forgeries,
scatteringly intermixed, and (so self-conceited he is) that he hopes such light
Stuff will counterpoise the Gravity of Courts, and the Justice of the Nation.
But, above all, I wonder he was not ashamed to object the Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfry, after he had seen the Mystery of his Death unfolded by Sir
Roger L'Estrange; where he will find no such Stuff as his own bare Sayings, or
Tattles of the Multitude, or the Words of byast men; but the sworn Attestations
of a great number of Indifferent Persons of all sorts, conspiring so perfectly
to the same Truth, that they force Human Nature to see evidently the
Conclusion; to answer the least of whose many Arguments, is beyond the Skill of
all the Blatants living.

But, oh! how he triumphs in the Testimony of his new Evidence, Dorothy Smith!
After all the baffled Shams of Braddon, and the rest of that Seditious Gang,
which he furbishes up again, and varnishes over ( p. 177, 178, 179.) with a
voluntary Lie (without any Proof offered for it) in almost every Line, this
pitiful Drudge comes, like another Daniel, to discover that sinful Account of
Murdering the Earl: But, I beseech you, good Mr. Blatant, why was not this
Authentic Kitchinwench called before the Parliament lately, nor Holland
neither, though kept in Prison to that purpose, when that business was moved? It
would have pleased all your Friends infinitely, to have had that Earl's Murder,
by the Duke's Order, well proved at that time of day: Nor wanted they Zeal to
prosecute it, had they judged they had competent Witnesses to make good the
Charge. But, you know well, that such a Choak-Pear was put to that Calumny, by
Witnesses of another kind of Quality than Dol was, that the intended
Prosecution was past over as desperate, He says ( p. 178.) That several were
ready to depose; But, why came they not in then, when the late Parliament sat?
Who discouraged them? Or rather, indeed, who durst have hindered them at a
season when it was meritorious to blacken K. James all that was possible? As
for Dol's Testimony, it discredits it self: The pretended Murderers must needs
meet at her Master's; must needs speak so loud and so carelessly, as to let the
Protestant Maid hear them, both before and after the Murder was committed:
Nay, she must needs be gadding abroad, and have business obliging her to walk,
a little before the Earl's death, before his Chamber Window, in the Tower: She,
who, as he told us ( p. 178.) lived in a by-Corner in the Town, what had she to
do there? Or, if she had, why must her Business invite her thither just when
the Earl was to be killed? How comes it, that she alone must hear a great
trampling and bustling in his Chamber, see three or four Heads move close
together, and hear a loud and doleful Cry of Murder? The upshot is, Dol was in
every place, and just at the very nick of time too, wherever her Inspirers
could have wished her to be: An evident Token of a Lie and Subordination to
boot, as could be imagined! And so much for Dol. The rest is the unattested
words of a dead Man, and Blatant's own Forgeries or Conjectural Conceits.

Of the same leaven is his positive affirming ( p. 187, 188.) not only without
Proof, but against the Senses of all the Persons and the Records of the Court,
that his dear Brother Dr. Oats was condemned for Perjury by Witnesses already
falsify'd and known Papists: Whereas, whoever heard that Trial, as I my self
did, know well, that not any one Witness against Oats was convicted of Perjury,
as also, that there were many Protestants, who swore positively against him;
the Religion of each Witness being asked publicly and particularly. It Is well
the House of Lords were Sitting when Blatant printed his Libel, or he would
have mauled them all for Papists, for not reversing that Sentence against that
First Savior of the Nation, when it was pressed so mightily by the House of
Commons. But, how bitterly Blatant declames there against the Whipping
Punishment! Poor man! the dreadful Lashes which he fears he may bring upon his
own back, are so lively by Anticipation imprinted in his Fancy, that the Idea
of them makes all the Humors in his Composition turn Choler, at the very
thought of so rough an usage, likely to be his own Lot.

What a pother he keeps ( p. 193.) about K. James's endeavoring to bring the
Corporations on his side! I meddle not with the Legality of any such
Proceeding, humbly acknowledging, that I want the high Privilege which Blatant
assumes to himself, of knowing better what is Law than all the Judges, or what
is more conducing to the Common Good, than does a King; only I may, with his
Leave, venture to say what every man knows, and the Matter of Fact testifies,
That that King's Reason for doing it, was to get Liberty of Conscience enacted
by Law, and this too, after his having used all other means he could invent to
bring it about other ways. Why Blatant should be so angry at that which would
have been so grateful to all his Friends, must be imputed to his inveterate
Distemper of Mind, which is altogether incurable, since even such Lenitives are
so far from asswaging it, that they exasperate it the more. Furious Choler is
so rooted in his very Composition, that it is beyond all the Power of Hellebore
to purge it away.

I must not forget how he lays open at large, from p. 11, to p. 19. a Treaty of
K. Chapter the Second with the Pope, in the Year 52. counterfeited most certainly
by some former Blatant; For, it is so very ridiculous in all its parts, that
none but a Madman would have proposed it to the Belief of any man of common
sense: For, first, what show of Reason is there, that K. Chapter would have closed
so with Rome, while he was in Scotland, this being the only way to ruin himself
as soon as he was newly come into a good condition? 2. What a silly thing it is
to desire the Pope to cause the whole beneficed Clergy in the World, of what
Dignity, Degree, State or Condition soever to contribute the third or fourth
part of all their Fruits, Rents, Revenues or Emoluments to a War against
England. In the Emperor's great necessity, when the Common Good of all
Christendon seemed to be concerned, the Turk then ravaging Hungary as far as
Vienna, it was never known that any asked, or the Pope gave, more than a Tenth,
and this not in all Countries, but in some few only. 3. What an imprudent and
odd Expression is that [the whole beneficed Clergy in the World] Did that
Forger think, or, could K. Chapter imagine, that the beneficed Clergy in Russia, the
Country of the Abyssins, and many others, are at the Pope's beck, or under his
Jurisdiction? At least, if it means all under the Pope, could it be thought
fit, that the Roman Catholics in America should contribute to the European
Wars? 4. What mean the Words [ cause and compel] every wise man knows, that all
the Pope can do in such cases, is, to exhort or permit, leaving it to the
respective Princes, to whom they are subject; to compel them to contribute, and
that himself can compel none out of the Ecclesiastical State, of which he is
the Temporal Prince. 5. What an impertinent thing it is to request, that the
Pope would admonish them all to have no Commerce with England? A very likely
thing, that so many Nations will wrong their own Interest in such an high
manner, as to leave Trading with England at the Pope's Entreaty! Lastly, Grant
it, That the then Governors in England were sworn Enemies to Monarchy; yet,
what a loud and senceless Lie it is, That both in Germany, Spain, France,
Polonia, etc. and in the very Dominions of the Great Turk, they have raised and
fomented dangerous Insurrections, and that, to that purpose they supply the
Charge, and make large Contributions to it. And certainly, they must be very
large ones that can supply the Charge of pulling down the settled Government of
all those Countries, (besides what the large, etc. includes) and making so many
Commonwealths of them. Is not this man frantic, to write at this mad rate?
Yet, this he makes vast use of; nay, and to abett it, he names Father Dawly,
that went to Rome about it. Now, the truth is, That that Gentleman's Business
was, to get K. John the Fourth to be owned for K. of Portugal by the Pope, and
by that means to obtain Bishops for that Kingdom, then quite destitute of them;
and the Point where it stuck, was, That the Pope, out of fear of disgusting
Spain, hung back then from acknowledging that Prince for King, and Bishops
(according to their Laws) could not be had without the King's nomination. This
is the Truth of that Affair, the rest is mere Fiction, and the silliest one,
into the Bargain, that ever was forged; which, in all likelihood, was the
reason that the whole Story was torn out of Whitlock's Memorials, before they
were published, lest it should discredit the whole Book and its Author.

Just such another Flam ( p. 144, 145.) is his Story of a Treaty with the K. of
Poland, about establishing the Roman Catholic Religion; and this he calls, An
undeniable Convincement to all the World of the Truth of what has been hitherto
said. Observe, by the way, that all he has said hitherto, cannot so convince,
but it may be denied, if the Strength of this Story, which is to support them
all, does hap to faulter. No doubt then, but he will exert his very utmost
Endeavors to make it evident, since so precious a Concern as is the Undeniable
Truth of that has been said hitherto, lies at stake. He proves it notably, by
its standing still Recorded under K. Chapter his own Hand. By my Faith, this looks
terribly: By the way, it is the first time I ever heard that Kings did use to
record things with their own Hands: But, let that pass. How proves he, that it
stands still recorded under his own Hand? Marry, he proves it with an [ If]; If
(says he) the Original of the Instructions be extant. Very good: The Argument
stands thus. If the Original of the Instructions to the Ambassador be still
extant, then the thing is undeniably true. Well; but is the Original indeed
still extant? I do not know that, says Blatant, and can only say, If it be. Is
there, at least, an Authentic Copy of it extant? He knows not that neither,
else we should have heard News of it. Nor, if there were, is it sufficient to
render his Proof undeniable, it being wholly built on this, that the thing
stands Still recorded under the King's own Hand. So that the Truth of all that
he has hitherto said, for 144 Pages, stands or falls by the strength of the
doughty and most substantial Proof [ If.] Whence if honest [ If] chance but to
totter, and it is Ten Millions to none it will, seeing its very nature and
notion expresses Tottering; and it is known, that a Conditional Proposition puts
nothing in re, then all Blatant's Heroic Achievements hitherto, as to their
Truth, fall to the Ground. Does such a silly Puppy ever hope to gain Belief
from any man that is not a mere Natural? Yet this is the very Genius of his way
of Talking, throughout his Book: He will speak so Big, and run on with such a
rushing Career, that he over-bears the Reason of a well-minded Reader, and
wheedles, or rather hurries, him into a Belief that all is Real that is
delivered so confidently; but, if he be so considerate, as to suspend till he
sees the Force of his Proof, not a Line shall he find that has the least show
of true Evidence; but that, what gives a kind of Counterfeit Life to his whole
Discourse, is his sputtering, and keeping a great coil and clutter to amuse
weak Readers, and put them at their Witsend what to think. Only, they can see,
that either Blatant* is the Greatest Liar living, or, every man he is offended
at, is the Greatest Knave in Nature. Whether of them is thus faulty, any sober
man may easily divine by his Natural Reason, without needing to go to a Wizzard.

We have seen by these few Instances picked out of many, (and I made choice of
those I judged his strongest and most important) what a terrible Beast Blatant
is at laying his Grounds, and drawing his Conclusions; and that either his own
Forgeries, or those of others, are generally his only Premises, or else that
his Consequences from some True Principle or True Relation of Matter of Fact
are mere Paralogisms. Which, put together, show him to be a Desert^^ of Human
Reason, which consists in the inferring Necessary Consequence^ from firm
Premises or Principles. I^ remains now to Examine what he defers to Authority:
For, if he bot^ wilfully baffles Reason, and with^^ despises Authority, he has
nothing i^ the World left to support his Credit in the least, but must be
look^^ upon as a wretched Deserter of Human Nature, and a Brutish Monste^ in
the shape of a Man.

How saucily he bears himself toward particular Persons, though sea^ed in a high
Place of Authority, hi^ Carriage toward Sir Lionel Ienkins one of King Charles
his Principal S^^cretaries of State informs us, p. 119^ That Worthy Gentleman
behav'^ himself so moderately, and civilly in that Employment, that he was
esteemed by all, but the Factious, to be a true Lover of Integrity and Justice;
nor was he Hated even by those generally, but only by some few of them; and
this merely upon the Score of executing his Office; which, when their Demerits
required it, was the unavoidable Duty of an Honest Man. Yet he falls upon him
very rudely, ( p. 119.) tells us, he was a Fool as well as a Knave; makes him
in a manner, accessory to a supposed Murder (which never was, the Person being
alive still) by concealing it. Lastly, he makes him a Papist in his Heart, or
One of F. Goff's Creatures; but brings no particular Reason for it but his
Fasting, which he makes one Infallible Token of it: Whence we may gather, That
our Jolly Libeller uses to Feast for his Sins, and to eat heartily of the best,
to correct his inordinate Appetite, and Tame his Original Concupi^cence. He
tells us, indeed, in common Words that there are other I^^fallible Tokens of
the same; which we may imagine are to be brough^ to light, when our Infallible
Libe^^ler's Fancy has coined or created them. But his Anger springs only hence
that he lived and died a True Son o^ the Church of England, and a stric^
Observer of Her Ancient Canons which in Blatants deep Judgment are Popish
enough in all Conscience.

Our Judges and Iuries are the Deciders in Ordinary, of all Law-Controversies,
and the Dispensers of Justice to every English Subject; an^ if they lose the
Repute of Unbyas^ Honesty, no Man can think he shall be able either to keep or
recover hi^ own, or that any Verdict given by them, is Lawful and Valid;
especially, should they be represented as Godless Wretches and Monsters for
Injustice. Their Authority then, as one would think, ought to be pre^erv'd
inviolate, and their Credit se^ur'd from public Reproach, under ^he highest
Penalties to those who should Libel them in any Infamous manner. But e're we
entertain too ^ood an Opinion of them, or their ^uthority either, we must first
know ^latant's Thoughts in the Matter, or we shall be sure to incurr his heavy
Displeasure, and fall into the same Condemnation. Who, p. 194. speak^ng of the
Twelve Judges, passes ^entence upon them from his Su^reme Court of Judicature,
that they ^verturn'd the very Fundamentals of Human Society, etc. This is very
^^d, and I hope is not True: For ^hey seemed Civil Gentlemen, and, ^or any
thing we can discern, Man^^nd held Society and Commerce with one another, just
as they did ^^rmerly, notwithstanding their De^^rmination in Favor of the
Royal ^rerogative. One would not think that this should make them such inhuman
Barbarians. Yes, says Blatant, they had abandoned all high Opinion of God and
Nature, and quitted all sense of Conscience and True Honor. Here we see this
poor wretch not only make himself more skilful in Law, than all the Twelve
Judges in the Nation, but their Superior too to whip them with the Iron-Rod of
his Indignation; nay, to search their very Consciences, and know their
Religious or Irreligious Tenets to a tittle. Atheists indeed, have abandoned
all high Opinion of a God, but yet they retain a mighty Opinion of Nature; but
these Judges are far worse than Atheists, for they (according to Blatant) have
no good Opinion of God, nor Nature neither; which signifies they are not Men
but Devils. A moderate Man, who had dislik't their Proceedings, would have been
content to say, that they complied out of Fear or Interest. But Blatant comes
Armed with Terror, wherever he attacques, and thunders out no less than Hell
and Damnation, against all those poor Sinners which are of his own Creation:
Nor let us think it is only against our English Judges (or upon this occasion)
that he bears them this Grudge; for he assures us, ( p. 172.) That the Judges
and Iuries of Scotland, (though every one of them were Protestants themselves)
were as Malicious against the Protestants, as the Duke of York was. And how
Malicious was that? Why he tells us ever and anon, in his Libel, that he was
their avowed Enemy, and wished them all destroyed. Fie upon these Judges and
Juries; for certainly they will never leave their Cruelty, till they have
destroyed all Mankind but themselves. It Is pity that they are not summoned
before the highest Court of Justice (this Wretches angry Fury) and there
sentenced to be hanged together for a Pack of Graceless Villains. We are to
Note that all this heat springs from their Condemning a most desperate and
incorrigible Scotch Presbyterian Traitor, Robert Bailzic of Ierismond; for all
the whole Brotherhood of them are (by I cannot tell what Commission) Blatants
peculiar Care. He chuckles them all under his Wing, and there they (or at least
their Credits) are safe, against all those Foxes and Kites; Kings, Princes,
Privy - Counselors, Secretaries of State, and especially against those most
abominable Fellows, Judges and Iuries.

Perhaps, the Right Reverend Bishops of the Church of England (especially
having shown themselves so hearty against Popery of late) may obtain the
Equitable Favor from him, to be esteemed good Men, and good Protestants. No;
not a jot; For he complains sadly, ( p. 32, 33.) That many of the greatest
Bishops in K. Chapter his time were still (that is, all along) chosen out of the
number of Papists, or else were such as were of no Religion at all. What! Many
of the Bishops, and those of the Greatest, and this still, that is continually
during his Reign! Most certainly, if Blatant's Word be Oracle, there are, even
now, not a few of the Church-of- England's Greatest Bishops, who are either
Atheists or Papists. Now, by his currying Favor with the present Government,
we are not to think that he means, the Swearing Bishops, but such as are, His
Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the good Bishops of Ely, of Bath and
Wells, etc. and the words [ Greatest Bishops] seem to aim at them. And, why
should these be held Papists, who in the Opinion of the Presbyterians
themselves, have both acted and suffered for keeping up the Protestant
Religion, and stood in the Gap, to keep out Popery? This is a thing cannot be
denied by the most shameless Slanderer. All this is true, says Blatant; but,
oh! this Fasting; this most abominable Sin, Fasting; this infallible Token of
Popery, Fasting, will never agree with Blantant's Stomach! Wherefore those
Bishops being known to be exceedingly addicted to that worst of Popish Vices,
shall never have any Quarter from our Bacchanal Libeller. But, let them do what
they can, as long as they wear that Badg of Popery [ Fasting] Papists they must
and shall be with him. Would it not now be a pleasant Comment upon that place
in Scripture, where our Savior says, That such a sort of Devils are not cast
out, but by Prayer and Fasting; to take the word [ Fasting] in Blatant's
Notion, and say, that the meaning is, They are to be cast out by Prayer and
Popery? Yet it is not Bishops alone he thus reproaches; his Hand was in, and he
lays about him at all that come in his way. It was but Many of the Greatest
Bishops that he made to be Atheists or Papists; but he lays the same Scandal
without any Restriction, upon all the Ambassadors, Generals, and Ministers of
State, (p. 32.) and affirms they were still chosen out of the number of
Papists, or such as were of no Religion at all. Which is to give the open Lie
to the Certain Knowledge of all England to the contrary, and to make himself
justly liable, did not his Mask a little conceal him, to as many Whippings for
Scandala magnatum, as there were noble Personages in England, who had born
those Employments, and yet were zealous Protestants.

But these Gentlemen, though of most Honorable and Sacred Quality, are not thus
scattered thinly into so many particular Persons, an Adequate Object for
Blatant's Noble Displeasure: Have at them then All at once, assembled in a
Parliament. He gives it them home, upon my word, with a facetious Jeer into the
Bargain, and tells us ( p. 101.) That the Protestant Parliament paid double for
the keeping up a Popish Army, to secure the Protestant Religion. Nay, and that
they did it contentedly too. Which is an Impudent Lie in every particular; for
neither was that Army in the least Popish, nor kept up for any end of securing
or meddling with Religion, but upon other Scores; but he twists together (as is
his constant fashion) a many little Ends of Falsehoods, and not one of them
proved, which his awkward Fancy casts into a smooth Narrative-frame, to patch
up an invidious Story, and then thinks his Work is done. It Is a Thousand pities
the Wisdom of the Nation did not consult the Oracle of this Fellow's Judgment;
for then they could not have done amiss; whereas now, though not in express
words, yet we may see, that at the bottom of his Heart, he holds that whole
Parliament, as he did Sir Lionel, to be a pack of Knaves or Fools, or both.

It Is hard to go higher than to calumniate the Actions and Decrees of
Parliaments (Kings being already so degraded by him, that they are scarce held
worthy to follow the Wheels of his Chariot.) Yet, what think you of the whole
Diffusive Body of the Nation at once? Why, he tells you a piece of his Mind (
p. 33.) concerning Them too, and that, once upon a time, that is, upon Charles
the Second's Restoration, the whole Nation was in a Delirium or Frenzy; by
which he means not that they were thus mad by their former wild Distractions,
but by consenting to settle themselves under the Government of their Lawful
King, when they could make no other hang together. But, if all the whole Nation
was then in a Frenzy, it were not amiss to ask Blatant where he was at that
Season? Not in the Nation, for then, he being a Part of that Whole, must have
been mad for Company too, which is not by any means to be said or thought of
such a sober man as Blatant is. We ought then to believe, that he was at that
time either translated, as Enoch and Elias were, or else rapt to the Third
Heavens; and thence, by a special Mercy, sent down to whip Vice, and tell all
Sublunary Kings and Ministers of their manifold and heinous Transgressions.

Thus we see that our Termagant Hero Blatant, does, like another Drawcansir,
take upon him an Absolute and Super-soveraign Dictature, by virtue of which he
snubbs Nations, Kings, Parliaments, Ministers of State, Bishops, Judges, and
Iuries, and, in a word, is Comptroller General of the whole World at once. He
spares none, if they come within the whisking reach of his Flayl, against which
there is no Fence, but thrashes them all to Dust. And the reason of it is,
because we are to take notice, that this Fellow's profound Judgment is the only
true Standard and firm Square of all Human Action. He is like Bays in the
Rehearsal, who made his Plays his Test, to take the true Dimensions of every
man's Parts and Capacity: If they did but approve of his Plays, then he was
certain they were wise and judicious persons; but if they did not, then Igad he
knew not what to think of them, he would have nothing to do with them, but let
them go for a pack of silly Blockheads and Dunces. So, if any hap to suit with
Blatant's Fancy, (and, as will be seen anon, it is hard to hit it, without
complying with both sides of the Contradiction) then you shall be Saints,
Cherubims, or what else you would wish; but if you do not, your Doom is passed;
for, be as many for Quantity, or as Great for Quality as you please, Igad you
are all stark naught, every Mothers Son of you, and he packs you all away in a
Bundle to Old Nick, for a company of Doting, Frantic, Knavish, Villainous,
Treacherous, Incestuous, Murdering, Fasting, Popish and Atheistical Rogues and
Rascals: You have forsaken the only straight Rule of all Morality, his
Infallible Judgment, and so it follows of course, that all you do must of
necessity be wicked and abominable.

These few Instances are more than sufficient to demonstrate, that this
Self-conceited Coxcomb makes it his least concern to regard either Sense,
Reason, Authority, Truth, or Honesty, but rails on contentedly to himself and
his Friends. I could have presented you with thrice as many, had it been
needful; yet, though I omit them, I stand engaged to add one more, relating to
one Mr. Sergeant, (p. 118, 119.) which I was the willinger to examine, because I
was informed, that he was held by all that knew him (the Lords of the
Privy Council amongst the rest) to be a man of Sincerity and Ingenuity. Not
being acquainted with him, I found means, by a Friend, to send him an exact
Copy of half a Page, where he was concerned; and my Request, that he would
please to give me under his Hand, what was the Real Truth of that Story.
Wherefore, since that Gentleman has been at the pains to write it, and send it
me, and withal signified his desire (if any Answer be made to the Book) to
insert it for his vindication, I ought not (though it be something longer for one
Particular, than suited with the Brevity I 'had intended) to refuse him that
Kindness. Take then his Words, transmitted to me under his own Hand, and signed
by himself. SIR,
HEaring, in the Plot time, that Bedlow had Order from my Lord N -- to look
after me, I found means to get into Holland, where a Dutchman, who discoursed
me in Latin, while we were going to the Hague, in the Skuyt, would needs
recommend me to the acquaintance of a Countryman of mine, by name (as he
pronounced it) Mr. Rockut, whom he praised very highly for his excellent Parts
and Civility, and said, he was Agent there for the Prince Palatine. I could not
for my Heart imagine who this famous man should be; but, I must confess, the
dullness of the Country made me willing to enjoy the Conversation of Learned and
Ingenious Persons; so, the Dutchman having made my way, and an Invitation
being sent to my Lodging, I accepted it, and went to visit him. He had never
seen me but once in his Life, which was in the Protector's days, and that
merely by accident; yet he knew me again, called me by my Name, and acquainted
me with his Person and true Name, which was Rookwood, changed by him there to
Rockwood. I was much surprised at such an unexpected Encounter: For I had not
seen him in above Twenty Years before, did not know he was living, much less
expected he should be in that Country; and, had I guest at him beforehand, I
should have avoided him, knowing him to be an ill man, and one who, having been
sent over by K. Chapter the Second, about his Business, had betrayed his Master,
took Money of Oliver, and had like to have ruined all his Friends; as that King
declared both in his Closet and before the Council. However, being light
casually into his House, I thought it became me to carry it civilly, and
accepted his Invitation to Dinner; not imagining in the least, that a Person
whose Business it was to serve a Foreign Prince, had any thing to do with
England, or was able to work me any Mischief there. After repast, he began to
ask me how Affairs stood in England, of which, to circumvent me, he pretended
himself wholly ignorant; only he said, He had heard much of the Plot, that he
perceived men had different Opinions of it, and desired I would give him mine.
I told him I verily believed it was a Contrivance of some designing
Politicians, to unhinge the Government; alleging for that Judgment of mine,
the Incredibility, if not Impossibility, of many of the things attested, the
slight or rather no Credit of the Witnesses, and the Incoherence of their
Testimonies in many particulars. I alleged also, That the Evidence they gave
in was unabetted, by any Circumstances, or Overt Acts, except such as were
merely talked of, not proved, which therefore I believed to be forged; for the
pretended Matters of Fact were of such a nature, as must necessarily have been
attended by a vast Train of Circumstances, either accompanying them, or
naturally issuing from them, which must have rendered the things witnessed by
those they called The King's Evidences, incontestably manifest to the whole
World. Lastly, that all the Persons condemned upon that account, did dye,
taking it upon their Salvation, they were Innocent, to believe whom Charity and
Christianity enjoined me. At first he slightly opposed, but at length he seemed
perfectly convinced by my Discourse, saying, That he was of my Opinion, that
some ill men swore for Money, and deluded the Great ones; adding, That he heard
his Brother was in Prison for the Plot, who, he durst swear, was no Plotter. So
that Discourse broke off, and he began (having then, I conceive, the rough
Draught of the Design in his Fancy) much to pity me, that a man of my Parts
(forsooth) and Loyal Principles, should be forced out of England. I replied,
That I was loath to leave England, if I could have been there without Danger;
but, that I did not apprehend England was, at that present, a fit Soil for
Loyalty to thrive in; in which he took much Pains to undeceive me. Then he
earnestly requested I would tell him whither I was going: I told him, I thought
Tergouw was a fit place to live in, where there were few English, and I desired
to be private, and retire to my Studies: Which I said, being willing to shun
his farther acquaintance; for, in truth, I was resolved to settle at Amsterdam.
Lastly, he earnestly begged I would come and see him within three Weeks or a
Month. To avoid his Importunity, I promised him I would visit him at my first
convenience, which I made account would be never; and so we parted.

No sooner was I gone, but he writes two Papers to the King and Council,
importing, That I had told him I knew of 2 Plots; the one of the Jesuits, to
kill the King; the other of the Secular Clergy, to raise a vast Sum of Money,
and by it an Army, and so bring in Popery by force. The Author of these Papers
was concealed in England by his Friends, with all the care imaginable; whence,
it being rumored, that I would come over (my Pardon being granted) and join in
the Discovery of the Plot, and no man named, it came to be apprehended, talked,
and printed, that I had wrote so my self: Which is a perfect Falsehood; as will
appear manifestly, when I come to unfold that business. I was advertised of
this strange Report in my Retirement by the Letters of some Friends; which, at
first, made me smile at such a groundless Story; but the Noise increasing, I
penned and sent abroad a Protestation, calling God to witness, that I neither
knew any thing of the Plot, nor said or signified to any that I did; as also,
That I had neither written nor caused any to write into England any thing to
that purpose: And, That I renounced any Pardon that should be offered me upon
the score of knowing and concealing the Plot. So having done what I was able,
to clear my Credit, I composed, as well as I could, the Disorder of my
Thoughts, and fell again to my Studies; not being able to imagine how such a
senceless Fiction should come to be raised; and, of all men in the World, not
suspecting that Mr. Rookwood could possibly be guilty of such Forgery against
his own knowledge so unmistakably imprinted. About six Weeks (or more, as I
guess) after I had parted with Mr. Rookwood, cold Weather approaching, I went
to the Brill, to fetch my Winter-Clothes (which I had sent for out of England)
and came back by the Hague, Mr. Rookwood's Man by accident espied me, and told
me his Master was very often sollicitously desiring to see me. Being thus
caught, and importuned, I could not handsomely refuse to see a Gentleman, to
whom I had been obliged for his former Civil Entertainment, and to whom I had
in show promised a Visit. After some Complements and kind Complaints, that I
would not in so long time either let him see me, or hear from me, he told me,
the Secretary of the Embassy must needs speak with me. I told him, I admired
what he could have to say to me. Mr. Rookwood pretended to wonder at it as much
as I did; But, says he, you cannot in handsomeness refuse to see him; he is a
very Civil Gentleman; I was speaking to him of you, and possibly he desires
your Acquaintance. So being hook't in thus by Civility, I was in a manner
constrained to go with him to the Secretaries; who immediately delivered me a
Paper, which contained an Order from the King and Privy Council, Commanding me
to come over. I was struck with much Amazement at such an unexpected Greeting;
however, having overcome the Pause and dumb Suspense, in which I had stood a
while, I opened it and began to read, but checked at those Words [ about
Matters of great Importance, as tending to the safety of His Masties Person and
of the Government,] saying, In the Name of GOD, Sir, what can I do to secure
His Majesty's Person and the Government? I wish I knew, I would do it with all
my heart. Lord (says Mr. Rookwood) What need you make these Scruples! Here is
nothing required of you but to come over. Yes, Sir, replied I, here is an
Expectation annexed, which I am utterly incapable of satisfying. The short is,
says the Secretary, will you obey the King or no? I replied, the King is my
Sovereign, and I ought to obey him; and though I see plainly there is a Trick
put upon me, and I fear, a Plot against my Life, yet I trust that Gods
Providence will instruct my Prudence how to avoid the Snare. Then I began to
make a deep Protestation before them both, that I never knew any thing of the
Plot; which I repeated with much Vehemence before that very Courteous and Civil
Gentleman Mr. Henry Sidny, at that time His Majesty's extraordinary Envoy at
the Hague; who ordered me to return to Amsterdam, to compose my little Affairs,
and dine with him on Tuesday after, and so go over in the Pacquet-Boat on
Wednesday. I came, as was ordered, and found Mr. Rook^wood at the Envoys, who
began to discourse me apart; bidding me fear nothing, for I had greater Friends
in England than I was aware of, who were able to protect me against the King
himself. He told me how my Lord Shaftsbury had written Two Letters hither, much
in my Commendation, and that If I would come over (and, as we are to suppose,
be ruled by him) I should neither want Security, nor Money, nor Honor. He
added, That I could not but know something of the Duke of York; that, if I did
but witness it, there was Ten Thousand Pound laid up ready for me. At this I
could not but blush with Anger, to hear such a villainous Proposal; and
replied, Certainly, Sir, the World is grown very Generous, that a poor Man can
get 10000 l. so easily, and yet be an honest Man. He smiled, and said I was a
Droll, and that he hoped I had wit enough to know my own Interest. These
Discourses made me plainly see the Devilish Trap that was laid for me,
wherefore I then resolved to decline going, if it might stand with my Duty and
Honor; and, if I did go, to Acquaint His Majesty with the Intrigue. I should
also by this have begun to suspect Rookwood, and that he was a Pensioner of
that Earl, but that he faithfully protested to me, he neither knew any thing of
that Order to call me over, nor had any Correspondents at all in England, but
that my Lord Sh -- his Letters came to another Person at the Hague, who upon
occasion showed them to him; every tittle of which was false.

As soon as dinner was done Mr. Sidney took me aside, and told me he wondered I
would thus Resolutely deny any knowledge of the Plot; Assuring me that he had
of late certain intelligence out of England, that it was expected there I
should make very great Discoveries of it. Hereupon I began to Reiterate my
former Protestations to the contrary, with that earnestness, that he came back,
and told the company he saw not to what purpose it was to send me, since he was
confident I would say the same before the Council in England, that I said here:
And J, on the other side, earnestly begged of him that before I went I might
know Liquidly what I went for, it being in vain to send me to attest a thing I
knew nothing of. He resolved hereupon to write to His Majesty how things were,
and to know His farther pleasure whether I should still come or no: Taking a
note of my Lodging at Amsterdam, (which I had not yet put off) and my Faithful
Promise that I would come, if His Majesty should yet send for me; so I set my
self to return. Mr. Rookwood followed me; exclaiming highly against Mr. Sydney
for stopping one that the King and Council had sent for; and threatening that
perhaps, when he came into England, he might be made shorter by the head for
it. The reason of which mighty huff I could not comprehend, till College, the
Protestant Joyner, told me here in England, that my Lord Shaftsbury had (out of
his wonderful care of me) sent a Guard to Harwich at the time that very
Wednesday Packet in which I was to have gone should arrive, to conduct me safe
to London, lest (according to the Shams that past in those times) the Jesuits
should kill me by the way: That is, this pretended Guard was to carry me to
that Lord, where (as was the Method then in vogue) if I would have been a
perjured Villain, I should have been a Rich one; or, if I would not, then I
should, by some Stratagem or other, either be hanged for being too Honest, or
else have past through poor Prance's Fiery Trial. Blessed be God's good
Providence, which thus wonderfully delivered me from the Hunter's Net, by
making Mr. Sydney's well-meaning Prudence defeat the Designs of that Great
Politician.

After I had thus parted with Mr. Rookwood, whom I left in a very angry Mood,
that the Information he had (doubtless) sent to England the Packet before, of
my coming over in the next, was so scurvily disappointed; e're I went from the
Hague, I writ and sent a Letter to His Majesty, protesting upon my Faith as a
Christian, and upon my Allegiance to him, which was one part of it, that I
never knew, directly or indirectly, the least thing of the Plot, nor ever did
say or signify to any that I did; humbly begging His Majesty would take some
way, as he in his Princely Wisdom should think fit, to clear me of this
dangerous Mistake, lest, if I should come into England, my invincible Ignorance
might be interpreted a voluntary Concealment; which would expose me to the
highest Dangers. What was the Issue of that Letter, will be seen hereafter.

When I came back to Amsterdam, I writ to two or three dear Friends how the
Case stood at present, and what passed hitherto. They in their Answers conjured
me by no means to go into England, and assured me my Life was in imminent
Danger if I went. I replied, That I judged the same they did, but that nunquam
feci animam meam pretiosiorem me. I alleged four Reasons, why I ought to
venture my self in going: First, My Duty to my Sovereign: Next, My Promise
given to Mr. Sydney: Thirdly, That did I now hang back, I should leave a Blot
upon my good Name, which had never been blemished with the least Stain of
Disloyalty; for I should never be able to wipe off the Aspersion of having
known of Treasons against my King and Country so long, and never discovered
them which would render me Guilty of Misprision of Treason in the Eye of the
World: A Disgrace which I had rather hazard any Danger than undergo. And
lastly, That this Plot, which had taken away the Lives of so many innocent
Persons, would receive a greater Countenance and Confirmation by my absconding
(especially after my Promise to come) than ever it had been able to gain by any
thing hitherto: For, being esteemed by all (as, God be praised, I was ever
held) an Honest man, it would be judged. I refused to come, because I would not
be perjured by denying what I knew; and therefore, if I were shy to appear to
answer my Accuser, (whom I as yet knew not, but supposed he was in England) it
would, especially as the Times went, be loudly proclaimed, That all which had
been informed to have been said by me was true. These were the Reasons I gave
of the necessity of my going into England: Whether the last of them, and my
hazarding my Life upon that score, have received the just Return from some
Persons, who ought to have had more Christianity and Honor in them, than to
slander their Neighbor, without caring to know how Matters past, I leave even
to their own Guilty Consciences to judge.

His Majesty having received my Letter, in which I petitioned to be cleared
from this Calumny, was pleased to send to his Envoy a Copy of Mr. Rookwood's
two Papers, and an Order to confront us before him e're we came, as to the
Contents of them. This being judged the surest Expedient of knowing whether he
or I had belied the Truth. A Messenger brought the Papers, who came also to
call Mr. Sydney into England, with an Order to bring me over with him;
wherefore the very next day he sent the Gentleman of his Horse to Amsterdam, to
require me to attend him. In the Morning, after I had arrived at the Hague, he
commanded me to dine with him: I was perfectly ignorant of the Order to
confront us, or what he had to say to me: Mr. Rookwood had got light of it, and
never left soliciting me to dine with him at his own House; saying, That he
too was invited, but he would send his Excuse for us both. I admired at his
Importunity; but after Dinner he discovered his Reason, by telling me, That we
were to be confronted that Afternoon about some Papers that he had been forced
to send into England, concerning some words that, if he did not misremember,
had past between us about the Plot; earnestly begging of me, for his Credit's
sake, to admit his Words, and make my own Interpretation, and he would witness
that was my Meaning. Then, and not till then, did I apprehend, that Rookwood
was the Person who had raised that Lie of me, and put me to suffer all that
Obloquy and Vexation. Which when I resented in such Language as it deserved,
telling him plainly* I would not admit one word, but what I truly spoke; nor
make any Interpretation for his sake, who had so grossly abused me; that, if he
had writ Falsehoods, they should lie at his door, to his shame; I would stand to
precise Truth, and I was sure Truth would stand by me. At which he fell into
high Language, and threatened me, That if I were Uncivil to him, he had Friends
in England should hang me high enough. Finding this wrought nothing with me,
but that I returned a scornful Smile to his Threats, and answered them with a
flat Defiance, he grew moderate, blamed his Passion, and fell to Entreaties
again. At length we came to his Composition, That I should not impeach his
Credit, nor reproach him for forging, but put the blame upon his bad Memory,
and he would not justify his Memory. I knew he was able to work me Mischief in
England, so I condescended to grant him that Civility, as long as it abated
nothing of the Truth of what had past between us. To Mr. Sydney's we went, and
his two Papers were read, in every Particular of which, that were of moment, or
related to the Plot, I baffled him. One Passage was very remarkable: Mr.
Rookwood, said I, certainly you have a Memory of another nature from the rest
of Mankind, that could write into England, that I told you of two Plots, whenas
I told you plainly I did not believe any Plot. How, says Mr. Sydney, Do not you
believe the Plot? Mr. Rookwood fearing I should have related all our Discourse
at large, which would have shown too clearly, that there was more than a Bad
Memory in the Business, immediately prevented my Reply with these words: No,
Sir, his Charity for Dying men was so great, that he could not believe they
died with a Lie in their Mouths. At which Concession of his I caught readily,
and said to Mr. Sydney; Observe this, Sir, I beseech you; If I told him, as he
confesses, that I judged that all who died for the Plot said true at their
Deaths, then since it is known, they all died denying they knew of any Plot, I
must hold withal, nay, tell him I held, there were no Plotters; and if no
Plotters, then no Plot; and if I told him I believed there was no Plot, then
how could I tell him, at the same time, I knew of Two Plots, or indeed of any?
When we had ended Mr. Rookwood went away very ill satisfied: And, though I had
gained this main Point, yet I was not perfectly satisfied neither; for these
were but fleeting words, and I feared Mr. Sydney's Memory (he being then in
extreme haste) might not enable him to speak firmly and particularly to our
whole Discourse, by which I might come to lose half of the Advantage I had
gotten. There were besides Mr. Sydney, two other Gentlemen present at this
Rencountre, one of them was called Mr. Plott, the name of the other I remember
not: Wherefore I pressed upon Mr. Sidney's Patience, who was now very busy in
putting up his things, being to part within five hours; and civilly demanded
the Justice of him, that himself and the other two (who were not to come over
with us) would, while the Matters were yet fresh in their Memories, Sign to a
Paper containing the several particulars in which I had confuted Mr. Rookwood;
and requested that he would bring it with him to be read before the King and
Council; which was done accordingly.

To Sea we went; and when we came near Greenwich, I requested the favor of Mr.
Sydney, that I might go to London in his Boat, and in his company, to his
House; and there to stay and lodge till I was conducted by him to His Majesty;
lest it should be pretended, that some body had treated with me to warp me, (a
great Policy then of the Plot-framers) which he civilly granted. The next
Morning at Eight, the King Ordered him to bring me to his Closet, where His
Majesty was present with my Lord Sunderland. The King, after I had kissed his
Hand, ask't me, What meant this Information of Rookwood's? I assured His
Majesty it was a perfect Forgery not only without any Ground, but directly
contrary to all the Discourse that had past betwixt us. I know well, replied
the King that he is a Rogue; for he took Money of Oliver and betrayed me and my
Friends; but what Motive should he have to send such a lying Information to a
King and a Council? Hereupon I acquainted His Majesty with their manifest
Design; which was to get me over into England with any pretense, to be managed
there by my Lord Sh -- and if I would have been obsequious to my Inspirers and
witness against the Duke I knew not what, I was to have had 10000 l. for being
a Knave; and, if I would not, I should be hanged for being Honest. I humbly
begged therefore of His Majesty, that since I had done my Duty even with hazard
of my Life, and acquainted Him with the plain Truth of their Intrigue, He would
please to protect me. Hereupon His Majesty took an occasion to speak of another
that had 4000 l. offered him to come over; and said to me these very words as
far as I can recollect them. Mr. S. I have been present at all the Examinations
relating to the Plot, and I do protest I have not found one single Circumstance
that concurs to abet it, but it wholly depends on the words of two or three odd
Men. He was also graciously pleased to promise me His Pardon under the Broad
Seal, lest they should Prosecute me upon other acounts, as Writing
Controversie-Books, etc. as also His and the Council's Protection; telling me
withal that it was a Council business; and therefore, that I was to appear at
the Board the next Council-day, which I did: Where the Oath being tendered,
Rookwood's Papers were read, and I addressed my self to my Defense. And, First, I
showed the Falsehood of that Pretense, that I made means to come into England;
or so much as had a thought of it; not by my self; there being no Letter or
Paper of mine alleged or produced, nor I am sure producible to that purpose,
nor that can be pretended to have been writ before I was sent for: not by Mr.
Rookwood; for, I there confuted that pretense by many clear and unanswerable
Arguments. As that, (as appears by his very Papers) I would not acquaint him
with the true place I was going to, nor hold Correspondence with him. By the
Orders lying dormant so long e're it reached me; whereas had I been fond of
going into England upon such a score, or made means to have procured an Order
to that end, I should have been diligent to look after it. By my taking Pains
to go as far as the Brill, to fetch my Winter-Cloaths; by my having taken a
Chamber till Spring, at which Time I had purposed to go to Abbeville in France;
as likewise by my having laid in my Winter-Provisions of Turf, Butter, etc. All
which was Attested to Mr. Sidney by the Gentleman of his Horse, who paid my
Landlady for her Chamber, and saw the rest of my Provisions. By the Surprise I
was in, when the Order to call me into England was delivered me. By the mere
casual meeting with Rookwood's Man at the Hague, which occasioned my Visiting
his Master the second Time; which had it not happened, the Order had never come
to my hand at all. And, lastly, by this, that I never capitulated for my Pardon
beforehand, but, in the Protestation I had put forth, utterly renounced it,
nor spoke of it to Mr. Sidney, nor petitioned for it in my Letter to the King;
but readily obeyed His Command, as was my Duty, relying solely on my own
Integrity; whereas, had I been Conscious to my self of having known and
concealed two such horrid Plots so long, and consequently, been highly Guilty
of Misprision of Treason, no Man of ordinary Discretion, but would have secured
that dangerous Point, while he was yet in safe Circumstances, and out of the
Reach of our English Laws. The Paper also signed by the Three at the Hague was
produced, and Mr. Sidney was present to testify all the Particulars, that came
to his Knowledge, which abetted my Defense. I was very large and particular in
my Discourses of this Nature, till both His Majesty and the whole Council were
perfectly satisfied of my Ingenuity and Rookwood's Knavery. After which I was
Questioned about some Tenets of certain Catholic Writers; and about a Story
which I and others heard in Flanders from a Gentlewoman, about some Words said
to be spoke by one of those who dyed; to all which, being still (as my Lord
Chancellor told me) npon my Oath, I Answered according to the best of my
Knowledge, as became a sincere Christian: But I was so far from Charging it
upon that Gentleman, or making him a Plotter for it, that I Declared openly,
(having first ask't His Majesty's Pardon for speaking freely) That both he and
the other Four; nay, all the rest that suffered for the Plot, did in my Opinion
dye innocent. A thing which I believe, few at that time of day durst have done;
but, being upon my Oath, I was resolved to speak my true thoughts without fear
or favor of any. The whole Narrative of which Particulars, I (as I was then
commanded) gave in under my Hand to the Council, where they are yet to be seen.
I desire it may be observed, that these Two last Points, about which I had been
examined, came in only accidentally; and were far from being the Occasion of
my being sent for, or coming over. For the whole Series of this Transaction
shows manifestly the sole Occasion of my coming, was to speak to Rookwood's
Papers, concerning the Two pretended Plots; and that the others came in on the
by only. Which will stop the Mouths of my Traducers and Maligners, who give it
out, not only that I made means to come, but also, that this was the sole, at
least main Reason of my coming; and, it seems, would have had me forswear my
self to gratify Parties. But I humbly thank their Kindness, Non sic didici
Christum. My Comfort is, that those who did Calumniate me upon that score, are
either malicious and partial Men, bigoted Ladies, or silly babbling Women; and
I have learned so much Philosophy as to consider that it is to be expected every
thing should act as it is. I beseech God to forgive the first, and to give the
others more Discretion to guide their Zeal for the future.

It Is besides my present Purpose to Relate what Wiles were used, and Traps laid
here to circumvent me, and in all likelihood, take away my Life. The
Importunity of the impeaching Folks to get into my Company, was incredible.
Upon this, being never at quiet, I was forced to change my Lodging and abscond;
yet this could not stave them off: For they came to that Impudence, as to tell
me they had an Order from the King and Council to know where I lived, under
pretense (forsooth) of protecting me, which obliged me for my safety to send in
a Note to my Lord of Radnor, then President of the Council, Complaining of
their Insolence; who came out to me with my Lord Sunderland, and when I had
related to him my just Fears of some Mischief intended against me, he delivered
me from my Apprehensions, by bidding me-tell them he had given me a Command,
that none should know my Lodging but himself: For knowing my Lord Shaftsburys
Resentment against me, for Discovering his Design, and his Bribing Offer, and
seeing such a bold Pretense of that Party, to get Knowldege of my Lodging, I
had good reason to fear, that their Plot was either to kill me at my Door, or
to bolt into my Chamber, and then accuse me of Speaking Treason, or of
confessing to them, that I did indeed know of two such Plots as Rookwood had
informed, but out of Fear or Interest was not willing to reveal them.

Sir, I do protest to you faithfully, this is the true History of that affair
in every particular, as far as my Memory Reaches (for I have not my Papers by
me) and the Truth of the main Branches of it, which sustain all the rest, do
not depend upon my mere sayings, or my Memory; but upon Authentic Testimonies,
known matters of fact, and on my Papers given in to the Council, containing
great part what I said before them, to be found yet among their Records. And I
am confident that my Lord Sunderland, and my Lord Sidney are Persons of that
Honor, that they will witness the Truth of this Relation of mine, as far as it
engages their Testimony. Having premised this plain, and Candid Narrative of
that business, I now come to comply with your other Request, that I would note
down how many open falsities are contained in that half page which you sent me.

First then, whereas he says confidently, that one Sergeant made a Discovery of
the Popish Plot from Holland; This is manifested to be a most palpable Untruth;
both by the protestation I put forth, and spread as soon as ever I heard of
that report: And by my protesting the contrary before the Secretary, and Mr.
Rookwood, when I first received the order to come; by my abjuration of my
knowledge of any such Plot before Mr. Sydney, and all this while I was yet in
Holland; likewise by my declaring before His Majesty in his closet, and
afterward before the Council, upon my Oath, that I knew of no such Plot, nor
believed it; Nay, by the words of Mr. Rookwood himself (who was the Informer)
when we were Confronted. So that I cannot but Admire that any Man, who has the
least regard whether what he says, or prints be True or no, would venture to
Assert so Notorious a Falsehood.

2 dly, He says, I caused my discovery to be Transmitted to the Court. This is
worse than the other; for, besides what has been even now alleged, the whole
course of this Transaction shows, that I was wholly the Ignorant of Mr.
Rookwood's Papers which informed of that discovery. Nor did or could Rookwood,
though hard put to it, Challenge me to have sent or caused to be sent any such
matter; which was Obvious, and easy for him, nay, necessary to have done when
we were Confronted; this being the only way to clear himself, and confound me
who then denied it. Lastly, had I caused any such discovery to be Transmited to
the Court, it would have been alleged against me by the Council (at least by
some of my Lord Shaftsbury's party) to my utter confusion, when I denied it
before them upon my Oath; and have unavoidably proved me to be be a perjured
Villain.

3 dly, He says I had aen Intention to have discovered several others. This is
still more surprising. Can this illuminated Gentlemen see into my Intentions?
Or, does he pretend to know this from my Words, and outward Actions? But, if
Denying it, Swearing, Writing, Protesting the contrary, Confuting my Slanderer,
and the whole Course of my Carriage from the very first to the very last, be
the best Signs of any Man's inward Intentions then it is most manifest, That I
intended no such thing as this Man Asserts with such a Careless Confidence, but
the direct contrary. He can then pretend nothing in the World, but a Revelation
of my Intention; which I much fear he will hardly be able to show us.

4 thly, He says I was first bribed off by Pillory Carr. Now, Sir, I do protest
to you in the Presence of God, That I cannot call to mind, that I so much as
know any man living of the Name of Carr, and that I as little know who he
should mean by Pillory-Carr; only, I hope Pillory Carr was some very Rich man:
For, if Ten thousand Pound could ot bribe me on to witness a Truth (as he
believes Rookwood's Information to be) there must in all the reason in the
World, a far greater Sum be requisite to bribe me off; otherwise I must be a
Great Fool, that no better understood my own Interest, and my own Safety too.
But, to be serious, if this Gentleman can name me any one honest Man, who will
attest, that I ever had the least acquaintance with the Person he names
Pillory-Carr, I will give all the World leave to repute me a Lying Villain; if
not, I am sorry to tell him, that he must be content to wear that infamous
Character himself; for, it will stick to him whether he will or no. Now, my
Circumstances hapt to be such, that it quite spoils his Calumny: For, desiring
to be private, I conversed ot with so much as one English man while in Holland,
except the Secretary and those of Mr. Sydney's and Mr. Rookwood's Families; and
if Pillory Carr was none of them, he must not be looked for in Holland; and my
cautiousness, as soon as I came to England, to keep close with Mr. Sydney, till
I had spoke with the King, and made all the Discoveries I could make of the
true Plot (which was, to bribe me to witness what my Pay-masters should
inspire) utterly spoils any Pretense of my being bribed off here.

5 thly, He says, I was slightly and slyly examined. Now, Sir, I was examined
so slyly, that it was openly before the whole Council; nor was there ever a
fuller Board; all the Lords being big with expectation of what strange matters
I should discover; which was raised by this, that I had (God be praised) the
Character of a Sincere Person, which none of the other Plot-Swearers ever had;
insomuch, that I have been informed, how even His Majesty himself was startled,
when he was told, that I was to come in to make Discoveries of it. Nor was my
Examination slight, as this Gentleman presumes: It lasted about two Hours, and
not only His Majesty, and the Chancellor, but many other Lords took their Turns
to question me. I wonder whence this Gentleman had his Intelligence, who still
contradicts Matter of Fact, though never so patent and notorious.

6 thly, He says I was sent back with God knows how much Money. And this is so
perfectly false, that the whole Council, and Thousands of others, who conversed
with me a long time after in London, can witness the contrary: For, in the
Order to call me hither, after their Promise there expressed, That I should
return in Three Months, they immediately added these words [ If he shall so
think fit] and because I did not think fit to do so, they were pleased still to
renew my Protection and Leave to stay from three months to three months, for a
long time.

7 thly, He says, That this Game (that is, the managing of me) was done by the
Contrivance of Sir Lionol Jenkyns, whom he very angrily calls here Fool as well
as Knave. What Quarrel there may have been between them, which occasions this
uncivil Heat, I do not know; only I do assure you, upon my Faith, I never
treated with Sir Lionel; never knew his Person; never saw his Face to my
knowledge; nor ever had the least Ground to imagine, that he had so much as a
Finger in this whole Business: Nor can I conceive how it is possible he should,
since it wholly past through the Hands of Mr. Sydney, my L. Sunderland, the
King and the Council: So that it never lay in his way, nor was in his power to
hinder or help it.

Lastly, He inveighs against the same Sir Lionel, for endeavoring to conceal
my Murder at Abbeville in France, when I was coming into England to make a
farther Discovery of the Plot. Certainly, Sir, this man is either crack-brain'd
or stark drunk with Passion; for, both my self and all that converse with me,
verily judge that I am alive yet; and, if I be alive, a very short remove of
Reason makes me gather that I was never yet murdered.

Sir, I am sorry your Friend is task'd to spend his Pains and Time in answering
such a Monster of Forgery; who, as it seems to me, (and, I believe every
indifferent man will be of my Judgment) is so fully bent against Truth, that he
can scarce write a Line, but is a direct and flat Falsehood. And, which is
worse, he is so brazen'd in that Humor of his, that he has not the least care
to choose out such Untruths as he may hope to conceal; but he rather makes
choice of such as are most evidently and inexcusably False. If you count them
exactly, you will find there are at least Ten egregious ones in the short
compass of about half a Page. Pray desire your Friend not to engage or extend
my Testimony to any State-matters; you know I do not love to meddle with such
Edg'd-Tools; though I hope this Bundle of Lies of his, in one particular
Subject, may serve for a Pattern, to show what ridiculous Fictions did pass for
Gospel among that Brotherhood in the Plot-time. What I have done here, is in my
own Vindication, which, since at his Request to you, and yours to me, I have
taken the pains to write, let it be mine to you both, that, if your Friend
thinks fit to publish any Answer to that odd Book, he would do me the Right to
insert this Narrative of mine (and that in my own words, without any
alteration) in its proper place.

Your Friend, etc. J. S.




When I had got this Relation of Mr. S -- 's, so clearly coherent in all its
Parts and Circumstances, so testified by the Council's Records, and abetted by
such Vouchers yet living, I began to be half sorry I had foul'd my Fingers so
long in meddling with a Fellow so evidently convicted of Imposture in almost
every line. Yet, since I have begun with him, I shall proceed in the Track I
had designed to follow, and show, in the next place, some few of his
Self-contradictions, which are far more Infallible Tokens of a Forger, than
Fasting is of Popery.

P. 26, he pretends that K. Charles the Second's following his Pleasures was
done on purpose to weaken and make soft the Military Temper of the People by
Debauchery and Effeminacy, and so introduce Slavery and Popery. Now, if this
Argument holds, then to train them up in Military Employments should, in all
Reason but his, Work a contrary Effect, be the ready way to secure the Nation
against those Mischiefs, and to keep them out. But our Blatant scorns to follow
that ordinary common Track of Reason, beaten so bare by all Mankind before him:
He will be above them, and extraordinary, as in every thing else, so in this
too, else he goes below himself. That Logic which will not make any thing
follow out of any thing, is not worthy him, nor able to do him the least
Service. For, p. 71, 72. he makes that King's training up his Subjects in
Military Discipline a mere Plot to enterprise upon his Protestant Subjects; that
is, to bring in Popery and Slavery, as well as the other. So that Fighting and
Courting, rough Soldiery and soft Effeminacy are equally argumentative with
him to prove a palpable Intention of altering the Religion of the Nation, and
enslaving it. It Is but clapping upon every Action, though contrary to one
another, a wicked Intention of his own Inventing; and then it is impossible to
do any thing, but it shall be writhed about to look the wrong way, and skew
toward the mark he levels it at, the introducing Popery and Slavery.

He complains of K. Chapter p. 31. for persecuting the Nonconformists (that is, for
not hindering Q. Elizabeth's Laws against them from being executed;) and yet ( p.
65, 66.) he is mightily out of humor with the same King for his Declaration to
give Liberty of Conscience; and as ill displeased at K. James, p. 202, for
attempting the same. Such another is his Saying ( p. 39.) That K. Chapter had
encouraged the Lord Clifford to attempt the bringing in of Arbitrary Power, and
yet called him rash Fool for his pains. As if any man in his Wits did ever call
another man a rash Fool for doing what himself had bid him do, or for obeying
his own Commands and this too after he had (as he says) encouraged him to obey
them.

He characters K. Chapter all over, as a perfect Creature of the French King, or
rather his mere Slave, to that degree, as to assist him to take his own English
Ships: Yet never could man more amply become his Compurgator, from being
over-fond of France, than our forgetful Blatant is ( p. 47, 48, 49.) where he
tells us at large, That K. Chapter was the first that began to form a Confederacy
against the French King, by sending to propose a nearer Alliance with the
Hollanders, and a defensive and stricter League than was before between the two
Nations; That to keep the French King from having the very Thoughts of ever
stirring, he sent to several Princes of Germany, to invite them into the
Leagne; That his Envoy, with no less heat than plainness, laid open the Danger
all Europe was in, urging the Insensibility of most Princes, the watchful
Ambition of the French, the Greatness of their Forces, and the little reason to
trust him; omitting nothing that could alarm all the World, and procure a
general Confederacy against the Oppressor: Lastly, That fearing the Spaniards
should not pay to the Swedes (who were also in that League) the Subsidies
stipulated, our King offered to advance part of it himself, and had done it, in
case the Dutch would have advanced the rest. Now, these things being confessed,
could the most avowed Enemy of France have done more than K. Chapter did to abate
his Height, when he saw the occasion required it (for to oppose such a powerful
Prince without necessity, was very Impolitick?) Do not these known Matters of
Fact clearly evince that he was very far from being a sworn Devote of his, as
Blatant has oftentimes shamelesly asserted? And if so, may we not safely
conclude, that he has all this while told us a most egregious Falsehood, and
positively contradicted himself? No, I Will warrant you, he will come off well
enough for all this. True, says he, the outward Actions of that King do seem
indeed very pregnant Testimonies of his Aversion to the French; but if you did
but look into his Intentions, as I do, the thing is quite otherwise; for, I
read it plainly in his Heart, that he did this prompted more by his own fears
than out of any kindness he had for the Nation. Well; let his Love for the
Nation alone a while, and let us suppose (since he will have it so) another of
his Contradictions to be true, and that K. Chapter made head thus vigorously
against the French, out of Hatred to the English; the Point yet sticks, Does
not this brisk Carriage of K. Chapter signify, that he was far from being the
French King's Creature, and that he was not enamored of him so, as even to
assist him to take our English Ships? Let it be Fear of him if he pleases, this
abetts our Assertion, that he was far from over-loving him whom he so feared,
or doting on a Person he could not trust. He runs from the Business, to tell us
how the League was broke afterward, and multiplies Lies upon Lies, well laid
together, to amuse us with a fine Story. And, what if, upon Reasons of State,
it was broke afterward? Was that League engraved in Adamant, so as to be
perpetual? He grants, that it lasted till it had done the Work it was intended
for, that is, This triple League, and the Peace of Aix la Chapelle soon after
concluded, did put a stop to the French King's Cureer; and was not that enough
for his purpose? The altering of Circumstances breaks Leagues every day. This
is no News to any man who has but read Gazetts. The Suede, he confesses p. 59,
fell off too, nay, drew his Sword in the French Quarrel; Did he intend too to
bring in Popery or Slavery into his own Country by doing so? Did he do this to
give Demonstrations of his Fidelity to the French Monarch, or recommend himself
the more meritoriously to his Patronage; as he banteringly imposes ( p. 54,
55.) upon K. Charles? How comes it then to be such a Geometrical Demonstration
against K. Chapter that he did it with that pretended Intention, or out of a
crouching Submissiveness to the French King; whereas the doing the self-same
action (nay, a worse) was never thought to have the force of the least
probability against the King of Sueden? In good faith, Mr. Blatant, you even
say any thing, and entangle your self in Contradictions the more you blunder to
get out of them. The short is, K. Chapter did like a wise Prince: He was glad to
live quietly by such a Powerful Neighbor, if he could without danger to his
Kingdom, especially knowing he had a factious Party at home, who desired no
more but tangle him in such a War, that he might be forced to truck his
Prerogatives for needful Assistances; which was the reason he kept fair with
him as much as he could; but, when he saw his Encroachments threatened England,
then he acted vigorously to repress them, even though he hazarded his own
Inconveniences. And this, in Blatant's Language, is giving Demonstrations of
Fidelity to the French King, and recommending himself to his Patronage.

But is it not pretty Non sense that he should ( p. 93.) make K. Chapter know of
the Plot, the chief part of which was to kill himself; that is, know there was
a Design on foot against his own Life, and yet be the chief Stifler of its
Discovery? Which amounts to this, That he was content to be killed, and Felo de
se in his Intention, even while alive. But, how comes that Prince to be so
rechlesly careless of his Life? He was held to be naturally held timorous, and
the fear of Sudden Death is enough to startle the most resolute man, even
though a Saint. Why, he was strangely infatuated (says Blatant, p. 172.) to
believe all was for the concernment of the Cause to which he was so affected
himself, that is, the bringing in Slavery and Popery. Very good: But was he
willing to be killed to carry on that Concern? It must be so, in case he
believed it: And, if he believed the other parts of the Plot (I am sure he has
granted he knew of it all) it must have been upon the Credit of the Witnesses
(for nothing else appeared to evince the Truth of it, as the King himself
openly and frequently declared in all Companies) then he must believe withal
the Lord knows how many methods laid to kill himself, as, by Shooting,
Assassinating, Poisoning, etc. And it is a strange Infatuation (as he says well)
I add, And such a one as Human Nature is scarce capable of, to have the same
reason to believe his own Murder was designed, that convinced him the other
things those men attested were true, and yet not be willing it should be looked
into, that it might be prevented. Now, the Truth is, the King utterly
disbeliev'd the whole Plot, as he often declared, and held the Evidences of
those Times, to be a Pack of perjured Knaves: Wherefore, seeing so many
Persons, whom he verily judged did dye Innocent, put to Death upon that score,
he could not in conscience, (though the Nation being put into such a ferment, he
was forced to give way for a while to the violence of the Stream) suffer the
Guiltless to be still thus barbarously murdered; and therefore he endeavored,
as far as Prudence would permit him, to put some Blocks in the way of those
Feet which were so swift to shed Blood.

What follows is yet worse, and indeed as ill as can be, and therefore it shall
be my last Instance of his admirable Nonsense and Self-contradictions. He
pretends ( p. 72.) that K. Chapter had an inveterate Malice to the Dutch, merely
upon the account of their being Protestants, and Protectors of the Protestant
Religion; insomuch, that he says, p. 42, That it was thought most requisite to
destroy them in the first place, and he all along makes the D. of York to have
the same Thoughts with him in that point, and to cooperate with him in that
Design. Yet he is so Forgetful as to acquaint us with three such signal Favors
done to the Dutch by the Duke, as no man living would do his Best Friend, much
less (as our Libeller pretends) his avowed Enemy. The first, ( p. 160.) that he
purposely fell asleep at Sea, to the end the Dutch, for want of Orders, might
have an opportunity to wrest the Victory out of the Hands of the English. Which
was a Kindness with a witness, to be willing to forseit his own Honor (which
great Personages value above their Life) by letting the Victory slip out of his
Hands, which was (as he tells us here) in a great probability of Success; nay,
to hazard to be beaten himself, (perhaps killed too) for their Advantage. The
second, That he permitted ( p. 160.) himself to be surprised at Sould-Bay, by
which means the English were sacrificed to the Dutch. The third ( p. 161.) That
the Duke procured the Firing our Ships at Chatham. Now, if the Dutch be
Protectors of the Protestant Religion, the Duke must with all reason in the
World (if what he says be true) deserve to be styled Protector of those
Protectors, or Grand Protector of the Protestant Faith; for, those
Vnder-Protectors might have been ruined, had not their kind Patron thus
friendly assisted and reprieved them. But how think you does he come off from
such a ridiculous Contradiction, to make the Duke hate the Dutch so
unmercifully, and yet befriend them so unmeasurably and preposterously, in
defiance of his own Honor, Interest, Safety, and Common Sense? If he hated the
Dutch so deadly, merely upon the account of their being Protectors of the
Protestant Religion, he should have let slip no occasion of mauling and
destroying them in the first place; for, the Supporters of that Religion being
once overthrown, he could not but think (in that Supposition) that the Religion
it self would fall without more ado. This then ought to have been the Duke's
first and most sure aim, and not to Establish them by the Overthrow of the
English, who, as it seems, by his Discourse, were not near so zealous
Protectors of the Protestant Religion, as were those Saints of his, the Dutch.
How comes he off then from such a gross and palpable Self-contradiction? Well
enough I warrant you. It Is but making use of his Supernatural Optic, and
peeping through it into the Duke's Intention, and then telling us (for he says
any thing) that he did it to keep the Balance even, and presently he fancies
all is as smooth and current Sense as Heart can wish. He had forgot what he had
said ( p. 42.) That it was thought most requisite to destroy those Protestant
States, in the first place: Which quite spoils his pretense of keeping the
Balance even. A sober man would rather think, that to give the Protectors of
the Protestant Religion such Advantages as were able to set them above us, and
hazarded to disable the other side from ever hurting them after, was most
clearly a turning the Scales on their side, and quite contrary to an Intention
of destroying them in the first place. Besides, the Die of War is uncertain, and
such Advantages lost or given away, are oftentimes never recoverable. Could any
man foresee the Consequences of the Duke's yielding them three such vast
Advantages over us, or, that the Dutch being by this means our Betters at Sea,
would not follow on their blow, keep us under them, and so quite spoil the
pretended Design of introducing Slavery and Popery? With what impertinent and
ridiculous Flams does this Baffling Fellow hope to fool his Readers! Yet this
is his constant handy-dandy method in every point he handles: Voluntary Talk
serves him for well-grounded Truth, mere Pretenses for Proofs, and flimflam
Stories for clear Evidences. Innumerable such as these the Reader may observe
in his Libel, grounded on nothing but his own voluntary Sayings, or his
untoward commenting upon every Action by his Gift of diving into invisible
Intentions; of which many others I had noted down, and intended to prosecute,
but he is an everlasting Subject, and I grow weary of him.

We have seen how ridiculous our Blatant is in his Rational Performances, how
far from Solid in his aerie Principles, how Untoward his Skill is in drawing
Consequences, how carelessly and openly Lying in his Narrative part, how
intolerably Arrogant in censuring all Authority but his own, and how
contradictory to himself in many Particulars: It remains now, that we examine a
little, by reflecting on two or three of his most grievous Charges of Sins of
the greatest Magnitude, and the Proofs he brings to make good those Charges,
how good a Christian he is. The true Badge of Christianity is, that new and
peculiar Command of our B. Savior, to love one another ( Ioh. 13.34.) And when
he resumed all the whole Law into two main Commandments ( Ioh. 22.37, 38, 39.)
he declared, that the second of them, which was, to love our Neighbor as our
self, is like the first, which is, to love God himself entirely. Nay, the same
Holy Evangelist (1 Ep. cap. 4. v. 20.) makes it impossible to love God without
loving our Neighbor. Now, to do an Injury to our Neighbor wilfully, is
utterly inconsistent with the Love of him; especially to wrong his Reputation
and Credit in any high nature, which ought to be as dear to him as his Life, is
yet more uncharitable; and this, though the person thus injured be our Equal.
But, the Dignity of the Persons thus defamed does aggravate still more the
Fault of the Slanderer; which makes our Laws inflict such severe Penalties upon
those who are Guilty of Scandalum Magnatum, above what uses to be inflicted on
them who shall speak contumelious words against those of meaner condition: But,
in case the Persons thus defamed be of the Highest Rank in the Universe, whose
Office and Persons (by reason of their superintendency over the Common Good of
a great Portion of Mankind) are justly esteemed Sacred, it adds still a greater
degree of Enormity to that most uncharitable Sin of Calumny. But then, to make
any such Personage a Monstrous Compound of all the Villainies imaginable, and
(which is yet worse) without Evident Reason to prove the Charge, does exceed
all the Bounds of Ordinary Malice, and approaches to plain Devilishness. We
have seen already how perfectly seared Blatant's Conscience is in this
Particular by many Instances; but we have reserved the Examination of two or
three of his most horrid Slanders till the last; by the laying open of which,
it will not only appear how this wicked Libeller is an Absolute Renouncer (or
rather a declared Enemy) of that best Christian Virtue, Charity; and this in
the highest degree possible, and under every Consideration that can enhance his
Vice, but also, hence we may make an Estimate of his whole Book; For, common
Reason gives it, That if he brings no Evidence to justify his highest
Accusations, much less has he brought any to make good his other Charges, which
are of an Inferior nature, and so less needing it.

K. Charles the First has been so celebrated for his Piety, by the whole
Protestant Church, and the day of his Martyrdom so solemnly kept amongst us,
that one would scarce think there could be such a Villain found in Nature, as
would take the Boldness to leave a Blot upon his Sacred Memory. But it being
Blatant's design, to vindicate the present Governors, by representing all
their Relations of the Family of the Stuarts, to be Rogues and Rascals, he
could not let even that B. King escape without some Mark of Infamy. Taking
occasion then ( p. 102.) to inveigh against K. Chapter the Second, for sending away
the Parliament, lest (as he says) they should prosecute some of the pretended
Popish Conspirators, he tells us, That he did therein like his Father (K. Chapter
the First) when the D. of Buckingham was accused of poisoning his Father ( viz.
K. James the First.) By which words, since he all-along makes K. Chapter the Second
know of the Plot, and yet protect the Plotters, he not obscurely hints, That
good K. Chapter the First was privy to the poisoning his Father, and therefore by
sending away the Parliament, protected his Murderer from Prosecution. Now, the
Truth is, that when there is any great and sudden change, Peoples Minds are
naturally in a violent motion, which hindering the settling a steady Judgment
of things, they oft-times grow apt to entertain groundless Jealousies, and
egged forward, perhaps, by some politic great Persons, who out of sinister
ends, hate those men, they let fly at some one or more of them whom the Princes
themselves judge Innocent. In such a Case as this, then it is that Kings have
one of their hardest Games to play: Their Conscience will not let them
willingly sacrifice those they hold Innocent; nor their Policy allow them to
oppose the Torrent openly. They are therefore in those cross and perplexing
Junctures forced to take such measures, as to gain time, till those violent
Heats spend themselves and evaporate, and a calmer Temper succeeds, that so
they may be able to protect the one without disgusting the other. This was the
very Case of those two Princes; for neither did K. Chapter the First believe the D.
of Buckingham had murdered his Father, nor K. Chapter the Second the least tittle
of the Plot; and therefore they judged it more becoming their Christianity and
Duty of protecting their Guiltless Subjects, to make use of their Prerogative,
by dismissing the Parliament till Men's Thoughts did settle, than to be forced
to yield to the Murder of those whom they deemed to be Faultless in
themselves, though unfortunate, by the undeserved Malice of the People or
Parliament, wrought up to a high ferment by some designing Politicians. And
therefore, since this was in all likelihood the very Cause why K. Chapter the First
did send away that Parliament, whose Hatred toward the D. of Buckingham was
known to him upon former scores, antecedent to his Father's Death; with what
Charity, with what Conscience could this Varlet hint, That he protected him
from Punishment, though he knew him Guilty of such an Inhuman Parricide?

Again, p. 22, he is not content that K. Chapter the Second should be held only
Guilty of Adultery with the Lady Castelmain, (though, God knows, that alone was
too shamefully sinful) but, as if he would prosecute his Soul after death, to
the nethermost Hell; he will needs have him Guilty of Incest too, at the same
time, by pretending that that Lady was his Sister by the Mothers side. The Fact
is very Horrid, and the Charge Grievous, and therefore we are to expect very
clear Evidences, to make it out, otherwise our Blatant Beast will be convicted
to be the worst of Ribalds, and far from a Christian. His first Argument is [
It being the Opinion of several Persons who had reason to know more than others
dill, that she was begotten by the E. of St. A --, upon the Queens Body, after
the Death of Chapter the First.] How! Opinion? Is the man mad? Is the Opinion of
diverse, I cannot tell who, sufficient Ground to charge a King thus publicly in
print with Incest? Let him bring such a Plea into a Court, for publishing the
like Slander of an ordinary person, and then seriously bethink himself what a
Judge and a Jury would have said to him: I doubt he would scarce abide such a
Trial before an Earthly Tribunal, armed with no better Allegations than
Opinions; and dare he stand it out before the dread Tribunal of a severely just
God, who has commanded him, under pain of Eternal Damnation, not to violate his
Sacred Law of Charity? Observe his words, and you shall see it is just the style
of babbling Gossips at their meetings, when they have a mind to slander some
Neighbor they hate, and dare name no Author for fear of being caught and
confuted: It Is the Opinion of some body, that knows I know what, that spoke
with those that heard it from others, who have reason to know more than we do,
etc. What Stuff is this to ground so horrid an Accusation of a King upon! But
why does not this Slanderer, if Opinion have such a Power with him, reflect how
it is the Opinion of all England, that that Lady was not his Sister, and that
King Charles the First's Queen never had any Child after his Death; that many
are not only of Opinion, but have certain Knowledge, that that Lady had both
another Father and Mother than those he is pleased to assign her, and can bring
many Witnesses of her Birth and Extraction; as That she was Daughter to my Lord
Grandison and his Lady, her Name registered in the Parish Book where she was
born, all the Neighborhood being Witnesses of her Education in her Infancy;
and her Relations, that she was brought up afterward with my old Lady Villers
her Aunt? Is it not a wilful Dotage then to prefer the Opinion of some few,
against the certain Knowledge of many, and the Consent of the whole Nation? His
Second Proof is, That Mr. R. O* saw that Earl and that Queen married. He must
pardon me if I do not believe him. But, does it follow thence, that that Queen
had ever a Child, or if she had, that the Lady Castelmain was that Child? Or
why is it rather to be believed for that reason? Must every Female Child be
believed to be their Daughter, because they were married; and this
notwithstanding the Certain and Firm Belief, nay, Knowledge, of all her near
Relations, that she had other Parents? What a beastly Fool is this, where
clearest Evidence was needful and expected, to alledg nothing but perfect
Nonsense? How will this insulting Barbarian clear himself then of this
graceless Slander? He told us in his Preface, That as for the more secret
Transactions, the Events and Consequences were his witnesses, which voided the
necessity of his Apologizing. Now, here is a Transaction the most Secret of any
in the World; and, what Consequences, what Events can he allege to justify
the Truth of it? Alas, he had quite forgot that: All he talks is at mere
Random, and such things use to go as they come; they are taken up to serve the
present purpose, and dismissed again without ever thinking of them after.

But Blatant makes that Lady King Chapter his Sister by the Mothers side only,
which renders it but Incestuous to the half part, and so in his Opinion does
not blemish that King enough. Have-at him then once again (says he) with
another and a more complete Incest with the Duchess of Orleans, who was his
own Sister by Father and Mother's side both. He charges it positively upon him
and that Virtuous Princess ( p. 50.) who, in despite of her Husband's
pretended Jealousy (which, as also Obloquy, are the usual Misfortunes of those
Ladies who are rare Beauties) was ever held by all that knew her well, and were
her constant Attendants, the Mirror of her Sex, both for excellent Natural
Endowments, Moral Virtue, and unspotted Honor and Chastity. I demand then his
Proof for this double foul-mouthed Calumny: Not a jot, he thanks you; his own
ipse dixit, and bare Affirmation, is all he can afford us: For, sure he cannot
think that the D. of B -- 's holding the Door looks, in the least, like a
Proof, were it true, which it is very unlikely to be; for, Why could they not
(were such a shameful Wickedness intended) go into a Room where they could
themselves fasten the Door on the inside? Is it any Misbecomingness for a
Brother and Sister, who ever loved dearly, and had been many years far distant
from one another, to desire (after such a Medley of Chances happened to them
both, which Nature would prompt them to communicate) to be an Hour or two in
private? Or, is it unusual, that such near Relations, at their first Interview,
should have some body attend at the Door, to keep them from being disturbed in
their Discourse? Had he alleged, That the Duke peeped in at the Door, or
through it, and seen any the least Indecency, (though it had argued an
incredible Folly in them both, to take no better order for their Privacy) this
Forger might have had some small Shadow of Excuse: But, to allege nothing, but
that one stood without the Door, and then raise so foul a Slander upon such an
Innocent Circumstance, and so usual in every Prince's Court, shows, that this
Ribald's Soul, and the Spiritual Life of it, Charity, is totally corrupted with
the Gall of Bitterness; and that Slander is so natural to him, that he vomits
it out gratis, without caring or concerning himself whether there be the least
shadow of Ground for it or no. He is as much out in his Conjecture, that this
Rencounter occasioned her Death. The D. of Orleans knew she was to come into
England, and gave his Consent to it; and Blatant himself tells us, if we may
believe him, That he knew she was to have a private Conference with her Brother
about making a League with France: And more than this, the Duke neither knew
nor could know when she came back: Why should this then so alarm him? But the
whole Story is perfectly false; for, whoever has conversed with the Great ones
in France, may hear it there current, That (in case the D's Jealousy caused
her to be poisoned) it was ever held to be for the sake of another, who would
needs either follow or attend her into England, and, that not the least
apprehension of K. Charles was ever in his Thought. So that our Blatant is a
mere Forger of Slander, and a Patcher together of Falsehoods, to defame his
Neighbor, nay, his Sovereign, and by consequence, a perfect Apostate* from true
Christianity, or rather what those who know him do conceive of him, a perfect
Atheist.

It remains now, only to examine what kind of Kidney this man is of as to his
Principles of Government: He scatters his Thoughts here and there, concerning
that point too, and I hope one Stricture or two will give us a perfect
knowledge of the System he would set up in the World to govern it by. He tells
us then ( p. 2.) That where the Prince strives to subvert the Fundamental Laws
of the Society, there He is the Traitor and the Rebel, and not the People, who
endeavor to preserve and defend their own. Had he said, That in that Case they
had been Unjust Men or Tyrants, I should not oppose him; but, the word Traitor
or Rebel, applied to a King or Supreme Governor, is a kind of Bull in Human
Language, and sounds like a Slipshoe-Hat. If a King can be a Traitor, or a
Rebel, he must be a Traitor or a Rebel to somebody above him: And, who can
that be, in his Judgment, but the People? By his Discourse then the People are
the Sovereigns, and the Prince is their Subject, it being Nonsense to say, that
the King and the People may be mutually Traitors and Rebels to one another. By
which we may see how consonantly to these Principles of his he bears himself,
in thus huffing Kings: For, he being one of the Super-Royal People, that is a
Parcel-Soveraign, it is but fit he should at his pleasure curb and check, and
rail at those naughty Boys, Tom, Dick, and Jack, the Princes, which are his and
the People's Vassals and Subjects.

Take another Expression of his, which is so odd, that one cannot easily tell
at first sight what to make of it. Speaking of K. Chapter the Second, ( p. 25.) he
has these words: From the first hour of his arrival into These Kingdoms, (for I
d^^e not call them His) etc. Why, what fears he? Or, What should hinder him?
Did any person in the World but K. Charles lay claim to them when he was
restored? Was there any other Pretender under Heaven, that put in for his Right
when he came to take possession of them? No, no, means Blatant, (if he mean any
thing) there was no other indeed of those pitiful Usurpers called Kings did so,
but the People were the True Sovereigns, and unjustly driven out from their
Government of it, when the Nation was ( p. 33.) in a Delirium and Frenzy upon
his Restoration. This sure should be his Common-wealthish Meaning, and it is
confirmed by his telling us, p. 27; That it was a Great Blunder in Politics,
to re-admit K. Chapter the Second for their King.

In a word, he is a Commonwealth's man every Inch of him, and his Flatteries
of the present Governors are but mere Feintures, either out of prospect of
getting Money, or some petty Place for Secret Service, by means of some Friend
that set him on to scribble; or else out of hope they will stoop to a
Common-wealthish-Government; in which I shall hope and pray he may find himself
mistaken.

Friend, I have performed your Command in perusing attentively the Libel you
sent me. I have milkt your He-Goat, and have found nothing in him but Froth and
Filth: Give me Leave to complain of you for setting me about such an unwelcome
Task; for, to meddle with such a dirty Antagonist, is (as an ingenious
Gentleman said in a like occasion) Non tam in arenam quam in sterquilinium
descendere. One Key will serve to open all he has thus laboriously involved.
Let but the Reader carry along with him that ordinary Discretion (as every
honest man ought) not to yield his Assent to the least tittle of his smooth
Tale, merely for its being said, but suspend his Belief till he sees it proved;
and, withal, be aware, that the pretended Proof depend not on his bare word,
but either on Authentic Records, acknowledged by the Generality of the
Indifferent World, or upon the necessary Consequence from some known Matter of
Fact, and then I dare pronounce, that he will not find even a probable Reason
to give Credit to one Line in his Libel, that are invective against those two
Princes, as endeavoring to introduce Slavery and Popery. This Honor I shall
willingly yield to the Author, that he is an Absolute Idea in his kind, or an
admirable and almost unimitable Exemplar, to show us how much it is possible to
deviate from the Love of Truth, which is so agreeable to our Nature; or rather
to degenerate into a perfect Hatred of it, whenever it thwarts the Headlong
Impulse of his Rash Passion or Rude Malice.

Your Humble Servant, N. N.


