THE HEU and CRY: OR, A. RELATION of the TRAVELS OF THE Devil and Towzer,
Through all the Earthly Territorys, and the Infernal Region, together with many
of their most memorable Adventures in search after the lost HERACLITUS

Written by N. N. M. A. and Chaplain Errant to his Excellency The Guide to the
Inferior Clergy

Per varios Casue, per tot discrimina rerum,
Tendimus in Stygium.
London, Printed for Roger C^gger.

To his Honored PATRON, the GUIDE to the INFERIOR CLERGY.
Honored Sir,
TO whom should I dedicate this Relation, but to your self, who ^ear one of the
greatest parts in it; This, besides those many Obligations I have received from
you, has emboldned me to lay this Book at your Feet. Many, it is like, of the
Credulous World will censure me for relating a mere Fiction; But if they are so
hard of belief as to mistrust the truth of your having been in Hell already,
they are not certainly so damnably sottish, but that they think the Devil will
have you in a short time, and then this may pass for a Prop^ecy. That our dear
Friend HERACLITUS is gone, alas! it is too true; and you and he having lived
the same lives, and acted alike, by most men you are doomed to the same
destiny. You have written many tedious Observaters for the public good, and I
^^ite this Relation for the same end. Ah! how will it revive the Cockles of the
Hearts of our Tory Friends to hear the Devil and you keep such Correspondence;
ah! say they, now our cause must needs Flourish when our two* great
Polliticians agree so well. But I care not what the men of the World say of my
Relation, let it pass for a mere Romance if they please, let it be the
Continuation of Quevedo's Visions, which (you know) you Translated out of a
Language you understood never a word of, and then why may not I complete it
with a Relation I never heard nor saw any thing of. And to conclude, I assure
you, if ever you take another Ramble it shall be Faithfully Related by

Your most Humble Servant, and Chaplain. N. N.

A Relation of the Travels of Towzer and Satan, (in search after the lost
Heraclitus) through all the Earthly Territorys, and the Infernal Region, etc.
IT was then (when Discord newly sprang up, did Flourish in its Verdure; when
Rogue and Whore were Epithets for Man and Wife, and Fool and Knave for
Neighbors; when Babels Bricklayers had Invaded England, and had made as many
Dissentions in it, as they had Bricks to build their Edifice) 'twas then, (I
say,) this Son of Discord called Heraclitus, Cadet to the Family of Prince
Beelzebub, came (by his Fathers Commission) to Plague our Commonwealth. The
History of his Life would be too tedious to Trouble the Reader with; And I only
design to Relate his Departure. How the Devil it came about, I know not, but
upon a certain day, the Wight stepped aside, and was never more heard of; various
was the talk both of City and Court, Town and Country, what was become of the
famous Heraclitus; some said, he lived a Fool, went out in a stink, and (if he
were quite Deceased) died a Knave; others (and those were but few) had a little
more Favorable Conjectures of him, and said he was only stepped aside to
Barn-Elms, Epsom Wells, or some such place, and was caught in a Net they call a
Petticoat; others said, he was drunk at the Prentices Feast, and was yet
asleep; this was again Contradicted by others, because (as they said,) he told
the World in a Printed Pamphlet a little before he went away, he had a Design
to Vanish, which made most think he was in Debt, and so gave his Creditors
warning of his Rupture. This News was soon carried to his Infernal Highness,
which cast him into such a Melancholy, you would wonder; he straitwayes puts
all his retinue of Hellish-long-tails into Mourning, mounts his Fiery Chariot
and ascends, and without any Ceremony drives away to Councellor Towzer, after a
little Consultation it was agreed upon by these two Politicians, first, To take
a Journey over the whole Surface of the Earth, and if he were not to be found
there, they were resolved to seek Hell too, but they would find him. Being
agreed upon by both parties, I was sent for from my Devotion (for by the way
you must understand I use to say my Prayers, and tell my Beads sometimes) to
attend his Excellency, My Patron, that has so many Names in the World, some
call him the Guide to the Inferior Clergy, others call him Towzer, and some
call him Rogero del Bombardo, I (who am always Ambitious of Ho^o^r*) hearing
his Worship, Satan, was in the Company, went away with as much Alacrity, as if
I had been Invited to a Christning to drink burnt Claret, and sup white Broth:
I put my hat under my Arm, set my Gown in Pimblico, Entered the Room, and made a
plaguey long Scrape with one of my hind Legs upon the Boards of the Chamber, and
then told my Patron, I was come to wait on his Worship; My Patron bid me come
nearer; but to say true, I did not much care for it, for the Old Gentleman
called Belzeebub sat just by his Side in a great Turkey Chair; Heavens! I was
in such a Fright, I thought verily, I should have defiled the case in the
presence Chamber; but if I had, there was such a Stink of Assa-Foetida and
Brimstone, it would have drownded such a puny Scent as this. At length my
Patron opened his reverend Chaps and told me, he had designed to take a long
Journey with that Gentleman, and I must go with him to perform the Office of a
Chaplain. I told him I was his Humble Servant. But yet, methought, I did not
Care much for Mr. Devils Company, I liked him so ill at first Sight; for he
Star'd at me most damnably with a couple of Eyes as big as a pair of great
Coachwheels, and his Teeth looked just like the Spoaks. But knowing him to be
one, that delighted in all kind of Wickedness, and my Patron to have a very
good hand at it, and to say true, I did not much come behind my Patron neither;
so Consideratis Considerandis, I thought we three might be very good Company;
Then I made a very Reverend low Conge to Mr. Devil, and told him, I would wait
on him and my Patron Towzer, whither soever they went. Towzer was all this
while fitting himself for his Journey, getting all the necessaries for so
tedious a Ramble; then he steps into his Closet and brings out a woundy great
Pouch, which he told me I was to hang by my side on my Cirsingle, and then bid
me withdraw, which (after the usual Ceremonies between men of such breeding as
we three were) I did* But I had a months mind to know what was in the Inside of
this Pouch; when I came out into the Entry, I made bold to open it, and the
first thing I laid my hands on, was a nasty bottom of Catsgut; then I plucked
out 2 or 3 pound of Rosin, but yet there lay something in the bottom of the
Pouch I was resolved t^ see; opening, there ^ay the head of a Trebble Violin,
staring at me like the wrought end of a Constables Staff, then putting all up
again, ha! Thinks I, we shall have a merry Journey of it, I find by my Fiddle.
By this time the two Knights-Errant were ready to Sally forth, and I their
Squire was as ready as they. Away we March in Pursuit of the lost Heraclitus;
we had past over many Melancholy Heaths, Desert Woods, and Unpeopled Forests,
but heard no Tale nor Tidings of him; The Savage Boars rudely grunted at us,
but told us no News of our dear Friend; the Ungentile wild Horses kick't and
Farted at us, and turned us away without any News of Heraclitus; Then we
retired to the Ionesome Cottages, then to the more Populous Towns and Citys,
but the Devil a bit of Heraclitus was to be found. But to see how Towzer
behaved himself, Heavens! I thought verily I should have burst my Cirsingle
with Laughter; Not a Post he came by but he lifted up his Leg and pist against
it, to see if it were a moveable; not a Church, but he peept in at the
Keyhole, to see if Younker Crape were not reading the Burial over his Corpse;
when ever he came in a way where there were many Turnings and Windings, he let
loose a Company of young Succub^s's (which he kept under the warm Influence of
his Tail for suchlike Purposes) to range the Labyrinth to find out the Lost
Ass; but all was in vain, the Wanderer was not to be found.

Then Beelzebub and Towzer resolved to descend, and search the nether Region
after him; and I, forsooth, must go too with my Budget of Fiddle-strings at my
Arse. We wandered for many days through Subterranean Holes and dark Caverns, as
glooming as Hell its self; then we came to a broad Level; at a distance we saw
a light hung out, by which we stear'd our Course; This Light was hung out at
the Ferry, to conduct the Passengers, who were ^ound Hell-ward; Here we
arrived, and then stalkt down with Charon, and entered his Boat, where we found
a great Company that were bound over; I looked about me to see if I could see
any of my Profession there. (For though we Preach the Word of God to men, and
perhaps send some Souls to Heaven, yet we indent with the Devil to have a part
with him in Hell.) Here I found a great many of my Acquaintance, but they came
without their Gowns on, and therefore I scorned to take any notice of them; our
Ferry Boat skim'd along the pitchy surges most bravely, and were quickly landed
in the innermost Region. Belzeebuh commanded the door of Hell to be opened,
which was soon done. Now you must know this door is kept by a great Mastiff
Tyke called Cerberus, who has gotten three confounded great Heads, and upon
every Head a Perriwig of Snakes and Adders* This Dog some days before we
arrived had angered the Queen Proserpina, and she still threatened him when her
Prince came home, she would have him turned out of his Office, and a more
deserving Cur put into his place; Now when he saw our Towzer, he thought this
was the Whelp, that was to succeed him, and thereupon fell a growling and
snarling at poor Towzer after a most Hellish manner; Towzer (who thought
himself safe because he had gotten Satan and his Chaplain by his side) very
fairly showed his snagling Teeth at him again, then the feud increased on both
^^des most vehemently, at length what does this Hell-Hound Cerberus do? But
leap after a most barbarous manner upon poor Towzers back, sets his Holders
into his Fiddle (which he had tuned ready to play us a Flourish to welcome us
into Hell) and brake it all to shivers, then bites him by the Back, Belly,
Sides and Ears, at such a rate, that it made Towzer Roar most mellodiously; nay
this Damned Dog Cerberus had certainly killed him, had not Charon come just in
the nick and beat him off with one of his Oars; So* this was the first
adventure we made, and here Towzer came by the worst of it. Beelzebub having
been long* absent from his dear* Proserpina, could not but make her a visit
before he sought any further. Towzer was m^d to go along with him* for he
understood her to be a very beautiful Female, and at such kind of Creatures the
Cur did continually lick his Chaps; to the Hellish Seraglio we march. And there
having taken a view of the Queen and the splendid Ornaments of the Structure;
from it (after we had taken our leaves of the Queen according to the Ceremonies
of that Court) we go to search all these Territories after our Dear Friend
Heraclitus; and in the first place we designed to walk along by the bank of the
famous River Acheron; I was in hope when they took up the resolution first, we
had been going to Travel by the side of some pleasing River environed round
with verdant Meadows, Comfortable Willows and matted sedge for the Nymphs to
sculk in; I promised my self a thousand sweets by the bank of this Stream, for
I expected it to be no less than an Infernal Heli^on; Now, thinks I, I shall
have mine Ears Charmed with the Mellodious Voices of its warbling Sirens; mine
Eyes feasted with the best Compositions of Natural Features; and all my senses
wrapped up in the Contemplation of most beauteous Objects. But truly I was much
deceived; The River was nothing else but a thick mixture of Pitch and
Brimstone, and that scalding hot too; No Flowery Meads and Grass on its Banks,
but Mountains of Sulpherous Ashes; No Mellody, but the screetching and Howling
of Damne^ Souls* that were doomed to stay there no less then eternally; Here I
saw poor Sisyph^s rolling up his Stone, while his M^^dere^ Theseus sat on the
top of the Hill bewailing his own Condition; here I saw Ixion tumbling on his
Wheel, and Tantalus with his Stony ruff about his Neck, and his Apples bobbing
at his Nose; here were different sorts of Punishments I looked about to find out
the place where the Divines sa^e, for certain I was, I should not miss of
finding some of their Reverend Souls in Bilbo; these I found at last in a long
Melancholy place, all sitting upon stools of Repentance, and comparing the just
decree of their Punishments with their own Sermon Notes; these I pitied, but
alas! Pity and Repentance avail nothing to Damned Souls. But the best jest was
to see how the poor Tailors were used; They were set upon their Heads in hot
Caldrons, and a Company of Fiends were pricking their Bodies, and making Button
holes in their Skins; these and the Lawyers were the most tormented, who were
hung over the Hot Flaming Furnace by Geometry in Shreds of Parchment. But to
see how Towzer looked, you would admire, he was as unconcerned as if he had been
amongst his Tory Friends at Sam's, and valued no more the screetchings of the
poor Damned Souls, then he did the twang of his Fiddle. Now for my part (though
I must confess, while I was on Earth, my Conscience was as hard as the Church
Walls) now it began a little to melt. Now were we come to the end of the River
A^^eron, and no News of our Dearest Friend Heraclitus; Now we are resolved to
Range the Banks of the next River, the Immortal Styx. But before we could come
to this River, we must past many Sandy Deserts and vast Mountains of Ashes,
between which Mountains were many large spacious Vales, very well set with
Trees, but these Trees are never green, and bear no Fruit, because of the
noisome Vapors that arise from the L^ke* One of these* Vales was Inhabited by a
company of Ladies, that had not committed so great Enormities as the others,
and therefore were to be tormented with a small punishment here, till Jupiter
should think fit to remove them to the Elysian-Fields; This place I verily
believed to be the Purgatory the Papists tell us of. Now you must understand
these Ladies have but two hours sleep allotted them in three days, and we
happened to come in the time of their Repose; Towzer he opened so loud in
search of Heraclitus, that on my Conscience if one had been pickled up in Opium
he would have awakned one; this yelping of his, disturbed the drowzy Ladies,
whose two hours sleep was a precious Tallent after so long a wake; they were
mightily Enraged, and thereupon sent their Chambermaids to salute Towzers Chaps
with some Pispots from their Chamber windows, but Pis-pot take 'em all! For I
am sure some of the Piss fell upon me, and scalded me most vengibly; for you
must understand by the way, that they Piss nothing but Fire in Hell; But this
Whelp Towzer got off all that fell on him only by shaking his Ears a little;
Hence we depart and go down to the brink of the River, and enquire for
Heraclitus, but no News at all; This River was a terrible flaming, stinking
River, enough to strike Terror into a Saint. This was an extraordinary
punishment for Extraordinary Sinners; Here were thousands of Bishops and many
Popes tumbling in their Tortures; here was Salmoneus King of Elis with many
other Kings; Here lay the Danaides like stewed Owls in hot Caldrons, but yet in
as bad a Condition as they were, we could scarce keep our Towzer from running
through Fire and Brimstone to commit a Rape upon their Bodies. The Inhabitants
of this River are very much troubled with Hurricanes, but of a far different
Nature to those we have upon Earth, ours are cold, but those are most damnably
hot; There happened one of these while we were by the brink of the River, which
blew off Prince Belzebubs Hat into the deep, how to get it again we knew not;
Beelzebub commanded Towzer to swim and fetch it out, now Towzer was put to his
trumps; Towzer he pleaded, he was no Water Spaniel, but a Bull-Dog, and that he
commanded him to do a thing that was below him; Beelzebub threatened to throw him
into the River with a great Millstone about his neck if he did not fetch it
presently; Towzer, he whin'd and was very loath to venture, sometimes he ran to
the water side, then he goes again, puts one of his Forefeet into the Water,
but the Water scalded his Toes, then he turns about and whines and yells most
hideously. But as good luck would have it, there arose an Hurricane on the
other side of the River, which blew the Hat to this, and so saved poor Towzer a
Parboyling. This Styx is a terrible great River, and runs nine times about
Hell; we had traveled by the bank of this River all round, and I think endured
as much Torture in our walks as the Damned do in their Torments, many a weary
step had we took, many a restless night had we endured, but no Tidings of
Heraclitus; Now were we come just to the end of this River; But before we
departed, Towzer would have Belezbub swear by the Stygian Torrent, That he
would forgive him whatsoever Misdemeanour he did commit before he went out of
Hell. Beelzebub (because Towzer was a cordial Friend) took the Oath. Now
Beelzebub began to be weary, Towzer to hang an Arse, and I almost jaded off
from my Legs, so 'twas agreed upon on all sides to leave seeking since we
sought in vain, to cheer our drooping Spirits, and to return to the beauteous
Proserpina to Court, there for a little while to lament the loss of our dear
Heraclitus, and then enjoy all the pleasures of Prince Belzebubs Court: we set
forward with all the speed imaginable, and at length arrived at our wisht-for
Harbor the Court, where we were entertained very kindly by the sweet natured
Proserpina. Beelzebub indeed behaved himself like a Gentleman, and treated us
after an extraordinary manner with all the Dainties of the Infernal Region; Now
did we every day Carouze in whole Rivers of Nectar, and eat the Manna of the
Gods; but I am sure we had not eat one bit since we came into Hell before, for
it is a d^mn'd barren Country for Provision; all the Courtiers gave us honor,
and Towzer was not a little proud to have the company of so many fair Ladies,
for you must know these Ladies that have suffered Purgatory in the Stygian
Vales, when they are released, do (in their way to Elysi^n) spend some time in
Belzebubs Court. Towzer he had gotten all the pieces of his F^ddle, and had
patcht them together, and every night went to serenade one or another of these
Ladies; Every day we were at some noble Treat with them; and Towzer did wag his
Tail and fawn most devilishly at them, and my foreboding Spirits did prophecy,
that Towzer would make sweet work with them if ever he could get an
opportunity. When ever we went to the Playhouse to see an Infernal Fir^^
Acted (for know by the way this Court does imp the Terrestrial in all their
doings) Towzer did gloat at the Ladies after a damned leacherous manner: now
I, who did still keep company with Towzer, would be very crank upon the
Ladies, would be glancing and cocking at them as I stood st^adling in the ^it
and they in the Box^s; I thought I might have the same Liberty in this
Playhouse I used to have at that in White-Fryars; But when ever I looked at
them, Towzer (...) did ^^^ me over the face with his ^^^gy Tail. And truly I
took it in great dudgeon, but durst not speak a word; I did verily believe he
had a leacherous design upon some of their Bodies, and knowing me to be a young
brisk fellow, he thought his zea^ and mine might jump at one and the same
Quarry, for I must confess I was naturally very lewd, and I am sure I lost
nothing by being acquainted with my Patron; one morning I heard Towzer very
buisy in getting a Pen and ink, and in a short time he came and knocked at my
Chamber door, gave me a Billet and commanded me to carry it to Proserpina's
Apartment, with a great charge to deliver it to none but her self; I took the
Billet, but by the way I was big with desire to know what was in the middle,
and indeed, like a faithful Servant I brake it open, and took a Copy of it,
which was as follows.

To the admirable Proserpina Queen of the Infernal Region.
Most beauteous and thrice delicate Madam,
I had not troubled you with this Billet could I have had any personal
correspondence with you. Love that has made Gods turn men, men became Gods,
and Fiends turn Saints, has made me your Martyr. I languish, I pine, I melt
away in Love, and (dear Madam) if you make no return I dye; that beauty of
yours that made Pluto fetch you from Sicily has conquered my heart, and you
not only Reign the infernal Juno, but the all-charming Queen of Love. In short,
Madam, without the enjoyment of your beautiful self I am undone; and s^eing I
have resigned up my Soul to your Husband Beelzebub, I can do no less then give
my Body to the Wife Proserpina. Madam, I desire to know by the Bearer how you
resent this Address; in the mean while I Remain,

The meanest of your Votaries, Towzer.


Having read this Billet, I was very much astonished at the Contents of it;
What a devilish Dog (think I) is this Towzer? What a complaisant Cur it is?
What a smooth, wheadling, insinuating Letter the Whelp has drawn up? I was in
an hundred minds in a quarter of an hour; sometimes I resolved to keep the
Billet; then to give it to Beelzebub and discover the villainy of Towzer, for to
say truly my righteous Spirit began to rise at this nefarious design, whether
it were out of a righteous Principle or no I know not, but I Will assure you my
Divinity was much concerned in the case; Thinks I, what a vile Hell-hound is
this Towzer, to conspire the Cuckoldom even of Prince Beelzebub? Oh Abhorrible
Act? Not only to make the Devil a Cuckold, but make a Divine the Pimp! What an
impious Scoundrel is this Patron of mine, to make me a Post to carry about such
bawdy Epistles? But I thought if I gave the Billet to Beelzebub the consequence
of it might prove very fatal both to me and my Patron; and if I kept it, my
Patron might have the impudence to have me condemned to sit upon a Stool of
Repentance in the dusky Room of Styx amongst my fellows; so I took wit in my
heat, and delivered the Billet to Proserpina, who took it and returned this
answer immediately, which I brake up, and took a Copy of, as I did of the
former.

To the Right Worshipful TOWZER.
I Have Received your Billet, and wonder at your Impudence in making such an
Address, am not I Proserpina Queen of Hell? And you in respect of me, an
Infamous Person? Do you think if I should tell my Prince of this, he would not
Chain you to one of the Stakes in Barathraum to drive out your Natural heat
with a greater? No, good Towzer forbear! I am meat for your Master, and take
this as kind Advice from

Kind Proserpine.


This I brought to Towzer, who was almost mad 'till he knew how his Billet
took with his Charming Proserpina, he goes into his Chamber and reads it; I
heard no more News of his Dogship until the next Morning; for my part I was in
bodyly fear least he should have hanged himself, and so I should have been
forced to have gone home again by myself; but in the Morning betimes he was
Scratching at my door for his Breakfeast, I arose and provided all things in
order; but you never saw a poor Dog altered so in your Life, he looked as sower
as a Cat at Stool, as Thinn as if he had not gnawed a Bone for a whole year
together; I could not speak to him, but the Spannish Cur was ready to bite my
Nose off; he walked about the Chamber, and pist against all the Joint S^ools,
and Chairs, for madness; then he would fetch a deep Sigh, Then crack a Fart,
Then Howl and make a Conceited noise like Cats a Whipping. I verily thought the
Devil was in the Whelp, or that he was Bewitched; away he goes on a sudden, and
in a short time brought me this Billet, which he commanded me to carry to
Proserpina as I had done the former.

To Proserpina Queen of the Infernal Territorys.
Madam,
NOtwithstanding your Angry Return, I make bold to adventure on^e more, knowin^
I can but come off with a positive D^nial. De^^^ls Increase Love, and Yours
has Increased me to such a Degree, that all the B^ll^ws of the Ocean cannot
quench it, I ^^^me in love; Daggers, Poisons, Furies rid me of my Life, I
cannot love H^ll n^^ Heaven, while I am not Beloved of you. Therefore sw^^t
Madam consent to my Request, for I Remain,

Your eternal Admirer, Towzer.


This I gave to Proserpina, who, when she had read it over, came to me and bid
me tell my Patron, That he was a Coxcomb, and that she would acquaint her
Prince with his vile Designs; to my Patrons Lodgings I went, where I found him
in a great Readyness to receive an Answer, I told him Proserpina had sent him
no Letter, but bid me tell him, That he was a Vile Whelp, a Mangie,
Maggot-ars'd Cur, and that she would tell Belzeebub he did intend to Ravish
her. This made To^zer Scratch his Pole most confoundedly, and Stalk away as if
he had been going to be hanged. We kept our constant course of Visiting the
Ladies as we used to do, and every Morning we took a walk in Belzebubs
Privy-Garden, where Towzer got a great Acquaintance with the Female Sex; so I
got leave of him to go into the Suburbs of the Court, for I was very curious to
see the fashions and manners of it, hoping if once I got safe out of it, never
to return again; I was absent from Court about a day and an half, at my return
I found the Court in a very great Hubbub, People running up and down the
Streets as if the Devil had driven them; I saw they did all Resort to one great
House, that was not far from the Court, thither I went, where I found a
numerous Congregation, this I presently mistrusted to be a Court of Judicature,
because there Sat some great ones in their Pontificallibus, seeming as if they
Inteaded to give Judgment upon some Male actor or other, I was very desirous to
see the proceedings of this Court, and therefore crowded up as close as I
could; presently I heard a great shout, make room for the Prisoner, and every
body gave way; but bless mine Eyes! who should this Prisoner be but our To^zer
led up in a long string, with a great brass Collar about his Neck; But to see
how Doggish the Cur looked! he laid his Ears in his Pole, his Tail between his
Legs, and looked as if he would have devoured the whole Society: Well; here
stood Towzer a Criminal, the first clause of his Accusation was read, which
was, That Towzer was Convicted both of Dishonesty and Lechery. They demanded of
him if he could say any thing for himself. Towzer very Jesuitically told them,
as to his being dishonest, in one Sense it was true, and in one sense it was
not; as he was Servant to Belzeebub he did confess he was not honest, yet as he
was a guide to the Inferior Clergy, he was, for they have some grains of
Allowance for Knavery; in like manner he answered to the other, he said,
Quatenus homo, i. e. quatenus Rogero del B^mbardo, he was very Lecherous; but
quatenus Towzer i. e. quatenus Dog, he was very chaste; for says he, Dogs are
of a hot Constitution by Nature, and besides there is no Act against their
going to Bitch-watching: none of the Hellish Sophisters could say any thing
against these Distinctions; But now the fatal clause was read, viz. That Towzer
had Committed a rape upon the Body of the Queen Proserpina. No musty
Distinction would serve turn here, Proserpina was produced, and several other
Witnesses; every one deemed, Towzer would be hanged, for who could have thought
he had any thing to say against so clear Evidence. But you shall hear how the
Pollitick Cur got off. If you remenber I told you before, at our Departure from
the Stygian Lake, Towzer made Beelzebub swear by the Stygian Torrent, That
whatsoever Misdemeanour he should commit before he went out of Hell, he would
forgive him. Now you must understand when a God swears by this Torrent, the
oath is so obliging, that if he break it, he loses his Godhead, and is to
drink no Nectar for a hundred year, this Oath Towzer put Beelzebub in mind of,
who rather then lose his Godhead and forseit his Nectar, would be a contented
Cuckold of Towzers making, and so they were both very good Friends again. Now
is Towzer in as much repute at Court as ever, but Proserpina had marked him for
a foul Cur, and cared very little for his Company. Now I knew not how this rape
was effected, nor nothing of the Circumstances of it, and therefore I was
almost distracted to hear how he did it

One Evening as I was putting his Dogship into his nightly litter, I asked him
the time when, and the manner how he accomplished his design. He ^old me one day
as he and I were walking in the Orchard, into which there is a door op^ns from
Proserpina's Apartment, he was walking a little before me, and found Proserpina
a sleep upon a Bank of Camom^l, and then he did the Jobb. I well remember the
time, for I thought he would have made a bite upon my body, he was so fierce to
have me gone out of the Orchard; but looking about out of curiosity, I remember
I saw him scratch with his face and hind Legs in the Grass, as Cats do when
they are going to dung in the dust but I did not in the least imagine he had
any such lewd project in his head. Now were we almost cloyed with Court
dainties, our dear fri^nd Heraclitus was not to be found in all Hell, though we
thought this climate did agree best with his Body, Towzer craved leave to
return to his dear Joanna again. Beelzebub was very loath to part with his
beloved Towzer: after a short paus^, Wrll quoth Beelzebub; Towzer thou most
deserving ^f thy Sex, thou art my Darling, my Beau^^ so^, and I will not l^ave
thee until I have Condu^^ed thee to the whence I bro^ght thee. Having taken our
Leaves of Proserpina and the Co^^t Ladies, Towzer, Beelzebub and I, march
Earthward again; Cerberus opened his door very willingly, and Charon soon
wafted us over, but told us by the by, it was for Belzebubs sake he Rowed us
back again, for of those many Millions of Souls he carried into Hell, he
brought none out. Now were we to climb the steep Caverns of the desky, cold,
and Watery Earth, never did poor-Mortals-suffer such a Torment; This was indeed
a Punishment little inferior to the Tortures of Barathrum, nothing had we to
take hold of, but the loosned grots of Ear^h, that gave way as fast as we laid
our hands on them; nothing to set our feet upon but pieces of Earth, that
molded away from under us. Heavens! I never was in such a Condition in all my
Life, sometimes I should be ascended a pretty good way, then ^y hold would slip
and I should tumble down, to the bottom again: my Sides were all bruised, my
Bones out of Joint, and some of them broken, Swollen Blisters did stick as fast
to my Sides as Jews ears to an Elder. This sad condition brought me in Mind of
the saying of the Poet: Est facilis D^census Averni, sed Revocare Gradum
H^c Labor, hoc Opus est.
With Care we Slide to H^ll; but Oh the pain!
Those Wretches take, that do come back again.


Nay, on my Conscience, I had never got about again had it not been ^or Towzer,
he set his Claws into the Stones and Earth, and Scrabled up lustyly, and truly
I was feign to hang by his Tail, and so he drew me up into my proper Element
once more, now are we got into our Native Country. Away march the illustrious
Beelzebub and his Magnificent Towzer to a Victualling-house at the Sign of the
Gun, where the goodly Joanna had provided a sumptuous Supper Roasted with
Observators, and Cooked by the one eyed Bastard. And I went to see if no body
had thrown my Church ^ut at Windows, but Heavens be praised! I found it just as
I left it.

FINIS.

