THE METHOD OF Mental Prayer, Rendered Practical and Easy for all sorts of
Persons.

Composed in French by R. F. Francis Nephew, S. J.

To which is added a Method how to offer up Mass, according to the four ends of
this Sacrifice.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Hales, 1694.

THE Advertisment TO THE READER.
NOthing has taken so much place, nor sunk so deep into the Minds and Opinions
of most Men, as the groundless prejudice they entertian against Mental Prayer;
and nothing can be so great a hinderance to their Devotion at this unlucky and
mistaken prevention; which frights most people from the practice of so holy,
profitable, and withal so necessary an exercise.

The very name of Mental Prayer makes most people afraid, some out of a foolish
modesty, and show of humility, persuade themselves, that this kind of Prayer is
only proper for Souls that are already perfect, that one must have great wit
and learning, or else a very particular Grace an call from God to enable 'em to
apply themselves to the practice of it, and therefore 'twould be a very great
presumption in 'em to attempt this exercise.

Others by a more gross illusion, look upon the duty and practice of
Meditation, as a thing very incompatible with the care which they must take of
their affairs, or with their quality; which obliges 'em to converse much in the
World; where their many civil and necessary duties, do not afford 'em leisure
to attend to Meditation; which they conceive to be an employment that only
becomes Religions persons, and such as live retired and separated from the rest
of the World.

There are some others that are still blinder, and more unjust also than these,
who look upon Meditation as an idle employment, in vogue only amongst silly
Devotes, and weak simple Souls, and are pleased to make it the ordinary subject
of their mirth, and railleries; so that many times, such Secular persons as are
addicted to Mental Prayer, are obliged out of discretion, or for fear of being
laughed at, rather to conceal its practice than expose themselves to their
censures and mockeri^s.

Infine, some others less unreasonable than the former, yet not less to be
pitty'd; tho they understand and apprehend very well the great benefit of
Meditation, and are convinced that ^hey may reap great advantages some so holy
an exercise, could they but seriously apply themselves to it; yet either their
apprehension of occuring difficulties, hinder 'em from venturing upon any trial
at all, or the little trouble they meet with in the beginning, disheartens 'em
from that perseverance in it, as would afford 'em comfort.

It Is in order to disabuse all such as are seduc't and deceived by these
groundless, dangerous and common errors, that I undertake first to prove, by
strong, plain and evident reasons, how necessary Meditation is for all sorts of
persons; secondly, that I endeavor to make 'em understand how easy it is for
'em to Meditate; by proposing so plain and easy a method, that I dare
undertake, that whoever will lay aside the prejudice he has already conceived
against it, or for a while suspend it, shall be obliged to confess, that there
are none of so mean a capacity, nor so engaged in business or Worldly affairs;
but may easily, if they will, daily make their Meditation; and therefore, that
all persons ought to do so.

When I have once explicated this easy method of Prayer. I shall add the Rules
necessary to be observed in the practice of it, and give examples upon all the
different subjects of Meditation; whereby I shall reduce the method into
practice, and teach the manner how to observe all the Rules prescribed for it.

I desire the Reader notwithstanding to take notice, that I pretend not here to
Write a formal Treatise of Mental Prayer, which would be very unnecessary,
considering the many excellent Treatises already Written, by the most Learned
Men of our Age upon that Subject: But that my only design is, to instrust and
assist those that desire to enter into a retreat who not being used to Mental
Prayer, find themselves in the beginning at some loss, they being yet ignorant
how to apply their minds to Meditation, which is, and ought to be the chief
business of a retreat. Wherefore, when I have let 'em evidently see how
profitable and necessery, Meditation is, I doubt not to convince 'em of the
easiness, and at the same time make 'em Masters of this Holy Art, by teaching
'em a short and easy manner how to Meditate, and laying before 'em the
practice of it, upon such different subjects as are the grounds and matter of
Meditation, so that by one hours Reading they may be sufficiently informed of
the manner how to make their Meditation well, and afterward with very little
pains may put their knowledge into practice.

But tho I had at first nothing else in prospect, but by this small Treatise to
help those that desire to enter into retreat; yet now I hope it may become also
very useful to such as are inspired with a sincere desire of working their own
Salvation; and that they may accomplish that great work with less difficulty
and greater security, are desirous to make use of so excellent and necessary a
means, as Meditation is experienced to be, to so profitable an end.

AN Easy Method for Mental Prayer, reduced to Practice.
CHAP. 1. Of the necessity of Meditation.
A Man would think 'twere enough to explicate only what we mean by Meditation,
to convince those that are the most prepos^est, with prejudice against this
holy exercise, that it is morally necessary for all that efficaciously intend to
save their Souls; for by Meditation we mean nothing else, but a serious
reflection upon the Maxims of the holy Gospel; upon the great and saving truths
of our Faith; upon our duties toward Almighty God; upon the best means that
may facilitate and secure our happiness, or, upon the obstacles that may
retard, or hinder our eternal felicity; which reflection naturally produces
those good and pious desires, holy affections, and such sincere and efficacious
resolutions, as reduce those good desires into practice, and move us to put in
execution all our good designs; by making use of those means, which by our
reflection, we find capable of furthering us in the work of our eternal
Salvation, and of helping us to overcome whatever obstacles oppose it.

All the Holy Fathers supposed this great truth, that Meditation, or a
consideration and serious reflection, is necessary for Salvation; and have
always admitted this for a fundamental Maxim in Christian Morality. It Is the
opinion of Saint Chrysostom and Saint Austin, who both assure us, that a
serious consideration and reflection is the first principal and foundation of
all good actions; and Saint Bernard proves that Prayer and Meditation are of
equal necessity; for Meditation, says he, discovers what we stand in need of,
and Prayer obtains from Almighty God whatever we want; the one shows us the
way, and the other brings us to our journies end. Meditation discovers the
dangers that encompass us, and Prayer guards us very safely through 'em. And 'twas
to show us the great necessity of Meditation; that this great Saint, so well
verst in all Spiritual concerns, composed that admirable Book of consideration,
he Dedicated to Pope Engenius.

But not to insist upon bare Authority, I will give the reasons upon which this
general opinion and consent of all the Fathers is grounded, which will also
serve to remove all the prejudice that any well meaning Christian can have
against Meditation.

The First Reason.
It Is impossible for us to be saved without knowing God, neither is a slight
superficial knowledge of him sufficient, but so lively and penetrating a
knowledge as is full of such affections, as may imprint in our Souls a great
Idea of that blessed and first Being; for we cannot be saved but by serving
God; we cannot serve him any other way than by loving him, and by loving him
with all our heart; we cannot love him with all our heart, unless we have a
great esteem of him; and we cannot conceive that high esteem of him, unless we
have a knowledge in some good measure of his blessed and infinite perfections;
and how is it possible to acquire and compass that knowledge without
attentively considering 'em, by a serious Meditation? Wherefore, it is for this
reason Almighty God tells us by the Mouth of his Prophet; Vacate and videte
quoniam ego sum Deus; Retire your self a while from the World, and the hurry of
Worldly business, to consider at leisure, and to reflect seriously, that I am
your God; that you owe to my bounty all that you have, and all that you are,
and therefore you are obliged to acknowledge at all times, that I am your
Matter, that I have an absolute Dominion over you, and that you have a
continual dependence upon me, and therefore ought to have a perfect submission
to my Will; Vacate and videte quoniam ego sum Deus.

Alas we cannot well comprehend even the least and most common works of nature,
nor their dependence upon their causes, tho they fall within the reach of our
senses, which are the best helps we have to understand 'em; how then shall we
be able to know God and his perfections, that are so infinitely raised above
our senses, and understanding? How can we ever conceive any true Idea of 'em,
without endeavoring all we can to penetrate 'em by a frequent and most serious
Meditation?

How comes it to pass that we serve God so little, and so very ill as we do?
But because we do not love him as we should do; And why do we not love that
infinite goodness? But because we do not know him as we ought, Pater Sancte,
says our Savior, Mandus te non cognovit; Blessed Father the World knows you
not, and therefore they serve you so coldly as they do; and are so ready to
offend you. Infine, what other reason can there be that God is not better known
by us, but only that we do not apply our minds to Meditate and consider his
infinite Majesty, Goodness, and Perfections? The source of all the sins and
disorders in the World, says the Prophet Osee, is, because truth, and the
knowledge of Almighty God, are withdrawn from the face of the Earth. Non est
veritas, non est scientia Dei in terra.

The Second Reason.
But it is not enough to know Almighty God, we must also endeavor to know our
selves intimately; wherefore, Saint Austin made it his continual Prayer;
Noverim me noverim te; Grant good God that I may know my self that I may the
better know you: That I may know my self; whereby to have humble thoughts of my
self, and dislike my own imperfections; and that I may know you, whereby I may
esteem and love you above all things. And in truth if we intend to apply our
selves efficaciously to work our own Salvation, we must endeavor to discover
the root of that corruption, and those bad inclinations that are in our Souls,
in order to humble, and render us mistrustful of our selves, and make us
continually watch and labor to suppress 'em. We must believe that of our selves
we can do no good, that we may not trust to our own strength; but have
continual recourse to Almighty God, and rely wholly upon the assistance of his
Divine Grace. We must find out that passion, that most tyrannises over us, that
we may resist it, and labor to overcome it. Infine, we must be sensible of our
infidelities and ingratitude toward God, and must sigh and be sorry for 'em,
that by our grief we may make some satisfaction, and by our Tears of true
repentance, wash and cleanse our Souls from these spots.

This is that knowledge of our selves, so necessary for our Salvation; for the
acquiring of which we must apply our selves without intermission. And can you
think it possible to attain it, without often reflecting, and sounding your own
heart, to find whither in those depths, where, as I may say, we cover and hide
our selves from our selves, there does not still lurk an Enemy? It Is for want
of Meditation and these reflections, that a great part of the World live in a
perpetual ignorance of themselves, know nothing less than what passes in their
own hearts, and to speak properly, are the greatest strangers at home.

The Third Reason.
To work our own Salvation we must know our Duty toward God, and those
obligations which are contained in his Holy Laws, and Commandments; for we
cannot observe 'em without knowing 'em, and to observe 'em exactly as we
^ought, we must have an exact knowledge of 'em. But is there, or can there be
any means to know them perfectly, without often studying and thinking of 'em?
After God had delivered his Commandments to the Children of Israel, he
immediately adds in the Sixth Chapter of Deuteronomy, These words which I
Command thee this Day, shall always be in thy heart, thou shall tell 'em to thy
Children, thou shall Meditate upon 'em, sitting in thy House, and walking upon
the Way, going to Sleep and Rising; thou shall bind 'em as a memorial upon thy
hand, and shall have 'em always before thy Eyes, thou shall Write 'em in the
Entry and upon the Doors of thy House; could Almighty God recommend to us the
continual Meditation of his Commandments, and make us comprehend the great
necessity of it, in any more express or moving terms, than these are? The
Prophet David, that Man according to Gods own Heart, recommends nothing so
earnestly, as the continual Meditation upon the Law of God, and begins his
admirable Book of the Psalms with, Blessed is the Man that Meditates Day and
Night upon thy Law, he shall be like a Tree planted by the River side, that
shall bear fruit in its season; and in the 118th. Psalm, Blessed are the
Immaculate that walk in the way of Gods Commandments, and seek him with all
their hearts; Practicing most exactly himself, what he so earnestly recommended
to others; of which the admirable Psalm I cited is an evident proof; for there
is scarce a Verse in the whole Psalm, wherein he does not mention the
Commandments of God, the great care he took to Meditate often upon 'em, and his
zeal and fidelity in observing 'em.

The Fourth Reason.
It Is not yet enough to know our duty, and to know the Law of God that enjoins
it; but we must also take delight therein, and place our affections upon it;
seriously applying our selves to its observance. To do this, it is necessary to
understand the reasonableness, and equity of the Divine Law; to apprehend the
advantages and the great recompense that God promises, to those that shall
observe his Commandments; and the terrible punishments with which he threatens
those, that shall dare to violate 'em; for this reason Almighty God after he
had proposed his Law to the Israelites, did on the one side particularly
declare the blessings he would heap upon such, as should faithfully observe it;
and on the other side, he set before 'em the miseries, should fall upon all
those, that should be so insolent as to transgress 'em.

Infine, the strange propensity we have to evil, the great repugnance we have
to good, the difficulty we meet with in observing a Law that contradicts the
inclinations of corrupt nature, are so prevalent, that nothing less than the
hope of a great reward, or the fear of such terrible pains as those of Hell,
which are infinite and eternal, can stop us, and serve as a ramper to check the
violence of our passions; we must then at all times have these rewards, and
these punishments in our thoughts; that is, we must continually Meditate upon
'em.

And is it not for want of considering and pondering these great truths, that
the greatest part of the World, abandon themselves so easily and so frequently
to all sorts of crimes, and plunge themselves so deep in sensual pleasures and
most enormous Sins? Is it not I say for want of making a reflection, that those
beastly pleasures which last but for a moment, must end in everlasting pain? If
one should ask those miserable Christians that are now in Hell, how they came
thither, they would certainly answer, it is, because they did not consider, nor
think enough upon those pains they now suffer, Desolatione desolata est omnis
terra, quia nullus est qui recogitet cord; All the Earth is become desolate,
because none considers, or takes it to heart.

The Fifth Reason.
We may at present say with great reason what our Blessed Savior said
heretofore; do you believe that if the Son of Man should come again upon the
Earth, to sound the minds, and examine the hearts of most Christians, or at
least of those that bear the name of Christians, he should find any faith
there? Assuredly it is this want of Faith, that is the source of almost all our
disorders, of the carelessness and neglect we live in, as to the great business
of our Salvation; of our forgetting Almighty God; and insine, of our eternal
Damnation. Not that we have lost all Faith, or that we do positively doubt of
the truths of Christian Religion, or of the Maxims of the Gospel; but for want
of a lively, practical and active Faith. We suppose, and take our Christian
truths for granted, without ever penetrating 'em, and without drawing those
consequences from 'em, which necessarily follow the granting 'em to be true.

But what is there that can render our Faith more lively and active? Without
doubt nothing can contribute more to it, than such solid reflections upon those
great truths, which are best made in our Meditations, and are most proper and
likely to make strong impressions upon our minds, and wills; which being moved
by those impressions, it is to be hoped we shall take our great affair to heart,
and fall seriously to work, reforming our lives, and reducing to practice those
things which have been represented to us in our Meditation.

By this it plainly appears, that as the want of a lively and practical Faith,
so much recommended to us in Holy Scripture, is the chief cause of the
Damnation of most Christians, so the neglecting to apply themselves to reflect
and seriously consider what Holy Scripture and the fundamental Maxims and
verities of Christian Religion teach, and require of us, is in truth the
greatest occasion of the want of that practical Faith.

The Sixth Reason.
It Is morally impossible to succeed in any business of great importance, that
is not only difficult in it self, but is also traverst and opposed by most
powerful, crafty, vigilant, and active Enemies, without first considering
seriously how to lay our business well; and applying great care to find out,
and to make good use of the best means to surmount the obstacles; and break the
measures of those Enemies which oppose us. Now tell me, is not the concern of
our Salvation a business of the greatest importance? Since of that depends
either our eternal happiness, or our eternal miseries. And is it not an affair
of great difficulty? By reason of the corruption of our hearts, the frailty of
our will, the blindness of our understanding, the violence of our passions, the
force of those ill habits we have got, the many dangerous occasions we are
exposed to, and which frequently we cannot avoid. Besides, are not the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, whom we are to fight against, most terrible Enemies?
Can there be any more powerful, crafty, vigilent, or active then these are?
Shall we then flatter and promise our selves good success in so difficult an
affair as this, without continual application and care to consider, and observe
well every step we make, to discover the artifice of our Enemies, and the many
Snares they lay for us? And is it possible to do this without frequent
Meditation?

These reasons which clearly manifest the great necessity of Meditation, as
plainly prove the necessity of a retreat, especially for such persons a^ are
engaged in multiplicity of business, and the great commerce of the World. For
the reasons they ordinarily allege to excuse themselves from retiring; are
those, which most evidently prove the great want they have of it; so that if a
retreat be profitable for all Men in general, it is in a manner absolutely
necessary for these; for since they cannot be saved, without making serious
reflections upon the means that facilitate the working of their Salvation, in
order to embrace 'em; nor without reflecting and discovering the obstacles that
stand in their way, in order to remove 'em, if the great hurry of business, and
that worldly commerce wherein they are engaged, will not allow 'em leisure, to
make these reflections as seriously as they ought; they are obliged to set a
part some few Days, and free themselves from those other businesses, that take
up all their thoughts; and from that worldly commerce that so dissipates their
minds, and suffers 'em to recollect themselves; that in the time of that little
solitude, they may have nothing else to think on, but Eternity, and their own
Salvation.

CHAP. II. Of the pretenses that many Men make use of to excuse themselves from
taking the pains to Meditate.
THo all Men are obliged to employ their wit and reason, to search after, and
find out the best means, to facilitate and secure their eternal happiness; yet
methinks most of 'em, are in nothing so industrious and ingenious, as they are
in contriving how to blind and cheat themselves; and in finding out idle
pretenses, to lay aside, and dispense with the most advantagous and holy
exercise, that can be practiced; not reflecting as they ought, upon that most
infallible and important Maxim, which ought to regulate all our undertakings,
That we can never have security enough, where Eternity lies at stake; Ibi nulla
satis magna securitas, ubi periclitatur aeternitas. All the pretenses which are
commonly alleged, to dispense with Meditation, may be reduced to six; and are
objections against the six Reasons, I proposed for the necessity of it.
Wherefore I intend now to examine these pretenses, and then 'twill be no hard
task to discover their vanity and weakness.

The First Pretense.
The first pretense they allege is their multitude of affairs; how is it
possible, say they, that a Man taken up by an employment, that requires his
whole time and application, burdened with the care of a numerous Family, or a
Woman engaged by her Quality in the Commerce of the World, obliged by necessity
to take care of her Children, Servants, and Household affairs, as also to
receive and to return Visits, can find leisure amongst all these employments,
to attend to Meditation? Which is only fit for Religious Persons, that are as
'twere out of the World, and have in a manner nothing else to do.

There needs but a very little Faith, and reason, quickly to discover the
fallacy and weakness of this kind of arguing; for is there any business in this
World so important, as that of our Eternal Salvation? Are there any duties so
Essential, as those we owe to God? Is there any Christian that dares say or
think there is? If then, as we have already made it appear, Meditation be one
of the most necessary and useful means to work our Salvation, and to acquit our
selves of our duty toward God; we are inexcusable if we neglect it, upon
account of any other business or employment whatsoever.

All other businesses compared with the concerns of our Salvation are but
trifles, as Saint Austin very well calls 'em, Majorum nugae, negotia vocantur;
we ought then to find always time, to think of this great and indeed only
important affair.

What would we say of an Ambassador, that were sent and charged with the care
of Treating, and Managing the Affair of the Peace of all Europe, who instead of
attending to that, should amuse himself in contriving how to be commodiously
Lodged, and spend all his time in Playing and Danceing? Durst he allege such
Employments as these for an excuse of his neglect, in managing and bringing to
a good issue, that important Affair, with which he was entrusted?

What press soever of business a Man is in, if a concern of any very
considerable Temporal Interest intervenes, he will not fail to find time to
look after it; and shall we say, we have no time left, when we are to attend to
that main business, which concerns our Eternal Interest? A Woman can always
find time, to Play, to keep idle, and many times dangerous Company, to comply
with the World, and perchance to ruin and Damn her self; but she cannot find
one moment of leisure to think and reflect seriously how to save her Soul. What
miserable blindness is this? Wherefore we must undertake no more business, nor
allow our selves any other divertisments, than what are consistent with our
great and only affair; which is, that of our Eternal Salvation.

The Second Pretense.
Some others object, that they no sooner apply themselves to Meditation, but
they are immediately filled with distractions. My fancy, says one, is so quick
and wandering, that it is impossible for me to fix it upon any object; to think
upon, or go about to make my Meditation, is enough to make me rave and run into
a thousand foolish, frivolous, and many times very extravagant fancys.

I grant, there are some people, whose vivacity is such, that it is hard to fix
their Imagination; and that those persons have not the same facility and good
disposition that many others have for Mental Prayer; but if you are not capable
of making a long Meditation, you may at lest Meditate by Reading; and the way
to do it is this. Take a good Book, and by an Act of Faith, place your self in
the Presence of God, and beg light sufficiently to understand, and penetrate
those truths which you are going to Read; persuading your self that it is God
himself who is going to speak to you by that Book; then Read leisurely and with
Attention, endeavoring to comprehend and relish well what you Read; when you
light upon something that touches your self in particular, or agrees with your
Disposition, or answers your present wants and necessities, stop there, make
some particular reflections, and apply it to your self; if you meet with
something in your Reading, that blames and condemns your former conduct, humble
your self before Almighty God, implore his mercy, and resolve to mend it;
begging his holy Grace for that end; and then continue your Reading in the same
manner. The blessed Saint Terese made use for a while of this Method of
Meditation, and there is no body but is capable of it, and may profit very much
by it.

The Third Pretense.
The third Pretense, which is much like the second, is drawn from the
importunity of distractions. My Prayers, says one, are nothing else but a
continual heap or flood of distractions, whereby that which is of great
advantage to others, becomes an obstacle to my Perfection; because endeavoring
to do a good work, I commit a sin, and 'twere better for me not to Pray at all
than to Pray ill, and offend by Prayer.

This may be answered diverse ways. First, the distractions are either voluntary
or not, if they are voluntary. it depends on you to shake 'em off, and it is
your fault if you do not. If they are not voluntary, they offer you a fair
occasion of Merit, by the care and endeavors you may use to reject 'em, by the
exercise of your patience, and by the pain and trouble you undergo, whilst you
suffer 'em against your Will.

In the next place, you must examine from whence these distractions proceed; if
it be from the great liveliness of your fancy, you must not be too much
troubled at it, but make use of that remedy set down in the Answer to the
Second Pretense; but if it be from your passions, you must labor to mortify
and overcome 'em; if they proceed from any disorderly affection, tho perchance
innocent, yet by reason it causes too great a dissipation of your thoughts, you
must strive quickly to break it off, or at least master it.

If your distractions come from the straying and wandering of your senses, you
must take care to keep a custody over 'em; if your own sins draw them upon you,
be sure to make an Act of Contrition, thereby to free and purific your Soul,
before you begin your Prayer; if multiplicity of business, and care of your
Family distract you, be not in pain, but apply your self seriously to moderate
that great solicitude, and to purify and direct well your intentions; and use
your self to take care of those affairs, incident to your Calling and
condition, not out of a passionate affection, interest, or ambition; but to
pursue and obey the orders of Divine Providence; which having called you to
that state and way of living, would have you perform those duties that belong
to it. If we considered and looked upon our affairs with this disposition of
mind, they would never distract us as they do, for whatever is done for
Almighty God, or because he would have it done, can never separate us from him.

The Fourth Pretense.
Many complain of, and allege as great difficulties in Mental Prayer, the pain
they feel, by their coldness and aridity in it, finding neither light, comfort,
nor any gust in Heavenly things; so that they have reason to cry out with the
Prophet, Anima mea sicut terra sine aqua tibi; My Soul is parch't and dried up
like the Earth for want of Rain, to what end therefore, say they, should we
torment ourselves without receiving any benefit thereby? To what purpose should
we weary out our selves in an exercise, wherein we cannot honor Almighty God?

But first, it is not consolation you are to look after in your Prayer: The best
Prayer that honors God most, is not that wherein we find most sensible comfort,
but that wherein we best practice Mortification; it is not that wherein in we
imagine we taste and feel Almighty God most; but that wherein we submit our
selves most entirely to his Divine Will; and this lies in our power to do, even
in this state of privation of all other comforts.

Secondly, This State of desolation is either a punishment of our past
infidelities toward God, or a trial of our present virtue, and constancy; for
sometimes God in his justice punishes us that way; and his mercy does at other
times make use of this means to exercise us. If it be for our punishment; how
can we better expiate our faults, than by submitting our selves to that pain,
we have so justly deserved? If it be for our trial, we must join with Almighty
God in his design; and rejoyee that we have this opportunity to give him a
proof of our fidelity, and ofthat disin teressedness, with which we hope and
desirealways to serve him; manifesting there by, that we seek him only, not our
own comfort or consolation.

Thirdly, one of the chief ends of Prayer, is to encourage us to love and
acquire virtue; and how can we labor better for the obtaining it, then by its
exercise; for this state of aridity and desolation, gives us the fairest
occasion that can be, to practice even the best and most excellent virtues.
First of humility; for then we find how weak, poor, and unable we are to do any
good; and the great need we are in, of having continual recourse to Almighty
God. Secondly, of patience, to suffer these disgusts, and other irksome effects
of so uneasy a condition, and of our passions those attacts, also, which while
we are in desolation set upon us, with all their force, and put us to no little
pain; yet we must not withstanding bear with our selves, and persever in our
Prayer, in spite of all the repugnance and trouble we find in it. Thirdly of
Conformity to Gods Will; by submitting ourselves to his Divine pleasure, even
then, when he seems to be so severe; kissing with all respect that Divine and
most adorable hand that strikes us, and saying with our Savior, O Father, let
me not drink of this Cup, but yet your Will be done, and not mine. Fourthly of
Obedience; by persevering and continuing by persevering and continuing constant
in Prayer, notwithstanding all our disgusts, going on with it, during the whole
time prescribed by our Rule, or advised by our Spiritual Director.

The Fifth Pretense.
Another says, I know not how to employ my time, nor how to entertain my self
in Mental Prayer; I do but loose my labor and time about it, 'twere better for
me to say some Vocal Prayers, or go about some other good work. Saint Terese
her self confesses, that this thought had once made such an impression upon her
mind, that she was upon the point of giving over Mental Prayer; and she adds
that 'twas the most subtle and dangerous Temptation, she ever had in her Life;
and was like to have overthrown all the designs that Almighty God had of her
Sanctification.

You loose your time, you say, at your Meditation, because you do nothing; but
pray, in the first place, can you not, as I have already observed, produce some
Acts of humility, and resignation? Can you not say often with the Prophet, and
with the same Intention; Tanquam jumentum factus sum apud te; Behold good God
here I am just like a poor beast before you, it is indeed honor enough for me,
that you suffer me in your presence; let other good Souls therefore honor you
by their zeal and fervor; it is honor enough for me to be able in your presence
sincerely to acknowledge my weakness, and incapacity to do so; wherefore let
'em honor you with those admirable lights and Divine Inspirations you bestow
upon 'em, and permit me, in darkness and aridity, to remain in your Presence
with profound humility professing my unworthiness of the favors they receive,
and let me with true conformity, say from the bottom of my heart, your Holy
Will be done.

Secondly, you may unite your self with so many other pious Souls, who with
very great zeal and fidelity, are attentive to their Meditation; offer their
Prayers to God, and bless him for the favors he bestows upon 'em; or make use
of the practice of that good Clown that followed Saint Ignace and his
Companions in their Voyage, who when they kneeled down to make their Prayer,
kneeled with 'em, and addressed himself to Almighty God with a great and humble
simplicity in these words; Alas my good God, I know not how to speak to you,
nor how to Pray as I ought, nor as these Virtuous good Men do, but I join with
'em, and wish that I could speak to you as they do. Or you may still do better
than he, by uniting your Prayer with our blessed Saviors. Pray therefore with
him, and offer to God the Father, the Prayer our Savior makes for you.

Thirdly, you may employ your thoughts in reflecting upon your own miseries, in
calling to mind your grievous sins, and infidelities, and mourning for 'em; and
if you do not find your self touched with sorrow enough, beg of God a contrite
an humble heart, which he alone can give; telling him, that you can offend him
without him, but you cannot have a due sorrow for having offended him, without
his Divine assistance.

Fourthly, you may pass the time of your Prayer, in making Acts of Faith,
Adoration, Hope, Charity, and Confidence in God; a Meditation made after this
manner, is a good Prayer.

Fifthly, employ the time of your Meditation in examining what passion it is
that sways you most? What effects it produces? What are the consequences and
dangers of these effects? What means you ought to use for resisting and
overcoming that passion? You may do the same in respect of any ill habit you
have contracted.

Sixthly, think upon, and often call to mind during your Prayer, those many and
great obligations which you have to Almighty God, them any blessings you have
received from him, which tho they are universal, yet are not the less great
upon that account; nor ought you to be less sensible of 'em: But above all, you
ought to consider certain particular favors, which usually move us more,
because they carry with 'em a mark of distinction; which self love renders
commonly more sensible of; there is no Man that passing over, and considering
the whole course of his Life, but will plainly discover many tracts of a
special Providence, that have sweetly, and efficaciously guided, and preserved
him amidst a thousand dangers, in which he had infallably perish't, without
Gods particular and powerful Protection; which obliges us to make our humble
and thankful acknowledgements, and to say with the Prophet, when he invites all
Creatures to join with him in blessing and praising God; Benedic anima mea
Domino -- qui redimit de interitu vitam tuam: Qui coronat te in misericordia
and miserationibus. Bless the Lord O my Soul -- who redeems thy life from
destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and compassion.

Seventhly, it is a very useful and profitable exercise during the time of
Prayer, to make pious resolutions; and consider what occasion we are like to
have, to put 'em that day in practice; and to take our measures how to overcome
those difficulties we are like to meet with. For the chief end and aim of
Prayer is to prepare us to Act well; so that Prayer is best made, which is
followed with good effects.

The Sixth Pretense.
There are some persons that are naturally so modest, and have such mean and
low thoughts of themselves, as to believe they are incapable of Meditating, and
are persuaded, that to be able to Meditate, one must have greater wit and more
eminent parts, than they can find themselves to be owners of; and there wants
not some Directors, who being neither very Spiritual themselves, nor used to
Prayer, do by their foolish Maxims and weak conduct, authorize this dangerous
illusion: believing that a young Maid ought to content and employ her self
wholly at her work, and a Married Woman only busy her self with the care of
her Family, and Household affairs.

But experience shows us how vain this pretense is, for how many persons do we
see of mean wit, but of a pure and humble heart, that are endowed with an
excellent gift of Prayer? And find more facility in the exercise of that
interior conversation with God, than Men of the greatest Wit or Learning do
experience. Does not the Holy Ghost assure us that God takes pleasure in
entertaining himself with simple, good, and sincere Souls? Cum simplicibus
sormocinatio ejus; and does not the Son of God, thank his Heavenly Father, that
he is pleased to discover his Divine secrets no little ones? That is, to the
ignorant; while in the mean time he hides 'em from the Wordly Wise, and from
great and presumptuous Wits?

The heart has a greater share in Prayer than the understanding; and there
needs only a good heart, to render a Man capable of making a good Prayer. The
business is not to raise high thoughts, and quaint discourses; but to penetrate
and be convinced of ordinary and plain truths. One good thought well pondered
may employ a Man during the whole time of his Prayer. Saint Francis past whole
Nights in Meditating these few words, Deus men's and omnia; My God and my All;
and our blessed Savior in his Prayer in the Garden repeated only these words,
Transeat a me Calix iste veruntamen non sicut ego volo sed sicut tu; Father I
beseech you that I may not drink of this bitter Cup of my Passion, but let it
not be as I will, but as you will; which made Saint Ignace say in his
Exercises, That the fruit of Prayer, does not consist in many thoughts, but in
the great feelings.

But the weakness of this pretense will be more clearly demonstrated in the
following Chapter, where we shall see how easy it is for any Man to make his
Meditation.

CHAP. III. Of the facility of Meditation.
. 1. Showing how casie it is for any Man to Meditate or make Mental Prayer.
I Cannot imagine how an opinion so ill grounded, as that is, which occasions
Men to fancy so great and extraordinary a difficulty, in Meditation and Mental
Prayer, comes to be so generally received; methinks there is nothing so easy,
as to disabuse 'em in this point, and make 'em see and acknowledge, if they
will deal sincerely, how gross that Error is; for there is scarce any Man that
is not capable of Meditating; and to do it, there needs but such an ordinary
capacity, as suffices for the smallest and easiest sort of business, which the
generality of Mankind does possess.

In fine, there needs no more, but being capable of reason, to enable any Man
to make Mental Prayer; for Prayer is nothing else, but the Exercise of the
three faculties of our Soul, that is, of our Memory, Understanding, and Will,
which three faculties we make use of in Meditation, to think upon the great
affair of our Salvation, and those Truths our Faith teaches us, in the same
manner as we make use of 'em in reasoning, and considering any affair that
concerns our Temporal interest, and our other Worldly business and employments.

A Merchant has no difficulty in reasoning and reflecting upon what concerns
his commerce; a Husband man upon his Tillage; a Tradse-man upon his Calling;
nor a good Huf-wife upon her Household affairs; all these persons make frequent
reflections upon what has before happened to 'em, to distinguish what they have
found advantageous and profitable, and what has proved inconvenient, or
occasioned their loss; and how little brains soever they have, upon these
reflections they take the best measures they can, and consider the best means
how to succeed in their business: They look forward and provide against those
accidents they fear may happen, to cross and hinder 'em: What therefore can
hinder 'em from doing the same in the business of their Salvation? Why should
they not in the same manner reflect upon what may be useful, and a furtherance
to 'em, and upon what stands in their way and hinders 'em? Why should they not
examine well the state of their Soul? How it is disposed and inclined? And
consider what they ought to pursue, and what avoid? This is all we call
Meditation; and is it not what all the World practices?

. 2. Showing farther and more particularly how easy it is to Meditate, by
explicating the method that is to be observed in Meditation.
To descend to particulars, and prove how easy it is to Meditate, we must
suppose that Meditation is nothing else but the exercise of the three faculties
of our Soul, our Memory, Understanding and Will, which we apply to consider
Christian Truths, and whatsoever may concern our Eternal Salvation.

After we have put our selves in the Presence of Almighty God by an Act of
Faith, whereby we know and believe he is every where; and after we have first
adored that Sovereign Majesty, with whom we take the liberty to treat in our
Prayer, saying with Abraham, How dare I speak to my God, I that am but dust and
ashes? And after we have made an Act of Contrition, to cleanse our selves from
our sins, which are great obstacles in our Communication with God; having first
begged of him to assist us, with the light of his Grace, necessary for our
Meditation, that our Souls may reap benefit thereby, we must apply our Memory
to call to mind that Christian truth, or mystery upon which we intend to
Meditate, and think of it seriously, and with the best attention we are able,
this is the proper excrcise of our Memory.

How little capacity soever we have it is morally impossible, but some
reflections will arise, and present themselves to us concerning that verity we
Meditate upon; and one reflection is sufficient to entertain us, if we endeavor
to taste and penetrate it well; from whence there will naturally follow a
looking back upon our selves, which is a kind of second reflection, whereby we
apply to our selves that truth we before considered, in order to draw from
thence some conclusion for the reforming and better regulating our manner and
way of living; thus we exercise our Understanding.

Our Understanding having made this discourse, and received this light, it
cannot be, but the Will must feel several motions, according to the diversity
of the objects, and reflections that have occurred to us; for if those objects
are in themselves great and lovely, they will raise in our Wills Love,
Admiration, Gratitude, Desire, Hope, and Joy; if they are in themselves
terrible, they will produce in our hearts; Fear, Aversion, Horror, Confusion,
Sorrow, and Repentance, in which Acts consists the exercise of the Will.

This is the Method of Prayer, which Saint Ignace has taught us, in his
Exercises; a Method both solid and easy, approved by the Sea Apostolic, and
Practiced by so many Holy Men; whereby virtuous Souls have found very great
benefit, tho the half witted, and malicious have endeavored to cry it down; but
can no more prevail, than those Phanatiques, and other visionary mystiques, who
would have it under-valu'd, as if 'twere below those great and elevated Souls,
whom God calls to Contemplation, to practice it; for all Spiritual and
experienced persons grant, that this manner of Prayer cannot lead or dispose us
to an empty dreaming Contemplation, which by sad experience, in these latter
days, is found subject to very great illusions, no less extravagant, than
dangerous; but to a solid Contemplation, which is the fruit of a continual
Mortifying of self love, our own Will, Passions, and Senses, to which this
Method of Blessed Saint Ignace insensibly conducts those Pious Souls that are
punctual in observing and following his Method:

CHAP. IV. Shows how to Practice Mental Prayer.
TO reduce this Method, we have explicated into Practice, and render it easy
for all persons, it is necessary to give some Examples upon the different
subjects of Meditation.

All the suject, upon which we are to Meditate, may be reduced to seven heads;
which are contained in the Histories of Holy Scripture; as the fall of the
Angels, the sin of Adam, the Conversion of Saint Mary Magdalen. Secondly, Moral
and Christian Verities; as those which set fourth the importance of our Eternal
Salvation, the necessity of repentance, the certitude of Death, and the
incertitude of the time. Thirdly, the Mysteries of our Blessed Saviors Life
upon Earth; as his Incarnation, Nativity, and Passion. Fourthly, such Maxims of
the Holy Gospel as this; If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself
and take up his Cross and follow me. Fifthly, the Parables in the Gospel; as,
that of the Barren Fig Tree. Sixthly, the Actions of our Blessed Savior; as,
his washing the Feet of the Apostles. Seventhly, the Attributes and Perfections
of Almighty God; as his Immensity, Infinite Power, Mercy, and Goodness, etc.

. 1. The Application of the Method, we have already explicated, to some
Historical passage in Holy Scripture, as for example to that of the fall of the
Angels.
The Exercise of our Memory.
Call to mind, that the Angels being Created by Almighty God, in a state of
great Perfection, instead of Attributing the happiness they enjoyed, to him
from whom they had received it, and looking upon him as their last End;
whereby, together with their fidelity and submission, they merited that
infinite happiness, for which they were destined, suffered themselves to be
puffed up with a most ungrateful and criminal vanity, imagining they were rich
and powerful enough of themselves, without depending upon Almighty God; or
considering him as their last end and only felicity, which obliged God to
punish them ^ ride, by casting them headlong into Hell, there to glorify his
Justice, by their Eternal pain; since they would not glorify his goodness and
power, by submitting themselves willingly, to his Holy and Divine Law.

The Exercise of our Understanding, or Reflection upon this History.
Mortal sin must needs be very horrible and detestable in Gods sight, since he
who is all Wisdom, Goodness, and Mercy, punishes by so grievous and infinite
pains, so great a number of such excellent Creatures, as the Angels are, for
one Mortal sin, and that only in thought, and but of one moments duration.

The Application of this reflection, or the return and looking back upon our
selves.
If God has with so great severity punished the Angels, that were capabl^ (...)
procuring him so much glory; how can I hope that he will treat me more
favorably: I, who am so miserable and poor a Creature, guilty of so many and
such grievous sins, as from time to time I have heapt together, the least of
which deserves Eternal Torments.

The Exercise of the Will.
The motions of the Will, that naturally arise from this reflection, are,
First, that of Astonishment, to see so great severity used toward the Angels,
and so great mercy and patien^^ toward me. Secondly, of Confusion, for having
so long time abused such infinite goodness. Thirdly, of Grief for my sins,
which have exposed me to the great danger of undergoing the same rigor of the
Divine Justice. Fourthly, of Fear, least if I continue longer in my sins, I
shall tire out Gods patience, and be sent to accompany those wicked Angels in
their pain, as I have followed 'em in their Rebellion. Fifthly, of a Strong
Resolution, after I have implored the mercy and assistance of Almighty God, to
do all I can possible to prevent by my true repentance, the terrible miseries
with which I am threatened, and which I justly deserve.

. 2. Application of the same Method to a Moral Christian Verity. The
Incertitude of a sudden and unexpected Death.
The Exercise of the Memory.
To call to mind, and consider very well this important truth, which not only
our reason, but our senses, and daily experience set also before our Eyes; that
there is nothing so certain, and withal so uncertain as Death; nothing so
certain, as that we must dye; and nothing so uncertain, as when, and how we
shall dye; You know not, says our Blessed Savior, neither the bour, nor the
day; you know not when the Son of Man will come; for be will come as a thief to
surprise you, he will come when you lest think ont.

The Exercise of the Understanding, or Reflection upon this Verity.
If we cannot tell when Death will come, we ought to be watchful, and always
upon our guard, and always ready and prepared for it. It Is the same reflection
which our Savior himself made, and the conclusion he would have us to draw from
this truth, Vigilate, estote Parati, Watch and be ready, he does not say, that
when Death shall come, we must think of making our selves ready, and prepare
for it; but we must be always ready; because Death will otherwise surprise us,
and not allow us time to dispose our selves for it; and what ruin and misery
must it needs bring upon us, if we are forced to depart this Life, with out
having made a necessary preparation and provision for so terrible a passage, as
that is to the next, from time to Eternity.

The Application of this Reflection, or the return and looking back upon our
selves.
If Death should come now this present hour and surprise me, would it find me
ready? Am I in that condition, in which I should wish my self if I were to dye
presently? And since it is possible I may be surprised every hour by Death, how
comes it to pass that I dare live in a condition, in which I should not be
willing to dye? Can there be any care or security too great, in a business
wherein my Eternal happiness, or Eternal misery lies at stake? And seeing I am
forewarned that Death will come when I least think of it, ought I not always to
think ont? To prevent being surpised by it.

The Exercise of the Will.
The motions which naturally arise from this reflection, are, First, of
Amazement, by considering the blindness and stupidity of most Men, who being so
often and so expressly warned by our Savior himself, to watch always, to avoid
their being surprised; yet nevertheless make so little benefit of so good
advice, as never to think of being always upon their guard, or making
themselves ready, tho they know very well the sad consequences, of such a
surprise, which must of necessity end in Eternal misery. Secondly, of
Confusion, to have trifl'd, and dwelt so long in so wilful and miserable
blindness as this is. Thirdly, of Grief, for having by this means exposed my
self to dye in my sins, and consequently to be Eternally separated from God,
and suffer the torments of the Damned for all Eternity. Fourthly, of
Acknowledgment and Gratitude toward God, that he has been pleased not to
suffer me to be surprised by Death as I deserved. Fifthly, of Fear, lest if I
do not for the future make better use of the advice our Blessed Savior has
himself given me, he will at last, punish so wilful and unexcusable a neglect
in a matter of this great concern, by permitting my being supris'd by a sudden
Death, as too many others have been. Sixthly, of a Sincere and Firm Resolution
to do what possibly I can, by the assistance of Gods holy Grace, to keep my
self always ready, and in a condition sit to appear before him, whenever he
shall please to call me; and in order to that, to watch continually, and to
live every day, as if that day were to prove the last of my Life.

. 3. The Application of the same Method to one of the Mysteries of our blessed
Saviors Life. The Nativity of our blessed Savior.
The Exercise of the Memory.
Consider how the blessed Virgin being arrived at Bethleem, and the time of her
Delivery approaching, finding none that would afford her Lodging, she was
obliged to retire into a poor Stable, open on all sides, and exposed to the
bitterness of the weather. Such was the poor and miserable Lodging that our
Blesled Savior would be Born in, where he was laid in the Manger upon Straw,
in great want of all things, and without any human comfort or assistance.

The Exercise of the Understanding, or Reflection upon this Mystery.
He whom I see in this poor Manger, is God; if he be God, he cannot but be
infinitely powerful, and infinitely wise; if he be infinitely powerful, nothing
could force or oblige him to put himself in so low, poor, and suffering a
condition as this: It must be then his own choice, where by he lets us see that
he prefers this condition before any other; and if his Wisdom be infinite, he
has certainly all the knowledge requisite to make a good choice, and therefore
cannot be deceived in it; whence it must neceslarily and evidently follow, that
the state of humiliation, of poverty and suffering, which Jesus Christ has
preferred before all the grandeur of wealth, and pleasures of the World, is
infallibly the best.

Application of this Reflection, or the looking back upon our own selves.
Have I been hitherto of the same opinion and judgment in this point, with my
Blessed Savior? Or rather have I not been of a quite contrary opinion? Either
he or I, then must have been deceived, but it was impossible for him to be
deceived, seeing he is Eternal Wisdom, and therefore infallible? Wherefore I
must certainly till now have been deluded, and lived all this while in a gross
Error.

The Exercise of the Will.
The motions that follow this reflection, are, First, of Admiration, to see God
himself, out of his Love to us, and to serve us for an example, reduced to so
poor and low a condition, as this. Secondly, of Love and Gratitude for so great
and wonderful a goodness. Thirdly, of Confusion and Grief to have lived so long
in a persuasion so contrary to that of my Saviors; and by my conduct, to have
in a manner condemned his Blessed choice, to have placed my affection, and
spent the best part of that Life he has given me to serve him, in the pursuit
of those imaginary goods, for which my Savior never showed any esteem, but
always scorned and contemned 'em. Fourthly, of Fear, lest if I do not follow
and imitate my Blesled Savior, in his humility and poverty in the Manger, I
shall loose that infinite happiness of partaking one day with him in his ever
lasting Glory in Heaven. Fifthly, of a Firm Resolution to reform my conduct and
manner of living, begging of my dearest and Divine Jesus, who for my sake was
thus Born in a poor Stable, that he would give me the courage to imitate his
admirable example.

. 4. Application of the same Method to a Maxim of the Gospel. If any Man will
come after me let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.
The Exercise of the Memory.
Consider well and with great attention those words of our Savior; If any Man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me,
and imagine that you hear our Blesled Savior Preaching this Maxim to you, as
well as to his Disciples.

The Exercise of the Understanding, or Reflection upon this Maxim.
We cannot be Disciples of Jesus Christ, that is, we cannot be true good
Christians unless we follow him; and we cannot follow him unless we deny our
selves, and unless we carry his Cross; but what is it, to deny our selves, but
to curb our own humor, to renounce our inclinations, desires, interest, all the
disorderly motions of our heart, and infine, renounce all that may prove
dangerous or criminal? And what is it to carry our Cross, but to tame our
passions, mortify our senses, chastise our bodies, embrace those things that
seem painful and irksome; or at lest bear all afflictions willingly and with
patience, when ever it pleases God to send 'em?.

The Application of this Reflection, or the looking back upon our selves.
We make Profession of being Christians, and of following of Jesus Christ, we
are then under an indispensable obligation of denying our selves, of daily
carrying our Cross, since in the judgment of our Blessed Savior, the one
follows necessarily out of the other; but do we practice it, or do we not
practice quite the contrary? Do we not act continually according to our own
humor? Do we not yield to whatever our natural inclinations require from us? Do
not we abhor, and avoid, with all care imaginable, whatever mortifies or puts
any constraint upon our Wills? Do we not run away from the Cross as fast as we
can, and murmur when God sends us any? And can we call this the following of
Christ, and the being a Christian? Whilst we act quite contrary to what the
Name of Christian obliges us to do:

The Exercise of the will.
The motions that arise from these reflections, are these. First, of
Astonishment, to see most of those that bear the Name of Christians take so
little care, and mind so little the duties of a Christian: And instead of
following our Blessed Savior, as they are obliged to do, by their promise and
engagement in Baptism, endeavor in a manner to oppose his Doctrine, both in
their opinion and conduct. Secondly, of Confusion, to see that we our selves
who have the honor to bear the Name of Christians, are of the number of those
blind People, who dishonor Christianity by a disorderly and sensual Life.
Thirdly, of Grief, for having been till now such cowardly betrayers of our
Profession, and such unfaithful Disciples of Jesus Christ, Fourthly, of Fear,
lest the Character of Christian, serve at the Day of Judgment for our
Condemnation; when on the one side, the obligations which so honorable a
quality imposed upon us, will be clearly manifested to us, And on the other
side, our manner of living will be discovered to have been quite different and
opposite to those obligations. Fifthly, of a Firm Resolution, to fulfill better
for the future, all the duties of a true Christian, imploring our Blessed
Saviors mercy and pardon for our past faults, and begging the Assistance of his
Holy Grace for the time to come, and courage sufficient to take up the Cross
and carry it after him.

. 5. The Application of the same Method to a Parable in the Gospel. Of the
Barren Fig Tree.
The Exercise of the Memory.
Remember the Parable of the Barren Fig Tree, set down in the thirteenth
Chapter of Saint Luke, where it is said, that the Master of the Vineyard, coming
to gather fruit from a certain Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and finding
none, spoke thus to his Servant; It Is three Years since I have still expected
fruit from this Fig Tree, but can find none; let it be cut down, for why should
it take up the room of another good fruitful Tree to no purpose.

The Exercise of the Understanding, or Reflection upon this Parable.
This Barren Fig Tree that bore Leaves enough but no fruit, represents several
persons, who making a fair outward show, deceive themselves, and impose upon
others by bearing no fruit; because they do not apply themselves to works of
Charity, and the practice of other Christian Virtues, but lead such a sort of
Life, which tho it seems not very disorderly, yet is so in effect; because it is
unprofitable; for, not to do good, is a very great evil in it self; and the
unprofitable Servant in the Gospel, was Condemned as an ill Servant, that
deserved to be cast into utter darkness, that is to say, into Hell.

The Application of this Reflection, or the looking back upon our selves.
Am not I like this Barren Fig Tree? Do not I content my self with bearing a
fair show of goodly Leaves, without having any fruit? That is, have I not an
outward appearance of Virtue, without the real substance of it? Seeking the
approbation and vain applause of Men, who judge by the outside, without taking
due care to please Almighty God, who sees and penetrates the most secret
designs and hidden intentions of my heart; and can distinguish the fruit from
the leaves, the good and bad intended actions, from those that are not so: Do
not I mistake those actions, which are the effects of good Nature, or good
Education, or done out of some human respect, to be the real fruits of true
Virtue and Piety? And does not some secret vanity, the desire of preserving my
reputation, or being accounted a person of great probity, pass with me for a
solid Virtue? Infine, does not a Life that in effect is very unprofitable, pass
in my fancy for a Life very innocent?

The Exercise of the Will.
The motions that naturally arise from this reflection, are, First, of Wonder;
considering the patience of Almighty God, who has expected and born with me,
not only for three Years, as the Master of the Fig Tree had done, tho I have
been so far from bearing any good fruit, that I have always born very ill; but
has suffered me for so many Years to go on in that ill course of Life.
Secondly, of Confusion and Sorrow; for having made so little use and benefit of
all that care his Divine mercy has taken to Cultivate and Improve me by all
ways and means imaginable; but have so long abused his wonderful Patience that
bore with me all this while. Thirdly, of Fear; least God to punish me for not
corresponding with his Grace, and making profit of it, should at last quite
deprive me of it, and pronounce that terrible Sentence against me; Cut him
down, why should he take up so much good ground to no purpose, cut down that
unfruitful Tree and throw it into the Fire. Fourthly, of a Firm Resolution;
addressing my self to my good Angel to beg his assistance to be more faithful
hereafter, and make better profit of the care he shall please to take of me,
and correspond with those Graces he shall obtain for me: Beseeching him to
intercede for me like that Charitable Keeper of the Vineyard, mentioned in the
Gospel, and affist and help me to bring forth the fruits of good Works, and
Virtues proper to my Condition.

. 6. The Application of the same Method, to one of our Blessed Saviors Actions.
Jesus Christ Washes the Feet of the Apostles.
Consider how our Blessed Savior who, as Man, was King of Heaven and Earth,
and, as God was the Creator and Lord of all, laying aside, and as it were,
forgetting his Majesty, was pleased to humble himself to that degree, and to
descend so low as to wash with his Sacred and Divine Hands, the Feet of Twelve
poor Fishermen; and withal consider well all the circumstances of so humble an
Action; how he Girt his Sacred Body with a Napkin; filled the Basin with Water,
and then kneeling down, Washed the Feet of all the Apostles, nay, even of Judas
himself.

The Exercise of the Understanding, or the Reflection upon this Action of our
Blessed Savior.
What could be the design of God in humbling himself after so strange a manner?
He was pleased to declare it himself in these words; You see what I have done,
and to what degree, I, who am the Son of the Living God, have humbl'd my self;
and if this Action does surprise you, because you do not yet comprehend the
Mystery of it; that you may not be ignorant of my intention. I declare it is to
serve you for an example, and to show you, that if I, who am your Lord and
Master, have thus humbl'd my self, you that are but poor Fishermen ought much
more to humble your selves, by seeking and embraceing those employments that
are esteemed the meanest, and exercising your selves in the lowest and most
humble sort of Actions: This is the great Lesson I would have you learn of me,
it is that which I have always Prech't to you, and that I have now taught you by
my example.

The Application of this Reflection, or the return and looking back upon our
selves.
Have I hitherto practiced this great Lesson? Having the honor to be a
Christian, and consequently a Disciple of Jesus Christ, I was bound to follow
his Example, and to observe his Maxims; especially, those Maxims, in the
practice of which he took most delight, and most expressly proposed to me to
observe; have I till now observed 'em? That passion I have for honor and esteem
of the World, for all that is or seems to me great or glorious, and serves to
entertain and feed my pride and vanity; that horror I have against all
humiliations, against being scorned, or undervalu'd; all this evidently shows,
how far I am from imitating the humility of my Blesled Savior.

The Exercise of the Will.
The motions which follow this reflection, are, First, of Wonder; to see
humility the favorite Virtue, most recommended by Jesus Christ, most becoming
his true Disciple, and the most Essential to Christianity, should yet be that
which is least practiced by Christians. We see many Men that are merciful,
patient, and of a very austere Life; but where shall we find any that are truly
humble? Secondly, of great Confusion and Grief; to find that I have let my self
be carried by that torrent of vanity, which sways most part of the World;
whereby I have in a manner renounced Jesus Christ's Maxims, and holy example,
to live according to the foolish humor of the World, which consists chiefly in
the love of greatness and honor. Thirdly, of Fear; lest if I make not better
use of these Lessons and Examples of humility, that Christ has given me; they
will one day serve for my Condemnation. Fourthly, of a Firm Resolution to labor
more seriously hereafter, to acquire a Virtue so necessary as humility is;
beseeching our blessed Savior to assist and instruct me in it; since it is only
he, that can direct and assist me, in this most weighty matter.

. 7. The Application of the same Method to one of the Divine Perfections. The
Immensity of God.
The Exercise of the Memory.
Remember what Faith teaches us, concerning the immensity of God, which renders
him present in all places, at all times, in all things; are in him, and he in
all things; you are in him, and he in you, and he is more intimately present in
your Soul than your Soul can be to your Body; endeavor therefore to taste and
penetrate the sense of these words, God in me, and I in God.

The Exercise of the Understanding, or Reflection upon this Perfection of God.
If God is present in all places; if he be in me, it follows from thence.
First, that I must always remember that I am in his Presence. Secondly, that I
ought to comport my self always with great respect toward his Infinite
Majesty. Thirdly, that I ought to be afraid of nothing so much as to offend
him; or to do any thing, that may in the least be displeasing in his Eyes, that
are so pure, as they cannot endure the least spot, and do continually behold
me. Mundi sunt oculi tui and ad iniquitatem respicere non poterunt.

The Application of this Reflection, or the looking back upon our selves.
Have I been hitherto well convinced or have I reflected as I ought upon this
great truth? Or if I have done so; how was it possible that I should think so
little of Almighty God, or that I should comport my self with so little respect
before that Infinite Majesty? In whose Presence the Seraphims fall down, and
cover their Faces, out of respect? How then is it possible I should have the
Insolence to provoke him so often, and offend his Eyes, so pure and holy, by my
impurities.

The Exercise of the Will.
The motions that follow these reflections, are, First, of Admiration;
considering the great patience of Almighty God, in whose Presence I have so
often, and so insolently committed most grievous crimes; who tho most highly
provoked by me, has still had patience with me, and forborne to punish me, as he
might easily have done. Secondly, of Grief and Confusion; for having been so
forgetful of God, and his Divine Presence, and not reflecting that he looked
upon me whilst I offended him; but so abused his Divine goodness and patience,
as to make 'em serve me for an encouragement to offend him the more boldly.
Thirdly, of Fear; lest his patience being thus abused and tired out, should
turn at last to fury, and punish me with so much the greater rigor; for having
so long in vain deferred and restrained his Justice from punishing me. Fourthly,
of a Firm Resolution, to have more respect for the future, for his All-seeing
Eye, which continually watches over me; so as never to offend him wilfully: And
since I can commit no fault, but in his Presence, to avoid all sin, as much as
human frailty will permit, and never wilfully and deliberately offend him.

Certain Rules which may serve to help Scrupulous Persons in their Conduct.
BY reason that many persons are rendered incapable of Praying by certain
Scruples, and that others are often by such Scruples deprived in a great
measure of that benefit and comfort which they should otherwise reap by their
Prayer; I think it very necessary for the assisting of these Devout Souls that
find themselves so crossed and hindered in the way of Perfection, to set down
some Rules that may be of use to them, to extricate themselves from those
Scruples, and to comfort and ease 'em from those troubles. Neither will it be
impertinent to my subject, and to what I have treated of; since it may serve to
remove those obstacles which the Devil often makes use of to divert and diswade
us from our Prayer.

The First Rule.
First, it is necessary to make choice of a Director that is both able and
experienced, and one that is not himself too severe and Scrupulous.

The Second Rule.
Having made such a choice, you must observe and follow his Counsel; persuading
and fully convinceing your self, that you cannot offend God in doing what he
advises; for if there be any fault, the blame will fall upon him that gives the
advice, and not upon you that follow it.

The Third Rule.
Tho it be true in General, that we cannot act, when we doubt, whether what we
are going to do, be a sin; yet it cannot be a certain Rule for those that are
Scrupulous, to conclude they have offended God, because many times, the trouble
and great solicitude they were in, by reason of their Scruples, left 'em not
sufficient freedom to determine themselves, and to choose which side to take.

The Fourth Rule.
Generally speaking, all Scrupulous persons in doubt, whether they have sinned
or no, are bound to judge favorably, and to hope the best; especially, when
they are Devout persons, that fear God, and live regularly.

The Fifth Rule.
In the opinion of most able Divines, such persons as are very Scrupulous, are
not bound to Confess imaginary sins, that put 'em in pain; unless they can with
a safe Conscience swear these three things. First, that they have committed the
sin. Secondly, that they have never Confessed it. Thirdly, that it is Mortal.

The Sixth Rule.
Scrupulous persons need not trouble themselves to make general Confessions,
which most commonly serve only to embroyle 'em the more, and furnish new matter
of Scruples.

The Seventh Rule.
They must understand, that it is not in their power to discover, or know for
certain, whether they have made a perfect good Act of Contrition; and that the
uncertainty they are in, as to that point, is no good reason or ground to make
'em repeat and begin their Confession a new; but it is an effect of their
Scruple, and many times of self love, secret pride, and little Confidence in
Gods mercy, to demand and expect a certainty, which God is not pleased to allow
we should have; let us but do on our part, what depends upon us, and we may be
certain that God will do on his part all that depends upon him.

The Eighth Rule.
Since the relapse into sin; makes those Scrupulous Souls very unquiet and
restless; they must endeavor to pacify their minds by these reflections.
First, that our Confessions, tho never so good, do not render us impeccable.
Secondly, that when we say, that the relapse ought to render our repentance
suspected; that must be understood to be meant of frequent relapses; and of
relapses into Mortal sin; and if it can be extended to Venial sins, it is only
to such sins as are wilfully committed, and with deliberation; and not to sins
of frailty and surprise. Thirdly, that although wittingly we fall sometimes into
the same sin, yet that does not argue, but that we had a sincere resolution to
avoid it, when we Confessed it last, provided we do not fall into it so often,
nor so deliberately; and that we resolve to Confess it as soon as we can, and
never offend God any more in that kind. Fourthly, that a Man may have a sincere
efficacious Will never to fall into such a sin any more, tho he perceive at the
same time, that it is likely he may fall into it again; which happens often to
the most perfect; so that we must distinguish well, the Will to sin, from the
doubt we have, that we may fall again; for the first is inconsistent with true
repentance, and the second, may well consist with it.

The Ninth Rule.
When Scrupulous persons go to Confession, they must employ no longer time in
Examining of their Conscience, than what their Director advises 'em, who ought
always to regulate that: And they must apply themselves, more to make good and
firm resolutions for the future, than to make too long Examins.

The Tenth Rule.
All that is in our mind, imagination, senses, or in our bodies, tho never so
impure, cannot of it self stain our Soul; it is only that which is received into
our heart that can infect the Soul; so that there can be no sin unless our Will
is pleased, and consents to the thought or act, and that our mind reflects upon
it; and besides, the matter must be of some weight, to make it a Mortal sin.

The Eleventh Rule.
The first motions, tho ill, and disorderly in themselves, are not criminal;
unless they are followed by reflection, and that we take delight in 'em, or at
least neglect to resist and repel 'em, and this bare neglect very seldom
amounts to a Mortal sin.

The Twelfth Rule.
We must carefully distinguish between the thinking of, and the consenting to a
sin, and we must observe that the first tho very bad, may chance not to be
attended with the second; for the consent renders us guilty, but the thought
may serve often to exercise and improve our virtue; and by giving us an
occasion and obligation of combat, may afford us matter of Merit and Victory.

The Thirteenth Rule.
The person that lives regularly, and in the fear of God, tho assaulted by
never so filthy and impious thoughts, yet gives no occasion to 'em, and never
permits 'em to prevail so far as to cause any ill action, ought to judge the
best, and rest satisfied, that there was no consent given to such thoughts.
It Is the Rule that Saint Gregory gives, Ita plerumque mali inutiliter
compunguntur ad justitiam, sicut plerumque boni innoxie tentantur ad culpam; as
good thoughts which disorderly persons, and ill livers sometimes have, when
they are not accompanied with consent, execution, or fruit; cannot serve to
justify such ill livers; so bad thoughts which virtuous persons are Tempted
with, be they never so violently prompted and moved to sin; yet we must judge
that they do not sin by 'em, when those motions have no effect, and when we see
they are never over swayed and carried by 'em to any ill Action.

The Fourteenth Rule.
Scrupulous persons must never dwell long in making reflections upon any ill
thoughts they have had, upon account of examining, whether they have not taken
some criminal delight in 'em; for that can serve only to embroyle 'em, and make
a deeper impression of those objects in their fancies, and consequently create
new matter of Scruples.

The Fifteenth Rule.
Scrupulous persons ought not to set upon Reading such Books, as treat of
terrible and frightful subjects; such as are, those which treat of the great
rigor of Gods judgments, of the conditions necessary for Confession, of the
qualities and nature of Contrition, and of the incertitude of it; nor Read
those Authors that rack all cases and circumstances to an extremity, in points
of Morality; but on the contrary, they ought to Read those Books that treat of
the Love of God, his great Mercy, the Virtue of the Infinite Merits and
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and such other Books, as are most proper to
infuse into their Souls a great confidence in Almighty God: Such as are all the
works of Saint Francis Sales.

The Sixteenth Rule.
To enable a good Director; to assist well, and cure Scrupulous minds under his
care, it is neceslary he should be made acquainted, with the first rise of those
Scruples; for he ought to apply different remedies, proportionable to the
different causes, and sources of Scruples; if Scruples are sent by Almighty
God, for trial of certain Souls, which are naturally high minded, and subject
to pride, and for rendering 'em more humble; they must humble themselves under
the powerful hand of God, and abandon themselves wholly to his Divine Conduct:
If Scruples proceed from self love, which cause our thoughts to be wholly taken
up with our own concerns; the best remedy is to think much and often of
Almighty God, and to think as little as we can of our selves; and cast off
frivolous reflections that still only regard our selves: If Scruples come from
idleness, as sometimes it happens they do, those persons must undertake and
embrace some good employment, such as may leave 'em no leisure, to think of
their Scruples: If Scruples proceed from a natural fearfulness, or from a
tenderness of Conscience, there must be great care taken to instruct well, and
encourage those fearful poor Souls: Infine, if they proceed from a Malancholly
humor, or from a weak brain, there can be no other remedy in those cases, but
to induce 'em to Docility, Obedience, and Resignation; for else those persons
will tire out a poor Director, and make him loose all his time.

As to the rest, we must observe two things. First, that it belongs not to
those that are Scrupulous, to judge whether they are so, or not; for they
themselves are not capable of that; but ought to rely upon the judgment of
their Director. Secondly, that these Rules concern only such as are truly and
really Scrupulous; and not such, as being persecuted by the remorse of their
own Consciences, would have that pass for Scruple, which in it self, is a well
grounded and very just fear, without consulting any but their own passions: Nor
for those extravagant Scrupulous persons, who make Monsters of trifles, whilst
in the mean time they neglect the performance of their most Essential duties;
like the Pharisees of whom our Savior says, That they paid most exactly the
Tithe of their Mint, their Aniseed and Cummin; and in the mean time neglected
what was of greatest moment and weight in the Law of God; as Justice, Mercy,
and Faith; that they took great care to strain what ever they drank, for fear
of swallowing a fly; and yet made no difficulty or Scruple of swallowing a
Camel.

Several Motives which may be of great use and help to Scrupulous persons, in
order to animate and increase their confidence in God, and to appease all their
anxiety and troubles.
THe great misfortune of Scrupulous persons, and the chief source of all their
pain, is the want of having a true Idea of Almighty God, through the fear they are
in: They represent him to themselves, as a revengeful God, always angry; that
never lays down his Thunderbolt, but is always ready to destroy all such as
offend him; and as a severe judge, that examins all with the greatest rigor
imaginable; in order to find out matters sufficient to condemn and punish the
sinner; as a jealous Tyrant that mistrusts every body, and resolves to secure
himself, by the ruin of those he suspects; as a crafty Enemy that is always
employed in laying snares to entrap those he hates. This is the Idea that
Scrupulous persons frame in their fancies of Almighty God; and is it not as
false, as it is unjust? Injurious to God, and most pernicious to Man? Whereas on
the contrary, those Scrupulous Souls ought to look upon God as a Master, full
of all goodness, and mildness; Sentite de Domino in bonitate; he is not only a
Father, full of tenderness, that loves all Mankind as his Children; Quomodo
miseretur Pater Filiorum, misertus est Dominus timentibus se; and therefore he
is called the Father of Mercies; Pater misericordiarum; infine, he is well
acquainted with our weakness and miseries; and has great compassion of us; Ipse
cognovit figmentum nostrum, recordatus est quia pulvis sumus.

After he had drowned the whole World, with the Men that then Inhabited it, he
was not long without resuming that tender care of Man, which is natural to his
Divine Goodness. I will revenge my self no more, says he, in so terrible a
manner, for the heart of Man is very weak, and is carried away, and prone to
evil, by a most violent inclination; so that his faults ought to be considered
in some manner as more pardonable; Sensus enim and cogitatio humani cordis in
malum prona sant.

Besides, we must consider and look upon Almighty God, as our Creator; and
infer from thence a great motive of confidence; for he hates nothing of his own
work; Nihil odisti little qu^^ fecisti, he loves the sinner as his Creature, tho
at the same time he abhors the sin; and is so far from wishing his Death, that
he tries all ways to win him; to convert, and save him; Nolo mortem peccatoris,
sed ut magis converiatur and vivat.

Infine, all the Holy Scripture is full of such thoughts, as serve to inspire
into our Souls, the Love of Almighty God, and confirm our hope in him; if we
fall, Lord, says the Prophet, you stretch out your All-Powerful hand to take us
up; Operi manuum tuarum porriges dexteram; the mercies of the Lord, adds the
Prophet David, surpass his Justice, and are above all his other works;
Misericordia supercxaltat Judicium, miserationes ejus super omnia opera ejus;
insomuch, that in the very heat of his anger, God still remembers his mercy;
Cum Iratus fueris misericordiae recordaberis; and the more miserable we are,
the more he is still inclined to have compassion of us.

But above all, the fearful and Scrupulous Souls, must often Meditate and
reflect upon those words of our Blessed Savior; that he is not come into the
World, for the just, but for sinners; that it is not those that are well, but
the sick that have need of the Physician; that he is not come upon Earth to
judge, and destroy poor sinners, but to gain and to save 'em.

The Parable of the good Shepherd is very proper to comfort and assure us,
against the too great fear and apprehension of Gods judgments; if we do but
well consider it, with all its circumstances: The great longing desire of the
Shepherd to find out his poor strayed Sheep; how he could not be dsswaded, nor
put off, neither by the length, nor fatigue of the journey in looking after her,
nor by the infidelity, ingratitude, and wilfulness of that unhappy Sheep; the
mildness and tenderness he shows toward her when he had found her; his
goodness in carrying her back to the fold upon his Shoulders; the great joy he
showed, for having recovered her, inviting all the World to rejoice with him;
Ita gandium erit super uno peccatore poenitentiam agente. If Almighty God in
this manner runs after a poor sinner, that flys from him, and by his resistance
renders himself unworthy of his care, and mercy, will he cast off, and refuse a
poor soul, that by the pain and trouble it is in, shows, that it fears nothing
in the World so much, as the offending of so Divine and good a Master, and
thereby the withdrawing himself from his Fatherly conduct and protection?

But what ought more than any thing, to hearten and comfort Scrupulous Souls,
is the price of the Blood of our Blessed Savior, the infinite Virtue of his
Merits, and his superabundant Satisfaction; which infinitely surpass all our
sins; because they are infinite, which our sins are not, tho they be never so
great and enormous; the least drop of that Sacred Blood, being sufficient to
satisfy for all the sins of a Million of Worlds, tho filled with Men as wicked
as the Devils are; and yet he was pleased to shed whole Torrents of that Sacred
Blood for us; what ground of comfort and hope is this to a poor Soul?

Let us then always remember these three things. First, that the Satisfaction
made by our Blesled Savior is of infinite value. Secondly, that it belongs to
us; because he is our Head, and we are his Members; that he has transferred, and
made over all that Satisfaction to us, having no need of it for himself; and
that the Eternal Father, has accepted of his Sons transfering it. Thirdly, that
it depends upon, and is left in our Power, to apply that Divine Satisfaction to
our selves; and that the best, surest, and easiest way to do this, is to repose
a great confidence in the Infinite Mercy, and Goodness of God.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE Chapters and Sections.
CHAP. I.
OF the necessity of Meditation. page 1. The First Reason. page 4. The Second
Reason. page 7. The Third Reason. page 9. The Fourth Reason. page 11. The Fifth
Reason. page 13. The Sixth Reason. page 16.
CHAP. II.
OF the Pretenses that many Men make use of to excuse themselves from taking
the pains to Meditate. page 19. The First Pretense. page 20. The Second
Pretense. page 23. The Third Pretense. page 25. The Fourth Pretense. page 28.
The Fifth Pretense. page 31. The Sixth Pretense. page 36.
CHAP. III.
OF the Facility of Meditation. page 40.. 1. Showing how easy it is for any Man
to Meditate, or make Mental Prayer. Ibid.. 2. Showing farther and more
particularly, how easy it is to Meditate, by explicating the Method, that is to
be observed in Meditation. page 43.
CHAP. IV.
Shows how to Practice Mental Prayer. page 47.. 1. The Application of the
Method, we have already explicated, to some Historical passage in Holy
Scripture; as for example, to that of the fall of the Angels. page 48.. 2.
Application of the same Method to a Moral Christian Verity. page 52. The
Incertitude of a sudden and unexpected Death. Ibid.. 3. The Application of the
same Method to one of the Mysteries of our blessed Saviors Life. page 56. The
Nativity of our Blessed Savior. Ibid.. 4. Application of the same Method to a
Maxim of the Gospel. page 60. If any Man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. Ibid.. 5. The Application of the
same Method to a Parable in the Gospel. page 64. Of the Barren Fig Tree. Ibid..
6. The Application of the same Method, to one of our Blessed Saviors Actions.
page 68. Jesus Christ Washes the Feet of the Apostles. Ibid.. 7. The
Application of the same Method to one of the Divine Perfections. page 73. The
Immensity of God. Ibid. Certain Rules which may serve to help Scrupulous
Persons in their Conduct. page 76. Several Motives which may be of great use
and help to Scrupulous persons, in order to animate and increase their
confidence in God, and to appease all their anxieties and troubles. page 90.
A METHOD HOW TO Offer up Mass, ACCORDING To the Four Ends of this SACRIFICE.

printer's or publisher's device IHS


London, Printed by T. H. 1694.

A METHOD HOW TO Offer up Mass, according to the Four Ends of this Sacrifice.
The First End. To Render Homage to God.
1. WE must first make an Act of Faith, whereby we acknowledge the Sovereignty
of God, who is the beginning, and end of our being, and therefore has all right
and power, to dispose of us according to his Divine Will and pleasure; and to
destroy, and annihilate us, when he pleases.

2. In acknowledgment of this Sovereignty we must present our selves before his
Altars as Victims, prepared, and disposed to render our Lives, and all we
possess into his hands; judging it a favor to be destroyed, and entirely
consumed, as an Holocaust, to his honor.

3. Knowing moreover, that he does not desire this real destruction of our
selves; and that the yielding up, spending, or loosing our Lives in his
Service, would not be a Sacrifice honorable enough for his greatness, nor an
Homage worthy of his Merits: We must in place of our own Life, substitute the
Life, of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has been given us
instead of a Victim, to supply all our defects; and present it in Homage to the
Divine Majesty of God; protesting that his Excellency well deserves, to have so
precious a Life consumed to his honor: Which Act may be expressed in the
following terms, which each one, according to their Devotion, may shorten or
lengthen as their leisure shall permit.

FAITH.
2. O My God I acknowledge, and confess, that thou art my Sovereign Lord, who
have all right and power, absolutely to dispose of my Life and Death, nay even
to destroy, and annihilate my very Being; and art not at all obliged to
consider therein my inclinations, or any way sweeten my losses. I am the work
of thy hands, I subsist not, but by thee; and I am not, but for thee: I have
nothing either of Body or Soul, which proceeds not from thy greatness, and
depends not on thy goodness, and ought not to be entirely Consecrated to thy
Glory and Service.

OBLATION.
2. IN acknowledgment therefore of this Sovereignty, and the dependence I have
upon thee my Lord and God, behold I here present my self before thy Altar as a
Victim, wholly prepared to be Immolated and consumed as an Holocaust, if so
thou please: O my God, I protest before Heaven and Earth, that I am not only
contented, but shall esteem it as a favor, to lay down at thy Feet, this Life,
and Being I have received from thy hands, in Testimony that I proceed from, and
depend on thee.

The SVPPLEMENT.
3. BUT seeing that on the one side, thou will not that I actually destroy my
Life upon thy Altars, and on the other side, tho my Life should be wholly spent
and evaporated as an Holocaust before thy Divine Majesty this would not be
sufficient to render any Homage worthy of thy excellencies; therefore to supply
this defect, I present to thee, O great God! The Life of thy Son, and
substitute it in place of mine. I offer to thee the very same Homage he here to
fore rendr'd thee upon the Cross, by his bloody Sacrifice, and which by this
un-bloody Sacrifice, he even to Day Exhibits to thee, both upon this, and upon
all the Altars of the World, by his Mystical Immolation: For he has wholly
given himself to us, to be our Victim; and will have us to supply by his
Homage, what is wanting in ours. Therefore, seeing the Oblation of my Life
would be too little to satisfy my obligation, in rendering all Homage suitable
to the eminency of thy Power and Dominion: In supply thereof, receive I beseech
thee as a Testimony of my submission, and acknowledgment of thy Sovereignty,
the Life of my Savior Jesus, which I Immolate to thee, together with all the
Priests who this Day Celebrate; protesting that thy Infinite Majesty truly
deserves, that so precious a Life has been, and should be again, in a manner
consumed to its honor.

The Second End. To give thanks to God.
1. MAke first an Act of Faith, acknowledging that all the benefits, graces,
and favors which you enjoy, are poured down upon you by the pure liberality,
and mercy of God.

2. That you may exhibit some kind of gratitude, and requital: Present to him
such Acts as are included in a perfect thanksgiving; these are, First, to set a
high value upon his benefits. Secondly, to publish them. Thirdly, to resolve
reciprocally to procure him all the good you can; by seeking his honor and
glory, and obeying him in all things.

3. Seeing that in this acknowledgment there is still too great unworthiness to
counterpoise his Divine favors bestowed upon you, which are of an infinite
value; supply what is wanting out of the Treasures of the Son of God; offering
to his Father the thanksgiving, which this great Savior once rendr'd him, in
his own Name and yours, upon the Cross; and still presents upon all the Altars
throughout the whole World; which you may express after the following manner,
shorter or longer as your leisure will permit, or your Devotion shall suggest.

FAITH.
1. O Inexhaustible Source of liberality, I believe, and confess, that
whatsoever I have of Being, what Power, Life, Grace, or other Goods, either of
Body or Soul I Possess, I have received 'em all from thy pure Mercy. Nor did
any Merits of mine, but purely thy own Love, and Goodness move thee to heap
upon me so many benefits, that it is impossible for me to number 'em. This truth
I here come to acknowledge, in the Presence of Heaven and Earth; protesting
before this Altar, that I have received from thy liberality such an infinity of
Graces and Favors, as I am not able even to conceive, much less express.

OBLATION.
2. BUT desirous not to be ungrateful or backward in offering what requital or
return my Poverty is able to make, admit and accept I beseech thee, O my
Sovereign Benefactor ^ My Heart replenish't with all possible sentiments of
gratitude and thanksgiving for what I owe thee. Certainly, if to acknowledge a
benefit worthily, one must first of all testify a great esteem of it. I assure
thee, O my God! That all the goods wherewith thou have been pleased to honor
me, are in my esteem, of an infinite value, because they come to me, from thy
All-Powerful Hand, as effects of thy Infinite Love and Goodness; and because
thou have bestowed 'em on a person, who is infinitely unworthy of 'em. And
secondly, if it be requisite to publish it; it being a kind of ingratitude to
render only secret thanks; behold me here in this public place exposed to the
view of Men and Angels, for no other end than to publish to the whole. World
those many favors thou have bestowed upon me. O Infinite Goodness, I desire
that all should understand, that thou have heapt upon me such benefits and
favors, as are not only beyond what I am able to express, but even exceed what
I am able to conceive; wherefore I desire that all the World may know, that
thou have entirely gained my heart by this thy eminent liberality; and
therefore, upon this account I present my self, as a Donary to hang at thy
Altar, as a Sign and Memorial to the whole World, of the innumerable
obligations I have to thee, promising thee moreover, to publish thy bounties
and favors, as far as I am or shall be able. In fine, if a due acknowledgment
requires a reciprocal return; receive, O great God! In requital of the good
Will thou have ever had toward me, the Solemn protestation, which I here make,
of entirely employing my self henceforward, to render thee all the services,
thou shall desire of me; and to procure thee all the good I am able, by seeking
thy greater honor and glory, and obeying thy Commands in all things.

The SVPPLEMENT.
3. BUT knowing, that tho my Heart and all my Being should melt away, and be
totally consumed in these affections of thanksgiving; yet I could not thereby
sufficiently acknowledge thy Immense favors; therefore to supply what is
wanting to my Act of thanksgiving, I present thee with that, which thy Son has
heretofore presented to thee for these very favors which thou have been pleased
to impart to me. I present to thee the esteem which he had of 'em; the
publication which he made of 'em; and the Oblation of his Life, which he made
to thee on the Cross for 'em; and which he still at this present offers to thee
upon all the Altars of the World, in return of all these thy bounties to me. He
has made us H^^irs of all his Actions, and consequently of his thanksgivings;
wherefore supplying the defects of my gratitude with his, receive I beseech
thee, O my God! The acknowledgments he rendr'd to thee upon Mount Calvary, and
which he continually renders thee in all thy Churches, for all the benefits and
favors wherewith thy Mercies and Goodness has obliged me.

The Third End. To Yield Satisfaction to God.
1. BY an Act of Faith, acknowledging your self a a Sinner, and liable to the
Divine Justice for a multitude of Offenses, which you have committed against
his Divine Majesty.

2. Show your self to be sorry for 'em, and offer him all the pains,
molestations, afflictions, dolors, misfortunes, incommodities, desolations, and
necessities, which you suffer, either of Body or Mind, in the discharge of all
your duties; protesting that you do and will embrace 'em, and bear 'em
patiently.

3. Seeing evidently that this payment you offer is not correspondent, nor
equal to your debts; therefore, in supply thereof, offer out of the Treasures
of the Son of God, all the pains and dolors, which he suffered in his Life, and
upon the Cross, which he had deposed in the Sacrifice of Mass to be applied to
you, if you will accept'em: Which you may express in these, or the like terms.

FAITH.
1. O My God, I acknowledge, and confess that I have greatly offended thy
Infinite Majesty, and that by my innumerable sins I have truly Merited that thy
Divine Justice should inflict upon me all its rigours, and chastisements. I
acknowledge that thou have all right to punish, and take vengeance upon my past
excesses. And it is in reguard of this right, that I here render and prostrate
my self before thy Throne of Justice, to make all possible Satisfaction, I am
able to perform.

OBLATION.
2. WHerefore I here offer to thee all the grief, and sorrow of Heart which I
feel at present, through the remembrance of the many and innumerable sins, whereby
I have so ungratefully contristated thy Divine Goodness: I am extremely sorry
for having displeased thee, and would rather that I had lost a thousand Lives,
than once in the least have offended thee, and together with this grief I offer
thee all the infirmities, wearisomnesles, afflictions, dolors, labors, pains,
calamities, and miseries which I do or shall suffer in this World, by what way,
or by what hand soever thy Providence shall please to send 'em. O my God!
Seeing that thy Justice for its own Satisfaction, and in defense of its just
rights, requires these chastisements of me; behold here my Body, my Soul, my
Goods, both exterior and interior, all which, I entirely lay down at thy Sacred
Feet, and give 'em up into thy just revenging Hands, protesting that I will
accept and bear patiently all the incommodities, losles, pains, and afflictions
whatsoever, that shall befall me, out of that irrevocable Will I have, to
satisfy in some sort the many and great debts, I owe thee.

The SVPPLEMENT.
3. BUT all this being not yet sufficient entirely to satisfy for my Crimes,
they having Merited infinite pains; to supply what is wanting to my payment, I
present thee all the sufferings of my Savior Jesus Christ, whereof he has made
me his Heir. In the Old Law thou ordainedst that the Children of Israel after
having sinned, should in place of their own persons substitute a Victim,
whereon they should lay their Crimes, and infine offer it to thee to receive
the scourges of thy wrath, which they themselves deserved, and ought to have
felt. Behold I likewise substitute here a Victim in my place, upon which I do
not desire thou should discharge afresh the scourges of thy anger, for he
has long since suffered them all, which I beseech thee to call to thy
remembrance; and in consideration thereof, mitigate and appease that just wrath
thou have conceived against me. This Victim is no other than thy only and
dearly beloved Son; whose sufferings were far more rigorous, than thy justice
required, for all the sins of the whole World: Seeing therefore he has done us
the favor to depose 'em in the Sacrifice of the Mass, to be thereby applied to
us; be pleased, O my God! That I discharge all my debts out of these
liberalities, he at this present sends me, from all the Altars of the whole
World; and which jointly with him I present to thee. Accept all the pains, and
dolors of his Passion, and Bloody Sacrifice, to supply those I am still obliged
to pay. Wherefore, assisting really at this unbloody Sacrifice, which is a
Memorial of his Passion, and of that un-bloody Sacrifie he offered upon the
Altar of the Cross, and rendering my self present in Spirit at all other Masles
which are this Day said throughout the whole World; I offer 'em all to thy
Divine Justice, in Satisfaction for all my sins, and all the sins of those
Souls which suffer and languish in Purgatory.

The Fourth End. Impetration, or the Obtaining what we Ask.
1. WE must on the one side acknowledge the inexhaustible riches of God, and on
the other our extreme poverty; for we have nothing, and stand in need of all
things.

2. Pressed with our necessities, we must approach the Gates of our most rich and
liberal God, and present our Petitions to him, with a most profound humility.

3. Considering, that all our Prayers and instances, are not able or
sufficient, to move or oblige him, to bestow his Treasures upon us, we wanting
such Merits as may give us Credit with him; let us, to supply our own
unworthiness, offer all the Merits and Credit which our Savior gained, by the
Sacrifice he offered upon the Altar of the Cross; which he has given us, and
applied to the un-bloody Sacrifie of the Altar, to be thereby Communicated to
us.

FAITH.
1. O My God! Behold me here a poor wretch, a most miserable Slave, in extreme
necessity, prostrate at thy Feet, of whose riches I can be no more ignorant,
than I am of my own Poverty. I must Confess the truth, that I have nothing, and
that thou have all things in abundance; and therefore, it is from thee alone,
that I can hope for any relief.

OBLATION.
2. WHerefore, behold I here place my self at the Gates of thy Mercy, humbly
beseeching thee to have pity on the most miserable Creature under Heaven.
Alas! O God of all bounty! Behold and succor my necessities, and incline thine
Ears to the earnest Prayers I presume to offer, and address unto thee. Ah! my
God, full of Riches and Compassion, give me the Grace of a perfect Contrition
of Heart, which may wash away all the spots of my sins. Restore me to thy
gracious favor, if by misfortuen and ingratitude I should have lost this Rich
and only Treasure. Make me hence forward always to live in it, and possess that
infinite Treasure of thy Love. Vouchsafe me all Virtues agreeable to my
Vocation. Grant me all Talents both natural, and supernatural, that are
necessary for the amplification of thy Honor and Glory; and refuse me not the
comforts of this Life, in such a degree, as is necessary for my Salvation in
the next. Permit me also to demand the Conversion of all sinners, the
Perseverance and Sanctity of all the Just, the Exaltation of the Holy Church,
the Extirpation of Errors, and Heresies, the Consolation of the Afflicted, the
Prosperity of my Parents, Friends and Relations, and forgiveness of my Enemies.
Beseech him to shower down his Blessings upon the Pope and all Christian
Princes, both Spiritual and Temporal, especially upon our King. Queen, Prince,
and all the Royal Family; upon all Superiors and others, both Ecclesiastical or
Civil, throughout the whole World, but particularly in England, by Converting
'em to the True Faith, and to a Virtuous Life.

The SVPPLEMENT.
3. IT IS indeed very true, that I Merit not so much as the least of these
favors, and I have nothing which can move thy bounty, to unlock its Treasures,
or to open thy liberal hands; notwithstanding, calling to mind that my dearest
Savior Jesus has made me Heir of all the Merits of his Life and Death, and
applys the same to me, by this Venerable Sacrifie of the Mass, I receive 'em
therefore from his Divine Hands to offer 'em to thee; which now I do, and
repeat this Oblation as many times, as there shall this Day be Masses said
throughout the whole World, that in reguard of 'em thou would grant me all
that I come to request of thee. Look not therefore upon my demerits and
unworthiness, both which I own and confess to thy Divine Majesty: But look upon
the Merits of thy well beloved Son; which are sufficient to render the most
unworthy, most deserving of thy favors. Show therefore, O Eternal Father I In
this occasion both thy justice, and the efficacy and Credit of thy Son; give
him that recompense due to him, that thou will not give to me. I ask it not but
in his Name: And behold him coming himself upon this Altar, to join his Prayers
with mine, and unite his recommendation with my Petition, wherefore thy honor
is engaged to hear, and render thy self favorable to those, whom he commands to
ask in his Name, and to whom he Communicates his Merits and Credit. Behold I am
one of these, honor him therefore I beseech thee, by granting me, what both he
and I most earnestly beg of thee.

Eight Comfortable Points to be Considered in the Sacrifice of the Mass.
1. THat all the value and efficacy which was orignally in the Bloody Sacrifice
upon the Cross, is by God entirely translated to the unbloody Sacrifice of the
Mass, by which Sacrifice, the former is applied.

2. The more one comprehends the value of this Sacrifice, the greater esteem he
will have of it, the more confidence in it, and more particularly cooperate
with it, partake more largely of it, and thereby become more capable of
receiving its effects in greater abundance.

3. To participate of the effects, and fruit of the third end of Mass, which is
to make Satisfaction to God for our sins and offenses, one must be in the Grace
of God. Therefore, it is good always to make an Act of Contrition, as often as
we go to hear Mass, of when we procure it to be said for us.

4. To partake of the effects of the fourth end, which is Impetration, or the
gaining our Petitions, we must actually demand something, either in general, or
in particular: Otherwise we let the Credit of the Son of God, which is
Communicated to us, remain useless and unprofitable.

5. That we may every Morning, and every Evening, and every hour of the Day,
offer all the Masses which are said that Day, or Night throughout the whole
World, for the four ends aforesaid: For so we shall render our selves
participant of the fruit of 'em all: Note also, that there is no hour in the
Day or Night, in which Mass is not then saying, in some part of the World or
other.

6. That when one has any thing to ask of God the true means to obtain it, is
to demand it in consideration of all the Masles which are said on Earth, and in
respect of the Merits of the Son of God, which are applied to us by their means.

7. That to offer Mass well, we must always make an interior Sacrifice of our
selves, as is directed in the first end, by an Homage, and Immolation of our
Soul, Body, Life, and Goods. In the second, a thanksgiving on our part. In the
third, Sorrow and Contrition, joined with some Sufferances. In the fourth,
Fervent Prayer; otherwise as Saint Gregory Nazianzen says, we shall be unworthy
to participate of the Sacrifice of our Savior. For none is worthy, says he, of
this great Sacrifice, if he Exhibits not himself a Victim: Otherwise, as the
great Cardinal Person says, 'Twould be to falsify the Sacrifice of Mass, if we
do not accompany it with these Interior Sacrifices: For this were to present to
God an Extern Figure, destitute of the verity, which it pretends on our part.
Seeing that we should ofter Jesus Christ Dead, and Immolated in protestation of
our Interior Immolation, and yet not withstanding we should not be Immolated,
at lest, in Spirit and desire. And 'twould be a presumptuous rudeness, to make
such free use of the Treasures of our Savior; and to desire to make benefit of
his Homages, Thanksgivings, Satisfactions, and the like, without a Will to
contribute something on our part. It Is true that he presents himself to us, to
the end that out of his Treasures we may supply what is wanting in us. And
therefore we may say, I supply out of thee, what is wanting in me, as Saint
Bernard says, in his first Sermon of the Epiphany. But if we have any thing to
offer, we must not be sparing on our parts, this being a present on our parts,
this being a present we are obliged first to offer to God; and afterward, when
we have nothing more left, we are allowed, as we want to take a supply out of
the Treasures of our Savior.

8. That the Eslence of this Sacrifice requires this practice, but as for what
concerns the circumstances which are, Prayers, Ceremonies, and Performance of
so many Actions, as the Priest does before and after the Consecration, to the
end we may participate of these, it is good after that one is entered into the
Church, actually to offer up all this, uniting our Wills with that of the
Priest, and approving what he shall do, in these, or the like following terms.

An Oblation of the Circumstances of the Sacrifice of Mass.
O My God! My Sovereign Lord, I here come to accompany the Priest, whom the
Church sends Ambassador to thy Divine Majesty. I join my Assent to all the
Praises he shall give thee, to all the Adorations where with he shall honor
thee, to all the Prayers he shall address unto thee, and to all the Good
desires he shall conceive; and consequently I desire to participate of the
Heavenly Food he shall receive; I am a Member of that Mystical Body, of which
he represents the Mouth. Let therefore this Divine Bread, and this Blood he
shall Receive, stream down its Virtue upon me, and all the Faithful united with
him in affection.

O Eternal Father, Behold the Face of thy Christ, behold thy Son Jesus, look
not upon us, who are full of vanity, but upon him, replenish't with Humility,
with which he covers our Infolency and Presumption: We are ungrateful, but his
Love satisfies for our ingratitudes; our sins are great, but his Satisfaction
is still greater; our Demerits are Excessive, but his Merits are Infinite; our
sins cry out for Vengeance, but his Blood craves Mercy for us; Wherefore,
Behold the Face of thy Christ and turn away thine Eyes from my Crimes; behold
the Wounds and Sufferings of thy Son, and for his sake Pardon those for whom he
Suffered and gave all, even his very Life; O behold the Face of thy Christ.
Amen.

FINIS.
That this Page may not be left Vacant, Accept Pious Reader, and make use of
this Excellent Prayer, to thy Angel Guardian.
OHoly Angel, dearly beloved by God, who have from my very Birth, continually
Protected, Enlightened, and Governed me, as one committed to thy special Care;
I Reverence thee as my Patron, I Love thee as my Keeper, I Submit to thy
Direction, and wholly Deliver up my self to be Governed by thee; Wherefore, I
humbly beseech thee, for Christ's sake, not to leave me, tho by Acting contraty
to thy kind Admonitions, I continue to carry my self ungratefully toward thee;
but still vouch safe, graciously to Direct me when I Err, to Instruct me in
what I am Ignorant, to Lift me up when I Fall, to Comfort me when Afflicted,
and to Deliver me when in Danger; till at length thou bring me to Heaven,
where with thee, I shall enjoy Everlasting Felicity. Amen.

A Catalogue, of what Books likewise are to be had.
A Method of Exercising the three Powers of the Soul, in Meditation, according
to the Doctrine of S. Ignatius, in his Spiritual Exercises. In a large Sheet of
Paper, in Latin, English, and French, with a Picture to each, Engraved by Wierx.

Ecclesiae Primitivae Clericus cujus gradus, educatio, tonsura, chorus, vita
communis, vota, Hierarchia, exponuntur, Authore Ioon Warnero, Societatis Jesus
olim S. T. Professore. In Quarto.

Duarum Epistolarum Georgij Morlai, S. T. D. and Episcopi VVintonienfis ad
Ianum Vlitium Revisio. In qua, de Orationibus pro Defunctis, Sanctorum
Invocatione, Diis Gentilium, and Idololatria agitur. Authore, Joan. VVarnero.
To which is added in English, A Revision of Dr. George Morlei's Judgment in
matters of Religion, or an Answer to several Treatises Written by him upon
several occasions. concerning the Church of Rome, and most of the Doctrins
Controverted betwixt her, and the Church of England. In Quarto.

The Rosary of the Blessed Virgin Mary; with an easy Method how to perform
this excellent Devotion, by way of Mental and Vocal Prayer. Printed in a large
Character, at London in the Year, 1694. In Quarto.

Of Adoration in Spirit and Truth. Written in four Books, by Father John
Eusebius Nieremberg, Native of Madrid, of the Society of Jesus; And Translated
into English, by Father Richard Strange, of the same Society. In which is
disclosed the Pith and Marrow of a Spiritual Life, of Christ's Imitation, and
Mystical Theology; extracted out of the Holy Fathers, and greatest Masters of
Spirit, Diadochus, Dorotheus, Clymacbus, Rusbrothius, Suso, Thaulerus, a
Kempis, Gerson; and not a little both Pious and effectual is superadded; lately
Printed. In Octavo.

The Life of the Lady Warner, of Parham in Suffolk, in Religion called Sister
Clare of Jesus. In which are specified, the occasion and Motives of her
Conversion, to the Roman Catholic Faith, and of her quiting her Husband,
Children, etc. to embrace the Strict Order of the Poor Clares at Graveling;
together with her Excellent Devotions, and Pious Practices in Religion, and
most happy Death. Written by a Catholic Gentleman. Printed at London in the
Year, 1691. In Octavo.

Le Guide des Croyans ou Method Polemique du R. P. Iean Keynes, Theologien de
la Compagnie de Jesus: Pour convaincre, clairement, solidement and en peu de
mots tous ceux qui sont eloignez de la veritable Religion. Traduite de
I'Anglois en Francois, par Monsieur Gonneau. Reveue, corrigee, and augmentee
sur la Traduction Latin qui en a este faite depuis peu de temps, par le meme
Auteur. In Octavo.

An Instruction to perform with fruit the Devotion of Ten Frydays, in honor of
S. Francis Xaverius, Apostle of the Indies. Much Practiced in Rome, and
Augmented particularly of late by some most Authentic Miracles wrought by the
Intercession of this Glorious Saint. Upon which he is taken as particular
Patron of almost all Italy. I ranslated into English by a Father of the Society
of Jesus, lately Printed. In Twelves.

A Method of Conversing with God. Translated out of French, by I. W. of the
Society of Jesus. The second Edition, Printed at London in the Year, 1692. In
Twelves.

The Daily Exercise of a Christian Life, or the Interior Spirit with which we
ought to Animate our Actions throughout the whole Day: with an easy
Instruction for Mental Prayer. Translated out of French by I. W. of the Society
of Jesus. The Second Edition. In Twelves.

The Method of Prayer, rendered Practical and Easy for all sorts of Persons.
Composed in French by R. F. Francis Nephew, S. I. And now Translated into
English. To which is added a Method how to offer up Mass, according to the Four
Ends of this Sacrifice. Printed at London in the Year. 1694.

A Treatise of Policy and Religion; Written about a Hundred Years since, by
Thomas Fitzherbet Esquire. The Third Edition newly Revised, Divided into Four
Tomes in Octavo, and the English, together with the Citations, Corrected. The
First Tome will be Published in the Month of January, 1695. And the other Three
Tomes will be carried on with all the Expedition imaginable, if this go's well
off. Printed at London in the Year 1695.


