TO THE Life of GOD IN ALL.
THE love of that precious Life of Christ Jesus in me constraines me (as the
light thereof arises) to declare to all people, and to generations to come, how
that innocent, Just and Holy Life came to suffer in me and be betrayed, and I
to lose the light thereof, so far as to be taken captive again under the power
of darkness, sin and death, from which that life had once set me free, and
born me in its self for some years above all the craft, subtilty, and power of
Satan that old deceiver and tempter of mankind, who ceases not to take every
occasion that pure life to devour, and so to take the creature captive again,
who with that precious life has once been ransomed, as once I had been by the
living virtue thereof; For our of kindreds and estate, and all visible
relations had he once called me and set me free, and had broken all my bonds,
as to all earthly things which was strong and many, and redeemed me from all my
sins past, and with his precious blood had he sprinkled my conscience (before
God) as though I had never sinned in his fight, anointing me with the oil of
deliverance and peace toward God and man, and sent me forth in the same bowels
to call lost and strayed souls to the same everlasting light, therein to wait
for the appearance of the same purifying life and power in themselves, there
with to be gathered to the pure God, to whom the children of darkness and
wicked workers cannot come, till with the word of life they be cleansed and
made new after himself, in whom is no iniquity.

And in this his work, by him I was preserved against all enmity, born in all
affliction, and feed above all wants within and without, though sent into a
strange country without money, bag or scrip, and among a strange people that
knew not God, in the North parts of this English Nation, and I may truly say,
as a Sheep among Wolves I was where ever I came, yet had none power to touch me
further then what should make for his glory in whom I lived, and the advantage
of that work I was about, which he daily turned to my exceeding joy and great
reward; and his living presence did ever furnish me with renewed strength
against all contrary spirits and the power thereof, and in him I had judgment
and power over them where ever they withstood his pure work.

And in this same life and dominion did he bring me up into this great City
London, into which I entered with the greatest fear that ever into any place I
came, in spirit foreseeing somewhat to befall me therein, but not knowing what
it might be, yet had I the same presence and power as before, into what place
or services soever I was led of the Spirit, in that life I never returned
without victory in Christ Jesus the Lord thereof.

But not minding in all things to stand single and low to the motions of that
endless life, by it to be led in all things within and without, but giving way
to the reasoning part, as to some things which in themselves had no seeming
evil, by little and little drew out my mind after trifles, vanities, and
persons which took the affectionate part, by which my mind was drawn out from
the constant watch and pure fear, into which I was once begotten, and spiritual
adultery was committed against that precious pure life, which had purchased me
unto himself alone, and is grieved with the least departure from him in Body,
Spirit or mind, even that eternal pure and zealous Spirit from above had drawn
me near into himself, and that Pure Word was become my life, who said, He that
does but look upon a woman to lust, commits Adultery, and in whose sight the
least coveting or letting any visible Object into the affections, is Idolatry,
into that life I was comprehended, and the Apple of that pure Eye was opened in
me, which admits not of an evil thought, but is wounded and bruised with the
least appearance of evil, even this birth was born, which reigns through
righteousness, and suffers till all righteousness be fulfilled in every
particular, and this is the Son of God for ever, and into this Life and Kingdom
I was translated, and I was in him that is true, in whom there is no sin, and
He alone Lived and Ruled in this his Temple, which to himself he had purchased
with his precious blood, and his delight was in me, and his presence was
Glorious, and not the least evil could appear, but I could feel him in Spirit
lifting up his witness against it; But when I reasoned against his tender
reproof, and consulted with another, and so let the Creatures into my
affections, then his Temple was defiled through lust, and his pure Spirit was
grieved, and he ceased to reprove, and he gave me up, and his light he
withdrew, and his Judgment took away, and so the body of death and sin revived
again, and I possessed a fresh the iniquities of my youth, and that which had
of old been buried arose and stood against me, and so the Temple was filled
with darkness, and the power of death, and my heart with sorrow, and Satan
daily at my right hand to tempt me further to provoke the Lord, and to take
away my life.

Thus having in a great measure lost my own guide, and darkness being come upon
me, I sought a place where I might have been alone to weep and cry before the
Lord, that his face I might find, and my condition recover, but then my
adversary who had long waited his opportunity had got it, and bestirred himself
every way, so that I could not be hid, and diverse messages came to me in that
case, some true, some false (as I have seen since) so I knowing some to be
true, to wit, how I had lost my condition, with this I let in the false message
also, and so letting go that little of the True Light which I had yet remaining
in my self, I gave up my self wholly to be led by others, whose work was then
wholly to divide me from the Children of Light, which was done, though much was
done by diverse of them to have prevented it, and in bowels of tender love many
labored to have stayed me with them, and after I was led out from them, the
Lord God of my life sent diverse of his servants with his word after me for my
return, all which was rejected, yea the provocations of that time of temptation
was exceeding great against the pure love of God, yet he left me not; For after
I had given my self under that power, and darkness was above, my adversary so
prevailed, that all things was turned and perverted against my right seeing,
hearing or understanding, only a secret hope and faith I had in my God which I
had served, that he would bring me through it and to the end of it, and that I
should again see the day of my redemption from under it all, and this quieted
my soul in my greatest tribulation.

Thus was I led out from amongst the Children of Light, and into the World to
be a sign, where I was chased as a wandering Bird gone from her rest, so was my
soul daily, and my body from one prison to another, til at length I was brought
in their own way, before a backsliding power to be judged, who had lost their
first love, as I had done, so they sentenced me but could not see their sign,
and a sign to the Nation, and a sign to the world of the dreadful day of the
Just God who is come and coming to avenge for that pure life where it is
transgressed, and to plead the cause of that precious Seed where ever it is
oppressed, and suffers under the fleshly lusts of this present World, and the
Cup is deep and very dreadful that is seen and filling, and it has begun at
Gods House, but many must drink it except there be speedy repentance.

And in this time of my darkness and night of great temptation, which
darkness I had let up over my head, and my judgment being much lost, there
got up many wild Spirits, Ranters and such like, acting many evil things
against the Life of Truth and Name of Christ, his Light and People that walk
therein, on purpose to bring reproach thereon, and set themselves to break and
disquiet the Meetings of the People of God, and made use of my name therein;
and others rejoiced thereat and cried Thus would we have it, they are divided
among themselves, this is that we looked for, etc. Others came to me in that
time, in true pity and in sorrow of heart suffered with me for all that was
befallen me and that precious Truth I had walked in.

Thus became I an occasion to make sad the innocent and harmless people,
whose hearts was tender, and to make glad the man that delights in mischief,
and such as rejoice in iniquity, and to gratify many unclean Spirits, which
things the pure God hates, and my soul hates; and all that name that God had
formerly given me in his house, and that power the wicked one made use on
against the Lord and his Lambs, and his Truth, wherein I had received that name
and power, thus I abused my power and knew not, by coming under him who seeks
to pervert the right ways of God, and his Truth to turn into a lie where ever
he gets above, whom the Lord had once trodden under my feet, and all his
instruments, and over the head of all this was I kept by his power, while
singly I stood in his pure council, and humbly walked in his daily fear, the
lose whereof was of my self, and this to his eternal Glory I confess for ever.

So to that precious life of Christ Jesus I confess openly, which I have openly
sinned against, which Life is the light of the World, and all the good that is
in man is from the virtue thereof, which whosoever goes from to feed elsewhere,
forsakes their own mercies, and to this must return and confess again if ever
they come to true peace in God, for this is the peacemaker and the Christ of
God, and the Lamb that takes away sin, and reconciles to the Father of Spirits,
and that Spirit that quickens the dead, of whom I testify for ever, and him I
confess in the night and in the day, before God and before men, who under all
has been my help and Savior, Immortal praises for ever.

And he that has this precious life, has the Son of the eternal God, and
eternal life, and with all that receive him as King and leader, with such the
Father is well pleased, because he alone it is that leads in all holy ways,
and out of all show of lust and uncleanness, and teaches to avoid every
apperance of evil within and without, therefore the pure God loves him above
all in Heaven and Earth, and has placed his fullness in Him, from whom the
living of all ages are to be fed, and what ever good gift any Creature receives
from God the Father, it is in this pure life, and for the sake of this
unspotted seed, and that he alone (that Spirit) may be exalted in all and above
all, not flesh which is grass whose glory turns into dust if this life
withdraw its virtue, and all his wisdom into shame and folly, who goes out from
this light and council, for this life is he which being disobeyed is man's
fall, and his Spirit being grieved is Gods wrath upon every Creature, but in
his favor is length of days and eternal glory, and both these I have learned
in the day and in the night, so I give all glory to the life for ever more, and
to him it is due, and all the evil has been from self.

This life is the Root and offspring of all Heavenly fruit upon Earth, and in
whom this is planted and as it grows, it will bring forth Truth and
Righteousness toward God and man, and the virtue that rises with it, will fill
the Creature with springs of Eternal Life and Heavenly Power, It will cover
thee with health of Salvation and stay thee with Immortal strength, He will
guide thee with council of Life, and open thy mouth in that Wisdom which none
shall confound, yea all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are in Him, and
the Richest excellency that ever appeared in flesh, in him is sealed for all
generations that receive Him in their faith and obedience, and as he rises in
his temples he gives forth of his riches, gifts to adorn his Habitation, and to
cover it with his Light and Glory. But this is the evil in his sight and that
which provoks his pure Spirit, that vain man in whom he thus delights should be
exalted in himself because of the gifts, and glory in his strength and Wisdom,
and so grow wanton against the life from whence he has it, and so through
feeding on the gifts ceases to walk humbly with the giver in his own vessel,
here man forgets his God and so withers at the Root; And be the tree never so
great it will fall in the end, and great will be the fall thereof.

And this is that God against whom I have sinned, and my offense I confess to
the Root that bore me, who raises up the meek and lowly, and casts down him
that boasts above the root, who does what he will in the Heavens and rules
in the Kingdoms of men, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, and he is worthy yea and
will be feared, even so be it for ever more. And what ever of that worship or
honor has any way by any Creature been given or received to my person which
belongs to that Eternal Spirit, for ever by me it is denied and condemned as
Idolatry, And what ever Creature I have at any time gone out to from this pure
Spirit and let in to my affections, or what ever I have taken counsel of
without this life and against it, is for ever condemned as Adultry in my heart,
and so I have found it in his pure sight, to whom I confess for my God and
Savior in all my troubles.

And in whom soever this pure Eternal Spirit of Life throughout the world has
been troubled or offended in man or woman through my fall, or the advantage
which the adversary got against my Soul, Gods truth, and his People, to that in
all I acknowledge mine offense. Against thee have I sinned who was with me in
the deep, and in so many tender hearts for my recovery and salvation, which is
one in all for ever confessed too, and the occasion of the grief thereof for
ever condemned in the presence of God, his Host and People.

But against him that sought my life in that day and rejoiced at that occasion
have I requited no evil in my heart, neither have I opened my mouth before the
Lord that the evil day should haste, who rejoiced at my fall and was glad at
that advantage to pursue my soul into the pit, that I might never have seen
light more, nor have appeared in the Assemblies of them which God has
sanctified on the earth. But in the bowels of him that has born me through all
adversity I have been kept toward them, and I know it is the Spirit of Christ
Jesus which thinks not evil for evil, and when all visible help was removed a
far off, and I in the depth of the pit, then this was with me and in me before
God, which often appeared when all else was gone, and many a time stayed my
soul in secret that it sunk not under the accuser and the weight of his
temptations when I was alone from any creature; and now seeing that the loving
kindness of the Lord has outlived all this enmity, and the long suffering of
Christ Jesus has born to the end thereof, and that endless life has ministered
freedom for me, thereto be glory and praise for evermore, And to God the Father
of all be thanks for ever, who is begetting his creatures into that one pure
Life, and with the cords thereof has bound up as in one bundle so many at this
day who in his living Spirit and Power are made at the needful time to stand
before him with cries and prayers one for another, which he has heard and does
hear, even as he has begotten thereto in every creature, the answer whereof
makes many glad at this day, praises to God everlasting.

And to the glory of this precious life is this sent forth, that all that have
sinned against him may have hope in him and return, whose Judgments are right
and his mercy endures for ever, and that all who have made their graves deep
through disobedience and their darkness thick through lust, might awake and
confess to the Lord of life and come forth, who quickens the dead, at his
word the blind he makes to see, and has called to the great deeps that his
praises may live for ever.

And that all you in whom any measure of this precious life has been betrayed,
either through this or any other thing, that to the light thereof you may
return in your selves, and there wait till the Life arise which is your
return, and which must give you rest with the flock of God, for its the Life
that's the door and the fold, and without it you will be but wanderers and lost
in all your thoughts and motions, and God will cross you and curse you for its
sake and plead against you till you return, if he cast you not off for often
rebellion, from which the Lord keep you; And take heed of evil thoughts to
which you will be tempted, you that are gone out from the true Light, or an
evil eye going out of your own hearts against the truth you once was called
into, or them that walk in it, to spy faults in others and feed thereon, This
food will but strenthen the enmity in you against you and your return, and with
this you may make bonds which you cannot break when you would; And your evil
thoughts are as witchcraft to the pure Life, and as a canker will eat till it
have devoured all that remains in you to lead you to repentance, that not so
much as the place thereof you will find in the end; And this I am moved to warn
you of having been often tempted therewith, that the Life of Peace and Truth
may only live and guide in you all, without which there can be no true unity
with God or his People, which is that the devil chiefly hates and withstands in
all in whom he can prevail.

Thus having drunken a measure of that depth which cannot be measured, I cannot
but confess thereto and declare thereof to his praise, who above all excels
in judgment and mercy to every particular creature, in their several states
and conditions, that all might hear and take heed to abide in him whose
offspring they are, who has his way in the deeps, and makes darkness as light
before him, he turns man to destruction for his disobedience, and the light of
his word is Salvation, and his Life the Resurrection out of the greatest depth,
who has saved my soul from death thus far, and lift my feet up out of the pit,
even to him be immortal glory for ever, and let every troubled soul trust in
him, for his mercy endures for ever.

JAMES NAYLOR.

And in the Day when my God lift my feet out of the Pit, was this given forth.
ITt is in my heart to praise thee O my God, let me never forget thee, what
thou have been to me in the night, by thy presence in the day of trial, when I
was beset in darkness, when I was cast out as a wandering bird, when I was
assalted with strong temptations, then thy presence in secret did preserve me,
and in a low estate I felt thee near me when the floods sought to sweep me
away, Thou set a compass for them how far they should pass over when my way
was through the sea, and when I passed under the mountains, there was thou
present with me, when the weight of the hills was upon me, thou upheld me, else
had I sunk under the earth, when I was as one altogether helpless, when
tribulation and anguish was upon me day and night, and the earth without
foundation, when I went on the way of wrath and passed by the gates of Hell,
when all comforts stood afar off, and he that is mine enemy had dominion, when
I was cast into the pit, and was as one appointed to death, when I was between
the milstones, and as one crushed with the weight of his adversary, as a father
thou was with me, and the Rock of thy presence; when the mouths of lions roared
against me, and fear took hold on my soul in the pit, then I called upon Thee
in the night, and my cries was strong before thee daily, who answered me from
thy Habitation, and delivered me from thy dwelling Place, Saying, I will set
thee above all thy fears, and lift up thy seet above the head of oppression, I
believed and was strengthed, and thy word was salvation, Thou did fight on my
part when I wrestled with Death, and when darkness would have shut me up, then
thy light shone about me, and thy Banner was over my head, when my work was in
the furnace, and as I passed through the fire, by Thee I was not consumed,
though the flames ascended above my head, when I beheld the dreadful visions,
and was amongst the fiery Spirits, thy faith stayed me, else through fear I had
fallen, I saw thee and believed, so the enemy could not prevail.

When I look back into thy works, I am astonished, and sees no end of thy
praises; glory, glory to thee, says my soul, and let my heart be ever filled
with thanksgiving, Whilst thy works remain, they shall show forth thy power.

Then did thou lay the foundation of the Earth, and leadest me under the
Waters, and in the deep did thou show me wonders, and thy forming of the
world; By thy hand thou led me in safety, till thou showed me the pillors of
the Earth, then did the Heavens shoure down, they was covered with darkness,
and the powers thereof was shaken, and thy Glory desended, thou filled the lower
parts of the earth with gladness, and the springs of the valleys were opened,
thy showers descended abundantly, so the earth was filled with virtue, thou
made thy plant to spring, and the thirsty soul became as a watered garden, then
did thou lift me out of the pit, and set me forth in the sight of my enemies;
Thou proclaimed liberty to the captive, and called mine acquaintance near me,
they to whom I had been a wonder looked upon me, and in Thy love I obtained
favor in those who had forsook me, then did gladness swallow up sorrow, and I
forsook all my troubles, and I said, how good is it that man be proved in the
night, that he may know his folly, that every mouth may become silent in thy
hand, until thou make man known to himself, and have slain the boaster, and
showed him the vanity that vexes thy Spirit.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1659.


