A LETTER From a Dissenter to his Friend of the same Peril asion. Being a
Persuasive to a Coalition for the better Establishment of the Protestant
Religion in England.
Licensed and Entered according to Act of Parliament.

AFter the ^^ng ^evere Sco^^ which has been ^a^^ed against the Reformed
Religion, me thinks all true Lovers of the same, should Unite their Pious
Endeavors to procure that happy Calm, which at this Conjuncture we need not
despair to enjoy.

Now among the means probably conducing to this End, You may safely reckon the
Disbanding all the Piques and Prejudices, and the Burial of such Designs, at
have hitherto hindered our Tranquillity, by hindering our Coalition, or being
made one Body with the Church of England. A thing which every good Protestant
ought to promote, and to which he is not only invited by the Dangers to which
our Separation does unavoidably expose us, but by the great Hopes of that
Christian Coalition which the Juncture affords.

And unless Prejudice, that unlucky impediment of informing our selves aright,
be still a Vail-upon our Minds, we cannot but see the many happy steps made
already toward a desirable Coalition.

For first, You well know Sir, that the great pretenses of our Nonconformity,
and Separation from the Church of England, are taken out of the way. And that
we have no longer any Reason to make use of that popular Topic, I mean the
Popishness of her Clergy and Offices:

As to her Clergy, their Behavior and Conduct in these Times of Difficulty and
Trial, have sufficiently cleared them from the imputation of Popishness, or
being popishly affected. For rather than they would betray the least
inclination to that which is properly to be called Popery, or give the least
advantage to the same, They have chosen to venture the loss of their Liberty
and Livelihood; and what they account more dear, even the loss of their Princes
Favor. And of any have Warped, or Shrunk in this Trial, they are such as went
out from us, and were never rightly of them. And as it would be highly unjust,
so it would be altogether unkind, any more to lay Popery to their Charge, who
have by so many Christian Methods, appeared against it. So that this old
stumbling block of Popishness in the Clergy of the Church of England, being
taken out of the way, there is in my judgment, removed one of the greatest
hindrances of our Coalition.

And e're, I leave this Intimation: permit me to put you in mind, to whom we
are indebted for those Excellent Confutations of Popery, the four last years
have produced. I am sure your Pen and mine have lain Fallow, and of those many
of our Party, who heretofore have spoke and writ so much against the Whore of
Babylon, not one has at this needful Season, dropped a Line, or uttered a Word in
public against her. But the Discoveries and Confutations of the Errors,
Superstitions, Idolatries, and Tyrannies of the Church of Rome, are all to be
ascribed to the Genuine Sons of the Church of England. And let me add, That
they have so well managed the Cause, that I wonder any thinking Persons of the
Church of Rome, can any longer tarry in her Communion, if they have impartially
read and considered what has of late been writ against it:

The next thing which we have long Objected against our Conforming to the
Church of England, is the Popishness of her Offices: from which heavy Charge,
nothing can either more compendiously, or more plainly acquitt her, than our
comparing the Offices used in our Churches with those that are used in
Mass-Houses. For since the Popish Priest have been so unwarry as to show their
Religion, those of our party, who have yielded so far to Curiosity, as to go to
see it, cannot but abundantly satisfy themselves, that the Offices used in our
Churches are as different from those used in the Mass-Houses, as a decent and
Edifying Solemnity is from an insipid and Gaudy Pageantry.

But if all this move you not to a Coalition, but that you are still restif
upon the Account of some Things required from you, as Terms of Communion, and
which you cannot so well digest: Then let me put you in mind of the Advances
the Bishops of the Church of England have made toward an happy adjustment of
this Objection.

The Bishops you know, have been the only Order of Men in the Land, of whose
Lordly stifness we have been most afraid. And yet I appeal to your own
Judicious Observation, if ever Men appeared better Champions for the Protestant
Religion, or expressed a more Christian Temper toward Protestant Dissenters.

I will remember you but of three Instances, and to leave you to your own
Lengths.

The first instance is that of the Bishops Petition to the King, in which they
promise a tenderness to Dissenters, and a readiness to exercise the same, when
these are requisite circumstances to make it of moment and significancy to them.

Another Instance, of the Bishops tender regard to Protestant Dissenters, is to
be seen in the two Articles Recommended by the Archbishop of Canterbury to the
Bishops within his Metrapolitan Jurisdiction, and by them recommended to their
Diocesan Clergy. I will set them down in their own Apostolical style.

That they viz. The Clergy walk in wisdom toward those that are not of our
Communion: And if there be in any of their Parishes any such, that they neglect
not frequently to Confer with them in the Spirit of Meekness. Seeking by all
good ways and Means, to Gain and win them over to our Communion; more
especially that they have a very tender regard to our Brethren the Protestant
Dissenters; that upon Occasion offered they visit them at their Houses, and
receive them kindly at their own, and Treat them fairly wherever they meet
them, discoursing Calmly and Civilly with them, persuading them (if it may be)
to a full Compliance with Our Church; or at least, that, whereto we have
already attained, we may all walk by the same Rule, and mind the same Thing.
And in order hereunto that they take all Opportunities of assuring and
convincing them, That the Bishops of this Church are Really and Sincerely
irreconcilable Enemies to the Errors and Superstitions, Idolatries and
Tyrannies of the ^^^^^arch of Rome, and that the very Unkind Jealousies which
some have had of Us to the contrary were altogether groundless.

And in the last place that they warmly and most Affectionately Exhort them, to
join with us in daily ferv^nt Prayer to the God of Peace, for an Universal
Blessed Union of all Reformed Churches; both at home and abroad, against our
Common Enemies, and that all they that do confess the Holy Name of our dear
Lord, and do agree in the Truth of His Holy Word may also meet in one Holy
Communion, and live in perfect Unity and Godly Love.

The last Instance I shall mention of the Fatherly Regard the Bishops bear
toward Protestant Dissenters, is to be met with in their tenth Proposal to the
King, where They Christianly insinuate their Desire, that (...) due Liberty of
Conscience may be Established by a fair and Free-Parliament, and State fettl'd
upon just and solid Foundations. Which is the sum of all You and I can hope or
wish for.

These things I hope, Sir, you will maturely consider and not grumble to make
some Advances toward them, who have made so many toward you. I am heartily
persuaded the Bishops are Real, and will not faulter in one title they have
said. And if we are not wanting to our selves, I doubt not, but that both you
and I, and all Protestant Dissenters, shall reap the Benefit of their Pious
Endeavors. And that they will be better than their word when they have the
happy season for so doing.

And as Things now stand, nothing can hinder our Coalition with the Church of
England, but either our own ill Temper, or the Craftiness of out Enemies: What
I now write is designed to Correct the former; and if I obtain, the latter is
at an End. For if all the Protestants in this Nation Embrace the Advantages
(the Juncture seems to promise) of uniting in one Communion, we may bid
defiance to Devil and Jesuit, to Hell and Rome.

SIR, Your Faithful Friend N. N.
Jan. 5. 1688.
Re printed in the Year, 1689.


