A LETTER FROM OXFORD, CONCERNING MR. SAMVEL IOHNSON's Late BOOK.

(...).

OXFORD, Printed in the Year MDCXCIII.

A Letter from Oxford concerning Mr. SAMUEL JOHNSON's late Book.
ACcording to your Desire I am very willing to give you not only my own
Judgment upon Mr. Iohnson's late Book, but that of others, who are much more
able than I am my self to pass a Judgment of it: You know I live in a Place
where Men of his Principles have been almost universally cried down as Enemies
to the English Monarchy, and consequently to the Church of England, (though
neither you nor I are very clear in that Consequence, if there were any
Foundation of Truth in the Premises) and where every thing that bears his Name,
or that of any other Person who is under the same Prejudice here, was like to
find but cold Entertainment: and yet I can assure you, that this Book has made
some Converts amongst us, such, I mean, who were not our Enemies out of pure
Malice; has staggered others, who were less settled upon their Lees; and has
hardened others in their Impenitency, whose Eyes the God of this World has
blinded, that they cannot believe nor understand.

It is observed in the Acts of the Apostles, and inserted into Holy Writ by the
immediate Inspiration of God's Holy Spirit, as a most notorious Instance of the
Prevalency of the everlasting Gospel of Christ, Cap. 6. Verse. 7.
that a great Company of the Priests were obedient to the Faith: as if they, of
all Men, were the most obdurate and hardest to be wrought upon.

For such is the Infirmity of Mankind, that we must have Men to instruct us in
our Duty; and the Veneration we naturally have for a Deity, carries us
sometimes insensibly and unawares into an implicit blindfold Awe and Respect
for the Persons of those Men who officiate at his Altar, preach his Word to us,
and instruct us out of it in our Duty to him and our Neighbors.

But since God has put this Treasure in earthen Vessels, as St. Paul informs us
(though perhaps that Expression, if it were not in Holy Scripture, might seem
needless, for daily Experience taught us before he was born, and will do to the
End of the World, that so it is) these Dispensers of his holy Word and
Sacraments being Men of like Passions with us, have been apt to take Advantage
of the Credulity of Mankind, and to inculcate things into us in the Name of the
Lord, which the Lord has not said, neither came they into his Heart.

And having once taught us, in the Name of the Lord, Doctrines, which really
are, and which sometimes they themselves know to be but Traditions of Men, (for
I cannot have that Charity for them all, as to believe that they believe
themselves) they are then obliged for the maintaining of their Credit, and by a
spiritual Pride, which is very incident to earthen Vessels, not to retract
those Doctrines, which indeed they cannot do, without giving God or themselves
the Lie, and without betraying the Interest to which they think those Doctrines
subservient. And hence it comes to pass that Clergymen of all others are
hardest to be reclaimed from any Errors that they have once imbarqued in. Their
Interest for the most part lies at stake; their Reputation, as Men of Learning
and Judgment; and above all, as Men entrusted with the Oracles of God.

Accordingly we find by History both Sacred and Profane, that in all Nations,
and in all Ages, the Clergy, whether Pagan, Jewish, Mohammedan, Popish or
Protestant, have mustered all their Force from time to time, to oppose any
Innovations whatsoever, either in Doctrine or Discipline, that have had the
least Color of being Alterations for the better.

The Jewish Clergy crucified our Savior, and persecuted his Apostles and
Disciples, where they had any part of the Civil Power in their own Hands; and
where they had not, they stirred up the Pagan Magistrates to do their Drudgery,
in persecuting the Christians, as appears by the Acts of the Apostles.

The Pagan Clergy opposed Christianity, because if our Savior's Doctrine of
One only God were received, their multiplicity of Gods, and consequently their
several Temples, Altars, Victims, Priesthoods, Profits, Perquisites, Advantages
and Emoluments whatsoever, thereunto belonging, or in any wise appertaining,
would become utterly void and of none effect, to all Intents and Purposes
whatsoever.

How the Popish Clergy opposed the Reformation, and with what weak Arguments,
but under how potent Inducements of another kind, we all know who have looked
but a hundred and fifty, or two hundred Years backward into the History of this
part of Christendom.

Examples of our Protestant Clergy I forbear to mention, because I would not be
invidious; and because we live in an Age, in which Wounds ought rather to be
endeavored to be healed, than to be ripp'd into, and made wider.

But this hint is sufficient to inform us, how great Prejudices the Clergy, of
what kind soever, labor under, with Respect to the maintaining what they have
once espoused and taught; and consequently how great a Credit accrues to any
Truth, by conquering their Prejudices, and gaining them to a Reception and
Entertainment of it.

Which that this Book of Mr. Iohnson's has done in a great Measure in this
University, I can and do assure you; and I will give you an Account by what
Methods their Conviction proceeded, before I give you my own or any Bodies
Censure of the Work it self.

They had their Education under the Reign of the late King Charles the Second,
in whose times all the several Maxims and Principles of Tyranny were set on
foot, and improved to the uttermost; the Government of this Nation represented
as an absolute Monarchy; and that sort of Government endeavored to be proved
the only Government, that had any Foundation in Nature or Scripture. Hence
proceeded the several Branches of Slavery, viz. that the Legislature was vested
in the Person of the Prince only; and the two Houses of Parliament, that of the
Commons especially, as in considerable, as they are represented in the
Beginning of Mr. Iohnson's Preface; the unalterable Right of Succession; the
Irresistibility of Princes; and their darling new-coin'd Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, the Characteristical Mark of the Church of England, to use the Words
of a late Prelate, when he was about to give up the Ghost.

These Principles were then so far countenanced at Court, that the asserting of
them in the Pulpit and in the Press, was then the only way to Preferment in the
Church; and Interest striking in with Education, the poor Gentlemen were tied
Hand and Foot. Their Education was such as had deprived them of Opportunities
to be rightly informed; and their Interest going hand in hand with their
Ignorance, they did not seek after Information.

That which contributed to their Blindness of Mind, was, that some Men, not
merely Speculative and Notional, as Clergymen generally are, the subject
Matter of whose Studies and Enquiries is for the most part wrapped up in the
Clouds, were set at work by the Court to persuade the Nation, that what the
Clergy taught us, as the Law of God, was really and truly the Law of this Realm
likewise.

Our Gentlemen here have not used to trouble their Heads much with humane Laws,
which they are apt to look down upon with Contempt, and account of them as a
Knack only by which one sort of Men amongst us pick Money out of other Men's
Pockets: but they had heard at a Distance of Fundamental Laws, and were very
ready to believe such Men as Brady, Johnson, Filmer, etc. who told them as from
History, Records, and the utmost Antiquity, that our Government was the same by
our Law, that it was or ought to be by their Divinity.

Thus they were lulled asleep, till the Consequences of their Principles came
to stare them in the Face in King James his time: Slavery they could digest,
for that was what they had professedly owned, preached and printed. But they
were not aware that Slavery would bring in Popery, or whatever the Sovereign
had a mind to, till they saw by Experience that a Slave is a Dog that must leap
over a Stick, and back again, as his Master bids him.

Being thus at a stand, and having no Remedy left them but their Prayers and
Tears, it pleased God to stir them up a Deliverer, whom indeed they accepted at
first with open Arms, tho some of them thought afterward he delivered them more
than he needed: however, neither the Providence of God, nor the Authority of
the States of the Realm, nor the Vox Populi would be limited and restrained by
the Dreams of our Men of Theory.

The Revolution being thoroughly wrought, they were glad to find themselves in
the Condition they were in; and as the Wit of Man is fruitful of Inventions,
they cast about how to come in to the Interest of this present Government,
without renouncing what they had formerly so openly avowed to be the Law of
God: and according to their several Judgments, Wits, Apprehensions, Fancies,
Whimsies, Fooleries, etc. one submits to Providence, another to an Usurper,
another to a King de facto, another to a Conqueror: one says, King James left
us; another, we turned him out; another, Gallio-like, cares for none of these
things, but submits to the Powers that are. Now this Book of Mr. Iohnson's has
so effectually, even in their own Judgments, and by their own Acknowledgments,
beat them out of all these weak Strongholds, that they begin to be satisfied,
that what all the rest of Mankind believe, is true; to wit, that there is no
safe Rule for Conscience in Civil Affairs, but the several Laws of Nations: and
this makes them see the necessity of enquiring into our Laws, if they will be
Dogmatical in Matters of this nature, or else of submitting their Judgments to
the States of the Realm Assembled in Parliament.

This great Work Mr. Iohnson's Book has done with many here: it has convinced
them that Law is Law; and that heretofore they did not understand the
difference betwixt Law and no-Law. And this Conviction having put some of them
upon bending their Studies toward an Enquiry into the Laws of this Government,
we may hope to see fulfilled what was said by the Prophet; The Priest's Lips
should keep Knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his Mouth, for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

The two Positions which Mr. Johnson lays down in the beginning of his short
Book, at the end of his Preface, viz.

That the People of England did actually Dethrone King James the Second for
Misgovernment, and promoted the Prince of Orange in his stead: And,

That this Proceeding was according to the English Constitution, and prescribed
by it; Have used to be traduced by our Clergy as Republican Principles; and as
such are branded by a Reverend Prelate of our Church, in a Preface of his to
three Treatises concerning the Jesuits Loyalty: Where, according to the Genius
of the Court, as it then was, he expresses himself thus; viz. It is allowed by
all Friends to our King and his Government, that the Commonwealth-Principles
are destructive to it; and that none who own them, can give any sufficient
Security for their Allegiance. All the mischievous Consequences of the
Republican Principles, do follow upon the Pope's owning the Power of deposing
Princes. However, the Primitive Christians thought it no Flattery to Princes,
to derive their Power immediately from God, and to make them accountable to him
alone, as being superior to all below him; yet after the Pope's Deposing Power
came into Request, the Commonwealth-Principles did so too, and the Power of
Princes was said to be of another Original, and that therefore they were
accountable to the People. These Principles and Practices we of the Church of
England profess to detest and abhor. The Power of the People, and the Deposing
Power of the Pope, are two fundamental Principles of Rebellion. The
Commonwealth's-men, when they are asked, how the People, having once parted
with their Power, come to resume it? presently run to an implicit CONTRACT
betwixt the Prince and the People, by virtue whereof the People have a
fundamental Power left in themselves, which they are not to exercise, but upon
Princes Violation of the Trust committed to them. Who made Conditional
Settlements of Civil Power upon Princes? Who keeps the ancient Deeds and
Records of them? For in all the first Ages of the Christian Church, this
Conditional Power and Obedience was never heard of.

Here we see the Foundation upon which this Government stands, and under which
this Author has accepted Preferment; and all the Proceedings of the Lords and
Commons, and of the People, toward the effecting the late Revolution, are
branded as Republican Principles, destructive to the Government; such as none
who own, can give sufficient Security for their Allegiance; such as the Church
of England professes to detest and abhor; a CONTRACT betwixt Prince and
People, turned into Ridicule, and what not?

Now this Gentleman took another Course in his Politics, than Mr. Johnson has
done: A few Years after he wrote this Preface, he might perhaps enquire a
little into our Ancient Laws and Government; which it is to be presumed he was
in a great measure in the dark concerning, when he let fly thus at random
against Republican Principles of his own Christning. If he had consulted the
Examples of our Forefathers, and the Provisions made by them from time to time,
even with the Concurrence and Assent, and by the Authority of our Princes
themselves, for the securing the Laws and Liberties of the People, and for a
due and impartial Administration of Justice, according to settled and
established Laws; he would hardly have traduced Positions, as new upstart
Commonwealth-Principles, which have so deep a Root in the Legal Government of
this Nation; and which whoever shall deny, does, as far as in him lies, set
this present Government upon a rotten, sandy Foundation. He would then perhaps
have learned to practice what he tells us the best Teachers of Christianity
did, viz. They never meddled with Crowns and Scepters, but left Mankind under
those Forms and Rules of Civil Government, in which they found them. What
greater and better Argument can be given against Church-mens introducing
Religion or Christianity into the Forms and Rules of Civil Government, than
what this Gentleman acknowledges, viz. that our Savior and his Apostles
meddled not with it? They left the several Civil Governments to depend upon
their own Laws, Policies, and Constitutions; and there, and no where else, are
we to seek for a Rule and Guide to our Consciences in Matters relating to
Allegiance and Protection, the Power of the Prince, and the Duty of Subjects.

I am not here professedly taking upon me to maintain either of Mr. Iohnson's
Positions, which no Man is better able to make good than himself; though there
is no great need of his undertaking it neither, unless some or other should
have the Impudence to contradict him.

But I must beg leave to observe that heretofore under the Reigns of Princes,
whose Accession to the Throne was occasioned by the Removal of their
Predecessors; the Doctrine contained in Mr. Iohnson's second Position, was
never looked upon as dangerous to Princes, but countenanced and openly a vowed.

In the first Year of King Edward the Third, there are these observable Words
in a Stature of that King, viz. Whereas it was necessary for our Sovereign Lord
the King that now is, and the Queen his Mother, seeing the Destructions,
Damage, Oppressions and Disherisons, which were notoriously done in the Realm
of England, upon Holy Church, Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and
the Comminalty, by the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert and Edmund Arundel, by the
incroaching of such Royal Power to them, to take as good Counsel therein as
they might. And seeing they might not remedy the same, unless they came into
England with an Army of Men of War; and by the Grace of God, and with such
Puissance, and with the Help of Great Men and Commons of the Realm, they have
vanquished and destroyed the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert and Edmund. Wherefore
our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, at his Parliament holden at
Westminster, etc. has provided, ordained and established, That no Great Man
nor other, of what Estate, Dignity or Condition he be, that came with the said
King that now is, and with the Queen his Mother into the Realm of England; nor
none other then dwelling in England, that came with the said King that now is,
and the Queen in Aid of them, to pursue their said Enemies, IN WHICH PURSUIT
THE KING HIS FATHER WAS TAKEN AND PUT IN WARD, AND YET REMAINS IN WARD, shall
not be impeached, molested nor grieved in Person, nor in Goods, in the King's
Court, nor other Court, FOR THE PURSUIT OF THE SAID KING, TAKING AND
WITHHOLDING OF HIS BODY, nor Pursuit of any other, nor taking of their Persons,
Goods, etc.

This same Parliament reversed the Attainders of several Persons who had
assisted Thomas Duke of Lancaster, toward the Removal of the Spencers, Father
and Son, from the Presence and Councils of King Edward the Second, and
particularly the Attainder of Thomas Duke of Lancaster himself, who, as Lord
High Steward of England, had betaken himself to Arms, to drive the Spencers out
of the Realmor to bring them to Justice, and had given the King Battle. And
they not only reverse his Attainder, but in a Letter to the Pope, give an
Account of his Worth, of the Justice of his Cause, that he died a Martyr, that
Almighty God had been pleased to give a Testimony of his Innocence, etc. by
permitting several Miracles to be wrought at his Tomb, which they desire the
Pope to issue a Commission, to enquire whether they were real or not, and to
canonize him for a Saint. The Reversal of his Attainder, and this Letter, are
yet extant upon Record.

Nor could I ever meet in any of our Histories or Monuments, that give any
Account of that Revolution, that King Edward the Third claimed the Crown,
either by Conquest, though he came from beyond Sea with a Force too, and routed
and dispersed those evil Counselors who had got the King into their Interest;
or by Right of Inheritance, though he was indeed the next Heir, but could have
no Title by Descent, as long as his Father was alive; or that any other
Hypothesis was invented to color his Accession to the Crown, than what was
really true in Fact, which was no other than his being set up by the States of
the Realm, who had deposed his Father for his Misgovernment, upon formal
Articles of Impeachment, which are yet to be seen in Adam Orleton's Apology, at
the end of Henry Knighton's Chronicle: Much less would that King have endured
such as should charge him to his Face with Usurpation, and that he was a King
de facto only, but not de jure.

We know how his Successor, King Henry the 4th, treated a couple of Prelates
that opposed his Title, which was the same with that of his Grandfather, the
Victorious King Edward the Third. The Bishop of Carlisle was proceeded against
in Parliament, and sentenced to Death, though the King was pleased to remit
that. But for the Archbishop of York, the more virulent and bitter Adversary of
the two, he made no more ado, but chopp'd his Head off.

Queen Elizabeth's Title to the Crown was by virtue of a Remainder settled upon
her by Act of Parliament; other she had none, nor ever pretended to any, for
she stood Illegitimated by an Ecclesiastical Sentence confirmed by Act of
Parliament: And so sure a Title she took this to be, and was so little ashamed
to own it, that it was made Higk-Treason, during her Reign, to deny that the
Succession of the Crown might be altered by Act of Parliament, and a Praemunire
for ever.

I mention these things, because we hear, to our Astonishment, that Mr.
Iohnson's Book is not well received at Court; where, of all other places, in
our poor Opinions, it ought to meet with the kindest Entertainment, because it
justifies his Majesty's Proceedings, which were previous to the Revolution; and
represents him, as the Truth is, to be a King, who has a Just and a Legal Right
to the Crown by the Laws of this Realm.

By what Logic it can be made ill Doctrine, to assert the Lawfulness of
removing bad Princes under the Government of good Ones, and those such, as upon
a supposition of the Unlawfulness of removing bad Ones, can have no good Title
to the Crown themselves, is what we cannot easily comprehend. But I have ever
thought that Courtiers see farther into a Millstone than other Men, and that
their way of Reasoning differs from that of the rest of Mankind, since I saw
King Charles the Second heal: I took notice, that when the King put the Gold
about their Necks that came to be Touched; the Bishop repeated over and over
these Words out of St. John's Gospel, viz. This is the true Light, which
enlightneth every Man that comes into the World. I asked a Courtier what
relation the meaning of those Words could have to such an Occasion? And he told
me, that I interpreted Scripture like a Peasant, and did not understand the
Court-Interpretation of Scripture.

But this Court, we think, would do well to consult their Master's Honor and
Safety more, than to sacrifice both to the Interest, or indeed but the supposed
Interest of a Party of Men, who in their Principles are his avowed Enemies, and
consequently are obliged to be so in their Practice, if an Opportunity ever
present it self; and who of all Mankind are seldomest in the right.

By discountenancing Mr. Iohnson's Discourse, they wound their Master's Honor
in a double Respect; both his own personal Honor, and that of his Family.

His personal Honor, by contradicting him in his Declarations, and blemishing
the Concurrence of others with him, to promote the Ends of his Expedition.

The Honor of his Family, by casting Dirt upon a Principle, which raised it to
so great an Eminency in the Low Countries, as that both his Majesty's Father
and himself married into a Royal Family; by which his Majesty had an
Opportunity, and has happily laid hold of it, to rescue a Distressed Nation
from Tyranny and Oppression, and thereby to make so Illustrious a Figure as he
does at present in this part of the World.

His Majesty accepted kindly that Learned and Ingenious Gentleman's Compliment
to him, upon the singular and transcendent Honor, bereditary to his Family, of
being the Champions of Almighty God, sent forrh in several Ages to vindicate
his own Cause from the greatest Oppressions. Which he and they have no
otherwise done, than by espousing the Cause of Laws in opposition to the
Exorbitancy of Princes, who obstinately declined to make them the Rule of their
Government.

How far they endanger their Master's Safety, I pray God, neither his Majesty
nor we may learn by woeful Experience.

In short, either let them give his Majesty (say we) a legal Title to the
Crown, which he cannot have but by the Laws of the Realm, which are the
Foundation upon which every Government is built, that is not a Tyranny; or let
them speak out roundly, and say in plain Terms, that he is an Usurper, Plain
Dealing's a Jewel.

One Consideration more I will add before I leave this Head; and that is, that
Trajan the Emperor, one of the greatest beyond dispute, and perhaps one of the
worthiest and most excellent Princes that ever swayed a Scepter, was so little
concerned whether his Subjects thought themselves obliged to yield Obedience to
Tyrants or not, that one of his chief Favorites, and who knew his Mind very
well, scrupled not to vent these bold and generous Truths in a Panegyric made
in his own Audience; viz.

Tuam Statuam in Vestibulo Iovis Optimi Maximi, unam alteramve and hanc aeream,
cernimus. At paulo ante aditus omnes, omnes gradus, totaque area hinc auro,
hinc argento relucebat, seu potius polluebatur; quum incesti Principis statuis
permixta Deorum simulachra sorderent. Ergo istae quidem aereae and paucae
manent, manebuntque quamdiu Templum ipsum; illae autem aureae and innumerabiles
strage and ruina publico gaudio litaverunt. Iuvabat illidere solo superbissimos
vultus, instare ferro, saevire securibus, acsi singulos ictus sanguis dolorque
sequeretur, (here the Author in the hearing of an excellent Prince, describes
the Multitude tearing a Tyrant to pieces in Imagination, and does it with Joy
and Triumph:) (...) tam tem^erians gaudii seraeque L^^titiae, quin instar
ulti^nis videretur, cernere laceros artus, truncatamembra; postremo truces,
horrendusque imaginis abjectas, excoctasque flammis, ut ex illo terrore and
minis in usum hominum and voluptates mutarentur.

And a little after, Quum de malo Principe posteri tacent, manifestum esteadem
facere praesentem.

Then he puts Trajan into the same Class with Brutus, who was instrumental in
delivering Rome from the Tyranny of the Tarquins, and him that helped to kill
Julius Caesar in the Senate: Visuntur eadem ex materia Caesaris Statuae, qua
Brutorum, qua Camillorum. Nec discrepat causa. Illi enim Reges Hostemque
Victorem moenibus depulerunt: hic Regnum ipsum, quaeque alia captivitas gignit,
arcet ac submovet; sedemque obtinet Principis ne sit Domino locus.

And whereas the Author of the Preface to the three Treatises, makes a Jest of
Conditional Settlements of Power, Pliny tells us, that the public Prayers for
this Emperor were conceived conditionally, viz. Si been Rempublicam and ex
utilitate omnium rexerit.

He applauds him for countenancing and Tre^^^^ring the Posterity of such as had
signalized themselves in asserting the Laws and Liberties of their Country. An
aliud a te quam senatus reverentia obtinuit, ut juvenibus clarissimae gentis,
debitum generi honorem, sed antequam deberetur, offerres? Tandem ergo Nobilitas
non obscuratur, sed illustratur a Principe; tandem illos ingentium Virorum
nepotes, illos posteros Libertatis, nec terret Caesar, nec pavet; quinimo
festinatis bonoribus amplificat atque auget, and majoribus suis reddit.

He tells him that no Prince can be acceptable to God, who has not the Love of
the People, and that therefore Trajan had concluded his Vota public^ nuncupata,
ut ita precibus suis Dii annuerent, si Iudicium Populi mereri perseverasset.
Adeo (says Pliny) nihil tibi amore civium antiquius, ut ante a nobis, deinde a
Diis, atque ita ab illis amari velis, si a nobis ameris. Et sane priorum
Principum exitus docuit, ne a Diis quidem amari, nisi quod homines ament.

And at the end of his Panegyric the Author prays to Jupiter Capitolinus to
preserve the Emperor to them and their Posterity, upon the same Condition; Si
been Rempublicam, si ex utilitate omnium rexerit.

And all these Principles were good Doctrine under the Reign of a good Prince;
one, who when he delivered the Sword to the Commander in chief of the Pretorian
Cohorts, gave it him with this Charge, viz. to use for him, if he deserved it:
if not, to use it against him.

As Mr. Johnson tells us truly, that Passive Obedience is calculated for
Tyranny, so are the opposite Principles calculated for Liberty under a Free
Government. Nor can any Prince be afraid of them, who is not conscious to
himself that his Government is such, as deserves to have the Effects of them
brought home to his door: and therefore whoever assert them under the Reign of
a Just Prince, put the greatest Affront upon him imaginable, for
consequentially they call him a Tyrant to his face.

I have argued with some of our Iure-Divino-Men upon this Topic, viz. That
Passive Obedience is directly against the Law of the Nation, by which all
Persons whatsoever, who act by virtue of any Authority derived from the Prince,
must act at their Peril; for that if such Authority, Writ, Commission, or
whatever it is, be not warranted by Law, the Persons who put it in execution,
are Trespassers, and if they meet with Opposition, and kill the Opponents, are
Murderers, because they acted without any Authority at all? for an illegal
Commission is a void Commission, and a void Commission is no Commission.
Whereas, according to our Passive-Obedience-Gentlemen, a void Commission, which
our Law says ought not to be obeyed, does yet command our Obedience, equally
with a Commission warranted by Law, because it proceeds, forsooth, from the
Authority of the Sovereign.

They have not been able to deny, being thus pressed, that Passive Obedience
has no Foundation in the ancient Laws of this Realm; and have betaken
themselves to a few Clauses in an Act or two of Parliament made since the
Restoration of King Charles the Second: The one is the Corporation-Oath,
whereby is renounced the Traitorous Position of taking up Arms by the King's
Authority against his Person, OR AGAINST THOSE THAT ARE COMMISSIONED BY HIM.

Besides that this Oath is now taken away by an Act of Parliament in the first
Year of their present Majesty's Reign, they would do well to remember what
passed in the House of Lords in the Year 1675, when great Endeavors were used
to have this Oath imposed as a Test upon the whole Nation; what was then
alleged against it; and that the Bill was thereupon thrown out of the House.
But the chief thing that I now think fit to mention, is, that in the very sense
of the Parliament which passed it, Persons Legally Commissioned were
understood, and no others: for it met with main Opposition in the House of
Commons; and in particular Sir Edward Vaughan, who was afterward Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, made a long Speech, in which he showed
that by the Law the People of England not only might, but in some Cases were
bound to take up Arms against Persons Commissioned by the King; and that
Sheriffs of Counties were bound, if it could be done no otherwise, to raise the
Posse Comitatus to oppose and suppress all such as should put any such illegal
Commissions in Execution, if they proceeded so far as to compel Obedience to
them; for then they became Rioters, and subject to the several Acts of
Parliament made for the suppressing of such Offenders. To which Sir Heneage
Finch, then Solicitor General, and afterward Earl of Nottingham, and Lord
Chancellor of England, who was a great promoter of the Bill, made no other
Answer but this, viz. That the word Legally needed not be inserted, for that it
must of necessity be understood to be implied, because Persons not Legally
Commissioned, were not Commissioned at all. Upon which the Bill passed. And for
the truth of this I appeal to the Memories of some who are yet alive, and were
Members of that Parliament, and present in the House at this Debate.

The same Oath, with very little Alteration in Words, is in the Act for
ordering the Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom, commonly called
the Militia-Act: The Alteration is this, OR AGAINST THOSE THAT ARE COMMISSIONED
BY HIM, IN PURSUANCE OF SUCH MILITARY COMMISSIONS Those Military Commissions
are Commissions of the Lieutenancy, which we know to be settled and regulated
by a Law; and therefore to swear not to oppose them, is no more than to swear
not to fight against an Act of Parliament.

The rest are cursory Expressions in the Preambles of an Act or two, which we
know do not make a Law.

But I fear the Fountain of the Errors that our Clergy have run into upon this
Subject, is their framing to themselves an Idol of their own invention, instead
of a Legal English King. This Cheat was discovered early in the 7 th Year of
the Reign of K. James the First, and complained of in an Apology of the House
of Commons in those Days; viz. That instead of enquiring into what Power,
Authority and Prerogatives the Kings of England enjoy by the Laws of this
Nation, our Men of speculative Heads had framed to themselves a general Notion
of the word King, as a Genus; had given it a Definition, and brought all Kings,
and other single supreme Magistrates as Individuals, under that Definition.

By which Means the Laws and Constitutions of Nations were silenced; and
whatever Government had a single Person at the Head of it, was equally subject
to that single Person, however their several Laws and Constitutions
respectively might limit and restrain his Power.

This pernicious as well as senseless Hypothesis strikes at the Root of
whatever the Church is possessed of in Temporals, as well as at the Liberty and
Property of Lay-Subjects: for the Clergy have no Privileges, Jurisdictions,
Endowments, etc. but what are conferred upon them, and secured to them by Law;
which Law if they subject to the Personal Power of the Prince, their Enjoyment
of them is precarious, and they have nothing but his good Nature to depend upon.

Not to mention the Ingratitude they show, in having received so ample
Endowments from the Charity of our Ancestors, who thought themselves
Proprietors of their Estates, out of which they provided so liberally for them,
and yet endeavoring to inslave their Masters, and render their Liberty and
Property precarious.

But St. Paul's Words to Timothy are verified in these Men, viz. Desiring to be
Teachers of the Law, they understand neither what they say, nor whereof they
affirm.

We could wish that Mr. Johnson had enlarged his Book with what he does but
hint at, and barely mention, I mean the Doctrine of the Mirror, the
Confessor's Laws, the Curtana Sword, and the Power of the Lord High Steward,
and other great Officers of the Kingdom: but particularly that he had given us
an Account of the Authority of the Lord High Steward, concerning which Great
Officer we find but some few Scraps here and there in any printed Book; but
they are such as give us good Cause to believe that he was farther entrusted
and empowered to redress Misgovernment in the State, than our Clergy are
generally aware of; and tho there be no such standing Officer at this Day, yet
there having been such an one, it would do well if we were informed both
wherein his Office did particularly consist, and how it came to be disused.

The Style of Mr. Iohnson's Preface offends some amongst us, as too light and
wanton for the Gravity of the Subject; others, as making too bold with his
Superiors by personal Reflections. To the former, we who are his Friends, give
this Answer, That it is a very hard Matter for an Author to keep his Gravity,
when he thinks he has nothing but Nonsense to encounter with. To the second,
That his Sufferings having been so considerable, and perhaps his Disappointment
so too, he may the better be allowed a Freedom of his Pen, in treating those,
whom perhaps he may look upon either personally, or in their Principles, to
have been instrumental in either.

Where we find so much Truth, so much Integrity, and such Strength of Reason,
as appears in every Page of his Discourse, we can easily dispense with humane
Infirmities, if more had really intervened, than what we hear are objected
against him.

SIR, I am Your humble Servant, N. N.

FINIS.

