A Second Packet OF ADVICES AND ANIMADVERSIONS Sent to the men of SHAFTSBURY.

OCCASIONED By several Seditious PAMPHLETS Spread abroad to pervert the People,
since the publication of the former Packet.

PLUTARCH. Inest omni Populo malignum quid, and querulum in Imperantes. Printed
at London, and are to be sold by JONATHAN EDWIN, at the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street. 1677.

A SECOND PACKET OF ADVICES and ANIMADVERSIONS Sent to the men of SHAFTSBURY.
London, May 7. 1677. SIRS,
WE are here in a New world, a world of Quiet, as you say you are in the
Country; and it is come about we know not how, unless it be that God, in
kindness to these Kingdoms, and this City, was pleased to furnish his
Majesty, and his Ministers, and his Parliament, with Wisdom extraordinary, to
divert a Design that had been long a brewing, by some persons both in and out
of Parliament; in the first place to embroyl the Parliament within it Self; and
then, as the natural Consequence of that, the three Kingdoms also inevitably in
another Civil War. I know every particular man of them will be ready to say to
me, as Hazael did to the Prophet, Is thy servant a dog, that he should do such
things? that he should design, in doing what he did, to bring on a Civil War?
But let the Philosopher answer him with an old Axiom, Qui vult Media ad Finem,
vult etiam and ipsum Finem, He who wills the Means tending to the End,
wills also the End it self.

If any one of the Projectors did such things, as have been observed, in all
times, to induce a War, then without question that person meant the bringing on
of a War, if he could not otherwise bring about his own Ends: and it is easy to
believe also, that he drew in as many as he could to accomplish those Ends. If
the same Opinions and Principles that brought on the First War, be now again
abroach, have we not cause to believe they meant, or may mean a Second? If the
same Faction be at work again that contrived the First War, and they as severe
with the King as they were with his Father in disputing his Royalty; seminating
Fears and Jealousies among the People, and new trimming the old Bridle and
Saddle of Presbytery, to run down the Bishops, circumcise the Crown, set Christ
in the Throne (as they ever most Hypocritically pretended, to the shame of
Christianity) thereby to ride King and Lords, and out-rant the Kingdom: If
these things were designed and transacted, the Party formed and ready
instructed by Pamphlets spread in City and Country, and their hearts full of
hope before the Session of Parliament in February last to have accomplished
their work, shall we yet doubt of their Intent because they did not effect it?
There is reason enough to inform our understanding, That they gave us the
Premises, though they could not the Conclusion.

If it be objected, that abundance of the engaged men, and most of those that
seemed to favor the Faction, were never known to be affected for Presbytery,
nor meant they any such thing: To this I answer, It Is no matter whether they did
affect and mean it, or no; we know what they must have done at last: For, if
they once be drawn in to vote and act along with a Party, whose business has
been by Prints and otherwise, to cry down the National Church Government of
Bishops, they must of necessity, after they come to be thoroughly engaged, run
along with them to overthrow it, and erect the other in its room; they two,
viz. Episcopacie and Presbytery, being in the Protestant Churches the only
Competitors for the National Form: and as long as our Nation is, and is ever
like to be, for the having of some such Form, if the prime Leaders and
Projectors lead you by the nose to the driving out the one Form, they are not
such shallow Politicians, as not to understand that you, as well as they, will,
of course, be necessitated to set up the other: And your Leaders also
themselves, though perhaps they care for no Form nor Church, yet if they will
hold the ground they may hap to get by your help; toward their own greatness
and advantage, will be under the same necessity of setting it up, though they
really never liked it, nor intended it before: yea, it is not improbable they
may hap to come unto such a pass as to think well of the old Form again, after
they by ruining it have obtained their own ambitious ends, provided it may
serve them better than any other Form, toward the maintaining of them.

A most pregnant Instance of such a probability we have in the late Game played
by Cromwell; who was one of the first for pulling down Bishops, and effected it;
and though he set up no Form Ecclesiastic in their stead, as long as he could
carry on his Greatness without it; yet after he had gained his Protectorship,
he began to think of such a Form to please the Nation; which not being to be
done by an absolute Presbyterial One, it being under an equal abhorrence both
amongst Royalists and Independents, I have been told, he cast about another way
to accommodate the matter; and that having but one step higher to make, he
meant, that once done, to have taken up a Church-form as like the Episcopal as
might be, by mincing a Medley of Bishop and Presbyter together; so that after
all, we should have had Bishops again; only they were to have had a new Name,
Superintendents, as they are called in some other Reformed Churches: that is,
in plain English, a Chairman to a Committee of Presbyters; that is to say, a
Bishop in Shackles; and consequently, a Monarch in Bonds, under the
Argier-Presbyterian Discipline.

(Sic idem jungat Vulpes, and mulgeat Hircos.) Which had he lived to effect, he
would have gained as much by it, as he that designs the milking of He-goats,
and going to plow with Foxes. For though his device might have served to please
the ambition of some of his Committee of Clergie-Triers which then sat in
Whitehal, by translating them to the Dignity of new-fashion'd Bishops; yet it
could never have agreed long with his own high Constitution, to have born such
a Clog upon Government: So that he and they, after a little experience, would
easily have agreed to part Stakes; the one to resume the old Name and Power of
Bishop, the other of King; and so to have left all the Factions in the lurch,
(so said my Author) as the likeliest way to have pleased the People, and
themselves too. And it may very well serve to instruct our little world
concerning the fair Issue of a foul Civil War; and teach them what may be
expected from another, if ever we should be so fond as to believe our new
Patriots, or be so mad after Change hereafter.

In the mean while, it is very pleasant to look back as far as February, to
contemplate the wisdom of the Projectors and their Party, and upon what fine
subtle Suppositions they grounded their matchless Confidence.

They supposed, and that most politickly, That a whole Nation had lost its
memory of things past; the Parliament its Loyalty; the Court its Understanding;
the King all care of his Crown and his People's Interest; the Clergy their
care of the Church; the City their Prudence; the Country their Senses; and
that one little Rook had run away with all the wisdom and honesty in the Land;
and that downright Treacheries, petty Cunnings, and plain Knaveries, may pass
in this Age, to entitle a man to the reputation of Politic Prudence, which
ought to be reverenced as a glorious Beam of Divine wisdom, which never shines
but in generous and faithful Spirits, and is never to be found but in the
Temples of true Honor and Virtue.

They supposed moreover very cunningly; That Monarchies which used of old to
last about Five hundred years, could not live now above Twenty: And that one
and the same People might in one and the same Age, be cheated with the same
Tricks: And that to bring this about, three Kingdoms, with three or four gay
Speeches turned into Printed Paper-kites, might be led in a string as the Boys
are by theirs; and that no other Kite of the same Strain could be found to
encounter 'em.

They supposed likewise, That if a Lord or two would but turn Tenants in the
City, and drive a Trade of Popularity upon the Old Exchange, their Lordships,
being better metal than ordinary Citizens, might be less liable to Breaking:
and that they could not choose but thrive, though every Body knew they were
going to set up with no better Stock of Interest and Wit, than of those that
had broken before 'em.

They yet more wittily supposed; That whereas our old World was (as they
thought) to have been drowned again, all their Creatures, though of different
kinds, and enemies to each other, would most tamely and lovingly concur into
the New Ark: Also that in the midst of this Flood, the City and Kingdom might
be set on fire, provided it were by Parliament-Wildfire; and that then they
might ring the Bells backward with a Rope of Sand; and that when the Combustion
should be over, they might safely put in execution their pious Project of
raising a new Fabric, as good and lasting as the former Republican, with the
most elegant mixture of all manner of Sects; every jot as agreeable for
building Castles in the air, as lays of Ginger-bread and Marble, with
untemper'd Mortar.

And for a final Crowning of the whole work, they once more supposed; That for
carrying on the World again after all this destruction, there might be a
coupling of Beasts of Mortal Antipathies, to replenish the Land.

So much for Drolling with our Politic Drolls; for this kind of Dress very
well becomes 'em.

Now in good earnest for Animadversion: And here I know not which end to begin
at, the Subjects are so many: which is strange; for, I thought this kind of
work would have been over; that the Faction would have been taken down by the
late Correction. But behold incorrigible Malice against the whole Government,
and new Attempts in Print, a swarm of Pamphlets, to revive their Design, and
seduce the People: Some printed a little before, and one so late as since the
time of the Battle of the Prince of Orange.

You may remember, the business of the first PACKET was to strip the Faction
out of all their Fine Pretenses and Projects, which were delicately laid for
Storming the Government; and the Lines of Circumvallation were drawn in Print,
after the Model of their Master-Engineers in FORTY ONE; they began also to make
their Approches after the same manner. They first fell upon the Episcopal
Quarter, and to that end they charged their Pamphlets here with all manner of
Scandals against the Bishops, and sent them to their Friends in the Country.
Next, they fell upon the Kings Court, His Favorites, and the chief Officers of
State, not sparing the King Himself; and then upon His High Court of
Parliament, using all manner of Devices to embroil the two Houses, and so
entangle Affairs, that one Session was frustrated after another; so that no
Public Business could be dispatched, nor Supplies be had, to answer the most
urgent Necessities of the King and Kingdom: by which means the present
Parliament was made in a manner useless: and the Word was given out to the
Multitude, to make an Outcry for a new One. All which Contrivances are to bear
Date from the time of one small States-man's being turned out of Service, as
has been already sufficiently manifested. He and his Complotters cut out all
this work before this last February-Session; others that became troublesome
after the Parliament then sat down, were but his Journey-men. For then, seeing
he had failed in all the former Inventions, to skrue on a New Parliament by
breaking the neck of this, some Friends that had been pettifogging among
Half-witted Lawyers, undertook to furnish him with Weapons; that is to say,
Arguments drawn out of Old Statutes, which have lain Dormant some Hundreds of
years without execution or notice, to prove this Parliament null or Dissolved,
because they cannot bring it to their Bow; and that a luckie new one, so much
longed for by the Faction, ought to be called forthwith; they being confident
to carry away the Bell at new Elections, to create a House of Commons that
shall do their Business one way, and the King's another, or not at all. In
pursuance whereof, they have sent abroad other new Pamphlets, which I now shall
make bold to encounter as they come in my way, though it is reported one or two
of them were written by one Lord, and that by another Lord the rest were
promoted to the Penning, and then to the Press in a private corner.

The first remarkable Pamphlet sent abroad, with intent to break the Neck of
this Parliament, is entitled, Some Considerations upon the Question, Whether
the Parliament is dissolved by its Prorogation for Fifteen Months: And the
Title Page further says, that the two Statutes upon which this Question
depends are,

4 EDW. 3. Cap. 14. Item, it is accorded, That a Parliament shall be holden
every year once, and more often if need be. 36 EDW. 3. Cap. 10. Item, for
maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redress of diverse Mischiefs
and Grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every year, as
another time was ordained by Statute. ANIMADVERSION.
From these Statutes the substance of what the Author argues is; That if the
King be obliged by Law to hold a Parliament once every year, then he ought to
call a new one every year. And if so, then he cannot Prorogue one Parliament
above the Term of a year. But the last Prorogation of this present Parliament
having been for Fifteen Months, which is Three Months beyond what the ancient
Law and Custom allows for one Parliaments sitting: Therefore that Prorogation
being contrary to those Statutes, the Parliament it Self must needs die, and
can continue no longer to act as a Parliament, being by Law extinct and
Dissolved. This is the Sum of what the Faction alleges to destroy this
Parliament.

Lord! what a Thing is Pedantism in every Profession! The shame and reproach of
every Science and Sort of Learning; especially of this of the Law; and more
especially of that part of it which concerns the Constitution of the Crown and
Kingdom, to the prejudice whereof no Construction of Law whatsoever ought to be
made, or will be made by any wise and weighty man. But there are a sort of
little Pedants, whose shallow Brains want Line and Plummet to sound the depth
of matters; whose Skulls are too narrow to comprehend the utmost Scope of Law:
these are a sort of Creatures that are wont to be carried away with mere Sounds
of words; are too apt to be Captivated by Fancy, and mistake it to be
Understanding, as it is the manner of the profane Vulgar of this and every
Profession; and so not being fit to get Public employment from a King, are of
little use but to torment the Law, by wresting it for the service of such as
are Factious and Seditious in his Kingdom. But now for an Answer to their
Argument, take notice in the first place; That in all the Books lately printed
by this sort of men, to pervert the People's opinion against the legal
continuance of this Parliament, they are very careful to tickle them with
frequent mentions of ancient Laws, the good old Laws and ancient Customs of
England, and the like Phrases; which make a noise, and great Noises usually
take the weaker sort of people; yea, and engage them too, they believing of
course that where most Clamor is, there must needs be most Right, especially
if it be thought that the wisdom of our Forefathers, and their practice, be
concerned in the Case. As for the Antiquity of Politic Constitutions, I
believe our Predecessors acted as far as they understood; and perhaps they
understood what was convenient in their time and state of affairs to be done;
but certainly they could not be so unwise as to do it eo animo, with an intent
to tie up Posterity to the same Rules as were then used, it being utterly
impossible in matters which relate to administration of Government; because in
the Torrent of Time there flow down innumerable Accidents both among our Selves
and our Neighbor Nations, which induce unavoidable Alterations in every Age,
and those must of necessity introduce new Counsels and Rules and Forms of
managing a Government, suitable to the Season, that is to say, to the present
posture and condition of the People. For as in the preservation of men's private
bodies, so this Verse following holds to be a Rule absolute in ordering the
Public Body.

Sic quoniam variant Morbi variabimus Arts. As new disorders in State arise
and alter its former Temper, so there must be variation in the method and means
of Remedy, or else all runs to Ruin. And for this End Parliaments themselves
were first ordained, that Princes, in such Cases, might advise with them when
they shall need their Advice, about the making of new Laws, or altering old
Laws and Customs, as they shall see occasion.

Secondly, we find by old Records, that our Forefathers, in conformity to this
Reason, many times varied the Formalities of Parliament, both as to its time of
Meeting, its Number, its Manner of sitting, and time of Continuance, and other
Circumstances; yet we nowhere find them in any wise condemned for it, it being
to be supposed they did what, in their times, was for the then public
Convenience. For both before and after the Conquest Parliaments were held Three
times a year, viz. at Easter, Whitsuntide, and Christmas, but for continuance
no longer than the space of Eight days for each time: but that Custom continued
not any considerable time after the Conquest, but received many Variations all
along to the time of King Edward the Third, in whose days the forecited
Statutes were made which give Occasion to our present Disputes.

The Book called The Mirror of Justice says, Cap. 1. Sect. 3. that sometimes
those Parliaments departed from that frequencie, and were held Twice a year:
and in those days there was no such thing as a House of Commons, as it is noted
in Print, for that the Parliament consisted then only of King and Lords; so
that it were better for our Admirers of old Statutes and Customs, in some Cases
to bury some of them, rather than let their Brains run a madding up toward the
Conquest and beyond, to revive them to give Rules for us to proceed by. Thus it
was some time of old as to the quality of Parliament-members: and then as to
their manner of Sitting, my Lord Coke, Instit. Par. 4. cap. 1. tells us, that
in Edw. the First's Reign, the Commons had no distinct House to sit in, and no
Speaker, as it appears in the Treatise de Modo tenendi Parliamentum. And in 6
of Edw. 3. in diverse places it appears, that the Lords and Commons sat
together, and had then no continual Speaker. And then as to the nature of the
Power of the Commons House, it would tend to little edification, to describe
and measure it by the Report of Ancient Records, Customs, and Proceedings; and
the People would get nothing by it but this, even a discovery of the
slenderness of those Privileges which they had of old, in comparison of those
that by the Favor and Indulgence of succeeding Kings they have enjoyed to this
day.

But thirdly, if Customs and Precedents of time past be of such esteem with
this Author and the rest of his Fellow-Scriblers, in their Printed Books, then
let them tell me a reason why a Prince may not in his time make use of a
Precedent made by a former Prince in a Business of the same nature, and for
which that Prince was never found fault with after, till this Captious
quarrelsome Age that we now live in. For this Author confesses, that Queen
Elizabeth, in the Fifth year of her Reign Prorogued the Parliament from the
second of October to the fifth of October of the year following, which was
three days above a year, and in strictness of Law, this Prorogation lately made
Anno 1675. for Fifteen Months, which is three Months above a year, is as good
and valid in Law as that; (they are his very words) wherein he is so far in the
right, because three days or three months can, as to point of Law, make no
difference in the Case, either of them being a lapse of time beyond what this
man and his Fellows do suppose as limited by those Statutes for a Parliament's
sitting, and consequently for its Proroguing; because if a Parliament cannot
legally sit longer than a year, it cannot be Prorogued to a longer time than
the Law gives it a Being: But that a Parliament may sit and act with full force
and vigor longer than a year, there is no Law to be found that contradicts; and
therefore it is to be supposed that an Argument drawn from those two Statutes of
Edw. 3. being an Argument ex Consequenti, that is, an Argument grounded upon
Consequence, the Consequence if good ought to be derived from a right
interpretation of those Statutes. Now the decision of the matter rests only
upon this, Which of the two Parties Judgments you will rely upon as most
likely to make right interpretation of the Statutes; whether upon our Author's
Judgment and his Fellows, who appear to be parties concerned in a present
Factious design and season; or upon the Judgment of the Queen's Parliament,
which sat in a more Happy Season, who doubtless could not be ignorant of those
Statutes: but neither they, nor any Parliament or Person since that year of the
Queen, ever found fault with her Prorogation as illegal; which, it is to be
believed would have been done before this time, if that Parliament, or any
succeeding Parliament, or Lawyer, or other person, before the time of the late
Prorogation, had apprehended the Queen to be faulty in hers. Therefore it is to
be supposed, that this Precedent of Prorogation made by that most excellent
Princess is a good one; and that the Interpretation of those Statutes made by
this Author and his Fellows, to serve a Faction, toward the ruin of this
Parliament, is the wrong.

Moreover, if the sense of those Statutes be taken as they would have it, viz.
That no Parliament ought to sit above a year, but a new one to be called within
the year, why were not those Statutes made use of before in Fifteen years time,
to condemn the sitting of this? It is strange that no notable Lawyer should in
all that time affirm the illegality of it: But that only some few Scarabees of
the Law should now, to bolster up a Faction, be scribbling their sense upon the
Statutes, when the ablest have been, and are silent, is ridiculous.

Besides, Fourthly, consider, that when his Majesty now Regnant did in the 16
year of his Reign, Enact, That the Triennial Act passed by his Royal Father in
his 16th year, should be Repealed, for Reasons in that Act of Repeal expressed:
yet upon the humble Supplication of the Lords and Commons He did Declare, That
hereafter the sitting and holding of Parliaments shall not be intermitted or
discontinued above three years at the most: And that within three years after
the determination of this present Parliament, and so from time to time within
three years after the determination of any other Parliament or Parliaments, or
if there be occasion, more often, your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, do
issue out your Writs for calling, assembling, and holding of another
Parliament, to the end there may be a frequent calling, assembling, and holding
of Parliaments once in three years at the least. From which I collect these
ensuing Particulars.

1. That by the word Three years after the determination of this present
Parliament, it is implied by the Act, that the duration of this Parliament
shall not be comprehended within any determinate time; and there was reason for
it, because they had a tedious work to do, to repair the Ruins of three
Kingdoms wasted and unsettled by a long Civil War.

2. This appears farther by the subsequent words, which show that the
determinate Course of Parliaments set by the Act is meant only for the future
after the Dissolution of this.

3. The Parliament had been sitting four years when they formed this Act: and
therefore though they in the Act made mention of the two old Statutes of Edward
the Third for holding a Parliament every year, yet it seems they did not then
in their virgin-days conceive themselves to be within the breach of those
Statutes for sitting above a year, because they were upon the making of this
Act: which doubtless so many learned men as are in these honorable Houses
would never have presumed to do, if their Sitting had by Law been limited to
but a years time, for then they could not but have apprehended that the Laws
they made in the three years before, must have been null and void for want of
legal power to make them, as well as all the Laws that they should make
afterward till this day. And what must the miserable Consequence of that have
been? even to demolish all the new Foundations which had been or were to be
laid for the Restoration and Establishment of the Crown, Church, and State, in
case the validity of their former Sitting and Acting had been questionable, as
they would have been by such bold Interpreters of Law, as I shall further make
them appear to be, who presume to advance their own Understandings above the
Judgment of whole Bodies of Parliaments; which these men have done, and do, by
Printed Books scattered like Wildfire about the three Nations to set all in
Combustion.

But Fifthly, what if it should appear a more considerable Question to be put,
Whether those two Old Statutes of Edward the Third be not of most force for the
King? And truly there appears good reason to conclude in the Affirmative. The
two Statutes may stand as declarative Memorials of the Judgment of Parliament
in time past for the Peoples having a right to a frequencie of Parliaments, if
need require, and no farther; but it is not to be believed, that so Victorious
and Potent a King as Edward the Third, ever would have passed those two Acts,
if his Parliaments meaning had been to cut off that main Point of his
Prerogative Royal, viz. the power of judging when it is fit or needful to call a
Parliament, and when not: Nor is it at all likely that it was the Opinion of
that Age, that the King had done so in passing those Acts; but it is rather to
be supposed, that that Parliament meant no more than this, That those Statutes
were intended to be declarative of the Common Law, and of the People's having
Right by ancient Custom to Parliaments, and that as they had been, so they
should also be yearly in the future, if judged necessary. For I would know of
any man of an impartial Judgment, how it is possible to skrue out of those
Statutes any other Meaning, seeing the words [if need be] are words
Hypothetical or Conditional, viz. supposing there be need, or upon Condition
there be need. Hereby it is implied, that if in a years time there be no need,
there is no obligation by Law from hence for the calling a Parliament always
within the year. The Sum of all then is this; That if no need be, he need not
call one. And who (I pray you) ought to be judge of this need, but the King,
who is to Call? But what says our Author of the Considerations to this? He
hereupon turns Statute-Expositor and Objector, as follows.

CONSIDERATOR.
He says this meaning of the Law is but a Fancy; all our Properties, Rights,
and Liberties, are bound up in those LAWS of Annual Parliaments; and the King's
Dispensing with them cannot take place with any man that considers the First of
those two Statutes; viz. That a Parliament shall be holden every year once, OR
more often if need be; by which words the King is left only Judge of the need
of a Parliament oftener than once a year. But whether the King see need or no,
he is absolutely and peremptorily bound to hold a Parliament once a year.

ANIMADVERSION.
This sort of men are always up with a great Noise about Property, Right, and
Liberty of the People, because most men are wont to be taken with the mention
of those matters wherein their Good and well-being is concerned, and the
Projecting Faction would be supposed to be the only Advocates for them; but
alas, this is the Faction's old main Engine to catch Proselytes among the
injudicious part of the World, which are always much the major Part of
Mankind, who in the mean time are not able to judge whether Discourses be made
rationally or not, till the Sophisms or Cheats of such Crafty Writers be
discovered. And verily I believe this Penman himself, if he had pleased, might
have saved me the labor of discovery; for he writes more like a Lawyer than
any of his Fellows: And therefore he could have told you, that the Law of
England is as careful for the Prerogative of the King, as it is for the Liberty
of the Subject; and whereas the Government of England has in all Times, even
from utmost Antiquity been for a Monarchy, the Laws have not left it destitute
of Powers to preserve it Self in that Condition; and the People ought to be as
zealous for the Conservation of it by maintaining the Rights of the Crown, as
they are for their own, because those also were Ordained for Public good, and
are as necessary as the other; and accordingly the eye of the Law has been as
tender of them as of the other, because our Ancestors in framing the
Constitution of this Kingdom conceived the end of Government, which is Peace,
public Convenience, and Safety, could not well be attained without it.
Therefore that in this the wisdom of the Law was great of old, and ought
greatly to be admired, is most evident, because by late Experience we have
found since 1641, that in pulling the Feathers of Monarchy, the People did put
none in their own Caps but what made them look like Bedlams, and become really
such by running at last into Anarchy, mere Confusion. It were endless to bring
in here a citation of manifold Provisions made by Law to preserve the
Prerogative; for, they are known to all men that have studied the Law, and to
most men that have not. And therefore in making Interpretations of Law about
Government, we are when we write, to carry an even hand betwixt what is Right
for the King, and what is Right for the Subject; and not draw Conclusions on
one side out of literal Expressions and particular Sentences, but rather to
derive them from the general Sense and Scope of all our Laws on both sides
compared one with another: and so should this Considerator and his Fellows have
done, if they had honest Intentions.

Next, as to what he says of the Peoples Rights and Liberties being bound up
in Annual Parliaments, it is so ridiculous, that his Masters of the Faction in
1641 would not understand it so: They before all things proclaimed to the
World, that the only way to preserve the Rights and Liberties was, to have a
Parliament of length sufficient to sit and dispatch the Public affairs; that
is to say, they who pretended themselves to be the great Patrons of the Peoples
Rights, were so far from thinking those Rights were bound up in yearly
Parliaments, that they would not be satisfied till they had an Act passed to
empower them to sit as many years as they pleased; which they never could with
any face have demanded, if the opinion of Lawyers, or of the People of that
time had been, that all our Rights had been so bound up in those two Statutes,
that to part with yearly Parliaments had been to part with our Rights and
Liberties. For it would then have savoured of too rank Hypocrisy before the
Multitude, and have raised their Jealousy against them, had they imagined, or
should any body have told them, that their Rights and Liberties were at Stake
by such proceeding of their Patrons.

Moreover, consider this present Parliament's proceeding in those days when but
few men offered to find fault with them: For when in the Sixteenth year of His
now Majesty they passed that Act to prevent long intermission of Parliaments,
it is plain that they were of another opinion than the Considerator and his
Fellows: For, the words and scope of the Act show they were exceeding tender of
our Rights and Liberties; yet determined the time of Parliamentary Meetings to
once in three years: which it is reason to believe they never would have done,
if they had not understood our Rights and Liberties would have been better
provided for by their Triennial than by yearly Meetings. But now adays it is a
small matter with our Factious Leguleian Scriblers to form up Opinions upon
forged Interpretations of Law, and prefer them before the Opinions of whole
Parliamentary Bodies; whose Wisdom ought to be reverenced as, and as it is, the
Wisdom of the whole Nation.

In the next place consider how slily the Considerator shuffles in his
transcribing one of the two controverted Statutes: The first says a Parliament
shall be holden every year once, AND oftener if need be; but he writes OR oftener
if need be, in stead of AND. It is not out of any inclination I have to
Pedantick Niceties, or that I think it becomes any man to mingle Points of
Philologie with discourse about matters of Polity, that I now begin to play
the Grammaticaster: but when I perceive there is a crafty purpose in altering
such a small Particle, when one is placed in a sentence in stead of the other,
I suppose it becomes me not to neglect it, especially when it perverts the
whole meaning of a Law. I dare appeal to the Ferula of Dr. Busby, the Prince of
Grammarians, whether there be not a material difference in signification
betwixt AND and OR, the former being a Copulative, the later a Disjunctive. Now
the present Dispute betwixt the Considerator and me being this, Whether the
words [IF NEED BE] do refer only to the later part of the Sentence, or to the
whole Sentence, as he a few lines after expresses, and would have those words
to refer to the later part only, and therefore would by foisting in the
Conjunction Disjunctive OR in stead of the Conjunction Copulative AND, dis-joyn
the said words [IF NEED BE] from the first part of the Sentence, give me leave
to say that he hereby would put upon us a most partial Artifice of Delusion,
and mere Juggle: for by the word OR there may be some color for his
Construction of the Law, that the King is Judge only whether a Parliament
shall be held oftener than once a year; whereas the Conjunction [AND] couples
and joins the sense of the words [IF NEED BE] to the former part of the
sentence, and so the Statute speaks plain for the King's being Sole Judge,
whether there be need of calling Parliaments once a year, as well as whether
there be need of calling them oftener than once a year: So that it is evident the
Noble King Edward the Third, and his Parliament, meant no such matter as the
Considerator and his Fellows, and as some other Professors of the Law have
hitherto misunderstood, contrary to the General sense of Law in that part of
our Laws which concerns the Establishment of the Prerogative of our Kings, a
very principal flower whereof is the Power of Calling and Dissolving
Parliaments as often as they shall judge there is need: and the Practice of
other Nations in all the World has justified this, that it is the common
Birthright of Hereditary Kings to be sole Judges of this Question, Whether
there be need, or no need, at all times, of Calling or of Dismissing the
Supreme Assemblies, unless they limit themselves; but (you see) here is reason
absolute to conclude our King Edward did not intend to limit himself to yearly
Parliaments, by the said Statutes.

And to make further proof of this, see again what is said by the Considerator.

CONSIDERATOR.
That the Kings of England have not duly nor constantly observed those
Statutes ever since their making, does not render them of the less Force;
because it is an Offense in the King not to fulfill a Law.

ANIMADVERSION.
Here he is pleased to acknowledge what cannot be denied, that the Kings of
England have not observed those Statutes ever since their making: which shows,
that our succeeding Kings never thought themselves obliged by them, or that
King Edward intended it so, unless they should see need, or at any time judge
it necessary to call a Parliament. Besides, we do not read of any Parliamentary
Complaint about the omitting of YEARLY Parliaments, till our Presbyterian
Masters of the Faction in their Grand Remonstrance 1641. charged it as a fault
upon his Majesty's Father, under pretense of those Statutes. And doubtless some
of the foregoing Parliaments would have made complaint about Yearly Omission,
had they believed Kings bound to Yearly Parliaments: But that King Edward and
his Parliament which passed the Law, never intended or understood it in the
Considerator's sense, is to be concluded from this most undeniably; That from
the Fifth year of the said King to the Eighth year, no Parliament was called;
the reason was, because he judged there was no need. Nor does it appear that he
did afterward observe any such certain Puncto of time in calling his
Parliaments: but doubtless it is in reason to be thought he would have been so
tender of his own Law as to have observed it within the fifth or sixth year,
and not so soon have broken it, if he had thought himself obliged absolutely to
a year, because it was but in the fourth year that he passed it.

CONSIDERATOR.
But (says the Considerator) the King is the only person that is meant or can
be bound: For he it is that is to Summon or Hold Parliaments, and therefore the
Statutes intend to oblige Him, or else they intend nothing, and the Laws for
Parliaments that secure our Religion, Properties, and Liberties, are become
only Advices and Counsels to the King, with no obligation further than the
Kings present thoughts of their expedience.

ANIMADVERSION.
That the Obligation to a Yearly Parliament lies no further upon the King than
if in prudence he see there be need, is already proved from a Right
Construction of the words of the Statutes; and that this prudential power and
part of the Kings Prerogative in Judging the expedience of calling Parliaments
at this or that time, as Affairs shall in His Judgment require, did remain
undiminished by the said Statutes: And they intended only this, which was
enough, That seeing the People had an ancient Right by Custom to have frequent
Parliaments, the King accordingly should oblige himself to call Parliaments so
often as every year, or oftener if there should be need: Whereupon it is
observable, that seeing in the interval of Parliament there neither ought nor
can be any Judge of the necessity but the King, these two Laws left the power
of judging it in the Prerogative-Royal as they found it; and the
then*Parliament gained this great Advantage for the People, that whereas they
before had a Right by Custom and Common Law, they now obtain a right by
Statute Law too: which certainly so wise a King as Edw. 3. would never have
granted without a Salvo put in for his Prerogative, by the words IF NEED BE.

Moreover consider, if those Statutes should be otherwise understood, viz. that
the King ex debito were bound every year to call a Parliament, whether it would
not have been a great Mischief rather than Benefit to the People: For in those
days they that served Members in Parliament were wont to take Wages for their
Service; and that would have layn heavy upon every poor Borough to have been
bound to pay Wages due once a year, sometimes oftener, to their Burgesses, it
being recoverable by Law against them; which peradventure would amount to more
than their share of payment of Subsidies. Again consider, as this would empty
their Purses, so it would lade them with innumerable Laws, which are as
grievous almost as to have none, as it has been found in many Nations by
experience; and therefore it is that Justinian has been everywhere praised for
so excellent an Emperor, because when all the Nations under the Roman Empire
were even over-laid with multitudes of Laws, and groaned more under this Yoke
than that of Taxes and Tributes, he took care how to deliver the people from
that vexatious Burden, by cutting off the major unnecessary part of the
Imperial Statutes, and Digesting the rest into a tolerable Body. Therefore
should such yearly Parliaments be imposed on us by Law, the Statutes would soon
swell to the like intolerable pass, and tire the people out of fondness after
so frequent Meetings as these Writers plead for, and would force Us to admit
even against all Sense and Reason. Therefore we have abundant cause to praise
the Wisdom of His Majesty and this His Parliament, that in the 16th year of
his Reign they framed that most prudent Triennial Law, which places a golden
Mediocrity betwixt the having too frequent Parliaments, and too long delay of
them; and I must needs say His Majesty has therein appeared, by limiting
himself to call Parliaments hereafter, at Three years time after the
determination of this, and after the determination of every succeeding
Parliament, to be beyond all our Kings, and most gracious in condescending, and
Indulgence toward his people; that as the Faction, which set on work this
Considerator and his Fellows to delude the Subjects, and beget in them an
Opinion as if His Majesty intended to deprive them of their Old Laws and
Rights to Parliaments, do appear now to be most ungrateful toward Him: so I
suppose their mouths will henceforth be stopped, seeing they are secured by
that new Triennial Act, in which they ought to bury all such Disputes for the
future: which they must needs do, if they will cast an eye upon the said Act
before they fall to disputing, and perverting His Subjects.

One Objection more give me leave to answer, because it will be but in short;
it is this: That though the words [if need be] be in the first Statute, yet they
are not expressed in the Second, which being passed Thirty two years after,
must be understood therefore to be absolute. But this I say, though the words
be not there in terminis, yet other words are there which make those to be
necessarily understood; and they are these: [AS ANOTHER TIME WAS ORDAINED BY
STATVTE.] The Statute meant here is the former of the two, which is of the
Fourth of Edward the Third. The Issue then is this: That this later Statute,
which is of the 36 of Edward the Third, referring, (as by the word AS appears)
to the former Statute, nothing more is Ordained here, but what was, and AS it
was Ordained in the former; and so it can bear no other Interpretation than
what is proper to the former, and is only a Second Confirmation by Statute Law
of the Right by ancient Custom which the People had before to Parliaments, as
often as they should be needful; as it is intended by the first of the said
Statutes.

So I have done with the Considerator: His Fellows, who do but steal out of
him, shall be handled in the next place. One of them entitles his Book, THE
LONG PARLIAMENT DISSOLVED: But under that Title he means this Parliament,
because they have sat Fourteen or Fifteen years, by reason of the world of work
they have had before them, to repair the large Breaches made within these
Nations by a tedious Civil War: which they might have finished before now, had
not many impediments been cast upon them by the Malice and Cunning of a
restless implacable Faction; whose glory it would be, above all other things
attainable in the World, if they could any way dissolve this Parliament, or
contrive how to make it End with disgrace, re infecta, that they may not have
the honor of finishing that glorious Establishment of Church and State which
they design; but that themselves (viz. the Faction) and the Forlorn Hope of
their Party, might once more have the opportunity to play the Game they have
prepared against the good time of trying their Fortune at New Elections. In the
mean while, their Plot is laid every way to backbite this present House of
Commons, and by odious Reflections upon the King and House of Peers, to make as
many of the People as they can out of love with our ancient Monarchical
Constitution of Parliaments, that they may introduce the New Model of their
own. For this is certain, the Spiritual Drivers which they make use of, and
must, will neither go nor drive (as the Proverb says) unless the whole Civil
Frame be formed to a cleverly comportment with the Geneva-Patern; but will
rather fly off and curse them, in stead of Meroz, and all their Undertakings,
as the Scotch General Assembly did Duke Hamilton, when by an Authority of
Parliament there, he presumed, without their Blessing, to enter England, Anno
1648. to have restored His Majesty's Father.

No Temporal Lordships must look to thrive by trinkling with them, unless they
will truckle to 'em too, and comply with their eternal Pride and Ambition in
all Senatical as well as Classical Concernments; as those unhappie Lords and
leading Commons who staid in the Houses to act along with them, were fain to do
in the years 1644, 1645, 1646. It Is worth the remembering how the Spiritual
Assembly sat and dictated Decrees to the Secular, which the poor Senate always
very tamely obeyed, and shaped into Ordinances as fast as might be, to be
hanged about the necks of the People, who had e'n as good have been hanged out
of the way, as to have suffered the Intailment of such a Slavery upon their
Posterity; the End whereof must have been, and, if we look not now about us,
may, and must be again, to bring King and Parliament to the same truckling
condition; which King James once most sadly experienced in Scotland, and in his
wisdom saw, after he came to the Crown of England, would certainly return upon
Him and His People here, if ever that Faction got afoot again, or a horsback;
forasmuch as it is the only Faction that cannot be mended or put into a
consistence with Monarchy. By which you may see what is to be gotten by crying
down Bishops; which their Opposites of late have most studiously done, both in
Prints and by long Speeches: and what those few Lords and others must bring
upon us at last, though perhaps they intend it not, if ever to compass their
own Ends they make use of that Malignant Faction: And know, that use them they
must, and be ruled by 'em too, if they weaken the Reputation, legal Power, and
Reverence due to Bishops; the doing whereof will necessarily make way for the
other, and give them the opportunities, for which they have, above these
hundred years, been sowing of Tares, and planting and watering them in England
and Scotland. Oh, that I had leisure in this place to give a particular Account
of them, what a Thorn they have been in the sides of Princes and People in both
the Kingdoms! The prevention of the like is to be expected only from His
Majesty, and this present Parliament, who are sure to Him and the Government by
Law established: And that is the reason why this Dissolving Pamphleter, and his
Fellows, are so hot for a Dissolution of them, having set their Dice to make us
undergo Hap-hazard by a New one; which must needs have less Ability,
Experience, and Knowledge, than these that have been long practiced, to promote
and manage what is proper Parliamentary work in this difficult season, to heal
our Breaches, secure the Government, compose and ease the People. But a new raw
one (quoth the Faction) would be more fit for us to practice upon and tutour.

The Author of this Book may be called the Dissolver, because he would Dissolve
all immediately: But having little of a Lawyer in him, he goes another way to
work, and in stead of Reasoning, he chiefly betakes himself to Oratory, to try
what that will do among the People, with the help of fine Flashes of Wit.
Therefore I shall make but short work in dispatching him, as he does to
dispatch this Parliament out of the way.

DISSOLVER.
Our Ancestors had a glorious value and kindness for our English Liberties;
therefore that they might have a perpetual Assurance that their Liberties
should continue, it was Ordained, 36 EDW. 3. cap. 10. That for the maintenance
of those Liberties, and remedy of Mischiefs and Grievances that daily happen, a
Parliament should be held once every year.

ANIMADVERSION.
I cannot but note this Dissolver to be a mere Shifter. He shifts that Statute
of 4 Edw. 3. out of the way, as a thing too hot for him to handle, because of
the words IF NEED BE. And as he lays that aside; so next he turns
Statute-clipper, cuts off the main Clause, which qualisies the Sense of the
Second Statute of the 36 of Edw. 3. The words of the Clause are, As at another
time WAS ORDAINED BY STATVTE: Now that other Statute here mentioned is the
first Statute of Edw. 3. which ordained, that Parliaments shall be holden once
a year if need be, and more often if need be; that is to say, we shall have
frequent Parliaments, and as frequent as heart can wish, IF NEED require. Just
so much and no more was Ordained by the former Statute. But who shall be Judge
of this need, or who can be but the King, in whom the Law has trusted the
Calling of Parliaments? Therefore it is in Law to be supposed it may be
inconvenient for Him to call a Parliament so often as every year, when in his
Judgment He concludes it not needful so to do. So much for Clipping the
Statute; a Crime as bad as Clipping the King's Coin, if not worse. But any
thing must be done to serve the turn of Dissolution.

DISSOLVER.
The reason (he says) is because this Parliament has sat so many years, till
they are not the Representatives of one half of the People of England: And the
Gentry, who think themselves born to have their share in Ruling, as well as
being Ruled, judge it a very hard thing upon them to be secluded from their
hopes of having the honor to serve their King and Country in Parliament.

ANIMADVERSION.
A Share of Ruling as well as being Ruled! It Is very fine (ye men of
Shaftsbury) this is so like the language of the Old Levellers, who were all for
Ruling by Turns, that one might almost swear a small Friend of yours was at the
Penning it. He is always for Up and Ride, and Rule, and Rule alone, and so is
the whole Faction; and that is the Reason why they are for a Tumbling-Cast to
the present Rulers of Church and State. But what Gentry are those who hanker
after Rule? If to sit and serve in Parliament be to Rule, this the Law never
understood in England; and the Writ of Summons to Parliament says no such
thing; the Rule and Empire being vested in the King and those that are by Law
deputed under Him for that purpose. It was never otherwise understood till that
fatal Parliament in FORTY ONE, when they wrested the Rule out of the hand of
the King and His inferior Magistrates. There were then such a Sort of Gentry
got into the House, though but few in comparison of the whole number, that in
order to the gaining of all Rule into their own hands, from their
Fellow Members as well as the King, first placed it in the hands of
London-Prentices, till by Tumults and Tumultuous Voting they drove away the
rest of the Gentry as well as the King and the majority of the Lords, and never
left till themselves became the only Lords of Mis-rule. Such Gentry as those
were, are they that now reckon of Ruling in Parliament one day or other, if
they can but be rid of this, and persuade the People to choose 'em, having to
that end a great confidence in the strength of the Tongues and Lungs of their
Ambulatory Chaplains. The rest of the Gentry understand them well enough and
all their Windings, and do very well know and are satisfied, that here is a
full Parliament, all places of Members having been filled up by Election of new
ones as fast as they were vacant; and that a convenient duration of this
Assembly of the Peoples Representatives (as he calls them) is the only
Expedient to prevent the Design of that restless Faction, in whose Service
this Dissolver and his Scribbling Companions are listed. And now to do the Feat,
he ventures at matter of Law too: and his Arguments are all summed up in what
follows.

DISSOLVER.
By the Statute of 4 EDW. 3. cap. 10. and 36 EDW. 3. cap. 14. and by other
Statutes, a Parliament is to meet once within a year. But directly contrary to
those Statutes, this last Prorogation Ordered the Parliament not to meet within
a year, but some months after: and therefore either the Prorogation is null and
void in Law, and consequently the Sitting and Acting as a Parliament is at an
end; or else by your Sitting and Acting you will admit and justify, that a
particular Order of the King is to be obeyed, though contrary to an Act of
Parliament, and thereby subvert the Government of England by Law. So also the
King's Order is to be obeyed against Magna Charta, Petition of Right, etc. and
we have neither life nor liberty secured unto us.

Then the Dissolver, by virtue of the foregoing Lines, goes on to spend four or
five pages in setting forth the great hazard of our Laws, Liberties, and
Properties, as if all were true he said, and concludes all are gone, if the
Prorogation beyond twelve months were a good one; but he says it is null, and
the Parliament nulled therewith.

ANIMADVERSION.
Such small Faggots of Argumentation as these are now bound up in Books to fire
the Nation if it be possible! They first make false Constructions of the two
Statutes of Edw. 3. telling the world the King is by them bound to hold a
Parliament once within every year; and if we could grant that to be the
Statutes meaning, then they might have some shadow of Reason to make
Conclusions to their own minds. But I have already made evident, that they
either misunderstand the Statutes, or craftily wrest the sense of them: There
is no intent in the Statutes, that Parliaments be called yearly ex absoluto,
but they contain a clear Hypothesis, as a Salvo for the undoubted legal
Prerogative of the King, in the words IF NEED BE; so that it is supposed in the
Statutes the King has, by his Prerogative-Royal, a Right of Judging the time
when it is needful to call a Parliament, because He, and none but He can Call.
Therefore it is to be admired there should so many words be made about so plain
a business: For, were I never so much a Conspirator in forming Devices for the
Destruction of this Parliament, I would find out some more solid Basis to
build my Arguments upon than a manifest Contradiction, or else certainly I
would for shame be silent: The two Statutes say, we shall have frequent
Parliaments, and so frequent as once a year if there be need: But the Factious
Dissolver maintains the sense of them to be, that we shall have Parliaments
once a year though there be no need; so that you see upon what a wretched
Bottom he and the rest of them do build their Argumentations, and the
high-flown flourishes of discourse which they so diligently Print and spread
abroad, to deceive the weaker unwary People, and intoxicate them with
disaffection to this Parliament, and to the lawful Prerogative and Government
of His Majesty. But if they can make no better Squibs than this to blow up a
Parliament, they had best give it over: for, the King not being bound up by Law
within a year, he is at liberty to Prorogue beyond the limit of a year, and so
the Fifteen Months Prorogation was and is good, though it has been seldom that
there have been so long Prorogations: For, that is no Argument against the
Wisdom and Power of the King to exceed some days or months, if He sees in
prudence it be pro bono Publico, and that urgent Reasons of State do require
it: and there is nothing in all our Law that speaks a syllable to the contrary,
if rightly considered.

Therefore to unwinde the Bottom which the Dissolver has entangled, let me
with assurance determine this Point, which is the Standard by which you may
measure all that they have said or can say. If those two Statutes did not
confine the Parliament's sitting to Twelve months, then the Kings Proroguing
His Parliament to Fifteen months was no violation of the said Statutes: If no
Statute be thereby violated, then the Prorogation was and is good. If so, then
the Parliament is as firm in Being as ever any Prorogued Parliament was or can
be, and consequently the Laws which they have made or shall make after the
Prorogation are as perfect and obligatory upon us as any other Laws that ever
were made in this Nation: And it is (no question) a Crime little less than an
endeavor at the Subversion of Parliament, for any persons by Speeches or
Prints, in or out of the Houses, to carry on a Design of arguing a Dissolution
of this, thereby to persuade the People against Obedience and Submission to it.
Nor can this Assertion of mine be construed, as if I maintained any thing in
derogation of that Freedom of speech which ought to be had in Parliament, and
which I count absolutely necessary for the Debate and the Dispatch of the Grand
Affairs. But then that freedom of speech ought to be qualified with so much
Modesty and Reverence, as not to run to such licentious discourse as the Laws
make Criminal: for, next to downright Treasonous discourse, none can be worse
than that which tends to the Violent Dissolution of a Parliament; that is to
say, without the King's consent, or against His will. What then do they deserve
who have been such busy Speech-makers both in and out of Parliament, to bring
that End about against the King's consent, and against the Laws? Or that shall
presume to do it hereafter; seeing the two Houses have given their Judgment in
the Case, contrary to the interpretation of all Factious Penmen and Talkers?

But the Dissolver goes further than this, and takes upon himself the person of
the People of England, and in their Name falls to downright threatening of both
Houses of Parliament, in the following words.

DISSOLVER.
Pages 9 and 10. This we say not, Gentlemen, by way of acknowledgment, that you
are in a Legal capacity now, to do us either good or hurt; for your day is
done, and your power expired; but that you may not like a Snuff smell ill after
you are out. For, the reason why we more particularly direct our selves to you
is, because of the Character you have born, that therefore you should not seem
so much as to give Prerogative the upper hand of the Law. That so however you
have lived, yet all may say and witness for you, that you died well, and made a
worthy End. If not, we hope the whole Nation will strictly observe every man
among you, that to sit a little longer yet, would sacrifice to this Prorogation
the very best of Laws, and in them all the Laws and Liberties of England. The
two Statutes of EDW. 3. were declared to be in force by your Selves, in the
Sixteenth year of the King, in the new Triennial Act then passed; and we are
sure there has been no new Parliament since to Repeal them.

ANIMADVERSION.
What need this phrentick impertinent Clause here at last, seeing that no man
affirms those two Statutes to be Repealed? Let them stand for ever as Laws, to
show that as we had and have a Right to a frequencie of Parliaments, so also
that the King has a Right of Prerogative to judge whether there be need of
having them so often as every year. And thus much is to be understood also by
the tenor of the new Triennial Act, passed by this Parliament, to prevent
Inconveniences happening by the long intermission of Parliaments; for they name
the two Statutes of Edward the Third, but make no mention of a Right to
Parliaments once every year, the words of the Act referring to those Statutes,
being these only [because by them Parliaments are to be held very often] which
is the very same that I grant and affirm to be the meaning of the said
Statutes: and their not affirming a jot more than I do, implies, that they
understood them no otherwise than I do, in general terms for a Declarative
Frequencie; but whether within a year or oftener, they say not a word: touching
which it is to be presumed they would not have been silent, if they had
understood it to be the Right of the People to have had certain Parliaments
yearly, whenas the Statutes declare not absolutely, but only with condition IF
NEED BE.

And because all mouths should be stopped, and no room left for an Objection
which ill-minded heads, or jealous, may make, and is made use of by these our
Factious Book-makers, viz. that our having of Parliaments is by this means left
to the King's pleasure, when he please to judge them needful; behold, there is
no reason for such objecting, because the nature of His power to judge I
maintain not to be absolute, whether we shall have Parliaments or not; but
whether it be needful to have one, or more, so often as within every year.
Therefore the high Wisdom of this present Parliament is to be magnisied in
contriving that new Triennial Act in such a manner, as prevents all the
frivolous Objections that may be made by any other persons. For in the later
end of the Act, they pray in these words: [That it may be Declared and Enacted,
And be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That hereafter the
Sitting and Holding of Parliaments shall not be intermitted or discontinued
above Three years at the most; but that within Three years after the
determination of this present Parliament, and so from time to time within Three
years after the determination of any other Parliament or Parliaments, OR IF
THERE BE OCCASION MORE OFTEN, your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, do
issue out your Writs for Calling, Assembling, and Holding of another
Parliament; to the end there may be a frequent Calling, Assembling, and Holding
of Parliaments, once in Three years at the least.] What can be desired more
than this Act has provided for? We have by it secured a Parliament every Three
years after this is ended; which is more than ever you had before. And if you
will not be contented with my Sense in expounding the Two Statutes of Edward
the Third, take here the sense and judgment of the whole Parliament; They have
Provided also for yearly Parliaments or oftener, in these words, IF THERE BE
OCCASION, as fully as Edward the Third did by the words IF NEED BE in those
ancient Statutes, the Prerogative of the King being left here entire, to judge
whether there be OCCASION, as it was in the former Statutes to judge whether
there be NEED of Parliaments every year or not: And so you see it is the sense
of this Parliament declared in their First days of Sitting many years ago, that
no more than this was meant by the Parliament of King Edward.

Behold also how great the Wisdom, Concession, and Tenderness of His Majesty
has been toward us in this Particular, that to remove all Fears and
Jealousies which Seditious men plant and nourish in the minds of weak people,
about His possible Delaying of Parliaments long, He did so graciously concur
with his Parliament in the said Triennial Act to secure us in the Golden mean
(as I once before told you) betwixt the having too frequent or too few
Parliaments in time to come! Most ungrateful then are they, and most malicious,
and the Peoples greatest Enemies, who by their dark desperate Contrivances,
have so many years been casting Rubs in the way of this Parliament, to
interrupt and impede the Noble Work of Settlement, which is most likely to be
done by them, or by none; and had not the Faction hindered, it had been done
long ago; so that we might ere now have seen Parliaments in motion upon this
fair Wheel of a well-ordered Succession. Judge then I pray you how little cause
this Clamorous unreasonable Dissolver has to revile this most Loyal honorable
House of Commons, or impute to them a sacrificing of our Rights and Liberties,
which every days transaction shows, when they are sitting, they do most
studiously maintain: Whereas if he and his Fellow-Dissolvers might have their
Ends to put an end to their Sitting before they have done their Work, it would
by experience be soon found the only way to run us out into Anarchy, and that
they have been the only Bank that kept out the great Flood of endless Contests
and Confusions which unavoidably would follow a present Dissolution. I could,
without the help of a spirit of Prophecy, give an account of all beforehand,
had I time or room to tell you the Story.

But now it is time to behold the DISSOLVER's Threatenings. He tells the House
The whole Nation will strictly observe every man among them, that, to sit a
little longer, does sacrifice to the late Prorogation made in 1675. But this is
not all: He proceeds further in more plain terms, as follows, page 10 and 16.

DISSOLVER.
Do not think to salve your Authority by your own Vote: for We (that is, the
men of Shaftsbury, the Faction) must tell you, that no Parliament which is not
antecedently so, can make it self a Parliament by Vote. Do not think the People
of England will do that indignity to their Laws; that dishonor to the Finger
of God, which by so stupendous and overruling Providence has Dissolved you;
or that disservice to their own Interest, as ever to acknowledge you any more
for their Representative. And page 17. Wherefore unless you will stand upon
Record as Oppressors of all the People of England, etc. And a little after he
says thus: It is only your single fear that the People will not choose you
again, that can make you do so and so, because you doubt they will credit you
no more: for opposing the Interest of the People is never the way to be chosen
again. And page 18. Pray you (says he) remember the former long Parliament,
how the People unroosted them, and took vengeance upon them, their Lives, their
Liberties, and the Fortunes of most of them. And page 19. he adds, Let not the
vain persuasion delude you, that no Precedent can be found that one English
Parliament has hanged up another, etc. An unprecedented Crime calls for an
unprecedented Punishment; and we faithfully promise we will use our utmost
endeavors, when a new Parliament shall be called, to choose such as shall, etc.
and so forth.

ANIMADVERSION.
Hold, hold, SIR! what do you mean? you will crack the Strings by and by which
should hang Us. What shall we have next! A Switzerland-Reformation! Must the
Nobility and Gentry of this Parliament all to the Pot when these Reformers can
get a New one? And for no other cause but sitting longer than those our New
Masters that would be would have 'em? See how furiously the Faction would ride
if they could get into the Saddle: but they do well to tell us so before they
have got a foot in the Stirrup.

Me thinks, ye men of Shaftsbury, I see in this Book a Print of the Noble hand
that wrote it, and of his heart too, which plainly threatens that he would, if
he could, furnish us with a Precedent, to teach Posterity that One Parliament
may hang another. What then would a Parliament quickly do with such a DISSOLVER
as this, if they knew where to find him out? But the singer of God (which he
talks of) may ere long point him out in a stupendous manner, before he can
bring about his brave intended DISSOLVTION.

In the rest of his Book to the very end, he goes raving on at the like rate,
telling Stories of time past about the hanging of two Lord Chief Justices, and
a Lawyer that was one of the Kings learned Counsel; and of three Judges, and of
forty Judges more, and of Empson and Dudley, in the Reigns of King Alfred,
Edward the Third, Richard the Second, and Henry the Eighth. But to what end is
all this reckoned up, unless it be to flush the Phantsies of the Rabble, right
or wrong, against the good time of DISSOLVING, which is as much longed-for by
the Faction, as the Jews long for the day of their yet-expected Messiah.

At length he comes to conclude with an Exhortation to the People, of
Disobedience to the Acts of this Parliament; That in the mean time they refuse
to pay Taxes, or obey any other of their Acts, without first trying their
validity by due process of Law. And he exhorts also the Juries, that upon
Trials they should not find against their neighbors. So here is the Trumpet
blown outright for Rebellion. But seeing he has been so plentiful in Stories
out of our Chronicles about Examples of Hanging, he should have been also on
the Peoples side so charitable, as to inform them, how we nowhere in our
Chronicle can find a Rebelling against payment of Taxes, but it always ended
in Hanging the Jack Cades, the Wat Tylers, and Captain Mendals, with all the
like Predecessors of this Leading Dissolver. But not a word of the Pudding: He
is so tender of the People, that he will not fright 'em, his Business being to
draw in as many and as fast as he can. Mutiny, mutiny, my dear Countrymen,
(said a Rebel in a Stage Play) or else I shall be hanged, etc. So there is an
End of the DISSOLVER, and his Threatenings.

The next Seditious Pamphlet that came abroad, appeared with the Title of A
Seasonable Question and an Useful Answer, etc. I have viewed this Author very
well: but after a strict impartial Search of him all over, I find that as to
matter of Law he writes little, yea nothing at all, but what has been said in
other words by the two foregoing Writers: yet because he has interwoven many
subtle insinuations under pretense of Law, and many Scandalous Additions; I am
constrained to take him also in pieces, and more effectually dissolve him, than
he can the Parliament, the design of this Pamphleter being the same with his
fellows.

And I am the more willing to tire my self out at this Work, that His Majesty's
good Subjects may be thoroughly informed of all that the Faction is able to
allege against the Legal existence and duration of this present Parliament;
and then the better judge of the unreasonableness of these men's Suggestions,
which they scatter all over the Land to impoison the minds of men, and prepare
them for the old pious work of Rebelling, after the mode of FORTY ONE. For, as
it was in the days of Solomon, so all the Designs they are now upon, do well
agree with the Text, There is nothing new under the sun. You shall see the old
Game of Covenanting, Sequestring, Slaughtering, Plundering, Committees,
increase of Taxes, with all the shapes of Metamorphosis in Governments, and
miseries Acted over again, if these men may prevail. They are likely to give us
nothing New but a New Parliament, and that shall be a Swinger, as the DISSOLVER
has promised us, and told us he has taken care for the New Elections: so that
the House shall appear New in its Outside; but in its Inside as like the Old
one as one Nut is like another.

Here perhaps some captious man of malice may be willing to mistake me, as if I
did declaim against New Parliaments. But that I may prevent those that lie at
Catch, let them know I plead not against them; but the having of any other
Parliament brought on by Factious Clamours and Outcries, in Print or otherwise,
till this Parliament has finished the Work now in their hands, for Settling the
Nation with sure Laws and Provisions against Renting and Tearing of it by
manifold Factions. But to proceed.

This Book which I am now to Dissect, is grounded upon mere Fiction. It
supposes a Letter from a person newly chosen to sit a Member of this
Parliament; one that, before he would make so great a Journey to London,
desires a Friend of his, a Bencher of the Temple, because there has been a
great noise in the Country, that by Law Parliaments are to be held once a year,
and that whereas this Parliament was Prorogued to three months above the term
of a year, the Prorogation being thereby illegal, the Parliament must needs be
null and in Law Dissolved. And therefore he would be loath to come up two
hundred miles to put his neck in a Noose by sitting here as a Member, unless
his friend the Bencher would satisfy him of the truth of the matter, and
advise him to come. This is the sum of the Question: and the Fable is so laid,
forsooth, that the pretended Bencher undertakes to give him his Resolution upon
the Point.

BENCHER.
This is a Question of the greatest moment, that ever was moved in England,
viz. Whether this Parliament be actually Dissolved by the last Prorogation for
fifteen months. He that will answer it ought first to consider, whether a
Prorogation ordered and continued beyond a year, can be made to agree with our
Laws, and the Statutes of the Realm; particularly those two Statutes of Edward
the third, which were reinforced by that Act of the sixteenth Caroli primi;
which was repealed by the Act of the sixteenth Caroli secundi, wherein this
Parliament acknowledged those Statutes of Edw. 3. to be still the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm; and they in this Act enacted no Clause that abates their
force.

ANIMADVERSION.
It is indeed a Question of the greatest, and withal of the slightest moment
that ever was in England: slight in the nature of it, but greatest in the
Consequence; and I will show you how. That in its nature it is but slight and
idle, appears most abundantly by what I have already given you in the former
part of these Animadversions. To which give me leave to add also, that it had
never been brought under Question, if one man in a corner had not failed in all
other Tricks to bring about an untimely Dissolution of the Parliament. For, as
soon as ever he was lifted out of the Court, the former PACQVET showed how
bravely he played his Game in Parliament, by imbarquing both Houses in Disputes
about Privileges, which raised so many Broils to hinder them from dispatch of
Business, that all good endeavors were made vain, the Parliament it self
became a while useless to the King, and unable to do any thing to relieve the
pressing Necessities of the Kingdom; that so by tiring out the patience and
expectations of Prince and people, there might have followed a willingness on
all sides, to admit of an Argument for this Parliaments Dissolution, and the
calling of his Plotted New one.

But the effect of these his Artificial Contrivances having been prevented by
the Wisdom of His Majesty and His Two Houses, then he had recourse to this
last Device of picking a Hole, if possible, in this point of the Prorogation,
which, with the assistance of a few Disaffected Lawyers and others, was
presently done, by false Expositions and Glosses upon old Statutes; and from
hence sprang the Original of this frivolous Question about the legality of this
Parliament's longer Sitting; which they with more Impudence than Conscience
determine in the Negative, as has been manifested unto you; so that whoever
shall concur with them, must obstinately offer violence to his own Reason, and
all the known Rules of Argument, if after due Consideration he shall adhere to
their Opinion.

Moreover, though the Question in it self be but slight, yet as to the
Consequence I agree it may be of exceeding moment, as the Devisers thereof
intended it. For, they meant to delude the people into a misunderstanding of
the Laws, a Jealousy of their Liberties, and a disposition to Tumults, to the
hazard of their Peace, their Lives and Fortunes, by new Commotions. Their
Design is, by raising the dust about this Question, to put it in your eyes,
that you may not discern Right from Wrong. Their Business is to get themselves;
by the help of a Popular Vproar, into a Governing posture; and to this end they
compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes, to carry on a general Crucifixion of
the present Governors; Cares and Sorrows, that is, a Crown of Thorns, they
prepare for the head of the King, Scandals for his Ministers, a Level for the
Nobility, a Pitfal for the Bishops, a Yoke for the Gentry, and a Fools Coat for
all the Commons that they can seduce into their Party; in which they have
leisure to repent, and once more pay Taxes to Fellow Subjects, who (as ye may
remember) do know how to ride you, being ready Booted and Spurred, if you
please once more to set them on horseback; till you sigh and confess what a
Poet said of old,

-- Nec enim Libert as gratior extat Quam Domino servire bono. -- As for the
two Statutes of Edward the third, you know I have granted, that the Triennial
Act of Charles the second does not at all infringe their force; and I have told
you I wish they may for ever stand to preserve the Right of the King in calling
frequent Parliaments when he judges them necessary, as well as to maintain the
Rights of the People in having them.

BENCHER.
He talks next of a Statute made in Richard the second's Reign, That
Parliaments be held yearly to redress delays in Suits, and to end such Cases as
the Judges doubt.

Also, that in the Ninth of Richard the second, the Duke of Gloucester told the
King, That one old Statute and laudable Custom is approved, that the King once
a year do summon his high Court of Parliament, as you may read in Grafton.

ANIMADVERSION.
First, you have only Grafton's word that the Duke of Gloucester said so. And
suppose the Duke did say so, you have only the Duke's saying for it; and he
does not name the time of that old Statute's making: for, no such Statute was
in being till the time of Richard's Grandfather, viz. King Edward the third;
and then that short succession of time from him could not make any such Statute
an old one. But I grant there had been an ancient Custom of yearly Parliaments,
till at length the people grew weary of it; which (no doubt) was the reason why
the House of Commons in Edward the third's time, agreed to pass those Statutes,
not to have them so frequent unless the King should see need. For, this sense
is clearly implied in the very words of the first of the two Statutes, as I
have shown before. Besides, I once again assure you, No such Statute is to be
found that says any thing about the matter, in the times elder than Edward;
only there had been a Custom, which the people held as laudable till they saw
reason to alter it in that King Edward's days.

As for yearly Parliaments to redress delays in Suits of Law, and end difficult
Cases, there is no such Statute which he mentions to be found; nor is it likely
that the Commons should be called to such kind of work of determining such
Suits, they having never had jurisdiction so to do. Nor could it have been a
Parliament, after the manner of the Parliamentary Constitution then in being,
if the Lords had assembled alone to end Suits. Therefore it is in no wise
likely that there ever was any Intention to make such a Statute about the
Calling of Parliaments yearly to end such Lawsuits. Nor are such difficult
Suits as pass the skill of the Judges, or so many of them, happening constantly
in a years time, as to need a Parliament to end them.

BENCHER.
The ancient Britains (as Dunwallo writes) held Annual Parliaments four hundred
years before Christ; and the Mirror of Justice says, King Alfred ordained
parliaments twice in the year, or oftener; and William the Conqueror did the
like.

ANIMADVERSION.
Here learned Mr. Bencher shows his Reading. So the old Britains went naked
before Christ's time, and many odd fashions came up in the times of the Saxons,
the Danes, and Normans, both in Clothes and Government. Does this oblige us to
the like now? To what end then is this old threadbare stuff brought hither to
stuff his Pamphlet? I have granted over and over, that Parliaments of old were
so frequent as he says: but I suppose it would do the people of England little
service to tell them what a sort of Parliaments they were, and how composed of
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, etc. I suppose we should be loath to have such
Parliaments now. And yet according to Mr. Bencher's learned way of Arguing, if
we be obliged to one Circumstance of Example, we are also as much bound to
observe the other. If to the timing of Parliaments as of old, then also to the
form and manner of them. But Time and Law having provided better things for the
people, his Worship's way of arguing Us into old Fashions again is as
pertinent, as if he would prove John a Nokes should be bound to make all good
that was devised by his sixteen hundred and tenth
great-great-great-Grandfather, whose name was John-a-Stiles, if the Writings of
the Devise were to be found in Dunwallo.

BENCHER.
I must tell you, there are those that affirm the Laws for Annual Parliaments
to be Musty obsolete Statutes whose strength and life are devoured by Time. But
it is enough to stop their mouths, that they have been Declared by two
Parliaments, within forty years last past, to be the Laws of our Realm.

ANIMADVERSION.
Who are they that are so weak-headed as to say they are Musty and Obsolete?
Neither his Majesty nor his Parliament will give 'em thanks for saying so: nor
does the Prorogation need such an Allegation to maintain it good. I have
sufficiently shown, that the sense of the two Statutes, if entirely taken,
makes fully for the Right of the King to judge whether Parliaments Annually be
needful or not: and that within Forty years time two Parliaments have confirmed
their Frequencie, and so frequent as every year, or oftener, if his Majesty see
Occasion shall require their Assembling so often. Therefore he has much more
reason to defend them, than the Faction has to make such ado about them,
unless they could get more Credit to their own Cause by a Rational Construction
of them.

BENCHER.
My Lord Coke says, Instit. part 1. page 81. That no Act of Parliament can
lose its force, or be antiquated by Non-user, unless the Reason of it fail, and
by change of time it become a public Mischief, etc.

ANIMADVERSION.
It seems the Reason for having constant yearly Parliaments did fail in Edward
the Third's time, or else his Parliament had never devised those two Statutes,
and put in the words IF NEED BE, so far to change the ancient Custom of their
frequencie, as not to hold them so often, unless Need require; and of that
Necessity who can be a Judge but the King, whom our Laws have Hereditarily
invested with all the Rights of Government, of which this sort of Judicatory
power is a principal? Wherefore, the Reason of the ancient frequencie being out
of date long since, it was well done by this Parliament, upon new Reason more
suitable to the Condition and Temper of this Age, to ascertain us of holding
Parliaments in the future with frequencie more convenient for us.

However, it is worth the observation what his Master-ship does grant, that
Non-user may antiquate Acts of Parliament, and make them lose their Force, if
the Reason of them fail, or if by change of time they become a Public
Mischief. As for the Reason of King Edward's Act, I have shown already that his
Parliament had nothing in their Reason of making them, that savours of the Old
Custom of yearly frequencie, otherwise than with Condition there shall be need:
nor do they contain any sense that gives us cause to plead that they are
antiquated, or to desire an antiquation of them; because to Repeal them would
be an Injury to the King. But next let me add this, that in the two late
Triennial Acts it is implied, that in these days things are altered to such a
pass, that there was high Reason to be no longer bound to the ancient Custom of
that Annual frequencie which his Mastership pleads for; and thereby you have
the Determination of two whole Parliaments, the FORTY ONE Parliament and this
Parliament, that the Reason of the said Custom at Common law fails, and that
public Inconveniences, if not public Mischief, would follow, if it were
practiced in our time, or else it is in reason to be supposed they never would
have altered it. Therefore, seeing his Mastership does admit what I have made
evident in the foregoing part of this Discourse, that there has been a
Non-user of King Edward's two Statutes, in any such sense as he and his fellows
do impose, they having never been so put in practice by Edward himself, or by
any succeeding King to this day, we with all assurance conclude, that a
pleading of Non-user is a good Plea against the two Statute's being in force
for such an absolute yearly frequencie, as the Faction does insinuate into the
minds of the people: Especially when two Parliaments before-nam'd have judged,
that Reason of public Good and Convenience now lies against having them so
frequent as within a year, and that the time of Three years is soon enough,
unless there be need.

Nothing then but a spirit of Sedition or Treason would have fixed such a
Construction as these men have lately made upon the said Statutes, with a
mighty Clamor, as if Noise would carry it among reasonable men. But their
Construction being every way proved naught, all the Arguments founded upon that
Bottom do necessarily fall; and Master Bencher and the rest of the Disputants
ought to be tried before a Bench of Academian Sophisters, that they may be
brought under Correction for that wretched Beggary, A Begging of the Question.

A way then with the Questions with which he stuffs up all the rest of his
Book, because they are grounded upon the same sad account of Petitio Principii,
and so are altogether impertinent to the Point in hand, till they can better
prove their own Construction of the two Statutes to be a right one, or that
those Statutes were at any time since their making put in use and practice,
upon supposal of any such absolute Meaning as he and his Fellow-writers would
fasten upon them. His Questions follow.

BENCHER.
1. Whether the Statutes for yearly Parliaments may be dispensed with by the
King's Sovereign Power and Prerogative, being (as some say) only Counsels and
Advices to the King, not obligatory.

ANIMADVERSION.
Who are those some that say so? If any did, they talked as idly as Master
Bencher writes, and as little to the purpose: for his Mastership hereupon
starts up an invidious Question, Whether the King may dispense with Laws and
Statutes?

I rather suppose the SOME that say so never were men of God's making, but mere
men of straw set up by Master Bencher, for a Trial of his own Skill in
Confutation and Conquest, and to entertain his Majesty's subjects with
Supposals that there is strange Doctrine at Court in matter of Law; that so
himself may take occasion to lug in a long discourse to prove the Negative,
that his Majesty cannot dispense. But know once for all, that there is none
under heaven who can be more tender of the currencie of Law and Legal
Constitutions than the King Himself is, especially such as are Parliamentary:
and it would be the joy of the Faction if they could really find Him
otherwise; or if they could by any Tricks of State, (such as were shown in
several Sessions of Parliament before last February-Session) play in upon Him
the necessity of having recourse to that Supreme Law, the Idol of the FORTY ONE
Parliament (Salus Populi suprema lex) to save Himself and his People from such
Confusions and Destructions as the Counsels of the Faction, if they proceed,
will bring upon us. I may well call it the Idol of that Parliament, considering
how they abused that Maxim in a causless using it against his Majesty's
Father, perfidiously pleading the Safety of the People to justify whatsoever
they did, as confidently as if the People could have been saved no other way,
if they had kept within the Bounds of Ordinary law. But the ordinary path of
Law is that which his Majesty desires to walk in; and to prove the Truth of
this, we need only to recollect the past Provocations given Him by the late
extravagances of some men, which would have provoked any Prince less patient,
to other Courses than he has taken, to secure Himself, his Affairs, his
Friends, and the Interest of his Crown. And as to that point of the
Prorogation, he did not thereby assume to Himself any power to dispense with
the Laws relating to the Course of Parliament, but kept within the Bound of
Law, as is abundantly proved: Therefore the dragging in this Question of yours
must needs be very impertinent, as well as maliciously meant, good Master
Bencher; and so are all the vile Inferences that you have made thereupon to
catch the People.

BENCHER.
2. His Second Point under question is, Whether the Kings dismission of the
Parliament without any day set for their return, and their continuing so beyond
a year, be a Dissolution? or whether such a failer in Time only may by Act of
Law dissolve a Parliament, even against the Will of the King?

ANIMADVERSION.
So, so; All is out now. The main Point they drive at is, to Dissolve the
Parliament against the Will of the King: but what pretense has the Bencher for
declaring it Dissolved? Not a tittle more than what was alleged by the
DISSOLVER. He said, Dismission of a Parliament sine Die amounts to a
Dissolution. But how comes it, that the Fifteenth of February, the day to which
the Parliament was prorogued or dismissed, is reckoned to be No day? They prove
this as fast as Hops, because it is to be reckoned No day in construction of
Law, in regard it exceeded three months beyond the term of Twelve, and beyond
Twelve no Parliament can by Law live; and dying at the years end, it cannot be
made alive again by Prorogation. This is a very fine and quick dispatch: but
it is to be answered too as fast as Hops now, that King Edward and his Statutes
meant no such quick Births and sudden Deaths of Parliaments as these men would
persuade us: so that notwithstanding all the Clouds that some persons raised
about it, the 15th of February appeared a fair day in Law, and to all other
intents and purposes; and it gave us daylight enough to discern the vanity and
folly of the Faction, and its chiefest Advocates, with their matchless
Confidence, grounded upon the Construction of no better Lawyers than Master
Bencher himself and his fellows appear to be, viz. pitiful Logicians,
Lack-learning Lawyers: for, they are his own words, which in page 22. he
frankly bestows upon all Gentlemen of the long Robe, that are of less malice
and more understanding. Therefore his Friend the new-elected Member may come up
to Town if he please; for the Body to which he belongs is yet alive, and like
to continue in good Health, notwithstanding all the endeavors that have been
used to put it out of temper.

Thus far I have been giving you the utmost that has been argued by all the
Three books which the Projecting Faction have hitherto proclaimed to be
unanswerable: But now you see, a very little Learning in Law, they having no
Law on their side, goes a great way with them: They are better at Vp-cry, and
Outcry, and Down-cry, and just so much Construction of Law and Gospel as will
serve to beat up Drums in the Pulpit; for, that is the way of doing their work,
without Wit or Reason. And therefore I was willing to spend the more time about
those Books, that I might not omit any one thing in them that is considerable;
that so the World may see how small cause they have for all their Clamor; and
that the Parliament did Justice, when they condemned so many of these Prints as
came to their hands, to be fired by the hand of the Hangman.

The next Pamphlet that comes to hand is a Thing that pretends to little of
Argument, but takes occasion from the Imprisonment of the Four Lords to rail at
and revile and scandalize the whole Government most sufficiently, especially
the Parliament in the most odious terms that could be invented.

It is Entitled, A Narrative of the cause and manner of the Imprisonment of
the Lords, now close Prisoners in the Tower of London. And it is intended to
walk abroad among the People, to persuade them that their Lordships suffer
Martyrdom for maintaining the Nation's Rights and Liberties: whereas the very
Truth is, they are but one man's Martyrs, being misled by him. It Is a little
leven that leveneth the whole lump. Behold, how great a matter a little fire
kindles! Can a man take fire into his bosom and not be burnt? Nay, though it
be but a small Squib, it will do the Feat if it be not well put out, especially
on the return of Gunpowder-Treason-days. Therefore I will be so charitable, as
not to think that all the Four Lords had a hand in this malicious work. My
reason is, It can hardly consist with a Man of Honor, unless he be one that
has often forfeited it, to be petitioning his Prince, and at the same time to
be plotting a Libel against Him. It was about the time that the Petition was
delivered to the King at Newmarket in April last, that this Printed Narrative
came to my hand; and after perusal, finding it was full fraught with Revenges
and Falsities, it proved the occasion of my now taking Pen in hand, to cure all
the Tetters of State that are to be cured with Ink; of which none is so
virulent and Corrosive as this. We expect to see it more openly published, as
soon as the Faction shall find the lucky day they hope for: but in the mean
while the Books are kept in and ready dormant all, except those which they
craftily convey in private, to inflame their Party in City and Country against
this Parliament. It begins thus.

NARRATIVE.
On Thursday the 15th of February, the Parliament (as they call themselves) or
the Convention (as I hear others generally call them) met. And at the same
time, a vast number of people filled Westminster Hall, the Court of Requests,
the Painted Chamber, the Lobbies, and all places near the Parliament House;
that the like was never seen upon the Meeting of this, or of any other
Parliament in our memory. They did earnestly desire and expect they would
declare themselves to be No Parliament.

ANIMADVERSION.
There was little difference betwixt the number of people at the opening of
that February-Session, and the number that went to be at the Opening of other
Sessions of Parliament. But how weak soever this Narrator's Memory be, I and
Thousands more can remember, and the City of London can, and will remember,
what they got by it, when it began to be Flowing water of Rebellion with the
same Faction in 1641, what a mighty Inundation of the Multitude they sent down
to Westminster to fill that Hall, and besides the Lobbies, Court of R^quests,
Court of Wards, and Painted Chamber, that whole City, White Hall, the Strand
and All, was filled with a Mad Crew, crying out upon King, Evil Counselors,
Bishops, French and English Popery, Fears, Jealousies, and Grievances. And as
Cats are let blood in the Ear many times by old women to cure the Shingles, so
the whole Posse of Sermoning Matrons (the chief Garrison of the Presbyterian
Clergy) made a Sally out of the City, and went down also to bleed Strafford
and Canterbury, as the only means to cure all our Evils.

I should not mention these things, but that I am forced with grief of heart to
it, now that I see the same Humors would be preached about anew by the same
impenitent restless Faction, if they could but cheat the Old men again, who saw
and cannot forget these things so easily; but the Faction now delude the
Younger men, who never saw yet a Bleeding, nor the sport of Bear-baiting the
King's Ministers and Privy Counselors, in whom lies all His Safety at such a
season. I remember what some of the Leaders then said, Have we got him to part
with Strafford? Then he must deny us nothing; the rest at Court, being
frighted, will fall in with us to save themselves: and so it proved too true of
too many of them, that for their childrens sakes I forbear the naming. But by
this means those Leaders got the Football before 'em, and the King was fain to
run for it, but could never recover it.

And then what got the Nation by it? I think we all know: but that the young
men of the City may have an Account of the Gains of their Predecessors, take
it as follows, it having been drawn up by one that was in those days a Member
of Parliament. Some concern the City alone, and some were charged upon both
City and Country.

1. A Tax called the Royal Subsidy of Three hundred thousand pounds. (I think
it was the Tax they got the King to pass, to pay the Scotch Presbyterian Army,
which themselves had brought a little before into this Kingdom to compass their
Ends.)

2. Poll-money.

3. The Free Loans and Contributions upon the Public Faith, of Money, Plate,
Thimbles, Bodkins, Horse, Arms, etc. amounting to a vast incredible sum. (I
remember, and mine eyes saw at Guild Hall, Plate brought in out of the Citizens
houses, and heaped up like huge Woodpiles.)

4. The Irish Adventure money (most out of this City) for purchase of lands in
Ireland (which the King's Father called a dividing of the Bears skin before
they had conquered him.)

5. The Weekly Meal-money; (that is to say, the Citizens spared a Meal out of
their own bellies, converting the value of it into Cash, to be presented after
their Plate.)

6. The City loan, after the rate of fifty Subsidies.

7. The Assesment of Money to bring on a Presbyterian Army of Scots a second
time.

8. The Fifth and Twentieth part of men's estates.

9. The Weekly Assesment for the Lord General Essex his Army.

10. The Weekly (or Monthly) Assesment for Sir Thomas Fairfax 's Army.

11. The Weekly Assesment for the second Scotch Presbyterian Army after it had
entered England.

12. The Weekly Assesment for the British Army in Ireland.

13. The Weekly Assesment for my Lord of Manchester 's Army.

14. Free Quarter connived at by the Rulers.

15. Sequestrations of the King's, Queen's, and Prince's Revenue.

16. Sequestrations and Plunders by Committees.

17. Excise upon all things.

Whereupon the Gentleman who drew up this Account wrote thus: [By these several
Ways and Taxes, about Forty Millions in Money and Money's worth were milked out
of the Nation, the most part out of this City; and that Parliament (as the
Pope did once) might well have called England Puteum inexhaustum. A vast
Treasure it was! such a one as nothing but a long Peace could have imported;
and nothing but pious Frauds, many Follies, and a Mad War could dissipate. And
yet all this prodigious Sum was drained away and spent before the year 1647. in
but six years; so that we do not reckon the vast Sums fetched out of the City
and Kingdom, to carry on the succeeding Wars which sprang out of this, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, betwixt 1647 and 1654. amounting to another
vast Sum of Moneys, of which I am not able to give any Account.

I might reckon also the many Tuns of Tears and Blood that were drawn out of
the eyes and sides of these three Nations, which the Presbyterian Faction can
never wash off without Tears of Repentance. But let it not be the Repentance of
Judas; such a one as they made in 1648. when they saw the Ball of Empire caught
out of their hands into the hands of Cromwell; and mourned for that, not for the
completed Ruin of the King and his Family; which themselves first began, and
carried on as far as they could. And they must look to have it mentioned, till
they leave off reviving their old Tricks of undermining the Government, and
embroiling the Nation. But this may serve at present, to let the Young men as
well as the old see what the City and Kingdom got by being led by the Nose to
Westminster for a Crying down and shifting of Governors and State-Ministers
under the King; of whose Faults they knew nothing but what they took up upon
the Credit of pretended Patriots, but really crafty designing public Enemies,
as they afterward appeared to be.

And you perceive also how false this Narrator is, when he tells you, that in
the memory of man there never was before February last, such a flocking of
people to Westminster at the opening of a Session of Parliament.

But what went the people out to see? They went to see a Reed shaken with the
wind. But the Wind brought on a Storm upon those that would have shaken the
Foundation of both Houses; which seeing they could not do, a Resolution is
resolved on in mere spite, that it is now no Parliament, but a Convention;
which certainly deserves a severe Animadversion of State upon such as would
turn up the Foundation upon which we stand.

NARRATIVE.
When the King was come, the Commons were sent for up to the Lords House, where
I made a shift to crowd in and hear. The King and Lord Chancellor each of them
made a Speech worthy your consideration, Copies whereof I have here sent you.

ANIMADVERSION.
But he is as false here also, as he was before in the other: for I find
neither of those Speeches enclosed in this Print. He will be wary enough of
printing them, because they are worthy to be often read and considered by all
the people, in order to their satisfaction touching the justice, prudence and
candor of his Majesty's Government: therefore I must needs give you short
Heads of the Kings Speech, that the sinister intents and boisterous invective
discourses of some men may be the better understood.

The King in his Speech of the 15 of February told his Lords, and the Gentlemen
of the House of Commons: That he had called them together again after a long
Prorogation, that they might have an opportunity to repair the Misfortunes of
the foregoing Session, and to recover and restore the right use and end of
Parliaments.

That he was resolved to let the World see, that it should not be his fault if
they be not made happy by their Consultations in Parliament.

That he plainly declared he came prepared to give them all satisfaction and
security in the great concerns of the Protestant Religion, as it is established
in the Church of England, that can consist with reason and Christian prudence.

And that he declared as freely, that he is ready to grant a further securing
of our Liberties and Properties, by as many good Laws as they shall propose,
and can consist with the Government; without which there will be neither
Liberty nor Property left to any man.

That he would have all men judge, who is most for Arbitrary Government, they
that foment such differences as tend to dissolve all Parliaments, or He, that
would preserve this and all Parliaments from being made useless by such
Dissentions.

That if these good Ends should happen to be disappointed, He calls God and men
to witness, that the misfortune of that disappointment shall not lie at his
door.

What can be more desired from a gracious King? But it is not the mode, nor
agreeable to the temper and business of some men in the world, to rest as men
satisfied with Reason, though perhaps they be. These are they at whose door the
guilt of Parliamentary Constitutions must lie, if ever God for our sins should
permit them to proceed. For, they of the Faction cannot fish in the waters of
Monarchy; they would have a Senate with Oligarchs over it, in stead of a
Monarch. For the Narrator says we ought not to use the word Parliament now;
but the word Convention is better.

Nor is it any part of the Faction's business to be content with the
Established Religion, or Liberty and Property; these are words which they know
how to make use of, by sprinkling them as flowers of Rhetoric in all their
Writings and Discourses: they work upon the People with them, as Witches do
with Charms, Characters, and Spells, to bewitch the Multitude with an opinion
against the Court, and that all is in danger that way, and that themselves are
the only Patrons and Patriots, when in the mean time they only tickle them
like Trouts with these things, to catch them, and enslave them to their own
designs and humors, for pulling the Government in pieces; which is the only
Bulwark of Religion, Liberty, and Property: For, as the King well says before,
without this there will be neither Religion, Liberty, Property nor Safety left
to any man. The Truth whereof we found by woeful experience, which ensued after
the very same Witchcrafts had bereaved the people of their Senses in FORTY ONE
to run headlong into Civil Wars, which lasted so long, till Twenty years
Suffering under loss of Religion, Liberty, Property, Safety, Government, and
all, made them long and sigh after their Sovereign Lord again as the only
Restorer.

Look back then once again upon those short Heads of His Majesty's Speech with
an impartial eye, and you have in view so many demonstrations of Wisdom,
Moderation, Tenderness for this Parliament, and the future being of Parliaments
in their ancient Legal state; as also of Love and Kindness toward his People,
that more cannot be uttered by Man to cast out the devil of Jealousy, and keep
it from haunting the Houses of this people any more.

His Majesty in one of the Heads says to this effect; That without keeping
within the compass of the Government, as the Laws have stated every part of it,
viz. in a delicate Medium betwixt the Regal Prerogative and the Parliamentary
Right and Liberty of the people, so as both may be preserved entire, unto Kings
and unto Parliaments, in their several Stations, neither Religion, Liberty,
Property, nor Safety, nor Parliaments, can be maintained. The Reason is plain,
because the Law of the land, which is the Band that ties all together, being
once broken by any one of the Parties, they immediately fall asunder, and will
easily be cleft into a thousand pieces, and the Parliamentary Constitution not
easily be restored, as it appeared upon the FORTY ONE Divisions, for Twenty
years together. Experience (says the Proverb) is the Mistress of Fools. Must
we always then be Fooling for new Experiments of our old Foolery? One would
think we should have been wiser by this time, than to suffer the same Faction
to inchant us any more.

But because a better Description of Kingly and Parliamentary Interest of
Government cannot be had than what was described by the Pen of His Majesty's
Royal Father, in His Answer to the Nineteen Propositions, presented to him by
that Parliament of the Faction, anno 1642. June 2. let me here set it down, in
regard it will be the best Informer of posterity what to do in like Cases, to
prevent future Troubles that may arise again, through men's acting old Cheats
over and over. His words are these: [There being Three kinds of Government
among men; Absolute Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, and all these having
particular inconveniences, the experience and wisdom of our Ancestors has so
molded our Government in England, out of a Mixture of all Three, as to give
this Kingdom (so far as Humane wisdom can provide) the Conveniences of the
Three, without the Inconveniences of any One, as long as the Balance hangs
even between the Three Estates, and while they run jointly on in their proper
Channels, (begetting verdure and fertility in the Meadows on both sides) and
while there is no overflowing of either on either side, to raise a Deluge or
Inundation.

In this Kingdom the Laws are jointly made by a King, by a House of Peers, and
by a House of Commons chosen by the People, all having free Votes and
particular Privileges. The Government according to our Laws, is trusted to the
King, with power of Treaties of War and Peace, of making Peers, of choosing
Officers and Counselors for State, Judges for Law, Commanders for Forts and
Castles, giving Commissions for raising men to make War abroad, or to provide
against Invasions or Insurrections at home, Benefit of Confiscations, power of
Pardoning, and some more of the like kind, are placed in the King. And this
Monarchy thus regulated, having this power to preserve that Authority without
which it would be disabled to preserve the Laws in their force, and the
Subjects in their Liberties and Properties, is intended to draw to him such a
Respect and Relation from the Great Ones, as may hinder the Ills of Division
and Faction, and procure such a Fear and Reverence from the People, as may
hinder Tumults, Violence, and Licentiousness.

Again, that the Prince may not make use of this high and perpetual Power to
the hurt of those for whose good he has it, and make use of the name of
Public Necessity for the gain of his private Favorites and Followers, to the
detriment of his People, the House of Commons (an excellent Conserver of
Liberty, but never intended for any Share in the Government, or for the choosing
of them that should govern) is soly entrusted with the first Proposition
concerning levies of Moneys, which are the sinews of Peace as well as War, and
with the Impeaching of those, who for their own ends, though countenanced by
any surreptitiously gotten Command of the King, have violated that Law, which
he is bound (when he knows it) to protect, and to the protection of which
they were bound to Advise him, at least not to serve him in the contrary. And
the Lords being trusted with a Judiciary power, are an excellent Skreen and
Bank between the Prince and the People, to assist each against any
Encroachments of the other, and by just Judgments to preserve that law, which
ought to be the Rule of every one of the Three.]

I would not have transcribed this, but that I conceive it impossible to make a
more excellent Delineation of the several Concerns of the King and his Subjects
in the Constitution of our English Government, that every one may understand
what is their due by Law, and how Monstrous the Demands were in those Nineteen
Propositions, the first of which was: [That those Lords and others of your
Majesty's Privy Council, and such great Officers and Ministers of State,
either at home or beyond the Seas, may be put from your Privy Council, and
from those Offices and Employments, excepting such as shall be approved of by
both Houses of Parliament, etc.] The rest of the Demands were agreeable to
this. But what answered the King to these things? [These (said he) being
passed, We may be waited on bare-headed, We may have Our hand kissed; the Style
of Majesty continued to Us; and the King's Authority declared by both Houses
of Parliament may be still the Style of your Commands: We may have Swords and
Maces carried before Us, and please our Self with the sight of a Sword and
Scepter, (and yet even these Twigs would not long flourish, after the Stock
upon which they grew becomes dead) but as to true and real Power We should
remain but the outside, but the Picture, but the Sign of a King. We were ever
willing that Our Parliament should debate, resolve and transact such matters as
are proper for them, as far as they are proper for them, and We heartily wish
that they would be careful, not to extend their Debates and Resolutions beyond
what is proper to them, etc.] But alas, instead of hearkening to this, they
without reason carried all before them like a mighty Stream, and so the fatal
Wars came on, because the King would not be unking'd, by giving away the
Flowers of his Crown: If he would not part with 'em by such fair means, they
resolved to have 'em by foul. But remember this, that God suffered not any of
the first Hotspurs and Beginners, to reap any Comfort by the Business: which
(as all Histories will show us) is the common Fate of such Undertakers. And it
were well, if I had room here to make a Stand, to give you a Relation of ours
here in England. But it is time now to return to the Narrator, and tell him, all
this kind of doings was at Westminster within the memory of man.

NARRATIVE.
As soon as the Speeches were made, and the Commons were withdrawn, a Bill was
offered to be read. But the Duke of Buckingham desired to be heard first. Well
then, what said the Duke? It was clear to him the Parliament was Dissolved: for
which opinion he gave his Reasons; which because they are the sum of all that
was said to prove tho dissolution, I shall give you as good and as brief an
account of them as I can.

ANIMADVERSION.
The sum of that Speech (as the Narrator has printed it) amounts but to two
pages: I have a written Copy of it by me, and could Animadvert upon it; but I
would not strip one of the finest Courtiers of the world for leaping aside out
of his proper Element. I am tender of him in many Respects; but it is both my
trouble and my wonder, that the Narrator prints him among the Martyrs that
suffer for the sake of a FACTION; who persecuted the Illustrious Duke his
Lordships father, both in and out of Parliament, till he fell their Sacrifice
by the hand of Felton, and left him the Inheriter of all those Honors and
Fortunes, which flowed from the Bounty of our Kings. Return, return, Noble
Lord, (if it may be) by the way of Penitence, and take Noble Salisbury along
with you well prepared, whose wise Grandfather was the great Instrument, in
making way for that happy Succession, which united both these Kingdoms under
the old name of Great Britain. I have here (my Lord Duke) taken some pains to
convince you and all the World; and I hope I have done it. If any thing more
could be done for you, I would do it, in hope of your Penitence: and I hope I
do not in vain persuade you, because I think your Conscience is not made of the
same metal with a man's, that (as St. Paul says) has been seared with a
red-hot Iron. Think not that I court you; or that I think your fault (as
Circumstances were when you committed it) has left you capable of pardon from
any but the most merciful of Kings, and the extreme commiseration of your
Peers, unless I could think the Destruction of such a Parliament as this a
small matter, (for, this a quick Dissolution would in probability amount to). I
would not have a tittle to say for you, if I did not believe who it was that
drew you in to the Business: which whether REASON of STATE can excuse, is a
weighty Question. If there were any thing in the Arguments of your Speech, more
than what was said in other words by the Considerator, and the Dissolver, I
would give you the satisfaction of handling it; but it seems to me to be but a
mere REHEARSAL, which has in it only more of Wit, and of a Gentleman, than of
the Reason of Law and a Lawyer.

NARRATIVE.
No sooner had the Duke ended his Speech, but my Lord Fretchvil moved to have
him called to the Bar, etc.

ANIMADVERSION.
This Narrator presumes to name many more Lords that spoke pro, and some few
con, that is, against the opinion of the Dissolution. But he says the Lord
Chancellor at length undertook to answer all the Arguments that were or should
be for a Dissolution. If so, then it was no wonder that the House was soon
satisfied, and concluded (as the Narrator says) that the Question should be
laid aside.

But I would have told you before, that he says the Earl of Shaftsbury, upon
the Motion of calling the Duke to the Bar, said, that it would be the taking
away all freedom of speech in Parliament. That would be troublesome indeed to
his Lordship, who has been a very free speaker in Parliament, if we may
believe the printed Letter to a friend in the Country, and those Speeches that
went abroad in print under his name. But no more of that. I would have somewhat
in me now of the Lion, and do pass him by. His Lordship may see by these
Animadversions how little reason he had in Law for so great Confidence in the
Speech which the Narrator says he made also upon the Statutes of Edw. 3. about
yearly Parliaments. I hope he did not sit a Dictator in the Council of these
Printed Dissolvers. If he did, it is but reason the FACTION, or somebody else,
should pay him his Fees.

But before I part with his Lordship, I must needs show him his Error about
the point of freedom of speech in Parliament: and it is absolutely necessary
that I do it, because it is become a villainous Insinuation used by the Narrator,
and the rest of the scandalous Faction round the Town, that the Imprisonment of
the four Lords is done contrary to the ancient Privilege of Parliament, which
is to have a liberty of speech in all Debates. As for this Lord, he need not
complain; he had enough given him, or rather he took it, if the Speeches
printed, with his name to them, be his. Does freedom of speech extend so far as
to make odious Insinuations and Reflections upon the King, upon the Crown and
its Rights, upon the Succession of it, upon the Honor of the House of Peers,
upon the Bishops, upon the whole Church, with the Canons, the Homilies, the 39
Articles, and her Doctrine, as it relates either to God, Religion, or the Civil
obedience due to the King, and the whole Government of State, and the Security
of all these by an Oath of Allegiance? If his Lordship thought that the Law
allowed either Peers or Commons such a liberty of speech, why did he bustle so
diligently and briskly (as I have been told) to promote a Bill, not long since,
against the ancient way of Trial of Peers? Every body then smelt a Rat in the
Case, and smiled at his Lordships wise Providence, and his secret intent of
speaking and acting beyond Compass upon the open Stage: and therefore I did not
wonder, when I did read afterward in the Pamphlet entitled, Debates and
Arguments for Dissolving this Parliament, etc. (which was reported to be his)
that his Lordship was very angry at the House of Commons for throwing out the
said Bill of Trial when it was sent down to them; and tells the Commons, p. 6.
They certainly were grown very high in their own opinion, and had a very low
esteem for the Lords, when they neglected their best friends in the House of
Peers, and did almost with scorn refuse that Bill, entitled, For the more fair
and equal Trial of Peers. I never saw the Bill yet, therefore can say nothing
more of it; only I cannot but take notice, that in the same page, and in many
other parts of that Print, a through-revenge is plentifully bestowed upon the
Honor of the House of Commons. Nothing would then serve the Turn but they must
be turned out of doors, Dissolved, and a new one presently called; an instance
clear enough for discovery out of whose Quiver this Arrow of Dissolution was
first shot, and of great probability who set on the Writers since against the
Prorogation, to break the neck of this Parliament, and in it all the hopes of
the Loyal part of the Nation. And if that aforenamed were the Print of his
Lordship, I might reckon up out of it, and another Print stitcht to the tail of
it, the most virulent Scandals that could be raked together to prepare that
House for the rage of the Rabble. But the Narrator having sum'd up in few words
the sense of the Author, I leave him here, because the Narrative it self will
give the House that short Cut by and by.

In the mean while, if freedom of speaking in Parliament, and after that, of
Printing All and more than All; that is, of more perhaps than was spoken, be to
be construed and extended at this rate, know that the old Customs and Laws
Parliamentary in England know no such matter. A freedom of speech in Debate is
that which every Speaker by ancient Custom, after the House of Commons has
chosen him, and presented him to the King, does petition for to the King on the
behalf of all the Members of that House; and it was never yet denied by any of
our Kings. The Lords also in their House do claim it by Birthright: for, to
what end do they meet, if they may not freely debate matters, without which
it is impossible to come to any Resolution about them? May his hand rot off then
that shall write a word against it. But withal we are to understand, there are
Bounds, Rules and Laws of speaking in either House of Parliament: for, the Law
of Parliaments ever supposes, that the Members ought to keep within the
compass of those Bounds, and observe those Rules, both as to the matter spoken
and the manner of speaking. Every Member has a Right to be heard, and heard
out what he has to say; but then when he has done, the House to which he
belongs has power to judge, whether he has spoken ill or not; and if ill,
then they are the proper Judges to dispose of him to punishment according to
his desert: And this the Law supposes they will always do, they being
interested and entrusted with such Necessary Power and Privilege, for the good
of the King and Kingdom.

Now this is the Case of the most Noble House of Peers. They have as to the
committing of the Four Lords to the Tower, not done it because they spoke; (for
they heard out with great patience what they had to say) but because they
judged what their Lordships had spoken against the Being of this Parliament,
was of most pernicious Consequence, against the Safety and Good of the King and
Kingdom. And to say no more of this, the House was so unanimous in concurring
to their Commitment, after a debate and consideration of the matter (as will
appear upon search of the Books of that House) that it was with great odds of
number carried by the Temporal Lords alone, without reckoning in the Bishops,
or the number of Proxies. And the Narrator himself confesses this was agreed
on after a full Hearing of all that could be said by the four Lords themselves,
or their few Friends; only he mingles many ill-favored Reflections and false
Insinuations in his Relation.

NARRATIVE.
It had been (he says) moved also by the Duke of Buckingham, that the Opinion
of the Judges might be declared in the Point.

ANIMADVERSION.
All Reverence be given to the Judges in due time and place. This was an
arduous Point of a Superlative Nature, touching the very Life and Being of a
Parliament, in a conspiring Factious Season, infinitely above those ordinary
points of Law, touching which that House is wont sometimes to consult my Lords
the Judges, when their Lordships conceive they have need to consult them. But
this was so plain a Case to their Lordships, that having the Judicatory right
and power in their own hands, and in so transcendent an Occasion, it had been a
strange thing to have yielded to such a Motion, merely to gratify those whom
they had judged Offenders. Nor was it to be supposed, that the Judges would
have undertaken to opinionate about so Supreme a Question, wherein the Safety
of all the Concerns of Crown and State were involved, fit only for the Supreme
Judicature to consider.

NARRATIVE.
It was the next day urged by some Lords, in the behalf of the Four Lords, that
three several times, viz. 1 Hen. 7. 1 Qu. Mary. 1 Qu. Eliz. the very same
Debate was in Parliament, yet no man questioned for moving it.

ANIMADVERSION.
Whether those Debates were the same or not, let the world judge, when as the
Narrator himself confesses, it was only about the Forms of the Writs that
summoned the Parliament that the Question in those days was: But this Question
made now was, about the validity of a Prorogation, and the very being of a
Parliament after it. I do not find in my Lord Cook's Treatise about the High
Court of Parliament, that the length of a Prorogation beyond a Years time can
dissolve it; or that a small flaw in the Form of the Writ of Summons can
invalidate a Parliament. But if it were so that it could, yet that is not
within the Case of this Parliament, whose Writ of Summons was never questioned;
nor could the Prorogation have been at all disputed, but that the Faction would
be so bold and mischievous as to do it; and with how slight a color of Reason,
you have already seen in these past Discourses. And now their last Clamor is,
that the House of Peers has condemned the four Lords to Prison, for presuming
to argue a Nullity of the Parliament: And what follows? The Dissolver told us
in his Pamphlet, that a New Parliament is to come that shall call this to
account, and leave a new precedent to the world; That one Parliament may hang
another. And who knows, but that this sort of Penmen, with their Patrons, are
continually of Counsel with the desperate FACTION?

The rest of this Writers Pamphlet contains nothing, but a partial Relation of
Circumstances and Ceremonies, which passed in calling the Four Lords to the
Bar, and about the manner of their Commitment: and then he closes all with a
few odious Reflections upon the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and the
House of Commons; which here follow.

NARRATOR.
He next proceeds in a jeering manner, to mention a new Triple League: but who
are they that are this Triple League? He names Bishops, Court-Lords, and Popish
Lords, who had already broken through the ancient Rules and Practice of
Parliament, and all the Laws of England, and now would go (according to the new
Court-word) thorow-stitch. The rest of the Lords he calls Allies of the Triple
League, who joined in the Commitment.

ANIMADVERSION.
What, a Petition in one hand, and at the same time a Poniard in the other?
Must it be so carried, a Petition to the King, and the same time a Stab given
to his Ministers, great Officers, Bishops, and all the rest of the Nobility of
the House of Peers that concurred with them to preserve the Government? I would
be loath to call the Four Lords, and those few that concurred with them on the
other side (the Allies of the FACTION,) A New Triple League; nor will I; let
other men think what they please. This Jeer sounds like the Witticism of one of
them, that uses to take care to print all his witty Sayings and Jests, as fast
as he speaks them; especially those against the Court and the Bishops, and
Ministers of State, whom he always dresses with this kind of Flowers, to be
offered in Sacrifice to his own New Parliament, as the old Heathen Sacrificers
were wont to dress their Beasts to be offered up to their Idols: therefore if
the word Thorow-stitch were the Word at Court, what would become of him and his
Triple League, if this old Parliament should proceed as roundly as his intended
New one would do, if we believe the DISSOLVER?

Then for the Bishops in particular, he proceeds thus:

NARRATOR.
He says, Under pretense of securing the Protestant Religion by Act of
Parliament, one of the designs of the Triple League is; To declare it lawful
for our Kings to be Papists; As is done in a Bill lately sent down to the
Commons from the Lords; and I do not hear of any one Bishop but agreed to it.

ANIMADVERSION.
This is a Fire-ball with a witness, made up of the most dangerous, but falsest
Ingredients; why then should I be long in extinguishing it? For the Bishops of
England, and their Doctrine, Discipline and Government, will be found the
surest Fence against the coming in of Popery, as well as against the Invasion
of the FACTION, and the Slavery of their Discipline. Can a greater Provocation
be given to the House of Peers and the Bishops? The Forming of this Bill was
committed to such a Committee of Lords and Bishops, that all our world knows
them to be Noble and true, and as firm as a Rock against the Roman Religion;
and they took the greatest care that men in prudence possibly could do, to
secure us from it at present and in future. And whatsoever the father of lies
may invent, and the FACTION spread abroad to the contrary, to exasperate and
increase their own Party, more could hardly be invented for our Religion's
security. Sure I am, it was thought so by the Papists themselves; and to be so
severe, that they dreaded nothing more than the Consequence of its passing both
Houses; insomuch that some Lords of that Religion opposed it what they could,
and spared not to say, that after this they expected nothing but Fire and Faggot.

NARRATOR.
And that the House of Commons may have their share too of damnable Scandal, he
lets fly at them without mercy, and thus he concludes, that they are (most of
them) either French or Court-pensioners, Indigent, or Out-lawed persons,
Children, Fools, or such as are superannuated persons.

ANIMADVERSION.
But why French Pensioners, etc.? How then came the Major part to be for an
Alliance with the Dutch, as appeared by the late Votes and the Address
thereupon to his Majesty? May not then the other side with as much reason from
thence make the like ungentile and unchristian Conclusion, that there are Dutch
Pensioners too? It Is a miserable pass the world is come to, when men shall take
up Scandals from Malice, Phant'sie, or Jealousy, to dart at one another; and
at this rate there can be no end, till we have railed our selves round before
the eyes of all the Nations of the world, and painted out our selves with the
vilest Characters, to become a subject for their Scorn and Derision.

It were again to scandalize those worthy Members of the Commons that he aims
at; for any man to undertake to vindicate them, against the foul Imputations of
a mad unconscionable sort of desperate Boutefeus. It Is to be hoped the Lords
and Gentlemen of both Houses will take heed of these Spirits, and by the
severest ANIMADVERSIONS of Authority and Justice, make their own Vindication.

FINIS.

