THE Art of Glass, WHEREIN Are shown the ways to make and color Glass,
Pastes, Enamels, Lakes, and other Curiosities.

Written in Italian by Antonio Neri, and Translated into English, with some
Observations on the Author.

Whereunto is added an account of the Glass Drops, made by the Royal Society,
meeting at Gresham College.

LONDON, Printed by A. W. for Octavian Pulleyn, at the Sign of the Rose in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXII.

To the most Illustrious and Excellent Lord Don Antonio Medici. Antonio Neri.
HAving taken much pains for many years from my youth about the Art of Glass,
and having experimented therein, many true and mavelous conclusions, I have
compiled a Treatise of them, with as much clearness as I could, to the end to
publish it to the world, to please and delight (as much as in me lay*) men
understanding in that profession, having found out many things by my own
invention, and some others tried by able men, and found most true. I will make
manifest those hidden Mysteries, for the reasons abovesaid. If I do attain this
my intention it shall occasion me hereafter to be encouraged to publish the
rest of my Labors about other Chemical and Physical matters, having likewise
in both experimented, many most profitable, credible, and admirable
Conclusions, for no other reason, but to understand them truly. I judge that I
ought not to dedicate this Book to any other, but your Illustrious Excellence,
who have been always my singular Protector, as also, because you are
understanding of this, and of whatsoever Noble and Precious knowledge, being
exercised continually in all these Arts, which are required in a true and
generous Prince; I beseech you then to accept, if not the work, yet my devout
mind toward your great merit, and virtue of your most Illustrious Excellence,
for whom I pray to God to prove on you all happiness.

From Florence, 6 Jan. 1611.
To the Curious Reader.
THere is no doubt that Glass is one of the true fruits of the Art of fire,
since that it is very much like to all sort of minerals and middle minerals
although it be a compound and made by Art. It has fusion in the fire, and
permanencie in it; likewise as the perfect and shining Metal of Gold, it is
refined, and burnished, and made beautiful in the fire. It is manifest that
it is use in drinking vessels, and other things profitable for man's service, is
much more gentile, graceful, and noble then any Metal or whatsoever stone fit
to make such works, and which besides the easiness and little charge wherewith
it is made, may be wrought in all places; it is more delightful polite and
sightly, than any other material at this day known to the world. It is a thing
profitable, in the service of the Art of distilling, and Spagyrical, not to say
necessary to prepare Medicines for man, which would be impossible to be made
without the means of Glass, so that herewith are made so many sorts of
Instruments, and Vessels, as Bodies, Heads, Receivers, Pelicans, Lutes,
Retorts, Athenors, Serpentines, Vials, Cruces, square and round Vessels,
Philosophical Eggs, Globes, and infinite other sorts of Vessels, which every
day are invented to compose and make Elixars, Arcana, Quintessences, Salts,
Sulphurs, Vitriols, Mercuries, Tinctures, (...) of Elements, all Metalline
things, and many others, which every day are found out; and besides there are
made others for Aquafortis, and Aqua-regia, so necessary for Refiners, and
Masters of Princes Mints, to Refine Gold and Silver, and to bring them to their
perfection; indeed so many things profitable for man's use are made, that seem
impossible to be made without the use of it: and the great Providence of God,
is as well known, by this, as in every other thing, who has made the matter of
which Glass is compounded (a thing so needful and profitable to man) so
abounding in every place and Region, which with much ease may be every where
made. Glass is also a great ornament to the Churches of God, for herewith
(besides many other things) are made so many beautiful Glass vessels adorned
with fair Pictures, wherein the Metalline colors are in such sort advanced,
and so lively, that they seem to be so many Oriental Gems, and in the Glass
Furnaces, the Glass is colored with so many colors, with so much beauty and
perfection, that it seems no material on the earth can be found like it. The
invention of Glass (if it may be credited) is most ancient, for the holy
Scripture in the Book of Job, Chap. 28. says, Gold and Glass shall not be
equal to it, etc. which gives clear testimony that Glass was anciently
invented, for Saint Hierom says, that Job descended from Abraham, and was the
son of Zanech, who descended from Esau, and so was the fifth from Abraham
himself; some will, and perhaps with some reason, that the invention of Glass
was found out by the Alchymists; for they desiring to Imitate Jewels, found out
Glass; a thing perhaps not far from truth; for as I show clearly in the fifth
Book of the present work, the manner of imitating all Jewels, in which way is
seen the vitrification of stones which of themselves will never be melted nor
vitrified. Pliny says, that Glass was found by chance in Syria, at the mouth
of the river Bellus, by certain Mer^hants driven thither by the fortune of the
Sea, and constrained to abide there, and to dress their provisions, by making
fire upon the ground, where was great store of this sort of herb which many
call Kali, the ashes whereof make Barillia, and Rochetta; This herb burned with
fire, and therewith the ashes and Salt being united with sand or stones fit to
be vitrified is made Glass: A thing that inlightens man's understanding with the
means, and manner of making not only Glass, but Crystal and Crystalline, and
so many other beautiful things which are made thereof. Many assert that in the
time of Tiberius the Emperor was invented the way of making Glass malleable, a
thing afterward lost, and to this day wholly unknown; for if such a thing were
now known without doubt it would be more esteemed for it is beauty, and
incorruptibility, than Silver and Gold; since from Glass there arises neither
rust, nor taste, nor smell, nor any other quality; Moreover it brings to man
great profit, In the use of prospective Glasses and Spheres.

And although one of them may be made of natural Crystal, called, that of the
mountain, and the other with the mixture, called Steel, a composition made of
Brass and Tin, notwithstanding, in both, Glass is more profitable and of less
charge, and more beautiful and of greater efficiency: especially in Spears,
which besides the difficulty, and expenses in making them, they present not to
the life as Glass does, and which is worse, in a short time they grow pale, not
representing any thing. Wherefore for these and many other reasons, you may
well conclude, that Glass is one of the most Noble things which man has at
this day, for his use upon the earth. I having labored a long time in the Art
of Glass, and therein seen many things, I was moved to make known to the world
a part of that which I had seen and wrought therein. And although the manner of
making Salt, Lees, and Frittaes, is known to many, yet notwithstanding it
seemed to me, that this matter requires to be handled (as I do) clearly and
distinctly, with some Observations and diligence, which if well considered will
not be judged altogether unprofitable, but perhaps necessary and known to few:
besides in my particular way of extracting Salts, to make a most noble
Crystal, that if the workman shall be diligent in making it, as I do publish
and teach it, with clear demonstrations he shall do a thing as beautiful, and
noble, as happily is made in these days, or can be done any other way* and in
this thing, and in every other matter that I treat of in this present work, the
diligent and curious operator shall find, that I have wrote and shown truth,
not told me, or persuaded me by any person whatsoever, but wrought and
experimented many times with my own hands, I having always had this aim to
write and speak the truth. And if any one trying my receipts, and manner of
making colors, Paste, and Tinctures, does not speed to do so much as I write
thereof, let him not be amazed thereat, nor believe that I have writ untruths,
but let him think that he has erred in something, and especially they which
have never handled such things; For it is impossible that they at the first
time should be masters: therefore let them repeat the work, which they shall
always make better, and at the last perfect as I describe it. I warn them in
particular to have consideration in colors whose certain and determinate dose
cannot be given: but with experience and practice one must learn, and with eye
and judgment know when Glass is sufficiently colored, conformable to the work,
for which it ought to serve, and in Paste made in imitation of Jewels
conformable to the size, whereof they will make them, Observing that those
which are to be set in Gold, with Foyls, as in Rings, or other where, must
always be clear, and of a lighter color. But those that are set in Gold to
stand hanging in the air, as Pendants, and the like, must be of a deeper
color, all which things it is impossible to teach, but all is left to the
judgment of the Curious operator. Observe likewise, and with diligence that
the materials and colors be well prepared, and well ground, and that he who
will make an exquisite work, may be the securer, let him prepare, and make all
the colors himself as I teach, for so he shall be sure that his work must
happily succeed. The fire in this Art is of notable importance, as that which
makes every thing perfect, and without which nothing can be done: Wherefore
consideration is to be had in making it in proportion, and particularly with
hard, and dry-wood, taking heed of it is smoke, which always hurts, and
endamageth it, especially in furnaces, where the vessels and pots stand open,
and the Glass will then receive imperfection, and notable foulness. Moreover, I
say that if the operator shall be diligent, and shall do like a diligent and
practiced person, and shall work punctually as I have set down, he shall find
truth in the present work, and that I have only published, and set out to the
world as much as I have tried and experimented. And if I find my pains
acceptable to the world, as I hope I shall be encouraged perhaps to publish my
other labors wrought for many years in diverse parts of the world in the
Chemical and Spagyrical Arts, than which I think there is no greater thing in
nature for man's service, known and perfect in ancient times; which made men
expert in it to be held for Gods, which then were held and reputed for such. I
will not enlarge my self any farther, because I have in the work set down every
particular, so clear, and distinct. I rest secure, that he which will not err
wilfully, it is impossible he should do so having thereof once made experience
and practice. Therefore let all be taken of me in good part, as I have heartily
made this present work, first, to the glory of God, and then to the just
benefit and profit of all.

To the Honorable, And true Promoter of all solid Learning, ROBERT BOIL, Esquire
SIR,
THis Treatise challenges the inscription of Your name for many reasons. The
Author of it Dedicated this piece to a Person of Honor, and eminent parts,
both which concur in you, and herein I thought fit to follow his Footsteps.
Then Your ability to judge of the piece, being for the most part Chemical,
wherein You have showed the world not only Your great progress and singular
knowledge, but have also taught it the true use of that most beneficial Art, as
to the improvement of Reason and Philosophy. Most Writers therein delivering
only a farrago of processes and unintelligible Enigm'as. But You have chalked
out the way of solid reasoning upon whatsoever occurs to observation in such
experiments. Next, you were the principal cause that this Book is made public,
by proposing and urging my undertaking of it, till it came to a command from
that most Noble Society, and serious indagators of Nature, meeting at Gresham
College, whose desire I neither could nor ought to decline. Though their, and
your choice might have been much more happy, there being many of that company
far more adapted for this undertaking than my self. Besides, I doubt not but
You will much promote by Your practice the Art it is self, there being scarcely
any thing contained in it, but You have already judiciously had experience in.
Not, because this Translation will any whit avail You (since Your skill in the
native Language is sufficiently known to all that have the honor to be
acquainted with You) but may be compendious to You for such as You shall employ
in these operations. Furthermore I have herein also satisfied Your vast desire
of communicating knowledge to others, who though intelligent of the Language
could not procure Copies in the Original; And lastly the candor of your genius
no less than that of your intellectuals ready to excuse the errors, and slips
whatsoever of,

Sir, Your most humble and most regardful Servant, C. M.

To the ingenuous Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IAm to advertise thee of some things, concerning the Translation of this Book.
You may take notice that I had first Translated it word for word, but finding
that the Author had thorowout the whole, so often repeated the same thing, by
advice of some ingenuous persons, I left out those repetitions, and have either
before the Books given a general account of these repetitions, or else have
referred you to a former process, where the latter has reiterated the same,
and for the most part in the very same words, yet so that I have omitted
nothing material in the Author: For what need is there to say, as ofteu as
Manganese is boiled with the metal, that you must do thus and thus, lest it
run into the fire, etc? or to repeat the same process* and rules in ^ach new
color for Pastes or Glass of Lead? Though you may find some needless
repetitions too, in this Translation not omitted. I confess these reiterations
caused a nausea in my self, and believe they would in thee, and therefore I
passed them over. Then observe that there being many words peculiar to this
Art, I was compelled to have recourse to the workmen, and for sueh things, and
materials not used nor known here, to take them upon trust from such workmen as
have wrought at Muran and other parts of Italy. As for other things I have
carefully surveid them my self. Now for the observations I have been more
large, especially in a business, wherein so little has been said, and
therefore have delivered whatsoever is material that I have met with in any
good Author concerning whatsoever Neri treats of, that thou might have
together all that is substantially written upon this unusual subject, and have
supplied some things defective in our Author, or very fit to be known to
Curious persons. Lastly, I doubt not but our workmen in this Art will be much
advantaged by this publication, who have within these twenty years last past
much improved themselves (to their own great reputation, and the credit of our
nation) insomuch that few foreiners of that profession are now left amongst us.
And this I the rather say, because an eminent workman, now a Master, told me
the most of the skill he had was gained by this true and excellent Book (they
were his own words,) And therefore I doubt not but 'twill give some light and
advantage to our Contrymen of that profession, which was my principal aim.
And lastly for the exotic words you will meet with in Reading this Book they are
now current with us, or* else expounded in my observations.

Fruere and utere. C. M.

To avoid our Authors Repetitions, Observe
1 ALl the fires must be made with dry and hard Wood.

2. When the Glass is colored before you work it, mix the colors well (which
otherwise sink to the bottom of the pot) with the metal that the Glass may be
colored throughout. This must be observed all the time you work the Glass into
any vessels.

3. The sign that Brass or Copper are well calcined is, that they being put
into the metal, make it swell and suddenly rise, if they be calcined too much
or too little, those signs are wanting, and Glass made thereof will be Black
and foul.

4. Manganese consumes the natural greenness of Glass.

5. Copper, Brass, Lead, Iron, and all compositions of them as also Manganese,
must be put into the metal, but a little at a time, and at convenient
distances, and the pot must be large, and not filled too full, because they all
swell and rise much, and so are apt to run over* into the fire to your loss.

To extract the salt of Polverine, Rochetta, and Barillia, wherewith Crystal
Fritt called Bollito is made.
The foundation of the Art of Glasswork, with a new and secret way.

CHAP. I.
POlverine, or Rochetta, which comes from the Levant and Syria, is the ashes of
a certain herb growing there in abundance: there is no doubt but that it makes
a far whiter salt than Barillia of Spain, and therefore* when you would make a
Crystal very perfect and beautiful, make it of salt extracted from Polverine
or Rochetta of the Levant. For though Barillia yield more salt, yet Crystal
made therewith always inclines to a blewness, and has not that whiteness and
fairness as that made of Polverine has.

The way often by me practiced to extract the salt perfectly from both of them,
is this which follows.

Powder these ashes, and sift them with a fine sieve, that the small pieces go
not through, but only the ashes; the finer the sieve, the more salt is
extracted. In buying of either of these ashes, observe that they abound in
salt; this is known by touching them with the tongue, and tasting what salt
they contain: but the safest way of all is, to make an essay of them in a
melting-pot, and to see whether they bear much sand, or Tarso, a thing common
in this Art, and which the Conciators very well know.

Set up brass coppers with their furnaces like those of the Dyers, greater or
lesser, according as you have occasion to make a greater or lesser quantity of
salt: fill these coppers with fair and clear water, and make a fire with dry
wood, and when the water boyleth well, put in the sifted Polverine in just
quantity and proportion to the water, continue the fire and boiling till a
third part of the water be consumed, always mixing them at the bottom with a
scummer, that the Polverine may be incorporated with the water, and all its
salt extracted; then fill the coppers with new water, and boil it till* half be
consumed, and then you have a lee impregnated with salt. But that you may have
salt in greater quantity, and whiter, put into the coppers when they boil,
before the Polverine is put in, about 12 pound to a copper of Tartar of red
wine, calcined* only to a black color, dissolve it well in the boiling water,
mingling it with a scummer, then put in the Polverine. This way of Tartar is a
secret, and makes more, and whiter salt, and a more beautiful Crystal. When
two thirds of the water is evaporated, and the lee well impregnated with salt,
slacken the fire, under the copper, and have in order many earthen pans, at
first filled with common water for six days, that they may imbibe less lee and
salt, and then with great brass ladles, take the lee out of the copper, and put
it into the said pans, take out also the ashes from the copper, and put them
all into the same pans, and when they are full, let them stand so ten days,
for in that time the ashes will be all at the bottom, and the lee remain very
clear, then with brass ladles, take gently (that the bottom be not raised, and
troubled) the clear lee, and put it into other empty pans, and so let the lee
stand two days, which by the settling of more terrestriety at the bottom,
becomes very clear, and limpid, let this be thrice repeated, and you shall have
the lee most limpid, and discharged of all terrestriety, wherewith a very fine
and perfect salt is made. Let the coppers be filled again, and boil with the
same quantity of Tartar, and then the Polverine as before; continue this work
till you have materials enough.

To strain the said lees, and extract the salt, first wash the coppers well
with clear water, then fill them with the said refined and clarified lees, and
make them boil softly, as before, and observe that you fill the coppers with
the said lee, till you see it thicken, and shoot its salt, which is wont to be
about the beginning of 24 hours, for then in the superficies of the copper, you
will begin to see white salt appearing like a spiders web, or white thread,
then hold a scummer full of holes at the bottom of the copper, and the salt
will fall upon it, and now and then take it out, suffering the lees to run out
well off it into the copper, then put the salt into tubs, or earthen pans, that
the lee may be better drained, the liquor that drains must be saved, and put
into the copper, then dry the salt. Continue this work till all the salt be
gotten out of the copper: but you must observe, when the salt begins to shoot,
to make a gentle and easy fire, for a great fire makes the salt stick to the
copper, and then the salt becoming strong, always breaks the copper, which
thing has sometimes happened to me; wherefore observe this chiefly, using great
patience and diligence. The salt in the pans, or tubs, being well drained, must
be taken, and put into wooden tubs, or vats, the better to dry out all the
moisture, which happens in more, or fewer days, according to the season in
which it is made. The secret then of making much, and good salt, consists in
the Tartar, as is before demonstrated. From every three hundred pound of ashes,
I usually get from 80 to 90 pound of salt. When the salt is well dried, beat it
grossly, and put it into the Calcar to dry, with a most gentle heat, and with
an iron rake it must be broken, and mixed as the Fritt is; when it is well
dried from all its moisture, observing always that the Calcar be not very hot,
but temperate, take it out of the Calcar, and pound it well, and sift it so,
that the greatest pieces which pass through, exceed not the bigness of a grain
of wheat.

This salt thus pounded, sifted and dried, must be kept by it self, in a place
free from dust, for to make Fritt of Crystal: the way to make this Fritt is
this which follows.

The way to make Fritt for Crystal, otherwise called Bollito.

CHAP. II.
WHen you would make fair, and fully perfect Crystal, see you have the whitest
Tarso, which has not black veins, nor yellowish like rust in it. At Moran they
use the pebles from Tesino, a stone abounding in that River. Tarso then is a
kind of hard, and most white marble, found in Tuscany, at the foot of the
Verucola of Pisa, at Seraveza, and at the Massa of Carara, and in the River
Arnus, above and below Florence, and it is also well known in other places.
Note, that those stones which strike fire with a steel, are fit to vitrifie,
and to make glass and Crystal, and those which strike not fire with a steel,
will never vitrifie, which serves for advice to know the stones that may be
transmuted, from those that will not be transmuted into glass.

Take then of the best Tarso, pounded small, and serced as fine as flower, 200
pound; of salt of Polverine pounded, and fifted also, about 130 pound, mix them
well together, then put them into the Calcar, which at first must be well
heated, for if they be put into the Calcar when it is cold, Fritt will never be
made of them. At first for an hour, make a temperate fire, and always mix the
Fritt with the rake, that it may be well incorporated, and calcined, then the
fire must be increased, always mixing well the Fritt with the rake, for this
is a thing of great importance, and you must always do thus for 5 hours, still
continuing a strong fire.

The Calcar is a kind of calcining furnace, the rake is a very long instrument
of iron, wherewith the Fritt is continually stirred; both these are very well
known, and used in all glass furnaces. At the end of 5 hours, take the Fritt
out of the Calcar, which in that time (having had sufficient fire, and being
well stirred) is made and perfected. Then put this Fritt in a dry place on a
floor, and cover it well with a cloth, that no dust nor filth may fall upon
it: for herein must be used great diligence, if you will have good Crystal.
The Fritt thus made, becomes as white as snow from Heaven. When the Tarso is
lean, you must add somewhat more than ten pound of the salt to the quantity
aforesaid. Wherefore let the experienced Conciators always make trial of the
first Fritt, by putting it into a chrysible, which being put into the furnace,
if it grow clear, and suddenly, they know whether the Fritt be well prepared,
and whether it be soft, or hard, and whether the quantity of salt is to be
increased, or diminished. This Crystal Fritt must be kept in a dry place,
where no moisture is, for from moist places, the Fritt suffers much, the salt
will grow moist, and run to water, and the Tarso will remain alone, which of it
self will never vitrifie: neither is this Fritt to be wetted, as others are.
And when it is made, let it stand 3 or 4 months, and it will be much better to
put into the pots, and sooner waxes clear. This is the way to make Crystal
Fritt, with the dose and circumstances, which I have often times used.

Another way to extract the salt of Polverine, which makes a Crystal as fair
and clear as natural Crystal: This was my invention.

CHAP. III.
TAke Polverine of the Levant well serced, and put it into great glass bodies,
luted at the bottom, with ashes, or sand, into the furnaces, filling them at
first with common water, give them a temperate fire for some hours in the
furnace, and let them stand till half the water be evaporated; the furnace
being cold, gently decant off the water into earthen pans glased, putting new
water upon the remainder of the Polverine, and let it boil (as before) this is
to be repeated till the water has extracted all the salt; which is known, when
the water appears to the taste not at all saltish, and to the eye when it is
void of color. Take of these Lees what quantity you will, let them be filtred,
and stand in glased pans four or six days to settle, which by this means will
leave a great part of their terrestriety, then put them to filtre anew, thus
will they be purified, and separated from a great part of their terrestriety,
then let these Lees be set to evaporate in great glass bodies, luted at the
bottom, in furnaces, in ashes, or sand, at a gentle fire, and at last when the
stuff is dried, observe that ye fire be very gentle, that the salt be not
burned nor wasted. When the salt is dried, take out the glass bodies and see if
they be broke at the bottom, which is wont to happen often, in which case put
the said salt into other good glasses, well luted at the bottom, and fill them
at the top with common pure and clean water, which set in the furnace, in ashes
or sand, at a gentle fire, and always evaporate an eighth part of the said
water, then, the furnace being cold, empty this water fully impregnated with
salt into earthen pans glased, and when the water is settled 24 hours, filtre it
with diligence, that the salt may be separated from the rest of the
terrestriety and dregs, let this lee be evaporated in glass bodies with a
gentle fire, and at last more gentle, that the salt be not burned, put this
salt again into glass bodies to be dissolved in common water, in every thing as
before repeat this work, till the salt yields no more terrestriety, or dregs,
then shall you have a pure and perfect salt wherewith a Fritt made with Tarso
as before, will make a Crystal, which in fairness, whiteness, and cleerness,
will excel natural Crystal.

An observation for Gold Yellow, in Crystal.

CHAP. IV.
OBserve that when salt of Tartar is mixed with salt of Polverine, Fritt made
of the said salt is not good to make, nor can make, a Gold yellow, although it
make all other colors. But to make your Gold yellow, you must make Fritt with
salt taken from Polverine alone, first purified as above, for otherwise this
yellow will not arise. Although this process be somewhat laborious, and a small
quantity of salt made therewith, yet notwithstanding it will make a Crystal
worthy of all great Princes, being fit to make all sorts of vessels and works.
This was my invention, whereof I have many times made trial with happy success
and my great content.

The way to make salt of Fern, which makes a very fair Crystal.

CHAP. V.
IN Pisa I made experience of Fernashes which grows in great abundance in
Tuscany, which herb must be cut from the earth, when it is green, from the end
of May to the midst of June, and in the Moons increasing, when it is near it is
opposition with the Sun; for then the said herb is in it is perfection, and will
then make more salt, and of a better nature, strength and whiteness, than at
other times: for when it is suffered to dry of it is self upon the ground it
yields little salt, and of little goodness. This herb being thus cut and laid
together, soon withers, then let it be well burned to ashes, with these
ashes, and with the rules, observations, and diligence given before for the
salt of the Polverine of the Levant, is extracted a pure and good salt,
wherewith I have made Fritt with good and well serced Tarso, the which Fritt
melts well in the pot, and yields a fair Crystal, and much better than the
ordinary Crystal, because it had more strength and bended much better, which
the ordinary Crystal does not, it is drawn into fine threads, such as I caused
to be drawn, and to this Fritt may be given a wonderful yellow Gold color,
observing that there be in it no salt of Tartar, for neither from this will the
Gold yellow arise, and the Gold yellow which is given to this Crystal is much
fairer and pleasanter than can be wrought* with the Crystal made with the salt
of the Levant Polverine, and with that Crystal cannot be made all sort of
works as with the other.

The way to make another Salt which will produce a marvelous and wonderful
Crystal.

CHAP. VI.
LEt there be made ashes after the manner aforesaid, of the Cods and Stalk^ of
Beans, dried in the summer, when ye husbandmen have thrashed and separated the
Beans, with which ashes, with the rules and pains abovesaid in the salt of
Polverine, a mavelous salt is extracted* wherewith is made a very noble Fritt
with white and well serced Tarso, which in pots will make most beautiful
Crystal; the same may be done with the ashes of Col^worts, Bramble Berry bush,
and also with stalks of Millet, Rushes, and fen Reeds, and many other herbs
which yield a salt, wherewith (making Frits after ye accustomed manner) will be
made most beautiful Crystal, as every noble and curious spirit may try by
experience, for thereby more is learned than by long study.

A salt that will make a very fair Crystal.

CHAP. VII.
TAke the salt of Lime which serves for building, and this salt purified and
mixed with the ordinary salt of Polverine of the Levant about two pound to a
100. that is two pound of salt of Lime to a 100 pound of the salt of Polverine
purified and well made (as abovesaid) with this salt so mixed is usually made
ordinary Fritt, and is put in the pot to clarify, as shall be hereafter
declared in the way of making of Crystalline, Crystal, and common glass, and
so thus made a very fair and beautiful Crystal.

The way to make ordinary Fritt, to wit of Polverine, Rochetta, and Barillia of
Spain.

CHAP. VIII.
FRitt is nothing else but a calcination of those materials which make glass,
and although they may be melted, and make glass without calcination, yet this
would succeed with length of time and weariness, and therefore this calcination
was invented to calcine the Fritt in the Calcar, which, when it is calcined,
and the proportion of the materials is adjusted agreeable to the goodness of
the Barillia, presently melts in the pot, and wonderfully clarifies.

Fritt made of Polverine makes ordinary white glass; Fritt from Rochetta of the
Levant makes the fairest glass called Crystal; Barillia of Spain, though it be
usually fatter than the former, yet it makes not a glass so white and fair as
that of the Levant, because it always inclines a little to an azure color.

To make then Fritt, serce the Polverine through a fine serce, the small pieces
which pass not, let them be pounded in stone mottars, the like is to be done
with the Rochetta and Barillia, to wit every one by it is self, and be sure that
they be well pounded, and serced through a fine serce; for as the common proverb
in this art says, A fine serce, and dry wood, bring honor to the furnace. Now
whatsoever the quantity of the Barillia be, for example, a 100 pound of it
commonly requires, from 80 pound to 90 of Tarso, which must be finely beaten,
and then finely serced, more or less, according to the goodness of the
Barillia, and it is fatness, whereof you need not make an essay, how much it
holds as is known by art. Then with sand, and especially with that from
Tuscanie found in the vale of Arnus, being much fatter, and having in it more
plenty of salt, than Tarso has. There is never added more than 6 or 8 pound to
the hundred. Now this sand must be washed from all it is unprofitable
terrestriety, and serced, and then this will make a white and good glass; for
Tarso always makes much fairer glass than any sand that is in Tuscany. The due
quantity of sand or Tarso, being found out, mix and unite them, first well
together with the Barillia or Polverine well sifted, and so put them into the
Calcar when it is hot, and at first mix and spread them well in the Calcar,
with a rake, that they may be well calcined, and continue this till they begin
to grow into lumps, and come into pieces as big as small nuts. The Fritt will
be well and perfectly wrought in the space of 5 hours, being stirred all that
time, and a sufficient fire continued, and when you would see whether it be
well made, take a little of it out, when cold, if it be white, yellowish and
light, then it is made. The calcining of it more than 5 hours is not amiss; for
by how much more it is wrought and calcined, the better it is, and the sooner
it melts in the pot, and by standing a little longer in the Calcar it
consumes and loses the yellowness and foulness which glass has in it self,
and it becomes more clear and purified. When the Fritt is taken out of the
Calcar thus hot, let there be thrown upon it 3 or 4 pails of cold water, then
set it under ground, in a moist and cold place, and the filth which arose when
the salt was made (as is above said) is wont to be put into the same pans, with
the lee from Polverine; fill them with common water, having tubs under the pans
to receive the water, which by little and little drops through the said filth
and setlings, and hence comes a very strong pure and clear lee to be kept
apart, and herewith now and then water the Fritt abovesaid, which being heaped
together in a moist place the space of 2 or 3 months or more (the longer the
better) then the said Fritt grows together in a mass as a stone, and is to be
broken with mattocks. Now when it is in the pot it soon melts stupendiously,
and makes glass as white as Crystal. For this Lee leaves upon the Fritt it is
salt which works this effect. When this Lee is not to be had it must be
watered with common water, which although it does not work this great effect as
the said lee, yet it does well, and makes it easier for melting. Wherefore
Fritt should stand, when made, some months* which thus made always causes less
wood to be consumed, and the glass clear and sweeter to work.

To make Crystal in full perfection, the way I always practice.

CHAP. IX.
TAke Crystal Fritt diligently made, set it in pots in the furnace, where
there are no pots with colors, for the fumes of metalls whereof the greatest
part of colors are made, make the Crystal pale and foul, but that it may come
forth white, shining, and fair, when you put the Fritt into the pots in the
furnace, then cast in such a quantity of Manganese prepared as is needful,
according as the pots are, greater or less. For this lies in the practice of
the able and diligent Conciatore, and belongs to his office. The quantity of
the Manganese and of all other colors to be put into the Fritt and metalls
cannot be precisely determined either by weight or measure, but must be wholly
left to the eye and judgment, trial and experience of the Conciatore. To make
a fair Crystal, when it is well melted take it from the pots, and cast it into
great earthen pans, or clean bowls full of clean water (for it requires to be
cast into water) to this end that the water may take from it a sort of salt
called Sandever, which hurts the Crystal, and makes it obscure and cloudy,
and whilst it is a working still casts forth Sandever, a thing very foul.
Then put it again into a clean pot, and cast it into water, which is to be
repeated as often as is needful, until the Crystal be separated from all this
salt, but this is to be left to the practice of the Conciator, then set it to
boil 4 or 6 days, and let as little Iron be mixed therewith as is possible, for
it gives it always a blackish tincture. When it is boiled and clear, see
whether it has enough Manganese, and if it be greenish, give it Manganese with
discretion. Wherefore to make good Crystal put in the Manganese by little and
little at a time, for it makes the Crystal of a murry color, which afterward
inclines to black, taking from it it is splendour; mix the Manganese, and let the
glass clarify till it becomes of a clear and shining color. The property of
Manganese is, being put in just quantity to take away the foul greasines which
Crystal always has, and to make a resplendent white, when the Crystal is
clear limpid and fair, work it continually into vessels and works that most
please you, but not with so great a fire as common glass is wrought with. Be
careful that the Irons wherewith you work be clean, and that you put not the
necks of the glasses where the Irons touch (for there always remains Iron)
into the pots of Crystal, for they make it become black. But this glass where
the Iron rods touch may be put in to make glass for vulgar works.

To make Crystall-glass, and white, called otherwise common glass.

CHAP. X.
FRitt of Polverine makes a white and fair common glass, Fritt of Rochetta
makes the fairest glass called Crystal, which is between ordinary glass and
Crystal. As much Manganese prepared must be used in common glass as is in
Crystalline; cast the Crystalline or common glass once at least into water,
that you may have them fair, clear, and in perfection. Although glass may be
made without this casting into water, yet to have it fairer than ordinary, this
is necessary to be done, and may be repeated according to your pleasure, as you
would have them more resplendent and fairer, and then you may work them into
what vessels you need. And to make them yet whiter, Calcine them that they
purify well and have but few blisters. And above all observe, that if to each
of them, by themselves, you put upon the Fritt, the proportion of 12 pound of
salt of Tartar purified to a 100 weight of Fritt, it makes them without
comparison fairer, and more pliable to work than ordinary. The salt of Tartar
must be put in when the Fritt is made, and then be mixed with Tarso, or sand,
together with the Polverine or Rochetta sifted, and then make thereof Fritt as
before.

To make Purified salt of Tartar, for the work abovesaid.

CHAP. XI.
TAke Tartar of red wine in great lumps, and not in powder, Calcine it in
earthen pots between live coals till it become black, and all it is unctuosity
be burned away, and till it begins to grow white, but let it not become white,
for then the salt will not be good. Put the said Tartar thus Calcined into
great earthen pans full of common water heated, as also into earthen pots
glased, and make it boil with a gentle soft fire in such sort that a quarter of
the water may be exhaled in two hours, then take them from the fire, and suffer
the water to cool, and become clear, which decant off, and it will be a strong
lee, then put in more common water into the said pans after the same manner,
and upon the remainder of the Tartar, and let them boil as before, repeat this
until the water become no more saltish then Filtre these waters impregnated
with salt, and put the clean Filtred lee into glass bodies to evaporate in the
ashes of the furnace at a gentle heat, and in the bottom there will remain a
white salt, dissolve this salt in warm water, let it settle two days, then
evaporate it in glass bodies at a gentle heat, and there will remain at the
bottom a salt much whiter than at the first time, dissolve this salt again, and
after two days settling, Filtre and evaporate it in every thing as before.
Repeat this manner of dissolving, Filtring, evaporating this salt of Tartar
four times, which then will be a salt much whiter than snow, and purified from
the greatest part of it is Terrestriety, which salt mixed with Polverine or
Rochetta serced with a dose of Tarso or sand will make a Fritt, which in the
pot will yield Crystalline and common glass much fairer than that that is made
without the addition of this salt of Tartar, and although a fair
notwithstanding a much fairer may be made with it.

To prepare Zaffer which serves for many colors.

CHAP. XII.
TAke Zaffer in gross pieces, put it into earthen pans, let it stand half a day
in the furnace, and then put it into an Iron ladle to be heated red hot in the
furnace, take it thence thus hot and sprinkle it with strong vinegar, as soon
as it is cold grind it fine on a Porphyrie stone, wash it in earthen pans
glased, with much warm water, always suffering the Zaffer to settle to the
bottom, then decant it gently off; this will carry away the foulness and
Terrestriety from the Zaffer, and what is good, and the tincture thereof will
remain at the bottom, which thus prepared and purified will tinge much better
than at first, making a limpid and clear tincture, which dry and keep in
vessels closed for use.

To prepare Manganese to color glass.

CHAP. XIII.
TAke Manganese of Piemont, for this is the best of all the Manganeses at this
day known in the art of glass. At Venice there is not always plenty, and at
Moran none other is used. In Tuscanie and Liguria there is enough; but that
holds much Iron, and makes a black foul color. That of Piemont makes a very
fair murry, and at last leaves the glass white, and takes away the greenness
and blewness from it. Put this Manganese in pieces into Iron ladles, and
proceed thorowout as in preparing Zaffer.

To make Ferretto of Spain which serves to color glass.

CHAP. XIV.
TO make Ferretto is nothing but a simple Calcination of Copper, that the
metal being opened, may communicate it is tincture to glass; which Calcination
when it is well made without doubt makes diverse and very beautiful colors.
This Calcination is made many ways, I shall set down two of them, not only
easy but of times used by me, with effects very fair, in glass, whereof the
first is this that follows, to wit, Take thin Copper Plates of the bigness of
a Florentine, and have one or more melting pots of the Goldsmiths, and in the
bottom of these pots make a layer of brimstone powdered, then a layer of the
said plates, and over them another layer of powdered brimstone, and another of
Copper Plates, as before, and in this order fill the pot, which is otherwise
said to make a S S S. cover and lute well, and dry this pot, and put it into an
open wind furnace amidst burning coals, and a strong fire must be given to it
for 2 hours, let it cool, and you shall find the copper Calcined, and it will
be broke in pieces by the fingers as if it were dry earth, and will be raised
into a black and reddish color. This Copper being beaten small and serced in a
fine serce is kept well closed for use.

Another way to make Ferretto of Spain.

CHAP. XV.
THis second way of making burnt Copper, though it be more laborious than the
first, yet it will do it is effects in glass more than ordinary.

The Copper then (instead of making a SSS with Brimstone) must make a SSS with
Vitriol, and then Calcine it, letting it stand three days in the floor of the
furnace, neet the occhio, then take it out and make another SSS with new
Vitriol, keep it in reverberation as before, and this Calcination with Copperas
must be repeated six times, and then you shall have a most noble burnt Copper,
which in colors will work more than ordinary effects.

To make Crocus Ferri, otherwise called Crocus Martis, to color glass.

CHAP. XVI.
CRocus Martis is nothing else but a subtilising and Calcination of Iron, by
means whereof it is tincture (which is most red in glass) is so opened that it
communicates it is self to glass, and not only manifests it self, but makes
all other metalline colors (which ordinarily are hidden and dead in glass)
appear fair and resplendent; I will set down four ways to make it, and the
first is.

Take filings of Iron (if you can have them, those of steel are better) mix
them well with three parts of powdered brimstone, and keep them in a melting
pot in a furnace to Calcine, and burn well off all the brimstone, which soon
succeeds, let them stand four hours in burning coals, then take and powder, and
serce them through a fine serce, and put them into a Chrysible covered and luted
at the top, and set them in the Leer of the furnace near the occhio or the
cavalet 15 days or more which then gains a reddiss Peacock-like color, as if
it were purple, this is kept in a close vessel, for the use of glass colors,
for it works many fair feats.

The second way to make Crocus Martis.

CHAP. XVII.
THis second way of making Corcus Martis, with so much ease, ought to be much
esteemed of, since the Crocus made in this manner makes appear in glass the
true red color of blood, and the manner of making it is thus,

Take filings of iron (steel is better) mix them well in earthen pans with
strong vinegar, only sprinkling them so much that they may be wet thorowout,
spread them in pans, and set them in the sun till they be dry, or in the open
air when the sun is cloudy. When dry, powder them, and if they be any whit in
lumps, sprinkle them with new vinegar, then dry and powder them as before,
repeat this work 8 times, then grind and serce them fine, and you have a most
fine powder of the color of brick powdered, which keep in vessels to color
glass.

A third way to make Crocus Martis.

CHAP. XVIII.
THis third way of making Crocus Martis, is a way by which the deep color of
Iron is made more manifest than may seem credible, and in glass is seen the
truth and proof thereof. Sprinkle filings of steel with Aquafortis, in glased
pans* see them in the sun to dry, powder them, wet them again with Aquafortis
and dry them, repeat this several times, and you shall have a red powder, as is
said of Crocus made with Brimstone, then powder, serce, and keep it for your
use to color glass.

A fourth way to make Crocus Martis.

CHAP. XIX.
THis is the fourth and last way to make Crocus Martis, and perhaps the best of
all, though each of the ways shown by me, are not only good and perfect in
their operation, but necessary also for diverse colors necessarily and daily
made in glass; and to make this, dissolve in Aquafortis made Aqua-Regis, with
Sal Armoniack (as shall be said in our rules of Calcidony) filings of Iron or
steel in a glass vessel well closed, keep them so 3 days, and every day stir
them well. Observe, when the said water is put upon the filings, that it be
done leasurely, and warily, because it rises much, and endangereth the
breaking of the glass, or else all to run out: at the end of 3 days let the
water be gently evaporated away, and in the bottom will be found a most noble
Crocus Martis for the most stupendous tinctures of glasses, which keep for use.

To Calcine Brass called Orpello or Tremolante, which in glass makes a sky
color, and sea green.

CHAP. XX.
BRass (as it is well known) is Copper, which by Lapis Calaminaris becomes of
the color of gold, the which Lapis Calaminaris, does not only color the
Copper, but also incorporating with it increases much it is weight 3 the which
augmentation gives a color to glass, when it is well Calcined, which is a
thing very delightful to see, keeping the medium between a Seagreen and a
skie-colour, when the Sky is clear and serene, wherefore be diligent in well
Calcining it; to make it punctually, this is the way.

Take Brass, and to save charges, buy that which is in works, and Festoons, cut
it in small pieces with a pair of Scisers, then put it into a Chrysible covered
and luted at the top in coals on a strong fire. I put it in the burning coals
of the furnace where they are stirred, there let it then stand four days in a
great, but not in a melting fire, for if it be melted, all the labor is lost,
in that time it will be well Calcined, powder it into a most subtle powder, and
serce it, and grind it fine upon a porphyrie stone, and there will come forth a
black powder, which spread on tiles, and keep it on the burning coals in the
leer, near to the round hole, four days, take from it the ashes that fall upon
it, powder, serce, and keep it for use. The sign that it is well Calcined is,
that if it be put into glass it makes it swell, and when it makes not the glass
arise and boil well, it is a sign, either that it is not well Calcined, or that
it is too much burnt, in which two cases, it makes not the glass boil, neither
does it color well.

To Calcine the said Brass, after another manner, to make a transparent red, a
yellow, and Calcidony.

CHAP. XXI.
TAke Brass and cut it small with sheers, and put it in a melting pot, make a S
S S. with powdered Brimstone, and set it on kindled coals, put it in the
burning coals of the furnace to Calcine for 24 hours, then powder, serce, and
put it covered upon tiles of earth into the furnace, for 12 days, to
reverberate, then grind, powder, and keep it for use.

Seagreen in glass, a principal color in the Art.

CHAP. XXII.
Seagreen is one of the principal colors given to glass, and if you would
have it fair, and to hold at all trials, you must always make it in glass
called Artificial Crystal; for in ordinary metal it arifeth not fair: and
though in Crystalline it arises fairer than in common glass, yet in the said
Crystal, only in perfection. Observe, that when ever you would make this
color, you in no wise add any Manganese at first, because this being added
(although the fire afterward consumes it,) yet it leaves a quality in the
glass, which makes the color black, and gives it great imperfection and
foulness. Now to make a fair Seagreen, take of Crystal Fritt, and put it in a
pot, not allowing it any Manganese at all, and as soon as it is melted and
clear, it yields a salt which swims at the top like oil, let this be taken off
with Iron ladles, by the Conciators, take it out with much diligence, for what
remains thereof, will make a foul, and oily color, and when the glass is well
and perfectly clarified, take a pot of about twenty pound of Crystal, six
ounces of Brass prepared as is aforesaid, and to this Brass calcined, add a
fourth part of Zaffer prepared, and let these two powders be well mixed, and
put to the said Crystal at three times, but at first this powder will make the
metal swell very much, and you must well mix the glass with the long squares.
Then let the metal settle, that the color may be incorporated for three
hours, then mix them again with the long square, then take a proof thereof, in
doing whereof, put in rather too little than too much, for the colors may be
easily heightened, which is to be done according to the works for which it is to
be employed, for gross tubes for counting houses require not so deep and full a
color, and tubes to make beads of, must not have too light a color. At the
beginning of twenty four hours (after it has had the due color) it may be
wrought, and before you work it, mix well the metal from the very bottom of
the pot, that the color may be well united, mixed, and spread through all the
metal, otherwise it settles to the bottom, and the metal at the top becomes
clear. This manner of making Seagreen, I have tried at Florence in the year
1602 and made pots for tubes for counting houses, always of a most fair color.
At Moran for the said tubes, they take half Crystal Fritt, and half Rochetta
Fritt, from whence notwithstanding proceeds a fair Seagreen, although in
Crystal alone it arises most fair.

Sky Color or Seagreen.

CHAP. XXIII.
SEt in the furnace a pot of pure metal of Fritt from Rochetta, or Barillia of
Spain. The Rochetta of the Levant does best. As soon as the metal is well
purified, then take to a pot of 20 pound six ounces of Brass calcined of it is
self, as in 20 Chap. put it into the metal as is said in the Skie-colour in
every particular; observing that this metal be skummed very diligently with a
ladle. At the end of two hours the metal must be very well remixed; take
thereof a proof, and leave it so 24 hours, then it is mixed, and wrought, and
this will be a most fair and mavelous Skie-colour varied with other colors,
which are made in the art of glass. This color tinged many pots in Pisa in the
year 1602 and there came out a fair color bearing all proofs.

A Red color from Brass for many colors.

CHAP. XXIV.
TAke Brass in small plates, and put them on the arches of the furnace, leave
them there closed until they are well Calcined of themselves with a simple
fire, but not to melt. As soon as it is Calcined and powdered it will become a
red powder, for many, and those all necessary uses in the art of glass.

Brass thrice Calcined to color glass.

CHAP. XXV.
PUt the said Brass into the Fornello, or on the Lere of the furnace near to
the occhio, into earthen tiles or pans baked, Calcine it four days together,
and it will become a black powder, and stick together, powder it again, serce
it fine, and Recalcine it as before four or five days, for then it will not
stick together, nor become so black, but russet, and powders of it self,
wherewith is made a Seagreen, and Emeral'd-green, the Arabian color called
Turcois, a very beautiful Sky color, with many others. Wherefore observe that
it be not too much nor too little Calcined at the third Calcination, for in
this case it colors not the glass well, and the sign, that it is done
perfectly is, that being put upon purified metal it makes it swell and boil
suddenly, and when it does not so it is not good nor well Calcined.

A Seagreen in Artificial Crystal.

CHAP. XXVI.
TO a pot of Crystal Fritt containing 40 pound not charged with any Manganese,
but well scummed, For when you would make a Seagreen, never cast the Crystal
into water, but only scum it carefully, when this Fritt is melted and well
purified, take 12 ounces of thrice Calcined brass, and therewith mix half an
ounce of Zaffer prepared, unite these two powders well together, and put this
mixture into the pot at four times, for so the glass receives it better. Mix
the glass and powder with diligence, let them stand two hours, then remix them
and take a proof, and if the color be full enough, let them stand; And
although the Seagreen appears too full, yet the salt which is in the glass
will eat up and consume the said greeness, and will always incline it to a
blewishness. And at the beginning of 24 hours it may be wrought.

I have many times experimented this way of making Seagreen without ever
erring. And if a moytie of Rochetta first be mixed with Crystal Frit, there
will arise a fair Seagreen, and in Crystal alone it is mavelous fair.

General observations for all colors.

CHAP. XXVII.
THat the colors may arise in full beauty and perfection, observe that every
pot great or small, that is new, and put the first time into the furnace,
leaves a foulness in glass from it is terrestriety, so that all the colors that
are made in them appear bad and foul; wherefore those pots that are very great
may be glased with white melted glass, as the Conciators well know, but the
second time the pots lose this foulness. Observe secondly, that those pots
which serve for one color must not be used for another, for example, a pot
which has been used for yellow, is not good to make a grain color* and that
which makes a grain-colour is not good to make a greencolour, and that which
serves for a red is nor good to make a blew, and so of all other colors.
Therefore every color must have it is own pot, for in this manner the colors
will become more perfect. Thirdly, that the powders be well Calcined (that is)
neither too much, nor too little; for in either of these cases they do not
color well. Fourthly, that a due proportion, and dose be used, and the mixture
be made in proportion, and the furnaces be hot, and fed with dry and hard wood.
Fifthly, that the color must be used dividedly, to wit, one part in the Fritt,
and the other in the metal, when it is melted and purified. There are other
observations also which shall be treated of in their places, when we treat
particularly of colors.

To make Copper thrice Calcined with more ease and less charge than the former.

CHAP. XXVIII.
TAke the Scales which the Brafiers make when they hammer pans, kettles, or
other works of brass, which being often put into the fire the workmen hammer
them, and these scales fall off, which cost much less than solid brass,
wherewith is made the stuff hereafter described. And to Calcine it, you need
not open and shut again the arches of the furnace (as in the aforementioned
way) a thing of much disadvantage and disturbance to the furnace. Take then
those scales that are clean, and free from all earth and foulness, wash them
with warm water many times from their filth and uncleaness, and then let them
be put into pots and pans of baked earth, and be kept in the leer near the
Occhio, or in furnaces made for this purpose. I made at Pisa a little furnace
in the fashion of a little Calcar, where were calcined 20 or 25 pound of these
scales in few hours. Now let them stand in the said place four days, then renew
them, powder and serce them fine, then again put them in the pans and pots of
earth as before, with the same fire and heat as aforesaid for four days more,
and they will come into a black powder, and run into lumps, beat, and serce
those lumps fine, and repeat this process again, and a third time, then the
scales will be prepared with much less charge than the former, and will
thoroughly have the same effect as the former; these scales rise much, wherefore
use the prescribed care.

A fair Seagreen in Crystal metal, with the abovesaid scales.

CHAP. XXIX.
TAke a pot of sixty pound of Crystal Fritt well scummed, and not cast into
water. I made a Seagreen without wetting the Crystal metal, and thought that
it came out better. But we may make trial of both ways, and stick to the best.
Then take of metal well purified the said 60 pound, and one pound and a half
of the said scales made with less charges, four ounces of Zaffer prepared, mix
well these two powders together, put them to the Crystal at four times, mixing
well the powder with the metal for two hours, than put it again to be well
remixed as it is usual, and take a proof. Herewith I have made many times a most
fair Seagreen with happy success. Mix half Crystal with Rochetta, and you
shall have a Seagreen every way beautiful.

A Seagreen of lesser charge.

CHAP. XXX.
TAke the same Brass prepared (as before) with the same quantity of Zaffer, put
them in the same manner and form to the Rochetta of the Levant, and also to
that of Spain, neither of which has had any Manganese, and which has been
well skummed, and not passed through water, using the rules as abovesaid in
Crystal; for by this means it will receive a very fair Blew for all sorts of
works, and will cost much less than Crystal: for the Rochetta is of much less
value than the Crystal, as it is known. In this manner have I often made it at
Pisa, and always with good success.

A mavelous Seagreen, above all Sea-greens, of my invention.

CHAP. XXXI.
LEt the Caput mortuum of the spirit of Vitriol of Venus Chymically made
without corrosives stand in the air some few days* draw from it of it self
without any artifice a green pale color, this material being pulverised with
the addition of Zaffer prepared, and with the same porportion (as is said in
the other prepared Brass) the metal being added (as in the other Seagreen) it
will make a Seagreen, so fair and mavelous, that 'twill seem a very strange
thing: I have often made it at Antwerp to the wonder of all the spectators that
saw it. The manner of making Vitriol of Venus, without corrosives,
Spagirically, is to take little thin pieces of Brass of the bigness of half a
Florentine, and to have one or more pots (as it is needful) and in the bottom
of them to put a layer of common Brimstone powdr'd, and above it little pieces
of the Brass aforesaid, and than a layer of Brimstone, and after that pieces of
Brass, work in this manner till all the Brass that you have be set to work,
this being done, let the Brass be baked as follows in the 140 Chap. then
prove it, and to your content you may see a thing of astonishment. I know not
whether any have tried this way, which I have found wonderful, wherefore I say
it is my own invention.

A green Emerald color in glass.

CHAP. XXXII.
IN making Green you must observe that the metal have not much salt, with
metal that has much salt as Crystal and Rochetta have, you cannot make a
fair Green, but only a Seagreen, for the salt consumes the Green, and always
inclines the color to a Blew. Wherefore when you would make a fair Green put
common metal made with Polverine, into small or great pots, and in no wise
have any Manganese. When it is melted and well purified, add to this metal a
little Crocus Martis calcined with vinegar, about three ounces thereof to a
hundred weight, let the metal be well mixed, and remain so an hour until the
metal incorporate the same tincture of the Crocus, which will make the glass
come out Yellowish, and takes away the foulness and Blewness, which the metal
always has. This process will give the metal a fair Green. Put of thrice
calcined Brass, made with scales (as before) two pound to every hundred pound
of metal, and this must be added at six times, mixing well the powder, with
the metal, then let them settle two hours, and the metal incorporate with it,
then mix again the metal, and take a proof, and if the Green enclines to a
Blew, add a little more Crocus Martis, so you shall have a very fair Seagreen,
called Leek green, which at the end of twenty four hours may be wrought: This
Green I have many times made at Pisa, which came forth sufficiently fair. And
so it will to every one that shall observe punctually what is abovesaid.

A Green fairer than the former.

CHAP. XXXIII.
BUt if you would have a Green much fairer and shining than the former, put
into a pot of Crystalline which has not had any Manganese, and which has
passed through water once or twice, till all the saltness be gotten out, and to
this Crystalline, let half of common white metal made of Polverine be put in
at several times, as soon as this metal is well mixed and purified, take to
every hundred pound, two pound and a half of thrice Calcined brass, made with
plates of Brass in the arches of the furnace, and with this mix two ounces of
Crocus Martis Calcined with Brimstone, and reverberated, put these two powders
well mixed together to the abovesaid metal, using the rules as before in the
said Green, if the metal has any Blewness give it a little of the said Crocus
Martis, which takes it away, and then work it as the other Greens, and there
shall be made the wonderful Green of the Burnet. I have thus made it many
times at Pisa with very good success, for works more exact than ordinary. If
you will have a fair color, see that the Brass be well prepared.

A mavelous Green.

CHAP. XXXIV.
TAke Brass thrice calcined as before, then in stead of Crocus Martis, take the
scales of iron which fall from the Smiths anvils, powder them finely, sift them
clean from the coals and ashes, and with the quantity aforesaid, mix them well
with the Brass, and put them to the common glass metal of Polverine, without
any Manganese, with the rules aforesaid in the Green, and with this Crocus
Martis, or scales, you shall doubtless have a more mavelous Emerald
Green-colour, which will have wholly lost it is Azure and Sea-colour, and will
be a Yellowish green, after the Emerald, and will have a shining and fairer
luster than the aforesaid Greens. The putting in of scales of iron was my own
invention. In the rest of the work let the rules and doses as in other Greens
be observed, and you shall have a strange thing, as experience has often shown
me.

Another Green, which carries the Palm from all other Greens, made by me.

CHAP. XXXV.
TO a pot of 10 pound of metal to wit half of Crystalline passed through water
several times, and half of common white metal of Polverine, take four pound of
the common Frit of Polverine, wherewith mix three pound of red Lead, unite them
well together, and put them into the same pot, and in few hours all of them
will be well purified, then cast all this metal into water, and take out the
Lead, then return the metal which has passed through the water into the pot,
and let the metal purify for a day, then if you put in the color made
Chymically with the powder of the Caput mortuum of the Spirit of Vitriolum
Veneris, adding a very little Crocus Martis, there will arise a mavelous
Green, fairer than ever I made any, which will seem to be a very Emerald of the
ancient Oriental rock.

A Blew or Turcois, a principal color in this art.

CHAP. XXXVI.
PUt sea salt which is called black or gross salt (for the ordinary white salt
which is made at Volterra is not good) into the Calcar or Fornello till all the
moisture be evaporated, and it becomes white, then pound it well, to a small
white powder. This salt so calcined, keep to make a Blew or Turcois color. Put
into a small or great pot of Crystal metal died with the color of Seagreen
(made, as has been said many ways.) But let the color be fair and full (for
this is of great importance to make a fair Sky color) according as you would
have the Seagreen fair and excellent. To this metal so colored, put of the
said salt calcined into the pots, mixing it well with the metal, and this is
to be put in by little and little until the Seagreen lose it is transparencie,
and diaphanietie, and takes opacity, for the salt being vitrified makes the
metal lose it is transparencie, and gives it a little paleness, and so by
little and little makes the said Sky color, which is the color of a
Turcois-stone; when the color is enough it must be wrought speedily, for the
salt will be lost and evaporated, and the metal returns again to be
transparent and foul-coloured. But when the color is lost in working add new
burnt salt (as before) that the color may be reduced, and so you shall have
your desired color. Let the Conciators well observe that this salt always
crakcles when it is not well calcined, therefore let him have a care of his
eyes and sight, for it endangers them. The quantity of salt must be put in by
little and little, leaving some distance between each time, till he see the
desired color. But in this I used neither dose nor weight, but my eye only. I
have often made this color, for it is very necessary in counting houses, and
the most prised and esteemed color that is in the art. Wherefore to make a
Blew for counting houses, take the Green of Crystal metal, and half Seagreen
made of half Rochetta, which will become a fair color, although it be not all
Crystal metal.

The second Book,
wherein are shown the true ways of making Calcidony of the color of Agats,
and oriental Jaspers, with the way to prepare all colors for this purpose, and
also to make Aquafortis, and Aqua Regis necessary in this business.

And the Manner of calcining Tartar, and uniting it with Rosichiero, made Chap.
128. which produces pleasant toys of many colors with undulations in them,
and gives it an opacity such as the Natural and Oriental stones have.

CHAP. XXXVII.
SInce I am to show the manner how to make Calcidonies, Jaspers and Oriental
Agats, it is necessary first to teach the preparation of some mineral things,
for such compositions, and although some of them may be publicly bought, yet
notwithstanding, I being desirous that the work should be perfect judged it
pertinent to my purpose to show the most exquisite Chemical way, that the
skilful may make every thing of themselves, both more perfect and with lesser
charge. For there is no doubt that when the materials are well prepared, and
the color of the metalls is well opened, and separated from their impurity and
terrestriety which usually hinder the ingress of their tincture into glass, and
their union in their smallest parts, that then they color the glass with
lively, shining and fair colors, which very far surpass those that are
vulgarly, and usually made in the furnace. And because the color of Calcidony,
or rather it is compound (which is nothing else, but as it were a reuniting of
all the colors, and toys that may be made in glass, a thing not common nor
known to all) if they be not well prepared, and subtilised as is necessary,
they give not the beauty and splendour to glass as is required. Wherefore it is
necessary that the metalls be well calcined, subtilised, and opened with the
best Aquafortis, Sulphurs, Vitriols, sal Armoniak and the like materials,
which in length of time, and at a gentle heat, are opened and well prepared,
but a violent fire herein hurts much. Tartar and Rosichiero (besides their
being very perfect and well calcined) must be also put in proportion and in fit
and due time, and you must also observe, that the metal be well boiled,
purified, and perfected, and in working of it some such care is to be used, as
the diligent masters are wont to use, and by thus doing the true Jasper and
Agat, and Oriental Calcidonies, with the fairest and beautifullest spots of
wavings, and toys, with diverse lively and bright colors. Hence it truly
appears that nature cannot arrive so high in great pieces, and although it is
said and may be made to appear true, that Art cannot attain to Nature, yet
experience in many things shows, and in particular in this art of the colors
in glass, that art does not only attain to and equal nature, but very fair
surpasses and excells it. If this were not seen, hardly would you believe the
beauty, the toys and wavings of diverse colors, variously disjoined one from
the other with a pleasing distinction, which is seen in this particular of the
Calcidony. When the medicine is well prepared, and the glass wrought at a due
time, the effect that comes thence passes all imagination and conceit of man.
In the three ways to make it, which I teach, I believe you may see how far the
art of glass arises in this particular, where I demonstrate every particular
so distinctly, that any practitioner, and skilful person, may understand and
work without error, and he that works well may find out more than I set down.

How to make Aquafortis called parting water, which dissolves silver and
quicksilver, with a secret way.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
TAke of Saltpeter refined one part, of Roch-alum three parts; but first
exhale in pans all the humidity from it; to every pound of this stuff add an
ounce of Crystalline Arsnick (this is a secret and no ordinary thing) which
besides it is giving more strength to the water, helps to extract better the
spirits from the materials, which are the true nerves and strength of the
Aquafortis, without which the water perhaps would be no better than
well-water. Powder and mix them well together, adding thereunto the tenth part
in the whole of Lime, well powdered, mix them well, and put so much of this
stuff into glass bodies, that about three quarters of them may be full, let
them be luted with strong lute, which I remit to the Artist as a common thing:
but one not vulgar I will declare. Take some lome for example of the river
Arnus (which is a fat earth known to all) one part, of sand 3 parts, of common
wood-ashes well sifted, of shearings of woollen cloth, of each one half; mix
them well together, and incorporate them into a past with common water, work
them well together, for the more it is wrought the better it is, therefore see
that your past be a little hard, to all these add a third of common salt, which
incorporate well with the lute, it is a business of importance. then lute the
glasses with this perfect lute, and set them in wind furnaces, fitting to their
bottoms, baked earth which will bear the fire. Under the bottom of these
bodies, let there be four fingers of sand, and thick Iron bars to bear the
weight, and filled round about with sand, put receivers of glass to them, large
and capacious within, lute the joints well with lute made of fine flower and
lime, of each a like quantity, powdered, mixed, tempered, and impasted with the
whites of Eggs well beaten, with this lute, bind and lute the joints with
roulers of fine linen, which, when well dried and rould about three or four
times, make a very strong lute, rouling but once at a time, and letting it dry
a little before the second rouling. And then this will bear all the violence,
fury, and force of the spirits of the Aquafortis, and to this end fit exactly
a very large receiver to every glass body. And when they are well dried make a
fire in the furnace only with coal at first, and that a very temperate one,
for three hours, for in that time the windy moisture distilleth off, which
endangers the breaking of the glasses, and continue for six hours a moderate
fire, afterward increase it gently, adding billets of dry oaken wood to the
coals, and so proceed by little and little, augmenting it for six hours more,
and then the head will be tinged with Yellow, a sign that the spirits begin to
rise; continue this degree of fire until the spirits beginning to condensate
color Red the receiver and head, which will always grow deeper colored like a
Rubie. Then increase the fire for many hours, till the head and receiver become
Red, which sometimes lasts two whole days. Continue the fire by all means
till all the spirits of Aqua fortis be distilled off, which is known, when the
head and receivers by little and little, begin to grow clear, and become white
as at first, and wholly cold; yet notwithstanding continue the fire one hour
more. Then let the furnace cool of it is self. Observe, that when the head and
receivers are Red, and the fire strong, you admit no wind, nor cold air into
them, nor touch them with any cold thing, for then they will easily crack, and
your pains, cost and time will be lost, wherefore when they are in this state,
let them be kept hot in the fire. Now, when all is cold, put upon the head and
receiver linen clothes wetted and well soaked in cold water, that the spirits
which are about the head and receiver may the better sink into the Aquafortis,
leave them thus for 12 hours, then bath the joints and lutings with warm water,
till they being moistened you may take off the bandage, and the head from the
receiver, which usually are safe. The bodies may be broke and thrown away, for
they will serve no more, powder the dregs and residences of the Aquafortis, to
wit, about their third part, and to every pound of them add four ounces of
Saltpeter refined, and put them into another body luted, and pour on them the
said Aquafortis, lute and distill them as before in every thing. Keep the
Aquafortis in earthen jugs well stopped that the better spirits may not
evaporate. This parting water is good for the following uses. Some there are
that instead of Roch Alume take as much more of the best Vitriol, such as the
Roman or the like is. The sign that Vitriol is good for this use, is, that
being rubbed upon polished Iron it colors it with a Copper color. This Vitriol
purified after the following manner, will make a stronger Aquafortis than
Alume.

To purify Vitriol to make the strongest Aquafortis.

CHAP. XXXIX.
DIssolve the best Vitriol (the better, the stronger the Aquafortis) in common
warm water, let the solution stand three days being impregnated with salt, then
filtre and evaporate in glass bodies two thirds of the water, and put the
remainder into earthen pans glased, which set in a cold place, in 12 hours the
Vitriol will shoot into pointed pieces, appearing like natural Crystal of a
fair Emerald color. Dissolve this same Vitriol again and do as before, and
repeat it thrice, at each solution there will remain at the bottom of the glass
a Yellow substance, which is it is unprofitable Sulphur, and is to be cast away.
At the third time the Vitriol will be purified, and fit to make a good and
strong Aquafortis, much stronger than the ordinary, especially if the Nitre be
well refined.

How to make Aqua Regis.

CHAP. XL.
TO every pound of the said Aquafortis, put two ounces of sal Armoniack
powdered, into a glass body, which set in a pan full of warm water, and let the
Aquafortis be often stirred, which will soon dissolve the sal Armoniack with it is
heat, which will be tinged with a Yellow color, put in more, sal Armoniack, as
long as the Aquafortis will dissolve any, when it dissolves no more let it
settle a little, when it is clear decant it leasurely off, and in the bottom
there remains the unprofitable terrestriety of the sal Armoniack. Now this Aqua
Regis is strong and fit to dissolve Gold, and other metalls; but silver it
touches not at all.

To burn Tartar.

CHAP. XLI.
PUt Tartar of Red-wine which is in great pieces, and appears full of spots
(lay by that which is in powder, for it is not good) into new earthen pots, and
let it burn in kindled coals until it smoaks no more, and when it is calcined,
and in lumps of a black purplish sustance then it is burned and prepared.

How to make a Calcidony in Glass very fair.

CHAP. XLII.
PUt of Aquafortis, two pound, into a glass body not very great, but with a
long neck, four ounces of fine silver, in small and thin pieces, and set them
near the fire, or in warm water, which as soon as the Aquafortis begins to be
hot 'twill work and dissolve the silver very quickly, and continue so until it
has dissolved, and taken it up, then take a pound and a half of Aquafortis,
and in it dissolve (as you have before done with silver) six ounces of
Quicksilver, when all is dissolved let these two waters be well mixed in a
greater body, and power upon them six ounces of sal Armoniack, and dissolve it
at a gentle heat, when it is dissolved put into the glass one ounce of Zaffer,
and half an ounce of Manganese, each prepared, and half an ounce of Ferretto of
Spain, a quarter of an ounce of Crocus Martis calcined with Brimstone, thrice
calcined Copper, Blew smalts of the Painters, and Red-lead, of each half an
ounce, powder all these well, and put one after another into the body, which
then stir gently that the Aquafortis may be incorporated well with the said
powder, keep the body close stoped for ten days, every day stirring it well
several times, and when they are well opened, then put it into a furnace on
sand, and make a most temperate heat, so that in 24 hours all the Aquafortis
may be evaporated. Observe that at last you give not a strong but a gentle
heat, that the spirits of the Aquafortis may not evaporate, and in the bottom
there will remain a Lion color, which being well powdered, keep in a glass
vessel. When you would make a Calcidony, put into a pot very clear metal and
made of broken pieces of Crystal vessels, and Crystalline, and white glass
which has been used. For with the Virgin Fritt which has never been wrought,
the Calcidony can never be made, and the colors stick not to it, but are
consumed by the Fritt. To every pot of about 20 pound of glass, put two ounces,
or two ounces and a half, or three ounces of this powder, or medicine, at three
times, and incorporate, and mix them, that the glass may take in the powder, in
doing whereof it raises certain Blew fumes, as soon as it is well mixed let
the glass stand an hour, then put in another mixture, and so let it alone 24
hours, then let the glass be well mixed, and take thereof an essay, which will
have a Yellowish Azure color, this proof being returned many times into the
furnace, and taken when it begins to grow cold, will show some waves, and
diverse colors very fair. Then take Tartar eight ounces, soot of the Chimny
well virrified two ounces, Crocus Martis calcined with Brimstone half an ounce,
put by little and little all these well powdered and mixed into this glass at
six times, expecting a little while at each time, still mixing the glass that
the powder may be well incorporated. As soon as all the powder is put in, let
the glass boil, and settle 24 hours at least, then make a little glass body of
it, which put in the furnace many times, and see if the glass be enough, and if
there be on the outside toys of Blew, and Seagreen, Red, Yellow, and all
colors with toys, and it has some waves, such as Calcidony, Jaspers, Oriental
Agats have, and that the body kept within be as to the sight as red as fire.
Now as soon as it is made and perfected, it is wrought into vessels always
variegated, which are not to be remade, for they do not arise well. These
vessels may be made of diverse sorts, and drinking glasses of many fashions,
broad drinking cups, salts, flower pots, and the like toys, still observing
that the master workman pinch off well ye glass (that is wrought) with pincers,
and anneal it sufficiently, that it may make waves and toys of the fairest
colors. You may also make with this pot dishes, pretty large in Oval,
triangular, quadrangular form, as you will, and afterward work it at the wheel
(as Jewels) for it takes polishing, and a fine luster, and it may serve for
little tables, and cabinets; so that those little Jewels will represent the
Oriental Agat, Jasper, and Oriental Calcidony, and when it happens that the
color fades, and the glass becomes transparent, and no more Opacous as it
ought to be for these works, then cease from working, put to it new Tartar
calcined, soot and Crocus, for thus (as before) it takes a body and
Opacousness, and makes the colors appear; set it then to purify many hours,
that the new powder put in may be incoporated, as it is usual, then work it.
This was my way to make Calcidony in the year 1661 in Florence, at Casino in
the glass furnaces; at which time I caused to work in the furnace, the brave
Gentleman Nicolao Landiamo my familiar friend, and a man rare in working
Enamels at the lamp, in which furnace I made many cups of Calcidony at the same
time, which always were fair to all essays, never departing from the aforesaid
rules, and having the materials well prepared.

The second Calcidony.

CHAP. XLIII.
1. IN a pound of Aquafortis dissolve three ounces of fine Silver cut small in
a glass body well closed, set this aside.

2. In another glass body, put one pound of Aquafortis, wherein dissolve 5
ounces of Mercury well purified, close the body well and set that aside.

3. In another little glass body, put one pound of Aquafortis, wherein
dissolve two ounces of sal Armoniack, then put into this dissolution of Crocus
Martis made with Aquafortis, Ferretta of Spain, Copper calcined Red, as in
Chap. 24. Brass calcined with Sulphur, of each half an ounce, put all these
materials well ground, and powdered by themselves, and then one by one, into
the bodies by little and little, with patience, because they all arise much.

4. In another little glass vessel let there be put one pound of Aquafortis,
and therein dissolve one ounce of sal Armoniack, and in the dissolution of
crude Antimony powdered, Vitriol purified, of Azure, or Blew Smalts, of each
half an ounce, one ounce of Red-lead, grind them all well and set the vessel by.

5. In a like body, dissolve in one pound of Aquafortis, two ounces of sal
Armoniack, then put in one ounce of Zaffer prepared, and a quarter of an ounce
of Manganese prepared, and half an ounce of thrice calcined Copper, and one
ounce of Cinaber, put in warily every one of these things (well powdered) by
themselves, into the body, avoiding those things that swell up arise and fume,
set this aside.

6. In another small glass body, dissolve in one pound of Aquafortis two
ounces of sal Armoniack, and then add of Cerus, Painters Red-lake, Verdigreas,
the Skales of iron that fall from the anvil, of each half an ounce, these swell
very much. Let all these 6 bodies stand 12 days, and shake them well six times
every day, that the water may penetrate and subtilise the ingredients and
metalls, to communicate their tincture to the glass.

After this time take a great glass body, luted at the bottom, into which you
shall empty all the materials of these six bodies by little and little, that
they may not run out, nor make the glass crack, in this great body mix well the
waters, that the materials may be well united, and mixed together, set this
glass in ashes at a very gentle heat, for twenty four hours, that the water may
evaporate. Observing that the fire be gentlest at last, lest the powder be
wasted with too much heat. He that will regain the Aquafortis may join the
head and receiver and lute the jonts (as is usual) and the water being
evaporated, there remains at the bottom a reddish powder, which is kept in a
glass closed for use.

Put this powder or medicine into metal made of broken pieces of glass, and
old glass, but not made of Virgin Fritt of Crystal, or Crystalline, as in the
first Calcidony has been said. Give the metal the same quantity, and use the
said distance of time as in the other, then give it the body of burnt Tartar,
and soot of the Chimny Vitrified, and Crocus Martis made with vinegar, then let
them settle twenty four hours, and cause a vessel to be made thereof, and put
it in the fire, and observe whether it take body and opacity, and if it show
the variety of colors with toys and wavings, work all of it into vessels of
diverse sorts, framing therewith all sorts of workmanship, and variety of toys.

With this sort of Calcidony, I made many cups, all which were fair, and
besides with this past of Calcidony may be made many hundred crowns for gentle
men, as fair as can be uttered. These were seen by Ferdinando the great Duke,
of blessed memory, and by many other Princes, and Lords, and this was done by
me in Flanders.

The third way of Calcidony.

CHAP. XLIV.
1. IN a glass body in strong Aquafortis, dissolve four ounces of fine leaf
Silver, that is to say, round cuttings of leaf silver, stop the body and set it
aside.

2. In another body of like glass dissolve in one pound of Aquafortis five
ounces of Quicksilver purified with vinegar and common salt, in a wooden dish
with a wooden pestle stir the Mercury sufficiently round with strong vinegar,
and wash it with clear common water, until it is dissolved, and carry away all
the common salt, together with the blackness of the Mercury, repeat this many
times. Then strain this Mercury through canvas, and dissolve it in the
abovesaid Aquafortis, as before, close the glass vessel, and set it aside.

3. In another glass body, dissolve in a pound of Aquafortis, three ounces of
fine Silver calcined after this manner, to wit, amalgamate the silver with
Mercury, mix the amalgama with as much more common salt well prepared from all
'its terrestriety, by dissolving it in common water, and boiling it a little,
and then let it settle two days that the terrestriety mixed with the salt may
sink to the bottom, then filtre the water, and in the bottom will remain the
grossness and terrestrity of the salt, evaporate this water filtred from the
terrestriety of the salt in a glass vessel, and dry it well, repeat this till
the salt sends no more dregs to the bottom, and then it will be perfect and fit
for the work. This purifying of the salt is made that it may be more
efficacious to open the silver, otherwise it will be hard to separate them. Put
all these things amidst the coals, in a pot, that all the Mercury may be
evaporated away, and the Silver remain at the bottom calcined and powdered,
and add unto it it is weight of new common salt prepared (as before) mix them
well, and put all in a chrysible or a pot to calcine six hours in the fire.
Wash this stuff in a glased pot many times with warm water till all the
saltness be well gone; then put this silver into a glass body full of common
water, boil it till a quarter of it be evaporated, then let the silver grow
cold and settle, and decant the water, repeat this fresh water thrice, and the
fourth time put it in a body of Aquafortis, stir it well, and set it aside.

4. In another like body, dissolve in a pound of Aquafortis, three ounces of
sal Armoniack, decant off the clear solution, the remainder at the bottom cast
away. In this water dissolve a quarter of an ounce of gold, keep this last
solution apart.

5. In another glass body, dissolve in one pound of Aquafortis, three ounces
of sal Armoniack. Then put into the solution, of Cinaber, of Crocus Martis, of
ultramarine, of Ferretto of Spain, of each half an ounce, put them (well
powdered) leasurely into the body, which being done close the vessel, and set
it aside.

6. In another body, dissolve in a pound of Aqua fortis, three ounces of sal
Armoniack. Then put in Crocus Martis calcined with vinegar, calcined Tin, a
thing common in potters furnaces, Zaffer prepared, and Cinaber, of each half an
ounce. Put gently each of them (ground by themselves) into the Aquafortis,
then keep this in a vessel, and set it aside.

7. In another body of glass, dissolve in a pound of Aquafortis two ounces of
sal Armoniack. Then put leasurely into the solution, Brass calcined with
Brimstone, Brass thrice calcined, as in Chap. 28. Manganese prepared, and the
scales of Iron, which fall from the Smiths anvil, of each half an ounce. Put
each of these well ground by themselves, by little and little, then close the
vessel, and set it aside.

8. In another body, dissolve in a pound of Aquafortis, two ounces of sal
Armoniack, whereto put of Verdigreas one ounce, Red-lead, crude Antimony, and
the C^put mortuum of Vitriol purified, of each half an ounce, put these
powdered leasurely in, close the vessel, and set it aside.

9. In another body, dissolve in a pound of Aquafortis, two ounces of sal
Armoniack, then put in leasurely Orpiment, whit^ Arsnick, Painters Lake, of
each half a^ ounce, each powdered, and ground by self, close the vessel, and
set it aside.

Keep these ^nine bodies (well closed in the furnace fifteen days, and every
(...) stir it well many times, that the Aquafortis may work, and the materials
be subtilised, and their tinctures well opened, else they will not work well,
then put all the materials with their waters into a great and strong body, by
little and little; the things being united together, let alone the great body
(whereinto you have powered the materials of all the lesser bodies) closed for
six days, and every day stir it, then put it in ashes, giving it a gentle heat
for twenty four hours, that the water may only evaporate, observing that the
body must be well luted at the bottom, even unto the midst of the body, and at
the last of all the heat must be made so gentle that it only evaporate the
water, and that the better spirits of the Aquafortis may remain enclosed in
the same powders, for so the powder will work fair, and strange things in
glass. In the bottom of this body, will remain a powder of a purplish Green,
whereof I gave the glass such a dose and quantity as is said in the first
Calcidony. Then in due times (as is said in the first Calcidony,) give it it is
body, to wit, Tartar burnt, the foot of the Chimny, and Crocus Martis made with
vinegar, using the same dose, and diligence, times, and intervals throughout,
as is said in the first Calcidony, then at the end of twenty four hours, work
it with diligence, and according to art, and set it to the fire again, as has
been most punctually said in the first Calcidony.

This third way of making Calcidony, I performed at Antwerp, a City of Brabant,
Anno 1609. in the Month of January. At which time, and for many years, there
was in the house Signor Emanuel Nimenes a Knight of the Noble Religion of Saint
Steven, a Portughes, and Citizen of Antwerp, a gentile Spirit, and Universal in
all knowledge, as any in the Low Countries, whom I saw or knew. With this
powder I made a Calcidony in the furnace of Antwerp, which I caused Signor
Philippo Ghiridolpho a very Courteous Gentleman to work, which Calcidony came
forth so fair, and beautiful, that it imitated the true Oriental Agat, and in
fairness and beauty of colors far surpassed it. Many Portughes Gentlemen well
Skilled in Jewels admired it, saying, that nature could not do more. This was
the fairest Calcidony that ever I made in my life, which although it be
laborious, and long a working, yet notwithstanding it does real things. Of this
Calcidony two vessels were given to the most Excellent Prince of Orange, which
pleased him very well.

The third Book.
This Book shows the ways to make the color of Gold Yellow, of the Amethist,
Saphyre, Granat, Velvet Black, Milk White, Marble, and Deep Red; As also to
make Fritt with natural Crystal, and to color glass of a Pearl color, and
other particulars necessary in this Art.

CHAP. XLV.
THis third Book teaches various ways, and one better than another, to make
all the abovesaid colors; As also a particular way to make Fritt of natural
Crystal, which will melt as ordinary Crystal metal, and will make vessels very
white, beautiful, and sightly. There is no doubt but some of those colors are
known to Artists, though not to all persons. For few they are that know how to
make well Gold Yellow, and a Deep Red, being hard and nice colors in this Art.
Since in making them it is necessary you be punctual in the dose, time,
circumstances, and materials: for if you err but a very little in any of them
whatsoever, all the whole labor and business is lost and comes to nothing. I
describe these two colors, and all other, in so clear and intelligible a
style, that every body may understand, and make them to their gust and
satisfaction.

You must be exact in the time, quantity, circumstances, purifying, powdering,
sercing, fire, materials, if you err but a little in any of them whatsoever,
all the labor is lost, and the colors come to nothing.

2. Tartar must be of Red-wine well vitrified in the vessel, in gross pieces,
not in powder, Vitrified na^urally of themselves. That of white wine is not
good.

3. To Manganese our author still subjoyns of Pi^mont.

4. The color must be made fuller or lighter according to the works you employ
them for, and to heighten them, put in more of the color, but to make them
lighter, put into the pot more Fritt. Take some metal out of the pot, and you
shall see whether you have your desired color; put in your colors by little
and little lest they overdo.

5. Put your color to the Fritt, and not to the metal, when melted, for then
it neither takes the color so well, nor so good a color.

6. Mix the colors well with the metal in the pots, when it is melted, that
both may be well incorporated, and this is to be done as often as you work the
metal.

To make a Gold Yellow in glass.

CHAP. XLVI.
TAke Crystal Fritt two parts, Rochetta Fritt one part, both made with Tarso,
(which is much better than sand) mix and remix well these two Frits, and to
every hundred pound of this composition, take of Tartar in lumps well beaten
and serced fine, of Manganese prepared, of each one pound, mix these two
powders well, first together, and then with the Frits. Then put them into the
furnace, and let them stand four days at an ordinary fire, because they rise
much. When the metal is purified and well colored (which usually is at the
end of four days) work it into vessels and works. This quantity of the
materials makes a most fair color, which you may make deeper or lighter by
adding or diminishing the powders or Frits. You must put the powder in at
several times, and not into the metal, for then it colors not. With these
rules and observations you shall make a very fair Gold Yellow. But if you would
have it fairer and a more graceful Yellow, take all Crystal Fritt. And thus I
have frequently made this color and always very fair.

Garnat color.

CHAP. XLVII.
TAke of Crystal and Rochetta Fritt, of each a like quantity, mix them well,
and to every 100 weight, add of Manganese one pound, Zaffer prepared an ounce,
mix well these two powders together first, then with the Frits, then put this
powder into the pot by little and little. Mix well the Manganese with the
Zaffer, for this quickens the color, making it shining, beautiful and fair. At
the end of 24 hours (when it is pure and well colored) work it.

Amethist color.

CHAP. XLVIII.
TAke only Crystal Fritt made with the most perfect Tarso, Manganese prepared
one pound, Zaffer prepared one ounce and a half, mix these two powders well
together, and then with the Fritt, and not with the metal in the pots. The
proportion is one ounce of the mixed powder to one pound of the Fritt. When the
metal is pure and well colored work it into vessels, etc.

Saphyre color.

CHAP. XLIX.
TO every hundred weight of Rochetta Fritt, add one pound of Zaffer prepared,
and to every pound of Zaffer one ounce of Manganese, mix these two well
together first, and then with the Fritt, put them all mixed into the surnace to
melt and purify, and when it is pure, and well colored work it, etc. This
small quantity of Manganese makes a most fair color of a double violet, which
I have often made at Pisa and always well.

A fairer Saphyre color.

CHAP. L.
INstead of Rochetta Fritt, take Crystal Fritt, whereto add the same quantity
of the foresaid powder, with the same rules, and you shall have a fair, and
shining Saphyre color.

A Black color.

CHAP. LI.
TAke pieces of broken glasses of many colors, grind them small, and put to
them Manganese and Zaffer, to wit, not more than half of Manganese to the
Zaffer. This glass purified will be of a most fair Black, shining like velvet,
and will serve for tubes and all kinds of works.

A much fairer Black.

CHAP. LII.
TAke of the Frits of Crystal and Polveverine, of each 20 pound, Calx of Lead,
and Tin four pound, mix all together, set them in a pot in the furnace well
heated, and when the metal is pure, take steel well calcined and powdered,
scales of Iron which fall from the Smiths anvil, of each a like quantity,
powder and mix them well, put six ounces of this powder to the said metal that
they may both strongly boil, let them settle 12 hours, and sometimes mix the
metal, and then work it. This will be a most fair Velvet Black, and pleasant,
to make all sorts of works.

Another fairer Black.

CHAP. LIII.
TO a hundred weight of Rochetta Fritt, give two pound of Tartar, and of
Manganese six pound, both pulverised, mix them and put them in the furnace
leasurely, let the metal purify, which will be about the end of four days,
then mix, and wash the said metal, which will make a more mavelous black
than all the former.

A fair milk White called Lattimo.

CHAP. LIVE.
TAke of Crystal Fritt twelve pound, of calcined Lead and Tin two pound, mix
them well, of Manganese prepared half an ounce, unite them all together, and
put them into a pot heated, let them stand twelve hours that the materials may
be melted, and at the end of eight hours you may work it. This will be a fair
White which I have often made.

A fair White much whiter than the former.

CHAP. LV.
TAke 400 weight of Crystal Fritt, and 60 pound of calcined Tin, and two pound
and a half of Manganese prepared, powder and mix them all with the Fritt, and
set them in a furnace in a pot, let them refine, and at the end of 18 hours
this stuff will be purified, which cast into water, purify it again in the
furnace* and make a proof, and if it be too clear add 15 pound of the aforesaid
calcined Tin, mix well the metal many times, and at the end of one day it
becomes mavelous white, and in whiteness surpasses any snow, then work it. I
have often made it and always with good success. This white may be also made
with Rochetta, but not so white as with Crystal.

To make a Marble color.

CHAP. LVI.
PUt Crystal Fritt in a pot, and when it is melted (before it is purified) work
it. This is a fair Marble color.

A Peach color in White.

CHAP. LVII.
MAnganese prepared will make in Lattimo the color of a Peachflower. But work
it in time because it loses color.

A Deep Red.

CHAP. LVIII.
TAke of Crystal Fritt 20 pound, broken pieces of white glass one pound,
calcined Tin two pound, mix these well together, put them into a pot to run and
purify, when these are melted, take steel calcined, scales of Iron from the
anvil, both well ground, of each a like quantity, mix them together, put
leasurely of this mixture, about an ounce, to the aforesaid metal when
purified, and mix them well, and let them incorporate, which succeeds commonly
in five or six hours. Too much powder makes the metal black, whereas the
color ought to be transparent and not opacous, of an obscure Yellow; when it is
so, put in no more powder, but then put about three quarters of an ounce of
Brass calcined to redness (as in the 24 Chap.) and ground, to this metal, and
mix them many times, and at about three or four times it will become as red as
blood, wherefore make essays often, and see whether this color be good, and
when so, work it speedily, else 'twill lose it is color, and become black.
Besides leave the mouth of the pot open, else* the color will be lost. Let not
the pot stand above 10 hours in the furnace, and suffer it not to cool as much
as is possible. When you see the color fade (which sometimes happens) put in
some scales of Iron, which reduces the colors. And, because this is a nice
color, use all diligence in making it by putting in the steel and scales, as
also in working it.

Fritt of natural Crystal.

CHAP. LIX.
CAlcine natural Crystal in a Chrysible, extinguish it in common cold water
eight times, cover the Crysible that no ashes nor filth get in, Dry the
calcined Crystal, and grind it to an impalpable powder, mix this powder with
salt of Polverine made in a glass body, as in Chap. 3. with these make a Fritt,
observing the quantities, rules, and portion of Manganese, setting it in the
furnace, and at due, and often times casting it into the water, purifying and
working it as in other Crystal. And thus you will make a mavelous thing.

A Pearl color in Crystal.

CHAP. LX.
PUt at 3 or 4 times to Crystal melted and purified, of Tartar well calcined to
whiteness, and continue to put in the Tartar 4 or 6 times, always mixing it
well with the metal, till the Crystal has gotten a Pearl color. Then work it
speedily, for this color fades. This I have often practiced and experimented.

The fourth Book.
Wherein is shown the true way to make glass of Lead, to calcine Lead, and
extract from it the colors of green Emerald, Topaz, Sky color or Sea green,
Granat color, Saphyre, Gold Yellow, and of Lapis lazuli.

With the way to colonr natural Crystal (without melting it) into the permanent
colors of Rubies, Balas, Topaz, Opal, Girasole, and other fair colors.

CHAP. LXI.
THe glass of Lead known to few in this Art, as to colors, is the fairest and
noblest glass of all others at this day made in the furnace. For in this glass
the colors imitate the true Oriental gems, which cannot be done in Crystal,
nor any other glass. It Is very true, that unless very great diligence be used,
all sorts of pots will be broken, and the metal will run into the coals of the
furnace. Observe my rules in all these glasses made of Lead exactly, and you
shall avoid all danger. This business principally consists in knowing well how
to calcine Lead, and to recalcine it also a second time; For by how much it is
better and more calcined, by so much the less it returns to Lead; Again, and by
consequence the less breaks out the bottom of the pot. Secondly, cast the
metal into water, and separate carefully the Lead from the glass, even the
least grains of it. This glass of lead must be cast into the water by little
and little, to make a better separation, for the least Lead remaining breaks
out the bottom of the pots, and lets all the metal run into the fire.

These two rules our Author repeats almost in every Chapter of this Book, and
these following also,

The pots and Lead must not have too much heat in the furnace, neither must the
metal be wrought too hot, and the Marble whereon it is wrought must be of the
hardest stone; and must be wetted, else the marble will break and scale.

To calcine Lead.

CHAP. LXII.
AT first Calcine Lead in a Kill as the potters do, and in great quantity.
Usually in two days they calcine many a hundred pound of Lead. In calcining
observe that the Kill be not too hot, but sufficiently heated only to keep the
Lead in fusion, for otherwise 'twill not be calcined. When the Lead is melted
it yields at the top a Yellowish matter. Then begin to draw forwards the
calcined part with an Iron fit for the purpose, always spreading it in the
internal extremity of the Kills bottom, which should be of soft-stone, which
will bear the fire. And the Kill must have a declivitie toward the mouth, which
I pass by as a thing well known. When it is calcined once it must be put, and
spread a second time in the Kill, to reverberate in a convenient heat, always
stirring it with an Iron, and that for many hours, till it come this second
calcination to a good Yellow and be calcined. Then serce all in a fine serce,
and what passes not the serce recalcine it with new Lead. This is the way to
calcine Lead in great quantity to make thereof store of Potters ware.

To make glass of Lead.

CHAP. LXIII.
TAke of this calcined Lead 15 pound, and Crystal or Rochetta or Polverine
Fritt, according as you would make the colors, 12 pound, mix them as well as
possibly you can, put them in a pot, and at the end of 10 hours, cast them into
water, for by that time they will be all well melted, separate the Lead, and
return the metal into the pot, which in 12 hours at most you shall have most
fit to work.

The manner how to work the said glass.

CHAP. LXIV.
TO work glass of Lead into diverse drinking or other vessels, it is necessary
before it is taken upon the Iron to be a little raised in the pot, and then take
it out, and (...) it to cool a little, and then work it on the Marble being
clear. At first let the Marble be well wetted with cold water that this glass
may not draw away with it the Marble, and scale it; which it always does when
the marble is not wetted, and incorporates it into its self. This sticking of
the marble makes a foul color in the works. Wherefore continually wet the
marble whiles this glass is wrought, otherwise all the fairness and beauty will
be taken from it, Do thus as often as you take the metal out of the pot. This
sort of glass is so tender, that if it be not cooled in the furnace and taken a
little at a time, and held on the Irons, and the Marble continually wetted,
it is impossible to work it. Which proceeds from the calcined Lead, which makes
it most tender as a caudle.

Glass of Lead of a wonderful Emerald color.

CHAP. LXV.
TAke of Polverine Fritt 20 pound, Lead calcined 16 pound, serce these two
powders first by themselves, then, when well mixed, put them in a pot not too
hot, and at the end of 8 or 10 hours they will be melted, then cast them into
water, and separate the Lead. Put them a second time into the pot, and in 6 or
8 hours they will be melted, then cast them into water and separate the lead.
This being twice done the metal will be freed from all the Lead, and all the
unctuosity which cale^ned Lead and Polverine give it, and will acquire a most
bright and shining color, and in few hours 'twill run and become very clear,
then give it brafs thrice calcined (made as in Chap. 28.) fix ounces, and
therewith mix a penny weight of Crocus Martis made with Viniger, put in this
mixture at six times, always mixing well the glass, and taking at each time
the intervall of saying the Creed. Let this glo^s settle an hour, then mix and
take a proof thereof. When you like the color let them incorporate 8 hours
then work them into drinking glasses, which will appear in a color proper to
the Emerald of the old Oriental rock with natural shining and glittering.

Let this glass, stand in a pot when sufficiently colored, till it has
consumed all the dregs* and till it be perfectly* refined and* then 'twill be
so like the natural Emerald that you can hardly know one from the other*

Another wonderful Green Emerald beyond all other Greens.

CHAP. LXVI.
THis is made in every thing as the Emerald-green, in Chap. 65. but with this
difference, that this only takes six ounces of the powder of the Caput mortuum
of Vitriolum Veneris, made as in Chap. 131. 132. and the other the same
quantity of Brass prepared. This happily is the rarest Green that can be made
any way whatsoever, which I have often made to my content.

Topaz color in glass of Lead.

CHAP. LXVII.
TAke Crystal Fritt instead of Polverine Fritt 15 pound, Lead calcined 12
pound, mix and serce them both together, set them in the furnace not too hot,
at the end of 8 hours, cast them into water, separate the Lead from the pot and
glass, and repeat this twice, then hereto add half glass of a Gold Yellow
color, let them incorporate, and purify for an Oriental Topaz.

A Sky or Seagreen in glass of Lead.

CHAP. LXVIII.
TAke Crystal Fritt 16 pound, Lead calcined 10 pound, mix and serce them well
together, set them in the furnace, in 12 hours the stuff will be melted, cast
both it and the pot into water, separate the lead, let them stand in the
furnace 8 hours a second time, then cast them into water a second time, and
separate the lead, put them in the furnace, and in 8 hours your metal will be
most clear, then take of Brass calcined 4 ounces, of Zaffer prepared a quarter
of an ounce, mix these well, and put in this mixture at 4 times to the glass of
lead, and at the end of two hours mix well the glass and take a proof, then let
the glass stand 10 hours, in which time the colors will be well incorporated,
and the glass be very well perfected, and be fit to be wrought in any works.

The color of a Granat in glass of Lead.

CHAP. LXIX.
MIx 20 pound of Crystal Fritt with 16 pound of calcined lead, serce and put
them into a pot, and to them of Manganese three ounces, of Zaffer half an
ounce, both prepared, let them stand 12 hours, cast them into water and
separate the lead, put them again into the furnace, and let them purify 10
hours, then mix them, and take a proof, when the color is perfect, and of a
fair Granat, work the glass as before.

Saphyre color in glass of Lead.

CHAP. LXX.
TAke 15 pound of Crystal Fritt, and lead calcined 12 pound, mix and serce them
well together, then add to them two ounces of Zaffer, and of Manganese a penny
weight, both prepared, let them stand in the furnace 12 hours, cast them into
water, and separate the lead, repeat this a second time, and you shall have the
color of an Oriental Saphyre, very beautiful and fair, with the mixture of a
double Violet color.

A Yellow Gold color in glass of Lead.

CHAP. LXXI.
TAke of Crystal Fritt, and calcined lead, of each 16 pound, mix and serce
them well, and add to them of Brass thrice burned six ounces, Crocus Martis
made with Vinegar 2 penny weight, put them well mixed in the furnace, let them
stand 12 hours, then cast them into water, separate the lead, set them in the
furnace other 12 hours, and in that time 'twill be clear, mix them and take a
proof. If it wax green, give it a little Crocus Martis (which takes away the
greeness) till it become a most fair Gold Yellow color, often made by me.

The color of Lapis Lazuli.

CHAP. LXXII.
MElt the fairest Lattimo made, as in Chap. 55. with the whitest Crystal and
most tender, in a pot, when it is well melted, give it of* Blew Painters Smalts,
by little and little, and when the color is good, let it stand in the fire two
hours, and make a proof, and when it is good let it stand 12 hours, mix them,
and work them. If the metal rise put in a piece of leaf Gold to diminish the
rising. This will be very like the natural Lapis Lazuli.

The way to color natural Crystal of a Viper color, without melting it.

CHAP. LXXIII.
TAke natural Crystal of a good water, and very clear, free from Terrestriety,
in several pieces of diverse Magnitudes, crude Antimony, Yellow O^piment of each
powdered two ounces, sal Ammoniac one ounce, powder and mix well these three
last, put this mixture in the bottom of a Crysible that wiil bear the fire, and
above this mixture the Crystalls in pieces, then cover this Chrysible with
another, mouth to mouth, lute them well, and when they are dry, set them in
coals, which kindle by little and little, and when they begin to fire, let them
flame of themselves, and then they will smoke much, do this operation in a
large Chimney, and avoid the dangerous and deadly fumes, when all these fumes
are gone, let the Chrysible stand till the pot cool, and the fire go out of its
self. Then unlute the Chrysibles, and take out the pieces of Crystal, and those
which are at the top will be tinged with a good Yellow color, with a red
Rubie, and Balass colors with fair spots, those which lay at the bottom upon
the powder, and the residence, into the Wavie color of a Viper. These pieces
of Crystal may be wrought as Jewels at the wheel, and will receive a good
polishing, luster and showing beauty, such as is in the Topaz, Rubie and
Balass, if you give them foils suitable to their color they make a fair show,
being set in Gold. Of these Crystalls you may color a good quantity, since the
charges and labor is but small, and in coloring a competent quantity there
always come forth some beautiful and fair.

The color of a Balass, Rubie, Topaz, Opal, and Girasole in Natural Crystal.

CHAP. LXXIV.
TAke Orpiment of a Yellow-oringetawney color in powder, Crystalline with
Arsnic, of each two ounces, crude Antimony, sal Ammoniac, of each one ounce,
put this powder well mixed, into a very capacious Chrysible, and upon the
powder, scales, and little pieces of Crystal, and upon these small pieces
larger and grosser pieces of Crystal of a fair water, without spots, if you
would have a pleasing thing, let them be very large. And so fill the Chrysible,
to which lute well another mouth to mouth, make a hole at the bottom of the
uppermost of the bigness of a Tare, that the air may draw through this hole the
fumes of the materials which pass through the pieces of the Crystal. Which
tingeth the Crystal well, and better than when they pass through the joints of
the Chrysibles. When the lute is dried, set them in the coals, so that all the
lower most, and half the uppermost be buried in the coals. Then kindle the fire
by little and little, do as in the former, and avoid the deadly fumes. The
materials fume long, keep constantly a strong, and good fire. See you let not
in any wind or cold air by windows or other places, for the pieces of Crystal
being then hot, will become brittle, will split, and not be good. When the fire
is gone out of it is self, unlute the Chrysibles, and you shall find the
greatest part of the Crystal tinged with the true colors of Topaz,
Chrysolite, Balass, Rubies, Girasole, and Opal with wonderful beauty. Those of
the best color may be wrought by the Jewellers, at the wheel, and appear
natural jewels, and the Crystal holds it is natural hardness, which is great.
At Antwerp I made good store, and amongst them, some of them were of a fair
Opal color, and some of the Girasole. You may set them in Gold with foiles. Be
sure the Orpiment be good, for therein consists all the sectet. If the work
proceeds not well the first time, repeat it a second, and with practice you
shall always do it without failing.

The fifth Book.
Wherein is shown the true way to make pasts for Emeralds, Topas, Chrysolite,
Iacinth, Saphyre, Garnat, Egmarine, and other colors, of so much pleasantness
and beauty, that they surpass the same natural stones in all things, except
hardness.

With a new Chemical way (never yet used) to make the said pasts, taken out of
Isaac Hollandus, and far excelling all other pasts that have been hither to
made, both in beauty and color.

CHAP. LXXV.
I Believe there are few who desire, and seek not with all earnestness the
knowledge to imitate perfectly Emeralds, Topaz, etc. And in a manner all sorts
of Jewels, which in color, splendour, pleasantness and clearness, excepting
hardness, excel the natural and Oriental, a thing very delightful and pleasant.

Wherefore in this present Book I describe the means to make them, with the
circumstances and diligence necessary to be used. There is no doubt but he who
shall set himself to the work with diligence, shall do much more than what I
publish. The way lately practiced by me, and taken from Isaac Hollandus, makes
pasts of incredible, and seemingly impossible beauty and perfection. It Is true
the work is somewhat long and wearisome, yet I that have many times performed
it, say it is very facil and plain, and (that which is above all) this way is
true. Wherefore all pains, expenses, and charges employed in such a like work,
ought to seem small and light.

The way to prepare natural Crystal.

CHAP. LXXVI.
TAke natural Crystal the clearest that is possible, and put by firestones,
Calcidonies, and Tarso and other hard stones, which though they Vitrifie, yet
they make not so clear, lucid and shining stones as natural Crystal does. The
said stones used to make counterfeit Jewels, though they take polishing
wonderfully, yet they always have something earthy, and obscure in them. But
Crystal has always something, that is aerial and transparent, and draws near
to the quality and nature of Jewels, especially those which are natural and
Oriental. For they work far greater effects than the Italian or Dutch. Take
then works made of Crystal, put them in Chrysibles covered at the top, set them
in burning coals till they be both well heated and fired, then suddenly cast
the Crystal into a very large pan, full of cold clear water. When the Crystal
is cold recalcine and heat, and cast it into fresh clean water, repeat this 12
times, and be sure the ashes and filth be kept out of the Chrysible, and that
the water be always very clean. When the Crystal is well calcined grind it to
an impalpable powder as fine as the best wheaten flour, and that on a
Porphyrie-stone, with a muller of the same, and then 'twill crumble and come to
a flour, like refined Sugar. If you powder the Crystal in Brass mortars, with
an Iron Pestle, you can make nothing therewith but a green Emerald color.
Grind not above a spoonful at a time, and this grinding, and sercing must be
often repeated, so long till no roughness remains, nor can be felt in the
powder. For otherwise a past made thereof will give only a durty and imperfect
work, and will never be like natural Jewels. But if the Crystal be well ground
'twill make artificial gems, far excelling true natural stones in beauty,
color, clearness, splendour and polishing. Make a good quantity of this
material that you may make all colors, for this is the prime material to make
all Artificial jewels, and shall be called hereafter Crystal prepared.

These rules often repeated by the Author take together.

1. That the whole be done cleanly, to this end lute all the pots wherein the
Crystal is calcined, and wherein the pasts are baked with lute well dried,
before they be set to calcine or bake.

2. Take pots that will bear the fire.

3. Grind all on Porphyrie-stone, and not in metal, to a most implapable
powder, first singly, and then together.

4. Keep a just proportion in the dose of the Ingredients.

5. Mix the materials well before you bake them, and if the past be not
sufficiently baked the first time, bake it again a second time in the potters
furnace, and never break the pot till you see it is baked, for if you do the
pasts will be foul, and full of blisters.

6. Leave the vacuity of a fingers thickness in the top of the pot, especially
where it is said it swells much, or that you must put it in leasurely, lest the
materials run out into the fire, or stick to the cover, and so make a foul
color.

How to make Oriental Emeralds.

CHAP. LXXVII.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Red-lead four ounces, mix and
incorporate them well together, good Verdigreas two penny weight, Crocus Martis
made with Vinegar eight grains, Mix all well and set them in a potters furnace,
in the hottest place thereof, as long as the fire lasts. To see whether the
past be sufficiently baked and purified, clear and transparent, take only off
the cover made of lute, and if the past be pure and transparent to the bottom
it is a sign it is baked enough. Otherwise relute, and bake it again, without
breaking the pot, for then the past will be full of points and blisters. Let
the fire be continued 24 hours with dry wood.

I set up a furnace at Antwerp a purpose, wherein I kept 20 pots of diverse
colors, and with a fire in 24 hours melted and purified all of them, and to be
the more secure, continue the fire six hours more, and by this means the past
will be very well baked, and little wood wasted. These pasts may be cut and
wrought, in every thing, as ordinary Jewels, they wholly receive the same
polishing and luster, and are set in Gold with foiles, as the other commonly
are. This past is harder than ordinary.

To make a deeper Emerald color.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
TAke of Crystal prepared an ounce, of Ordinary Red-lead six ounces and a
half, mix them, and add, of Verdegreas about three penny weight, and 13 grains,
of Crocus Martis made with vinegar 10 grains. Proceed according to the rules,
and you shall have a mavelous Emerald color for small works, and to be set
in Gold. This past must be baked more than ordinary, to wast that imperfection
which Lead usually gives; this past is britler, but fairer than the former.

To make a more beautiful past for Emeralds.

CHAP. LXXIX.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, Ordinary Red-lead seven ounces, mix and
add to them of Verdegreas about ten grains to every ounce, and of Crocus Martis
made with Vinegar ten grains only at a time, mix them and proceed according to
rule, and you shall have an Emerald past for small works, very fair and
beautiful, but not hard, by reason of the plenty of lead. Wherefore bake it
more than ordinary to take away the blackness, and unctuosity Lead naturally
yields.

Another most fair Emerald.

CHAP. LXXX.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium six ounces, mix them,
and add of good Verdigeas well ground 80 grains, mix and bake them for a most
fair Oriental Emerald.

An Oriental Topaz.

CHAP. LXXXI.
TAke Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium seven ounces, mix them, and
bake them, for a marvelous Oriental Topaz, to work any kind of work you please.

An Oriental Chrysolite.

CHAP. LXXXII.
TAke of prepared Crystal two ounces, ordinary Minium eight ounces, mix them,
and add of Crocus Martis made with Vinegar 12 grains, mix and bake them more
than ordinary by reason of the great quantity of lead.

Sky color.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium five ounces, mix them,
and add 21 grains of Zaffer prepared and ground, remix and bake them for a most
beautiful Sky color.

A Sky with a Violet color.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium four ounces and a half,
mix them, and add about four grains of Painters Blew smalts, mix and bake them,
this past will be a most fair Violet, and pleasant Sky-colour.

An Oriental Saphyre.

CHAP. LXXXV.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium six ounces, mix them
well, and add of Zaffer prepared five grains, mix with the Zaffer of Manganese
prepared seven grains, remix and bake them for an Oriental Saphyre, which will
have a most beautiful Violet color.

A deep colored Oriental Saphyre.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium five ounces, of Zaffer
prepared about 42 grains, add to the Zaffer of Manganese prepared eight grains,
mix and bake them well, and they will make a deeper Oriental Saphyre, with a
Violet color of notable fairness.

An Oriental Garnat.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium six ounces, mix them and
add about 16 grains of Manganese prepared, wherewith mix three grains of Zaffer
prepared, mix them all together, and bake them for a most fair and sightly
Garnat.

A Deeper Oriental Garnat.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium five ounces and a half,
of Manganese prepared 15 grains, wherewith mix four grains of Zaffer prepared,
mix them all, this swells much, bake them for an Oriental Garnat, which has in
it a very fair Violet color.

Another fair Garnat.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
TAke of Crystal prepared two ounces, ordinary Minium five ounces, mix them,
and add 52 grains of Manganese prepared, wherewith mix six grains of Zaffer
prepared, mix them all well and bake them for an Oriental Garnat fairer than
any of the former.

Observations for Pasts and their colors.

CHAP. XC.
OBserve, that the colors in the aforesaid pasts, may be made deeper, or
lighter, according to the works they are to be used for, and also the will and
humor of the maker. Small stones for rings, pendants, and earrings require a
fuller, but greater stones, a lighter color. No rules can be herein given,
though those given by me will give some light to the curious Artist, to whose
judgment it must be left, and who may find out and invent more and better
colors. Besides I set down here only colors from Verdigreas, Zaffer, and
Manganese. But a curious person and practical Chemist may extract a wonderful
Red from Gold, and another fair Red from Iron, from Brass an exceeding fair
Green, from Lead a Gold color, from Silver a Sky-colour, and a much fairer
from Granats of Bohemia, which are low-priz'd, for being small you may draw a
tincture from them, as I have often done in Flanders, and this does notable
effects. The same may be done with Rubies, Sapphires and other Jewels. To write
of these things would be a business too long for me, who speak so clearly in
this present work. But the colors abovesaid will make pleasant works.

The way to make the abovesaid Pasts, and to imitate all sorts of Jewels,
marvelous and never used.

CHAP. XCI.
THis way which I have taken from Isaac Hollandus, when I was in Flanders, to
imitate Jewels, is not much used, and known perhaps to few persons, and though
it be somewhat laborious, Yet by how much it is more laborious it is so much the
fairer; and beautiful, than any made in any place whatsoever to this day, or at
least not shown to me by any person. Wherefore I will show the manner to make
them, so clearly, and with so many circumstances and observations, that any one
versed in Chemistry will be easily capable thereof, and will do the work
perfectly. Take Ceruss, otherwise called white lead, grind it very fine, and
put it into a great glass body, and pour therein as much distilled Vinegar as
will rise a palm above it. Observe that at first the vinegar boils and swells,
wherefore put it in by little and little, till all the fury and noise is gone.
Then set the Vinegar on a hot furnace in sand, and evaporate away the eighth
part of it, take it from the fire, and when the body is cold, decant leasurely
the Vinegar colored enough, and impregnated with salt, which set aside in a
glass vessel, then pour more fresh distild Vinegar on the Ceruss, and evaporate
and decant as before. Repeat this till you have extracted all the salt from the
Ceruss, which is when the Vinegar is colored no more, nor has any more taste
of sweetness, which usually succeeds the sixth time. Then Filtre these colored
Vinegers mixed together, evaporate and dry them in a glass body, and the salt of
Lead will be at the bottom of a white color. Which set in sand in a glass body
from the neck downwards well luted, but the mouth of the glass must be open,
and the furnace heated for twenty four hours continuance. Then take the salt
out of the receiver, powder it, and if it be Yellowish and not Red, set it
twenty four hours in the fire, till it become as Red as Cinaber. Make a good
fire* but not to melt it, for then all your labor and pains will be lost. Pour
distilled Vinegar on this Red-lead calcined, repeating this work as before till
you have extracted all the salt from it, and separated all the dregs and
terrestriety in whole or in part. Keep these colored Vinegers in earthen pans
glased six days, that all the terrestriety and imperfection may sink to the
bottom. Then Filtre them, leaving the grosser part at the bottom as
unprofitable, then cover the Vinegers in a glass body, and there will remain at
the bottom a most white salt of lead, and sweet as Sugar, which dry well and
dissolve in common water, let the solution stand six days in glased pans,
separate the terrestriety at the bottom, Filtre and evaporate as before, and
there will remain at the bottom of the glass a salt as white as snow, and sweet
as Sugar, Repeat this Solution, Filtration, and evaporation thrice. This salt
is called Saccharum Saturni. Which put into a furnace into a body of glass in
Sand, and at a temperate heat for many days, and it will appear calcined into a
color much redder than Cinaber, and as subtle and impalpable as the finest
serced wheaten flour. This is called the true Sulphur of Saturn purified from
all terrestriety, foulness, and blackness which Saturn had at first in it self.
Now when you would make pasts for Emeralds, Sapphires, Garnats, Topaz,
Chrysolite, Sky or any other color, take the same materials, colors,
quantities as abovesaid in the former receipts, except that instead of ordinary
Red-lead, you shall take Sulphur Saturni, working exactly in every thing as
before And you shall have Jewels of marvelous fairness in all colors, which
very far surpass the forementioned, made with ordinary Red-lead. For this true
Sulphur Saturni outgoeth all others, more than I write thereof, as I have seen,
and often made it at Antwerp. Pasts made with this Sulphur, have not that
unctuosity and Yellowness, as the other ordinary ones have, which in time show
their foulness, and the moisture and sweatiness which coming from within men
much soil them, which happens not to those made with the said Sulphur.
Wherefore think not that pains much, which will be well recompensed with the
work and effect.

How to make very hard past of all colors.

CHAP. XCII.
TAke of prepared Crystal ten pound, salt of Polverine six pound, made as in
Chap. 3. well dried and ground on a Porphyrie, mix and serce them well
together, Sulphur Saturni two pound, mix these three powders in earthen pans
glased and clean, and with a little common water make with them a hard past,
and of the past little cakes, each weighing three ounces, with a little hole in
the midst of them, dry these in the sun, and then calcine them in the highest
part of the potters furnace, or in other like fires, then powder and grind
these cakes on a porphyrie, and serce them fine, then set them in pots in glass
furnaces, to purify three days, and cast them into water, and return them to
the furnace for 15 days to purify, that all the foulness and blisters may
vanish, and the past remain most pure, like natural Jewels. And moreover this
sort of purest glass will be tinged into all colors you desire. For example
into an Emerald with Brass thrice calcined, as is done in ordinary glass, into
a Seagreen, with Brass calcined to redness, made as in Chap. 24. and with
Zaffer into a Topaz, into a Saphyre with Manganese and Zaffer, into Yellow with
Tartar and Manganese, putting them in by parts, and into a Garnat also, with
Manganese and Zaffer dividedly put in. And indeed this past imitates all Jewels
and colors, and has a wonderful shining and luster, And in hardness too it
imitates the jewels, Especially the Emerald, which will be made most fair and
almost as hard as the true.

The sixth Book.
Wherein is shown the way to make all the Goldsmiths Enamels, to Enamel upon
Gold in diverse colors, with rules, and the materials which color, and what
fires make those Enamels, with exact diligence and clearest demonstration
possible.

ENamelling on Gold and other metalls is a fair and pleasing thing, and in it is
self not only laborious, but necessary, since we see metalls adorned with
Enamels of many colors make a fair and noble show, enticing beyond measure the
eyes of the beholders. And because it is one of the most principal, and a most
necessary part of glass, and it appearing to me to be a thing grateful and
pleasing to all, I set my self to describe many ways to make several sorts of
Enamels, as a thing not vulgar, and belonging to this Art, and one of it is most
noble Appurtenances. And that this work might not be deprived of a matter so
pleasant, profitable and necessary, I have made this sixth Book for the delight
and benefit of all.

The Material wherewith all Enamels are made.

CHAP. XCIII.
TAke of fine Lead 30 pound, of fine Tin 33 pound, Calcine them together in a
Kill, and serce them, Boil this Calx a little in clean water in clean earthen
vessels, take it from the fire and decant off the water by inclination, which
will carry with it the finer part of the Calx, put fresh water on the
remainder, then boil and decant as before, repeat this as long as the water
carries off any Calx. Recalcine the gross remaining Calx, and then draw off
again the more subtle parts, as before. Then evaporate the waters which
carried off the finer Calx at a gentle fire, especially at the last, that the
Calx may not be wasted, which will remain at the bottom much finer than the
Ordinary. Take then of this fine Calx, of Crystal Fritt made with Tarso, ground
and serced fine, of each 50 pound, of white salt of Tartar eight ounces,
powder, serce and mix them well: Then put this stuff into a new earthen pot
baked, giving it a fire for ten hours, then powder it and keep it in a dry
covered place. Of this stuff are made all the Enamels of whatsoever colors.
This shall be called the stuff for Enamels.

To avoid our Authors repetitions observe

1. The pots wherein Enamels are made must be glased with white glass and bear
the fire.

2. Mix and incorporate well the colors and stuff for Enamels.

3. When the Enamel is refined, and the color good, and well incorporated,
take it from the fire with a pair of tongues for the Goldsmiths use.

4. The way to make Enamels is this, powder, grind, and serce well the colors,
and mix them first well one with another, and then with the stuff for Enamels,
then set them in pots in the furnace, when they are all melted and incorporated
cast them into water, and when dry set them in the furnace again to melt (which
they soon do) make a proof, and if the color be too high, take out some of it
and add more of the stuff for Enamels, and if too light add more of the color
at pleasure to your content, then take it out of the furnace.

A Milk-white Enamel*

CHAP. XCIV.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels six pound, of Manganese prepared 48 grains, cast
it thrice into water when refined and melted.

An Enamel of a Turcois color.

CHAP. XCV.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels six pound* mel^ refine and cast it into water,
set it in the furnace again; when it is melted, and refined, put in of th^ic^
calcined Brass three ounces, Zaffer prepared 96 grains, wherewith mix well 48
grains of Manganese prepared, mix them well and put them into the stuff at four
times, mixing them well every time, let them incorporate, make a proof with
your eye that you may know by the eye when the colors are good, as I have
always done, because sometimes the powders color more and sometimes less. Thus
I did at Pisa, and by mine eye without weights colored all sorts of Glass.

Another Azure Enamel.

CHAP. XCVI.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels four pound, wherewith mix of Zuffer prepared two
ounces, and mix with it at first of thrice calcined Brass 48 grains, mix these
two powders well with the stuff for Enamels, set them in the furnace, and work
according to the rules.

A Green Enamel.

CHAP. XCVII.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels four pound, put it in the furnace, and in ten or
tewlve hours 'twill be melted and refined, cast it into water, and put it again
into the furnace in it is own pot, when it is refined, give it of Brass thrice
calcined two ounces, wherewith mix of scales of Iron well ground two ounces,
put them in at three times, mixing and incorporating them every time, and ever
and anon see whether the color please, when it is well take it from the fire.

Another Green Enamel.

CHAP. XCVIII.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels six pound, wherewith mix well Ferretto of Spain
well ground three ounces, and mix with it 48 grains of Crocus Martis, put them
into the furnace, etc. These furnaces are made from about four to six inches
for all Enamels.

Another Green Enamel.

CHAP. XCIX.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels four pound, which in few hours will be refined,
then cast it into water, and put it again into the furnace, and let it refine,
then add these two powders well mixed at three times, to wit, of Brass thrice
calcined two ounces, of Crocus Martis made with Vinegar 48 grains, put them in
the furnace, and when they are well incorporated, take them from the fire: This
is a fair and good Enamel.

A Black Enamel.

CHAP. C.
TAke four pound of the stuff for Enamel, of Zaffer and Manganese, of each two
ounces prepared, and well mixed, incorporate the stuff and colors, put them in
the furnace in a large pot, and when refined cast them into water, then put
them in the furnace again, and they will soon refine, and make a Velvet Black.

Another Black Enamel.

CHAP. CI.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels six pound, of Zaffer prepared, of Crocus Martis
made with Vinegar, of Ferretto of Spain, of each two ounces, grind and mix well
together these three powders, with the stuff for Enamels, put them into the
furnace, and when refined cast them into water, put them in the furnace again,
and take the Enamel out when it is incorporated, and the color pleases you.
This is a fair Black.

Another Black Enamel.

CHAP. CII.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels four pound, Tartar four ounces, Manganese
prepared two ounces, grind and mix these two powders well with the stuff for
Enamels, set them in the furnace in a large pot, when melted and refined, cast
them into water, and put them into the furnace again, let them refine. This is
a most fair Velvet Black to Enamel upon metalls ordinarily.

A Red Enamel.

CHAP. CIII.
To four pound of the stuff for Enamels, add two ounces of Manganese prepared,
mix them well, and set them in the furnace in a large pot, when it is refined
and melted cast them into water, set them again in the furnace, and when
refined take them out. This is a fair Purplish Enamel.

A Purplish Enamel.

CHAP. CIV.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels six pound, of Manganese prepared three ounces,
of Brass thrice calcined six ounces, mix them all well together, set them in a
furnace, and let them refine, then cast them into water, and put them into the
same pot, let them boil, and when refined take them from the fire. It Is a good
Enamel.

A Yellow Enamel.

CHAP. CV.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels 6 pound, of Tartar three ounces, of Manganese
prepared 72 grains, grind and mix well these powders together, and then with
the stuff for Enamels, put them into the furnace in a large pot, when refined
cast them into water, and set them again in the furnace. This Enamel is of a
fair Yellow to Enamel on Gold, where it shows not well, if you add not Enamels
of other colors.

A Sky colored Enamel.

CHAP. CVI.
TAke of the stuff for Enamels 4 pound, Brass calcined to make a Sky color, as
in Chap. 21. of Seagreen made as in Chap. 23. of each two ounces, of Zaffer
prepared 48 grains, mix first these powders well together, then with the stuff
for Enamels, when they are refined cast them into water, return them into the
pot, let them melt and refine. This is a very fair and beautiful Sky color.

A Violet colored Enamel.

CHAP. CVII.
TAke six pound of the stuff for Enamels, of Manganese prepared three ounces,
of thrice calcined Brass 48 grains, mix these two powders well together, then
remix them with the stuff for Enamels, put them into the furnace, and cast them
into water, put them into the furnace again, and do as before.

The seventh Book.
Wherein is shown the manner how to extract Yellow Lake for Painters, from
Broom flowers, and all other colors, with another way to extract Red Lake,
Green, Azure, Purple, and all colors from all kinds of Herbs and Flowers.

And to make Cochin, Ultramarine, and Lake, from Cochneel, Brasill, and Madder
for Painters, and also to color discolored Turcoises; another way to make a
transparent Red, and a fair Red to Enamel upon Gold and Metalls, things neither
Vulgar nor common.

IN this Book is shown the way to extract all colors from Flowers and Herbs,
for the use of Painters, which may serve also for glass; and Lakes of many
colors, and Ultramarine from Lapis Lazult, all which things though in
particular useful for Painters, may notwithstanding serve to color glass in
the superficies, and also in the fire of the furnaces, such is the Ultramarine,
and also the way to make a transparent Red in glass, which seems at this day to
be wholly lost, as a thing not profitable, and to make a fair Red, to Enamel
upon gold all materials in the Art of glass, and at this day much concealed,
and known to few, and many other things which I judged meet to be put in this
present work, which I believe will be acceptable to curious and ingenious
Spirits.

A Yellow Lake to Paint, from Broom Flowers.

CHAP. CVIII.
MAke a Lee of Barillia, and of Lime, reasonable strong; and in this Lee, boil
at a gentle fire fresh Broom Flowers, that the Lee may draw to it all the
tincture of the Flowers, which you shall know by taking the Flowers our and
seeing them white, and the color well taken out, and the Lee will be yellow
like good Trebian wine: then take out these Flowers, and put this Lee in
earthen dishes (glased) to the fire, that the Lee may boil, and put into it, so
much Roch-Alum, that with the fire, all the Alum may be dissolved; then make a
fire, and empty this Lee into a vessel of clean water, and it will give a
Yellow color at the bottom: let them settle, and decant off all the water, and
again put upon them other fresh water, and decant it off; let the tincture
first sink to the bottom, and do this so long, till you have taken out all the
salts of the Lee and Alum from the tincture; observing that by how much the
more you wash this tincture from the salt of the Lee and Alum, by so much more
will the tincture of the color be fairer, and more beautiful, washing it
always with water to carry away the salt of the Lee and Alum, and at each time
before you decant the water, let the Yellow tincture settle to the bottom.
Repeat this process, until you perceive the water run out sweet and without
saltness as 'twas first put in, and then at the bottom will remain a beautiful
and fair Lake: which spread, when wet, upon pieces of white cloth, and dry it
upon new baked Bricks in the shade, and you shall have a beautiful Lake of a
Yellow color, for Painters, and also for glass.

To extract Lake from wild Poppies, Flower-deluces, Red Roses, Red Violets,
and from all sorts of Green Herbs.

CHAP. CIX.
GEt what quantity of the leaves of Flowers of what color soever they be, let
every color be by it self, fair Green Herbs by themselves: proceed with them
as in Chap. 108. and you shall have a Lake and true tincture and color from
every Flower, and Herb, which will be a fair, and beautiful thing for Painters,
and without doubt, worthy to be much esteemed.

To extract a Lake, and color to Paint, from Orange Flowers, Red Poppies,
Flower-deluces, ordinary Violets, Carnation and Red Roses, Borage and Cabage
Flowers, Gilli-Flowers, from all Flowers whatsoever, and green from Mallows,
Pimpernells, and all other Herbs.

CHAP. CX.
TAke of whatsoever Herb, or Flower, of whatsoever color you will, which being
bruised green upon a leaf of white Paper, tinges it with it is color, these are
good, but the Herbs and Flowers which do not so, are not good, then put into a
glass body ordinary Aqua vitae, the head must be as large as possible, and in
the top thereof put the leaves of whatsoever Flower or Herbs, from which you
would draw a tincture, then lute the joints of the head, and thereto fit a
receiver, then give a temperate heat, that the thinner parts of the Aqua vitae
ascending to the head, and falling upon the leaves and Flowers, may suck out
the tincture, and distill thence into the receiver colored Red, and full of
the tincture of the Flowers, making all the subtle part of the Aqua vitae to
ascend so long as it comes colored, and then distill this Aqua vitae colored
in a glass vessel, which will come over white, and may serve at other times,
and the tincture will remain at the bottom, which must not be dried too much
but moderately, and thus you shall have the tincture or Lake from all Flowers,
and Herbs, singular for Painters.

A Blew to make.

CHAP. CXI.
TAke Quicksilver two parts, flour of Brimstone three parts, sal Armoniack
eight parts, grind them all upon a Porphery, and with the Quicksilver, put
them in a glass with a long neck luted at the bottom in sand, make a gentle
fire till the moisture rise, then stop the mouth of the glass, and increase and
continue the fire, as in sublimation, till the end, and you shall have a Blew,
most fair and excellent.

How to color natural Turcoises discolored.

CHAP. CXII.
PUt Turcoises discoulored, and becom^ white, into a glass, pour upon them oil
of sweet Almonds, keep this glass upon temperate ashes, and warm, and in two
days at most the stones will have acquired a most beautiful color.

A mixture to make spears.

CHAP. CXIII.
TAke of Tin well purified and purged, three pound, Copper well purified one
pound, melt these two metalls, first the Brass, then the Tin, and when they are
well melted cast upon them six ounces of Tartar of Red wine only burnt, and
one ounce and a half of Saltpeter, then a quarter of an ounce of Alum, and two
ounces of Arsnick, let them evaporate, then cast it into the form of a sphere,
and you shall have a good material, the which you shall cause to be burnished
and polished, which will show well, and this is the mixture called steel to
make spears.

The manner how to color within, Balls of glass, or other vessels of White
glass, with all sorts of colors, which will imitate natural stones.

CHAP. CXIV.
TAke a Ball, or other sort of glass that is white and fair, and Isinglass
which must be infused two days in common water, then put this infusion into a
white pan with fair water, and boil it till all be well tempered, observing
that the Isinglass will be very tender with much water, then take it from the
fire, and when it is warm, put it into a Ball of glass, and turn the glass
round, that the Isinglass may fasten and wet every where the glass within, this
being done let the moisture drain and run out, then have in order these colors
powdered, to wit Redlead; and casting it into the glass it will make the said
color stick (which will run in waves) cast it into many places through a tube,
then throw in blew smalts making it stick in waves, within the Ball. Then do
the same with Verdigreas, then with Orpiment, next with Lake, all well ground,
always casting the colors in many places in waves, which by means of the
Isinglass which has moistened the glass within, those powders will every where
stick to the glass; and so shall you do with all colors. Then take Gesso well
powdered, and put enough thereof into the Ball, and suddenly turn it about,
that it may stick every where to the glass within. Do this work nimbly whilst
the moisture of the Isinglass glass lasts, that the powder may stick well,
then empty by the hole of the glass the Gesso which is within the Ball, which
shall then appear of diverse colors with a most fair appearance like the
natural Toies of hard stones, and at last these colors (when the Isinglass is
well dried) stick so that afterward they will not fall off, and always their
color is most fair without. Fit to these Balls a foot of wood, or of other
stuff painted, and they are held for beauty before Cabinets, and for Merchants
counting houses very fair.

Ultra-marine.

CHAP. CXV.
TAke fragments of Lapis Lazuli, found plentiful at Venice at a low price, let
these fragments be well colored with a fair Sky color, lay aside those that
are not colored, calcine them well in a Chrysible, and so heated, cast them
into cold water, repeat this twice, then grind them upon a Porphyrie, to an
impalpable powder as fine as wheaten flour sifted.

Take then three ounces of the Rosin of the Pine, Black Pitch, Mastick, new
Wax, Turpentine, of each three ounces, Linseed Oil, Frankincense, of each an
ounce, dissolve them in a new earthen Pipkin at a gentle heat, stir and
incorporate them with a Spatula, then cast them into cold water, that they may
cleave in a lump for your need.

Take for every pound of Lapis Lazuli ground as before, ten ounces of the
aforesaid past of gums, which dissolve in a Pipkin at a gentle fire, and when
it is well dissolved, cast in by little and little, the said powder of Lapis
Lazuli, and incorporate it with the gum with a Spatula, I cast all the
materials thus hot being incorporated suddenly into cold water, and bathing my
hands with Linseed Oil, made a round pastill hereof long and proportionally
thick. Of these pastils you may make one or more according to the quantities of
the materials, keep these pastils fifteen days in a great vessel full of cold
water, changing the water every two days, then shall you boil in a Kettle
common clean water, the pastils in clean and well glased earthen pans, and cast
upon them warm water, and so leave them till the water is cold, the said water
being emptied out, cast upon them new warm water, and when it is cold empty it
out, putting in again warm water, and when it is cold, empty it out, putting in
again warm water, repeat this so many times till the pastils be dissolved by
the warmth of the water, then put in new warm water, and you shall see the
water will be colored of a Sky color, decant the water into a pan well gl^sed
and cleansed. This casting on of warm water upon the pastils, must be repeated
till it be no more colored, but observe that the water be not over hot, but
luke warm only, for too much heat makes the ultramarine grow black. All these
colored waters strained into pans, have in them the unctuosity of the gums,
therefore they must be left to settle 24 hours, that all the color may sink to
the bottom, then the water with it is unctuosity must be leasurely decanted off,
put upon the pastils clear water, and then strain the cold water through a fine
strainer, stirring the color that it also may pass the strainer, and by this
means a great part of the foulness and unctuosity will remain in the strainer,
wash the strainer always with fair water. And with new water pass the
ultramarine thrice through the serce, washed every time, and then usually all
it is filthiness will remain in the strainer. Put the ultramarine into clean
pans, decant the water softly off, which dry of it is self, and you shall have a
most beautiful ultramarine, as I have often made it at Antwerp. The quantity
from a pound of L^pis Lazuli shall be more or less according as the stone is of
a fuller and fairer color. Then grind it to an impalpable powder on a
Porphyrie (as is abovesaid) and 'twill arise most beautiful. If you take common
Blew smalts ground on a Porphyrie to an impalpable powder, and incorporate it
with the gumm pastils with the foresaid quantities, keeping them indigestion in
cold water 15 days with Lapis Lazuli, and work thorowout as in Lapis Lazuli,
you shall have a very fair and sightly Blew Bice, which will seem to be an
ultramarine. These Blews not only serve for Painters, but to color glass
excellently.

A Lake from Cochineel for Painters.

CHAP. CXVI.
INsuse one pound of the shearings of the finest Woollen Cloth in cold water a
day, then press them well to take away the unctuosity the Wool has from the
Skin, then Alum these shearings after this manner.

Take four ounces of Roch-alum, two ounces of crude Tartar powdered, put them
into a small pipkin with about three flagons of water, when it begins to boil
put in the Flox, and let them boil half an hour at a gentle fire, then take
them off to cool for six hours, after take out the Flox and wash them with fair
water, let them stand two hours, then press the water well from them, and let
them dry.

A Magistery to extract the color from Cochineel.

CHAP. CXVII.
COld water four gallons, wheaten bran four pound, Saline of the Levant,
Fenugreck, of each a quarter of an ounce, put them into a pipkin over the fire
till the water become so hot one may hold his hand in it, take them from the
fire, cover the pipkin with a cloth, for twenty four hours, to preserve well
the color, then decant the Magistrie for use.

Put into a clean pipkin three gallons of cold water, and one of the said
Magistery, when it boils, of Cochineel powdered, after this manner, in a Brass
Mortar, powder and serce one ounce of Cochineel, so many times, till all pass
the serce, at last take 2 little crude Tartar, pound it in the mortar, and
twill take up all the tincture sticking to the bottom of the Mortar, and to the
Pestle, mix this Tartar with the Cochineel serced, and as soon as the water in
the pipkin boils put in the Cochineel, and let it color the water whilst you
can say a Miserere.

Then take the Flox Alumed as before, which must first stand in a pan of cold
water for* half an hour, and when the water is well colored, press well the
water from the Flox, put it into a pipkin, and stir it about very often, with a
little stick, that the Flox may be well tinged, let it stand half an hour over
the fire that it may boil gently, then take the pipkin from the fire, and take
out the Flox, mixing it with a clean stick, put it into pans full of cold
water, and in half an hour let all the water drain off, and put more cold
water, let that drain, and press it well, and set it to dry in a place where no
dust falls, spread it abroad that it may not become musty, and heat again. Take
heed that the fire be always very gentle, for with two strong a fire the color
becomes Black. Then shall you make a Lee in this manner, to wit,

Take ashes of Vine branches, or of Willows, or of other soft wood, put them
upon doubled Canvas, and pour gently on them cold water, let the water run into
a pan, pour twice this strained liquour upon the ashes, and let the Lee settle
24 hours, that the ashes may sink to the bottom, and when it is pure and clear,
decant it off into other pans, putting by the terrestriety which is not good.

Put the said colored Flox, into a clean and cold pipkin, with the Lee, boil
them at a most gentle fire, for so the Lee will be tinged with a Red color,
and will draw the tincture from the Flox, and at first take a little Flox and
press it well, and if the color be discharged, take the pipkin from the fire,
and this is a sign that the Lee has drawn the tincture of the Cochineel from
the Flox.

Hang an Hyprocras bag of Linen, over a great and capacious pan, strain through
this bag all the tincture from the pipkin, and let the Flox also go into the
bag, when the Lee is drayned, press the bag where the Flox are, that you may
have all the tincture: Then wash the bag from the hairs of the Flox, turning
them inside outward, that they may come forth pure and clean.

Then take 12 ounces of Roch-alum powdered, put it into a great glass of cold
water, let them stand till all the Alum is dissolved, then fitly place the said
bag well washed from the hairs of the Flox betwixt two sticks in the air. The
bag must be large at the mouth, and narrow at the bottom, sowed in the manner
of a round pyramid, and under the bag set a clean pan, then cast all the Alum
water into the pan where the tincture of Cochineel is, and you shall see the
Alum water suddenly separate the tincture from the Cochineel like as a Coagulum
does. Then with a clean dish cast into the bag all the said tincture and Lee,
which will run clear out of the bag, but the tincture will stick to the bag.
And when all the water is well near out, if happily any strain through somewhat
colored, pour it again into the bag, and then this second time 'twill leave
all the tincture in the bag, and the Lee will then run white and discharged of
tincture. Then take clean sticks, and therewith mix the tincture which sticks
on the bag in gross pieces, and have in readiness new baked bricks, whereon
spread little pieces of linen, and on the linen small pieces of Lake which
you shall take out of the bag, let them dry well, spread them not too thick
that they may soon dry, for when the Lake stands long wet it grows musty and
makes a foul color. Wherefore you may, when the brick has sucked out much
moisture take another new brick, and so you shall soon dry it. When it is dry
take it from the linen, and this is a good Lake for painters, which I have
oftentimes made at Pisa. Observe, that if the color be too deep, you must give
it more Rock-alum, but if too light less Roch-alum, for so the colors are made
according to you gust and will.

Lake of Brasil and Madder very fair.

CHAP. CXVIII.
IF you would make a Lake of these materials each of them by themselves, you
shall do in every thing as is before said of Cochineel, coloring the water
with one of these materials, but you shall not use so much Alum by an ounce as
you did in Cochineel, for Cochineel has it is tincture deeper than Brasil, and
Madder have. Wherefore you shall give them their proportion, which you shall
find by practice. And also to one pound of Flox you shall use more Brasil or
Madder, for they have not so great a tincture weight to weight as Cochineel
has. And in this manner you shall have a very fair Lake for Painters, and with
less charge than that from Cochineel, and that from Madder in particular will
arise most fair and very sightly.

Lake from Cochineel after another and more easy manner.

CHAP. CXIX.
IN this way invented by me at Pisa, you meet not with Flox nor Magisterie, nor
Lee, nor dying the Wool, nor so many things as go the former, which indeed is
a very laborious way, though most true. But this way is most easy, and works
the same effect, and it is this which follows.

In a pottle of Aqua vitae of the first running, put one pound of Roch Alum
well powdered, when it is all dissolved, put in an ounce of Cochineel powdered
and sisted in every thing as before, put all this in a glass body with a long
neck, and shake it well, and the Aqua vitae will be wonderfully colored, let
them stand four days, then empty this stuff into a clean earthen glased pan,
then dissolve four ounces of Roch-alum in common water, cast this into the pan
of Aqua vitae colored with Cochineel, and put this into the Hyppocras bag, and
so proceed throughout as in the 117 Chap. This is a most noble Lake from
Cochineel, made with small pains, and in much greater quantity. All this was
tried at Pisa.

A transparent Red in Glass.

CHAP. CXX.
TAke Manganese ground to an impalpable powder, mix it with as much more
refined Saltpeter, set it to the fire in an earthen pan to reverberate and
calcine 24 hours, then take and wash it with common warm water from it is
saltness, the salt being separated, dry it, and it will be of a Red color,
hereto add it is weight of sal Armoniack, and grind them together on a
Porphyrie, wet them with distilled vinegar, let them dry, then put them in a
Retort which has a large body, and a long neck, give them a subliming fire in
sand for 12 hours, then break the glass, and take all that is sublimed to the
neck, and body of the Retort, and mix it with the bottom and remaining
residence, weigh them and add as much sal Armoniack as shall be wanting in this
first sublimation, grind them all together on a Porphyrie, imbibing them with
distilled Vinegar, then sublime them in a retort as before, and this
sublimation is to be repeated after the same manner so long till the Manganese
remain all at the bottom fusible.

This is the medicine that colors Crystal and past into a Red Diaphanous
color, and into a Rubie color, there are used of this medicine 20 ounces, to
one of Crystal or glass, but more or less may be used thereof according as the
color requires. The Manganese must be of the best from Piemont, to color
glass of a fair, and very sightly color*

A Red as red as Blood.

CHAP. CXXI.
PUt six pound of glass of Lead, common glass ten pound, into a pot glased with
white glass, when the glass is boiled and refined, give it Copper calcined to
redness according to discretion, let them incorporate, mixing well the glass,
then give it so much Tartar powdered that the glass may become as Red as blood,
if it be not so much colored, add Copper calcined to Redness, and Tartar, till
it come to this color.

The color of a Balass.

CHAP. CXXII.
PUt Crystal Fritt in a pot into a furnace, cast it thrice into water, then
tinge it with Manganese prepared into a clean purple, then take Alumen Catinum
fifted fine, put in thereof so much as will make the glass become purple, and
this you shall do eight times, and know that Alum makes the glass grow Yellow,
and a little Reddish, but not blakish, and it always makes the Manganese fly
away; and the last time that you add Manganese, give not the glass more Alum
except the color be too full, and so you shall have a most fair Ballas color.

To extract the Anima Saturni which serves for many things in Enamels and glass.

CHAP. CXXIII.
PUt Litharge well ground into an earthen pan well glased, pour upon it
distilled Vinegar, which must be higher than it four fingers, let them stand
till the Vinegar is colored into a milkie color, which it will suddenly be,
decant off this colored Vinegar, and put new upon the Litharge, repeat this
work till the Vinegar becomes no more colored. Then let these colored
Vinegars stand in earthen pans glased that the milkie substance of the Lead may
sink to the bottom, decanting off the clear Vinegar, this milkie material is
the Anima Saturni, to wit the most noble part, which serves for enamells, and
glass in many things, and if this white stuff precipitate not well, cast upon
it cold water, which is wont to make it fall to the bottom, and when it does
not precipitate evaporate the Vinegars and waters, and the more subtle part
remains at the bottom good for many things in this Art.

A fair Red to Enamel Gold.

CHAP. CXXIV.
TAke Crystal Fritt made in this manner, to wit, salt of Polverine ten pound,
white Tarso finely ground eight pound, make a solid past with this stuff, and
water, and make thereof as it were small and thin wafers. Put these on earthen
pans in a little furnace made in the fashion of a calcar, that they may be
calcined with a good fire ten hours, and in defect thereof put them in the
furnace, near the Occhio, for three or four days till they be well calcined.
Take calcined Lead, and Tin prepared as in Chap. 93. Tartar of white wine
calcined, of each two pound, mix them well together, and put them into a pot
glased with white glass, let them melt, and refine well, then cast them into
water, do this twice, then put them in the furnace, and when well refined in
the pot give them of Copper calcined to Redness ten ounces. Let the color
purify well, then give it Crocus Martis made with Aquafortis, putting it in
by little and little, as you do with Manganese, then let it settle six hours,
and see whether the color be good, if not give it Crocus by little and little,
till you have the desired color.

A fair Red for Gold after another Manner.

CHAP. CXXV.
TAke Crystal Fritt, made as in Chap. 124. four pound, melt it in a clean pot
glased, cast it, when refined, into water, and refine it again in the furnace,
cast it into water a second time, and refine it again, then put in by little
and little of calcined Lead and Tin purified, half an ounce at a time, let the
Calces incorporate, and when the glass becomes of an ash color, put in no more
Calces, For too much of them makes the color white and not good. Let the glass
refine with the calces, then put into the glass fine Red Lead two ounces, and
when incorporated and refined well, cast them into the water, and set them in
the furnace eight hours, then take of the Copper calcined to Redness, and of
white crude Tartar of each half an ounce, put them and mix them well in the
pot, then add of Lapis Haematites, wherewith the Cutlers burnish, and of fixed
Sulphur, of each one Dram, mix and incorporate these powders, and see if the
color be too deep, give it a little Manganese, which makes it lighter, and if
it be too light a color give it fixed Sulphur, and Lapis Haematites, and a
little of Copper calcined to Redness, and a little Tartar of white wine with
discretion, and do this till it come to the desired color.

To fix Sulphur for the work abovesaid.

CHAP. CXXVI.
BOil Flowers of Brimstone in common oil an hour, take them from the fire, and
cast upon them the strongest Vinegar, and the Sulphur will suddenly sink to
the bottom, and the oil will swim upon the Vinegar, empty the oil and Vinegar,
and put new oil upon the Sulphur, repeat this thrice, and then you shall have a
fixed Sulphur, for the work abovesaid.

Glass as Red as blood which may serve for the abovesaid fair Red.

CHAP. CXXVII.
MElt in a pot of glass of Lead six pound, Crystal Fritt ten pound, cast them
when refined into water, put them again into the pot, when they are well
refined give this glass four or six ounces of Copper calcined to Redness, let
them boil, and refine well, then give them Red Tartar powdered, which incorporate
with the glass, let them refine, and see if the color please you, and if it be
not heightened with the Copper, and Tartar, put it again to anneal till it come
to be sufficiently Red, this is done to heighten the color.

An approved way to make a fair Red Enamel for Gold.

CHAP. CXXVIII.
TAke of Crystal Fritt, boil it as in Chap. 124. six pound, refine it well in
a glased pot, and give it fine Calx of Lead and Tin prepared, as in Chap. 113.
four ounces at four times, when well refined and incorporated cast them into
water, and then melt and refine them well again in the furnace, and give this
glass at three times one ounce and a half of Copper calcined to redness, which
makes the deep Red, mixing the glass well, and let this powder incorporate, and
refine well in the glass, and within two hours give it Crocus Martis made as in
Chap. 16. one ounce and a half at three times, let it mix and incorporate well
in the glass three hours, then add six ounces of Tartar burned, with one ounce
of the soot of the Chimny well vitrified, and with these powders mix half an
ounce of the said Crocus Martis, put these powders well ground into the glass
at four times, mixing them well, and interpose a little space between each
time, for they make the glass swell and boil exceedingly, when all the powder
is put in, let the glass refine three hours, then remix them, and take a proof,
to wit, a little Bowl of glass, and scall'd it well, if it take a transparent
Red, as blood, it is well, if not, give it new Tartar burnt with soot, and
Crocus Martis, by little and little, till it come to the desired color, let
the glass stand to settle, and an hour after you put in the powder, take
another proof as before. This is good to Enamel, and proved often times at Pisa.

A transparent Red.

CHAP. CXXIX.
CAlcine Gold with Aqua-regis, many times, pouring the water upon it five or
six times, then put this powder of Gold in earthen pans to calcine in the
furnace till it become a red powder, which will be in many days, then this
powder added in sufficient quantity, and by little and little, to fine Crystal
glass which has been often cast into water, will make the transparent red of a
Rubie as by experience is found.

The way to fix Sulphur for a Rose-Red to Enamel on Gold.

CHAP. CXXX.
MAke a strong Lee of Lime, and Oaken ashes, boil sufficiently Sulphur in this
Lee, which takes away a certain unctuous and combustible color which Sulphur
has in it; by changing the Lee the Sulphur becomes white and incombustible and
fixed, good to make this Rosered for the Goldsmiths to Enamel upon Gold.

Vitriolum Veneris which was began at the end of 31 Chap.

CHAP. CXXXI.
SEt Chrysibles luted and covered in an open wind furnace with burning (...)
over them, let them stand two hours, and then at last let the furnace cool of
it self, then take out the Chrysibles, and you shall find the Copper calcined
to a blackish color, having an obscure purple, which powder, and serce well,
then take a round vessel of baked earth plain at the bottom, which will bear
the fire, set these pans in an open wind furnace, on iron bars set across, fill
the pans with kindled coals, and put in the aforesaid calcined Brass, wherewith
you have first mixed to every pound weight there of six ounces of common
Brimstone powdered, and when the fire begins to heat the pans, and the Brimstone
to flame and burn, continually stir the Copper with a long Iron having a hoock
at the top, that it may not stick, nor cleave to the pans; continue this till
all the Sulphur, be burnt and smoke no more, then take the pans from the fire
thus hot, and all the Copper, with an Iron ladle or like thing, powder it well
in a Brass mortar, and serce it, which will then be a black powder, proceed
thrice with the same quantity of Copper and Brimstone in every thing as before.
Observe, that at the third calcination you let the pans stand over the fire, so
long that the Copper acquires a red Lion color, then take it from the fire,
and powder it in a B^^ss mortar, and you shall have the said color to make the
said Vitriol as we are about to say.

Vitriolum Veneris without Corrosives, from which is extracted the true and
lively Blew, a thing mavelous.

CHAP. CXXXII.
TO make then the Vitriolum Veneris abovesaid, take one or more very capacious
Glass bodies, according to the quantity of the Copper calcined, and prepared,
to wit, to a pound of Copper take a body which will hold six pints of water,
put this common clean water into the body with calcined Copper into a sand
furnace, give them a temperate fire for four hours, until of the six pints of
water, there be evaporated about two, which is seen by the eye; let the furnace
cool, and gently decant off the water into earthen pans glased, and the Copper
which remains at the bottom put into pans in a furnace to evaporate all the
moisture, and the water which is decanted into the pans will be colored with a
full and wondrous fair blew, let them stand thus in the pans two days to
settle, and part of the Copper will sink to the bottom in a Red substance,
then Filtre the said water with usual linguets into glass vessels, and
evaporate from the said Copper all the moisture, and with six ounces of Sulphur
calcined, powder and serce it to a black powder, as in Chap. 131. and then as
in the beginning of this pour in water and extract the Blew color. Consider
that in this work many pots will be broken, wherefore as often as the pots are
broken or cleft take a new one, lest they break in the furnace, and all your
labor be lost; when the humidity is evaporated put the same quantity of
Sulphur powdered and serced, and do as before. The reason why the Copper is to
be taken out whilst it is hot, is, because then it is better separated from
the pots, and it is impossible to separate it, if you suffer it to be cold,
although you break the pots. Repeat this process not only four but five or six
times in every thing as before, Then the Copper will remain as a soft earth,
and the better and most noble tincture of it will be in the Filtred waters, all
which mixed together must be Filtred with the usual linquets, and the setlings
and dregs may be cast away as unprofitable, then you shall have a most limpid
water, and colored with a most mavelous blew color.

The way to extract Vitriol from the said colored waters.

CHAP. CXXXIII.
SEt then a great glass body that will hold three Flasques of liquour in ashes
or sand in the furnace, and with a temperate fire evaporate the said colored
waters, and near to the furnace keep other glass bodies full of these colored
waters, that they may be warm, and now and then fill the great body, which is
in the sand with glass ladles, do this that the colored waters may be put in
warm, for being put in cold they will make the great glass body break;
evaporate the colored liquour from ten Flasques to two and a half or three,
then these waters will be deep and full of tincture, which put into earthen
glased pans in a cold and moist place for a night, and you shall find the
Vitriol shot into points like Crystals, which will appear like true Oriental
Emeralds, decant often all the water that is in the pans, dry the Vitriol, and
let it not stick to them* then evaporate half this water, which will yield you
new Vitriol as before, Repeat this till you have gotten all the Vitriol. Put
this Vitriol in a Retort well luted with a strong lute, see you put no more
than one pound of Vitriol in a Retort, which must not be very large, and have a
large and capacious receiver; make for 4 hours together a most temperate fire,
for if it be too strong the moist and windy Spirits which first arise from this
Vitriol, are so powerful, and arise with so great force, that no receiver is
able to hold them; let the joints also be very well luted. At last make a
strong fire when the dry Spirits begin to rise in a white form, continue the
fire till the Receiver begins to wax clear, and to be quite cold, then make no
more fire, and in twenty four hours let the joints be unluted, and the liquor
which is in the Receiver must be kept in glass very well sealed. This is the
true lively Azure, with which mavelous things are done, as you may well
perceive by it is smell, which is as powerful and sharp as any this day known in
nature. Many things might be said, which are passed over as being not pertinent
to the Art of glass, which happily you may judge upon better occasion; the
feces then which remain at the bottom of the Retort will be black, which left
some days in the air of themselves will take a pale blew, powder and mix this
with Zaffer, and put it to Crystal metal as before, and with the said
quantity will be made a mavelous Seagreen. Wherefore I have here set down
the way to make this powder with much clearness, presupposing that I have not
published an ordinary way to make it, but a true treasure of nature, and that
to the content of noble and curious Spirits.

FINIS.
AN INDEX.
LEad to calcine 62. To prepare Crystal 70, 76. Manganese 13. Sulphur to fix
126, 130. Vitriol to make Aquafortis 39. Tartar to calcine 37. to burn 41. to
extract the salt 11. Zaffer to prepare 12.

To make Aquafortis 38. Aqua Regis 40. Crocus Martis with Sulphur 16. with
Vinegar 17. with Aquafortis 18. with Aqua Regis 19. Crystal and Crystalline
Metal 9, 10. Frit 3, 8. Frits of Crystal 59.

Brass to calcine 20, 21. for Ferretto of Spain 14, 15. to redness 24. thrice
25, 28. Vitriolum Veneris 31, 131, 132, 133.

Glass of Lead 63. Saccharum Saturni 123.

Salt from Polverine Rochetta and Barillia 1. a better way 3. from Fern and
other herbs 5, 6, 7.

Lakes 108, 109, 110, 118. from Cochineel 116, 117, 119*

Spears 113.

Turcoises that have lost their color 112.

Ultramarine 115.

Blew 111.

Colors to make.
Amethist in glass 48. Balass in glass 122. in Crystal 74. Black in glass 51,
52, 53. in Enamels 100, 101, 102. Calcidony 42, 43, 44. Chrysolite in Past 82.
Emerald in glass 32, 33. in glass of Lead 65, 66. in Pasts 77, 78, 79, 80.
Green in glass 33, 34, 35. in Enamels 97, 98, 99. Girasole in Past 74. Granat
in glass 47. in glass of Lead 69. in Past 87, 88, 89. Lapis Lazuli in glass of
Lead 72. Marble color in glass 56. Opal in Past 74. Peach in glass 57. Paste,
observations on them 90, 91, 92. Pearl color in glass 60. Purple Enamel 104.
Red deep in glass 58. as blood 121, 127. in Enamels 103. Transparent in glass
120. Rose red in glass 120, 124, 125, 128. Ruby in Past 74. Seagreen in glass
22, 23, 26, 29, 30, 31, 131. Saphyre in glass 49, 50. in glass of Lead 70. in
Pasts 85, 86. Sky color in glass 23. in glass of Lead 68. in Pasts 83, 84. In
Enamels 106. Topaz in glass of Lead 67. in Past 74, 81. Turcois in glass 36. in
Enamels 95, 96. Viper color in Crystal 73. Violet Enamel 107. White Enamel
94. white called Lattimo in Glass 54, 55. Yellow in glass 46. in Enamels 105.
Gold Yellow in glass of Lead 71. Observations of Yellow in glass 4.
Observations on the Epistle to the Reader.
COncerning our Author, and this work, I find no other mention of him* than a
bare naming him by Garso in his Book della dottrina universal^, and by
Borne^^us de sufficientia, Page 141. Neither could I ever find by strict
inquiry that the other piece promised in the Epistle Dedicatory, and the
Preface, concerning Chemical matters, was ever published, neither have I read
in any Spagyrical writers quotations drawn thence. Wherefore I may easily
conclude, that it never came to light; and it is no wonder he found no
encouragement by this Book, to put forth that, since this kind of learning
(...) useful to mankind, was accounted sordid (...) below the speculation of
men living in t^^se times; Who wholly busied their subtle ^its, either in
contemplations useless, or in^eterminable, most of whose notions were ^are
(...). But our most learned ^acon, man of a most sublime, and piercing
intellect, in his incomparable Novum organum, has fully confuted and showed
the vanity and in efficacy of that other way, and has more wisely substituted
another more effective and operative, for the more solid promotion of Arts and
Sciences. This way of useful learning has been more experimently followed by
some particular persons, but not universally throughout* But now it is like to
make a considerable progress, being designed by that most noble and honorable
company of the Kings society at Gresham-College; which by the indulgence of His
^^^red Majesty, restored to his people, for the promotion of all virtuous
undertakings, weekly conven^ to this very end and purpose, and daily bring in
materials for this fair Edisice.

One part of this design this present Book* contains, wherein is set forth
truly and plainly, the whole business of making and coloring glass, which from
his youth our Author had learned of able and diligent persons, or what
experience, o^ the fire had taught him, and in many he tells you the time and
places of his trial and invention, with all the circumstances thereunto
belonging.

Art of Glass. Our English word Glass is the same with the Dutch, and is
derived from the Latin, Glastum, which by removing the last syllable, is
plainly Glass; now it appears that Glastum was called Vitrum, by Caesar in his
Commentaries, lib. 5. Where he says, omnes Britanni se vitro inficiunt, all
the Britans color themselves with Glass, and Mela, lib. 3. cap. 6. Britanni
virro corpora infecti, and Vitruvius, Wool died with Glass, for so the learned
Turnebus restores these places, where 'twas anciently read Ultrum for Vitrum;
but that Vitrum is Isatis, appears by these words of Vitruvius, they color for
want of Indico Chalk from Selinutia Vitro, with Glass, which the Greeks call
Isatis, as also by a Treatise of Apulcius d^ herbis, not published, but is in
the hands of Doctor Morrick Causabon, larger and more correct than those that
are published, he this, Herbam Isatis alii Aogigneme prophetae Apesion Itali
alutam alii herbam vitrum, which is to be written, Isatis alii Angionen
Propherae Arosion Itali rutam alii her^am vitrum. Salmatius ever fasly p^^^
Guastum for Glastum, because the Britans continually call it Guadum, The which
call a Blew color Glass. And Pliny, lib. 22. chap. 1. witnesses the same in
th^se words, simile plantagini Glastum in Gallia Vocatur quo Britannorum
conjuges nurusque toto corpore oblitae quibusdam in sacris nudae incedunt. The
British women cover their bodies with Glastum, and in some Festivals go naked.
And Cambden in his Britannia, this is the herb we term Woad, and it gives a
Bluish color, which the Britans at this day call Glass. The reason why
Glastum acquired this name Vitrum, or Glass, might be, because all glass has
Naturally (as this Author and experience teaches) somewhat of blewishness in
it. Vitrum comes from Visum as Aratrum and Rutrum come from Artum and retum,
the last syllable being changed into trum, so Iscodurus, lib. 16. cap. 15. Quod
visui perspicuitate transluceat, because it is transparent to the sight: for in
other metalls, whatsoever is contained within is hid, but in Glass all liquors,
and things within appear the same as without, hence it is that many transparent
bodies are called Vitrea, as the humor of the eye, the Sea, Rivers, Waters by
Physicians, Horace, Ovid, and Boeth, and Apuleius of a spring.

Glass is one of the fruits of the fire. Which is most true, for it is a thing
wholly of Art, not of Nature, and not to be produced without strong fires. I
have heard a singular Artists merrily to this purpose say, that their
profession would be the last in the world: for when God should consume with
fire the Universe, that then all things therein would Vitrifie and turn to
glass. Which would be true upon supposition of a proportionable mixture of fit
Salts, and Sand or Stones.

It Is much like all sort of mineral or middle mineral. I find Authors differ
much about referring Glass to it is Species. Agricola, lib. 12. de Metallis,
makes it a concrete juice, Vincent Belluasensi^, lib. 11. calls it a stone,
Fallopius reckons it amongst the Media mineralia, and the workmen, when it is
in a state of fusion call it metal. But to me it seems neither of these, which
this general Argument sufficiently evinceth, that all the forementioned are
natural concretes, but Glass is a compound made by Art, a product of the fire,
and never found in the bowels of the earth, as all the others are*

Wherefore as factitious words of Art are excluded out of the predicaments by
the Logicians, so is Glass to be excluded out of the former Species. Neither is
it more to be called a metal, concrete juice, than Beer or ^alt, Barley, or
Lime, a Stone, or Brick, Eart^, etc. But to this argument Fallop, thus re^^ies,
by asking of what Glass we speak, whether of that which is in it is own Mine,
and it is own stone, or else of true Glass, and now extracted from the stone? if
of this purified, he says it is no more Artificial, than a metal is extracted
from it is Mineral, and purified. But if we understand it of that which is the
first stone, then he says that as metal in the Mine and proper stone, so
glass having it is existence in the stone, whence it is educed, is natural. To
whom I answer, that Glass is never found in that form in any Mine, but only
Sand, and Stones which are the Materials of it. But of Metalls it is far
otherwise, which nature has perfectly formed into a certain Species in proper
veins, though sometimes they are by the fire forced out of the veins, and Earth
or stones wherein they in smaller particles and Atoms lay hid. And with this
difference too, that fire only produces or rather discovers Metalls by it is
innate energie of separating heterogeneous bodies and congregating homegeneous:
But in Glass it is far otherwise, for that is made by ^^iting and mixing
different parts of salt and sand. Which Fallopius to admiration denies, saying,
that it is false that Glass is made of Ashes and he adds, that although
Glass-men add ashes brought from Alexandria, or from other places, yet he says
that ashes is added instead of Nitre which the Ancients used, that they might
more easily extract Glass from the Metalline stone. Yet we may not say that
ashes is mixed with the Metal to make Glass, but that it is only put into the
furnaces where Glass is melted, that Glass may be more easily educed from the
smallest and inmost particles of the Glass-stone, that is, of it is proper
Metal; so far he. But this strange opinion is easily confuted; for if Glass
were extracted from the stones only, then the weight of the Metal must needs
be far less than the stones alone, but in truth the weight of the Metal far
surpasses that weight, for 100 weight of Sand yields above 150 of Metal;
besides, the Salts composing Glass are the most fixed salts, which the fire
cannot raise with the most vehement heat. Again in old windows of French Glass,
in that part which lies toward the air, you may manifestly discern, nay, pick
out pieces of salt, easily discovering their nature to the taste; furthermore in
the finest Glasses, wherein the salt is most purified and in a greater
proportion of salt to the sand, you shall find that such Glasses standing long
in subterraneous and moist places will fall to pieces, the union of the salt
and sand decaying. And this is the reason of that saying, that Venice Glasses
will break with poison, which is true of some Mineral, but not of Vegetable or
animal poison. All which manifestly evince that salt remains in the Glass in
specie. Add hereunto that experiment of Helmont, Cap. de terra, who thus says,
Si vitri pollinem pluri alkali quis colliquaverit ac humido loco exposuerit,
reperiet mox totum vitrum resolvi in aquam, cui si affundatur Chrysulea, addito
quantum saturando alkali suffecerit, inveniet statim in fundo arenam sedere
eodem pondere quae prius faciendo vitro aptabatur. If you melt fine flour of
Glass with good store of Sandever, and set them in a moist place, you shall
soon find all the Glass resolved into water, whereunto if you pour as much
Aquafortis, as will suffice to saturate the Sandever, you shall find the sand
presently settle to the bottom in the same weight which was put in at first.

And in this experiment the salt is imbibed, and taken up by the Sandever, and
Aqua Regis, and so the component parts analyzed into their former principles,
which were before confused in the compound.

A second general argument is this, that though the said concrete juyces stones
and Glass, may have fusion in the fire, yet neither all stones, nor all
concrete juyces, Metalls, nor Semimetalls have fusion, such are Talc and
English Spaud, sal Armoniack, Tincal, etc. Reckoned amongst concrete juyces;
nor Diamonds, Cats-eyes, Agate, Jaspers, nor most other precious stones, nor
Marble; Nor many other stones wherewith the inside of those furnaces are built.
Neither can Mercury amongst Metalls be said to melt, nor amongst the middle
Minerals Orpiment; and though most of them have fusion, yet none of them have
ductilitie, but Metalls only, and they only too, when they have received a
great degree of cold; for when they are red hot the particles of them stick not
together; nor are so Tenacious as Glass is, which only whilst it is red hot,
will with small force of the breath receive any fashion or figure, and by
blowing form a cavity, none whereof any of the aforesaid bodies will do;
besides metal poured out, when melted, will run into many small globuli, or
pieces, but glass sticks together in a lump even in the furnace it self, when
the pots are broken. And this quality of ductility, and tenacity, I make to be
the essential difference of glass from all other bodies; nay from all other
substances, which have gotten the name of glass, as Vitrum Antimonii, Moscovie
glass, and bricks or other stones vitrified, neither whereof will bear this
trial. Which rather have their denomination from their transparency, (as
Vitriolum too has a Vitro) than from their intrinsecal nature and properties.
But to shorten this comparison, I shall here set down the proprieties of glass,
whereby any one may easily difference it from all other bodies.

1 It Is a concrete of salt and sand or stones. 2 It Is Artificial. 3 It melts in
a strong fire. 3 When melted it is tenacious and sticks together. 4 It wastes not
nor consumes in the fire. 5 It Is the last effect of the fire. 6 When melted it
cleaves to Iron, etc. 7 It Is ductile whilst red hot, and fashionable into any
form, but not malleable, and may be blown into a hallowness. 8 Breaks being
thin without annealing. 9 It Is friable when cold, which made our proverb, As
britle as glass. 10 It Is diaphanous either hot or cold. 11 It Is flexible and
has in threeds motum rectitutionis. 12 Cold and wet disunites and breaks it,
especially if the liquors be saltish, and the glass suddenly heated. 13 It
only receives sculpture, and cutting, from a Diamond or Emery stone. 14 It Is
both colored and made Diaphanous as precious stones. 15 Aqua fortis, Aqua
Regis, and Mercury, dissolve it not as they do Metalls. 15 Acid juyces nor any
other thing extract either color, taste, or any other quality from it. 16 It
receives polishing. 17 It loses nor weight, nor substance, with the longest
and most frequent use. 18 Gives fusion to other Metalls and softens them. 19
Receives all variety of colors made of Metalls both externally and internally,
and therefore more fit for Painting than any other thing. 20 It Is the most
pliable and fashionable thing in the world, and best retains the form given. 21
It may be melted, but 'twill never be calcined. 22 An open glass filled with
water in the Summer will gather drops of water on the outside, so far as the
water reaches, and a man's breath blown upon will manifestly moisten it. 23
Little balls as big as a Nut filled with Mercury, or water, or any liquor, and
thrown into the fire, as also drops of green glass broken fly assunder with a
very loud and most sharp noise. 24 Wine Beer nor other liquors will make them
musty, nor change their color nor rust them. 25 It may be cemented as Stones
and Metals. 26. A drinking Glass filled, in part with water (Being rubbed on the
brim with the singer witted.) yields Musical notes, higher or lower, according
as it is more or less full, and makes the liquour frisk and leap.
Antiquity of Glass.
Concerning the Antiquity of Glass our Author here fetches it from Job Chap.
28. v. 17. Who in this Chapter from v. 15. to the 20th compares wisdom to the
choicest things; and in this 17th v. says, Gold and Glass shall not be
equalled to it. So our Author from the Vulgar Latin translation, the
Septuagint, Hierom, Senes, Elias in no Menclatore. Hieron. Pineda, Biblia
Tigurina, and Syriac, but lacinth in the Arabic translation.

Crystal, Chaldee, Santes, Arias Montanus, Forsterus. The Hebrews whom Nicetas
follows, and the King of Spains edition, and so the English translation.

A stone more precious than gold, as Pagninus from Rabbi Levi Kimhi.

A Looking gl^ss, as the Thargum renders it; perhaps because in that time or
age Looking-glasses were first invented and highly valued, being made of
precious materials, and so Muneer reads it.

Glass of Crystal, Vitrum Crystallinum, Complut^nsis.

A Peril, as Vatablus.

A Diamond, Rabbi Abraham, Rabbi Mardo^ai, Pagnin, Cajetan, the Italian,
Spanish, French, High and Low Dutch.

A Pyropus or Carbuncle, or some such neat and precious Gemm, as others, so
Pineda: But both those are the same name of one stone, which the Ancients gave
to such a gemm as would shine by night, but there is none such in nature, and
the later writers take the Ruby for it.

The reason of this difference in the translators, is, because the Original
word Ze^hu^hih comes from the root Zacac which signifies to purify, to
cleanse, to shine, to be white, and transparent. The same word is applied to
Frankincense, Exodus 30. 34. and rendered by the Septuagint, Pellucid, Hence it is
manifest why so many rendrings of the text, since the word in general
signifies only what is transparent and beautiful, therefore the translators
might apply the word to any thing which was of price and value, for so the text
requires, and transparent too, for so the word requires. But it seems to be
neither Diamond, Carbuncle, nor Iacinth, for those are mentioned in Aarons
Breast Plate, Exodus 28. and this word here not to be found in that Chapter. Nor
Glass nor Crystal, because 'twould seem incongruous, that those of so mean a
value should be brought into comparison, the former being made of Materials
very common, and the latter could not-but be vulgar. Besides, it is probable
this word subjoyned to Gold, was added after it for amplification. Add
hereunto* that Glass is no where mentioned in the Old Testament, though
frequently in the New by S. Paul, S. James, and in the Revelation. And indeed
who can imagine that a thing fit for so many illustrations, and comparisons,
and of so common use, could be passed by in silence, if known, by the Scripture
so full of elegancies in this kind? And therefore I judge it meet to keep the
general word, and not to confine the sense to one precious and transparent
stone, or thing, but to extend it wider to all things that have those two
properties in them. But too much of this in mess aliena.

Aristophanes seems to be the first that mentions this word (...), now rendered
Glass; for in Nubibus, Act. 2. Scen. 1. he brings in Sthrepsiades abusing
Socrates, and teaching him a new way to pay old debts, viz. by placing a fair
transparent stone sold by the Druggists, and from which they strike fire,
betwixt the Sun and the accusation brought in writing against him, for the Sun
would soon melt away the letters of the accusation, which stone Socrates
readily called (...). Whereon the Scholiast thus, Druggists sold precious
stones as well as Medicaments. And that the Ancients called (...), (the same
with (...)) Crystal. That Homer knew not the name, and that with him and the
Ancients, the word Electrum was used, the Scholiast there testifies, though he
himself clearly describes our Glass in these words. We properly call that Glass
which being melted by fire from a certain herb burnt to prepare certain
vessels. Hesichius has not the word (...), in this sense, but Hyalen, Hyalon,
Hyaloen, shining and Diaphanous. The Etymologist has it in this sense and
fetches the Etymon from (...), to rain, from the Likeness it has to ice
(which is congeled rain or water) in consistence and Diaphaneity, and in this
sense, as some Glass from glacies ice. Aristotle has two Problems of Glass,
first, Why we see through it, Sect. 2. 61. secondly, Why it cannot be bended.
Now if these Problems were Aristotels (as learned men doubt whether they are or
no) then this seems to be the most Ancient piece of Antiquity for Glass. For
neither in the Ancient Greek Poets nor Orators shall you find any mention of
Glass, though a thing so fit for their purpose, as was abovesaid. And note the
ambiguity of the word (...), for Crystal was so called as the Scholiast above,
and Hugo Grotius, and these names are wont to be mixed by reason of the
likeness of the things, and Gorraeus says, that, a certain kind of Yellow
Amber, and transparent as Glass, was called by some Hyalus. The first then
amongst the Greeks, that without question have mentioned Glass are Alex.
Aphrod. who thus says, As the Floridness of a color is seen through Glass,
and yet more clearly, lib. 1. Probl. Glasses in the winter in vehement and
sudden heat coming upon them, break, and again, to break the Body of the Glass.
And Lucian mentions very large drinking vessels of Glass. And Plutarch in his
Symposiack, says, that fire of Tamarisk wood is fittest to form Glass.

That the Egyptians were skillful in this Art, appears by Flavius Vopiscus,
quoted by Marcel. Donatus, in these words, Alexandria a City rich, fruitful,
wherein no body lives idle, some Blow glass others make Paper, etc. Though
Kicher in his Oedipus, writing of the Egyptian Arts, mentions not this.

Lucretius amongst the Latin Poets, is the first I find mention Glass, whose
Verses I shall add, because they give his account of it is transparency.

-- nisi recta foramina tranant Qualia sunt vitri, l. 4. 602, 60. and again,
Atque aliud per ligna, aliud transire per Aurum, Argentoque for as, aliud
vitroque meare. l. 6. v. 989, 990. But downwards all the other Poets.

This Art was unknown to America, and all Asia, except Sidon, and China, who of
late have learned to make it very perspicuous of Rice, but very brittle, and
therefore not to be compared as yet with ours, though it come near it. Atlas
Cinicus, page 6.

But to decide this controversy, it is manifest that Glass could not be unknown
to the Ancients, and must needs be as Ancient as Potterie it self, or the Art
of making Bricks, for scarcely can a Kill of Bricks be burnt, or a Batch of
Pottery ware be made, but some of the Bricks, and ware will be at least
superficially turned to Glass. And therefore without doubt 'twas known at the
building of the Tower of Babel, and as long before as that Art was used, and
likewise by the Egyptians: for when the children of Israel were in captivity,
we read that making of Bricks was a great part of their bondage. And of this
nature must that Fossil Glass be, whereof Ferant Imperatus, lib. 25. cap. 7.
thus says, Glass like to the Artificial is found under the earth in places
where great fires have been, neither whereof struck yield sparks of fire. Other
Glasses are found in round clots like firestones, shining in the breaking, and
transparant with greeness, which in show resemble Colophonia, and these struck
sparkle like firestones. From which notwithstanding they are different as well
in their Vegetation proper to fire stones, as also in shining, and much quicker
melting, proper to Glass. Of these said Glasses some are brittle, others solid,
the brittle or crumbling, put in the fire, swell, and take the shape of white
pumice-stone, and afterward the shining of Artificial Glass: But those which
are continued and solid, by a small change from the fire, pass from blackness
to white Artificial Glass. This Fossil Glass is wrought by the Americans to
make holes, and cut instead of Iron. So far he. And happily of this sort of
Glass, was a piece thereof, which I lighted on at S. Albans, an ancient
garrison of the Romans, which I struck off from a Roman Brick, it is of the same
color and substance with what appears in ours at this day.

And no doubt but this Glass was more frequent in their Brick than ours, for
they tempered their earth two years together, and so it wrought more firm, and
close; besides, they burnt them better. And this vitrification of earth made
into Bricks, is not only at the first burning of them, but also as Imperatus
observes might be from great fires, to wit such as are in lime-Kils, and
Potters Kills, such as were most Ancient in Asia and Africa, for in those the
Bricks usually Vitrifie. But I have not heard nor seen any of them Vitrified in
the firing of houses built therewith. For it seems that only a fire made with
layers of dried crude Bricks burnt in the fire, can produce this effect, or
else by the way of Reverberation in furnaces where most vehement close and
continued fires are made.

This Glass lay long in the earth, though Helmont affirms that Glass there
dissolves, putrifies and turns to water, in few years. which though true in our
finer Crystal, as to the saline part, yet seems not so of Glass in general.

As for the way mentioned by our Author found out by Merchants, it seems not
very credible, since the continual burning of Kali in Spain and Egypt, for
Barillia and Polverine, and of Kelp, and other Materials for green Glass with
us, in greater quantities, than the said Merchants did to dress their
provision, and consequently a stronger and more lasting heat raised thereby,
did never produce Glass in any place or time whatsoever, nay the strong and
close heat of the calcar, cannot produce it; Perhaps those that refine Metalls
from the Ore. whereof Tubalcain was the inventor or Ancient Chemists, could not
but hoth in their furnaces and from their Metalls long wrought upon by the
fire, observe Glass also.

Amongst those Chemists, the most ancient seem to be Egyptian Princes, who all
from Hermes Trismegistus downwards professed this art, endeavoring at an
universal Medicine, but not the supposed transmutation of Metalls, as Kircher
in his Alchymia Hieroglyph. affirms. Now this attempt could not be without
great fires and furnaces, which must at some time or other run into Glass, and
their materials also must do the like.

So that it plainly appears by what has been said, Glass must be known from
great antiquity. But the art of making and working Glass seems by what has
been said to be of later invention, and the first place mentioned for the
making of it to be Sidon in Syria, which was enobled for Glass-houses and
making of Glass, as Plin. l. 36. cap. 26. And that Glass was made in the time
of Tiberius (the first we read of amongst the Romans) it is apparent by the
history of the man whom Plin. relates he put to death for making Glass
malleable, of which hereafter.

Of the use of Glass.
IN Domestic affairs it makes drinking vessels, infinite in fashion, color,
largness, the Romer for Rhenish wine, for Sack, Claret, Beer, plain, molded,
colored in whole or in part, Bottles and other vessels to keep Wine, Beer,
Spirits, Oils, Powders, wherein you may see their Fermentations, separations,
and whatsoever other changes nature in time works in any liquours, the
clearness and goodness of them. Besides dishes to keep and to serve up
sweetmeats, glasses to measure time, sleek-stones for Linen, Ornaments for
studies, and Presses, Windows to keep us warm and dry, and to admit Light into
our dwellings, which passing through colored Glass, it tingeth with the same
color whatsoever lies in opposition to the Sun. And lastly Looking-glasses,
the delight and business of Narcissus and his followers.

In Physic, Unequal Spectacles for aged persons, and Concave Glasses for such
as are Purblind, and cannot see unless the object be placed near their eyes,
contrary to the former, besides Cupping-glasses, Urinals, and to draw
Womens-breasts, in preserving the eyes of Engravers, and Jewellers, when they
work some small and accurate work, and also for delight, in Magnifying, to make
artificial eyes, for Ornament, Diminishing, Dilating, Lengthning, and
Multiplying Objects, and variously changing their figure, and Situation, and by
various placing of them to work astonishment and fear in the Vulgar beholder,
as you may see in Schottus Optics, Catopticks, Catoptrocausticks,
Catoptrographicks, Dioptricks, and Telescopicks, who ha^h there collected out
of Kircher, Porta, and other Authors whatsoever is rare and admirable.

In Astronomy, what strange wonders and discoveries have those Telescopes
wrought, invented by Galileo or Scheiner (for they both contend about it) and
since exceedingly promoted by Sir Paul Neal an honor to the English Gentry,
and the most learned Hugenius, the incomparable Hevelius, and by Eustachio
Divini at Rome? The use whereof has made the Doctrine of the Heavens very
clear, daily detecting new Stars and new Worlds, things wholly unknown to the
ancients, besides their use by Sea and Land, for Seamen, Soldiers, and all
other Persons, to discern, and distinguish things at distance. Hereunto add
that excellent Sphere of Glass, whereof Claudian writ that witty Epigram, which
take Englished by M. Randolph.

Jove saw the Heavens framed in a little glass,
And laughing, to the Gods these words did pass,
Comes the power of Mortal cares so far?
In brittle Orbs, my labors acted are,
The statutes of the Poles, the Fates of things,
The laws of Gods the Syracusian brings
Hither by Art; Spirits enclosed attend
Their several Spears, and with set motions bend
The living work; each year the feigned Sun,
Each month returns the counterfeited Moon,
And viewing now her world, bold industry,
Grows proud, to know the Heavens her subject be,
Believe Salmonius, has false thunders thrown,
For a poor hand is natures Rival grown.
The reason of this Fabric, why made of glass Card. in his Book of Subtilties
gives at large.

In Philosophy the Doctrine of Reflections, and Refractions, and Refractions,
to discover the effects, and affections of air and water, and other liquours,
and their various motions, in Tubes and Siphons. Experiments of a vacuum with
Mercury, as also infinite experiments of raresaction and condensation, in
Thermoscopes, in the Hydraulicks, and Pneumaticks, in the Florentine and Roman
experiments, and also the Magdeburgical, which gave occasion to that rare
invention of M. Boil, whereby he has demonstrated so many rare conclusions,
and tried so many singular experiments, which have made him famous here to all
natives, as also to all foreign Ambassadors and learned men abroad.

Neither may I omit Burning-glasses, nor those for the admission of species
into a darkened room, whereby has been taught the true nature of vision by
Plempius and Scheiner, and also by other Glasses the demonstration of the
generation of the Rainbow by Descartes.

Neither may I forget those Beads, Bracelets, Pendants, and other toys, which
have procured us good store of Gold from Guiney, adorning the Noses, Ears,
Lips, Rists and Legs of that nation.

Glass also affords us Ornaments for our houses and Churches, wherein all
natural and artificial things are set out, to the life, in most glorious and
Oriental colors.

We shall conclude with that Triangular Glass called the fools Paradise, though
fit for the wits of wiser men, which represents so lively Red, Blew, and
Green, that no colors can compare with them. And shall relate out of
Tagaultius in what great account the wisest nation accounted the Chinese had
of them, Riccius the Jesuit fell sick at the City Tanian in China, of a most
dangerous sickness, But his friend Chiutaiso performed so good offices to him,
that within a month (which time he stayed there) he recovered his strength so
well that he seemed stronger than he had been before.

Riccius recompensed his friends civilities amongst other presents with a
Triangular Glass, wherewith he was much delighted, and to add some state to the
Glass, he put it in a Silver case, and fastened Gold chains to the buttons at
the end of it, writing an elegant Encomium on it, whereby he endeavored to
prove that this Gem was a fragment of that matter whereof the heavens are made.
These Ornaments caused many to desire it, for not long after one is said to
have offered five hundred Crowns for it. But he then refused to sell it, though
he much desired to do so for this reason only, because he was not ignorant
that such a Glass was a present for the King, and he feared the buyer would
prevent Riccius by sending it to him, and that the novelty being passed 'twould
be less esteemed by that Emperor. But afterward when he know that such a gift
had been presented to the King* and having somewhat increased the price, he
sold it, and with that sum paid many debts, and thereby obliged his society.

Concerning the malleability of Glass, whereon the Chemists build the
possibility of making their Elixir, take their weak foundation from Pliny, lib.
36. cap. 26. They report, says he, that when Tiberius was Emperor, there was
invented such a temperament of Glass that it became flexible, and that the
whole shop of the Artificer was demolished, lest the prices should be abated of
the metalls of Brass, Silver and Gold, and this report was more common than
certain. Now Pliny lived in the time of Vespatian, who was the third Emperor
from Tiberius, so that it appears this report continued long. Many after him
relate the same, though with some difference. Dion Cassius, lib. 57. thus, At
that time when a very great Portico at Rome inclined to one side, a certain
Architect (whose name is unknown, because Caesar through envy forbid it to be
registered) strangely set it upright, and so firm'd the foundations on every
side, that it became immovable; Tiberius having pai'd him banished him the
City, but he returning (as a supplicant) to the Prince, wittingly let fall a
cup made of Glass, and when it was broken remade it with his hands, hoping
thereby to obtain pardon; but for this very thing he was commanded to be put to
death. Isidorus affirms that the Emperor in a chafe hurled it upon the
Pavement, which the Artist took up being battered, and folded like a vessel of
Brass, he then took a Hammer out of his Bosom, and mended the Glass, which
being done the Emperor said to the Artist, does any one else know this way of
making Glass? when he had denied it with an oath, Caesar commanded his head to
be cut off, left this being known, Gold should be esteemed as dirt, and the
prices of all metalls should be abated. And indeed if Vessels of Glass did not
break they would be better than Gold or Silver. These three grave Authors,
Pancirollus and others follow, only telling it as a hearsay; but Mathesius,
Goclenius, Valensis, Quatriami, Libavius, and all the tribe of the Chemists,
assert it with great confidence, affirming that it was done by the virtue of
the Elixir; but for all this confidence of theirs, Pliny only relates this
story with a serunt, they report, and with a fama, the report was, and thirdly,
crebrior quam certior, more common than certain. Which thrice repetition of
such like words, sufficiently argue his small belief of the story. It had been
enough to have introduced this improbable relation the usual way with a ferunt,
and hereby sufficiently have provided for his reputation, but he superadds de
proprio, fama crebrior, etc. Which at most proves only that some small credit
was by some few given to it, but ex vi verborum a disbelief in the wiser sort.
For what can such words as these (they say such a thing, but the report is most
uncertain) import, but a diffidence in the relator? And 'twas but a fama, no
Naturalist, Poet, nor Historian deliver it, no record of the person, nor
unusual punishment, which is strange, when their Books abound with observations
of whatsoever rarely happened. And is it probable that the Emperor himself
should not lay up this Glass as a secret in his choicest Archives, and have
transmitted it down to his successors, as a thing worth the keeping, being the
first of that nature ever made in the world, and perhaps the last, the Artist
being put to death? And yet within a few years all this most rare invention,
and strange punishment vanish into a report only. All then was but vox populi
and Romani too, nay, of the cruelty of a Nero too, all which might easily keep
up this Fable. But why did Pliny then relate it Surely, to please and follow
his genius, which was to commit to writing whatsoever was rare in Art and
Nature, as his nephew in his Epistles, and this present work witness. Now on
this account he might take occasion, in a thing perhaps he judged not
impossible, to commend that present age (should after times produce any such
effect,) and so ascribe the invention thereof to his own nation. Besides 'twas
but such a temperament of Glass that rendered it flexible. And is it credible
that after ages should not light on it, especially in a thing so commonly
practiced, and whereto so few, but two matterials only are required? Or what
means, fame, by the undervaluing of Gold and Silver? I confess I see no
inconvenience to the Emperor, nor his Gold and Silvers value, by this
invention, but many ways advantage, nor any force of consequence in Caesar's
words. But so much of Plinyes testimony. And what shall the borrowers from him
gain more reputation than the first relator gave it? Surely no, especially
since they have made such a commentary on Plinys text the words will not bear,
and have with additionals molded it into a formal relation. Pliny says, ut
flexibile esset, that it might be flexible. Dion comments, the man remade a
broken Glass, One degree to malleability, but Isidorus completes it saying,
with a Hammer he mended it. Hereby you may see the degrees how this opinion
came into the world, and by what strange piecings variations and
interpretations, it has been fomented to make that seem credible to after
ages, which Pliny relates as a vulgar tradition, adding thereto a censure of
uncertainty. Which the Chemists to keep up the opinion of their Omnipotent
Philosophers stone, omit, and turn Plinys flexibility into malleability. As if
there were no difference betwixt flexible and malleable. Whereas all bodies are
in some degree, or other flexible, though none but metalls malleable. A green
stick, Muscovie Glass, and infinite other things will bow very much, whereon
the Hammer, notwithstanding, has no effect as to dilatation, and formation
into thin plates, such as things called properly malleable have. And that Glass
is in some degree flexible of it is self it is apparent, for fine Crystal
Glasses made very thin, and well annealed, will bear some small, yet visible
bending. And I have had Tubes made twelve foot long and longer for the
Mercurial experiment, which being filled therewith would bend exceedingly. So
that I am prone to think that if there were any thing at all in this narrative
of Pliny it might be this, That where. as their Glass before this time was most
brittle, as being made of Saltpeter, and the art of annealing it (not
mentioned by Pliny) unknown and consequently must break with the smallest
force; Now this Artist might invent and show such Glass as might accidentally
bear a fall, or greater force, than what was formerly made, by making it of
Kali, and superadding the way of annealing it. Which might give occasion to
fame, whereof Virgil, parva metu primo mox sese attollit in auras, to add some
circumstances (which is most common with the vulgar) and so to form this story
related by Pliny.

Now as to the possibility of making Glass malleable, I find not one argument,
besides this report, unless by the Chemists who prove it per Circulum,
reasoning from their Elixir to Glass, and from Glass to the Elixir. And surely
twere more feasible to make the one than the other. For in the making of the
Elixir the production is tale ens ex non tali ente, there being no resistance,
and incapacity in the matter ex qua. But in Glass quite otherwise, for it is of
it is own nature the most brittle thing in the world, and to make it malleable a
quality quite contrary to it is nature must be introduced. Besides diaphaneity
is a property not communicated to any thing malleable, and who would call that
Glass, that were not transparent? As well may one name that Gold which is not
ponderous nor malleable, as that Glass which is malleable and not transparent.
Add hereunto, that the nature of malleability consists in a close and
throughout adhaesion of parts to parts, and a capacity to the change of figure
in the minutest parts. Both which are inconsistent with the nature of Glass.
For the matterials of Glass, Sand, and Salts, have such figures as seem
incapable of such adhaesion in every part one to another. For all salts have
their determinate figure which they keep too, in their greatest solutions and
actions of the fire upon them, unless a total destruction be wrought upon them,
as many instances might evince, and that figure is various according to the
Salts. Saltpeter, and all Alcalizate-salts are pointed, and by their pungency,
and caustickness seem to be made up of infinite sharp pointed needles. And as
for Sand the figure thereof is various, nay, infinite, as it appears in
Microscopes. Now how can any man imagine that such variety of figures in Sand
can so comply with the determinate figures of Salt as to touch one another in
minimis, which is necessary to make it malleable? Whereas to make it Glass it is
enough that those two touch one another at certain points only, whereby such
an union is formed, which is necessary to denominate Glass, but wholly
incompatible with malleability. And this union is that which makes in Glass
Pores, from whence comes it is diaphaneity as you have heard from Lucret.
Besides something said before, declares that they both remain the same in the
compound they were before. I shall conclude this argument, and say, that I
conceive that nothing but the Elixir will perform this effect, and that both of
them will come into the world together.

Of the Furnaces.
BEfore we enter upon the Art it is self, it is necessary to deliver the manner
of their Furnaces, and their several instruments, and also how their Metalls
when ^efined must be wrought, all which are pretermitted by our Author, though
necessary to be known by the Reader. There are three sorts of Furnaces as
Agric. de re metallica distinguishes them. The first the Calcar, fornax
calcaria, is made in the fashion of an Oven, ten foot long, and seven broad,
where widest, and two foot deep. On one side thereof, they have a trench about
six inches square, the upper part whereof is level with the surface of the
Calcar, separated only from it at the mouth by bricks some nine inches wide.
Into this trench they put their Sea-coal, the flame whereof passes into all
the parts of this Furnace, and reverberated from* the roof upon the Frit, over
whose surface all the smoke flies very black, and goes out of the mouth of
the Calcar. And the Conciator never stirs his Frit till the smoke is past. The
Coals burn (as in other Furnaces) on Iron grates, and the ashes fall thence
into the ashole, which is level with the floor. The Conciator (called in the
Green-glass houses the Founder) is he that weighs, and proportions the Salt, or
ashes, and Sand, and works them with a strong fire till they run into lumps,
and become white, and if the Metal be too hard, and consequently brittle, he
adds salt or ashes, and if too soft, sand, still mixing them to a fit temper,
which is only known by the working of it. According as the Frit is prepared,
he draws it out of the Calcar, and when it is cold lays it by for use. He does
not here cast water upon the Frit, nor water it with Lee, as our Author
enjovns, and after some few days uses this Frit to make metal. Which when
it is melted in the pots, in the working Furnace, with a square, he rakes and
stirs and mixeth well the Metal, when the square is red hot, he puts it into a
pail of water, for otherwise the Metal will stick to it. With a Ladle he takes
out the Sandever, or empties the Metal from one pot into another. And with his
Porteglo he scums the Glass, and with the Spiei (an Iron pointed and hooked at
the end) he takes Metal out of the pots for proofs or Essays, to see whether
the color be good, and the Metal fit to work. Some anneal their pots in this
furnace, as Agric.

The second or working furnace is that where the pots are set, to which belong
the fire place, and ash-hole. This Furnace is round, of three yards Diameter,
and two in height, arched above, round about the inside whereof, 8 or more pots
are set, and on these the piling pots; the number of the pots is always double
to the working Boccas, that each Master may have one pot refined, and to work
out of, and another for Metal to refine in whilst he works out the pot which
has refined in it; it has two partitions, the lowermost separateth the pots
from the fire place, in the center whereof there is a circular hole made with
Iron grates fourteen inches or more in diameter, through which the flame
passes from the fireplace into this furnace, from whose arched sides and roof
it is reverberated into the melting pots; the second partition divides this from
the Leer, to this furnace belong these holes, first, Bocca, the working hole,
by which the Metal is taken out of the great pots, and by which the pots are
put into the furnace, this is stopped with a cover, made with lute and brick,
removable at pleasure, to preserve the work-mens eyes from the vehement heat of
the fire; this has a hole in it more than a palm wide, by which the vessels
are scalded as often as it is needful. To this Bocca belong the Halsinella's
which are certain hooks, fastened to the sides of the furnace, whereon to rest
and turn their vessels when they scald them. 2. Boccarellas, one on each side
of the Bocca, lying almost Horizontally with it, out of these the Servitors
take colored or finer Metal from the piling pot. 3. Ovens or holes next the
Leer to calcine Tartar, Iron, etc. One on each side lying level with the Bocca.
To this also belong the fire place, having two Tizzonaios or stitches, one on
each side of the furnace, by which a Servitor night and day puts in Coals to
maintain this Vestal fire. These are made with Bricks.

These furnaces are variously made in several places, and to strengthen them
are arched with five or more arches, yet all three are necessary in all
Crystal Glasshouses. See variety of them, Agric. de re M^tall. l. 10. Libav.
Comment. Alchem. part. 1. l. 1. c. 20. Ferant. Imperat. l. 12. c. 14, 15. Porta
l. 6. c. 3.

The Green Glass furnaces are made square (whereas the former are circular, but
where the Leer takes off an arch thereof) having at each angle an arch to
anneal their Glasses.

The Leer (made by Agricola, the third farnace, to anneal and cool the vessels,
made as the second was to melt the Metal, and to keep it in fusion)
comprehends two parts, the tower and leer, The tower is that part which lies
directly above the melting furnace with a partition betwixt them, a foot thiek,
in the midst whereof, and in the same perpendicular with that of the second
furnace, there is a round hole (Imperat. and Agric. make it square and small)
through which the flame and heat passes into the tower; this hole is called
Occhio or Lumella, having an Iron ring encircling it called the Cavalet or
Crown, on the floor or bottom of this tower the vessels fashioned by the Mrs
are set to anneal* it has 2. Boccas or mouths, one opposite to the other, to
put the Glasses in as soon as made, taken with a Fork by the Servitors, and set
on the floor of the tower, and after some time these Glasses are put into Iron
pans ( Agric* makes them of clay) called Fraches, which by degrees are drawn by
the Sarole man all along the Leer, which is five or six yards long, that the
Glasses may cool Gradatim, for when they are drawn to the end of the Leer they
become cold. This Leer is continued to the tower, and arched all along about
four foot wide and high within. The mouth thereof enters into a room, where the
Glasses are taken out and set. This room they call the Sarosel, and the
Sarole-men those who draw the Fraches along the Leer, and take them thence.

For green Glass on two opposite sides they work their Metal, and on the two
other sides they have their Calcars, into which linnet holes are made for the
fire to come from the furnace, to bake and prepare their Frit, and also for the
discharge of the smoke. But they make fires in the arches, to anneal their
vessels, so that they make all their process in one furnace only.

The stones wherewith the inside of these furnaces are not brick, (for these
would soon melt down into Glass, as also other softer stones) but hard and
sandy, which Imperat. calls Pyramachia, such are brought from New Castle, they
will strike fire, one being struck against another, and are of a whitish
color. And yet this hard stone frequently rends in a quarter of a year, or
else furrows will be made in them. The outside of these furnaces are built with
brick. The heat of those furnaces, is the greatest that ever I felt, and I have
observed straws put in three days after the extinction of the fire soon
converted into a flame. The workmen say it is twice as strong as that in the
other Glass-furnaces.

The melting-pots come next to be treated of, and are made of clay fetched from
Purbeck in the Isle of Wight, the very same which makes Tobacco pipes. This
clay being well washed from all impurities is calcined in a furnace for this
purpose, and then ground in their Mill into a fine powder, which being mixed
with water is trod with their bare feet till it come to a good consistence, fit
to mould, which they do with their hands, and when fashioned, dry them in a
convenient place, and afterward anneal them in or over the furnace. But those
for Green Glass are made of Non-such clay, mixed with another clay brought from
Worcestershire, which bears the fire better than that of Nonsuch, but both
together make the best pots. These pots are filled with Metal, and stand level
with the Bocca.

Two sorts of pots are used in Crystal furnaces, a greater which will hold
three or four hundred weight of Metal, these are an inch thick, and at the
bottom, near two, deep two foot, and above twenty inches broad at the top, but
much narrower at the bottom. The second sort of pots they call piling pots,
because set upon the greater, into which they put their finer or colored
Metal for rigarines or other works.

The last business will be to show the manner of working Glass, which take from
Agric. de Metal l. 2. with some additions. The Servitor when the Metal is
sufficiently refined, puts his hollow Iron into the pot, and turning it about,
takes out enough for the vessel or work it is intended for, the Metal sticks to
the Iron like some glutinous, or clammy juice, much like ^^t more firmly than
Turpentine or Treacle taken by tradesmen out of their pots. The figure it takes
on the Iron, is roundish, and whilst it is red hot the Servitor rouls it to and
fro on a Marble that the parts thereof may be more firmly united; And then
gently blowing into his hollow Iron raises the Metal just as blowing does a
bladder or glove. As often as he blows into the Iron (and that must be very
often) so often he removes suddenly the Iron from his mouth to his cheek, lest
he should draw the flame into his mouth, when he reapplies it to the Iron. Then
he takes his Iron and whirls it many times about his head, and so lengthens and
cools the Glass, and if it be needful for his designs, moulds in the stampirons
or flats the bottom by pressing it on the Marble; And then delivers it to the
Master workman, who with a gentle force breaks of the collet (which is that
part of the Glass which cleaved to the blowing Iron, and casts by to make Green
Glass) and with his ponteglo sticks the Glass and scalds it, and with his
passago makes the boul of the Glass, then with his procello widens and makes it
hollower and more capacious, and with the shears cuts off what is superfluous,
and withal making it plain and even. And thus with blowing, pressing, scalding
(which must be repeated as often as the Glass cools) amplyfying, cutting, etc.
frames it into the shape preconceived in his mind. And when need requires
fastens on feet and handles, and with the Spiei puts on Rigarines and
Marblings, and when the Master finisheth them another Servitor takes them, with
an Iron fork, and speedily places them in the tower to anneal, mounting up by
a step for the more convenient placing of them, unless by a stumble in the way
he chance to break this ware, then most brittle and tender, nay, that will
break of it is self without this annealing. So many Masters as there are so many
pots at least, and so many Boccas or holes there must be, for each man has his
proper station. Where they receive those scorching heats sallying directly into
their faces, mouths and lungs, whence they are compelled to work in their
shirts like the Cyclopes and nudi membra Pyracmons, with a straw broad brim'd
Hat on their heads to defend their eyes from excedency of heat and light. They
sit in wooden large and wide Chairs with two long Elbows, whereon they hang
their instruments, fastened so that it is immovable. They work six hours at a
time measured by one Glass only, and then others succeed them, and when these
latter have wrought their six hours the former return to their labor, and by
this means the furnaces are never idle, whilst they are in good condition, and
the pots break not, and the fire keeps the Metal in fusion. Libavius observes
that they are for the most part pale, thirsty, and not very long lived, by
reason of their colliquations, and the diseases of their head and breast, and
that having their bodies weak, they are soon fudled with wine or bear. A very
true Character of them.

Observations on the first Book.
HAving now dispatched what was necessary to be premised, we come to the text
it is self.

Polverine or Rochetta, are the same thing, and are nothing more than ashes
extracted from the same plant, but differing in goodness, as appears by our
Author in several places. The name of the latter is wholly unknown to our
Glass-houses, and has now no distinction at Moran it is self. The name of
Polverine still is kept, and it is given to all ashes which come from the Levant
to make Glasses with. The reason then of their different* names seems to be,
that the Polverine was that which was brought in small powder, and the other in
hard pieces or stones, and therefore named Rochetta. And indeed the workmen
observe that the harder and bigger lumps yield a whiter and stronger salt than
that which comes over in small pieces or powder. And whether this proceeds from
the different sorts of this kind of plant, or the seasons of their growth,
gathering and burning, or from some sophistication from other salts mixed
therewith, or rather from Sea Salt water, or other moisture which much
endammageth them, I determine not. But certain it is, that to make the
strongest salt, and such as will come into hard and stony lumps, they make a
Lee of their first burnt ashes, and therewith water the herbs to be next burnt,
and so water the herbs with new Lees at every burning, and this will make a
most strong pot ashes for Soap-boylers, and Dyers. Which way whether it has
been practiced to make Rochetta, and now omitted I cannot affirm.

Comes from the Levant and Syria. Syria is part of the Levant. Now these ashes
are brought from Alexandria and Tripoly.

A certain herb. This herb he names in his Epistle Kali, and it is so called by
most Authors, but with some small variation, as Kalli, and Kallu, by Alpinus,
in l. de plant. Egypt. by some Cali, Alkali by Gesner, Soda by Lobel,
Salicornia by Dodon, Salsola, by Dodon Gallice, and Hist. Lugd. Anthyllis, by
Camer. Cordus, Fuchs. and Lusitanus, the two latter whereof confidently assert
it to be the Anthyllis of Diosc. both which Mathiolus has fully refuted in his
apology against Lusitanus, who saw this plant grow at Tergestum in Mauritania,
and lastly, Antylloides, by Thalius. Soda, Salicornia, and Salsola manifestly
derive their name a Sale from Salt, wherewith they all exceedingly abound. Of
the Antiquity of knowledge, and names of this plant with us, thus our learned
Countryman Dr. Turner in his Herbal. As I remember it has no name in
English, and though it be very plenteous in many places of England, yet I could
never meet with any man that knew it; But lest this herb should be without a
name, it may be called Salt-Wurt, because it is salt in taste, and Glass-weed,
because the ashes of it serve to make glass with. Parkinson says, that it is
called by the inhabitants of our Seacoast, Frog-grass, and Crab-grass, perhaps
because those animals feed thereon, being a very juicy, substantial, and not of
an unpleasant saltish taste. Gaspar Bauhin in his Pinax makes ten sorts thereof,
whose names and descriptions we omit, as too long for this place. I shall only
mention those three wherewith the Alexandrians, and other Egyptians make their
Polverine for Glass, and Soap, as Alpinus chap. 42. delivers them. The first is
Kali geniculatum, the second sort Kali secunda species, and Anthyllis
quibusdam, by Alpin. but by Columna Kali Florid. repens Neapolitanum, who found
it at Naples, and figures, and describes it, and says it is used to make Glass.
The third sort more peculiar to Egypt is called by the same Author Kali
Egyptiacum foliis valde longis hirsutis. And besides these three, I have seen,
and have by me a fourth, taken from their Polverine bags called Kali spinosum
by the Herbarists. The first and last of these (besides the minus and minimum)
our river Thames, and Seacoasts affords in great plenty, but in no Country
more Northerly than England, yet ours will not make ashes for Crystal, or any
other sort of Glass, as an experiment made at the Glass-house taught me, for
ours being put upon an Iron heated red hot smoaked all away, leaving little or
no ashes at all thereon: But the Kalies brought from the Levant, put on the
same Iron, soon converted almost all of them into a very saltish ashes of a
dark ash their proper color, these in burning contracted themselves like
worms, flame long, and make a white and very strong salt. Our Kali when
gathered appears to the taste very brackish and salt, and will being laid in
moisture, contract it self into a small dimension, which a Confectioner whom I
know found to his loss, who bought thereof instead of Samphire, For having
washed it, and put it to vinegar to pickle, found very little of his Samp^re
remaining, for the Vinegar had well near devoured it all. This great difference
of plants in respect of the country may be manifestly perceived in many other
plants as well as in these Kalies. As in Tobaccoes arising from the same seed,
and in Canary and Rhenish wines from the same stock, in the Hemlocks of Greece,
and those of other countries, and in multitude of other examples, and this
reason differenceth Polverine and Barillia. These Kalies though natural
denizens of the water, and flourishing naturally near salt lakes, yet are
planted on land in Spain and Egypt, which doubtless contributes much in those
hot regions (especially in Egypt where no rain falls, but the Country is only
watered once a year, by the rising of the river Nile, leaving much fatness and
soil behind it) to the quantity, strength, and fixedness of the salt. Now these
Kalies about midsummer, when in their full strength, are cut down and dried in
the Sun, and then burned, being laid in cocks or piles, either upon the ground,
or upon Iron grates, the ashes whereof fall thence into a pit where they grow
into a hard mass or stone, and are gathered and laid up for use, and are called
Sode as Lobel affirms. When these plants were first taken notice of is
uncertain. The first that took notice of them, and gave them their name, were
the Arabians, as also to their salt, as appears by their addition Al which is
purely Arabic. Amongst them I find it mentioned by Serapio and Aviden the
Physicians, who both commend it for the Stone, ulcers, and diseases of the
eyes. Lobel thinks that we owe the plant, name, and way to make the Salt to the
latter Graecians or Arabian Philosophers Chemists that wrought in Glass.
Advers. page 169. But as to the Graecians, and their knowledge of it, I cannot
consent, because it is not mentioned by any of the Greek Physicians or other
writers, besides it has not yet attained any name in that language, and
therefore doubtless the Arabians of latter times have conveyed the knowledge
thereof to us.

Chap. 1. TO know the quantities and strength of the Salt. The best and
readiest to know this, is that practiced by the Soap-boylers, in their
Essay-glasses. They dissolve their Soap-ashes in fair water, and Filtre the
Lee, and weigh it again, and so by measuring the quantity of the Lee, and
comparing it with the weight of the water and ashes before they were dissolved,
they find how much Salt such a quantity of ashes contains.

Brass Coppers. Our Author every where forbids the use of Brass and Copper,
unless where Green, or Blew colors are to be made. And certainly these strong
Lees will fret off some part of the Copper, or else the moisture of the air and
Lee will turn part of it into Verdigreas. And therefore here they use only
Boylers lined on the inside with Lead, such as the Alume and Copperas makers
employ to extract their Salts in.

Tartar of red wine Calcined. Tartar called by our Author Greppola and Grumi di
botti, which are indeed the Lees, and are to be distinguished from the Tartar
it is self, this sticking to the sides of the vessel in thick and hard lumps,
and (as Helmont says) is never to be found in the region of the Lees, whereas
they on the contrary are always found at the bottom of the vessel, moist and in
small pieces only. Tartar of red wine best for this use, because it contains a
stronger Salt, and more in quantity than that of white wine. It Is calcined, to
burn off all Heterogeneous bodies mixed therewith, and to make the Salt whiter,
and for the speedier dissolution of it in the water, and better extraction of
the Salt from the Polverine, whose body is opened by the Tartar, as Alume or
Vitriol open the body of Saltpeter, in making Aquafortis or Spirit of Nitre,
which otherwise without such like addition would not rise. And for the same
cause the Tartar must be dissolved in the water before the Polverine is put
into the boyler. They Calcine their Tartar in an Oven, near the Leer, in the
space of six hours, and that to whiteness too, finding that this has a better
effect, than a meaner calcination has. What advantage the drawing off the
humidity of the Tartar gives, a secret way used by some Chemists does
demonstrate. To make their Crystals and Cream of Tartar, larger, and whiter,
they powder it grossly, and then Calcine, or rather dry it thoroughly in an Oven,
in tin pans. And thus they make them much better, than they can be made without
this drying, or moderate Calcination.

The Salt sinks to the bottom of the boyler, and is taken out with a scummer,
from which drain all the moisture, and let it run into the boyler; when the
faeces of the Lees have settled to the bottom of the tubs, they draw them off
with a Siphon.

Chap. 2. TArso. The second material, and that which gives consistence and
body, and firmness to Glass, is sand or stones. As Iron gives to English
Copperas, and Copper to Hungarian, Dantzick, and Roman Vitriol, which otherwise
would run into water in moist places and seasons. Concerning these stones,
Agric. l. 10. says, They must be such as will melt, and of them, those which
are white, and transparent are best. Wherefore Crystals challenge precedence,
For of these broken, Plin. says, Authors affirm, that Glass is made in India,
so excellently transparent, that no other may be compared with it. The next
place, they give to those stones, which though inferior to Crystal in
hardness, yet are white and transparent, as that is. The third place is given
to those which are white, but not transparent. Next to Tarso our Author
commends Quocoli, rendered Pibles, which Ferant. Imperatus, l. 24. c. 16. thus
describes, The Glass stone is like in appearance to white Marble, partaking of
transparency, differing from it in hardness, which it has as much as flint,
whence it is that being struck, it sparkles, and put into the fire, turns not to
Lime. This stone most commonly partakes of a light Green, like the Serpentine
stone. It Is found in 'its natural place clad and mixed with veins of crusted
Talk, when it is first put into fire it loses it is transparency, and becomes
white, and lighter, and afterward it turns into Glass. It Is wrought by the
Glass-men, as a material of Glass under the name of Cuogolo. Because they
gather them in the bottom of rivers, and torrents, in the form of round pibles
or shards. And those are they our Author says are used at Muran. It Is without
controversy that all white and transparent stones, such as will not become
^^me, serve well for Glass, but our Authors axiom is not wholly true, for
neither the stones from New Castle, mentioned in the Glass furnaces, nor
fire-stones, nor rance stones, and many other which strike fire with a steel,
or horse shoes, and Coaches wheels, will not serve to this purpose. Flints
indeed have all the properties, and when calcined, powdered, and serced into a
most impalpable powder, make incomparable pure, and white Crystal Metal. But
the great charge in preparing them has deterred the owners of our Glass-houses
from farther use of them.

Sand is made use of where fit stones cannot be had, and according to our
Authors story, were first used; it must be white, and small, and well washed
before used, which is all the preparation of it. Such is usually found in
mouths and sides of Rivers; for Crystal requires a fine soft and white sand,
but Green-Glass, that which is harder, and more gritty. And there is great
variety in this material, for some soon melts, and mixeth with the ashes, and
becomes Glass. Joseph. l. 2. c. 9. of the wars of the Jews relates strange
things of Sand, which is briefly thus. Near Ptolemais a city of Galilee, runs
the river Belus, arising from mount Carmel between Ptolemais and Tyrus. Near
this small river is the Sepulcher of Memnon, having near it a space almost of
100 cubics most worthy of admiration. For there is a valley round in show,
sending forth Sand for Glass, which when many ships coming together have
exhausted, the same place is presently filled again. For the winds as it were
on purpose, bring from the circumjacent sides of the mountains this Sand. And
the place where the metal is, presently changes into Glass what it has
received. And this seems more strange to me, that the Sands converted into
Glass, whatsoever part thereof is thrown into the skirts of that place is again
changed into common sand. And Tacit. l. 5. Hist. Belus runs into the Jewish
Sea, about whose mouth Sands are gathered ( Lipsius reads it Collectae not
Conjectae) which having Nitre mixed with them are boild into Glass. That shore
is small, but unexhaustible by them that fetch it. The same thing witness
Strabo l. 12. Plin. l. 6. Agric. de fosse. All Authors that write of Glass,
mention those places whence the Sand is fetched. Our Glass houses in London
have a very fine white Sand (the very same that is used for Sand-boxes and
scouring) from Maid-stone in Kent, and for Greenglasses, a coarser from
Woolwich. The former will not mix with ordinary green metal. Both these cost
but little besides their bringing by water.

Cardan l. 5. de variet. adds Manganese, called by him Syderea, as a third
ingredient into Glass. Constat (says he) Vitrum ex tribus, to wit, of stones
or sand, of the salt of Cali, and Syderea, but the small quantity of Manganese
added to the metal, can contribute little to a pot of metal. Besides it is not
used in all sorts of Glass.

Chap. 3. Shows but the common way of Chemists, by solution, filtration, and
coagulation to make fixed Salts.

Chap. 5. MUst be cut, etc. All plants have their time to be cut or gathered,
that is, when they are in their full growth and strength. The best time is a
little before they are in full flour, and that to all purposes, to which the
leaves or stalks are used, and also in Chemistry to extract the oils of
Vegetables, and Spirits, which then are produced almost in double quantity more
than at other times, but for Salts when the herbs are in seed, as Fern is at
this time. It Is a Vulgar error, that Fern and other cappillary herbs have no
seed, which they have in great quantity on the back-sides of their leaves, in
form of dust, of a brown color. Nay, Mosses also abound in seed, as it is most
evident in an undescribed kind of Chamapeuce I keep in my horto sicco, all
whose branches, and betwixt each leaf thereof are multitudes of round and
brownish seeds. How much also the seasons of the year difference Vegetables,
the Button-mold-makers can inform you, in those woods they make molds of, who
find that Pear Tree cut in Summer works toughest, but Holly in the Winter, Box
works hardest about Easter, but mellow in the Summer, Hawthorn works mellow
about October, and Service tough in the Summer.

Chap. 6. GIves an account of other plants, which yield a Salt fit for Glass.
In one word, whatsoever Vegetables afford quantity of Alcalazite salts (for so
the Chemists call such as will persist in, and bear a strong fire, without
flying away, and vanishing in the air, and are so denominated from Alkali, that
is Salt drawn from Kali) are good to make Glass. Some whereof this Chapter
enumerates. Kelp so named from Kali, and pot ashes are used for Crystalline
metal. Kelp is principally made of that Sea-plant we call Sea-thongs or Laces,
and from it is use by Joan. Bauh. lib. 39. c. 2. de Hist. plant. Alga
angustifolia vitra^^orum, which being kept moist a little after gathering, will
show afterward, though long kept, it is white salt on the surface of it is
leaves. Math. in Drosc. calls it Algam vulgarem Venetorum, the common Sea-Wrack
of the Venetians, not only for the reason before, but also because the
Venetians wrapped up their Glasses therein, which they sent to foreign parts. This
wrack when the Sea is tempestuous, scopulis illisa refunditur Alga, as Virg. is
thrown and scattered upon the Rocks, in great abundance, and also on the shore,
which the country people in the summer rake together, and dry it as they do
hay, by exposing it to the Sun and Wind, and so turning it as occasion serves
till it is fit to burn, and make these ashes called Kelp, used as well to make
Alume as Glass. Nor is this particular wrack alone used, though very much
abounding in all our Seas, but also all other Algas, fucus and quercus marina,
and other Sea-plants, all which abound in Salt. Potashes come from Poland and
Russia, and New England, and are the ashes for the most parts of Firs and
Pines. For Green-glasses in England, they buy all sorts of ashes confused one
with another, of persons who go up and down the Country to most parts of
England to buy them. But the best and strongest of all English ashes, are made
of the common way Thistle, though all thistles serve well to this purpose. Next
to Thistles are Hop-strings, that is, the stem and branches of Hops, cut after
the flours are gathered, these two are of late invention. Bramble-bush yields
the best Salt among trees, and Genista Spinosa, and Hawthorn next that, and
Kali Spinosum amongst the Sea-plants. So that it seems that those plants which
are thorny and prickly afford in their kind the best and most Salt. Next to the
forementioned are all bitter herbs, as Hops, Wormwood, Carduus benedictus,
Centauries, Gentians, Southernwood, Tansey, Woad, etc. could store of their
ashes be procured at small charges; add to these Tobacco, which affords
abundance of Salt, the stems being gathered and burnt, and might turn to great
profit, though some damage to the soil. A Merchant told me, he offered to King
Charles the first, that he would erect and maintain at his own charges
Churches, and endow each thereof with 100 per annum, only for the stalks of
all the Tobacco which grew in Virginia, and did demonstrate to me the great
profit would arise to him by this Patent. In the next place follow all
Leguminous plants, such as bear Peace, Beans, etc. which have some affiaity with
the other tribe, especially Lupins, Fetches, Cicers, and Lentils, the last
whereof being lately sown plentifully in Oxfordshire for their catel, have
been found by experience good to this effect. Add amongst the milky plants, all
the sorts of Tithymals or Spurges, and Fig Tree, which have a Blistering
faculty in them, and the Vine-branches, and Sow-thistles, which are somewhat
prickly and downy flowered, wherein they agree with thistles, and have a milky
juice, as Tithymals have. Now concerning these fixed Salts, observe, that those
are best, which are freest from earth, sticks, and all other Heteregeneous
bodies, and are in the hardest and whitest lumps, and to the taste most sharp.
Secondly, the best ashes being most full of pure and unmixt Salt soonest run in
the Calcar. Thirdly, That ashes made with Vegetables, when in their full
growth, and of the most flourishing branches of them, are best. For from hence
the Chemists seem to derive their name of Cin^res clavella^^, from Clavola,
instead of Clavolati. Whereof Varro l. 1. de re rust. c. 40. thus. In
oleagineris seminibus videndum, ut sit de tenero ramo exutraque part
aequabiliter praecisum, quos alii clavolas alii taleas appellant ac faciunt
circiter pedales. Where he expounds Clavola by tender branches. Nonus reads it
Clavula, and defines them the cutting of wood. Certain it is that Clavola or
Clavula comes from Clava which is our Club in English. Fourthly, These Salts
must be kept dry, for moisture, and wet much endamage them. Lastly, some of
these ashes make whiter Glass than others. Oak ashes partaking of a Vitriolate
nature make Glass of a darker color, and Ash-tree, and Hawthorn, communicating
in their Salts with Niter, render a more whiter metal than the former.

Agricola thus of the Salts make Glass, The first place must be given to
Saltpeter, the second to white and transparent Fossil Salt, the third place to
the Salt of the ashes of Anthyllis or other Salt herbs; some there are who give
precedence to the ashes of Anthyllis or Kali, and not to Salt of Nitre. But
those which want make Glass of two parts of the ashes of common Oak, or the
Ilex or Scarler-oak, or Cerrus the Bitter-oak, or for want of them with the
ashes of Beech or Fir, with one part of gravel or sand, and they add a little
Salt extracted from Sea Salt Water, and a little Manganese, but these ashes
make a Glass less white and transparent. Now these ashes are to be made of old
trees, whose trunk when grown to six foot high is hollowed, and fire being put
into the cavity, the whole tree is burnt down and turned to ashes. This is done
in the winter, when the snows have long continued, or in the Summer when it
snoweth not. For rains at other seasons of the year make the ashes foul, by
mixing earth with them. Wherefore in the winter they make ashes of those trees
cut into schides and burnt within doors. So far Agric. But time and experience
have worn out the use of Saltpeter, and Fossil Salts, which have given the
priority to Polverine, being too soft and gentle, whereas Glass requires
Lixivial, and fixed Salts, that have a Caustical, and strong taste, and but
little Unctuosity, whereof Nitre and Fossil Salt have store, and therefore run
most of them into Sandever, unto which Nitre comes somewhat near in taste and
fattiness. But Agric. and other Authors seem to mistake Pliny, who puts Nitre
for those Alcalizare Salts, for so lib. 31. cap. 10. Quercu cremata nunquam
multum nitrum factitatum est, never much Nitre was made of Oak burnt. And
Virgil also seems to use the word in the same sense,

1 Georg.
Semina vidi equidem multos medicare serentes
Et nitro prius, and nigra perfundere amurca.
I have seen many would anoint their grain
With Nitre first, then lees of oil would spread.
This kind of good Husbandry he expresses before when he says,

Arida tantum
Ne saturare fimo pingui pudeat sola; neve
Effetos cinerem immundum jactare per agros.
Nor with rich dung spare hungry grounds to feed,
And unclean ashes on poor Champains spread.
As Mr. Ogilby well renders them. Now these latter verses manifestly prove that
salts enrich the soil, and therefore it seems that Nitre in the former verses
must signify either salt extracted from ashes, or ashes themselves wherein the
salts lie. And to the same purpose are those verses in the same Book.

To burn dry stuble, on the barren fields,
In crackling flames, often handsome profit yields.
From which burning nothing but salt, is produced, whose nature it is to destroy
the weeds, which being a long time and strongly rooted in the earth, would draw
away from the new sowed and tender corn all the nourishment, and thereby render
the ground barren, and the seed unprofitable, besides the use of ashes and
salt, to destroy worms, which otherwise might eat up the grain. But the
coldness of Nitre, as my Lord Bacon affirms, is an enemy to all sorts of grain;
Besides learned Caesalpin. lib. 3. cap. 23. de metal. Calls the ashes of Kali
a kind of Nitre. Add hereunto, that in the Western parts of England, these
Algas whereof Kalp or Kelp is made serve the Husbandmen to stercorate their
land. Which is practiced also by the inhabitants of the Mediterranean as
Ferantes Imperatus relates. And though Nitre may be extracted from Seawater,
and some Vegetables, yet 'twould run almost all of it into Sandever, being put
into the Furnaces.

Chap. 7. SAlt of Lime. It Is not here used, that which is sometimes found on
old walls, and thence called Paretonium, is much, stronger than the Ordinary
salt of lime, a large piece whereof I have amongst my Cimelia, very Diaphanous,
very like in figure to Alume, and of a strong Saline taste. Ferant. Imperatus
commends the Lime made of the Pisces crustacei and testacei, such are Oysters
and Crabs or Lobsters, to extract a good salt for glass. And upon experience I
have found that a lime of them (used in Holland by the plaisterers) affords
plenty of a strong salt: But this salt, salt, though it make a very white
glass, yet 'twill not be so transparent as that of Kali, and most thereof will
run in the pots into Sandever.

Chap. 8. FRit, seems to be derived from Frittare to Fry. For it is nothing else
but salt or ashes fried or baked together with sand, and so the English call
the whole quantity baked at a time in the Calcar a batch. And secondly, the
Frit melted runs into lumps like Fritters called in Italian Frittelle or little
Frits. 'Twas by some anciently called Hammonitrum, and by others more agreeable
to Etymology Ammonitrum, compouuded of (...), sand, and (...), Nitre. For so
Pliny, lib. 36. cap. 26. Fine sand from the Vulturnian sea is mixed with the
weight or measure of three parts of Nitre, and being melted it is carried to
other Furnaces. There a mass is made which is called Ammonitrum, and this being
reboil'd makes pure and White glass; and Caesalp. more expressly, Ex arena and
nitro fit massa quam Plin. Hammonitrum appellat, hodie Fritta dicitur, of sand
and Nitre a mass is made which Pliny calls Hammonitrum, but at this day it is
called Frit. This making of Frit serves to mix and incorporate the materials
well together, and to evaporate whatsoever superfluous Humidity they contain in
them. Green-glass Frit compounded of grosser materials requires 10 or 12 hours
baking more or less, according to the goodness, softness of the sand, and ashes.

We have three sorts of Frits. First of Crystal for Crystal metal made with
salt of Polverine and sand. The second and Ordinary Frit is made of the bare
ashes of Polverine or Barillia without extracting the salt from them, this
makes ordinary white or Crystalline metal. Thirdly, Frit for Greenglasses,
made of common ashes without any preparation of them, or else of Cobbets ground
to a fine powder, and a hard sand fetched from Wooll-wich in Kent.

The materials must be finely powdered, washed and serced, and then mixed, and
equally compounded together, and then the fire of the calcar will exactly mix
them in the smallest particles and minutest atoms. For otherwise the Sand and
Salt; will in the melting pot easily separate the one from the other, which
they are apt enough to do were they not often stirred with the Rake.

Pounded in stone Mortars. This following way now in use is much more expedite,
they now grind their ashes which is in hard lumps, their Manganese, Zaffer,
Collets calcined, Clay and Salts, in a Horse-Mill, the stone whereof is 9 or 10
inches thick, and 7 or 8 foot Diameter, and turns on a floor, where the
materials to be ground are put, and are both of hard Marble. This grinding
dispatcheth more in one day than 20 men can do in a Mortar.

We use no tasting of water on the Frit, nor wetting it with Lees, but work it
off in the pot within few days, if need requires it, though the latter of these
two must needs conduce much to the purity of Glass.

Chap. 9. THe quantity of the Manganese, etc. the reason whereof is because the
colors to be put in are of various goodness, some higher, and others lighter,
especially the difference of Manganese and Zaffer, is so great, that some
thereof is good for little, other very rich, some of a middle nature, and to
know their difference in goodness, there^s no way found out but trial in the
furnace, neither in our Glass houses, nor in pottery where they have very great
use of both. Besides, the metalls of the same materials, and of the same
preparation, change the quantity of the colors, in several pots. Wherefore the
Conciator always puts in all his colors, not by weight, nor measure, but by
little and little at a time, and then at each time mixeth them well with the
metal, and takes out a proof, and by his eye alone judges whether the color
be high enough, and when too low adds more of them till he attain the desired
color.

The furnace must have dry etc. strong wood. Our Author every where commends
Oak, for that makes a strong and durable fire with a good flame. Ferant. Imper.
l. 14. c. 16. says, that the Glass-men in working-glass, because they would
have a substantial and gallant rather than a great flame, use the trunks of
ash, which ascending directly, and straight, comes to the Vortex of the
furnace, and communicates it*s force to the pots within. A^sh indeed affords a
most pleasant fire, but soon decays, and therefore unless a continual supply be
made, the metal will not be kept melted, nor fit to work. Camer. in horto
deservedly commends Juniper as a most lasting and strong, and sweet fire, could
plenty thereof be had, I know not therefore what Pliny means, who l. 36. c. 24.
says, levibus vitrum aridisque lignis coquitur. Glass is boil^d with light and
dry wood. Nor why Plutarch should say, that Tamarisk is fittest to form Glass:
for certainly so great a fire as Glass requires cannot be made with such woods.
One effect of the fire mentioned by the Arabian physicians, and from them by
others, I may not omit, viz. the burning of Glass mixed with sponge, which being
calcined they commend to break the stone in the Kydneys and Bladder, and for
outward Ulcers, But the ways to burn it, taught by them, are wholly unfit, and
it is most certain that the longest and strongest fires, will only keep it in
fusion, but never reduce it to a powder.

Casts forth Sandever, sal Alkali, called by the French, Suin de verre, that
is the fat of Glass, and by contraction in English Sandever. It Is a very white
salt, and inclining nearest to a nitrous taste, and easily dissolveth in the
air, or any moist place. Our Conciators never cast the metal into water, to
separate this salt from it, but take it out with a ladle, for it swims on the
top of the metal. This must be separated and all scummed off, or else 'twill
make the Glass unfit for working, very brittle, and no way pliable. The best
metal will yield in a pot of two hundred weight a quarter or half a hundred of
Sandever. The weaker the salt or ashes are the greater quantity of Sandever
they yield, some four or five parts more than others do. For green glasses when
the ashes are bad they are compelled to fill the pot four or five times with
more fresh ashes, by reason of the quantity of Sandever that is in them, before
the pot will be filled with metal. Whilst any of it remains in the pot, they
may not cast in any cold water to hinder the boiling over of the metal, for if
they should, the furnace and pots would be blown up together. Sandever serves
to make metalls run, and a little thereof put into Antimony and Saltpeter, for
making Crocus Metallorum, increases the quantity of the Crocus, and 'twill
therewith separate better from the Scoria. It Is sold into France, and there
used to powder their meat, and to eat, instead of common salt, a solution
hereof bestowed on gardenwalks destroys both weeds and vermin.

Necks of the Glass, are also called Collets, which they always break off their
iron rods (whereunto they stick) before they take new metal out of the pot,
and these they throw into a place ordained for that purpose, which they grind,
and put to the metal, and make thereof the purest green Glass only, though
the product of the finest Virgin metal.

Chap. 10. CAlcine it well. The Glass must* continue twenty four hours or more,
nay, two or three days in a strong fire, the longer the better, for this
refines the Glass, and takes away all Blebs and Blisters from it.

Chap. 11. TArtar in great lumps* Because this comes from the strongest Wines,
and has suffered no damage by sal^ water, or any other, which dissolves it
into s^all pieces, and draw from it some of it is strength. They calci^e it in a
place made for the purpose ^eer the Leer of the furnace, on either side of the
utmost working holes, in six hours time, and that to whiteness too, which
works all the effects in Glass with us, better than a lower calci^ation does.

Chap. 12. ZAffer and Manganese, have no other preparation here than bare (...)
them in the mill to a fine powder, and sercing them in the same serces
wherewith they serce their Polverine, and other materials. What Z^ff^r is I
cannot find in any Author, few there are that mention it. Ca^d^n. l. 5. de
subtle. calls it an earth. Est alia cri^m t^rra quae sic vitrum tingit Caerul^i
coloris quam Zapheram quid^m appellant. There^s another earth which colors
Glass Blew, some call it Zaffer. But since him Casalp^^us, l. 2. c. 55. reckons
it among stones. Alius est lapis vitrum tingens color coerul^o and
si^plusculum adda ur i^ficit nigredi^e, Zafferam vocant. Hic ex cinereo tendit
ad purpureum ponderosus and friabilis est; per se non funditur, sed cum vitro
fluit aquae modo. There Is another stone coloring Glass Blew, and too much
colors it Black, they call it Zaffer. It enclines from an Ash to a Purple
color, it is heavy and brittle, it melts not of it is self, but with Glass it
runs like water. Aldrovand. in Musaeo follows both, and in one place calls it
an earth, in another a stone. Ferant. Imperat. l. 26. c. 8. likens it to the
Lodestone and Manganese. But it is not an earth, for it mixeth not with water,
nor will it be compounded with it. Neither is there any stone so brittle as
Zaffer, for with your fingers you may easily crumble it into a sandy gritty
substance, which appears so to the teeth. And certainly were it either of these
or any natural color it could not but have been taken notice of by some writer
on these subjects, being a thing so commonly used, and so much thereof spent in
Glass and Pottery. It escaped the knowledge of the diligent Agricola, who no
where mentions it, and Jul. Scaliger who saw a Book concerning Glass, replies
nothing to Cardan concerning it. So that it seems to me to be an artificial
thing of late invention, and made by some metall-men in Germany (from whence
all of it comes) and kept by them as a secret. And if I might conjecture at it,
I should think that 'twere a composition of Brass and Sand, and perhaps some
Lapis Calaminaris added thereunto. The Blew color it gives, induces me to
think, that it is from Brass, as the color of Manganese is from Iron: for
certainly nothing can give a tincture to Glass, but what is metalline, and all
metalls do give a tincture thereunto. Lapis Lazuli a very hard stone loses
it is color in the fire, and so do other precious stones. It Is true, Antimony
gives Glass a color, but it is by reason of it is Metalline part the Regulus
only. Much less will any sort of earths bear the strong heat of their
furnaces. For though Scots-ochre and India-red, may be both calcined into good
colors for the uses they are emploi'd for, yet in the Glass furnaces they
wholly lose them. It remains then that nothing but what is mettalline must
produce this color, and if metalline what can it else be but Brass? For though
silver be said to afford this color, yet that pr^ceeds from the allay of
Copper wherewith it is mixed. For purely thrice re^ined Silver gives no tincture
at all to the parting water. A second ingredient into Zaffer is sand, your
tongue and teeth may easily discover it, but if you put it into Aqua fortis you
shall manifestly see some white and transparent gravel, very like the powder of
our transparent Pebles, or perhaps the forementioned quocoli described by
Imperatus, and some other like our common sand, of a Brownish color, which
will easily vitrifie. And thirdly, the reason I suppose that Lapis Calaminaris
may be admixt therewith, is, because neither Aquafortis nor spirit of Vitriol,
poured on the Zaffer, have any operation sensible thereupon, either as to
raising bubles, solution, or tincture. Both which experiments I tried with
ordinary Aquafortis and spirit of Vitriol, and could not perceive the least
buble arise, nor smallest motion of these liquours, nor any tincture in either,
nor hissing noise, which happens in the solution of metalline bodies. But that
the Lapis Calaminaris hinders the solution and consequences thereof will be
manifest by an experiment we shall presently produce. Besides this ebullition
may be hindered by the admixture of some Rosin or Gum, on which these liquours
have no effect. With what preparation of Brass or Copper, this is made, I
cannot determine, whether from the Ore or some preparation delivered by
Authors, or what other way, a few experiments might detect this secret, and
unty this knot, whereunto I shall leave the Reader. Lastly, whosoever shall
consider the weight, value, and color, now changed from the Purplish of the
Authors to a Brown (for so is all that I have seen) will not with much
difficulty be persuaded to be of my conceit. It Is called Zaffer from the
Saphyrestone, with whom it communicates in it is Blew color.

Chap. 13. MAnganese (so called from it is likeness in color and weight to the
Magnes or Lodestone) is the must universal material used in Glass, not only
to purge off the natural Greenish Bluish color so called by Virgil 4. Georg.

Eam circum Milesia vellera Nymphae,
Carpebant hyali saturo fucata color.
Whereon the Commentator,
Vitr^o viridi Nymphis apto.
Which is in all Glass, and therefore may be called the Soap thereof; but also
to tinge it, which it does with a Red, Black, Purple or Murray color; nay it is
the most universal ingredient into all colors, as this present work
demonstrateth. Concerning it Caesalp. l. 2. c. 55. more largely and very well
in these words. Hoc genus Magnetis hodie vulgo Manganese vocatur, ab Alberto
Magnesia, addi solet ad confectionem vitri, quoniam in se liquorem vitri quoque
ut magnes ferrum trahere creditur. Lapis est niger, Magneti similis, quo
utuntur vitrearii. Si enim modicum ejus vitro a^misceatur, illud purgat ab
alienis coloribus and clarius reddit, si veto amplius, color purpureo.
Affertur ex Germania, foditur quoque in Italia in montibus Viterbii and alibi.
M^minit and Plin* speudomagnetis. Inquit enim in Cantabria non ille magnes
verus caute continua sed sparsa, nescio an vitro fundendo perinde utilis,
nondum enim expertus est quisquam; ferri inquit infi^it aciem u^ Magn^s. This
^ind of Lodestone is now called Manganese, by Albertus Magnesia, it is added in
the ma^ing of Glass, because it is thought that it draws into it self the
liquour of Glass as the Loadstone does Iron. It Is a Blackstone like the
Lodestone, the Glass* men use it. For if a little thereof be mixed therewith
it purges it from improper colors, and makes it clearer, but if too much it
colors it Purple. It Is brought from Germany, it is also dug in Italy in the
mountains os Viterbium and elsewhere. Pliny also mentions the Pseudo-magnes.
He says in Cantabria not the true Lodestone in a continual, but scattered
rock, I know not whether it be as good to run-glass, for no body yet has made
trial of it, it colors (says he) Iron as the Lodestone does. Cardan. l. 5.
de subtilitat. calls it Syderea (upon what ground I know not) and mistakes the
color, putting Blew for Red. Whereunto Scal. exerc. 104. 23. replies,
Manganese is unknown to me, yet in a Manuscript of blowing Glass belonging to
Pantheus a Venetian 'twas written, that Glass was colored Purple therewith.
Believe the Author as you please. I remember when I was a Boy and lived at
Ladroni, there was dug up at the Solodonian-mountains (if I mistake not) I know
not what, which they said was carried to V^nice, wherewith Glass was refined to
that whiteness, and purity that it kept the name of Crystalline. I seem to
remember the color was that of Iron. Secundus my Master taught me that Glass
by the admixture of an Iron color grew White by reason of the strange
Cohaesion of both substances, whose parts being compounded, the colors also
entered one into another, and that the Manganese of an Iron nature did exhale,
being impatient of the fire, and carried away with it the foulness of the
Glass, no otherwise than Lees wherewith linen is cleansed. A judgment not
unlike this opinion I find in Arist. where he shows the force of Origanum to
purge wine. But this Iron substance exhales not, if it be mixed with metalls,
because then it is baked with less fire or a less time. And this is all we have
delivered concerning this Manganese. Now in these discourses, two things are
observable, the attraction, and purgation. As for the former, attraction of the
liquour of Glass, there is no ground for it, no more than the bare name imports,
which was imposed ex placito: For if you apply never so great a quantity of
Manganese to the smallest particle of broken or melted Glass, it stirs it not.
And then if they mean by the liquour of Glass the Sandever part thereof, it is
certain the greenish color remains in the metal after that is wholly scummed
off, and that Manganese then put in refines it. But if they mean by liquour of
Glass only liquid Glass, then it is only gratis dictum, no argument, no
experiment being brought to prove it. As for that of purifying it is as manifest
as the attraction is obscure. Though the modus be very doubtful. Scaliger and
his Master Secundus think it is by the way of exhalation, and perhaps, Plin. and
Caesalp. mean by their attraction, this purgation, but then they tell us not
what becomes of them both. They must be separated from the metal by
precipitation or exhalation, but the former cannot be, for then the metal
being stirred twould return to it is former color, or 'twould be found in the
bottom of the pot in the form of powder, as in other precipitations it is
constantly usual. And the exhalation is as incredible si^ce there appears no
loss of weight after this resining, besides, how can the fixed bodies of
Manganese arise in exhalation being inviscated with the tenacious substance of
Glass? and what strange choice can there be supposed in the Manganese, that it
should cull out the Greener part only of the metal to be carried away with it
into the air, and in insensible vapors too? The reason seems to me to be only
a change in the figure and minutest parts of the metal, for the fire making
the Manganese run, mixeth it with the smallest atoms of the metal throughout,
which by boiling, and various agitation and revolution of them frames those
atomical figures which are apt to reflect most of the light which falls upon
it, and is the same we call White. Multitude of instances might be given to
illustrate this doctrine of the production of colors by mere transmutation of
parts, but we shall content our selves with those only which by admixture of
colourate bodies become White. Take then Terebinthine which is of a yellowish
color, or Oleum Capevae of a blackish color, or tinge oil of Turpentine with
Verdegreas (in which 'twill easily dissolve) into as full a Green as the
natural color of Glass, and shake either of these very well together, with the
yolks of Eggs, and they all make a very clear and white color. Or else take a
strong lixivium of the Soap-boilers; and mix it by agitation with the Greenish
oil of Elder, and you shall therewith make that medicine Physicians call Lac.
Virginis, you may do the same with any other oil, and the said Lee. Here you
have the color of a Yellowish Red-lee destroy the green of the Oil. Again Oil
of Tartar poured on the green water made with the solution of the Pyrites in
rain water, gives ^ white color, nay the said Oil poured on Green ^r Blew
Copperas dissolved in common water, effects the like, though the color will
not be altogether so White as in the former, unless you add a great quantity of
oil of Tartar. Which instances sufficiently refute the way of exhalation, and
manifestly convince that this purging of Glass, is wrought only by a various
texture, and position of the parts of the metal, made by this new accession of
Manganese. Nay, what other reason can be assigned, but this change, why Salt
and Sand both most white, should produce a colored metal? or why Zaffer and
Manganese should produce a Black?

That Manganese consists of much Iron seems beyond contradiction, which may be
evinced by these experiments. I poured Aquafortis upon some powder of it, and
in a narrow mouthed Glass, the water rose up in great bubles, and immediately
boiled over the Glass, and in a Glass, with a wider mouth it rose less, and a
strong, and most piercing fume there from, offended much my Nose-thrils. And
Spirit of Vitriol poured on it boild a little, but sparkled more, the glass
became so hot that I could not hold it in my band, and that which seems
peculiar to the Manganese, fair water poured thereon increased the decaying
heat very much. The tincture of this stone was of a deep claret color. All
which agree throughout with the same Spirits poured on Iron; and certainly the
colors of the Manganese, come from the Iron that it contains. Red is common to
them both, and a Purple is but a deeper Red with an eye of Blew, and the same
color some preparations of Crocus Martis have, and as black is made with
Zaffer and Manganese, so rich Blacks in silks are made of slip, that is the
powder which the Sheargrinders grind from shears and other edge tools mixed
with Sand from the Grindstone, and doubtless would be of use in the color pots
of the furnace did they know it, and would they use it. Secondly, this
Manganese makes the metal rise and boil as all Iron or Steel alone, or Crocus
Martis, or any other preparation, or composition thereof, which quality is also
common to Copper, Brass and Lead. Observe here, that wheresoever any of these
are put into the pot our Author commands that it be done leasurely and by
little and little, and that some vacuity be left in the pot, for fear you lose
your metal which will run into the fire and ashes, and thereby you lose the
time and charge, for all this commonly goes together with him.

Our Author here commends Manganese of Piemont, for the best in the world, and
therefore wherever he mentions the one, he subjoyne the other. But some few
years since, the industry of our nation has found in our own country at
Mendip-hills (famous for Lead) in Somersetshire, as good as any used at Moran.
wherever the Lead-Ore-Men find it, they certainly conclude that Lead-Ore lies
under it. They call it Pottern-Ore, because the Potters spend such great
quantities of it, this being the only material wherewith they color their
ware Black, as they do Blew with Zaffer. They count that the best, which has
no glittering sparkles in it, and is of a Blackish color, but powdered of a
dark Lead color, it is very hard ponderous, the deeper the color, the deeper
it colors the metal in the Furnace, it is to be put into the melting pot
together with the Fritt.

Chap. FErretto of Spain, commonly called 14, 15. aes ustum, or burnt Brass,
and it is made Latin, by Coesalp. l. 3. c. 5. where he thus says, Optimum aes
ustum conficiebatur in Aegypti Memphide deinde in Cypro, cujus notae sunt, ut
sit rubrum and attritu colorem Cinnabaris imitetur, nam nigrnm, plusquam decet
exustum est. Hodie in Hispania conficitur, appellant autem Ferrettum, sed
nigrum est, inficit ingredine, ideo utuntur ad capillum denigrandum. The best
burnt Brass was made at Memphis in Egypt, afterward in Cyprus, the marks
whereof are that it be Red, and that by bruising it imitate the color of
Cinnaber, for that which is black is too much burnt. It Is now made in Spain,
they call it Ferrettum, but it is Black and colors Black, therefore they use to
color therewith their hairs Black. But if it be calcined to a mediocrity it
appears Red, and it is of the same color when powdered, and hence it seems to
have it is name Ferrettum a ferreo color, for Crocus Martis appears to the
eye Red, though much lighter than Ferretto does. By the former discours-of
Caesalp that some Countries afforded better Ferretto than others, as Castile
Soap, and Venice Glasses are the best, but we find no such difference in the
several climates, that we need fetch any thereof from Spain.

The two most eminent and singular colors, both in themselves, and in relation
to animals, and to this Art of Glass, are Blew and Green* in themselves, as
partaking much of light, as is seen in the Triangular-Glasses, and they are
also most delightful and agreeable to the sight, and eyes of animals as neither
widening nor contracting the Pupil too much, both which are dolorous and
offensive; and in the Art of Glass, in Pasts, Enamels, Glass of Lead by reason
of their great conformity and neerness to many sort of gems, challenge a great
share of use, besides the many gradations of them used simply of themselves, or
else blended and mixed one with the other. Blew is a simple color in all Arts
conversant about it, but Green in the curious Art of dying is a compounded
color of Blew the Ground, and Yellow super-induced, or contrary-wise wrought.
But in other Arts this color is simple, and both arise from the same material
Copper or Brass by various ordering and preparing them. It Is a strange and
great mystery to see how small and undiscernable a nicety (though the same
materials be used) makes the one and the other color, as is daily discovered
by the resiners in making their Verditers, who sometimes with the same
materials, and quantities of them for their Aquafortis, and with the same
Copper Plates, and Whiting make a very fair Blew Verditer, otherwhiles a fairer
or more dirtygreen. Whereof they can assign no reason, nor can they hit on a
certain rule to make constantly their Verditer of a fair Blew, to their great
disprofit, the Blew being of manifold greater value than the Green. Now
although the genuine and natural color of Brass and Copper, is the true Sea
green, mixed of both colors, yet the former inclines more to a Blew than the
latter, and the dissolvents have a great share in this business. For Verdigreas
made of Copper Plates buried in the earth with Grapes, makes a Green, but
Copperas made with Copper, and the liquour of the Pyrites dissolved with rain
water, yields a Blew in Dantzick and Hungarian, and Roman Vitriol, the only
difference of these proceeding from the resolution of the materials into finer
and minuter Particles, and various texture of the Atomical parts of the
materials dissolved. Now the reason why Brass makes a better Blew than Copper,
seems to be this, that the Lapis Calaminaris the only thing that differenceth
them, takes in, and incorporates with it is self that acidity which naturally
Copper contains, which as it appears in the making of Verdigreas turns it to a
Green, being exalted by the acidity of the Grapes. And this seems also to be
the cause, why Frenchwine-grapes, which have more acidity in them than
Spanish-wine-grapes have (though the climate of Spain be more suitable than
that of France) are fittest to work this effect. The force also of Vitriolate
juyces may be seen in our English Copperas, and Vitriol of Mars, made of Spirit
of Vitriol and Steel, both which change the natural Yellowish color of Iron
into a Green, and Lapis Armenus a Blew stone ground with Vinegar, or the
tincture thereof drawn. The effect of Calaminaris in drinking in the acidity of
the Vitriol do the same, an ingredient into Aquafortis is clearly manifested,
by a pretty and lucid experiment, was once showed me by my neighbor a Refiner,
who bought some Copper Plates to draw down his silver from Aquafortis wherein
'twas dissolved, but these Copper Plates would not wholly praecipitate the said
silver, but left ten pound thereof in thirty remaining unpraecipitated in the
water. The reason whereof was found to be, because the Copper for those plates
had been melted in a pot, wherein Brass before had suffered Fusion. The
Copper-smith, hereupon remelted the said plates in new pots, and with a strong
fire, burnt off (as they usually do) the flours of the Lapis Calaminaris, which
are volatile and fly about the workhouse, coloring the Clothes, hairs, and
Beards of the Workmen, as white as those of Meal-men, or Millers. Now when
these flours had been well separated, and the Copper Plates freed totally from
them, they drew down the silver wholly from the Aquafortis. Now in this
experiment the Lapis Calaminaris, imbibed part of the acidity from the
Copperas, and so the Plates being less corroded, and consequently too little
thereof received into the parting water, left room for the silver to remain,
and to be supported by the said water which is the reason of all
praecipitation, for the new advenient metal coming into the place of the
silver, forces it to descend upon the Boule and Plates in the form of a White
powder. But that this effect followed from the imbibition of the acidity from
the Aquafortis seems manifest, because Aqua-fortis-vineger, or it is Spirit, or
any other acid juice, poured thereon becomes more sweet, and heavy, as they do
with Coral, Crab's-eyes, (as they are falsely called) the shells of fishes or
Lapis Lyncis, and whiting wherewith and the water from the Copperplates
Verditer is made, likewise do. And hence it proceeded too that the water made
with these Plates, acquired the most singular Skycolour the said Refiner had
ever seen. And to this purpose I remember, that from Brass dissolved in common
Aquafortis, with an addition of Crab's-eyes, a most fair Sky color proceeded
thence.

Of all metalls Copper is the most pliable to the Hammer, drawing into wire,
gives malleability to silver and gold in coins, and is of no hard solution in
the fire, is soon corroded with any acid Spirits or Salts, and without great
difficulty is resolved into a powder with the fire. Five preparations or
reduction to powder our Author gives, First, a calcination of Copper, c. 14. of
Brass, c. 21. with Sulphur, then with Vitriol, c. 15. Thirdly, a simple
calcination of Brass by fire, c. 20. of scales of Brass, c. 24. Fourthly,
scales thrice calcined, c. 25, 28. Fifthly, the making of Vitriol of Venus, c.
31, 132, 133. All which are so well known to the meanest Chemists I shall need
to say little of them, especially having given so large an account, how the two
prime colors, Blew, and Green are thence ^educed. But above all these
preparations, that of Vitriol of Copper carries the pre-eminence, and next to
that being prepared the same way with it, the calcination with Sulphur, and
especially with Sulphur vivum in a clear and strong fire makes a better color
than any of the other calcinations mentioned by our Author. For though
Originally Brimstone and Copperas are made of the same Marcasite, and produce
Spirits undistinguishable each from other, yet Sulphur sooner and better
penetrateth into the body of the metal, being more vehemently driven in by the
most acute and sharp points of the flame, and so consequently divide more
subtly the smallest particles thereof. Besides the flame dissipateth and
carries off the Spirit of the Sulphur, which of it is own nature is apt to
blacken, and make all colors more dirty. For as it is well known Copperas with
gals or any other astringent vegetable make Ink, and the Black for dyers. But
if you list to try Vitriol, you must not use English Copperas made with Iron,
but that which is made with Copper, Because experience teaches the Refiners
that Aquafortis, made with it will carry 'its foulness through all their
mediate solutions even to the Verditer 'its self, which 'twill make infallibly
of a dirty Green color. Wherefore they make their Aquafortis of Dan^zick
Copperas only.

Whosoever then would extract a good color with Aquafortis (which way our
Author uses not though he does in making Crocus Martis) should make it with
Saltpeter and Alume instead of Vitriol as it is hereafter made for Calcidonies,
chap. 38. or with Hungarian or Roman Vitriol especially the last which makes
the strongest water, being most impregnated with Copper, and coming nearest to
Vitriol of Venus, for with these waters rise some small atoms of Copper (as
it is manifest by holding a knife over the fumes of such Aquafortis boiling)
which will color it of a perfect Copper color. And if you dissolve in this
Aquafortis the best Copper, and then precipitate it with speltar (which I have
sometimes done with the refiners double water impregnated with Copper) you
shall have a most excellent Blew, which may be of good use for the coloring of
Glass, for I doubt not but the strong fire of the furnaces will wholly
dissipate the speltar being of a Sulphurious nature, or convert it tr Glass,
for upon the dissolution thereof with Aquafortis it shoots into Green
Crystalls, however the Copper will remain to give it is tincture to the Glass,
and that this way of precipitation is much better then by drawing of the Spirit
with heat it is apparent by this, that the finer and purer parts of the Copper
rise with the water as in the experiment of the Knife, and by many others to be
met with in the writings of the Chemists. One experiment more I shall add to
extract the tincture from Copper. I took Copper calcined and Verdigreas of each
an ounce and filled two Glass bottles with the juice and leaves of garden
Scurvigrass, which abounds in volatile Salt, and closed these Glasses well, and
first for a month, set them in a Sellar, and afterward upon Leads in the Sun,
during the Summer months, then I strained the liquor per chartam emporeti eam,
and had from the former a fair Sky, from the latter a pure Sea Green. And this
I the rather relate, because I have not met with any experiment in this nature
with volatile Salts, and it is very probable that other plants full of the same
Salt, especially having some clammy juice in them, such as Onions, Garlic,
Leeks, and Molyes have, might show some rare effect upon Copper, for their
leaves have either a deep Green, or else a Green mixed with Blew. The whole
tribe of Acids also are dissolvents of Copper, and all sorts of fixed salts,
all which have acidity in them. And no doubt great variety might be met withal
in diversity of menstruums, and processes of extracting these tinctures.

Our Author c. 20. tells you Brass is made of Copper and Lapis Calaminaris, I
shall here deliver the process since I find it no where fully delivered, Lapis
Calaminaris is found in Sommersetshire, and the North of Wales, and though some
of it has been brought from Dantzick, yet it is not of the same goodness with
ours of England. This stone before used must have the following preparation. It
must be first calcined in a furnace like the Calcar with a small hole on one
side to put fire in, which may be either of Coal or Wood, but Wood is hest,
because it makes the greatest flame, and consequently the best reverberation.
The time of Calcination is about five hours, in which space they often rake it
about with a great Iron rake, It requires good judgment to calcine it well*
for when it is not sufficiently calcined 'twill not mix with the Copper, and
when too much, 'twill make it too brittle, and in both cases gives not the true
tincture to Copper. The sign of it*s just calcination is, when it is in a white
and very fine powder. Almost half of the Calamie (as the workmen call it) is
wasted and flies away in flour, which sticks to the mouth of the Furnace of
diverse colors of little use with them, though I could easily prove these
flours to be the true pompholix of the ancients, and to be used in the
ointment, that has it is denomination thence. It Is an excellent dryer, and
applied to Gleeting Nerves, and Tendons, without pain, it soon exiccateth them.
This powder I communicated to the eternal glory of our nation, and Anatomy, and
an excellent Chirurgian, and never to be by me forgotten the incomparable Dr.
Harvey, a man most curious in all natural things, who confessed he thought this
to be the said Pompholix, and with most happy success frequently used it. Now
when the Calamie is well calcind, they grind and serce it to a very fine
powder, and therewith mix well Gharcoal* finely ground to a powder, this
mixture they put into the bottom of a pot, and upon it a Copper-plate, to wit,
seven pound of this mixture, to five pound of Copper, which is their usual
proportion. These pots are made of Nonsuch-clay, which must be first calcined
if they make pots of it alone, but usually they grind their broken pots with an
equal quantity of the clay, and therewith make them, which being well wrought
and annealed, will commonly* last 12 or 14 days.

The furnace wherein they melt their Copper and Calamie is about six or seven
foot deep under ground, the earth being circularly raised by degrees from the
plain of the workhouse to the hole, whereby the materials and fire are put into
the furnace, which is the center of the raised earth, and in a perpendicular to
the bottom, and area of the furnace. The diameter whereof at the bottom is
three or four foot wide, growing gradually narrower and narrower in the form of
a cone to the said hole which contains a foot in diameter, wide enough to put
in and take out their pots and fire. This hole has an Iron cover with a small
hole in it, wherewith they regulate their fires. At the bottom of this furnace,
they have a long pipe or hollow place by which they blow their fire with
bellows. At first they make a very gentle fire, increasing it by degrees, till
they see the Copper melted down, and well mixed with the Calamie, which is
usually done in the space of twelve hours, for every twelve hours, they cast
their plates at five in the morning and evening; and then they take their pots
out of the furnace (which are usually eight or ten in number) with a long pair
of tongues, and set them in a hot place a little time till the metal grows a
little cooler, yet still melted, and then pour it out of all the pots together
into a mould of stone, which produces a plate of Brass three foot long, and a
foot and a half wide weighing betwixt 60 and 80 pound. The mould is made of two
stones which seem to me to be of that sort, which are called Calcarii, for they
have many small shining particles in them like Spars, which continue after long
use of these stones, whose color is thereby changed from a Gray to a reddish
Copper color, only the spots remaining. These stones have formerly been
brought from Holland, but have been sometimes since found in the mountanous
parts of Cornwall, and are as big as a reasonable gravestone, and of the same
figure. They must be annealed some hours before they cast their plates on them,
else the metal will fly, and besides endanger their breaking. They must have
many pair of them in readiness, because after three days casting they become
weary (as they call it) and must be new coated with coal and tallow. It Is to be
observed that the mixture of the Calamie and Coal, must be always put under the
Copperplates, for then the Calamie being raised by the mixed Charcoal and heat
of the furnace easily penetrateth and mixeth by little and little with the
Copper melted, and so both unite into one mass, making the compound called
Brass* whereas the Calamie would most of it fly away should it be put above the
Copper Plates* And though the interposition of the Copper hinder it is ascent,
yet much thereof flies away and sticks to the sides of the furnace, and
according to the diversity of the superior or inferior part of the furnace
where it is found and difference in figure and color receives various names, of
Capnitis, Botrytis, Placitis, Onychitis, Ostracitis, so called by Plin. l. 34.
c. 10. All which contain some Copper in them easily discoverable by the
affusion of Aquafortis on them or by long lying exposed to the open air, nay,
you shall see in them sometimes a Greenish Bluish color, when they are taken
out of the furnace. The increase of weight by the Calamie is from 38 to 40
pound in the hundred, so that 60 pound of Copper makes with Calamie 100 pound
of Brass. Observe also that the fire must not be too strong, or must the pots
continue too long in the furnace after fusion of the Copper lest the Calamie
fly away, and that the coals lying at the bottom of the pot, and which were
mixed with the Calamie are not totally turned to ashes, but oftentimes come out
untouched, and unaltered, though the pots have continued red hot for many hours
together, which is needful because Copper with the Calamie require longer time
to be melted then Copper alone does. As to the easy parting of the Calamie
from the metal, we shall to what has been formerly said, add this, that when
they draw this Brass into Wire, at each new drawing they must anneal it else
'twill hreak, and yet they must not heat it to above a Cherry red, for if they
do they burn of the Calamie to their great loss, which is easily done in Brass
drawn into small threads.

Chap. 16, DEliver several ways of 17, 18, 19. making Crocus Martis, all which
and many more are delivered by Chemical Authors. They may be reduced to these
heads, 1. A simple reverberation without admixture, and such I have seen made
of Iron Bars wherewith some furnaces are supported and built, and the best, and
deepest color I ever saw was made this way in a furnace wherein Aquafortis
was constantly distilled the whole bars turning by little and little into this
Crocus, and was brushed off in a considerable quantity. The second way is a
calcination or reverberation with Brimstone, Salt, Urine, Vinegar. Thirdly, by
solution in Aquafortis; Aqua-regis, Spirit of Salt and Nitre, and then by
exhaling the waters you shall have a very Red powder. The solution of Iron in
Spirit of Vitriol, or of Sulphur make the Vitriolum Martis, not much differing
from our English Copperas in goodness but only in strength, either as to
dying, or Medicines, which being calcined makes a Colcothat, not unlike that of
common Vitriol, which though it may serve Painters for a deceitful color, yet
'twill not serve the Glass-furnaces, for all Colcothar contains in it much
terristriety which would make the Glass foul and obscure, this seems to be the
reason, why our Author uses not Vitriol here, as he does before with Copper.

I shall say no more concerning the tincture of Mars, but that whatsoever of
Acid or biting juyces work upon Copper, the same have also their effect upon
it. And though all the ways produce a red, yet some of those reds are lighter
and more transparent, than others, and so may serve for several colors, and
various admixtures with other Metalline colors, to advance or moderate them,
for Crocus Martis made with Vinegar complies with Greens, Chap. 32, 34, 35. and
in the Emerald color of Glass of Lead, chap. 65. and for the same color in
pasts it is used indifferently with Verdigreas, chap. 77, 78, 79. and in Blacks,
chap. 101. but for a fair Red, Crocus Martis made with Sulphur, chap. 128. but
for more fair colors Crocus Martis made with Aquafortis, chap. 43. But so as
the best color from Brass is of Vitriol of Venus the primest and lightest
color from Iron or Steel, is that which is made with Aqua-regis, which
proceeds partly from the mixture of sal Ammoniac, and partly from a finer
solution of it.

And thus having past over the prime materials, and preparations for colors in
Glass, the rest of the work consisting principally in the due mixture of the
said colors with the circumstances, which our Author has fully done, we shall
be very brief in what follows, and shall only deliver* here one pr^^aration
come to my knowledge, whilst a secret of great value, but now commonly enough
known to the furnaces, and it is this. Take of Antimony and Saltpeter well
ground and mixed, of each twelve pound, together with 200 weight of the common
materials for glass wherewith this mixture of Antionomy and Peter must be also
well united, and then calcined in the calcar and made into a Frit, or which is
all one make Regulus of Antimony with Crude Antimony and Peter, the manner
every Chemist knows, which being mixed with the metal afford a very white
Enamel, and serves with other mixtures for various colors.

Chap. 29. POrt. l. 6. c. 5. To color the Blew Gemm which the common people
call Aqua-marina (and our Jewellers Egmarine) a kind of Sapphire. Beat burnt
Brass into a most fine and impalpable powder, otherwise a courser gemm will be
made thereof, and let it be mixed with Glass. The quantity cannot be
determined, for they are made deeper or lighter, for one pound of metal one
dram of burnt Brass will suffice.

Chap. 32. FOr the Emerald color Porta, l. 6. c. 5. thus, When you have
colored that Egmarine you shall easily turn it to an Emerald, by adding half
Crocus Martis to the calcined Brass, to wit, if at first we put in a fourth
part of Brass, we now add an eighth part of Crocus, and as much calcined Brass.
Observe that they boil together six hours after the colors are put in the
stuff, that the jewels may grow clear which became cloudy by putting in the
colors. Brass is heavy, and when it is mixed with the metal, every moment
'twill sink to the bottom of the pot, and make the gemm more dilute, wherefore
you must very often stir it. Let the fire decrease by little and little till
the furnace grow cold, let the pots be taken out of the furnace, and being
broken they afford you counterfeit jewels.

Observations on the Author.
ROsichiero, whereof thus, Port lib. 6. cap. 9. But the more skilful and modern
Glass-men in coloring Enamels of a clear Rose-colour (the common people call
it Rosachiero) take not a little pains, seeing our Ancestors made it
Artificially and beautifully.

Chap. 37. OUr Author advises you to make your Aquafortis, etc. your self;
and good reason for it, for one pound of common Aquafortis upon my reiterated
experience shall yield but four ounces of good Spirit, the other 12 ounces will
be phlegm of Vitriol. This addition of white Arsnick in the making of
Aquafortis, I find in the Lady Isabella Cortese printed at Venice in Italian
18 years before the publication of this work. Many are the compositions of this
water, but Nitre is the principal operative ingredient in them all. Most make
it of Vitriol, some of English Copperas which serves for common uses, and for
Bow-dies (though made of Dantzick Copperas would be better for that use) for
this the refiners use finding a dirtiness from our English, some add alum
instead of Vitriol, but that yields at best but a weak phlegm, Others have made
essays with Sal gemm, but they found that this Salt affords no Spirit, but
sticking to the neck of the retort, hinders the passage of the Spirits and
breaks the vessels. When the red fumes are past all the Spirits of Nitre are
raised, and then the fire is to be extinguished, for after follows only the
Spirit of Vitriol, which hinders the operation of the Spirit of Nitre toward
the solution of metals. I have often seen singular good parting water drawn by
the refiners twice in 24 hours, in which time, with their fire, not much of the
Spirit of Vitriol could arise, which requires commonly three days with the
strongest fire can be made for the two last days to draw off both the Spirit,
and ponderous oil from it, though the volatility of the Nitre in Aquafortis
may help to raise them. One thing our Author omitteth though very necessary to
be done before the Aquafortis be used, practiced constantly by the refiners,
else their waters will be foul, the manner is thus, as you have it in Beg.
Tyrocin. Chym. c. 3. Take of the distilled water and put into it a penny weight
of refined silver, and dissolve it upon coals, then pour this silver water into
three parts more of the unfined Aquafortis which will become of a milky
color, then they let it settle, and decant off the clear, this settling the
refiners call the fixes, and cast it into a tub of water of 20 gallons, all
which it will in a moment turn to a milk color. I know a refiner who
destilleth his Aquafortis out of an Iron pot, which he finds to make a
stronger water, besides the great charge in pots and fire saved, you may see
the way in the commentator on Beguin.

Chap. 40. YOu need not charge your Aqua-Regis with so much Sal Ammoniac as it
will dissolve, one ounce and a half to a pint is sufficient. I wonder at
Beguins way of making this water, who distills the Saltpeter and Sal Ammoniac
together, but experience has taught me that half the quantity of Aqua-Regis,
wherein Sal Ammoniac has been dissolved, will do as much as near double the
quantity of that wherein it has been distilled, Aqua-Regis only blacks
silver, but 'twill slowly dissolve very thin plates of Copper and Tin, as
Aquafortis will corrode Leaf-Gold. But if you draw off the water when it has
dissolved Gold, then 'twill fall upon Silver or other metalls.

Chap. 42. THe ways of making Calcidonies, Jaspers and Agats seems to be the
same with making marbled paper described exactly by Kirch. l. 10. de luce and
umbra par. 2. c. 4. and transcribed by Schott. par. 1. l. 5. Chrom. 9. the way
whereof is, that several colors are dissolved in several liquours proper to
dissolve them, and are such as will not readily or not all mix one with
another, when put into water, before they are cast upon the Paper to receive
this variety of colors. And so in like manner variety of materials being mixed
together, and such as will not incorporate each with other, must needs give
various and distinct colors to the metal. Many experiments might be given of
tinged liquours, that put into the same Glass, would keep their distinct
stations and colors, nay though the liquours were agitated and confounded,
they would each return to their proper place and stations. In the preparation
of these Calcidonies, I shall observe first, that all the coloring materials,
though not all their preparations are used in each of the three ways, viz.
Zaffer, Manganese, Silver, Steel, Smalts and Lead. Secondly, the greater
variety of ingredients, makes the better Calcidony, for the first is more
simple than the second, and the second than the third, and our Author commends
the last before the second, and that before the first. Thirdly, that some
ingredients there are in each of them which contribute no color at all to the
metal, such are Tartar, Soot, Sal Ammoniac, Mercury. Fourthly, that some of
them are of an unctuous nature, as Lead, Soor, Tartar and Smalts, which may
hinder the union of the materials one with another, which appears by this, that
they do part one from another, and therefore the metal being taken when it
begins to grow cold, will then show some waves, and diverse colors very fair,
chap. 42. A great deal of Art there is in working the metal at a due heat, and
in the manner also, and in this latter much of Art lies as it does also in
marbling Paper.

Porta teaches how to color Glass with various colors, this he found out by
chance, when he was making other trials. Calcined Tin takes away the
perspicuous color of Glass and variously colors it, for when it is sprinkled
by turns on Glasses polished with the wheel, and exposed to a kindled fire, it
colors them variously and renders them darker, for one part becomes stone, the
other is variously colored that 'twill seem an Opal. But you must often take
them out of the fire, and sit them till you have your wish.

Here and in many other places our Author tells you that Glass may be wrought
into any shape. I shall for the Readers delight set down the most curious I
have met with. Card. l. 10. c. 52. de vari^tate saw a Cart with two Oxen which
was covered with the wing of a Fly, Agric. l. 12. de re Metal, saw at Moran
living Creatures, Trees and Ships, and many other famous and admirable works.
Master Howel, page 39. saw a complete Galley, with all her Masts, Sails,
Cables, Tackling, Prore, Poop, Fore-castle, Anchors, with her long Boat, all
made out in Crystal Glass, as also a man in armor. Worm. had in Musaeo, little
statues of Glass, both of men, and other things. The most beautiful Church of
Saint Mark at Venice, adorned within with Mosaic work, representing several
holy histories with fit colors, and covered in some places with Gold.

Chap. 48. POrt. l. 6. c. 5. makes this Amethist color with a Dram of
Manganese to each pound of Metal.

Chap. 49. POrta for the Saphyre, adds two Drachms of Zaphar to a pound of
metal, and the longer (says he) they continue in the fire, the brighter the
color will be, you must continually mix them.

Chap. 58. DEep Reed in the original, rosso in corpo, whereof thus, Imper. l.
4. c. 1. haver corpo dicon^ quelli colori che coprono e sono senz^
transparenza, non havere corpo dicono quelli c' hanno trasparenza. The Painters
say those colors have body which are close, and without transparency, and
those not to have body which have transparency.

Chap. 61. GLass of Lead, it is a thing unpractised by our Furnaces, and the
reason is, because of the exceeding brittleness thereof. The whole Art of
calcining Lead, to glase their ware withal being the principal thing wherewith
that glasing is made, is sufficiently known and practiced daily by the Potters.
And could this Glass be made as tough as that of Crystalline 'twould far
surpass it in the glory and beauty of it is colors, of which no man can be
ignorant, that has had any experience of this Metal. That experiment of
Kircher easily to be tried and with inconsiderable charge will evince this,
thus he, l. 1. de luce and umbr. par. 3. c. 5. If you heat with live coats
Quicksilver congealed with the vapor of Lead in a Brass-spoon, there will soon
appear to you in the melted stuff so great variety of colors, that no greater
can be conceived in the world, insomuch that none of those which are called
apparent colors may be compared with them; I remember that trying the
reduction of Lead from Ceruss, by setting it over the fire, had by putting an
Iron sharp pointed into it a considerable quantity of a most brittle matter,
not transparent, but adorned with most beautiful colors of Blew, Green and
Yellow, though the later overruled both the former, and some grains of Lead. I
also cast some Brimstone into melted Lead which became of the fairest sky
color that ever I saw, with the intermixture of other colors with the Blew,
and those colors not fading but now continuing for these 12 years past, Libav.
de transmut. met. l. 7. c. 20. says, that the melters, and tryers of metals
daily change Lead into Glass, and that this Glass is Black, Red, Yellow, or
otherwise colored, as the calcined Lead is handled, or as Lead is calcined
into Lytharge, Ceruss or Minium. Quercet, in Hermet. med. defens. cap. 9.
affirms he saw with his own eyes, a Ring made of Glass of Lead, which infused
in wine a night was a perpetual Purgative, The like variety may be observed
from Bismutum or Tin glass as Libar. Syntag. Arcan. l. 6. c. 4.

Lead returning into it is body, breaks out the bottom of the pots. Lead can
hardly be so well calcined, but some particles thereof will remain uncalcind,
which the heat of the furnace reduces to Lead again, the same was said of
Ceruss before, and the like you shall find in Minium, the highest calcination
used thereof. Now the cause why it breaks out the bottom of the pots seems to
be, that receiving there a new calcination, and closing with it is unctuosity,
and body the pores of the pots, it hinders the passages of the fire into the
metal, which impeded, converts all it is force upon the clay, whereof the pots
are made, and by farther calcining it must necessrily make holes in them; Now
that Lead does sink into, and not as other metals continue melted on the
surface of the pots it is manifest by the refiners tests, and Goldsmiths
coples, which show by their color and weight, what body they have received
into them, and by their remelting and reduction of the Lead. It Is true the
tests do imbibe some Silver, and therefore they remelt them in the great heat
of the Almond Furnaces, and no doubt the same happens to the coples, though the
Essay Masters of the Tower strongly assert the contrary against the importers
of Bullion, But the Essay Masters at Gold-smiths-hall do gain Silver from these
coples by melting them down. But in this case some minute parts of Silver only
get into the tests and coples by the mediation of the Lead alone, since Lead is
used in both refining and Essays. But Silver alone nor other metal will at all
sink into the test. Another reason of this Accident, may be that the Lead
insinuating it is self into the pores of the pots, and continued there in
fusion, will by getting farther and father by it is weight into the bottom of
the pot at last run out and then leave holes for the metal to follow.

Our Author mentions not a Jacinth from Glass of Lead, nor Glass of Tin, nor of
Copper. Bapt. Port. supplies you with the first, l. 6. c. 7. in these words, To
make a very Jacinth, and not much differing from the true one. Put Lead in
earthen pots that are very hard in a Glass Furnace, and there let it stand some
days, and thus your Lead is turned into Glass, and imitates the color of the
Jacinth. and of the second Ib. c. 9. Melt a pound of Tin in an earthen pot that
will bear the fire, let it stand in the Glass furnace three or four days, then
take out it, and break the vessel, and on the surface you shall find a Glass of
a muddy Saffron color, and if it stand longer in the fire 'twill become more
perfect. Neither know we any more perfect in this kind of many we have tried.
But you must put it into the pot well powdered, wherein you must use not only
Mortars and Mills, but the Porphyrie-stone, if you would have it lighter,
dilute it by adding Glass. Another way reserved for his friends is this, let
there be nine parts of calcined Tin, seven of Lead, two of Cinnaber, of
Ferretto of Spain, and of Tartar one part and a half, of Lap. Haematitis or
Boodstone, one part, Red-ochre a quarter, do as thou know. His Glass from
Copper, l. 6. c. 7. is this, Dissolve Silver in a strong Aquafortis, then cast
it into the water* Copper Plates, to which the Silver will stick, which gather
and dry, then set it in the Glass furnace, and 'twill be turned into an Emerald
in few days. I commit to you the trial of other metals, it is enough for me to
have searched out and showed the way.

Chap. 72. BLew Smalts for Painters. I cannot find the composition hereof in
any writer, but I have been informed by an honest workman in Glass, that it is
made of Zaffer, and Potashes calcin^d together in a furnace, made like that
for Glass, and that he wrought it in Germany. But of this, and all other
natural and artificial color in a treatise designed on this subject.

Gold hinders the rising of the Metal. And so does a little Oil, or Tallow,
thrown into a Copper of boiling Sugar, hinder it is running over into the fire,
though it rise with the greatest fury.

Chap. 74. THis way of coloring Crystal, teaches the true and natural way,
whereby Opals, Agats, Jaspers, Chrysolites, Cats-eyes, Marble, etc. Receive
their variety of colors, they have in themselves, to wit, from exhalations of
Minerals, supervening to the praeexistent substance of the stone, as here the
colors of Orpiment, etc. raised and driven by the heat, penetrate the body of
the Crystal, and give it this variety of color. Now if the matter of the
stone being first in liquid form, and therefore capable to receive a tincture,
have for it is matrix or womb such a place, whence simple exhations proceed, the
color is single and unmixt, but if manifold, then the tincture of the stones
becomes correspondent to the diversity of the colors arising therefrom. And
this appears to be true, by what is frequently observed in larger transparent
stones, part whereof will be colored with their natural color, and part void
of all color, but simply transparent like Ice. So that the whole stone may
well be resembled to frozen water, to that part whereof which was first frozen
an accession of color was made, and none to the other part. Which may be seen
more frequently in Amethists than in other gems, though many other Jewels
afford the like, some having in some part a color, and some others wholly
without any, or else the several parts tinged with diversity of colors.

Chap. 75. THe knowledge to imitate Emeralds, etc. There Is nothing of value,
but some way has been found to Sophisticate it. And since the counterfeiting
of Jewels with exactness, would bring more profit to the inventer, than any
other adulteration whatsoever, and perhaps with no real loss to mankind, but
great advance, as some Chemists affirm, and therefore not punishable by any law
I know of unless in the Gold smith who will warrant the counterfeit for true,
it is no wonder that many means have been to this end and purpose used by pasts,
doublets and foils, or coloring the bottom of them, and various other
compositions, and artifices, whereof this of our Author seems the most genuine
and natural. Of the fraud in Doublets, Ferant. Imper. l. 20. c. 14. gives this
relation. A jeweller of Milan sold an Emerald doublet for 9000 Ducats, and the
fraud was a long time conceald.

The Chemists have invented a peculiar though barbarous name for these pasts,
and no where extant but amongst themselves. They call them Amausa, so Libav.
Joan Isaac, but Clauber. Amausae, which, whether derived from Musaicum (not
Mosaicum as Vossius in his Glossary, proves at large) I determine not, though
this Etymon be very probable, For Mosaic work was made in this manner as
Hermol. Barbarus, describes it. Musivum opus quod vulgo Museacum vocant,
tessulatum lapillis variorum colorum, ex queis art compositis and coagmentatis
omne genus imaginum redditur. Mosaic work they call that which was checkered
with stones of diverse colors, with which composed and joined by art, all kinds
of resemblances are made. These works were anciently made, with small pieces of
various Marbles of several colors formed in the shapes of Animals, and
sometimes enchac'd with Gold, as appears by Plin. l. 36. c. 1. Senec. Epist.
86. Plilander in l. 7. c. 1. Vitruvii mentions the relics of some pavements
seen by him, wherein Checkered Marbles no bigger than small Beans did
accurately and expressly imitate in various colors, the effigies of Fishes and
other things. But the use of colored Glass succeeded the use of Marbles, and
other stones. Libav. in his Syntagm. says, the Saracenical Authors call them
terra Saracenica, but he confounds these Enamels and Pasts one with the other.
It Is true these two are very near of kin, but are distinguishable by this, that
Pasts are made of Crystal, prepared and mixed with some Glass, and so wrought
into a transparencie, but Enamels have the basis from calcined lead and tin,
which gives them opacity, corp^reity and solidity, by reason of the great
quantity thereof mixed with the ingredients. Glauber thinks Furn. Philosop. l.
4. Pasts were found out by chance by those who reducing calcined bodies with a
strong fire, converted them into Glass, and adds out of Isaac Hollandus, that
metalls vitrified and reduced yield better and more noble Metalls than those
which were first vitrified, to wit, Gold a tincture, silver gold, and copper
silver, etc. he says, noble Glasses might be made of Metalls, could Chrysibles
be made strong enough to hold them; what he says in many words, concerning the
preparation of Crystal casting into molds and colors, contains nothing but
what is vulgar.

Chap. 76. HArtm. in praxi Chym. has this peculiar way of preparing Crystal
for making of Jewels. Dissolve, says he, in water two ounces of purified salt
of Tartar, which moisten with Beechenashes, make thereof balls as big as
apples; Dry and burn them in a potters furnace in a covered pot, for so the
balls will somewhat melt, and stick one to another, let them then be finely
pounded and a Lee made thereof, which congele to a Salt. And in this Lee let
the Crystalls be so often, and so long extinguished, till you can rub them to
powder, betwixt your fingers. This being done, let some of the remaining salt
be so often purified by solution, coagulation, and calcination, till no feces
at all appear in the solution. Take then of purified salt of Tartar two parts,
of the foregoing salt prepared, part one, melt them together. This will receive
all the colors of the whole world, and appears like Oriental gems. Chemical
Authors generally prepare Crystal this way, only some extinguish it in
Vinegar instead of fair water, you may easily know the best way, by the
discourse concerning the Glass drops, which is to follow, and doubtless the
best way, were to extinguish it often in a strong Lee.

The making of these Pasts differs nothing from that of Glass, but that Pasts
are made of Crystal prepared, as the other of Crystal metal, the colors in
both are the same. And therefore Porta calls his Glass tinged with colors, by
the names of Amethist, Ruby, etc. Trial would be made with our English
Diamonds, which are harder and purer than Crystal.

Chap. 77. Boeth. de Boodt, an excellent writer upon stones, writes thus of
adulterating the Emerald, This may be done several ways. The best is with
Crystal, Glass and Flints calcined, and melted, if a little quantity of Minium
be added to them. So I have made good ones. He subjoyns, the making of them
with burnt Brass, half the weight of Crocus Martis, boil them six hours, and
let the pot cool of it is self. If they be well made they will be wholly like
those that come from America. Garcias ab Horto affirms them to be made fair
colored and very large in Balaguate and Bisnager of larger fragments of glass
pots, Dal^champ, thinks some green Jasper is to be added to them. Birelli, l.
8. c. 9, 10, etc. gives you the same composition with our Author, where you
have many more. Another of Minium and Copper-scales, c. 5. like our Authors, c.
78. Hartm gives several ways, the first obscure, and unintelligible with Anima
Lunae, and Solis, and Crystal, with a little Sal Ammoniac fixed with lime; a
second with Minium four ounces, Crystal prepared one ounce, gold two drachms;
the third with Brass calcined and powdered fine, mixed with a double weight of
Sand for Glass, and standing four days in a very strong fire, and half a day
more in a stronger fire. A fourth with his prepared Crystal mixed with a little
Copper, fill herewith a pot half full, set them at a gentle fire four or five
hours, then run them in a strong fire, then take away the fire, and break the
pot, you shall find the stuff covered with the spume of Lead, which break, and
a fair Emerald will appear, which he caused to be broke into pieces, and to be
cut to his liking. This succeeds not always well, for a serene air is
necessary. Therefore he prepared it in a forefold quantity, in four several
pots, and so with one labor had four distinct colors one higher than another.
For the first he took of Copper a scruple, for the second two scruples, for the
third one dram, for the fourth a dram and a half, and nothing else, for
otherwise they will not be transparent. The same is to be done with Jacinth and
Topaz, with Crocus Martis, and with the Saphyre with Zaffer.

But in this composition Mars is wanting to give life and luster to his Venus.
Card*de var. l. x. c. 52. makes this color of stones taken out of the river
calcined to whitness, and then mixed and melted with an equal quantity of
Minium in a Chrysible, and this must be twice done to effect this color, but
this way is wholly insignificant.

Isaac affirms of calcined Copperas and the rest of the Calces, that if they be
ground with salted water, and then washed with fair water, both warm, they will
have a far better effect than without these washings, becoming thereby more
perfect and fusible.

Seneca Epist. 91. writes that Democritus invented a way to turn stones into
Emerald. And Plin. l. 37. c. 12. says, that ways are extant in the writings of
the Authors, by what means Emeralds may be colored from Crystalls, as also
other precious stones, and perhaps differs not from the artifice delivered, l.
36. c. 26. de Vitro obsidiano and Myrrhino of many colors.

Chap. 81. BApt. Porta thus adulterates the Topas. He mixeth to every pound of
Metal a quarter of an ounce of Crocus Martis, and a little Minium, and that it
may more neatly shine, adds to each pound three ounces of Minium, but puts in
the Minium after the Crocus. Boodt transcribes this, and adds this also of our
Author, and then this following, powder aes ustum, native Cinnaber and
Crystal, and four times as much of Calcined Tin, set them a day in a fire not
too strong, but kept in the same degree, for the said powder easily melts.
Birelli proceeds this last way, only changes Cinnaber into Minium, and in the
very same words, so that Boodt had this from him, as the former from Porta.
Hartm. and Libav. with three ounces of Ceruss, and Crystal prepared half an
ounce. The Author of quadrig. Chym. makes Salt of Tin to be the Topaz.

Chap. 82. POrta thus imitates the Chrysolite, when you have made a Topas, add
a little Brass, that it may become more Green, for these two only differ in
this, that the Chrysolite shines more neatly, Claveus saw silver calcined two
months in a Glass furnace, the twelfth part whereof became a Citrin Glass.

Chap. 85. ASaphyre. Glauber makes this color with Silver Marcasite dissolved
in Aqua-regis, and precipitated with his liquour from Flints.

Chap. 90. A Wonderful Red from Gold. The Chemists with their menstruums
promise from Gold, a Gold colored tincture, but I have heard an able Chemist
offer, not an unconsiderable wager, that he would reduce the full quantity of
the Gold within few grains (which sure must be lost in the process) when
another eminent person of the same profession, had extracted the fullest
promised Yellow tincture from it. But the condition was not accepted of. Sure I
am that Gold dissolved in Aqua-regis, and dropped upon the skin will color it
with a deep purple color, lasting some days, and this solution poured on a
great quantity of water will give it the very same tincture; Glauber gives it a
fair Saphyre color, being precipitated with a liquour from Flints. The
tincture of silver is not a sky color, but white, and for it you have also
the undeniable Authority of Master Boil in his Physiological Essays, page 60.
and therefore as I have said before, the blew must proceed from some Copper
mixed with it.

Granats of Bohemia. Boeth de Boodt affirms that these Granats from Bohemia
keep their color in the fire, but almost all others not, and therefore seem
the best for this use, but yet the heat of the Glass furnace consumes it,
though it may persist in an ordinary fire.

Chap. 91. TAke Ceruss. Our Author delivers two ways of making Saccharum
Saturni, the one here of Ceruss, the other of Lytharge, Chap. 123. only in
this he calcines the Saccharum, and out of it calcined remakes a new Saccharum.
The Chemists commonly take Minium, some only calcined Lead, all returns to the
same purpose, but it is observed that Minium yields a greater quantity of Salt,
and good reason, for that has had more calcination than any of the other. All
make use of distilled vinegar alone, but Beguin he substitutes in it is place
Phlegm of distilled vinegar, but the commentator well passes a deleatur upon
it, Two things I shall here set down, the one that it is much better and less
chargeable by far, to pour distilled Vinegar on new Minium at each time, and not
on that you have used before, for the cheapness of the Minium, and the goodness
and quantity of the Saccharum drawn the first time from the Minium, besides the
saving a great deal of Vinegar, this way will advantage the operator much in
point of profit. A second thing here to be inserted is a new way, I have not
met with in any Chemical writer, but invented for my own use, which does
readily and in a moment make it, and I am sure it is rather better than worse
than the ordinary for Chirurgical uses in which I employ it. The manner of
making it is this, Take very thin plates of lead, or rather that which has
been long in Glass Windows, and dissolve it in Aquafortis (good water near
dissolves as much as it is own weight) and the dissolved Lead will soon become a
Saccharum in the bottom of the Glass. I have in half an hour made a
considerable quantity this way in a small glass set in sand, and at no great
heat, or in a fire shovel over the fire, or in ashes. And certainly this
process as more speedy so less expensive, but what this medicine will effect in
glass I cannot say.

Chap. 93. THis sixth Book treats of Enamels, which seem to be so named,
because it is used in annulis in rings, or from the Duch word Emailleren or the
French Esmailler which comes a maille macula a spot as Minsheu, for so it is
laid on. In Latin Encauston (that is burnt in, a (...) to burn) for so the
Lexicographers render Eucauston Enamel, Encaustice, the art of Enamelling,
Encaustes an Enameler. But the Encaustum of the Ancients whereof Vitruv. l. 7.
c. 9. Plin. l. 35. c. XI. Mart. l. 1. etc. make mention, was a thing quite
different from our Enamelling. Concerning which, and the three kinds thereof,
see at large Salmas. in Solin. who truly concludes his discourse, that all this
Art is lost. Porta makes a Latin word, of the Italian Smalto, calling them
Smalti and Libav. Smalta.

Chap. 94. WHite Enamel, a new way with Regulus Antimonii, you had before,
Libav. and Porta make it of Calcined Lead one part, of calcined Tin two parts,
and Glass the double.

Chap. 95. A Turcois, by Porta with Zaffar alone.

Chap. 97. FOr a Green Porta takes ae^ ustum which the common people (says he)
call raminella, and by our Author ramin^, Chap. 24. for a deeper color, and
for a lighter, the Scales which fall from the hammers, when the Brass is
hammered Red hot.

Chap. 100. BLack made by Libav. and Porta with the Purple and Blew colors,
meaning thereby Manganese and Zaffer, and is the same with our Authors, the
doses in all of them the same.

Chap. 103. A Red by Libav. with Crocus Martis.

Chap. 108. A Lee of Barillia and Lime. Much care is to be had of the
Menstruum, this of Lime and Barillia are the best, though pot ashes with Alum,
do very well also. I know an Ingenu^as gentleman, who this way has made all
his colors for plants, which he has drawn to the life in a large volumne of
the most beautiful flours of all sorts in their proper and genuine color. The
virtue of pot ashes (which the dyers call ware) is seen in their working of
Indico and Woad, neither of which without these ashes will yield their
tincture; for the lightest colors use only a solution of Alum for stronger
Salts destroy their colors, as in dying Soap ashes, mars the Yellow of Weed or
Fustick, and in Chap. 4. Tartar will not make Yellow in Glass.

Chap. 110. WHatsoever herb, or flower. The trial of our Author is good, but
stayning of linen is a better sign. The rule given by the Merchant to the
Mariners in their instructions for foreign voyages, is to chaw the plant, and if
that color tinge the spittle deep it is good, otherwise not, and so with linen
or fine white paper.

I shall here give you a catalogue of many plants, etc. which give a color,
and consequently are fit to make Lakes of, and first those of the dyers, as
Log-wood, three sorts of Fusticks for Yellows, Green, old and young. Campegiana
and Sylvester, which are two sorts of grains or small berries brought from the
West Indies, they make a grain color, though not so good as Cochine^l, yet
they are used instead thereof. Red-wood, Symach, Brasiletto, or Sweet-wood,
Turmerick, Safflower, that is, Saffron-flower, but not that of the Crocus, but
of the Carthamus brought from Italy, Anotto made of the Fucus Marinus
Tinctorius, stale and grease, which yields a fair Scarlet. Weed, that is,
Genista Tinctoria, for a Yellow color.

Others not used in dying are Saffron, Phalangium Tradescanti, a very deep and
fair Blew. Cyanus an excellent Sky for Dyers. Alga marina Tinctoria distinct
from the former Fucus, both mentioned by Joan. Bauhin. Harebels, our Purple
Colchicum. A triplex Baccifera a deep Red, Heliotropium in whose juice rags
insuccated make Turnsole. Blattaria with a Blew, and also with a Yellow flower,
and the Convolvulus narrow leafed of America; some plants have a colored
juice, as the Spurges, Sow-thistles, Dandelion, Tragopogon, Periplocas,
Rampions, Lettices, etc. most whereof dried in the Sun turn Yellowish (which
makes me suppose Camboja may be the juice of some Spurge.) But Saint John's and
Saint Peter's Wort, and Tutsan have a reddish juice in their tops. Celandine the
greater, and Felfel Alpini give a Yellowish juice. The Berries of many plants,
also affords colors, as Dwale garden; Nightshade, the Bryonies, Ruscus,
Solomon's Seal, Herb Christopher, Rasberries, Great-bearing-Cherries, Spina
Cervina, the Painters Sap-green, Wall-nuts, Bezetta, Seu Torna solis Bezedini
of Wormius in his Musaeum, l. 2. c. 34. who thus describes it. It Is a fine
linen cloth impregnated with a most Red and Elegant Tincture, But how it is
prepared, and what is the way of making it, the doner of it Christopher Herfurt
the Apothecary of King Christian the fifth knew not. It seems to be the
tincture of Red-sanders, wherewith the Cloth is colored. They use it as
Turnsole to color the body and dishes of meat Red: But this is far neater than
that, sit for Cosmeticks, having this peculiar that steept in water it
communicates it is color thereunto, scarcely to wine, but in no wise to Spirit
of Wine, so far he. I have seen this tincture, but made with Cotton-wool, and
it is used for a Fucus, and common enough with us, and without doubt a singular
good Lake might be made therewith. Amaranthi, ba^laustia the seed of
Heliotropium tricoccum that at first rubbing gives a Green, then a Blew, and
lastly a Purple as Libav. fragments of the Alaternus as Clus give a Black*
Succory flowers, the flowers of the Scarlet Bean, of the Indian Scabious, the
Golden Marigold of Crete, Cerinthe and Indian water Cresses, and many other
whereof (Godwilling) at large hereafter, especially since no Herbarist has
taken notice of the tincture of Plants, nor put them in any tribe, which are of
very great use in many Trades, and some of those beforementioned, have been
brought into use by Tradesmen; Leaves that color, are stramonium Arbor
tinctoria of Virginie whose leaves ru^'d on the hands, gives the deepest Green
I have seen from any Vegetable, Leaves of Acanthus or Bears-breech. The true
Tobacco-leaves, the flowers of Nigella Hispanica, which though Blew, being
rubbed on the hand, paper or linen, give a fair Greencolour.

This way of extracting colors by distillation is now well known and
practiced, for all the Spirits Chymically drawn, rise white, and they are
colored either by infusion of materials that have tinctures in them, as in the
Pharmac. Land. the compound Spirit of Lavender, and compound Poppy-water, and
Aq. Mariae, etc. and most Pharmacopaeas, and Chemists teach this way of our
Author.

But the extraction of the Spirit of the wine thus tinctured will render the
color dead, and worthless, unless you draw but a little of it, and with no
stronger a heat, than that of B. M. for too much heat turns all the colors of
Vegetables Black, Nay, Lapis Lazuli a hard stone, by too great a heat loses
it is color.

Chap. III. THis preparation I made, and had a dirty Blew therefrom which would
do no feat in Pottery. Our Author calls this Blew of Germany, and so does
Birelli, l. XI. c. 106. only Birelli uses Brimstone, and takes but four parts
of Sal Ammoniac, you may see many other of this nature there.

Chap. 112. TO restore the decai'd color of Turscoises. I doubt and have been
told this will not succeed, yet may be much better than those of Isab. Cortes,
l. 3. c. 53. She rubs the stones with Ultramarine that has stood a day in
Aquafortis, which being evaporated and dried, the powder may be used.
Secondly, She infuseth them in Aquafortis, made of Vitriol and Brass, then in
Vinegar, and last of all in water, and each of them some time. Chap. 113. A
Mixture to make Spears. Many compositions I find in Authors, and because they
are of singular use in the Optics, and nothing published thereof in our own
language, I shall here give you such as I have met with. Those Spears or
Glasses are called Metalline, not because they are made of metal, but because
some Metalline bodies are mixed with them, and they do as to weight, and
appearance much resemble them. Porta. Mag. l. 17. c. 23. thus prepares the
mixture for them. Take a new pot that will bear the fire, luted within, dry it
twice or thrice, melt therein of Tartar and Crystalline Arsnick of each two
pound, when you see them smoke, put in fifty pound of old Worn-brass, melt them
six or seven times, that they may be purified and refined, then presently add
twenty five pound of English Tin, and melt them all together. Take a little
hereof with an Iron out of the pot, and try whether it be britle or hard, if
britle add Brass, if hard, Tin, or else boil it till some of the Tin fly away,
when it has the desired temper, cast upon it two ounces of Borax, and let it
alone till the fume be gone, Then cast it into a mold and let it cool, when
cold rub it with a Pumice, then with Emerie, when you see the superficies
smooth and polished, rub it with Tripoly, and lastly with fit Tin give it light
and luster. Most add a third part of Tin to the Brass, that the mass may be
harder, and acquire greater perspicuity.

Porta l. 4. c. 23. Of his former edition, thus compounds this mixture. It Is
thus commonly made by all men. Brass, and a triple of Tin, a little Arsnick and
Tartar, that they may melt, and be incorporated; some add a triple quantity of
Brass to Tin a little stibium, silver and the White Pyrites; some make it of
Lead and a double of silver, and it is made of other metalls, and otherwise
tempered. When they are cast into molds they must be polished and smoothed,
that the reflected Ray may bring with it the resemblance of things, and imitate
a Looking Glass. Whereunto the smoothness and fitness of the parts much
conduces. If the mixture be not smooth enough, cut or grind it, that on one
side the image represented may be bigger, and on the other less, and different.
If it be rough apply it to the wheel, where arms are polished, and so it is
burnished. If you make the glass Concave or Unequal, lest the motion of the
wheel should break the Glass plain a piece of wood, and make it of the shape of
your Glass, and fasten it on with pitch that it stir not. Then rub it over with
fine powder of Emery with a Cloth or Lether, then with fine powder of the
Pumice-stone, or whilst it sticks to the Wood with Putty (so the Goldsmiths
call Tin calcined) mixed with Tartar, Soot and ashes of Willows or Juniper,
which will make it shine best of all. Emery is prepared by powdering sercing
and wetting.

Cardan. l. 2. de variet. c. 57. Glasses called Steel-Glasses are made of three
parts of Brass, of one part of Tin and Silver, and an 18th part of Antimony.
Most leave out the silver for the charge, others add only a 24th part, as
Aldrovand. l. 1. c. 4. Musaei Metal relates. Some make it of a pound of Tin, a
third of Brass melted, and then add an ounce of Tartar, and half an ounce of
white. Orpimont, all boild so long as they smoke. Then they fashion the Molten
Metal into the figure of a Looking-Glass, on plain tables, heated and dried
with the smoke of Rosin, and smoothed with v^ne ashes, then they afterward
smooth it glewed to Wood with water, and sand, next with Emery, or a smooth
Pumice, thirdly with Putty, thus Cardan, and from him Kircher and Schwenterus.

Harstoffer. tom. 1. par. 6. q. 13. deliciar. Math. from Fliorovant, takes
three quarters of Tin, and a quarter of refined Copper and melts them, then
four ounces of calcined Tartar, Crystalline Antimony six ounces, Antimony
sublimed two ounces, common oil four ounces, Marcasite three ounces; Mix all
these, and to every pound of the said metalls, take thereof two ounces, let
them evaporate and refine, adding a little Burgundiepitch, when these are
consumed pour the stuff in the molds.

Scal. exerc. 82. Sect. 3. thus of this mixture, melt nine ounces of Tin, three
of Brass, and then add dried Tartar one ounce, white Arsnick half an ounce, let
them stand on the fire as long as they smoke, and in the casting, and polishing
proceeds as the other Authors.

Cornaeus communicated to Schottus this way. Take ten parts of Copper, when
it is melted, add four parts of Tin, then sprinkle a little Antimony and Sal
Armoniack, and stir and mix them till all the dangerous smoke (from which keep
your mouth and nose) vanish, then cast it into a mold. I have found (says he)
this mixture by much use to be very good.

Some of these mixtures, and many others like, with diverse other materials for
polishing you may find in Birelli, l. 9. c. 47. to the 55. to whom for
brevities sake I refer you.

Chap. 114. THis way of coloring Glass Balls on the inside, is now changed
into another of Pasting Pictures on the outside of Balls, they are very
pleasant, commonly hung up in houses.

Gesso. Whereof thus Caesalp. l. 1. c. 9. (the only Latin Author I find
mention it) est alia terra pallida glebis lapidosis qua utuntur ad Aurichalcum
tergendum, vulgo vocant gessum. There Is another pale earth with stony clots,
which they use to scour Brass, they call it Gessum. But it seems he knew not
what it was, It Is a sort of Lime burnt into a pretty hard and very white stony
substance, glittering with spots, as Spar does in Lead and Tin Ore, and pretty
ponderous. To the eye it much resembles Alablaster, and is brittle as it, for
so is a large piece I have by me. It Is made in Spain, and carried thence to the
Canary Islands, and put into the wine transported thence, and gives it a
whitish color and fermentation, and so preserves that wine which would not
otherwise keep, but would grow vapid, being transported into other countries.

Chap. 115. ULtramarine, so called as Caesalp. quod forte Egyptum significat
aliis praelatum, this most beautiful color, and of value equal, if not
surpassing Gold, all Authors that treat of stones or colors, deliver the ways
of preparing it. It Is a very nice color to make, and unless all the Lapis
Lazuli you use be singularly good, all your labor is lost. It Is sufficient for
me to point at the Authors, who have written of it, omitting their processes,
because very long and tedious. Boeth. de Boodt. de gem and Lap. l. 2. c. 123,
124. to Chap. 142. Where he teaches in a long series of words, to chose the
stones (for some of them will bear the fire which Aldrovand. calls fixed, others
will lose their color in the fire) then the way to calcine it, to make
vessels, Lees, strong and weaker Plasters, wherewith the colors may be more
easily drawn forth, and how it must be washed to serve for Pictures. And in the
last Chapter he teaches a shorter and less expensive way to extract this
color. Next him follows Birelli, who somewhat shorter delivers all these
Processes, l. 9. from Chap. 80. to Chap. 109. Some painters only grind the
Lapis Lazuli into a fine powder, and so use it.

Chap. 116. LAke from Cochineel. No doubt this word comes from the Gum called
Lacca, the color and tincture whereof have both the same color, with this of
the Painters. Math. in l. 1. Diosc. c. 23. asserts there are many kinds of
Artificial Lake which are made of the Sediment of several tinctures. One is
made of the Berry (head) of Burnet which they commonly call Cremese and
Cremesino (Crimson) another of Chermes Berries, a third of true Gum-lacc, and
lastly a fourth of Brasil, the worst of all, but he shows not the way of
making either of them.

Concerning this place, and the mistakes of Math. herein, hereafter in a
Treatise designed for colors, Birell. l. 11. c. 39. teaches a way to make a
Lake of this Gum. Take (says he) about twenty pound of men's urine, which boil
and scum well, put a pound of Gum-lacc, and five ounces of Alum into it, set
them over the fire. Boil them till the color be extracted, make proof with a
little of it, then add of Alumen Saccharinum, what quantity you judge fit, then
strein it as the other Lakes are.

I find in several writers receipts for making Lakes, differing only, either in
the materials from which, or in respect of the Menstruum wherewith they are
extracted. Some use Chermes-berries or Grains (a sirup whereof the Apothecaries
have of a noble tincture) and they are gathered from the Ilex thence called
Coccigera, a tree whereof you may see in a garden in Old-street, London, near
the Pesthouse, but it never bore fruit in England, another grew in his
Majesty's Privygarden at White Hall, but 'twas lately cut down, by the
ignorant usurpers. Some use the Cochineel, which is a Maggot or fly bred on the
Ficus Indica, whereof see at large, Joan de Laet descript. Ind. l. 5. c. 3. as
also Herrera and Zimenes. Others use dyed Flox (the most common) which our
Author here teaches how to die, and this is the best way. Others take the
Scowrings of Cloth dyed in Stammel or Scarlet.

Hernandez in his Hist. l. 3. chap. 45. thus of making Lake in the Indies. Of
Nocheztli, that is Cochineel, sometimes a Purple, sometimes a Scarlet color is
made, according to the various ways of preparing it.

The most exquisite is made by beating it with the water of the dicoction of
the tree called Totzuatl, adding Alum, and the settling is formed into Cakes.

As for the Menstruums they are Lees made by our Author of Vine or Willow, or
of other soft VVood. Others make it of Oaken or other strong ashes, yet the Lee
must be no stronger than being put upon the tongue, 'twill prick or bite it a
little only. Surely Aquafortis might do very well, since we see it so far
advances the color of Cochineel in our incomparable Bow-dyes. The only
inconvenience in Lakes hence made would be, that they would soon Tarnish and
lose their color in the air, or with wet, by reason of the Salts relenting;
but perhaps this might be remedied by extracting and washing of these Salts
without any damage to the color. Now all writers proceed the same way in
discharging the color, precipitating streyning and drying the Lake made. As to
the last I shall add this, that Chalk-stones sooner dry by imbibing the
moisture than Bricks do, as the constant practice of Painters in making
Pastils, and of the Refiners in drying their Verditers confirms. Before the
Lake be fully dry, they form it into Balls, or cut it with a Wooden Knife (not
with an Iron one) into what shapes and figures they please, or they may do as
Painters for their Pastils, cast them in furrows made in the stone.

Chap. 117. SAline of the Levant, with my Author Pilatro di Levante; this word
Pilatro I cannot find in any Italian writer, this exposition of the word I had
from an ancient person who wrought at Moran, he added 'twas a Salt extracted
from the froath of the Sea, coagulated through the extreme heat of the
country. The name of Saline, and this way of generation thereof I have had
from other workmen, but the exposition from him alone. Chap. 118. BIrelli makes
his Lake from Brasil thus, He first extracts a tincture from Flox, and then
takes a pound of Brasil cut (ground is better) and boils the Lee to the
consumption of a fingers thickness, then streins it, and adds to the streyned
liquor one ounce of Gum Arabic in powder, and reboils it, and boils away half
as much as before, then mixeth both the liquours with a stick, then proceeds
with the Hippocras-bag, etc. as before.

Chap. 124. AFair rose Red Rosichiero, which Porta, l. 6. c. 9. calls
Rosaclerum, and teaches this way of making it. Put 10 pound of Crystal into a
pot, when it is well melted, put in a pound of the best Minium by halfs at a
time, stir them speedily, then with Iron ladles cast them into water, and that
thrice, then mix five ounces of calcined Brass and Cinnaber of the deepest
color, and having stirred them well, let them settle three hours. When you
have so done superadd of Glass of Tin three ounces, mix them without
intermission and you shall see in the Glass the most Florid color of the Rose,
which you may use to Enamel upon Gold.

Chap. 126. To fix Sulphur he teaches another way, Chap. 129. Another Process
to the same purpose, but much larger, Birel delivers, l. 1. c. 50. But Sulphur
thus prepared will easily rise sublimed with Sal Armoniack. None that I have
met with affirms such a fixation of Sulphur, as Helmont does, for in his
mixture of Elements, he says, he knew ways whereby whatsoever Sulphur was once
dissolved, might be fixed into a Terrestrial powder. Our Author no where
mentions any use of this powder in the Art of Glass.

Chap. 129. A Transparent Red. Libav. l. 2. Tract. 1. c. 35. By conjecture hits
right on this color from Gold in these words. I judge that from a red tincture
of Gold dissolved into a liquour or oil, and especially with Crystal, a Rubie
may not unfitly be made. Of which conjecture he assigns this reason, because
Rubies are frequent where Gold is found, and therefore it is consentaneous that
gold there does degenerate into this jewel.

Chap. 131. TO make vitriolum Veneris, Glaub. l. 2. Furn. Philosop. proposes
this short way. Spirit of Sal Ammoniac powered on calcined Copper, made by
frequent ignition and extinction, in an hours space extracts a Blew color,
which when dissolved, decant off, and set in a cold place, and 'twill yield a
most elegant Blew Vitriol. Croll. in his Basil. Chym. describes well the making
of this Medicine. Beguin, c. 17. sets down this way, Powder calcined Copper, or
it is scales very fine, which digest 24 hours in distilled vinegar. Pour out the
Tinctured Vinegar by inclination, and pour on more till 'twill be no more
colored. Filtre the decanted liquours, Evaporate, or distill off a third part,
set the remainder in a cold place, and you shall have Green and obscure
Vitriolum Veneris.

FINIS.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE GLASS DROPS.
THese Drops were first brought into England by His Highness Prince Rupert out
of Germany, and showed to his Majesty, who communicated them to His Society at*
Gresham College. A Committee was appointed forth with by the Society, who gave
this following Account of them, as it is Registered in their Book appointed for
that purpose, and thence transcribed by their permission, and here published.
The which I the rather desired, that this might be a pattern for experiments to
be made in any kind whatsoever, as being done with exceeding exactness.

This account was given to the Society by Sir Robert Moray* MDCLXI.



A B the thread, B C the body, B the neck, A the point or end of the thread.

They are made of Green-glass well refined; till the Metal (as they call it)
be well refined, they do not at all succeed, but crack and break, soon after
they are dropped into the water*

The best way of making them, is to take up some of the Metal out of the pot
upon the end of an Iron rod, and immediately let it drop into cold water, and
there lie till it cool.

If the Metal be too hot when it drops into the water, the Glass drop
certainly frosts and cracks all over, and falls to pieces in the water.

Every one that Cracks not in the water, and lies in it, till it be quite cold,
is sure to be good.

The most expert Workmen, know not the just temper of heat, that is requisite,
and therefore cannot promise before hand to make one that shall prove good, and
many of them miscarry in the making, sometimes two or three or more for one
that hits.

Some of them frost, but the body falls not into pieces; others break into
pieces before the red heat be quite over, and with a small noise; other soon
after the red heat is over, and with a great noise; some neither break nor
crack, till they seem to be quite cold; others keep whole whilst they are in
the water, and fly to pieces of themselves with a smart noise as soon as they
are taken out of the water; some an hour after, others keep whole some days or
weeks, and then break without being touched.

If one of them be snatched out of the water whilst it is red hot, the small
part of the neck, and so much of the thread or string it hangs by, as has been
in the water, will upon breaking fall into small parts, but not the Body,
although it have as large cavities in it, as those that fly in pieces.

If one of them be cooled in the air, hanging at a thread, or on the ground, it
becomes like other Glass, in all respects, as solidity, etc.

When a Glass drop falls into the water, it makes a little hissing noise, the
body of it continues red a pretty while, and and there proceed from it many
eruptions like sparkles, that crack, and make it leap up and move, and many
bubbles do arise from it in the water, every where about it, till it cool: but
if the water be ten or twelve Inches deep, these bubles diminish so in the
ascending, that they vanish before they attain the superficies of the water;
where nothing is to be observed, but a little thin steam.

The outside of the Glass drop is close and smooth like other Glass, but within
it is spungious, and full of Cavities or Blebs.

The figure of it is roundish at the bottom for the most part, not unlike a
pear pearl, it terminates in a long neck, so that never any of them are
straight, and most of them are Crooked and bowed into small folds and wreaths
from the beginning of the neck till it end in a small point.

Almost all those that are made in water have a little proturberance or knob a
little above the largest part of the body, and most commonly placed on the side
toward which the neck ends, although sometimes it be upon that side that lies
uppermost in the vessel where it is made.

If a Glass drop be let fall into water scalding hot, it will be sure to crack
and break in the water either before the red heat be over, or soon after.

In Sallet Oil they do not miscarry so s^equently as in cold water.

In oil they produce a greater number of bubbles, and larger ones, and they
bubble in oil longer than in water.

Those that are made in oil have not so many, nor so large blebs in them, as
those made in water, and diverse of them are smooth all over, and want those
little knobs that the others have.

Some part of the neck of those that are made in oil, and that part of the
small thread that is quenched in it cooled, breaks like common Glass. But if
the neck be broken near the body, and the body held close in ones hand, it will
crack and break all over: but flies not into so small parts, nor with so smart
a force and noise as those made in water, and the pieces will hold together
till they be parted: and then there appears long streaks or rays upon them,
pointing toward the center or middle of the body, and thwarting the little
blebs or cavities of it, whereof the number is not so great, not the size so
large as in those made in water; if the Glass drops be dropped into vinegar, they
frost and crack, so as they are sure to fall to pieces before they be cold, the
noise of falling in is more hissing than in water, but the bubbles not so
remarkable.

In milk they make no noise, nor any bubbles that can be perceived, and never
miss to frost and crack, and fall in pieces before they be cold.

In spirit of wine they bubble more than in any of the other liquors, and while
they remain entire, tumble too and fro, and are more agitated than in other
liquors, and never fail to crack and fall in pieces.

By that time five or six are dropped into the spirit of wine, it will be set on
flame: but receive, no particular taste from them.

In water wherein Nitre or Sal Armoniack has been dissolved, they succeed no
better than in vinegar.

In oil of Turpentine one of them broke, as in the spirit of wine, but the
second set it on fire, so as it could no more be used.

In Quicksilver, being forced to sink with a stick, it grew flat and rough on
the upper side: but the experiment could not be perfected, because it could not
be kept under till it cooled.

In an experiment made in a Cylindrical Glass, like a beaker filled with cold
water, of seven or eight only one succeeded, the rest all cracking and
breaking into pieces, only some of the company, who taking the Glass in their
hand; as soon as the drop was let fall into it, observed that at the first
falling in, and for some time after, whilst the red heat lasted, red sparks
were shot forth from the drops into the water, and that at the instant of the
cruption of those particles, and of the bubbles which manifestly break out of
it into the water, it not only cracks and sometimes with considerable noise,
but the body moves and leaps, as well of those that remain whole in the water,
as those that break.

A blow with a small hammer, or other hard tool will not break one of the Glass
Drops made in water, if it be touched no where but on the body.

Break of the tip of it, and it will fly immediately into very minute parts
with a smart force, and noise, and these parts will easily crumble into a
coarse dust.

If it be broken, so that the sparks of it may have liberty to fly every way,
they will disperse themselves in an orb, with violence like a little Granado.

Some being rubed upon a dry tyle, fly into pieces by that time the bottom is a
little flatted, others not till half be rubbed off. One being rubbed till about
half was ground away, and then laid aside, did a little while after, fly in
pieces without being touched. Another rubbed almost to the very neck on a stone
with water and Emery did not fly at all.

If one of them be broken in ones hand under water, it strikes the hand more
smartly, and with a more brisk noise than in the air: yea, though it be held
near the superficies, none of the small parts will fly out of it, but all fall
down without disperfing as they do in the Air. One of them broken in Master
Boyles Engine, when the Receiver is well Evacuated will fly in pieces as in the
open air.

Anneal one of them in the fire, and it will become like ordinary Glass, only
the spring of it is so weakened, that it will not bend so much without breaking,
as before.

A Glass drop being fastened into a cement all but a part of the neck, and then
the tip of it broken off, it made a pretty smart noise, but not so great as
those use to do that are broken in the hand, and though it clearly appears to
be all shivered within, and the colors turned grayish, the outside remained
smooth, though cracked, and being taken in pieces, the parts of it rise in
flakes, some Conical in shape, and so crack all over, that it easily crumbled
to dust.

One fastened in a ball of cement some half an Inch in thickness, upon the
breaking off the tip of it, it broke the ball in pieces like a Granado.

Two or three of them sent to a Lapidary to pierce them through, as they do
Pearls, no sooner had the tool entered into them, but they flew in pieces as
they use to do when the tip of them is broken off.

FINIS.
An Appendix.
In the Chapter of the Furnaces I gave an account of the Instruments used about
Crystalline Metal, but having omitted there those which are used in making
Green Glasses, take them here as they follow.

TWo Bars to lift their pots into the Furnaces, each near four yards long.

A Padle to stir and move the Ashes and Sand in the Calcar.

Rakes to rake the Ashes and Sand too and fro in the Calcar.

Procers are Irons hooked at the extremity to settle the Pots in their places,
whether set too far or near, or on either side from the working hole.

Ladles to empty out the Metal from one Pot into another, whether the Pots
break, or to any other purpose.

Small Ladles for each Master workman to scum the Sandever, and dross, from the
pot wherein he works.

Strocals a long Iron instrument like a Fire-shovel to carry the Metal out of
a broken into a whole Pot.

Forks to prick betwixt the bars of the Fireplace to help the descent of the
ashes, that the fire may burn clear, and bright.

Sleepers are the great Iron bars crossing smaller ones which hinder the
passing of the coals, hut give passage to the descent of the ashes.

Ferrets are the Irons wherewith they try whether the Metal be fit to work, as
also those Irons which make the Ring at the mouth of Glass Bottles.

Fascets are Irons thrust into the bottle to carry them to anneal.

The Pipes are the hollow Irons to blow the Glass.

Ponte is the Iron to stick the Glass at the bottom for the more convenient
fashioning the neck of it.

Pontee stake is the Iron whereon the Servitors place the Irons from the
Masters when they have knocked off the bhoken pieces of Glass.

Cassia stake is that Iron whereon lies a piece of wood, on which wood they
lay the Glass when they have taken it off the pipes, and whereon they turn the
Glass to fasten the Pontee to it.

Shears are the Instruments to form and fashion the Glass.

Scissers cut the Glass, and even it.

Cranny is a round Iron whereon they roll the Glass to make the neck of it
small.

Tower is the Iron on which they rest their Pontee when they scald the Glass.

Several sorts of Iron Molds wherein they make their works of several figures,
protuberances, etc. according as they are cut in them.

FINIS.
Errata Corrigenda.
EPist. Ded. read pour on you* p. 12. line. 2. r. from although to the end at
the latter end of Chapt. 3. p. 16. l. 13. etc. r. refine the Glass, ib. l. 16.
r. is made. p. 24. l. 14. r. 10. p. 106. l. 15. r. lead again. p. 159. l. 11.
for Cochin r. Blew. p. 205. l. 8. r. Bo^int. p. 208. l. 16. r. I sod. p. 209.
l. 13. r. Belluac. p. 267. l. 17. r. that make. p. 320. l. 4. r. cast the water
on.


