THE LIFE and DEATH OF POMPONIUS ATTICUS: WRITTEN By his Contemporary and
Acquaintance Cornelius Nepos; Translated out of his Fragments.

TOGETHER WITH OBSERVATIONS POLITICAL and MORAL thereupon.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for W. Shrowsbury, at the Bible in Duke-Lane,
1677.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
THis Book presents Thee with the History of the Life and Death of POMPONIUS
ATTICUS, and the various Concussions and Revolutions that happened in the Roman
State and Government in his time; and the wise Methods which that excellent man
used to preserve the Honor, Innocence and Safety of his Person from the
Dangers that might occur by them.

Two Things I must caution thee in reading hereof;

First, Concerning the Person and Practice of Atticus. Many things in him are
worthy of Imitation; his Prudence, Learning, Beneficence, Compassion; his great
Care to avoid engaging in any of those Factions that gave those great
Disturbances to the State of Rome, his Love to his Country.

But some things were so appropriate to his Person, Condition, and
Circumstances, and the Manners and Occurrences of that State wherein he lived,
that are hardly to be matched in any other Person, and therefore may possibly
in these respects rather give matter of admiration of his Fortune, than matter
of imitation of some of the Transactions of his Life.

Secondly, Concerning the Common wealth of Rome, which in the time of Atticus,
was the Theater whereupon the Heads of the several Parties and Factions acted
their parts, to the great disturbance of that State, whereof some Account is
hereafter given.

The Constitution of Kingdoms, States and Commonwealths, are in themselves very
various, but oftentimes much more various in the Circumstances that attend
them; as the Temper and Disposition of their Officers, their different
Managements, their public Concerns with other Nations, and infinite more: so
that it seems impossible that two States may in all things exactly match one
another; whereby it comes to pass that some Kingdoms, States and Commonwealths
are more obnoxious to Public Evils; especially that of the Collision of
Factions than others.

Some Governments (especially that of this Kingdom of England) are so wisely
constituted, and so firmly established and fixed by Law and Custom, that in all
Humane Reason, they are not much obnoxious to such Factions: But if such at any
time should happen, yet they are quickly composed, or effectually suppressed,
or languish and die of themselves in a little time: But the State of the Common
wealth of Rome was so molded, that it was scarce possible for them to be long
without such Storms and Commotions by great Factions arising therein; as is
hereafter shown.

That therefore which is written in this Book, was not written in relation to
any Kingdom or State on this side Rome, nor even to Rome it self, otherwise
than it stood under those Circumstances of those Factions that were frequent
therein about the time of Atticus his Life.

Therefore read this Book with its due application to the Roman State; and to
that State as it was in at that time of those Disturbances, and as if thou
had been a Spectator of the Scene where those Tragedies were acted, and then
thou answerest the intention of the Writer; and possibly this Pamphlet may give
thee the innocent diversion of an hour, and in some measure give thee an
Account of the State of the Roman Commonwealth, and the reason of the
Occurrences that happened therein in and near the time of the Life of Atticus,
though it be by no means applicable to the Kingdom, State and Country wherein
thou live.

If thou find the Translation of the Life of Atticus not to run so smoothly as
could be wished, I have this Excuse for it, that as near as I can, I have in
the Translation pursued the Letter of the Original; which, by reason of the
difference of Idioms in the Latin and English, will not allow that Elegance to
the Translation, as it is to be found in the Original. In the Equation of the
Roman Money with the value of Ours, I may in some places be mistaken, because
of the discrepance between them; but this may fairly be rectified by the
Reader, and is not of any great consequence to the History. The Errata of the
Press are inserted at the End of the Book, together with some few Addenda.

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Life of Pomponius Atticus, written by his Contemporary and Acquaintance
Cornelius Nepos, Translated out of his Fragments. Page 1.

Chap. 1. A brief Chronological Account of the Life of Atticus. P. 33.

Chap. 2. Touching Factions in general, and the reasons of the great Factions
in the Roman Empire, and why they happened more at this time than for many
hundreds of years before. P. 59.

Chap. 3. Concerning the Methods that ordinarily persons use to secure
themselves in the Vicissitudes of prevailing Factions. P. 96.

Chap. 4. Touching the Means whereby the Safety of Atticus was procured under
the various Vicissitudes in the Roman State. p. 105.

Chap. 5. Touching the means that Pomponius Atticus used to save himself from
the Dangers of the Civil Wars that happened in Rome; and first concerning the
quality and condition of the man himself. p. 117

Chap. 6. Concerning the other Expedients that this wise man used to avoid the
difficulties of the times wherein he lived; and first of his Travels into
Greece. p. 126.

Chap. 7. The second Expedient that he used for his safety and preservation;
his industrious avoiding of being engaged in any Faction while he lived in
Rome. p. 134

Chap. 8. The third Expedient that Atticus used for his safety; refusing too
great Kindnesses from Great Persons. p. 159.

Chap. 9. The fourth Expedient of Atticus; refusing Offices and public
Employments in the Commonwealth by the Suffrages of the Senate or People. p.
165.

Chap. 10. The fifth Expedient that Atticus used to preserve himself, was the
avoiding all those occasions that might procure unto him emulation or envy. p.
181.

Chap. 11. The sixth Expedient; the avoiding of all occasions of enmity from
any. p. 189.

Chap. 12. The consideration of things that Atticus did in order to his safety
and security against Dangers and Troubles of the Times; and first, touching his
Charity, Bounty and Liberality. p. 199.

Chap. 13. The second thing which Atticus did in order whereby he secured
himself. p. 211.

Chap. 14. The third Expedient conducing to the safety of Atticus; his
admirable moderation and equality of Mind and Actions. p. 216.

Chap. 15. Concerning the fourth Expedient conducing to the safety of Atticus;
his Constancy. p. 222.

Chap. 16. Touching certain Cautions to be used in the observation and
imitation of the Life of Atticus in public collisions of Factions. p. 228

THE LIFE OF POMPONIUS ATTICUS:
Written by his Contemporary and Acquaintance CORNELIUS NEPOS; Translated out
of his Fragments.
POMPONIUS ATTICUS, being deduced from the first Origin of the Roman Stock,
obtained the dignity of a Roman Knight, derived unto him by an uninterrupted
Succession from his Ancestors. He had a diligent and indulgent Father, and rich
according to those times, and a great Lover of Learning: As he loved Learning
himself, so he instructed his Son in all that Learning wherewith one of his Age
was fit to be furnished. Moreover, in this young youth, besides his readiness
of wit, there was a certain sweetness of Elocution and Speech, whereby he did
not only readily learn what was taught him, but did also excellently pronounce
it: By which means, even in his youth, he became eminent among his equals, and
shone forth with greater luster than his generous fellow-Scholars could bear
with an equal mind. He therefore by his study pricked on others; Among whom
were P. Torquatus, C. Marius, the Son of Caius, and M. Cicero, all whom by his
conversation, he so obliged unto him, that none was dearer to them than he. His
Father died early. And Pomponius being then but a very young man, was not
without some danger, by reason of the assinity of P. Sulpitius, who was slain
being Tribune of the People. For Amicia the Niece of Pomponius, married Servius
Sulpitius, Brother of P. Sulpitius. P. Sulpitius therefore being thus slain, as
soon as Pomponius observed that the City was disturbed by the Tumult of Cinna,
neither could he have liberty of living according to his Rank, but that he
should offend one Party; the minds of the Citizens being disjointed, while some
favored the party of Sylla, others the party of Cinna. Concluding it therefore
a seasonable time to addict himself to his Studies, he went to Athens, and yet
neverthless helped with his wealth young Marius, then declared a public Enemy;
whose flight he assisted with his Money. And lest this his journey should bring
some detriment to his Estate, he removed thither a great part of his wealth. He
so lived at Athens, that he became deservedly most dear to the Athenians: For
besides that great Grace which appeared in him, being then but young, he
oftentimes relieved their public wants with his own Wealth. For whereas here
was a necessity of public Versura, taking up money at less interest, and to
put it out at greater; neither had they any equal conditions in the doing
thereof; he ever interposed, and in such a manner that he never received any
usury from them, nor suffered his money to continue longer in their hands than
the time appointed; both which were of great advantage to them: For hereby he
did neither suffer their debts to grow stale by indulgence, nor to grow greater
by the running on of usury. Also he added to this friendliness by another
liberality: He gave Corn to all, so that to each person were given six measures
of Wheat, which kind of measure at Athens, is called Medimnus (something more
than our English Bushel) he carried himself so, that he seemed common to the
lowest, and yet equal to the chiefest; whereby it came to pass that they
publicly heaped upon him all the honors they could; endeavoring to make him
a free Citizen of that City; which yet he refused (which some interpret because
the liberty of a Citizen of Rome would be lost by becoming the Citizen of
another City.) As long as he was there, he opposed the setting up of any Statue
for him; but could not hinder it after his departure; therefore they placed
some for him and Pilia (his Wife) in their most sacred places; for in all the
businesses of the Republic they had him their Actor and their Author.

Therefore it was first the bounty of his Fortune, that he was born in that
City wherein was the Palace of the Empire of the World, whereby he had the same
for his Country and Governess. But it was the evidence of his prudence, that
when he came into that City that excelled all other in in Antiquity, Humanity
and Learning, he became most dear unto it above all others.

When Sylla came hither, as he returned out of Asia, as long as he was there,
he kept Pomponius with him, being taken with the Humanity and Learning of the
young man; for he spoke Greek so well, that he seemed born at Athens. But so
great was his sweetness in the Latin Tongue, that there appeared to be in him
a certain native grace, and not acquired. He pronouced Poems in Greek and
Latin, so that nothing could be done better: By which means it came to pass,
that Sylla would never let him go from him, and desired to carry him along with
him. To whom, when he endeavored to persuade him, Pomponius said, I pray thee
do not desire to lead me against those (with whom, lest I should bear arms
against thee) I left Italy. But Sylla commending the kindness of the young man,
departing from Athens, commanded that all the Presents which he had there
received, should be delivered to Pomponius. Here living many years, he employed
so much of his endeavors for the affairs of his Family, as he became a diligent
Father of a Family, and allowed all the rest of his time either to Learning, or
the affairs of the Commonwealth of the Athenians; yet nevertheless he performed
all civil offices to his Friends. For he came to their Assemblies, and if any
great business was in action, he was not wanting: He yielded a singular
fidelity to Cicero in all his dangers; To whom, flying from his Country, he
gave 250000 Sestertia (two thousand eighty three pounds six shillings eight
pence) but the Roman affairs being appeased, he returned to Rome, L. Cotta and
L. Torquatus being (as I think) Consuls. Which day the Athenians so
entertained, that by their Tears they showed their sorrow for their future
loss. He had an Uncle, Q. Caecilius, a Roman Knight, and a friend of L.
Lucullus, rich, of a nature hard to be pleased; whose frowardness he so
weathered, that he kept, without offense, the good will of that man, to his
extremest old age, whom no other could patiently bear; by which means he
gained the fruit of his obserservances: For Caecilius dying, by his Will
adopted him, and made him his Heir of three fourth Parts of all he had; out of
which inheritance, he received centies LLS. (or to the value of 300000 Crowns
according to some; or 83360 lib. according to others.) His Sister was married
to Q. Tullius Cicero; which Match M. Tullius Cicero brought about; with whom,
being his School-fellow, he lived most entirely, and much more familiarly than
with Quintius: whereby it appeared, that in Friendship Likeness of manners was
far more prevalent than Affinity. He used Q. Hortensius very intimately (who in
those times obtained the Mastery of Eloquence) so that it was hard to
understand who loved him best, Cicero or Hortensius. And herein he effected
that which was of greatest difficulty, that between those betwixt whom there
was the greatest emulation of praise, there interceded no detraction, and that
he became the common uniter of them both. He carried himself so in the
Commonwealth, that he always was, and was thought to be of the best party; yet
he would not commit himself to the waves of Civil Dissension; which he esteemed
to be no more in the power of him that should deliver himself over to them,
than if he had been tossed on the waves of the Sea. He sought not honors,
although they lay open to him; either by reason of his Favor or of his
Dignity, because they could neither be sought according to the ancient use, nor
taken up with due observance of the Laws, among those excessive charges that
accompanied such Competitions, nor could they be born in the Commonwealth
without danger, the manners of the Citizens of Rome being very much corrupted.

He never came to public Sales, neither became he a public Farmer of any
thing, or a Surety thereof. He accused no man either by his own subscription,
or by proxy. He never went to Law touching his own Interest, nor had any
Lawsuits. He entertained the Prefectures of many Consulates and Praetors
offered unto him, that he would follow none to a Pronounce, being contented
with the honor of the Offer, but despised the fruit of its private advantage;
and would not go even with Q. Cicero into Asia, when he might have obtained the
place of Legate with him. For he thought it became not him who would not be a
Praetor, to become the follower of a Praetor. In which thing he did not only
serve his own Dignity, but also his own Tranquillity; while he avoided the very
suspicions of offenses: Whence it came to pass, that his respect was the more
valuable to all men, which they plainly saw was to be attributed to his
kindness, and not to hope.

The Civil War of Caesar happened when he was about 60 years old. He used that
Vacancy that belonged to his Age, neither did he stir any way out of the City.
All those things that were needful for such of his Friends as went to Pompey,
he supplied out of his own Estate. Neither did he offend his Friend Pompey; for
he would receive of him no eminent bounty, as others, who by his means obtained
honors or wealth, part of whom, even against their wills, followed him to the
Field, and part staid at home, not without his great offense. But the sitting
still of Atticus was so acceptable to Caesar, that when he returning Victor,
commanded Money from private persons by his Letters, he was not only not
troublesome to Atticus, but delivered up the Son of his Sister and Q. Cicero,
taken in Pompey's Camp. Thus by keeping the old course of his Life, he escaped
new dangers. After this, it followed, Caesar being slain, when the Commonwealth
seemed to be wholly in the power of Brutus and Cassius and their party, and the
whole City seemed to stand at gaze what Atticus would do, He so dealt with M.
Brutus, that that young man used no Equal more familiarly than he did this aged
Atticus; and had him not only the Governor of his Council, but also the
Companion of his Table. It was contrived by some, that a private Treasury
should be raised for the Murderers of Caesar by the Roman Cavalry. They thought
this might easily be effected, if the chief of that Order did contribute Money.

Therefore Atticus was called by C. Falvius, a familiar Friend of Brutus, that
he should be the chief of that Undertaking: But he who always esteemed good
Offices to be done to his Friends without Faction, and always kept himself from
such kind of Councils, answered, That if Brutus would use any of his Riches, he
might use what they were able to bear. But that he would neither speak nor meet
with any person about that matter. So that Ball of Contention by this one man's
discretion was broken. Not long after, Anthony began to be uppermost, so that
Brutus and Cassius (the Affairs of those Provinces (which by way of
dissimulation were assigned to them by the Consuls) being desperate) were
banished. Atticus, who would not give money with others, to that Party when it
flourished, sent to Brutus, being now an Abject, and going out of Italy, L L S
Centum, or 3000 Crowns, and gave order, being absent, that 300 Sastertia more
should be delivered to him in Epirus: Neither did he, upon his Change, the more
slatter Anthony, or leave the distressed. After this followed the Battle at
Mucinia, wherein, if I should only call him prudent, I should say less than I
ought; when rather he was divine, if a perpetual natural goodness, which is
neither shaken nor diminished by any Casualties, is to be called Divineness.

Anthony being a declared enemy, went out of Italy, having no hope of
restitution; not only his Enemies, who were then powerful and many, but even
his very Friends gave themselves up to his Adversaries, and hoped they should
obtain some benefit by hurting of him, persecuting those of his Family, desired
to plunder his wife Fulvia of all her goods, and went about to destroy his
Children, Atticus using a most intimate familiarity with Cicero, and being most
friendly to Brutus, did not only not allow them to injure Antony; but on the
contrary, as much as he could, hid those of his Family flying out of the City,
and helped them with the things they wanted: And to P. Volummius, such things,
that more could not have been from a Father. And whereas Fulvia was involved in
Suits, and vexed with great terrors, he performed his Office of kindness toward
her with so much diligence, that she gave no pledge without Atticus: He was the
Surety for all things. And further, whereas in her prosperous Fortune she had
bought a Farm to be paid at a day; and after this calamity, could not take up
money to pay, he interposed himself, and sent her Money without Usury and
without Security; esteeming it the greatest gain to be known to be mindful and
grateful; and to make it manifest that he was used to be a friend to men, and
not to Fortune, which things while he did, no man could well think he did it to
serve the time: For no man thought that Antony could ever return again.
Nevertheless he was reproved by some great men, that he seemed too little to
hate evil Citizens: But he being constant to his own judgment, respected rather
what was fit for him to do, than what others were ready to commend. The wheel
of Fortune is suddenly turned. As Antony returned into Italy, every man thought
Atticus was in great danger, by reason of his intimate familiarity with Cicero
and Brutus: Atticus therefore at the coming in of the Emperor, withdrew from
the City, fearing Banishment, and hid himself with P. Volummius, to whom, as we
have a little before shown, he gave his assistance (so great was the variety of
Fortune in those times, that sometimes these, sometimes those were in the
greatest power or danger) and he had with him Q. Gellius Canius his Equal, and
very like him. And this is another example of the goodness of Atticus, that he
lived so entirely with him whom he knew his Playfellow from a Boy, that their
friendship increased even to their utmost old Age: But Antony, though he was
carried with so great hatred against Cicero, that he was not only an enemy to
him, but also to all his Friends, and would banish them all; yet many reminding
him, he remembered the good offices of Atticus: and when one had enquired where
he was, he wrote to him with his own hand, that he should not fear; and that he
should presently come to him; that he had exempted him and Gellius Canius from
the number of the banished: And lest he should fall into any danger, because it
was night, he sent him a Guard.

Thus Atticus in his greatest fear, was a safeguard not only to himself, but
also to him whom he held most dear: For he sought not only for his own safety,
but jointly for others; that it might appear, that he would, no Fortune of his
should be disjoynted from his Friend: Therefore if a Pilot deserves great
praise, that saves his Ship from the Storm and Rockie Sea, why should not his
singular prudence be valued, which out of so many and so great Civil Storms
came to safety? And to discharge himself from these evils, he did nothing else
than to become an assistance to the most in what he could. When the common
people by the rewards of the Conqueror, redeemed some of those that were
banished, none of the Banished came into Epirus, to whom any thing was wanting;
and all that came thither, had liberty of remaining there. But also after the
Battle at Philippi, and the death of Cassius and Brutus: He purposed to protect
L. Julius Merilla the Praetor, and his Son Aulus Torquatus, and the rest that
were stricken with the like Fortune, and took order that to them all things
necessary should be privately conveyed from Epirus to Samothracia. It is
difficult to reckon up all things he did, and note such as are necessary to be
remembered. This one thing we would to be understood, that his Liberality was
neither temporary nor crafty: That may be judged by the things and times
themselves, that he commended not himself to those that were prosperous, but
always helped those that were in distress. Who therefore respected Servilia the
Mother of Brutus no less after his death, than while he flourished: Thus
managing his Liberality, he maintained no enmity, because he neither injured
any, neither if he received any injury, had he rather revenge than forget it.
With a never dying Memory he retained Benefits received; but those which he
did, he only remembered so long as he continued grateful that had received them.
He did therefore so, that it seems truly said, Every man's Manners fashion to
every man his own Fortune: And yet he first fashioned himself before his
Fortune, who took care that in nothing he might be justly punished. By these
things he brought to pass that M. Vipsanius Agrippa (one joined to young Caesar
in intimate familiarity) who by reason of his own Favor, and Caesar's
Authority, had a power upon persons of every condition, did chiefly desire the
affinity of Atticus, and sued to have the Noble Daughter of this Roman Knight
in Marriage, and the maker of this Match was M. Antony the Triumvir of the
Commonwealth; by whose Favor, when he might have increased his Possessions, he
was so far from the desire of Money, that he used it in no other thing than in
deprecating either the dangers or inconveniences of his Friends: Which was
eminent even under the very Proscription it self. For whereas the Triumviri,
according to the custom whereby things were then managed, sold the Goods of L.
Sanfeus, a Roman Knight, his Equal, who lived many years at Athens, being
thereunto led by the desire of Philosophy, and had fair possessions in Italy.
By the Labor and Industry of Atticus, it was brought to pass, that by the same
Messenger, Sanfeus was informed that he had lost his Patrimony, and re-obtained
it again. The same Atticus delivered Julius Claudius, the most elegant Poet of
this Age, next after the Death of Lucretius and Catullus, and a very good man,
well instructed in the best Arts; who after the Proscription of the Roman
Knights, was for his large possessions in Africa, brought into the List of the
banished in his absence, by P. Voluminous General of the Workmen of Antony;
which at present it is difficult to judge whether it was more painful or
glorious for him to effect, because it was known that Atticus had a care for
his Friends in their dangers, whether absent or present.

And this man Atticus was esteemed no less a good Father of a Family, than a
good Citizen; for whereas he was full of money, no man was less a Buyer, or
less a Builder: And yet he dwelt very well, and enjoyed all things of the best:
For he had a House in the Quirinal Hill, left to him hereditarily by his Uncle,
whose pleasantness was not so much in the building, as in the Groves adjoining.
For his House being an ancient built House, had more of Decency, than of Cost;
wherein he changed nothing but what he was compelled to by its decay.

He had a Family, that if we may judge by its profitableness, was the best; if
by the form of it, not mean; for in it were most learned Youths: excellent
Clerks, and many well read in Books; that there was scarce a Footboy, but
could well do any of these businesses; in like manner other Artificers
requisite for household Affairs, singular good: And yet he had none of these,
but such as were born and taught in his House; which is a sign not only of
Continence, but of Diligence. For not intemperately to desire that which thou
feast desired of many, ought to be esteemed the sign of a continent person: And
to procure rather by diligence than purchase it, of no small Industry. He was
neat, not stately; handsome, not sumptuous; he affected with all diligence a
cleanliness without superfluity: His Household Stuff moderate, not much; so that
in it neither Extreme appeared: Neither shall I pass by this, although I guess
it may seem light to some: Whereas he was a chief Roman Knight, and did very
liberally invite men of all Ranks to his House, yet we know that he spent not
monthly more than 3000 Aerii; (about 10 l. sterling:) and this we speak not by
hearsay, but of our own knowledge; for by reason of our familiarity with him,
we were often present at his domestic Affairs. No man in his Feasts heard any
other Acroama than a Philosophical Lecture, which we esteemed most pleasant;
neither did he ever sup without some philosophical Lecture, that his guests
might be delighted as well in their minds, as in their appetites; for he
invited those whose manners agreed with his. When so great an accession of
Money happened to him, he changed nothing in his daily deportment, nothing in
the custom of his Life: And he used so great moderation, that neither under the
200000 Sesterces (or 6000 Crowns) he had from his Father, he carried himself
less splendidly, nor under the 100000 Sesterces, or 30000 Crowns (which he had
from his Uncle) he lived with greater affluence than he before had appointed:
But under both Fortunes he used the like port. He had no Gardens, no
Country House, or sumptuous maritine dwelling. Nor in Italy had he more than
his Country Farm of Ardeali and Munantum. All his Rents were in what he had at
Epirus, and City possessions, whereby it may be known, that he was fully
accustomed to measure out the employment of his Money, not by vast expense, but
by Reason. He neither would speak, nor could suffer a Lie: Therefore his Mirth
was not without severity, nor his Gravity without affability; so that it was
hard to understand whether his Friends more reverenced than loved him. When any
thing was desired of him, he promised always with religious observance; because
he judged it the part of a light, not of a liberal man, to promise what he
could not perform. His care was so great in endeavoring the fulfilling of what
he once undertook for any other, that he seemed herein not so much to do
another business, as his own: He never was weary of any business he undertook;
for he esteemed his own credit to be concerned in it, than which, nothing was
dearer unto him: Whence it came to pass that he performed all the businesses of
M. and Q. Cicero, Cato, Hortensius, Aulus, Torquatus, and many other Roman
Knights besides.

Whereby it may be well judged that he avoided the procuration of the
Commonwealth, not for sloth, but in judgment. I can give no greater testimony
of his humanity, than that being a young man, he was most delightful to Sylla,
an old man; and being an old man, most delightful to Brutus, a young man: But
with his Equals, Q. Hortensius and M. Cicero, he so lived, that it is hard to
judge for what Age he was fittest. Although Cicero so greatly loved him, that
his Brother Quintius was not more dear or familiar to him: And this was an
evidence hereof, that besides those Books that are now published, in which he
makes mention of him, there are sixteen Volumes of Epistles sent to Atticus,
from the first Consulate of Cicero, to the last end of his life; which
whosoever reads, will not much want a continued History of those times: For all
things concerning the designs of the great men, the faults of the Commanders,
the changes of the Commonwealth, are so fully written, that all things appear
in those Writings; and it may be easily collected that Prudence is in a manner
Divination: For Cicero did not only foretell those things that afterward fell
out in his lifetime; but also he presaged, as a Prophet, those things that now
come to pass. And what should I relate more touching the Piety of Atticus, when
as I my self heard him truly glorying at the Funeral of his Mother, who being
90 years old, he buried when he was 67 years old, that he never was reconciled
to his Mother, nor ever was at difference with his Sister, who was near his own
Age; which was a sign that either there was never any controversy between
them, or that he was of that indulgence to his Relations, that he held it a
crime to be angry with those whom he ought to love. Neither did he this only by
nature, although all of us ought to obey it; but also by his Learning: For he
so well understood the precepts of the chief Philosophers, that he used them
for the ordering his life, and not for ostentation. He was a strict imitator of
the customs of the Ancients, and a lover of Antiquity, which he so diligently
knew, that he declared it in that Volume wherewith he adorned the Roman
Magistrates: For there was no Law, no Peace, no War, no notable thing of the
People of Rome, which is not set down in its order of time in that Volume. And
(which is a thing of great difficulty) he so unsolded the Original of Families,
that we may thereby know the pedigrees of eminent men: He did this also
severally in other Books, so that at the request of M. Brutus, he deduced in
order the J^nian Family from its root down to this Age; setting down who, and
of whom every one arose, what honors they received, and in what time. In like
manner, he did at the request of Marcellus Claudius, touching the Family of the
Marcelli: And at the request of Cornelius Scipio and Fabius Maximus, touching
the Families of the Cornelii and Fabii, and also of the Emilii: Than which
Books, nothing can be more pleasant to them that have the desire of the
knowledge of eminent men. Also I believe he had skill in Poetry, lest he should
be wanting in the sweetness thereof: For he declared in Verse what persons
exceeded others of the Roman people in honor and amplitude of great Exploits;
so that under the Statues of every person he wrote in no more than four or five
verses their Exploits and Magistracies (which is scarce to be believed) that so
great things should be so briefly declared. There was also another Book of his
in Greek of the Consulate of Cicero. Hitherto these things were published by
us, Atticus living. Now because Fortune was pleased that we should survive him,
we will prosecute the rest; and as much as we may, we will instruct the Readers
by examples of things, as we have above declared, that every man's manners
procure to him his Fortune; for he being content with the Equestrial Order,
wherein he was born, arrived to the affinity of Julius, the Emperors Son, whose
acquaintance he formerly gained by no other thing than the handsomness of his
Life; whereby he won to himself other Princes of an equal Dignity and lower
Fortune: For so great a prosperity followed Caesar, that Fortune denied him
nothing which she had before given or bestowed upon any, whereunto any Citizen
of Rome could possibly attain. Now there was born to Atticus, a Niece of
Agrippa, to whom he had married his Virgin-Daughter: her being scarce a year
old: Caesar espoused too Tiberius Claudius Nero his Son in-Law, born of
Drusilla; which conjunction confirmed their friendship, and rendered their
familiar intercourse the more frequent; although before these Espousals, not
only when he was absent from the City, he never sent Letters to any of his
Relations; but he sent Atticus word what he did, and principally what he read,
and in what places, and how long he was to stay; but also when he was in the
City, and by reason of his infinite business, enjoyed Atticus oftentimes less
than he desired; yet no day almost passed, wherein he did not write to him,
wherein he did not enquire of him somewhat touching Antiquity; sometimes he
propounded to him some Poetical Question, sometimes merrily jesting, he drew
out from him Letters of length: Whereby it came to pass, that the Temple of
Jupiter Feretrius, built in the Capitol by Romulus, by length of time and
neglect, becoming uncovered, was fallen down, that by the persuasion of
Atticus, Caesar took order for rebuilding it: Neither being absent, was he less
complemented by Letters foom Anthony, insomuch that while he was in exile, he
acquainted Atticus what was done in the Land of his Exile, what he did, and
what he cared for: What a kind of matter this was, he will easily esteem that
can judge of how great wisdom it was to retain the use and good will of them
between whom there was not only a mutual emulation of matters of greatest
moment, but between whom so great detraction of either from other, did
intervene, as was necessarily to be between Caesar and Anthony, while each
desired to be the Prince, not only of Rome, but of the whole world. In this
manner when he had completed 77 years of his life, and to the extremity of his
old Age had increased no less in Dignity than in Favor and Fortune (for he
gained great possessions, by no other means than his goodness; and had enjoyed
so great a prosperity of health, that for thirty years he wanted no Physic) he
got a Disease, which himself and his Physicians at first despised; for at first
they thought it a Tenesinus, whereunto speedy and easy Medicines were
propounded.

Under this Disease he continued three Months without any pain, but what he
received from the endeavor of his Cure. Suddenly so great a violence of the
Disease broke in upon one of his Intestines, that at the latter end a putrid
Fistula broke out through his Loins. And before this happened, after that he
felt his pains daily to increase, and that a Fever came upon him, he commanded
his Son-in-Law Agrippa to be sent for to him, and with him P. Cornelius Balbus,
and Sextus Peduceus. As soon as he saw they were come, leaning upon his elbow,
he said, There is no need for me in many words to declare how great care and
diligence I have used in the preservation of my health, since I have you the
witnesses of it. And because I hope I have satisfied you that I have omitted
nothing which might belong to my recovery; it remains, that I should now
advise my self: I would not have you ignorant of this thing; for I am purposed
to cease to nourish any disease: For these many days whatsoever meat I have
taken, I have thereby so lengthened out my life, that I have increased my pains
without any hope of health: Therefore first I desire of you, that you do
approve of my purpose; and next, that you do not vainly endeavor to diswade
me. This Speech being uttered with so great setledness of speech and
countenance, that he seemed not to depart from life, but out of one house into
another: But when Agrippa weeping and Kissing him, did pray and beseech him
that he would not hasten that to himself, which Nature would compel; and
because he might then live somewhat longer, that he should reserve himself as
long as he might to himself and his Friends, he stopped his entreaties by a
silent obstinacy: So when he had forborne Meat two days, his Fever suddenly
left him; and his Disease seemed more easy, yet he continued his purpose. In
the fifth day therefore after he had taken this resolution, pride. Calend. April
is, C. Domitius and C. Sosius being Consuls, he died. He was raised up in his
Bed, as he commanded, without any Funeral Pomp; all good men, and a great
Concourse of the Common People accompanying him: He was buried near the Via
Appia at the fifth Stone from the City in the Monument of Q. Caecilius his
Uncle.

CHAP. I.
A Brief Chronological Account of the Life of Atticus.

Such was the Life and Death of this worthy Pomponius Atticus, described by one
that was Contemporary with him, and well acquainted with him, namely, Cornelius
Nepos, who, as himself witnesses, wrote this History about the beginning of
Augustus, that every circumstance thereof deserves a distinct observation.

And therefore I shall proceed to do these thing: First to give a Chronological
Account of the Life of Atticus, and of those great occurrences that happened in
the Roman State within the compass of his Life. Secondly, To give some account
of the reason of those great motions that happened in this period in the State
and Commonwealth of Rome. Thirdly, To make some Observations touching the
honest and wise Methods that Atticus used to preserve himself and his Estate
without loss or dishonor among all these great motions, revolutions and
dangers that happened in the State of Rome by these Civil Dissentions.

Touching the first of these, I shall give a short Chronological Account of the
Life of Atticus, and those great Disturbances and Civil Wars that happened in
Rome during the time of his Life, that so it may appear what they were when
they happened, and the various successes they had, whereby at once it may
appear what difficulties and storms happened in his time, and how they were by
this man's prudence weathered in the several periods of his Life. And herein I
shall be but brief, and mention only those of great moment, and such wherein
this man's concernment principally lay; omitting many, which though had they
been single, might have been worth the remembering; yet they were but branches
of these greater commotions, and sprang from them, and were but small in
comparison of them.

Neither shall I be over curious in this Account, but only mention them so far
as they conduce to my purpose. He that lists to take a full view of all the
History, may find at large in the Roman Histories, especially, Florus,
Paterculus, Dion. Cassius and Plutarchus in the Lives of Maritis, Sylla,
Sertorius, Pompey, Caesar, Anthony, and Octoevius, afterwards' Augustus Caesar.

I shall dispose of the Times in their order, according as they fall in the
Julian Period, because of the difference among Chronologers touching the
Computations of the years of the world, of the building of Rome, or of the
Olympiades into which these Occurrences might be otherwise aptly enough
disposed.

POMPONIUS ATTICUS died in the 77th year of his Age, C. Domitius and C. Sosius
being Consuls, as Cornelius Nepos tells us, which was in the 12th year of
Augustus, the next year before the Pugna Actiaca between Augustus and Marcus
Antonius, and 2 years before the taking of Alexandria by Augustus, which was
the fatal and funeral deletion of Antony. The death therefore of Pomponius
Atticus was in or very near the 4683 year of the Julian period, and by this
means we come to find out the several periods of his Birth, and other the
occurrences that happened to him and the State of Rome within the time of his
Life.

If therefore we subduct the years of Atticus his Age, namely, 77 years,
current out of 4683 years, it gives us the time of his Birth, viz. about the
year 4606 of the Julian period, in or near the Consulate of Sulpitius Galba and
Marcus Scaurus.

Marius that great Commander and popular Citizen, whom we shall have occasion
often to mention, grew into his great power and authority by countenancing the
popular Interest at Rome, against the Senate and the Optimates. He laid the
foundation of all those future storms in the State of Rome, which were the
occasion of so much bloodshed, and the final Ruin of the ancient Government
thereof, and setting up that Empire that began in Julius Caesar, and was
completed in Augustus, his Heir and Successor. The sixth Consulate of Marius
happened in the year of the Julian period 4614, at which time Pomponius was
about eight years old.

And now the Civil Wars in Rome began to break out; the Process whereof were as
follows.

Marius, by the help of Saturninus, Tribune of the people, Metellus Nonus Dicus
was banished; this caused ill Blood in Rome.

Quintus Metellus his Father, Metellus was by the people recalled out of
banishment; which was so great an eyesore to Marius, that he withdrew himself
from Rome, and went into Cappadocia.

After this Marius returned to Rome, when Lucius Cornelius Sylla, a valiant
man, was in great esteem, a friend to the Senate and the Nobility, a man that
had been very successful in suppressing the War of the Confederates of Italy
against Rome.

Marius and Sylla, there grew great animosities and emulation, which at length
broke out in open violence. For Sylla was chosen by the Nobility and Senate (to
whom he was greatly addicted) to prosecute the War against Mithridates; and in
pursuance thereof, took his journey with his Army. In his pursuit of this War,
he took Athens by long siege; where he was often before his final return to
Rome; where he met with Pomponius Atticus, and showed him the respects
mentioned in his Life.

Marius, to carry on his own Designs, and to root out Sylla, falls in with the
common people, and by the help of Sulpitius, a bold and turbulent Tribune, gets
the Province of Asia, and the management of the War against Mithridates, to be
decreed to himself.

But the Army being constant to Sylla, would not submit to the Government of
Marius. Whereupon, Marius put diverse of the Friends of Sylla to death, and made
a great alteration in the State of Rome.

Marius, things running into a popular confusion under the conduct of Marius
and Sulpitius, the Nobility gave advice thereof to Sylla: Whereupon, he sent
Murena his Legate, with the greatest part of his Army to prosecute the War
against Mithridates, and takes the rest with him, and returns to Rome.

Against him Sulpitius and Marius make opposition; but Sylla prevailed:
Su'pitius is slain, and Marius flying, is by Edict banished, and fled into
Africa, whither his Son, young Marius, the School-fellow of Atticus, fled to
his Father.

This is that Sulpitius mentioned in the Life of Atticus, who being thus slain,
Atticus seeing the State of Rome to grow troublesome and unsafe, all persons of
Note being drawn into the one party or the other, took his journey to Athens;
he was then, as it seems, about twenty years old.

Sylla intending to make all things as sure as he might, used extreme severity
against Marius's Party, killing some, and banishing others; and having settled
his business at Rome, proceeded in his Expedition against Mithridates.

C. Octavius and Cornelius Cynna are made Consuls; Cynna, though he had made
firm promise upon his Entry into his Consulate, to adhere to Sylla's Party, yet
he was (in truth) of Marius's Party, and quickly discovered it after Sylla's
departure.

Hereupon there grew dissension between the two Consuls, and great slaughters
and proscriptions used in Rome, according as either party prevailed. At length
Octavius prevailed, and Cynna was banished.

Cynna, after his banishment, went into Asrica, and met with his Friend Marius,
in an obscure condition; where they enter into new Counsels, which created
future disturbances: For the Marian Faction was not so suppressed by Sylla, but
that they had sufficient power to give new trouble to the State of Rome, if
they had but Marius or Cynna to head them. Thereupon Marius and Cynna return
into Italy, raise a sufficient force of their Friends and Party, enter into
Rome, subdue Octavius, and slew him.

And now again the Party of Marius and Cynna grew as high as ever; and it is
incredible what slaughters they made in Rome of such as opposed them, or such
as they but suspected not to be true and cordial to them.

Marius's return, Marius takes his seventh Consulate; Cynna being his
Colleague; and they held up their Faction for about four years following, with
great severity against all they suspected not to be cordial to them, with
Murder and Banishment: So that most of the Nobility that escaped their Fury,
fled to Sylla, and solicited his return to relieve their oppressed Country.

Scipio and Norbanus Flaccus, being the third Consulate after Marius his
seventh Consulate, Sylla having settled his business of Mithridates, returns
with a great Army into Italy, subdued the two Consuls Scipio and Flaccus.

But the Party of Marius (who, as it seems, was slain in this Battle, or as
others say, died) kept still the City of Rome; young Marius, the Son of Marius,
and C. Carbo are there made Consuls, and exercised extreme cruelty at Rome,
toward those that were suspected to be of Sylla's Party.

Rome Sylla draws his Army, and soon subdued and slew these two Consuls, and
took the City, where he was created Dictator; and again used all manner of
severity against those of the Marian Party: He lived about four years after he
recovered Rome, and died in the Consulate of Lepidus and Catullus.

And these were the Vicissitudes of the Factions of Marius and Sylla, and their
Parties: First Marius prevailed, then Sylla; then Marius again, and then Sylla
again; and then the Faction of Marius seemed wholly suppressed; yet the root of
this evil dissension was not utterly extirpated; but out of it there arose the
seeds of all those Civil Wars that happened in the Roman Commonwealth, till the
final change of the Government thereof in Octavius Caesar. For all the Troubles
and Changes that happened afterward between Caesar and Pompey, between Brutus
and Anthony, between Anthony and Augustus, did spring from those Parties and
Factions, whose foundations were laid in Marius and Sylla.

And now things being for the time settled by the severe Government of Sylla, it
seems that shortly after the Death of Sylla, Pomponius returned from Athens,
being about thirty years old, and brought with him a very great accession of
Learning, Reputation and Honor, and the Surname of Atticus, and lived in Rome
till his Death.

Atticus was near sixty years old, those mutual Emulations and Jealousies that
had long fomented, began to break out into a more public Breach; namely,
presently after the Consulate of Marcellus and Lentulus, about the year of the
Julian period, 4665. Presently after this Consulate, Julius Caesar being absent
in the War committed to him, made suit to be chosen Consul; Pompey being of
great power and interest, especially with the Nobility and Senate, opposed it,
as a thing unusual for any to be chosen Consul being absent: Though this were
his pretense, yet the true reason was, his suspicion of the growing Greatness
of Caesar. By this means, Caesar was disappointed, and others chosen Consuls.

Caesar being enraged with this disappointment, and judging that worse was like
to ensue by Pompey and his Party, drew the Army under his Command into Italy,
came to Brundusium, where Pompey was but escaped by flight; thence he led his
Army to Rome; from whence the Senate were also fled: There he made himself
Consul, broke open the public Treasury, and wanted nothing but the name of
being Monarch or Emperor; though he kept up the shell and the form of their
former Government. After this, he so closely persecuted Pompey, that in the
Battle of Pharsalia, and some other ensuing Battles, the Forces and Power of
Pompey were totally broken, and Pompey himself basely slain by Scptimius.

Caesar continued his Greatness for about five years; and in the fifth year,
Caesar and Anthony being Consuls, Caesar was basely murdered by Brutus and his
Accomplices, in the Senate House; this was in the year of the Julian period 4671,
which was about the sixty fourth year of the Life of Atticus.

This Villainy was committed partly to prevent the growing power of Caesar,
whereby they feared his affectation of the Empire, and change of the
Government, and partly upon the score of Pompey (for his Assassinates were most
of his Party) and in revenge of his Fall.

Caesar by his Will left Octavius his Sisters Son, his adopted Heir, who
thereupon, soon took the Surname of Caesar.

After the death of Julius Caesar, there happened a strange complicated Faction
in Rome: First, between the Murderers of Caesar and the Pompeian Party, of the
one part, and the Caesarean Party, Anthony and Octavius, of the other part. And
then between Anthony of the one part, and Octavius of the other part; for
Anthony being great and powerful, and finding that Octavius was the declared
Heir of Julius Caesar, thought himself neglected, and began to envy Octavius,
who not being above nineteen years old, began to grow great in the Army and
City, being a man full of worth, and looked upon as one that might probably and
reasonably succeed his Uncle in all his Greatness, especially being declared
his adopted Heir.

And hence it came to pass, that both Octavius and Anthony so far agreed as
much as they could, to suppress the party of Brutus and Cassius, and other the
Assassinates of Caesar, and yet kept a jealous eye one over the other.

But on the one side, the Senate and People of Rome had a great respect and
honor for Brutus and Cassius, as being the pretended Champions for the Roman
Liberty: On the other side, Anthony and Octavius had great Relations and great
Interest in the Roman Armies.

Anthony and Octavius, and discerning some animosity between them; as they kept
up the repute of Brutus and Cassius, so they courted and complemented Octavius,
and withal at the same time made Octavius Pro-pretor, and Anthony declared a
public Enemy: This was done in the year of the Julian period 4671. Hirsius and
Pausa being Consuls; and the prosecution of the war against Anthony, was, in
name at least, committed to Octavius, though still Brutus and Cassius were the
persons principally trusted.

The War against Anthony succeeded well, and the Pompeyan party and Senate
having now obtained their ends in the honor they did to Octavius, namely, the
dividing him from Anthony, and thereby strengthening themselves, and weakening
their Opponents, in the same year began to give evidence of their public
neglect of Octavius: And having now served their own turns by him against
Anthony, declared their public dislike and jealousy of Octavius, Cassius,
Brutus, and the Pompeyan party were the great Favorites of the Senate.

In the same year Lepidus Master of the Horse to Octavius, having received
Anthony, a declared enemy, was also by the Senate declared an Enemy to the
Commonwealth of Rome: So that now Octavius, though not a declared Enemy, yet
began to be either suspected or neglected; and Anthony and Lepidus declared
enemies.

This was that time mentioned in the Life of Atticus, wherein the condition of
Anthony was esteemed desperate, and he invaded by his Friends as well as his
Enemies; when yet Atticus stood by his Relations, and protected them against
injuries.

The Case thus standing with these three great men, Anthony and Lepidus
solicited Octavius to fall in with them, otherwise he might look for the same
ill success from the Senate that they had themselves found; and that as now he
began to be neglected, so in a short time he would be oppressed by the Pompeyan
party. Hereupon in the same year, Octavius, Anthony and Lepidus entered into a
confederacy, to establish in themselves a Triumvirate to last for five years
with Consular power, and the disposal of Provinces among themselves, as they
thought good.

This being thus agreed between them, before the same was known to the Senate,
Octavius being willing to have a fair occasion to break with the Senate,
demanded a kindness, which he was sure they would refuse, namely, the
Consulate; wherein he was rejected, and so had a fair occasion to fall off from
them, who formerly and now had so much neglected and affronted him.

Thereupon, Octavius, Anthony and Lepidus joined their Forces, declared their
purpose to reform the Commonwealth under the Triumvirate of them three, and
march with their full power to Rome; which they enter and obtain; and in
pursuance of their former counsel and purpose, dispose of Provinces, create
Consuls, some of those that opposed them, they proscribed, others they killed;
amongst whom, was Marens Tullius Cicero, the great Friend of Atticus, and the
bitter Enemy of Anthony.

This was that season wherein Atticus being now about 66 years old began to
fear proscription at least; but was delivered from that fear by the clemency of
Anthony, namely, in the year of the Julian period 4671.

Cassius and Brutus, that were formerly designed to manage the War against
Anthony, accordingly pursued the same against the Triumviri.

But they were overthrown at the Battle of Philippi, where Brutus was ^lain,
and now the Triumviri held the entire government of the Roman Empire, all
Opponents being cut off or disabled.

Shortly after, by the imprudence of Fulvia the Wife of Anthony, a difference
was raised between Octavius and Anthony; but that was soon composed by a
division of the Roman Empire between them, the Eastern part assigned to
Anthony, and the Western to Octavius: and they entered triumphantly into Rome,
and ratified their agreement by new alliance; Anthony marrying the Sister of
Octavius.

Julian Period, the five years appointed to their Triumvirate, expired, and
they prorogued their power for other five years.

In the year following, Sextus Pompeius being overthrown by Octavius, Lepidus
began to arrogate the honor of that Victory, and began openly to oppose his
Colleague Octavius; but his Army forsaking him, he resigned up his Office of
Triumvir, and upon his submission and importunity, Octavius pardoned his Life,
but exiled him. And now there were only Antonius and Octavius in the exercise
of that Triumviral power.

In the same year, Octavius being 28 years old, returned to Rome in Triumph,
where the Senate decreed unto him the Honor and Office of perpetual Tribunus
Populi.

Julian period 4682, Enobarbus and Sosius Consuls (Which was the year wherein
Atticus died) new differences began to arise between Antonius and Octavius. The
Consuls and part of the Senate fly to Anthony, who in testimony of his defiance
of Octavius, repudiates his wife Octavia, the Sister of Octavius; and open war
was declared between Octavius and Antonius. This ended the next year in the
Victory of Octavius against Antonius at Actium, and shortly after in the taking
of Alexandria by Octavius, and the death of Antonius and Cleopatra the Egyptian
Queen.

Octavius now settled in the Empire of Rome, honored by the Senate with the
Style of Augustus and Imperator; namely, in his fifth Consulate, and in the
year of the Julian period 4685.

And thus we have a short account of the State and Seasons of those great
Motions and Civil Wars that happened in the Roman Commonwealth during the Life
of Atticus. Unto all which we must add these ensuing Considerations, which will
much evidence the greatness of those concussions and difficulties that
accompanied these various revolutions, namely,

1. There were not any of these Changes effected without very great and bloody
Wars between the several Heads of these Factions and their Parties, the changes
were not easy or familiar transitions from one Faction to another; but they
were effected for the most part by great and formidable Armies and Battles, and
effusion of Blood.

2. These Battles that were preliminary to the Victory of either party, were
not slight velitations and conflicts, but they were carried on with greater
vehemence, violence, fury, and blood than many of their wars with Foreigners;
each party engaging as many to their Faction as they could; and each party
carried on with this expectation to be the possessor of the others Honors and
Wealth, if they prevailed; and being assured of utter ruin from the prevailing
party, if conquered by them.

3. The success of these Battles, was always with greatest ruin of the
subdued party that the Victory could inflict.

It is truly noted by the Florentine Politician, that the Romans when Victors
over their neighboring Nations, never used mediocrity or a mean toward those
they conquered; but either used so great beneficence or favor toward the
conquered, that they thereby obliged them from a future revolt; or else dealt
so severely with them, that they utterly disabled them from it. But though in
the victory over the Foreigners, the Romans, according to the various temper of
those they conquered, used sometimes the one Extreme, sometimes the other; yet
in those Victories that happened between the Romans themselves in their Civil
Wars, as they never used mediocrity, so they never used the former extreme, but
always the latter; omitting no severity that might render the subdued party in
all probality, incapable of ever making head again: And this they evidenced in
their bloody slaughters, that they made, after their Victories obtained,
Consiscations and Proscriprions were their greatest animadversions, not only
upon such as had been opposites, but also upon such as they suspected not to be
their real Friends. If any were that had stood neutral, and assisted neither
party, for the most part his wealth became his Crime, and rendered him obnoxious
to Confiscation or Banishment, or at least to excessive Mulcts and Penalties,
to help to gratify and reward the Soldiers and Assistants of the Victor, and
to strengthen and oblige his Party. Indeed Octav. Augustus, when he had subdued
Antonius, was moderate toward the subdued party, and he had reason, because he
then obtained the full mastery of all parties, and made them his own; and
besides his own nature rendered him generally benign and favorable to such of
his enemies who were not implacable. But in these revolutions of Successes
between Marius and Sylla, Caesar and Pompey, Brutus and Antonius, their
severities were horrid and violent, in so much, that the very Friends and
Relations of the depressed party, though they never acted any thing against the
Victor; yet to secure themselves against the rage and jealousy of the
prevailing faction, became the Persecutors and Betrayers of those that were
subdued, as is before declared in the Life of Atticus: Upon all which
Considerations it seems little less than a Miracle, that Atticus, a rich and
wealthy and honorable Citizen of great acquaintance and relations of great
esteem should live in the midst of all these flames and storms, and for the
most time in that great City which was the Stage on which the greatest and
severest part of those bloody and terrible Tragedies were in earnest acted, and
yet retain his Wealth, Honor and Innocence, and an awful esteem and respect
from all parties. But of this and the several honest methods whereby he
preserved himself, his Wealth and Honor together with his Innocence and
esteem, more shall be said in its due place: In the mean time, I shall in the
next Chapter make a short digression to show the nature and reasons, of these
great Factions in the Roman Empire.

CHAP. II.
Touching Factions in general, and the reasons of these great Factions in the
Roman Empire, and why they happened more at this time than for many hundreds of
years before.

THe Roman State in its first Institution, seemed to be principally
Monarchical, yet ended with a Senate, consisting at first of one hundred, and
afterward of three hundred persons, called Patres or Patricii: After the
expulsion of their Kings, they fell in to a Commonwealth; consisting of their
Senate, and two Consuls yearly elected, who had a power in some things Regal.
Afterward, there growing Contests between the Consuls and Patricii of the one
part, and the rest of the People of the other part, the constitution of their
Common wealth was much altered by the admission of a popular power of the
Tribunes elected by the people; so that now their Commonwealth begun to be
mixed, partly of an Aristocracy, residing in the Senate; and some what
analogical to a qualified and elective Monarchy, residing in the Consuls; and
some what of a Democracy, residing in the Tribunitia potestas, in the Tribunes
elective by the people.

Thus this mixed Republic grew great and powerful, and continued many years in
great strength and peace, only sometimes there arose jars and contests between
the power of the Senate and People, which nevertheless seldom broke out into
wars, but sometimes by the prudent intervention of some wise Senators, in
credit among the people; sometimes by seasonable concessions from the Senate to
them; sometimes by the occurrence of some foreign war, these differences were
often allayed or diverted without any great detriment to the Public.

But Marius being a rough, fierce and bold person, a man of Wit and Courage, a
good Soldier, successful, ambitious, and that could not endure any Opponent or
Rival, began that Fire in the Commonwealth of Rome, that scarce ever left
burning, till the Commonwealth of Rome was at last necessarily resolved into
the Monarchy of Augustus. And all those Civil Discords and Wars, all those
Rapines and Violences, those Murders and Banishments, that in the space of
about fifty years after the sixth Consulate of Marius, filled the City and
Empire of Rome, were the success of that Faction that he began, and of that
Breach that he first made in the Texture and Contiguation of that goodly
structure of the Commonwealth of Rome, and the Praeludia to the Monarchy of
Augustus, as the only Cure thereof.

Now in as much as the frame of the Roman Commonwealth consisted of the
Consuls, the Senate, and the Tribunes, and had so stood for many years; and
though in all that time, there had been men of Spirit, and ambitious enough to
trouble a State, and there wanted not frequent brawls between the Nobility and
Commonalty of Rome, in all this time, which might have as well given
opportunity to troublesome Spirits, and to have given fire to the Ambition and
Discontents of persons, and thereby have raised Civil Wars, and put the State
of Rome into blood, It will be seasonable for us to enquire what the reason
might be why that Commonwealth was no sooner engaged in Civil Wars; or if at
any time, some such thing happened (as some such there sometimes were, though
not so great or dangerous) they were soon extinguished, and things quickly
reduced into a peaceable state; and yet in the time of Marius such a Civil War
begun as never left the Common wealth of Rome, till it had in a great measure
changed its Government: And how it came to pass that the Factions in Rome were
so deeply radicated that the Commonwealth could not be cured of it, till it
grew into an Empire, under the Government of Augustus Caesar.

But before I come to the discussion of that enquiry, it will be convenient,
for the application of what follows in this Discourse, to premise something
touching Factions in general; what they are, and what are so truly denominated.

And I must premise, that the established Government of Kingdoms, States or
Commonwealths are of various frames and constitutions; and those things may be
lawful according to the constitution of one State, which are neither lawful or
tolerable according to the constitution of another State.

And therefore what I am about to say concerning Factions in a State, must be
understood with relation to that or the like State or Government whereof I
write, viz. the State of Rome, as it stood in those times when these troubles
broke out: And this I mention to prevent misapplication and miss-interpretation
of what I am writing.

By a Faction in a Commonwealth, I do not mean that Government, which is by Law
or custom settled; and therefore where the settled Government is Monarchical, I
do not take the adhering to the King, a Faction; or where the Government is
Aristocratical, or by a Senate, as it was sometimes in Rome, or mixed, partly
Aristocratical, and partly popular, as it was after the settling of the
Tribunitia Potestas; that established Government, or the adherence to it, was
no Faction; but it is so far from it, that the adherence to the Government
legally established, whether it be Monarchical, Aristocratical, Democratical,
or mixed, is the duty of every good Subject and Citizen.

But that which I call a Faction in a State, is one of these ensuing kinds.

1. When a party of men shall conspire and unite themselves against the
established Government, to subvert or alter it; and this is the greatest
Faction, Crimen lesae Majestatis.

2. When a party of men shall unite and confederate themselves together, to
gain either something to themselves, or to others, by force or fraud, against
the will and consent of that Power that by Laws is entrusted with the
concession or denial thereof.

3. When any person entrusted by the Sovereign power, with a particular Power
or Authority, shall endeavor by force or fraud to extend that power wherewith
he is entrusted, beyond the bounds of it: as if in the State of Rome the
Tribunes should by stirring up the People, or by force or secret confederacy,
encroach upon the power of the Senate or Consuls, or e converso: For though by
the constitution of the Government, they were invested with a just and real
power, yet when by violence or fraud they accroach a larger power, this
acoroachment is an act done by them as private persons, and without the bounds
and limits of their Authority, and therefore in such an Enterprise, they are no
more excused from a Faction by their Authority that they had, than if they were
without any such Authority; because they herein act beyond the bounds, and
without the warrant of that Authority, and consequently as private persons.

4. When two or more great and ominent persons or parties, and it may be of a
considerable interest in a State or Government, engage one against another, at
first, it may be, privately, and as opportunity grows, it may be, more openly
and visibly crossing each other, accusing publicly each other; each party
soliciting others to be of their party: At length using discriminations of
denominations, or habits or signs; and possibly in a little time, public
affronts and rencounters: And at last, it may be, open hostility; and all this
while, the true real Governors of that State, whether Monarch or Senate, sit
still and look on it, may be, out of fear of being oppressed by the power of
both or either party; it may be out of respect to some of the heads of either
party, it may be out of policy, to suffer either party to worry and weaken, and
ruin one another; hoping thereby to preserve the Government; or it may be, one
of a weak and same, and inconsiderate opinion, contenting themselves with the
name or external face, tile and ensigns of Government, and the professed
respects of either party; but not daring to interpose any acts of real
authority, to suppress or remedy those growing mischiefs; fearing they should
not be able to carry it through in respect of the potency of parties: and so
the true Governors stand by, and look on, contenting themselves with the
complements and profession of subjection by both parties; till at last one
party getting the better of the other, lays by the disguise of pretended
Subjection, and gives the Law to his lawful Governors, and makes them do what
he pleases, or suffer what it inflicts. And this commonly is the mischief that
attends a Government that out of any the beforementioned respects, suffer
Factions to grow so great, that at last they become Masterless, and either by
conjunction of both parties, or prevalence of one, give the Law to their lawful
Governors.

5. When some particular persons that are or are not in any authority in a
State or Commonwealth, design some matter either for themselves, or against any
other; and to effect that design, do by secret means or power, or fraud, or
otherwise, draw over the power of that State wherein they live, to be their
Engines and Instruments under the countenance and signature of their authority,
to effect their Design.

For though the authority of the State is engaged therein, yet that being
obtained by the force, fraud or other Engine, and to serve the particular
interest or end of a party, and not acting according to the true and native
freedom and integrity of their Institution, excuses not this from being really
a Faction, though sometimes it be speciously gilded over with the countenance
of public authority: For instance; Suppose Marius and Sylla, two great leading
men in Rome, had a jealousy and animosity one against the other, and Marius
desires that Sylla be deprived of the Province allotted to him, and that it be
conferred on him: On the other side, perchance Sylla has the like design
against Marius; Marius solicits by Bribes or Menaces as many of the Senate as
he can prevail with, to take his part, and Sylla does the like for his part:
The Senate is near divided: Sylla procures some of the Senators of Marius's
part, to be sent away about some other employments, and thereby Marius is
over-voted, and deprived of his Province; then Marius makes in with the
Tribunes, solicits the people to be of his party, and a tumult is thereby
raised in the behalf of Marius, and thereby, and by those Friends of Marius
that are of the Senate, the former Decree is repealed, and then Marius is
restored to his own Province, and also obtains Sylla's Province.

The next day, Sylla, who is potent in the Army, complains of the wrong done
him, and engages the Army for him; whereby again both Tribunes and Senate are
overpowered; and the Senators of Marius's part, withdraw themselves for fear
of the Army, and now Sylla carries it both with the Tribunes and Senate, and
re-obtains his own and Marius's province, and perchance Marius sent into exile,
though here be the concurrence of the Governors in these vicissitudes,

Yet these are nevertheless but several Factions. And this was most commonly
the Discipline of the several Factions of Rome; or if they that could get to
have more interest or power with the people, or with the Army, or could make
the more bold and daring part of the Senate, though less in number, to
overruled the greater part, or if they were excessively loved, or excessively
feared, or were subtle and crafty, to fit either the People or the Senate to
their Designs, these were sure to have a countenance of Authority quickly for
what they did; so that in the vicissitudes of Factions, and of their
prevalence, they never wanted a Senatusconsultum, or a Plebiscitum to warrant
what soever they did. And in the mean time, the favorers of the adverse party,
for fear, or by-ends, withdrawing themselves from the Senate or Assemblies; and
then the others did what they pleased in favor of their own Party. And when it
came to the turn of the other party to be uppermost, the same method was
commonly held; the friends of the depressed with drawing themselves, or sitting
silent, or changing their Suffrages, and then all went smoothly the other way:
Whereby it came to pass, that as Sylla at his return, wanted not the Decree of
the Senate to justify all his Murders and Proscriptions; so Marius at his
return, wanted not the like for his Murders and Proscriptions of the party of
Sylla; and the same vicissitudes obtained between Caesar and Pompey, Brutus and
Antonius, Antonius and Octavius; and for the most part, the Factions of Rome,
whereof I have written, were of this latter kind, and managed under the shadow
and umbrage of the Civil Authority, though in their original they arose from
the pride and ambition, envy and emulations, jealousies and designs, disgusts
and animosities of particular persons, who could not brook any whom they
suspected might be Rivals of their Greatness, Honor or Power. And these
prevailing, bore down the Magistracy of Rome before them; and yet sooner or
later grounded all their exorbitances under the stamp, signature and
countenance of the Authority of the established Governors.

Now though it may be true that these Decrees of the Authority established by
Law, though by this means obtained, are binding, while they stand in force; yet
the manner of obtaining such Decrees by these and the like means, are unjust
and factious, and in true intrinsic justice, do not excuse or justify the
obtainers thereof from oppression and injustice, though they may possibly, for
the time, be temporary projections of them, when they continue unrepeated or
unavoided.

Now a few words touching the second, namely, the Reasons why these Civil Wars
broke out more abundantly and violently at this time than formerly.

It is true, that the very Constitution and Make of such a Government as Rome
had, being partly Aristocratical, and partly Popular, and with some shadow of
Monarchical Power in the Consuls, renders such a State very powerful in
relation to foreign Undertakings and Wars; for foreign Engagements do concenter
and unite a people, and the Fabric of such a State renders their power united
against a foreign power, and consequently more forcible, formidable, and for
the most part successful; the weight of the whole Body moving together in such
foreign Enterprises: But on the other side, these Forms of Governments have
this Disease natural to them, that they are unquiet, and full of Factions among
themselves; especially when they have no foreign diversions.

Great Bodies, they move slowly, yet move they must; and if the Mill have not
Corn to grind, the upper and nether Millstone will grind each other. If we
should suppose the supreme Government had been only Aristocratical, by a
Senate, consisting of three hundred persons, Reason and Experience shows that
Factions are apt to rise even in such a Council: Much more when the common
people were sharers also in the Government.

For first, Commonly in such great Assemblies, some particular persons are the
leading men, who think themselves entitled by their parts, or reputation, or
interest, to govern the Councils, and that raises envy and emulalations in
others, who think they have as much reason to sway in supreme Councils as
others; which presently engages that Council in parties and Factions.

Again, 2. It is commonly seen in such numerous Councils, where they are
supreme and absolute, some there are that drive on their particular interests,
offices and advancement of their Families and Relations, and because others
among them, have the same designs for themselves, which must needs cross and
disappoint one another, every one gathers and engages as many as they can, to
carry on their own designs; which presently engages either the whole Council,
or very considerable numbers thereof into Parties and Factions: Upon these, and
many the like emergencies, where the supreme Government rests in many, it is
hardly possible to avoid breaking themselves into Parties or Factions; unless
some one supreme Governor be to check and control, and disperse these
Factions; or unless some foreign emergency happen, that may concenter them in a
common union against a common Enemy: But besides all this, the mixture of the
Roman Governors, consisting partly of the Patricii, Optimates or Nobility, and
partly of the People and their Tribunes, who were their Delegates, between
which the Sovereign power was in many things distributed and divided, did still
administer occasion of contest and difference, and gave opportunity to busy
and unquiet and discontented spirits, to interess themselves with the Senate
against the people; or e converso: but especially with the popular party, and
by secret suggestions or insinuations, or by open Declamations or Orations to
create disturbances in the State; a coordinate power in several parties,
Councils or Offices rarely resting quiet till some one person or party has
gotten the mastery of the rest; as appears among many instances in that of the
Roman Triumvirate of Octavius, Antonius and Lepidus; wherein, first Lepidus,
and then Antonius were reduced into the single power of Octavius, together with
the Empire: And besides the Constitution of their Commonwealth, partly
consisting in the authority of their Consuls, partly in the Senate, partly in
the people and their Tribunes, there was yet a fourth fountain of continual
commotions; namely, their standing Army: If any of the Consuls, that were
annually chosen, was of a tumultuous or of ambitious nature, and it may be of
too great a Spirit for his Companion, or not willing to be dispossessed of his
power at his years end, and his present power in the Army, gave him opportunity
to satisfy his ambition: If a man were of a great wit, interest and elocution,
he had a great opportunity of leading the Senate, or the greater number of
them, whither he pleased, unless he had some Antagonist of equal wit, interest
and elocution, and then their collision begat emulation and contrary Factions.
Again, a man that was bold and confident, and a great assertor of Liberty, that
could make plausible Invectives against the Senate or Nobility, and could cry
up the interest of the people, that could find faults with the administrations
of the Senate, or could set up some popular Law (as that of the Lex Agraria,
which bred so many tumults in that State) such a man had an admirable
opportunity to work Tumults and Factions among the people: Again, if a man that
were an Officer in the Army (as the Consuls, the Magistor Equitum was) and were
esteemed a gallant man, a man of courage, resolution and conduct in the Army, a
man successful and fortunate, liberal, and of a good presence and elocution,
such a man had a great power and influence over the Army, could lead them as he
pleased, make what alterations, innovations he pleased by them in the
Commonwealth; so that the State of Rome, as they could not live without a
standing Army, considering their Military condition, so they were in danger by
them, if they had the least intermission from foreign Wars; that their
Magistrates, Senate, People, Army, were as so many common places, and topiques,
in or from which, men of unquiet, ambitious and turbulent spirits, had
opportunities to create or nourish Factions and Parties, which must necessarily
in time, either by their mutual collisions, or the prevailing success of
either, make great changes, or strange Earthquakes and Concussions in the State.

Certainly the Roman Senate were a noble Council, without which Rome could
never have risen to that grandeur; yet they being supreme and numerous, could
never be long free from Factions: much less when the Tribunes of the people,
and the great Officers of the Army had such a share in the Government.

But these are but Generals; there seem certain special reasons that occasioned
these great and continuing Factions and Civil Broyls in the State of Rome at
this time; besides that general habitude and propensity to Factions, arising
from the Frame and Constitution of their Governore, when they had no Foreign
Enemies; which seem to be principally these.

1. The Commonwealth of Rome about that time, and shortly after that under
Sylla, after their Victory over the Confederates of Italy, had gotten the
Mastery of all their neighboring Nations, that they seemed to have little left
for them to do in Military Engagements, and therefore being a busy, active
people, they were still restless, and for want of enemies abroad, they were (by
the restlesness of their active souls, accustomed to Wars) carried on to
exercise their fervor and fire one among another: And the wiser part of the
Council easily found that this would be the necessary consequence of their
peace with others; and therefore although they had subdued all their near
neighbors, and had little necessity of any foreign wars, yet they sought
occasions for the diversion of this unquiet humor, by sending abroad their
Armies to remote countries, as Gallia and Britain, and Spain, and the farther
parts of Asia, in their unnecessary War against Mithridates; using that means
to keep things quiet at home, by employing their fiery, active spirits in
remote actions, dealing by their Armies, and military, ambitious men, as they
say, Conjurers do with the Unquiet Spirits that they have raised, set them
about some impossible or difficult employment; as, filling a Sieve with water,
or making a Rope of Sand, that they may not do mischief. So the Roman Councils,
to keep restless, ambitious and troublesome persons in motion and action,
though they had many times little need or reason for it, rather sought enemies
at a distance, or made them such, that they might divert by revulsion those
other inconveniences that otherwise they might find from them at home. But now
when these great Broyls fell out, namely, after the 6th Confederacy of Marius,
they had in effect, subdued all Opponents; and although Sylla was employed then
in the War against Mithridates, yet he did but play with it, and protracted the
War, which he at his pleasure, could have sooner concluded; as appears by the
peace he made with him at last. This seems therefore the first reason of the
eruption of these intestine Wars at this time; because the Roman power had
mastered all their neighboring Nations, and reduced them into a perfect
subjection, or into such a kind of association with them, as still left the
Roman State the Supreme over them. And these Wars they then had, were not such
as were necessary, nor near, but such as were at a distance, and undertaken
either politickly, for the end above declared, or at least ambitiously, and to
augment their Grandeur, not out of any other necessity.

2. The second cause or reason seems to be this; they at first gave too much
head, and too much power to ambitious and intemperate spirits; which thereupon
radicated a Faction, and habituated great spirits to the same. Marius was a
high-spirited, and factious man, and the Commonwealth indulged him too much,
and too often in great Commands and great Offices. He was six times chosen
Consul, and once he made himself so; and by this means, he accustomed and
habituated many of the Grandees of Rome to the knack, and practice and skill of
managing a Faction; and when Sylla was set up against him, he grew a great
Favorite, trusted with great power, oftentimes made Consul, and at last
Dictator; and under his Discipline, those of his party got. the trick of
managing a Faction, and tasted the sweetness of power, and could never be
perfectly weaned from it: the like might be instanced in Pompey, Caesar,
Antonius, Brutus, Octavius, etc. For these men were lifted up so high by the
great and overlong trust, and power, and offices, and commands that were
committed to them, that in a little time they grew too big for the
Commonwealth; and although the Senate and People bore the name of a
Commonwealth, yet in truth they were but Ciphers, and did no more than what
these great men, while they were in power, and had the Army at their command,
did either command, or direct, or permit. And these great Commanders and
Officers, though they pretended an inferiority to the Commonwealth, and that
they were but their servants, yet in truth, those were but Complements; for in
their several vicissitudes of power, they exercised as great and greater
Monarchical, or rather Tyrannical power than ever Octavius did after he was
saluted by the name and style of Augustus. And by this means the generality of
great Spirits in Rome, were taught to despise the former regular Conduct of the
Commonwealth of Rome, and aspired after greater matters, initiated and listed
themselves under Factions, learned the art and skill of them, designed to
themselves as much greatness as they had seen acquired by those Grandees to
whom they had joined themselves, and were not patient of being any longer under
the Commands of the Senate, but were filled with spirits, and habits and
designs, not consistent with a Commonwealth; and accordingly as opportunity
happened, they broke out into new intestine commotions; whereas the former
Discipline of the Commonwealth of Rome was not to make men too great, or if
necessity exacted it of them, as when they created Dictators; in time of
desperate danger or necessity, they continued it not longer than the necessity
lasted: By this means men were not very long in great power or offices, and
thereby were kept from growing too great.

Factions growing by them, or under their umbrage, had not time enough to
ferment or take root, or grow strong, but a substitution of new men in office
and power, soon suppressed, or scattered, or starved the budding Factions
before they grew too masterless. And men that were naturally high-spirited, or
ambitious, or fond of power or greatness, had thereby discouragement or
interruption in their projects, and the generality tutored into obedience and
quietness, having no examples of successful Factions: And by this great
moderation and restraint of too great or too long power in any, they prevented
that envy and animosity, which is naturally apt to rise against men in a
Commonwealth, that are grown too great or too powerful: But on the contrary,
the course that about Marius's time was used in Rome, gave necessary occasions
of the growth and turbulency of Factions by these three necessary consequents
thereof.

1. He that was thus raised to too great and long a domination, was
necessitated to maintain a Faction to support and keep him in that state of
Grandeur to which he arrived.

2. That the accustomed Grandeur of any one person did as naturally raise envy
in others against him, and consequently the raising of Faction against him to
suppress or reduce him to a lower condition.

3. It suddenly instructed men in the methods of raising Factions, and
accustomed men with a kind of facility and dexterity in managing of them, and
invited them to the frequent use of these practices by the sweetness of power,
and the success of others that had prevailed by them.

3. The third occasion of the multiplied Factions that happened in Rome, after
the Dance began by Marius, was that very thing which was ordinarily used for
the suppressing them; namely, the violence, rage, and revenge that was used by
that Faction that prevailed, against the Faction that was subdued.

For instance, When Marius was uppermost, he used all manner of severity
against Sylla's party that opposed him. Again, when Sylla prevailed, he used
the very like severity against the party of Marius. The like was done again by
Marius and Cynna, and their party. Thus like foolish Passengers in a Boat, when
the waves roll, and the Boat tilts to one side, then run on the other, and make
it tilt worse; and then run again to the other side, till they endanger the
casting away of the Vessel and themselves.

Thus these great Heads of Factions, and their parties, by the violent and
outrageous dealing with the depressed party, endeavoring thereby to secure and
establish themselves in the free enjoyment of their acquired Victory and
Greatness, and utterly to disable the adverse party ever to appear again in
power, did obtain a quite contrary effect, and suddenly ruin themselves, and
by their violence give life to that party they thus endeavor by these means to
extinguish: And thus it must necessarily be, and in experience has been
commonly found to be; and the reasons of it are these.

1. These excessive severities do raise in the generality of mankind these two
passions, which do most ordinarily bring to pass that which I have said;
namely, a loathing and detestation of that cruelty and inhumanity, and of that
party that practices it; and a pity and compassion toward their
fellow-Citizens, whom they see thus cruelly handled. And that hatred does most
commonly waste, and in time ruin the conquering party; and this pity does
secretly animate, assist, and buoy up the depressed party, and oftentimes give
it life, when it seems extinguished and dead.

2. These excessive severities can never wholly extirpate all those that are of
the adverse party; some will remain do what they can; And if they could wholly
extirpate every person that ever appeared against them, yet it will be
impossible to extirpate all their Relations or Acquaintance, unless they should
wholly dispeople their Countroy of all but themselves. There is not a person
that they murder, but it may be has twenty others under some relation or other
unto the person murdered, either as a Father, or Son, or Brother, or Kindred,
or Friend, or Dependant. And the more of the adverse party they destroy, the
more Relations they leave that survive them. And so many of the adverse and
suppressed party as are of their relations, that survive, will bear in mind the
remembrance of that cruelty, and harbor a secret and violent passion of
revenge against it: And this passion, as it is fierce, cruel and implacable, so
it is vigilant and industrious to gain an opportunity to satisfy it self. And
this was it that principally caused that Villainy against Caesar, and the
endangering of all those that adhered to him. It was not altogether the
jealousy they had of the Greatness of Caesar, the fear of his invading the
Empire; but it was the memory of Pharsalia, and the death of Pompey, and those
severities which he used against that party (though he were not immoderate
therein after the Battle ended.) The Love and Memory of Pompey and his Party
that survived him in his Friends and Relations, and the spirit of revenge that
they had long harbored, was that which made and united, and fortified the
Conspiracy against Caesar. And possibly the death of Antonius, and the
destruction of his party, by Octavius Caesar, might have produced as unhappy
effects, had not the experience of Octavius Caesar, and his singular prudence
and moderation, and his deserved esteem in the Roman Empire, conquered as well
the revenge and envy of the relations of Antonius his party. Thus these
severities of prevailing parties too often times perpetuate and unite their
enemies, instead of extirpating and extinguishing them.

4. The fourth, and indeed the great cause of these Commotions at this time,
and for so long a continuance, was this; States and Common wealths have certain
periods of their duration and consistency appointed them in the ordinary
methods of the Divine Providence; and sometimes those periods determine in a
final desolation or excision: Thus the Commonwealth of Carthage was finally
destroyed by the Roman. Sometimes this period does not expire in a desolation,
but in some great change and alteration of it: And if the Compages and Fabric
of the Commonwealth be strange and foreign, the change is more difficult; it
has a long and great struggling before that change can be affected; and
preparatory to the effecting thereof, there are ordinarily great aspiring
attempts endeavored by great Spirits; concussions and shakings antecedent and
preliminary to it, as if the very complexion and temperature of the great and
more regnant spirits in it, were tending to some such change. And thus it fared
with the State of Rome at this time; the period of its former Aristocratical
and popular Government was within sixty years of its end, and a new and better
shape of Government to be assumed. And now all the great and active spirits in
Rome, seem to be reaching after a Monarchical or Imperial Government; as first,
Marius, then Sylla, then Pompey, then Caesar, then Antonius, then Augustus: And
although all these were not able to acquire the full accomplishment of it, yet
every one of these drew nearer to Imperial power, than the other; Sylla's power
grew greater than Marius's; Pompey's than Sylla's; Caesar's than Pompey's; till
at last it fixed and was completed in Octavius Augustus.

And all these were so many indications that now at this time the Genius of the
Roman Republic, or rather more truly, the Genius, the disposition, temperament
and complexion of the Roman State was drawing toward, and breathing after a
Monarchy, as that which was now the most suitable Government for it; and that
these several Earthquakes, raised by these fiery spirits, were but as so many
strokes of a skilful Statuary, to bring the Roman Commonwealth into the more
stately Statue and Configuration of an Imperial Government; which seemed now
not only to be the complement and perfect growth and stature of the Roman
State, but that which was absolutely necessary to preserve it from ruin by
Civil dissentions, and to preserve its Grandeur; so that as the state and
condition of the natural Body arrives from a more imperfect degree, to a more
perfect, and passes through various changes, till its complement and
perfection; and then gradually declines: so the Roman State passed through
these various forms, which in its several seasons were suitable to it, till it
came to this goodly and complete station whereunto it attained under Augustus.
And these various concussions and shakings that it had in those sixty years
before Augustus, were but the preparatory endeavors, and struglings, and
tendencies of the Spirit and Genius of the Roman State, that tended to it, and
the strokes and hammerings that were necessary for its effecting: And therefore
this was the periodical season for these attempts and preparations to a change.
And thus far (by the way) of the Reasons that might probably occasion these
Civil Broyls in the Roman Commonwealth at this season more than formerly.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Methods that ordinarily persons use to secure themselves in the
Vicissitudes of prevailing Factions.

WE have found Rome in the whole compass of the Life of Pomponius, to be a
Theater of great and tragical commotions, full of unquietness and danger, and
of various vicissitudes; sometimes one Faction prevailing, and sometimes the
contrary Faction being uppermost; and then again the former returning; whereby
the Scene was oftentimes varied. And now I shall brieffy consider of those
Methods that commonly persons use, and in that season did use for their
security and safety, and the errors and ineffectualness thereof, to the ends
here proposed, that thereby the prudence and wisdom of Atticus, and the
singular discretion of those means which he used for his own security, may the
more clearly appear. The means that ordinarily men choose in such unquiet
States, are for the most part such as these.

1. They commonly strike in with that Party or Faction that is in present
power, and join with it, and commit their Fortunes into the same Vessel with
it; the imprudence whereof, is apparent in this, that they venture all in the
constancy of the success of that Party or Faction which they espouse.

And consequently, if they prevail not, or happen to receive at any time a
shock, they are ruined with them, or at least escape that ruin with infinite
difficulties. And herein is apparent their want of due consideration of the
state of things of this nature. They judge according to the present face, and
show, and appearance, and do not consider that truth which Reason and
Experience makes evident and common; namely, that Factions in a State never
long hold their ground. But if they are not suppressed by the natural power of
the State wherein they arise, yet by the same like means whereby at any time
they obtain, they are commonly broken and dissolved, and by the same Artifices
whereby they gain the Saddle, they are commonly unhorsed, either by the adverse
party, or by some distemper rising in their own Party, which is equally
michievous to them. The Game being ordinarily thus managed, that when one
Faction has suppressed another, the victorious Party fall into divisions among
themselves; some thinking they have too small a share in the acquest, and
others too much, and so weaken their Party, and render it less and narrower;
and then commonly one of the subdivided party, that finds it self weakest,
falls in with the remainders and Relics of the first party, and so oppress
that subdivided party that last obtained; whereby it comes to pass, that if the
person that fell in at first with the prevailing party, takes that subdivided
party that seems prevalent, he suffers ruin with them; and if it be his Lot to
fall in again with the weaker subdivided party, and so join with the old
suppressed party, yet his former oppression is remembered, and he is never
trusted; and commonly as the old party gets advantage and power, he is exposed
to Infamy, Contempt or loss. But be the success what it will be, he is ever in
an uncertain, unstable and tumultuous condition, and still put upon necessities
of new Devices, Shifts and Contrivances to save the State; whereby he never can
enjoy true tranquillity either of Life or Mind.

2. Another Expedient that men use to save themselves, is, ever to be of the
prevailing Faction by all Methods and Artifices imaginable, and as the parties
change in their successes, so to fall to them or from them: And herein they
have a difficult and troublesome Game to play; and they had need be their
Crafts-Master, if at the first change they are not at a loss; but if they keep
their ground upon the first change, they never can weather the second; for they
irrecoverably lose their Credit; their tricks and shuffling and disposition
will be known, and then they will be like Stratagems in War, that can never be
practiced twice with any success; at least, by and between the same parties.
And now these Artifices wherein men thus save themselves, are commonly Flattery
and Dissimulation, Pretensions of their being formerly miss-led, and now their
eyes are opened, professions of great satisfaction with the proceedings of the
party prevailing, and extreme indignation against that party which they
formerly took; suing for opportunities to manifest their indignation against
them, and hatred of them; and to gain credit with their new Masters, and give a
testimony of their through conversion to them, offering their service, and
employing it in the bitterest persecutions, treacheries and cruelties against
those that they formerly served. It is observed in the Life of Atticus, that
when Antonius was declared an Enemy, and Brutus and Cassius obtained in Rome,
there were none more bitter persecutors of Antony's Family, than those that in
his prosperity had been his Friends: But the folly of these Sycophants and
followers of Fortune, appears in this:

1. That though possibly they may save their skins by such tricks, yet they
never gain credit enough with their new Friends to be either loved or trusted:
They may use them for their ends, but always secretly hate and detest them, as
men of base dispositions and principles, and ever suspect them, as such as
would do the like with their new Friends upon any turn of Fortune.

2. Their new Friends, if they employ them at all, employ them in the basest
Offices, and such as are commonly, though perchance useful to their occasions,
yet hateful and detestable to Humane Nature; as to be Assassinates, Spies,
Betrayers of those that were of the former party, and such sordid employments:
And they dare not boggle or scruple at such employments, nor perform them
perfunctorily or ineffectually; for then they are rendered obnoxious to their
new Masters, and commonly suffer worse than if they had never complied. And if
they go through with these base employments, they are rendered odious to all
good men; and if ever the adverse party gain ground again, they are sure to be
ruined: Thus they purchase their peace with their new Masters at the dearest
price, and become everlasting slaves to save their Skins and Estates.

3. The third Mischief that they are involved in, is this; that if ever the
former Faction prevail again, they are sure to be dealt with worse than the
worst of enemies, and can never save themselves by new flatteries and
tergiversations: Nay, if it fall out (as commonly it does) that this last
prevailing Faction breaks and subdivides into Factions, and one part falls in
with the old Faction, to strengthen themselves, and carry this Sycophant along
with them; yet the remains of the old Faction will never forget this man's
revolt; but one time or other, will work his ruin, unless his Fortune be
better than either his Wisdom or Desert.

3. Another, and the most ordinary help is upon the prevalence of the adverse
party, men that are obnoxious to them, purchase their peace, if they be rich
and able: But this is not without danger too; for such a man shall rarely sit
quiet under the party with whom he so compounded; but they will ever find some
device to be always draining of Money from him; partly because their
necessities will be still calling; and partly that they may disable him from
giving new supplies to the adverse party, if ever they should appear again. And
if ever such a Turn happen, he shall be sure his old Friends will expect a
greater contribution from him; and make him pay a double Ransom, (if he be
able) to expiate his former composition with their Enemies, and will pretend it
a piece of Justice, to set the higher Mulct upon him.

These are some of those ordinary Helps whereby men use to secure themselves
under the Vicissitudes of Factions: But these were not such as were used by
Atticus; they were quite of another kind, and such as were more Noble, Prudent
and Safe; as shall be seen when we come to consider them.

CHAP. IV.
Touching the Means whereby the Safety of Atticus was procured under these
various Vicissitudes in the Roman State.

THe History of this Man's Life gives us the Relation of these things.

1. It gives us a short and obscure Account of those Storms and Civil Wars of
Rome, whereof I have given an Account somewhat more particularly in the first
and second Chapters.

2. It gives us an Account how that notwithstanding all these storms, this man
enjoyed a quiet and serene Life, and a peaceable Death, after he had lived 77
years.

3. It shows also the Means which he used for the attaining of this
Tranquillity of Estate, among all those troublesome Contests and Difficulties.

4. It also tells us of the excellent Learning, Virtue, Goodness, Liberality,
Frugality, Constancy, and other Excellencies of this excellent man.

Touching the first of these, I have said enough before: Touching the second, I
shall say but little; because the History of his Life fully relates it. He
always in these times lived in great peace, quietness and tranquillity. 2. In
great wealth and plenty. 3. In great esteem and reverence with the Nobility and
Common People of Rome. 4. In great value and esteem with all parties; no
Faction, though never so prevalent or violent, did him any hurt; but studied
and endeavored all ways imaginable to oblige him; insomuch that in his old
age, his Daughter was married into the Family of Augustus Caesar. 5. Which is
yet more, he kept a fair and open, visible correspondence with all contesting
parties, even in the times when their differences and animosities were highest,
and yet without any distaste or jealousy, by either party; all parties
courting and honoring and esteeming him in their greatest heats, and contests,
and civil wars one against another. Indeed upon the return of Anthony to Rome,
this good man began to be somewhat afraid of Proscription; this fear attaqued
him by reason partly of his old Age, which naturally is more obnoxious to Fear,
than younger Age; and partly by reason of that extremity and violence used
against Cicero his intimate Friend: But it soon appeared that he was more
afraid than he had cause; for Antonius did not only give him an assurance of
his own safety, but at his intercession, spared many more, that had otherwise
been obnoxious to the danger of this revolution. In short, he lived as happy
and as honorable a life as could possibly be expected in the most serene and
quiet times.

Touching the fourth of these, namely, the Virtues of this excellent man, I
have occasion to mention them in the next Chapter. And the Business of all the
following Discourse shall be principally employed in the third General; namely,
the Means and Methods whereby this excellent man was preserved in the midst of
these Civil Flames and Storms. And next under the Divine Providence (which
secretly and powerfully orders and governs all things and events in the
world) I think the preservation of this excellent man, may be attributed in the
first place, to the Virtue and Prudence of Atticus himself; and secondly, to
the Temper and Constitution of the Affairs of Rome at this time, and of the
Nobility and Citizens thereof.

And because my great Design in all this Discourse is to trace out those
excellencies, and that prudent Conduct of Atticus herein. I reserve the first
of these to the full enquiry of the ensuing Chapters, and shall take up the
second Consideration, which as it was the least of the Conducibles to his
preservation; so it shall be but briefly handled.

There seems to be in the condition of Affairs and Citizens of Rome, these two
Expedients, that, though to an ordinary person, they might be of little use in
these Calamities; yet to a man of that eminent worth and goodness, and desert
that was in this man, might be some assistance to his own prudent conduct of
affairs in relation to his safety and preservation.

First, The experience that the Roman State had gained of the mutability of
things before such time as Atticus returned to Rome, from Athens: For he went
to Athens about the time of Sylla's first return to Rome against Marius, he
returned not till after Sylla's Death, as it seems, And though that after his
return, the Factions and Vicissitudes thereof in Rome, were great; yet I think
scarce any History gives an account of so great Troubles, and Vicissitudes, and
Changes in so short a time, and between two single Heads of Factions, as
happened between Marius and Sylla: And this instability and vicissitude of
things gave a Lesson to ensuing Factions, of some more moderation than appeared
between those two parties of Marius and Sylla; and therefore it seems that in
Contests between Caesar and Pompey, there was somewhat more of moderation, than
was between Sylla and Marius. But this was soon forgotten (I must confess) for
the assassination of Caesar by Pompey's party, soon made both parties forget
moderation, as appears by the cruelty of Antonius against Cicero and diverse
others at his return to Rome.

This was something conducible to the quiet of Atticus, namely, the experience
that all parties had of the vicissitude of Fortune, taught them somewhat more
of Moderation than formerly; and men engaged in Factions, were contented to
keep an interest in so good and worthy a man as Atticus; though he took not
part with them; because they knew not how soon they might stand in need of his
Friendship, either to relieve their distressed condition, or to intercede for
them.

2. A second Consideration relating to the Great men, and chief Officers, and
Citizens of Rome was this, that long and great experience had given them a
great observation and judgment of men and their dispositions and worth. Athens
indeed was then the greatest School in the world, for the attaining of the
knowledge of Learning and Arts; but there was no School in the world equal to
Rome, for the knowledge of men. For they had the best opportunity to have the
experience of this kind by their frequent converse with men of all
dispositions, inclinations, employments, and Nations, both in the resort of
Foreign Agents thither, and in their own Negotiations and Expeditions abroad,
and the great variety of occasions, and actions, and occurrences of several
natures. These opportunities taught, especially the Grandees of Rome, admirably
well to understand men as well as business.

And they found that Atticus was not only a very learned, wise and excellent
man (this indeed had not been sufficient to have protected him no more than it
did Cicero) but that he was a man of great esteem, and well beloved by the
Citizens generally; and a man that really and sincerely declined any
intermedling with any Faction, did not stand in the way of that Honor and
Grandeur that ambitious men looked after; that he was contented with his
Station, affected not Power nor Wealth, that his beneficence was great to all,
and not out of contemplation or study of parties, but as a friend to Humane
Nature and Mankind in general. And upon this account, they found that it was
not at all their interest, neither did the necessity of their Affairs engage
the Victorious Faction to bend themselves against him; nay they well knew it
would have been a disreputation to their Cause, to have oppressed a man of that
credit and innocence that Atticus was of. And besides, they found, that as the
state of all affairs was so mutable, that sometimes one party, sometimes
another was uppermost, so he was a common Magazine and Treasury of goodness and
beneficence to the necessities and exigences of Mankind, though he
industriously declined cherishing or encouraging their Factions and
Animosities. And they prudently fore saw a possibility of the change of their
own condition, wherein they might stand in need of his Beneficence hereafter;
and therefore not only out of Justice, in contemplation of his Innocence, but
out of Prudence, in contemplation of the mutability of things, and the use they
might have of his relief and beneficence upon a change of Affairs, they did not
only not oppress or injure him; but they endeavored by all offices of kindness
and respect, to oblige him. And hence it was, that although the great Heads of
Factions, when they prevailed, were severe to all that oppressed them, and
jealous of all that were not of their party, were ready to receive occasions
against them, and enriched themselves, and gratified their Assistants with the
spoils of all such as they suspected: Yet they would receive no accusation
against him, and generously did bear with the reliefs he gave to their Enemies
in distress; and interpreted it not as an adhering to the adverse Faction, but
to be, as indeed it was, the fruit of his natural beneficence and goodness to
Mankind, as such. And therefore they were not of such narrow and pitiful souls,
to give ear to busy Informers or Sycophants against a man of his worth and
goodness, as one that strictly sided with the adverse party, or that his
beneficence toward men in distress was an owning or espousing of their Follies
and Factions: For they understood and knew the man to be wise, and just, and
peaceable, though liberal and compassionate to those that wanted. And this was
another occasion of his safety, namely, the prudence and generosity of those
great men, who, though by reason of their Self-Love, Interest, Ambition,
Affectation of Power, and Greatness of Spirit, and emulation, could brook no
Opponent or Rival in their Greatness; yet had so much wisdom as to know men;
and so much generosity and nobleness of mind, as to value and esteem such a one
who was really a common Friend and Benefactor to Humane Nature. And these be
some of those foreign and accidental contributions to his preservation: But all
these are but little and inconsiderable. The great foundation of his safety
(next under the Divine Goodness and Providence) were his own Worth, Virtue,
Goodness, Prudence and wise Conduct of himself and his actions, whereby he
became, as the Author of his Life observes, suae ipsius Fortunae Opifex, one
that molded and shaped his own success and happiness through the whole course
of his Life.

And this is the business and design of the ensuing Discourse, namely, to show
those excellent, wise and honest Methods whereby he served the great
superintendent Providence of the Governor of the World, in his own
preservation and steering of his Life in peace and happiness through all the
Storms and Tempests of that troubled State of Rome, till he arrived at his rest
in a good old Age. And this Argument I shall prosecute at large in the ensuing
Chapters, as the principal end of this Discourse. 1. Because it may give a more
distinct account of the admirable Prudence and Wisdom of this excellent man. 2.
Because it will give a singular example, and possibly a useful instruction how
a man may preserve at once himself and his innocence and tranquillity in
difficult and tumultuous times, and steer himself between the Rocks of
contesting Factions without Shipwreck.

CHAP. V.
Touching the Means that Pomponius Atticus used to save himself from the
dangers of the Civil Wars that happened in Rome: And first, concerning the
Quality and Condition of the Man himself.

THe Means that this excellent man used for his preservation, were not of those
low and despicable kinds that are before mentioned in the Third Chapter; but
they were such as are honest and generous, justifiable and rational; such as
consisted with innocence, worth and prudence, and accordingly proved singularly
successful, as well to preserve his Reputation, as his Safety.

And I shall digest them under these three Heads, viz.

1. What he was, and how the qualifications and condition of his person
conduced to this end.

2. What he principally avoided.

3. What he principally did in order to this attainment. And in all these, I
shall follow that faithful Description of him and his Life, by his Contemporary
Cornelius Nepos; though I shall perchance order and transpose the several
circumstances and passages in it, in some different order from that
Description, singling out, and laying together the same under various Heads or
Sections.

For the first of these; what he was: He was a man of deserved veneration and
esteem wherever he lived; and that esteem obtained not by a bare, light,
popular eye; but raised upon the firmest and most deserving accounts, arising
in or from himself, or those accessions or contributions that were of great
vicinity to himself; so that he had a kind of intrinsic propriety in the
reputation he had; because it was but the natural reflection of what was his
own: and not from the Donatives, or Charity or liberality of others. By this
means his honor and esteem became fixed, stable and permanent.

1. Though he were not of a Patrician Race, yet he was of a generous Extraction
and Family, derived to him by a long succession of Progenitors of the
Equestrian Degree.

2. He had a fair Estate descended to him from his Father, which was increased
by the accession he had from his Uncle; and this he increased, not by great
Offices, or Military Rapine, Farming of Customs, or by Merchandise, or by any
Mechanical employments, but by a prudent and generous Frugality, savouring
neither of parsimony, nor profuseness.

3. He was educated in all sorts of Learning, first in Rome, and after at
Athens, the University of Greece, and of the world.

4. He had persons of great eminency and Learning, that were the companions of
his Education.

5. He made a great proficiency in all kinds of Learning, as Greek Oratory,
Poetry, Antiquities and Philosophy; in all which he exceeded his Contemporaries.

6. He was a man of exquisite parts, of a great Wit, profound Judgment,
admirable Elocution, singular Wisdom and Prudence.

7. All these he improved by use and experience in matters of public
concernment, whereof he was a great observer; and though he would not meddle as
a public Officer; yet he much assisted the Commonwealth of Athens with his
private advice and assistance in the businesses of the Commonwealth; and after
his return to Rome, he was looked upon as a very wise man in State Affairs;
insomuch, that if he would have engaged himself in public Councils, he had
been able probably at any time to have weighed more than any one man, the
public Counsels and Actions of that State.

8. He was a man of great Truth, Veracity and Sincerity, that hated Lying and
Flattery.

9. He was a man of singular Prudence in his Domestic Affairs, frugal without
Parsimony or Prodigality, his House and Furniture neat and handsome, without
Sumptuousness, his Family great, but orderly; his entertainments plentiful,
without superfluity.

10. He had a great prospect into the Affairs both private and public, and
could at a distance foresee the events of things. Tully, that was a wise man,
consulted him as his Oracle; and had he followed the Counsels or Example of
Atticus, he had escaped the violence of Anthony.

11. He was a man of a large heart, liberal, bountiful, compassionate to those
in want, distress, or necessity, and yet placed his bounty with that wisdom,
that he avoided the suspicion of Popularity, and the danger of countenancing
Factions or Parties; and this he did by these two methods, he did what he did
in this kind, openly and generously, not sneakingly, as if he was ashamed or
afraid of what he did; and he did it indifferently, and without discrimination
of parties.

12. He was a man of great affability and cherfulness, and yet mingled with
such authority and gravity, that as by the former he gained Love, so by the
latter he upheld his Respect and Reverence; that as my Author tells us, it was
hard to judge whether he was more feared, or reverenced, or loved. He conversed
with the meanest with a handsome condescension, and yet lost nothing of his awe
and due distance; and he corresponded with the greatest without adulation or
flattery; with the meanest, without superciliousness or insolence.

These are some of those many qualificationns of this man, that rendered him
acceptable to all, beloved of all, reverenced and esteemed by all; so that none
would or durst do him hurt: all courted his Friendship and Familiarity. And by
that excellent humanity and goodness, and suitableness of disposition to the
true Genius of Humane Nature, he obtained a secret interest and party, as it
were, in every man; for although most of mankind be transported either with
passion, or ambition, or self-love, or interest, whereby they are carried out
to many unruly and disorderly actions, yet there is in every man a secret
Genius of Humanity, a secret bias toward Virtue and Goodness, that a man can
never so far forth put off and discharge himself from, but that he will still
retain an approbation of Virtue and Goodness, a secret esteem of it, and of
them that practice and use it; though men's Passions and Errors and Incogitancy
may carry them off from the practice of it themselves; so that the common bias
and secret sympathy of the humane Nature in all men with Virtue, Goodness and
Honesty, gives an honest and a worthy man interest almost in the worst of men,
whereby they are before they are aware, inclined to love, reverence and honor
him, whom yet their passions and interest many times forbid to imitate. And
this goodness of Atticus was that which gave unto him a secret interest and
party, as it were, in those rough, great and ambitious Commanders and Officers,
and all others of the Roman Empire, that they durst not injure him, but loved,
honored and admired him as a man framed according to the true Standard of the
Humane Nature.

And as this connatural benignity of this man was the root and fountain of all
those excellent actions hereafter mentioned, which were those other Auxillaries
that procured his safety, so I do look upon that native and acquired worth,
virtue, goodness and congruity to humane perfection; and that deserved esteem
and honor that from thence resulted unto him from the generality of men, to be
one of the greatest procurers of his security in troubled times. And indeed
upon the bare account of his worth, wisdom and excellence, I do look upon him
as a greater man than Sylla, or great Pompey, or Caesar, or Antonius, or
Augustus himself: For these great men being circled about with great Armies,
with Horsemen and Legions, with Swords and Pikes, and other instruments of
force and cruelty, subdued and conquered Cities, and Kingdoms, and Armies, and
afterward shattered and broke one another, and with these assistances ruled
the Senate, the City, the People; but this single man, without either Armies,
or Military power, or external force, without any Instruments of terror, by his
own personal virtue, goodness and worth, commanded the love and esteem of all,
prevented injuries, conquered the Conquerors, and reduced them all
successively, one after another, when they were in their greatest splendour and
power, to court him, to strive to oblige him, to pay an awful reverence to him;
so that he was in truth greater than the greatest of them, and better fortified
and guarded against the common violences that attended those times, than either
Pompey or Caesar, in the midst of their greatest and most formidable Armies.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the other Expedients that this wise man used, to avoid the
difficulties of the Times wherein he lived; and first, of his Travels into
Greece.

IN the former Chapter we have seen Pomponius Atticus an excellent, good and
virtuous man, and in great esteem by reason thereof, wherever he lived, and
the great security he had upon that account of the great reverence and
veneration that all men owed and paid to him: And this was the great Basis both
of his security and tranquillity in troubled and factious times, and the root
and spring of all those virtuous actions and prudent management of his Life,
which together with the reverence and veneration of his worth, contributed to
his safety and happiness of Life.

These actions and prudent disposals I have before distributed with relations
to their Objects, into these two kinds.

1. The things which he avoided. 2. The things which he did.
1. The first Essay that he made, was to avoid the Scene of the troubled estate
of Rome, upon a wise foresight of the ensuing commotions, and the difficulty
for him, being young, rich, and in esteem, to avoid, if he staid in Rome,
engagement in those dangerous Factions that were now hatching, and partly
broken out: And for that purpose he retired with a considerable part of his
personal Estate, to Athens. And this he did principally to avoid those growing
Storms which were beginning; but yet with a fair and worthy design to improve
himself in Learning at Athens, which was the learnedest School in the world,
and the place of resort of young Gentlemen, not only of Greece, but of Rome,
and other parts of the Roman Empire, for their education: And the manner and
occasion of this his withdrawing from Rome, was thus:

Marius became a great man in Rome, had been now six times Consul, a man of an
active, busy, fierce and imperious Spirit, and projected great alterations in
affairs to the detriment of the Senate and Nobility of Rome, and by his often
holding the Magistracy, had gotten many active Spirits of his party, among
which was Julius Caesar, though privately and cautiously, and many other
Gentlemen of Spirit and Fortune.

Pomponius lived all this time in Rome, being bred there in the time of
Marius's power, and bred up with one of his Sons, and with diverse Gentlemen
that could not choose but be devoted to the party of Marius.

In the sixth Consulate of Marius, he began to be almost of man's estate, about
18 years old, the season for young Gentlemen of Rome to mingle themselves in
public Affairs, or to be initiated in Military Employment; and doubtless he
could not choose but be solicited and importuned thereunto about that Age, and
could hardly avoid it without an imputation of sluggishness and cowardice, or
of being no friend to the present State of Rome; and the rather because he was
known to be rich, and Nobly descended.

And besides all this, he was linked into affinity and acquaintance with many
of the party of Marius, especially with Sulpicius the Tribune, a great Friend
of Marius, whose Brother married his Sister.

And now the Senate and Nobility of Rome smarting under the power of Marius,
and desirous to avoid his Insolence, solicited Sylla to return to Rome for
their deliverance.

Sylla returns with his Army, and being opposed by the power of Marius and
Sulpicius, overcomes them, kills Sulpicius, banisheth Marius, and sits heavy
upon the party of Marius, with Death, Confiscation and Banishment, as has been
before shown.

Pomponius finding the business to grow warm and dangerous, and fearing the
increase of troubles, and being now about 19 or 20 years old, and having an
handsome and just excuse and opportunity to go to Athens, to improve his
Learning and Knowledge, takes the opportunity; and in the interval of the
domination of Sylla, and possibly foreseeing a probability of the party of
Marius to engage Rome in new Troubles, repairs to Athens, and there he stays
for about eight years; and as it seems, till after the second Return and Death
of Sylla.

And by this handsome retirement, he gains these two advantages.

1. The opportunity of his increase in Learning.

2. The declining and avoiding the Storms at Rome, and the necessity of being
some way unhappily engaged in one of the parties, or crushed between both; and
yet the reasonableness of the former, namely, his seasonable going to Athens
for the acquest of Learning, according to the custom of young Gentlemen of that
Age and time, fairly covered his latter design of avoiding the troublesome
concerns of the Roman State, and was a just and reasonable excuse for his
retreat thence, though there had been no other cause.

So that herein the Wisdom of this young man appears; namely,

1. In choosing such a season to retire from Rome, when it was not safe for a
young Gentleman to remain there, unless he would vainly hazard all by engaging
in a Faction.

2. In choosing such a season of his Age; namely, about twenty years; and such
a place for his retirement, as was proper for his advance in Learning, and
carried his apology with it, and avoided all just cause of exception by either
party.

And if any shall say it was a piece of pusillanimity for him then to retire,
when his Country stood in need of his advice, assistance and countenance. It
is easily answered, The whole City was then divided into those two Factions; if
he had gone about to have appeared against both, it had been vain and
ridiculous, and utterly ineffectual; he had imprudently lost his Labor, and
exposed himself inevitably to be ruined by both: or either had he stood single
in such opposition, every man would justly have esteemed him a Fool; and had he
engaged others in such an opposition, he had ruined his Friends and
participants as well as himself; which had not only been vain, but also
inhumane, to have involved others in so fruitless and desperate an Enterprise.
But on the other side, had he fallen in with either Faction, he must
necessarily have been carried with a violent torrent of the Faction wherein he
was engaged, either in their common opposition of his Country, and the
Cruelties which they used against their Opponents, if they prevailed; or must
needs have sunk in the calamity of that party, if they were subdued: So that
his retirement in this season, was an act of great prudence; because unless he
had so done, he had no pretense, considering his youth and eminence, to avoid
the intanglement in one Faction, or the desperate opposition of both, if he had
staid: But afterward in that Faction between Pompey and Caesar, he being then
near sixty years old, kept his Station in Rome without any retirement, having
the fair excuse of his old Age, to apologize against engagement with either.
This therefore was the first Specimen of his Prudence, his seasonable and
justifiable retirement to Athens in his youth, when Factions grew violent, and
choosing that time and place for his quiet improvement of Learning, which he
might with most opportunity and safety dedicate to that Employment.

CHAP. VII.
The Second Expedient that he used for his safety and preservation; his
industrious avoiding of being engaged in any Faction while he lived in Rome.

INdeed the Generality of the honest Methods of this good man to preserve
himself and his tranquillity, together with his innocence, may be reduced to
these two general heads, his care to avoid the making of Enemies and his
endeavors honestly to make all men his Friends: The latter (...) come under
the consideration (...) what he avoided in order to (...) preservation: And
under (...) falls this particular consideration of avoiding Engagement in any
Factions. In order thereunto, was that Expedient mentioned in the former
Chapter; namely, his retirement from Rome.

And now I shall consider the farther prosecution thereof in relation to those
importunities that were used to engage him in parties after his return to Rome,
and even while he was in Athens; and shall make these Observations touching it,
that may be useful in relation to it.

When Pomponius was at Athens, Sylla resorted to him, there presented him with
Gifts, complemented him, and used all methods to endear him. And this he did
for many Reasons.

First, Out of the great respect and honor that he bore to his Learning and
worth; this was fair and noble, and became such a man as Sylla was, who was a
great Lover of Learning. But this was not all.

Secondly, Therefore Sylla being now engaged against the party of Marius, and
now about to return to Rome, upon that Design, thought that it would be an
advantage to him and his proceeding, if he could but publicly posses the World
with an opinion of a great familiarity and intimacy between himself and
Pomponius, who was a person of great honor and reputation, not only at Athens,
but at Rome; and the news would quickly fly thither touching the great kindness
between Sylla and Pomponius, and this would quickly beget an opinion that
Pomponius was won over to his party; that Sylla communicated his Counsels to
him, and used his advice; and that all the courses he steered were guided by
Atticus his Compass; and then the veneration that all persons had of Pomponius
and his Wisdom, would give a great credit to his undertaking, when once the
People of Rome were possessed of that great intimacy and dearness between him
and Sylla. And besides it was well known, that although Pomponius ^ld never be
drawn into the party of Marius, or any other; yet he he had many Friends and
Relations in that party; and such a report would give a great discouragement to
that party: And this is no strange piece of policy. Hannibal when he came into
Italy, showed all the kindness to the Relations and Possessions of those men in
Rome, that he most feared; thereby to possess the people with a jealousy of
them, that they were of his party, or with a greater kindness to himself, that
he favored those the people honored. And it has been an usual trick in times
of public differences, that when Usurpers or the heads of any Factions were
about any pernicious or mischievous action, they would immediately before the
propalation of such businesses, send for persons of greatest reputation and
credit, and possibly those that they knew to be greatly in credit with the
adverse party, caress them, entertain private converse and speech with them,
though perchance of some idle impertinent business; as of a Horse-Race, or
Hunting-Match, and then presently after, publish, or go about some pernicious
action, that the world might think to be the product of some advice from those
persons whom they thus entertained. And this was another reason that Sylla
maintained this great familiarity with Atticus at Athens, that the world might
think that surely he was now of Sylla's party, and that they had communicated
counsels each with other, for the farther advance of Sylla's undertakings.

3. It rested not here; Sylla being a great man, and having the province of
Asia assigned to him, wherein Athens lay, used all these Friendships to
Atticus, to see whether he could really draw him over unto him; and having, as
he thought, prepared him with so great applications, and addresses, and
familiarity, from so great a man as himself then was, thought that now it might
be seasonable to persuade him to go along with him to Rome, and in plain terms
to be of his party; but he was not only disappointed herein, but by the
overacting of this part, he lost all that advantage which he might have gained
by the former policy, namely, to have persuaded the world by that great
intercourse between them, that Atticus was secretly at least, of his Faction.
When Sylla therefore a little before his going from Athens, plainly broke his
mind to Atticus, and persuaded him to go along with him to Rome, he gave him
the peremptory, yet reasonable Answer: Noli adversum eos me velle ducere cum
quibus ne contra te arma ferrem, Italiam rebiqui: Persuade me not to go against
them; for I left Italy, that I might not bear arms with them against thee.
Sylla, though he lost his Complements and Design, yet outwardly, at least,
appeared satisfied with the reasonableness and justness of his Answer, gave him
fair respects at his departure from Athens, and returned to Rome, where he gave
another turn of things, and quite routed the party of Marius.

Again, when Pompey was in his great power, and upon the difference between him
and Casar, marched against Casar, with the Vote and Suffrage of the Senate and
the City of Rome, though Atticus now in Rome, showed him all private and
friendly respect, yet he would by no means be drawn to follow Pompey into the
Field, or to interess himself into the Concern of that Faction; but fairly
excused himself by reason of his Age, being then about threescore. This Casar
interpreted to his advantage (though he would most certainly have given the
like Answer to him, had Casar had the like opportunity of the like request) yet
I say Caesar took it kindly, and was willing, for his Credit's sake, to
interpret it to his own advantage; and therefore when he returned Victor over
Pompey, he did not only spare Atticus (though he staid at Rome) from any such
thing as Proscription or Confiscation (the easiest animadversion that the
Victors use upon their enemies) but excused him from that Mulct or Fine that
was imposed upon Neuters. Yea, he did not only spare him from any thing of
punishment, but used him with all the humanity and respect imaginable.

Again, when Brutus and Cassius, and their party basely murdered Julius Caesar
in the Senate, and Brutus was thereupon raised up, not only by the party of
Pompey, as the Vindex Pompeiani sanguinis, but by the Generality of Rome, as
the great Patron of their Liberty; that as the first Brutus delivered them from
the power of Kings, so the second Brutus rescued them from the power of a King,
under the name of a Perpetual Dictator; and the Senate and People magnified
him, as the great Assertor of their Liberty: I say, when Brutus rid upon this
triumphant Chariot of popular Applauses, there was a secret design on foot for
the raising of a private Bank or Treasury for Brutus, the Head of this
Commonwealthparty, and the design was laid that it should be done by a
Subscription; and those of the Equestrian Order should be the first
Subscribers: And the contrivers of this Advice, knowing Atticus to be rich,
liberal, of great reputation, and therefore that his example would be of great
authority: They thought to begin with him, and that his Name should be the
first in the Subscription-Roll, but they were deceived: Atticus plainly told
them, that although Brutus should command his Purse, as a private person, for
the relief of his personal exigencies, as he had often done before; yet he
would by no means meddle in such an Enterprise, which savoured so much of an
engagement in a Faction, and a public owning of a party; and thereupon the
Design broke, and was no further prosecuted. And this was no small occasion of
his safety and preservation, and also of his honor and esteem, when the Tide
of affairs turned, and Anthony returned to Rome, victorious against Brutus.

And by all these and many more indications of this kind, Atticus made it
evident to all men, that he was resolved against any engagement in any Faction;
and this gave him that great security and privilege, that whenever he
relieved any of any Faction, it was not with any contemplation of their party
or Faction; but as I have often said, upon the common account of respect to
Humane Nature, and a certain native Philanthropy to Mankind in general: and
again, when he resolutely denied any such action or thing as might be justly
construed an espousing of a Faction, yet he was not thereby obnoxious to the
indignation of that party that he so refused, he did but solitum obtinere, kept
his custom, and did equally and impartially reject the solicitations of all
parties in this kind; and hereby he stood upon his own Basis and bottom, kept
his station, was neither engaged in any Faction, nor was he rendered thereby
obnoxious to the indignation of the parties which he thus refused, though they
were in power, and able to do what they pleased; because they found by
experience, he did but hold his Principle, and was impartial therein, equally
refusing other Factions as well as theirs.

And the Reasons that moved him to this kind of neutrality in Factions, are
evident, and may be satisfactory.

First, He did it upon an account of greatest Prudence; for it was evident to
him by great experience, and by a wise prospect of things, that these Factions
and their successes were strangely mutable and uncertain. Our Author tells us,
Tanta variet as iis temporibus fuit Fortunae, ut modo hi, modo illi in summo
essent fastigio aut periculo: The successes of Factions were so uncertain, and
the vicissitudes so strange and various, that those that now prevailed, and
seemed in an empregnable condition, were suddenly tumbled down; and again,
those that seemed in an irrecoverable and desperate ruin, regained the
Government, even to a Miracle. And the Reasons are partly given in the Second
Chapter; and therefore by engaging in any Faction, he was sure to undergo the
common Fate which that Faction had; which was either wholly to be ruined, if
the adverse party prevailed, or at best, in case the party wherein he should be
engaged, prevailed, yet they were but in a tottering, uncertain, unquiet,
restless condition, and were not like to hold that power or interest which they
had so difficultly gotten.

Secondly, He did it upon account of common Justice and Honesty; for those
Factions in the State of Rome, were not the true, lawful, settled Government
thereof: For therein Atticus and all good men ought to have engaged; for it had
been their duty and glory to have assisted it, and a certain baseness and
pusillanimity of mind to have deserted: But those Factions in Rome, were such
as I have before described in the Second Chapter; certain Excrescencies,
Tumors, and Diseases arising in the Roman State, by the Power, Ambition and
unquiet Spirits of certain busy men in Rome, that either thought their Worth
neglected, or not sufficiently rewarded, or were provoked to Animosities by
mutual Jealousies and Emulations one of another. And although it is true in the
several Vicissitudes of the prevalence of any Faction, they did so handle the
Senate and People by Artifices, and Tricks, and Threats, and Affrights, that
they minted their Factions oftentimes with the stamp and face of the Senate and
public Authority; yet the truth was, they were really still no other than
Factions and Parties, which like prevalent noxious Humors, or putrefied
Distempers in the Body, overpowered the true State and Genius of the Civil
Government, and rendered the whole Body in Disorder; yet it could be no more
esteemed the true complexion of the Roman Government, than a Fever or
Calenture, though it overspread the whole man, can be accounted the true and
natural complexion of the man: And although the Paroxysmes or Fits that the
Roman State was put into, were various, and contrary each to other, according
as one or the other prevailed; like the hot Fit and the cold Fit in an Ague;
yet still the Commonwealth of Rome was sick, and labored under the Distemper
of either Faction, which soever of them prevailed, as the Histories of those
Times abundantly inform us.

And therefore all those several Factions, as they were extremely cruel and
severe unto one another, so they were all infinitely pernicious to the
Commonwealth; which by the competitions of those turbulent Spirits, was torn in
pieces. And therefore Atticus in common Justice, and upon the account of that
Love he owed and bore to his Country, had no reason to join with one or other
party, which were in truth, but so many Cancers, and Ulcers, and Diseases of
his Country; which though they were too strong for him to cure, yet he had no
reason to assist.

I do confess that commonly all Factions, to gain themselves credit, at least
make some pretense for the good of their Country, something that they would
pretend to reform. And it may be, really there was something in the State of
Rome, that was necessary to be reformed, and the Disorder might be so powerful,
stubborn, and obstinate, that they thought it could not be done by ordinary
means, and that at the first attempt might be the thing that they, or at least
many of them really, and it may be, only, or at least principally aimed to set
right: But Atticus was a wise man, and did easily see,

1. That many times Reformation was pretended, but the great Design was private
Interest, or Revenge. Or,

2. If some men in the simplicity of their hearts, meant well to the State of
Rome, that were engaged in those Factions; yet when once a Faction is set on
foot, men that have other Designs, either of Ambition, or Covetousness, mingle
in it, and commonly in a little time, become prevalent, and distort all to
their private Ends and Advantages, and engage others in the like, who are fed,
or do feed themselves with the like Hopes. And,

3. He well knew that in a little process of time, variety, succession, and
occurrences, and new emergencies, and Counsels carry Factions quite beyond
their first Designs into greater Rapine, Fury, and Cruelty and Revenge, than
ever they themselves, it may be, at first thought they should ever have been
guilty of.

And therefore the Experience that Atticus had of the prodigious Cruelties, and
Bloodshed, and Rapine and Violence that former Factions had produced in Rome,
made him peremptory against engaging in any, notwithstanding their most
specious pretenses and earnest importunities to engage him; for he well knew
that if he should be engaged in any, yet had it obtained the best success that
they could reasonably expect, namely, Victory, and a full enjoyment and
possession of the power they desired, yet the rage and exasperation of the
Soldiery, the desire of revenge of those injuries the conquering party had
formerly suffered, the opportunities of enriching themselves by the spoils and
confiscation of the conquered, the necessity of gratifying many necessitous and
indigent persons of their party, the politic endeavor to secure themselves in
their new acquired power, by the death and ruin of all such whom they knew, or
feared, or suspected, were, or might be their Opposites, and the striving to
establish themselves against any possibility of falling under the power of
those that they had injured; these, I say, and such as these, would presently
engage the victorious party to exercise all cruelty and violence, confiscations
and proscriptions, death and murder upon those they hated, or feared, or
injured, or suspected: And all this Atticus must behold, and not be able in the
least degree to help; and so his first engagement into this party, though
victorious, must interess him in all the villainies, and injuries, and
unjustness that must be the fruit of this success.

In the first motion of Enterprises of this nature, the pretenses are commonly
fair, modest, nothing pretended but reformation of abuses, and great moderation
professed; and this is so carried by the Heads of Factions, partly to cover
their Designs, partly to gain to themselves credit and good esteem with good
men, or at least with the Vulgar, that thereby the Heads of parties may with
the more ease and plausibility attain their desired success: Yea, it may be
possible that the Heads of parties might in their first attempts really intend
what they at first pretended. But when the success is attained, and possibly by
great Bloodshed, the Governors of Factions quickly outgo the ends and designs
at first propounded. New successes give new resolutions, new designs, new
attempts, which before either were not discovered, or it may be, not thought on
by the first undertakers in their first undertaking. And Atticus well knew,
that if once he was engaged in the Enterprise, he must follow not only the
Fortune, but also the Commands and Counsels of the party and their Governors,
and so be engaged in all the Villainies and Injustice that attended their
success, and so lose his innocence: Or if he should go about to declaim and
protest against the unjust prosecution of their Successes, and endeavor to
resist them, his endeavor might be his ruin; but at the best, could never be
prevalent or successeful; and the best fruit he could expect from his
Engagement in the party, would be repentance too dearly bought, the loss of his
Credit, if not of his Innocence, the sad spectacle of the violence and
injustice of that Faction wherein he thus had unhappily engaged, and a
miserable deplorable disappointment in all his endeavors to reclaim it, or
restrain those violences that must accompany its success; the motions of a
powerful, prevailing, successeful Faction, being ordinarily as ungovernable by
the interposition of a private person, as the rolling of a mighty Stone from
the top of a steep Hill, which will never leave rolling, till it comes to the
bottom; and the longer it runs, the more violent and ungovernable is its motion.

Nay, it very often comes to pass, that a Faction in a State, if it has any
continuance, grows utterly unlike to what it first was; the Counsels and first
designs must necessarily change, new men and of new principles successively
come in play, which bring new Counsels in fashion and request: Nay, every
variety of success changes the Counsels of them that at first presided in it,
though they continue the same persons, that put on new purposes, resolutions
and undertakings; so that if Atticus could have persuaded himself to have
engaged in any Faction, he must have resolved to have kept those plausible
principles which first led him to that Engagement, and then he had been quite
outrun by his own party, or else he must have resolved to hold pace with his
party in all their changes and practices, and then he must outrun his
Innocence, his constant integrity himself. And as thus his Prudence kept him
from mingling himself in Faction, by a due prospect of the ill consequences
that must needs arise to him thereby; so the very habit, complexion and
constitution of his mind admirably secured him against all temptations
thereunto.

There is in most men a certain intemperance of passions that renders them very
obnoxious to fall in with Factions; but among them there are three sorts of
Passions, or rather indeed putrefactions of passions, and diseases of the Soul,
namely, Ambition, or the desire of Honor, Power, Place, Preferment,
Covetousness, or the desire of riches, or vindictiveness, or the desire of
revenge. And if a man do but take notice of the politic managements either of
the Governors of States or Kingdoms, or of particular Affairs of less note, the
concerns of the world are very much carried on by setting of Handles to those
distempers in men, and then they are led about and guided as men guide Puppets
on a Stage, by unseen Wires or Pulleys; so that those motions which to outward
appearance seem free and from themselves, yet in truth, they are in kind
necessary, and managed by others, that either wisely or craftily propose but
Objects to those unruly passions; and they follow them as the Needle does the
Loadstone. And this the crafty Heads of Factions make great use of; and if they
find a man that is under the regiment of any of these Distempers, it is a
thousand to one but they win him over: If he find an ambitious or a mutinous or
a revengeful man, he siddles him in the head with such instances as these;
would thou be great, or rich, or powerful, or revenged for some public
neglect or affront, I will show thee a sure and compendious way of attaining
thy Desires; thou shall not need to run the long, tedious, laborious race of
Virtue, to attain honor, or make thee great, nor the tedious, industrious
application of thy self to some Trade or calling, to make thee rich; nor the
regular motion of a judicial process, to avenge thy injuries: Fall in with us,
and all the Honors, and power and Riches of Rome shall at one clap fall into
our dispose, and thou shall have the opportunity to be thine own avenger of thy
affronts and injuries. Nay further, to say the truth, such is the Magic and
Enchantment that arises from those intemperances of the mind, that without any
solicitation from without, they carry men headlong that way they think shortest
to satisfy themselves; and therefore are easily caught and entangled in a
Faction, as that which promises the most compendious method for the attainment
of their Desires.

But the Constitution and Complexion of the very Soul of Atticus was such, that
those Distempers of Ambition, Covetousness, or Revenge, dwelt not there; and by
this means he was proof against Temptations from within or from without, to
side with a Faction. He was honored and esteemed for his own Worth and Virtue,
and he was not ambitious of any other accessions of Honor, Place, or
Preferment.

He had a competency of Estate, decently to support himself and his Family, and
relieve his Friends in necessity; and he was contented with his condition, was
not desirous of more: And as he was so happy, as never to have received any
such injury as might provoke revenge; so he had such a calm, serene, even frame
of mind, that that passion could get no hold upon him: And he had abundantly
well learned the best Lesson of the Stoical Philosophers, not to injure himself
by passion or perturbation because another did him wrong; if the injuries were
small, he took no notice of them; if great, he soon forgot and forgave them.
And this was all the revenge he took of injuries; and to say the truth, it is
an exquisite, yet innocent kind of revenge; for it makes the wrong doer quickly
sensible of his own injustice, and revenge the same upon himself by sorrow and
repentance.

These and the like Considerations were obnoxious to his Experience, as well as
his Reason; and therefore although he were acquainted, and possibly very
familiarly, with many persons engaged in those Factions; nay, though he might
see easily an apparent demonstration of their success, yet he would never
engage in them himself, but avoided it as a Pest or a Plague Sore, wherein he
was sure, if he were once engaged, he should lose either his Safety, or his
Innocence, or both.

CHAP. VIII.
The Third Expedient that Atticus used for his Safety, refusing too great
kindnesses from great persons.

THe Third Expedient which this man used for his Safety, was this; That
although he was always ready to oblige all men by all offices of kindnesses,
yet he would never receive overgreat kindnesses from great persons, especially
if they were of such a kind or measure, as he might not be able probably to
requite; as great or profitable Places, Offices, Honors or Donatives: And the
Reasons that induced him to this abstinence and declining of such great
Obligations, seem to be these:

1. He was a man that contented himself with his condition; which, as it was
plentiful enough, so he was very well satisfied with what he enjoyed, and had
neither an ambitious mind to become greater, or a covetous mind to become
richer than his Father and his Uncle left him.

2. He was a modest man, and did not set so high a rate upon himself or his
Merits, as to expect a tribute of beneficence from others, as the desert of his
worth.

3. He was a grateful man; he was forgetful of injuries done to him, but
mindful of Benefits received by him, and thankful for them, and esteemed
himself still in debt, till he had made a proportionable return for kindnesses
received. And therefore if the benefits were so great, that they were beyond
requital, he thought himself in the condition of such men as owe more than they
are able to pay; which is a troublesome and slavish condition: And such his own
would have been, if he had been surcharged with immense Courtesies.

But 4. and principally, the reason why he declined such obligations, was,
because he would retain his own liberty, and continue Master of himself and his
Actions; for most commonly immense benefits received from great men, render the
Receiver under a great servitude to his Benefactor, and is a great obligation
for a man to think, and speak, and act as their Patron desires or expects; and
certainly in a troubled State, inclinable to Factions, such kind of Obligations
are pernicious to the obliged, renders them, as it were, the Clients and
Vassals of their Patron, and by a kind of secret charm or enchantment, makes
them servants to him; and this obstinacy of Atticus in these commotions of
Rome, was a great means of his Peace, Liberty, Safety, and disengagement from
parties: And therefore when Pompey (who was a great man, popular and
beneficent) endeavored to place great Gifts and Offices upon him, he warily
and prudently declined them; and by that means, when Pompey solicited him to
appear of his party against Caesar, and to go with him to the wars, he was in a
condition to refuse it, and accordingly excused himself from that engagement,
and sat still at Rome, when at the same time those persons whom Pompey had
obliged with great Offices and large Donatives, were fain to come to him, upon
his Summons, and engage with him in that great contest between him and Caesar,
and fall with him; for although they would have been gladly excused from this
undertaking, yet they durst not decline it, being under this unhappy Dilemma,
that if Pompey prevailed, they should have lost his favor, and those honors
and offices that they enjoyed by his bounty; if Caesar prevailed, yet being
persons so greatly obliged by Pompey, they would have been suspected and
oppressed by Caesar, or at least neglected by him, as persons that were really
of the Pompeyan Faction, though they declined the present Engagement. But
howsoever their reputation would have suffered, and they would have been
accounted a sort of ungrateful people, that after all such Obligations as they
had received from Pompey, should ungratefully desert their Benefactor, when
danger or difficulty appeared.

But on the other side, this prudent obstinacy of Atticus, fairly excused his
declining of Pompey's Engagement, without the least imputation of ingratitude,
and was yet of singular advantage to him when Caesar returned Victor, who
highly honored him at his return to Rome, and much advanced the reputation of
his Prudence and Discretion, that so wisely refused such an Engagement in
Pompey's Faction, that in the success might otherwise have ruined him; and so
wisely refused all those great obligations that Pompey would have put upon him,
that had they been received, would in all probability, have engaged him in his
Faction. Thus our Author tells us, Nullum enim a Pompeio habebat ornamentum, ut
c^teri qui per eum aut honores aut divitias ceperant; quorum partim invitissimi
Castra sunt sequuti, partim summa cum ejus offensa domi remanserunt.

And there was another reason of his modest refusal of public Honors and
Offices from those who had the power of conferring of them, and that had a
favorable respect for him; for he made use of their Favors for a better and
nobler end, namely, to rescue and relieve men that were, or might be oppressed,
or in extremity, in the collision of Factions: This use indeed he made of their
Favors as he had opportunity. And had he taken respects from them for his own
advancement or wealth, those rewards and gratuities would have precluded his
opportunity of intercession for others. He therefore prudently declined the
collation of Bounties, Offices or Honors to himself from those that had the
opportunity and will to confer them upon him, and reserved their respect for
the good or deliverance of others, whom the unconstancy and change of Affairs
rendered obnoxious to those that were in present power.

CHAP. VIII.
The Fourth Expedient of Atticus refusing Offices and Public Employments in
the Commonwealth, by the Suffrages of the Senate or People.

I Come to the Fourth thing which Atticus industriously avoided, namely,
Public Offices.

Some Offices in Rome were in the power of particular persons; as principally,
their Legati Provinciarum, Lieutenants of Provinces, which were in the gift of
these public Ministers, whether Consuls, Tribunes, or others, to whom the
government of Provinces were allotted. These Substitutes had very honorable
and profitable employments, commanding in affairs of Peace and War in those
Provinces in the absence of the chief, and also of great authority while they
were present.

Other Offices were Elective or Constitutive by the Senate or People, as
Consuls, Tribunes, Pretors, Ediles, Censors, etc.

In the former Chapter I have shown his declining the reception of Offices from
the hands of private persons; and now I shall show his avoiding of such public
Offices as were of public choice or donation.

Offices in Rome were rarely offered, but sought; they were beneficial and
honorable employments, and wanted not Competitors; but Atticus was so far from
seeking Offices, that he would not take them when offered, but industriously
declined it: When the Citizens would have elected him Praetor, he refused it;
and he made this handsome advantage thereof, that when his Brother-in-Law
Quintus, being afterward elected Praetor, and had a Province assigned him, and
offered Atticus to be his Legate, he told him that he had formerly refused the
Office that Quintus now had, and therefore it was not decent for him to take a
substitution from him.

This therefore was Atticus his principle, he would do all the good Offices he
could, either for particular persons, or for the Commonwealth, in the station
and capacity of a private person; thus he did for the Republic of Athens,
while he lived there; and thus he did in Rome: But neither in the one City nor
the other, could he be drawn to undertake any public Office or Employment.

The Reasons whereof shall be hereafter shown.

First, Touching public Offices and Employments in general, certainly the
generality of men are strangely mistaken. It seems a wonder to me, to see the
folly and vanity of men, that so fondly hunt after great Offices and
Employments: Heretofore in the State of Greece especially, men better
understood themselves and their interest, and peace, and happiness, than
voluntarily to engage themselves in Offices and great Employments, insomuch
that there were then compulsary Laws to enforce men to undertake, not only
inferior and petty Offices that were of burden and charge, but greater Offices
that had honor and profit annexed to them; which though they are more
honorable, and more profitable, yet they are more dangerous and hazardous, And
the truth is, that it has been the skill and art of the wiser sort of mankind
to annex to such great employments those Blandishments of honor, esteem and
profit, to invite men to the undertaking of them; as Physicians guild their
bitter Pills, that they may be the easier swallowed. The plain truth is,
Offices and places of great import and trust, are necessary for the good of
others, and for the preservation and order of Kingdoms, States and
Commonwealths, and therefore the wisdom of those Kingdoms and States is to be
commended, that annex to them those Ensigns of honor and honorable supplies
for their support, to invite and encourage men to undertake them; yea, and
further, where those invitations will not serve to draw men of worth and
ability to undertake them, those States are to be commended that enact Laws to
compel such men to undertake them. But it is most certain that any man that
ambitiously hunts after them, nay, that man that does not industriously decline
them, if possibly he may, understands not himself, nor his own peace, happiness
or contentment; which will appear, if these things be considered.

1. A man that undertakes a public Office or Employment, does necessarily draw
upon himself much envy: and the reason is, because the generality of Mankind
have a good opinion of themselves, and think they deserve those Offices and
Employments that others enjoy, and they think also very well of the Offices and
Employments themselves, look upon them as goodly, fine gaudy businesses, and
are fond of the honor and wealth that is annexed unto them, and they would
fain be at them, and think those that do enjoy them, stand in their way, and
therefore they envy, and malign them, and envy is a busy active humor, and
restless, until it unhorse those upon whom it fastens, or break it self in the
attempt.

For it is ordinarily true, whosoever possesses that which many desire, has
as many Enemies and Enviers as he has Rivals and Competitors; and as many
Competitors as there are ambitious or covetous men in the world. And besides
this, all great Offices have commonly somewhat of power annexed to them. And
although Societies of men can never subsist in order without some power be over
them, yet particular persons commonly hate and envy any power in any but
themselves.

2. A man that undertakes a public employment, is under a powerful temptation
to lose and give up all that quiet, and rest, and tranquillity that a private
Station yields; and if not all, yet a great part of his liberty, and divests
himself of himself; and do what he can, he must in a great measure give himself
up to others, as the price of that honor, pre-heminence and power which he
enjoys; which is too dear a purchase for any wise and considerate man that can
well avoid it.

3. There is no man so wise, so dexterous in business of public employment, so
attentive to it, nor so fortunate in it, but has his defects, incogitancies
and inadvertencies, or at least misfortunes in it; and these deficiencies in a
private station, are less perceived and observed, and the consequences of them
are narrow, and most commonly within the confines of a man's self or his Family:
But in a man of a public employment, first, these defects are more easily
observed, and seen; as his person and station is conspicuous, so his defects
are easily seen by any By-stander.

2. As they are easily seen, so they are diligently watched and observed; he
wants not such Spectators as make it their business to be diligent searchers
and observers of them.

3. When those defects at any time appear, though perchance they are but few
and small, yet they are the objects of most severe censure and animadversion.

If a private man's wisdom, goodness or prudence, do ad plurimum overbalance his
follies or inadvertencies, the man passes for a wise and good man; but a
little folly in a man in a great employment, shall cloud and overshadow in the
public esteem all his wisdom and goodness, though this be far the greater.

4. But that which is worst of all, the errors, mistakes, miscarriages or
inadvertencies of a private man hurts none but himself or his narrow Relations:
But even small errors or mistakes, or follies in a man of public employment,
and in the exercise thereof, may be of a vast and comprehensive concern, and
the ill consequences thereof oftentimes irreparable. An Error of a Judge in
his Judgment, may mislead or undo thousands; an Error in Counsel in a
Counselor, may ruin a State or Kingdom, an Error in Conduct in a General,
may destroy an Army: And surely every wise man will as much as he may, keep
himself out of these hazardous consequences, since every wise man knows that
his is not without his mixtures of folly and weakness.

4. Again, let a man in public employment, manage them with all the integrity
and wisdom imaginable, yet the Race is not always to the swift, nor the battle
to the strong; there may be, there will be often times such disappointments and
cross events, that will bring ill success to the best and wisest endeavors,
and then not withstanding all his wisdom and fidelity, the ill success shall be
attributed to his want of integrity, courage or wisdom. Every fool will be
ready to say, if the Counsel had been thus, the event had been otherwise; and
the people shall either persuade themselves, or be persuaded by others, that
the man was either false or foolish in his employment; yea, and the State
wherein he lived, either to humor the people, or to hold up their credit, and
an expectation of better success when others are employed, will be ready to
make a politic Sacrifice of such a Minister of State, whose fault was not to
be false, or a fool, but only to be unfortunate.

5. Again, There is no politic Officer in the world, but must necessarily make
a considerable party of mankind his Enemy: If he be one judicial, he must
pronounce to the disadvantage of one party, and then that party that hates him,
if he be an Officer employed in the issuing of the public Revenue, he that
stays longest for his Money, hates him; if he be employed in dispensation of
rewards; offices or places, as Military Commanders, he that is disappointed in
his expectation, or that finds less than he expected, hates him: And it will
not be material to the safety of him, that is hated, whether there be cause or
not, if the party provoked think he has cause, his indignation is as high as
if it were just; and most commonly is provided with a calumny to infuse into
the people to make them believe it so. And if it be said in all these and the
like cases, the party makes as many Friends as he does Enemies; for if one be
disappointed, another is rewarded; and if one be pronounced against, another is
pronounced for: This mends not the matter; for supposed injuries are longer
remembered than real benefits; and commonly he that receives a benefit, esteems
it his due; he that goes without it, thinks it an injury: And hatred and
revenge are more active and vigilant to do mischief upon a supposed injury or
neglect, than duty or gratitude is to defend one, from whom either Justice or
Benefit has been received.

Upon all these, and many more evident Reasons, it is beyond question, that no
considerate man has reason to be fond of any public employment, though
attended with honor, power and profit; but fairly to decline it if he may: And
therefore it is no wonder that Pomponi^^ Atticus, who was a wise, knowing man,
was so far from seeking it, that he declined it when offered.

2. But supposing that in a calm, sedate time, this wise and good man might
have been persuaded to take an honorable public employment, and that it had
not been only consistent with his Wisdom, but his Duty so to have done; and
that if he had declined it, it had been either an argument of pusillanimity or
foolishness, yea, and injustice to partake of the benefit and protection of the
public Ministers and Officers of Rome, and to have denied the same common
Offices to others, when by the suffrages or nomination of those who were
entrusted therein, he was appointed a public Minister; yet certainly
considering the time wherein he lived, and the great Distempers that prevailed
in that State, his declining of public employments, was not only excusable and
justifiable, but also very commendable, and an abstinence full of prudence and
great discretion: For he that takes a public employment in a troubled State,
is (without the intervention of a mavelous providence) first, and before any
others, exposed to the shock of all public commotions: If a Faction prevail,
if he either oppose it, or be suspected by it, he is sure to be one of the
first that must be ruined by it, because he will be thought an impediment to
the Design; and it is a wonder if he escape without an Exile or Confiscation.
On the other side, if he be in the good opinion of that Faction, and so
continued in his employment, he is under an engagement, not only in the hazard
of their Fortune, but also in the pursuit and execution of all those desperate
Enterprises that such a Faction thinks necessary or convenient for their
establishment; which if he do not, then unless they otherwise fear him, or
exceedingly reverence his person, as one that may credit their Party, he is
sure to be dealt more severely with, than if he had at first opposed them. On
the other side, if he comply with them, and serve their turns, and prosecute
their Designs in the public station wherein he stands, he shall lose his
reputation, and his innocence, and be entangled in a most base servitude, and
be made instrumental in those actions which perchance he inwardly abhors; and
if he start or boggle at them, he shall be dealt with as the worst of Enemies:
And if ever there come a turn of Affairs, he shall be sure to be one of the
first that is crushed by the prevailing party: And this Cicero found to be
true, to his cost; for he, that while he was but an Advocate, stood unshaken in
all those troublesome times wherein he lived (though he sometimes used his
Tongue with too much liberty in his public Orations) yet when once he became
entangled in public Offices of Consul and Senator, he quickly felt the power
and vindictivenes of the party of Anthony, upon his return; and lost his Life
in the Fury and Rage of his incensed Adversary, which he had escaped, had he
followed the wise example of his Friend Atticus, in declining public
employment. And therefore Cato Uticensis, who the greatest part of his Life had
been concerned in public Offices and Employments in Rome, yet when he found
himself overborn by the Caesarean Party, learned, though too late, Atticus his
wisdom, and left this Legacy to his Son, that he should never engage himself in
the public administrations, offices or employment of the Commonwealth.

And truly Atticus by this wise abstinence from public Offices and
Employments, obtained much of that Safety and Happiness which he enjoyed.

1. By this means he enjoyed himself and his tranquillity of Mind and Life, and
all those advantages and opportunities of improving his Learning and Knowledge,
which he could never have had in a public station.

2. By this means he kept himself free from Enemies or Emulation, Envy and
Detraction, the common Attendants of public and great Employments.

3. By this means he kept both his Safety, his Innocence and Reputation; all of
which must necessarily be greatly endangered, if not utterly lost, had he taken
upon himself any public Office in those turbulent times.

4. By this means he preserved his Power, Interest and Veneration among all
Parties, and was able to do better Offices with the prevailing party, for the
Safeguard and Preservation of good men, than if he had born the greatest
Offices, and with the best applause in the City of Rome, as appears by the
History of his Life.

CHAP. IX.
The Fifth Expedient that Atticus used to preserve himself, was, the avoiding
of all those Occasions that might procure unto him Emulation or Envy.

THe Fifth Remedy that he used against the danger of Tumultuous Times, was, to
avoid with all care all such things as might procure an Exile, Envy or
Emulation against him.

This appears already in part, by his declining of Offices, of Honor, of Power
and Profit; but I shall give this as a distinct Consideration, because I shall
evidence it with farther Instances.

When he was at Athens, he was solicited to accept of honorable employments;
but although as a private man, he did them all the friendly Offices he could,
yet he refused their public Honors; they then desired that he would be
enrolled as a free Citizen of Athens; but this he also refused, as knowing it
would be interpreted to be a deserting of his native City of Rome, and might
procure Enemies, or at least Envy: They also solicited him, that his Statue
might be set up at Athens, among their Worthies and Benefactors; but this also
he would by no means allow of, for the same reason; although after his recess
from that City, the Citizens, notwithstanding his refusal, did in his absence
set up his Statue.

And this refusing of this Piece of Pageantry, namely, the public setting up
of his Statue or Picture, though it seems a small matter, was surely an act of
great prudence, for he that allows the setting up of his Statue or Picture,
first, draws upon himself much envy: other persons that have not the same
honor done them, malign him that has it, as having that piece of public
favor done him, which another thinks he as well at least deserves.

2. It gives unseen detractions or censure, exposing to every man's eye that
Object that administers occasion of censure; This is that man's Statue, that did
such an injury, that committed such an Error or Oversight: so it becomes a
Monument of so much more disadvantage to the Prototype, by how much men are
more apt to take notice of, and remember the evils, than the good of any
person. 3. If that State or City take up any distaste against the Person, the
poor Statue commonly receives the public contumely, and the man is prosecuted
in effigy; he has committed a Depositum unto that State or City, that must
engage him to their perpetual service and pleasing of them, or in default
thereof, to be the Subject of their contumely or public indignity in effigy.

When he came back to Rome, besides his refusal of public and honorable
Offices, he kept himself in the state of a private Gentleman; and
notwithstanding the access of a fair Estate from his Uncle Caecilius, he never
exceeded his former charge or method of Housekeeping; indeed he thereupon
enlarged his private liberality and beneficence to persons that stood in need
thereof; but he did not at all thereupon advance the Port or Equipage of his
Housekeeping or manner of living; his House was plain, though noble; and he
never would by new Building, make it stately or splendid, but contented himself
with it as he found it: and although he were rich, yet to avoid the glory of
being said to be a great Purchaser, he never would make any new Purchases, but
kept the Possessions which were left him by his Father and Uncle, well knowing
that great Purchases would make a great noise and rumor, occasion envy, and
become but a troublesome burden and encumbrance, rather than a benefit or
advantage in a troubled State.

His Money would be a portable commodity for his subsistence, and ready to
supply the necessities and emergencies of himself and his Friends, when his
Lands must be necessarily fixed, and in troubled times might yield him little
revenue, and were of necessity to abide the Storms of that place wherein they
lay. In short, he kept such a mediocrity in his House, his Furniture, his
Housholdexpences, his Entertainments, and the manner of his Living, that
neither exposed him to scorn on the one hand, nor consure, or envy, or
imputation of affecting either too much Grandour and Popularity, on the other,
nor consumed or wasted his Estate, but left himself in a continual capacity of
supplying the Exigence of his Friends, which he justly esteemed the best
Employment of his Wealth; and yet he so ordered his Affairs and Expenses, with
that decency and prudence, that kept him above the imputation of baseness or
unworthy parsimony. And by this means he avoided envy on the one hand, and
contempt on the other; keeping himself in a middle and constant conduct between
all extremes. It is true, in the latter end of his Life, he was, by the
importunity of Antonius and Octavius, drawn to match his Niece into the Family
and Relation of Octavius, which seemed to be a step beyond his degree, and that
mediocrity that he used and affected in the former course of his Life: But it
was not a thing sought by him, but from him, the great Triumviri of Rome, being
ambitious of his Affinity, whom they very well knew to be a man of as great
interest and esteem, and power in the City of Rome, as any private person could
possibly be; and that interest, esteem and power bottomed upon as firm a Basis
as could possibly be expected; namely, the native and experimented prudence and
worth of the man: And therefore they thought that whatever mutability of
Fortune their high flying attempts might meet with, yet they had, by this
affinity with Atticus, a more firm interest in Rome, than if they had matched
their. Relation into the Family of a Commander of an Army of forty thousand
men. Besides all this, he was rich, and might probably leave a fair Fortune,
which he accordingly did. And lastly, the times now seemed pretty well settled,
the Triumvirate of Antonius, Octavius and Lepidus had mastered all opposition,
and although there afterward broke out Wars between Octavius and Anthony, yet
that was not long before Atticus his Death; and as he was not likely to live to
see those eruptions; so if he should, he could not probably survive their
issue; neither did he: for he died the year before the Battle of Actium,
wherein Anthony was overthrown by Octavius: And yet if these differences had
been in his prospect, he was reasonable secure against whatsoever issue should
happen in it, both the Heads of that Faction being his Admirers and Friends,
and his great Age giving him the Protection and Privilege of sitting still
between them.

CHAP. X.
The Sixth Expedient, the avoiding of all occasions of Enmity from any.

THe Sixth thing that this wise man industriously avoided in order to his
Safety, was, all manner of envy from any, and all occasions and opportunities
thereof, that humane Prudence could possibly foresee.

This has been in part shown before in the precedent Chapters, in his
declining of Factions, Offices, and Excitations of Envy; but it shall be here
prosecuted with farther Instances, that more directly and specifically were
ordered against this inconvenience; and the former Instances more especially
relate to the avoiding of public Differences, and the Enmities arising by it;
but these relate to such Enmities as concern a man in a private station.

There be these ensuing occasions, that commonly create Animosities and
Enmities.

1. He that is an accuser or Informer against any man for matters of Crime or
Misdemeanor, makes the party accused, and all his Relations his Enemies; nay,
though he do it but as an Advocate* I do verily believe, that the sharpness of
Tully's Tongue in his Declarations, though it procured him some Friends, it
created him many more Enemies, that did sit close upon him when they had
opportunity; though the occasion of his ruin, was his public Action: But
Atticus was ever careful to avoid this.

He never would be an accuser of any, either as Party or Advocate, nor
subscribe any public Accusation.

2. A second thing that creates Enemies, is Litigiousness, Contention, and
going to Law for every Trifle: This excellent man did with that prudence order
his Affairs, that the Author of his Life tells us he never had any Lawsuit.
His Wisdom was such, that it prevented him from great or wasting injuries: And
his Goodness was such, that he rather forgave Injuries of a less magnitude,
than prosecuted the wrong-doers: It was one of the great commendations of his
Life, that he quickly forgot the Injuries that he received, and the kindness
that he received, and the kindness that he had done.

3. A Third thing that creates many enemies, is when a man is Farmer or
Collector of those troublesome Duties, where many are concerned, a Publican or
Farmer of Customs or Tolls: For such men are commonly hated by the generality
of the people. Now Atticus, although some Conjectures there are, that he was
sometime Farmer of the Vectigalia, yet the Writer of his Life assures us the
contrary; or certainly if he were so at any time, he quickly left that
Employment, as a probable root of Contentions and Enmity and Animosity.

4. A Fourth thing that creatos Emies, is when a man deals much in the Goods or
Lands that are Confiscate by the power of any Faction: Such Confiscations were
frequent in Rome, because the vicissitudes of the prevalence of Factions were
frequent; and hither persons often came, and met with good Bargains; But
Attious wholly declined those public Markets, not only because it would be a
mark of a covetous mind, but because he knew that the former Owners would bear
a secret indignation and enmity against the Purchasers and Possessors of their
Goods; and such Purchases carried with them a clear evidence that the
Purchasers approved the party and violences of those men that thus confiscated
and exposed such Goods to Sale; and it was against the Principles of Atticus,
to give so much countenance or credit to the proceedings of any of those
Factions.

5. A Fifth thing that often creates men trouble, especially in a troubled
State, is the too much prodigality of Speech. An over-free, inconsiderate
commendation of some persons of one party, or too liberal Invectives or
Censures of the Persons engaged in another, create oftentimes Enemies, and give
a man a Blow when he has forgot it, or thinks not of it; some Enemy of a
person commended, or Friend of the person censured, oftentimes reporting to the
disadvantage of the first Speaker: In this kind Atticus was very wary; he was
not liberal of his Tongue either in praises or dispraises of this or that
party, or the persons concerned in it: And if any time he commended any person,
it was upon the account of his due personal worth and virtue, without
contemplation or respect of parties, or the concerns thereof:

Pride and Haughtiness of deportment does infallibly create more enemies than
any one Distemper besides, and indeed is commonly the root of all Contentions
and Animosities both in public and in private persons. A proud man in effect
resists all men, and therefore does either necessitate, or at least engage
all men to oppose him, and become his enemy: But herein was Atticus his great
Wisdom, that in his whole course of Life, he always kept an humble mind, and an
humble deportment: When he lived at Athens, our Author tells us, Sic se gerebat
ut communis infimis par Principibus videretur; ex quo factum est ut huic omnes
honores quos possent public haberent: The like was his deportment at Rome, And
certainly this Humility of mind, and deportment, and freeness from all manner
of pride, brought him very great advantage; for it kept him in a true estimate
and judgment of things. Pride and Vainglory blinds the judgment; Humility, and
Lowliness, renders every thing in its true and just estimate and value.

2. It kept him in great tranquillity of Mind, as well as of Life; it is not
possible for any man to suffer so much torture and vexation from all the
affronts and injuries without, as from a proud heart that galleth and vexes it
self, when it cannot have its will; but an humble man in all states and
conditions stands square upon his own Basis, without any great disorder or
perturbation.

3. By this means he greatly secured his own safety in public dangers; for by
reason of his humble deportment, he got but few enemies; and if there were any,
such this humble carriage either melted them into Friends, or gave that
relaxation and abatement to their fervor and animosity, that they never
attempted to hurt him, though possibly the prevalence of a Faction wherein they
were parties, gave them opportunity.

And yet though his deportment were full of humility and condescension, yet it
was not without a becoming Gravity and Grandeur, whereby, though he was affable
and cheerful, yet he rendered not himself cheap and contemptible; so that as the
Author tells us, it was a hard thing to tell, whether the very same men did
more love or fear him.

And certainly this part of Atticus his management was a singular means of his
safety, and an excellent indication of his prudence, especially in troublesome
and difficult times; namely, a wise and circumspect avoiding of making Enemies:
It is the common folly of men great in place, power or wealth, to think
themselves above the reach of enemies, of the meaner sort especially; and
therefore they care not how many they disoblige by their insolence, scorns,
injuries or neglects: This is a piece of great weakness and folly; for it is a
certain truth, that there is no man, though never so mean, but once in seven
years will have an opportunity to do the greatest man much good or much harm.
When the Mouse troubled the sleeping Lion, and disturbed him, and happened to
fall under his Paw, he desired the Lion to spare him, he was but a Mouse, and
yet might live possibly to do him a kindness; but howsoever was not worth his
indignation: the Mouse afterward served to eat asunder that Net that entangled
the Lion, and so deliver him, that for all his Greatness, could not deliver
himself: Kindness, and Affability, and Gentleness are but cheap and easy
things, and as easily exercised as Roughness and Acerbity; and when a man can
make a friend upon as easy terms as he can make an enemy, he is imprudent if
he do the latter; for a mean Friend may be able sometimes to do a great
kindness to a great man, and a little enemy may have an opportunity to do a
great Mischief.

In tumultuous times an ordinary common Soldier is Master of another man's Life
and Estate, either in the unbridled rage of a Storm, or by a false accusation:
He therefore that means to sit safe in stormy times, must be careful with
Atticus, to avoid the making of Enemies, even in his private station, as well
as in his public, and must never think any person so despicable, but that he
may some way or other, or at some time or other, do him a mischief; and
therefore must never unnecessarily provoke any, or make him an Enemy, if he can
fairly avoid it.

And these are the principal things observable in the Life of Atticus, which he
principally avoided in order to his Safety and Tranquillity in troublesome
times.

CHAP. XI.
The consideration of the things that Atticus did in order to his Safety and
Security against the Dangers and Troubles of the Times; and first, touching his
Charity, Bounty and Liberality.

I Have done with those things which this wise man avoided in order to his
Safety in troublous times. I come now to the things he did; which as they were
worthy and honorable in themselves, so they were the great Means of his Safety
and preservation.

In the precedent Chapter, I showed his Prudence and Industry to avoid making
himself Enemies; this was that he consciously avoided: But he did not only
avoid the procuring of Enemies, but was prudent and wise in making very many
Friends: This conduced greatly to his Safety and Preservation.

And the means whereby he thus made so many his Friends, was his Liberality,
Beneficence and Bounty, especially to those in distress.

But although the safety that he had, was partly the consequence of his many
Friends that he procured, and the berieficence that he used, was one great
means of procuring Friends; yet herein consisted the excellence of the Man,
that he was not bountiful and beneficent upon the bare account of procuring
Friends, or by them to secure his safety: But the principle of his benesicence
was higher and nobler than his own interest and safety; for it arose from the
nobleness of his disposition, and was a certain native generosity and
beneficence to Mankind, that prevailed upon him to be greateful to those that
did him kindness. bountiful to those he loved, compassionate to those in
misery, and beneficent to Mankind in general: Indeed the Consequence and effect
of this goodness was the multiplication of Friends, and his security in times
of danger. But that was not the great Wheel that moved him to it, but the
admirable constitution and habit of his Mind, which would have rendered him
such, though there had neither been Friends nor safety acquired by it: For he
had a self-contentation in the egresses of his own bounty and goodness, though
it had never reflected to his own Honor, Safety or Advantage.

And this is the more evident, for that the Instances of his Liberality and
Beneficence were most frequent and eminent toward such as were in greatest
distress, and below the expectation of ever making a retribution: whereby, as
our Author tells us, it was evident that neither Hopes nor Fears, nor Self Ends
or Advantage, were the motives of his Liberality, but the Virtue, Goodness, and
Beneficence of his Naure and Soul.

But because if his Beneficence had been singly to any one single party or
Faction, or only to that Faction that were undermost, it might have been
interpreted a secret compliance with them, and adherence to them, and so
rendered him suspected to those that attained the upper hand, he so wisely
ordered his Charity and Beneficence to the oppressed, that at the same time he
also liberally presented the Victors; and those things he did not poorly and
sneakingly, but boldly and openly, that the oppressed might see he countenanced
not their Cause, but regarded their wants; and the Victors might see he durst
do good to the necessitous, though their Enemies; and all the World might see
that his Charity and Goodness was directed to the Humane Nature, not to
encourage or flatter Factions: Some Instances hereof are given in the History
of his Life.

When Marius was declared an Enemy to the State, he assisted him with
Necessaries in his flight; and when Sylla, a declared Enemy by Marius, visited
Atticus at Athens, he entertained him with honor and respect.

When Pompey was hardly beset by the power of Caesar, he supplied him and his
Assistants with Money for their support; and yet at the same time supplied
Caesar and his Followers with Money for their wants.

When Brutus and his Assistants were oppressed by the power of Anthony, he
supplied them with Necessaries: And when afterward it was Anthony's Fate to be
declared a public Enemy, and his condition seemed desperate, in so much that
the very Friends of Anthony turned bitter Enemies of Anthony's Family, he then
undertook the Patronage and protection of the Family of Anthony, relieved and
supported Fulvia, the Wife of Anthony, and Volummius, one of his Family, and
stood between them and the violence used against them, and supplied them with
Necessaries.

And in this Liberality and Beneficence of Atticus, these things are very
observable.

1. That it was full of sincerity and integrity; his greatest Bounty and
Erogations commonly employed upon those that were not in any likelihood of
making him any return; such were his distribution of Corn among the poor at
Athens, his relief of Marius, Pompey, Brutus, and the Family of Anthony, when
they were at the lowest, and their Cases seemingly desperate; Nec Desperatos
reliquit.

2. That it was full of equality and impartial: If Brutus were in distress, he
relieved him; if Anthony, though of a contrary Faction, were in distress, he
relieved him: His Liberality was not intuitu partis, or governed by regard to
any particular Faction; but intuitu humani generis, a common benignity to
humane Nature, that whatsoever the party was, yet if he were in distress, he
had the experience of his Bounty. And upon the observation hereof, neither
party took amiss what he did for the other, because they found he did the like
for them, when their turn was to be lowermost. And indeed the vicissitudes of
the successes of the Factions of Marius and Sylla had made all parties wise, so
that they became pretty well contented to find such a common Promptuary and
Treasury of Beneficence, which though their suppressed Adversary now tasted,
might be of equal advantage to them at the next turn of Fortune.

3. That it was full of singular prudence: Pompey and his party were in some
distress, he relieved them; Caesar wanted not his Relief; yet Atticus presents
him liberally; this was not to bribe each party; but it was to give assistance
to their necessities: Caesar no less honored him then Pompey. And by these
prudent contemporations he made his Liberality safe, and gave assurance to all
parties, that the Bounty to either party, was not a compliance with parties,
but an excellent beneficence to Mankind in general.

And therefore when either party solicited him to any thing that savoured of
the countenance of a Faction, he constantly declined it; as when Sylla
persuaded him to go with him to Italy, and the party of Brutus solicited him to
contribute to a private Treasury for Brutus, and Pompey endeavored to draw him
to his Army. By all which, all parties and all men were fully satisfied that
the Bounty of Atticus was not in contemplation of Factions, or for private
designs or ends, but the emanation of a noble and benign Soul, full of rivers
of Goodness, Clemency and Beneficence,

And now we will a little consider the singular effects that this Beneficence,
Liberality and Charity had in all the Successes of his Life.

1. By this means he removed our of the Minds of all men all that envy which
commonly waits upon Wealthy men; for he was so true a Steward, and generous
Dispenser of the Wealth he had, that no man envied his Riches, but wished it
more: For they well knew that when their misfortunes or necessities made them
stand in need of relief, he was ready to dispose of it for their supply.

2. There is nothing in the world renders a man more popular and beloved of
all; and so it made him.

And although Popularity is a dangerous thing in a State, when it meets in an
ambitious Spirit, yet it is safe and desirable when found in a good, and
peaceable, and wise man.

3. This Liberality or Bounty was so diffusive, that it exceedingly multiplied
his Friends: Every man that had tasted of his Bounty, became his Friend and
Advocate; in so much that there was no one party or Faction in Rome, but had a
considerable person of it obliged unto Atticus, by his Benefits, whereby it
came to pass that in all the Revolutions and Vicissitudes of successes of
contesting Factions, he never wanted some considerable persons in power, that
were studious of serving him and his Friends, and were his Advocates, if he had
occasion.

4. Consequently this Bounty and Liberality of Atticus was one of the great
Instruments of Safety in all those various Revolutions that happened in Rome
during his Life. This was one thing that rendered Atticus so safe, and so
acceptable to Caesar, after his return Victor over Pompey: The kindness and
liberality which he showed to the Family and Relations of Anthony in his
distress, was that which rendered him so acceptable to Anthony, at his return
Victor over Brutus; that while thousands were banished or destroyed, and Cicero
himself slain in the rage of that Revolution, Atticus was protected and highly
favored; insomuch that he obtained protection hot only for himself, but diverse
of his Friends that were in the Black List of Death, Confiseation; or
Banishment, as appears at large in the History of his Life.

It is true that this Expedient of Safety is not exerciseable by men of mean
Fortunes, neither is it needful for them; men of low condition have much of
their security in times of common distration, from that which ordinarily
mistaken men account a piece of misery or infelicity, namely, their poverty;
such be below the storms and tempests in a State, they blow over them, and
rarely hurt them, unless they are over-busie or wilfully entangle themselves in
them: But Wealth and Greatness stand in the eye of Troubles and Storms of this
nature, because it commonly invites every necessitous or ambitious man to make
such the prize of Rapine; and therefore the wisdom of this man that was wealthy
and eminent, is more conspicuous, in that he enjoyed his Peace together with
his Wealth, and so prudently managed the latter, that he secured the former;
and yet without any enormous detriment or wasting of his Wealth, while he
wisely placed such part thereof that he could reasonably spare, and hereby
secured both himself and a fair competency of the rest.

And these were the Effects of this excellent man's Bounty and Liberality, which
always returned with great advantage to his Honor and Safety.

CHAP. XII.
The Second thing which Atticus did in order whereby he secured himself.

THe Second Observable in the practice of Atticus, was his constancy to his
Friends under all conditions; whereby he never ceased to do them all Offices of
Kindness and Beneficence, were their Fortunes never so low and desperate.

Marius, though a turbulent person, yet was personally the Friend of Atticus,
and his Son bred up at School with him; when the Father fled from Rome, he
supplied him with necessaries in his flight.

Pompey was a Friend of Atticus, and in his distress Atticus supplied him
liberally in his necessities.

Brutus was a familiar Acquaintance of Atticus, and when he was forced to
desert Rome, he supplied him in his streights and necessities with Money, and
after the Battle at Philippi, where Brutus was slain, maintained Servilia his
Mother, and used his Interest with Anthony, and procured the liberty of many of
his Friends that were taken after that Battle, as Gellius, Canius, Julius
Canidius, and others; the like he did after the Battle of Philippi, for Julius
Morilla the Praetor, Aulus Torquatus, and the Son of Quintius his
Brother-in-Law, and others of his Friends that were engaged in the quarrel and
misfortune of Pompey: Thus he always improved his interest that he had in
Julius Caesar, Anthony, and other the Heads of great Factions in Rome, when the
Victory fell on their side, not to make himself rich or great, but to deliver
his friends from the common calamities that befell them in the fall of that
Party wherein they were unhappily engaged: Only the Ruin of Cicero was so
sudden, that it prevented the intercession of Atticus in his behalf.

Neither can I omit that admirable piece of fidelity to his Friends, and yet
that admirable Prudence, that though it fell out oftentimes that many of his
Friends were engaged in opposite Factions, and extreme animosities and
irreconcilable differences, yet so he ordered the Matter, that he kept an
intimate Friendship with them all, corresponded with them all, and had the
entire Love and Service of them all without any breach of Friendship, or
incurring the displeasure or jealousy of any of them or of their Relations:
Marius was his Friend, and so was Sylla, and yet engaged in irreconcilable
enmity between themselves. Pompey was his Friend, and so was Julius Caesar, yet
engaged in desperate Wars each against the other. Brutus was his Friend, and so
was Anthony, yet mortal Enemies one against another.

Again, Anthony was his Friend, and so was Octavius Caesar, and yet both
implacable enemies each to other. Cicero and Hortensius the two greatest
Masters of Eloquence of Rome, had great emulations between them, and yet
notwithstanding all those bitter and irreconcilable Feuds and Emulations
between these Friends of Atticus, though he were not able to reconcile their
differences, he still kept up an entire Friendship with them all, correspondent
with them by Letters, Entertainments, and all Offices of Friendship with them
all, was bountiful to them all, relieved them all in the vicissitudes of their
Exigences and Misfortunes, and kept himself yet free from engaging in their
Differences, nor rendered himself suspected to either party. They all knew his
integrity and his wisdom, and were abundantly satisfied that his Friendship and
Beneficence to either party, were acts of pure and generous goodness, and not
leavened, or tainted, or stained with base Ends, or Hopes, or Designs. And this
Fidelity and Constancy to his Friends, caused all men to love and honor him,
and to desire his Friendship, and engaged his Friends in great firmness and
fidelity to him. And this among all the rest of his honest and prudent
managements, was a great security to him: For, as before I observed, his
Friends were hereby so multiplied and increased, that there was not, nor indeed
could be any party in Rome, but had a considerable number of the Friends of
Atticus, whom he had formerly engaged by great benefits mingled with it, which
were as so many Protectors, or at least Advocates and Instruments of his Safety
and Preservation upon any Revolutions that happened or could happen in the City
or State of Rome.

CHAP. XIII.
The Third Expedient conducing to the Safety of Atticus; his admirable
moderation and equality of Mind and Actions.

ONe of the greatest Enemies to any man's Peace and Safety, is the immoderation
and excess of passion which ordinarily carries men into excesses and extremes,
and creates to a man Enemies and troubles if it find none; transports men
beyond the bounds of Wisdom or Reason; sometimes it breaks out into rude, harsh
and offensive actions, sometimes into provoking and irritating Speeches, and
always disorders the judgment, and brings precipitation and inadvertence into
the actions: But our worthy person was quite of another Make; he governed his
passions, and thereby governed his Actions and Speeches, was deliberate, and
considerate, and of great moderation: He was not presently transported to love
and admire every man that either did him a kindness, or was great in the
Commonwealth; he understood and weighed wherein their ends and designs lay:
neither was he presently transported with hatred and indignation of every
person that was voted an Enemy by the Senate; he allowed something in those
Sentences to the Passions, Interests and Ends of Persons, Parties and Factions:
Though he was an Enemy to Faction in the State, yet he did not presently
conclude that all the men that were engaged in a Party, were Enemies to the
Commonwealth; he considered that some might mean well, and were ignorant of the
Designs and Ends of those that commonly governed the Party; who like a
prevailing Humor or Distemper, many times carried weak or wellmeaning men
beyond their intentions, and therefore he was not of that common humor of the
Vulgar, whereof it is said, Sequitur Fortunam semper; and odit Damnatos.



And therefore as on the one side he was not cheated into parties by the goodly
pretenses of them that raised or managed them; so he was not transported with
hatred and detestation of all that were of them: As he had his Allay that made
him not overcredulous of the former, so he had an allowance of Charity and
Gentleness for the latter; whereby he was moderate in his Censures of them, and
his dislike of them and their proceedings, left still a room for their relief
in their necessities, and for an intercession for mercy for them, with those in
power.

He looked upon the commotions in the State of both sides to be but the product
of Faction, a Disease and Distemper, not the true Temperament and Complexion of
the State, and therefore in the collision of Factions, he did not presently
judge that the best that prevailed, nor that the worst that was suppressed,
they had each their errors, and faults, and mischiefs to the Commonwealth,
which possibly were in themselves equal, notwithstanding the discrimination of
the success: And therefore he did not presently fall in with the prevailing
party, and adore it, nor deny those measures of Charity to the adverse party,
which he used to deal to them in distress; possibly he thought them not less
innocent than the former, though less fortunate, and therefore esteemed them
much at one in their merit or rather demerit; only the distressed stood more in
need of his Charity than the Victors, and therefore they had more of it.

Again, when he saw the Rage and Fury, and Proscriptions, and Condemnations
that the conquering party used against those that had been engaged on the other
side, though he hated and detested that Cruelty and Fierceness that he saw
exercised by Citizens of the same Commonwealth and City, against their
Fellow-Citizens, as breaches not only of the Bonds of Civil Society, but as
Invasions upon Humanity it self; yet he still governed himself with that
moderation, as not to fall foul upon the Victors with public Invectives and
Phillippiques: For he well knew that would but irritate and provoke their Rage,
and possibly disable him to do those Offices of kindness for his Friends that
fell under the power of the Victors: And besides, Experience of the
Vicissitudes of Successes in adverse Factions, had well assured him that it was
the common Method of which soever Faction prevailed, to use all Extremities
against the other: And although this cruel Custom did no way justify the
things they did, nor rendered them excusable in the judgment of Atticus; yet it
gave a little allay to the censure of their severity, that had the other
Faction prevailed, they would have done no less by them.

And this moderation of Atticus gave him great security in troublesome times,
procured him Friends, kept him considerate and circumspect in all he did, that
he never overshot himself with Folly, Passion or precipitancy in words or
action.

CHAP. XIV.
Cancerning the Fourth Expedient conducing to the Safety of Atticus; his
Constancy.

IF I should follow Atticus through all those expressions of his Prudence and
Wisdom, joined with singular Virtue and Goodness, my Observations would be too
voluminous: The truth is, there is scarce any one part or passage of his Life,
but deserves remark. My Author truly says, Difficile est omnia dicere, and non
necessaria: I shall therefore conclude all with this one Observation more;
namely, his Constancy.

1. He was constant to his Friends, even in their lowest and most desperate
condition; he ever retained his Love to them, and it was not a complemental
Love, but such as expressed it self in real indications, relieving them in
their extremities, engaging all his Endeavors and interest for their
deliverance out of dangers, and never giving over his endeavors till he
effected what was possible for their good and safety.

2. He was constant to his Mode and Fashion of Life; he lived in the same
House, without any considerable alteration, kept the same Equipage, not
withstanding the increase and access of his Fortune; the same Rules and
Observances in his Household, his Entertainments, his Housekeeping, pari
fastigio stetit in utraque Fortuna.

3. He was constant to his Principles; what he once was, he always was; and
what he once practiced, he always practiced; he used the same moderation and
equality, the same Justice and Integrity, the same quietness and evenness of
mind, the same Virtue and Goodness, the same Piety and Honor to his Parents,
the same Humility and Affability, the same Gravity and Decency, the same
Compassion to the afflicted, the same Bounty and Liberality to all; and no
variation of Successes or Fortunes, no Dislikes or Distastes of other men, no
Hopes, no Fears, no persuasions, no sinister Ends or Designs conld shake him
from his Principles, or unsettle him from his Basis of Honor or Virtue, upon
which he stood fixed, square and unmovable. And therefore when Anthony was in
his lowest condition, declared an Enemy to the State. Brutus and Cassius in the
vogue and esteem in Rome, and seemed to ride upon the strength of the Common
breath of popular applause, and yet in this condition of Affairs, Atticus
assisted and protected the Family of Anthony with his Money and Interest in
their lowest and deplorable condition: And when the great men of the time began
to look sour upon him, and complained, quod parum odisse malos Cives Videretur:
That he was too favorable to the public Enemies of the State, yet he
continued constant in his way, and as our Author tells us, rather thought it
his honor for him to practice what was fit for him to do, than what others
would command.

And certainly this Constancy of Atticus to his Friends, to Himself, to his
Principles, was not only his Honor but his Safety; all the World looking upon
him as a common Benefactor to Humane Nature, not changed nor shaken from his
Goodness by any variety of Fortune. A man that is unstable or tottering is
loved by no man, because he is not fit to be trusted; but a man constant to
worthy and generous Principles retains the like constancy of Esteem and
Veneration from all men, and together with his honor and esteem and worth,
commonly retains his safety and security in public concussions.

And thus I have gathered out of the History of the Life of Atticus such things
as seemed to me the great means of his unexampled peace, safety, honor,
tranquillity and happiness in a continued series of incomparable and matchless
concussions and storms in the Roman State, I shall conclude with these few
general Observations upon his Life, and with some Cautions touching it. The
Observations are these:

1. That most certainly Virtue, Goodness, and Integrity is the best Policy and
greatest means of Safety in the most dangerous times and places.

2. That most certainly Virtue and Goodness and Integrity is the truest way for
any man to gain true honor, veneration, and esteem among men; it is more
conducible than Riches, and Armies, and Triumphs, and Victories.

3. That as it is the truest way to get Honor, so it is the best means to keep
it, because such an Honor has not its dependence upon any thing without a
man; his Fortune, Wealth, Power, or Success, these are changeable and variable;
but a good, wise, and virtuous man carries the root and spring of his Honor in
himself, he shall never cease to be honored till he cease to be good.

4. That there is a secret veneration of Goodness and Virtue in all men, even
in the worst and vilest; a man cannot so far put off Humanity, but that
Goodness, Wisdom, and Virtue will have so much of party and interest in his
nature, that he cannot choose but pay a secret approbation, veneration, and
esteem to those that have it.

5. That consequently Wisdom, Beneficence, Virtue, and Goodness have a great
connaturality to Humane Nature, and are the true genuine Spirit or Genius of
it, and that it is so, is evident, 1. By the great good it procures to Humane
Nature, Honor, and Safety; and 2. By the great esteem that Mankind has of it,
and the common interest it obtains in the common Nature of Mankind.

CHAP. XIV.
Touching certain Cautions to be used in the Observation and Imitation of the
Life of Atticus in public collisions of Factions.

WE have seen in the former Discourse not only the singular Virtue and Goodness
of Atticus, but also his admirable Safety in times of public Factions and
Commotions in the State of Rome.

And yet we may observe in his Life some things practiced by him with great
success and security, which yet were things of great danger and hazard, and
possibly such as may not be undertaken or adventured upon by others, and exceed
the limits of common Example. When a person is by the lawful supreme Authority
of a State or Country declared a public Enemy, or a Traitor, proscribed or
banished, ordinarily common humanity of all States allows of relief and support
to his Wife, Children, Family, Servants and dependents, but for the most part
(if not always) forbids supplies to be sent to the person thus proscribed, or
declared an Enemy, or any communication or converse with him; because though
possibly it may be all done upon a personal account, and intuitu personae,
without respect to his condition in relation to the Public; yet it cannot
choose but be a support to him, and a countenance of him, whereby he may be
enabled to gather new supplies, or at least courage or encouragement for
farther attemps to the promoting of his Faction, Party, or Designs. And
although in the Roman State those declarations of Enemies, whether Marcus, or
Sylla, or Brutus, or Anthony, or Pompey, or Caesar, were obtained by the
prevalence and solicitation of the adverse Party or Faction, and were in a
manner extracted from the Senate and People; yet it is plain, that according to
the Constitution of the Roman Republic, the supreme Authority was lodged in
the Senate, or Senate and People; and therefore the public Acts, Decrees, or
Laws made by them were in force till repealed by the like Solemnity or
Authority, though perchance at first unduly obtained. For such veneration is
necessarily due to Laws or Constitutions enacted by the full, supreme,
legislative, legal power, according to the true Constitution of the Civil
Government, that they are not to be rescinded by private persons, upon their
pretense of being unduly obtained, till they are regularly avoided by the like
legal power by which they were enacted or instituted.

And therefore a private person (such as Atticus was, or any other might be)
that should go about to relieve and supply Marius or Sylla, Pompey or Julius
Caesar, Brutus or Anthony, Octavius or Lepidus while they were under these
public Declarations or Proscriptions by the Civil Power of the Roman State,
according to the settled Laws of that State, must needs be under a violation of
the Law, and subjected to the danger and inconvenience that arises from
violations of public Laws. Besides, it may seem this liberty taken by Atticus
of relieving persons thus declared Enemies to the Commonwealth, and holding
such intimate correspondence with them, neither became a good Citizen nor a
good Man, which according to the old standard of the Roman Morals, was, Qui
consult a patrum, qui leges juraque servat.



And therefore though the general Scheme of the Life of Atticus afford a
prudent and good Example of Imitation, especially in the like state of Affairs,
yet it were hard to make him a pattern of imitation in this particular of his
supplies of Enemies, so publicly declared by the true supreme power of the
Roman State, (I say the true supreme power of the Roman State) nor in his
correspondence with them. For it is so far from proving a man's safety, that,
according to the usual Methods and Laws of Government, it exposes a man to the
greatest danger, and that even by the Law it self.

What Atticus therefore did in this kind, is singular and scarce compatible to
another person, because it is hardly possible that any other person could be
under the same circumstances with Atticus when he used this practice, and
therefore that which he did in this kind with safety, yea and honor to
himself, may not be ventured upon by any person that stands otherwise
circumstantiated, and studies his safety.

Although the Roman State were severe enough in prohibiting supplies to their
foreign Enemies, or holding correspondence, or clandestina cum hostibus
colloquia, yea and had and used the like strictness in relation to those
Mutinies, or Conspiracies, or Rebellions immediately or directly levelled
against the State or Commonwealth it self; as in the Conjuration of Catiline,
their Bella servilia with their Slaves, and the like; yet it should seem at
this time they had not that strict animad version against the dissenting
Parties or Factions, which though they were bitter and cruel one toward
another, yet they all pretended a common love and care of the Commonwealth or
Government closely, and each party possibly at some times might really intend
the prosperity and advancement thereof, though the means whereby they attempted
it proved pernicious to that end.

2. Again and principally, although by the power and industry of a prevailing
Faction the Senate and People were oftentimes brought to countenance them with
a Decree or Law in their favor, and with a Proscription or Declaration to the
disadvantage of the adverse party, yet every body knew that it was but a kind
of forced compliance by the true Body of the Senate or People, and that the
concern lay merely between the parties litigant, and not so much in the true
Genius of the Roman Government, which would have been glad to have been free
from both the Competitors, or at least from their Competition: And therefore
the animadversions and severities used against either Party, though they were
oftentimes great and cruel, yet were not so much from the temper of the Roman
Government, as from the distemper, jealousy, animosity and hatred between the
contending Parties themselves: and therefore they that suffered, looked upon
their sufferings not as so much the exertions of the Justice of the Roman
State, as the violence of the prevailing party.

3. Again, the various successes that those Factions and their Heads and
Parties had in the common experience, and in their successes, seemed by degrees
to make men sensible, that a good man and beneficent was necessary to be
protected, because no party knew whether it might not shortly be his turn to
make use of his beneficence: So that a man not addicted to either Faction as a
party in it, was by a kind of tacit compact free from animad version or
punishment for his assistance to the oppressed; and was spared in these public
Concussions, as Temples or Sacred places are in time of public Hostility.

4. But again, Atticus had given in the whole course of his Life most certain
and infallible indications that he did not, would not engage in either Party or
Faction, and that he did with an equal indifferency supply the necessities, and
endeavor to remove the calamities of any of what Party soever he was; and bare
a fair and equal respect to all of what Party soever, whether of the Party of
Marius or Sylla, of Caesar or Pompey, of Brutus or Anthony; by all which all
men concluded him to be a common Friend to Mankind; but no fomenter, or
encourager, or maintainer of any Faction. And it is scarce possible for any
other man to have all these happy circumstances to contribute to that common
good opinion that all Parties, yea all men had of Atticus; whereby it came to
pass that these supplies and correspondencies that he held with the several
engaged Parties, never brought him into the danger or suspicion of being a
promoter or favourer of their Factions, or to render those his acts of Humanity
any way unsafe or dangerous to him.

And therefore since the danger that might befall Atticus in his relief of
those that were declared Enemies to the Commonwealth, must necessarily arise
either from the resentment of the Senate and People of Rome, in relieving those
they had declared Enemies, or from the jealousy, indignation and animosity of
that Party or Faction that then obtained, and might be offended at his kindness
to an adverse Party: He was in both these respects under a competent degree of
security, not with standing those supplies and correspondencies: For the Senate
and People of Rome, though by the force of a prevailing Party they were drawn
to, or rather driven to make Decrees and Declarations in their favor, and
against the other Party; yet in truth they really disliked both, and would have
been glad to be at quiet; and therefore were not over-eager, or busy, or
fierce in prosecuting those that were beneficent to either Party, especially if
he were no Friend to the Faction it self.

And on the other side, the Factions themselves were not over-violent in their
animadversions upon Atticus his Beneficence to either Party, because it was
apparent he did it not in contemplation or favor of a Faction, but as a common
Benefactor to men in want and extremity: And so between both he escaped those
severities which possibly the rigor of the Law might have inflicted upon an
assistant to a declared Enemy, or the jealousy of a prevailing Party might
have brought upon him.

5. Again, he was a man of that great and deserved reputation for his Prudence,
Learning, Worth, Love to his Country, Liberality, Beneficence, Sincerity, that
he had a high veneration with all men of all Parties and Factions; every man
thought it a kind of barbarousness and inhumanity to accuse or injure such a
person especially that had so obliged all Mankind. When a bold Tribune did
accuse Scipio Africanus that great Roman Captain, he answered his Accusation
with no other language, but led the People up to the Capitol and other places
where the Monuments of his Triumphs and Benefits to the Roman State gave them
the fresh remembrance of his Merits, and thereupon the Accusation vanished, and
the Accuser slunk away ashamed of his Attempt. But in all the whole Life of
Atticus we find not so much as any Accusation of him, no not to the Heads
themselves of the combating parties. He was so much above Censure, that he
never so much as fell under any Accusations; which possibly may be a privilege
that few men living in public Concussions, and of any eminence, are capable of.

And therefore as this Example of the Liberality of Atticus to parties
obnoxious to a public declaration of being Enemies to the State, and his
familiarity, intimacy, and correspondency with them may be a signal evidence of
his Wisdom, yea and also of his fortunate success under so dangerous
Adventures; yet it cannot be allowed to be a common Example to other persons to
run the like hazard, because it is morally impossible they should be under such
happy and beneficial circumstances in this kind as Atticus was, and therefore
cannot expect the like success therein as he sound.

Indeed if the Senate and People of Rome that made these Decrees in favor of
those that got into the Saddle, had been but Usurpers of the supreme Authority,
or had it not been really and legally fixed in them, or had they been a pack of
men that had but pretended the supreme Authority, and the State-power of making
Laws or politic Edicts, Proscriptions, and Declarations of this nature,
without any legal and true power so to do: It had not only been an act of
nobleness and generosity, but possibly of duty, to have ministered relief and
supply to those that were oppressed by them. But the Case was otherwise; the
true supreme Authority of the Roman State was engaged in those Edicts and
Proscriptions, though drawn thereunto by the power of a prevailing Party. And
therefore the adventure of Atticus was great in ministering supplies to those
that fell under those Sentences and Decrees, though his great Wisdom in
managing thereof, the great and public veneration of his goodness, and the
junctures of the affairs of the Roman State, rendered him safe and secure from
danger under that adventure. And whosoever shall adventure in like manner, had
need be sure his Circumstances be the same with those of Atticus, and that he
has as good a Judgment, yea, and Fortune also, to discern and weather
Difficulties, as he had, otherwise in such Adventures he cannot be without
great danger.

And as I have added this Caution touching the practice of Atticus, in his
Life, so there is another Caution to be added touching his Deportment near his
Death. It seems to me, that his obstinate resolution not to take any
nourishment to preserve his Life, because it would prolong his pain together
with his Life, was not at all commendable; but as it savoured too much of
impatience, unbecoming a Philosopher, so it was an act of much wilful
imprudence; for the receiving of convenient nourishment, might prolong his
Life, and possibly abate his pain. But the wilful refusal of it must
necessarily be (as it was) an immediate cause of his Death, which he thereby
hastened; and although self-Murder was grown too much in fashion among some of
the Grandees of Rome, as appears by the instance of Cato and others; yet
certainly it was a practice not only of Inhumanity, but of much Pusillanimity
and Impotence of Mind, and a miserably mistaken choice, to choose Death, the
worst of Evils, rather than endure Pain or Disgrace in the world; which a
little Philosophy would have taught them to bear with patience, rather than to
avoid by destroying their own Lives.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 9. 1. 23. r. Province. P. 17. 1. 19. for note r. not. P. 36. 1. 15. r.
11th year. P. 41. r. 4628. P. 45. 1. 5. r. fermented. P. 57. 1. 6. r. Gentlest
Animadversions. P. 59. 1. 24. r. aided. P. 69. 1. 9. r. evil Engine. P. 73. 1.
6. r. Gilded all their. 1. 21. r. Protections of. P. 82. 1. 7. dele rather. 1.
14. r. Consulate of Marius. P. 87. 1. 2. r. in or against. P. 93. 1. 21. for
strange and foreign, r. strong and firm. P. 98. 1. 4. r. or like means. P. 99.
1. 16. r. for the state, his stake. P. 104. 1. 4. r. who will. P. 114. 1. 1. r.
opposed them. P. 118. 1. 20. r. Air, but. P. 134. 1. 22, 23. r. for the later,
both will come. P. 153. 1. 27. r. they put. P. 158. 1. 18. r. were obvious to.
P. 161. 1. 9. r. Great men especially, if inclinable to any Faction. P. 165. 1.
8. r. CHAP. IX. and so for all the rest of the Chapters to the end of the Book
on forward. P. 174. 1. 22. r. No public. 1. 25. r. Injudicial. 1. 26. r.
Employment be must. P. 190. 1. 15. r. His declamations. P. 199. 1. 23. r.
constantly avoid. P. 225. 1. 5. r. others would commend, P. 230. 1. 1. r.
extorted from.

ADDENDA.
Page 92. Between Line 12 and 13, insert as follows.
IT is true that the lawful Governors of a Kingdom or State, must necessarily
sometimes use great severities upon Rebels and Disturbers of the Government;
and this is necessary as well by way of just retribution of great demerits, but
principally for example, and so prevent others from the like Exorbitances, Ut
Poena ad paucos, Metus ad omnes: Rewards and Punishments being as well the two
great Pillars that support Government, as the two great Wheels that keep it in
a regular and orderly Motion.

But yet there is great Prudence and Moderation to be used therein, as well in
reference to the kinds and degrees of the punishments, as in the extent of
them; for if they be too inhumane and barbarous, or be extended to all the
persons that are Offenders (when the number of them possibly is very great) it
may prove like Physic that is too strong for the Bodies, and brings many times
greater danger than the Disease it designs to cure.

But the Case of those Factions in Rome, was not like that of the Civil
Magistrate in punishing Malefactors in a State; but it was the Passions and
Animosities of one Faction or Party against another, and therefore such horrid
and extensive severities that they used one against another, rendered their
severities and the extent of them, as unexcusable, so in the event, dangerous
and unsuccessful to those that used them; the reason above given.

Page 144. Between Line 7, and 8, add,
It is true that he relieved Brutus after his Exile; but so he also relieved
Anthony after his Exile, though both were extreme Enemies each to other; but
still it was for their private relief, not to support their Factions. Brutus
used him as his great Councellor, as we are told in his Life: But it was not
upon the account of Brutus his public undertakings, but only touching his
private Concerns; which appears beyond all question, in that in their highest
Familiarity and Friendship, he refused not only to subseribe for the Treasure
designed for Brutus, but would not so much as meet about it.


