THE NECESSITY OF SETTLING THE Crown of England.
WITHOUT making particular remarks upon what I am about to acquaint the Reader
with, which is bare matter of Fact, or any application thereof to our present
circumstances, as supposing the design of this Paper obvious to all Men's
understandings at the first view; I shall in the First place, relate some of
those considerations, that induced the whole Parliament in the Twenty eighth
year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign to petition the Queen, That sentence of Death,
which had been given against Mary Queen of Scots, might be put in Execution;
And Secondly, I shall represent how the Succession to the Crown of England now
stands, and into what Families it is likely to come, if care be not taken
thereof in this present Convention.

The Parliament in the Twenty eighth of Elizabeth was Summoned and Assembled
upon no other cause, or ground, than the timely, and strange Discovery of that
bloody, and merciless Treason Plotted by Babington, and others, for the violent
taking away of her Majesty's Life, of which Mary Queen of Scots had been first
by a most Just and Honorable Trial fully Convicted, and afterward judicially
pronounced to have been in a high nature Guilty. But yet her Majesty not being
satisfied with her so just Trial and Attaindure, Assembled the Parliament on
purpose, that so all those former Proceedings, how just soever, might be
further committed and referred to the Impartial Examination, and Final Judgment
of the whole Realm.

Both Houses of Parliament Unanimously voted the Sentence to be just, true and
honorable, and Petitioned the Queen that Execution might be done; for that
they could find no other way to secure her Majesty's safety, and that of these
Realms.

The Reasons upon which they grounded their Petition, I shall put down, as
succinctly as I can, out of Sir Simon D'Ewe's Journal of Queen Elizabeth's
Parliaments; and they are as follow, viz.

For that they had a long time, to their intolerable grief, seen by how
manifold, most dangerous and execrable practices, the said Queen of Scots had
compassed the destruction of her Majesty's person, thereby not only to bereave
them of the sincere and true Religion of Almighty God, bringing them and this
Noble Crown back again into the Thraldom of the Romish Tyranny, but also
utterly to ruinate, and overthrow the happy State and Commonweal of this most
Noble Realm: to Banish and destroy the Professors and Professing of the true
Religion of Jesus Christ, and the ancient Nobility of this Land, and to bring
this whole State and Commonweal to Foreign Subjection, and to utter ruin and
confusion; which malicious purposes would never cease to be prosecuted by all
possible means, so long as the said Queen's Confederates, her Ministers, and
Favorers had their eyes and imaginations fixed upon the said Queen, the only
ground of their Treasonable hopes and conceits, and the only Seed-plot of all
dangerous and traitorous Devious and Practices against her Majesty's Sacr^d
Person. And for that upon Advised and great Consultation they could not find
any possible means to provide for her Majesty's Safety, but by the just and
speedy Execution of the said Queen, the neglecting whereof might procure the
heavy displeasure and punishment of Almighty God, as by sundry severe Examples
of his great Justice in that behalf left us in sacred Scripture, does appear;
and that if the same were not put in Execution, they should thereby (so far as
man's reason could reach) be brought into utter despair of the continuance
amongst them of the true Religion of Almighty God, and of her Majesty's Life,
and of the safety of all the ^ubjects, and of the good estate of this
Flourishing Commonweal.

For that she (the said Queen of Scots) had continually breathed the overthrow
and suppression of the Protestant Religion, being poisoned with Popery from her
tender Youth, and at her Age joining in that false termed Ho^^^^eague, and had
been ever since, and was then a professed Enemy of the Truth.

For that she rested wholly upon Popish hopes, to be delivered and ad^^nced,
and was so devoted and doted in that Profession, that she would (as well for
the satisfaction of others, as for the feeding her own humor) supplant the
Gospel where and whenever she might: Which evil was so much the greater, and
the more to be avoided, for that it slays the Soul, and would spread it self
not only over England and Scotland, but also into all parts beyond the Sea,
where the Gospel of God is maintained; the which cannot but be exceedingly
weakened, if defection should be in these two most valiant Kingdoms.

For that if she prevailed, she would rather take the Subjects of England for
Slaves than for Children.

For that she had already provided them a Foster-father and a Nurse, the Pope
and the King of Spain; into whose hands, if it should happen them to fall, what
could they else look for, but ruin, destruction and utter extirpation of
Goods, Lands, Lives, Honor and all?

For that, as she had already by her poisoned baits, brought to destruction
more Noble men and their Houses, and a greater multitude of Subjects, during
her being here, than she would have done, if she had been in possession of her
own Country, and armed in the Field against them; so would she be still
continually the cause of the like spoil, to the greater loss and peril of this
Estate; and therefore this Realm neither could, nor might endure her.

For that her Sectaries both Wrote and Printed, that the Protestants would be
at their wit's end, world's end, if she should overlive Queen Elizabeth: (...)
thereby, that the end of the Protestant world was the beginning of their own
and therefore if she, the said Queen of Scots, were taken away, their world
would be at an end before its beginning.

For that since the spairing of her in the fourteenth year of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, Popish Traitors, and Recusants had multiplied exceedingly: And if she
were now spared again, they would grow both innumerable and invincible also:
And therefore mercy in that case would prove cruelty against them all: Nam est
quaedam crudelis misericordia; and therefore to spare her blood, would be to
spill all theirs.

For that God's Vengeance against Saul for sparing the Life of Agag, and
against Ahab for sparing the Life of Benhadad, was most apparent; for they were
both by the just Judgment of God deprived of their Kingdoms, for sparing those
wicked Princes, whom God had delivered into their hands. And those Magistrates
were much commended, who put to death those mischievous and wicked Queens,
Jezabel and Athalia.

How far these Reasons, that then swayed with the Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal, and all the Commons, to Petition the Queen for the Execution of Mary
Queen of Scots, ought in this present Conjuncture of Affairs to sway with the
people of England against any Application to, or coming to any manner of
Accommodation with the now withdrawn King, will farther appear, if we take a
view how the Succession to the Crown of England now stands, and into what
Families we are like to fall, if timely remedy be not carefully applied.

I shall say no more of the pretended Prince of Wales, than this, That if he be
an Imposture, who shall secure us against having many more such tricks played
us? If he be not an Imposture, he ought at least to be delivered into
Protestant hands, to be Educated in that Religion, which whoever comes to be
King or Queen of England must swear to Maintain and Defend: If not, every man
is at liberty to imagine, what the Nation may expect from such a Successor.

The next Heir to the English Crown, after the two Princesses, and the Prince
of Orange, was the Princess Henrietta, King Charles the First's Youngest
Daughter, she was Married to the only Brother of the French King, by whom she
had Issue, two Daughters; the Elder of which is Married to Charles the Second
of that name, now King of Spain, by whom she as yet had no Issue.

The younger Daughter is Married to the Duke of Savoy; by whom she has
Children.

The next Heir to the Crown of England, is the Princess Louisa, only Daughter
of Charles Lodowick, Prince Palatine, Married to the present Duke of Orleans,
by whom she has diverse Children.

The next Heir to the Crown of England, after the Issue of the present Duchess
of Orleans, were three French Ladies, Daughters of Prince Edward, who was a
Younger Son of the Queen of Bohemia; the Eldest of these is Married to the Duke
d' Enguien, Eldest Son to the Prince of Co^de, the other two ^^e dead without
Issue.

So that unless the Nation take advantage of this opportunity, now so
miraculously put into their hands by Almighty God, of securing to themselves
their Religion, and Liberties, and securing the Government in Protestant hands;
what can we expect, but to be delivered up in a few years space, to a Spanish
Inquisition, to French Dragooning, to Massacres, and all sorts of persecutions,
which the poor Protestants have been harassed with in those Countries, by
Princes of an inveterate and hereditary malice to us and our Religion; from
whose Families we shall be forced to admit of Successors?

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.


