TO ALL THE People of the LORD, EVERY WHERE, Gathered or Scattered.
IN the Fear of God, and Love to his Truth, and People do I declare, in the
Spirit of Meekness, what has long oppressed my Soul, concerning those Unclean
Spirits gone out from the Unity of the Truth and Light, by which we have been
called, and gathered into one in Christ Jesus, the Head over all his Blessed
for ever, whose Name has been greatly dishonored through many wild Actings,
and his Innocent Spirit grieved, and many simple Souls deceived; many opressed,
and many offended against the Truth; because of those Spirits gone out from the
Truth, and now secretly, under a pretense, seeks daily to make it odious to
all. (For which Work my Soul has been much troubled:) Who to this Day raven
about from Place to Place amongst the People of God, seeking to enter where
they can; and so to strengthen themselves into Parties, to trouble such as they
cannot enter, seeking to spoil the peaceable Pasture of the Lambs, that they
should not Feed in Peace: And for that end, hunt after the Meetings of the
People of God. All which Practices and Pretenses, I deny in my Soul, and that
Spirit that acts therein.

And the more it lies upon me from the Lord, to warn the simple innocent ones
of his thereof openly, in that thorough me these Spirits have got much Head and
Entrance into the Minds of some who were simple toward God's Truth: And this
the Envious One has done, in the Night of my Trial, and Hour of Darkness and
Temptation, taking Advantage at my Sufferings, in the Day when my Judgment was
taken away, and I led Captive under the Power of Darkness, which all along has
sought my life, had not the Father hid it, and with his Hand upon me, stayed me
in those great Temptations; to whom alone I give the Glory of my Deliverance
from that great Destruction, as his Promise was to me before I came into that
Trial; who has now brought me up again, and has given me to see those Evil
Spirits, and that the Work of the Murderer and Devourer is therein, against
the Life of God in his Temple: Which, though they seek Entrance under pretense
of Humility, promising some great things, and more Holiness in that way, to
steal into simple Minds; but being got in, exalts themselves above the Seed of
God, and Tramples the Meek Spirit under Foot, and so darkens the Vessels, and
being exalted in the Openings of the Imaginations, leads the Creature, (as God)
above that of God, and so against that of God; he wars in others, where God is
above.

And this Mystery of deep Iniquity has the Lord God in the Spirit of the Lamb
revealed unto me, whose powerful working I have found, working in me above the
pure Measure and Unspotted Life of God. And though in the Simplicity of Christ
Jesus, I had given up my Body all along, a Free Offering to the Will of God in
Life, or in Death, for the Seeds sake; yet ungathered in the World; (as God
knows I lie not) yet could I often feel that exalted One above, secretly
tempting to Envy against the People of God already gathered, pretending a
greater thing to come another Way; but this, with the Life of God was ever
Judged. Though often I was buffeted therewith, sometimes so strongly, as to
force Words from me, above the meek and lowly Principle: All which Words were
soon judged, with the sufferer which lay under, and with his life be they
Condemned for ever.

And this lies upon me to declare openly, which God has revealed to me, for
the sake of the simple Ones, who may be deceived therewith, but would not, did
they know his Subtilty; And by this shall you all perceive that Spirit,
whatever it pretends, it will secretly withdraw your entire Love from the Flock
of God, already gathered, and cool your Affections and Zeal toward their
present Meetings, and if you judge it not there, it will grow on with an Evil
Eye, to spy out their Failings, and delight to hear of them, and talk of them,
with an hidden Joy, whispering them to others, and adding thereunto, with a
desire to see them broken, and their Nakedness laid open, if any thing be
amiss: And thus it has wrought in a Mystery of Wickedness in some Unjudged,
until it be seated in the Throne of open Enmity and Strife against the Lambs of
Christ; preferring the Society of the Profane before them, and taking Part
therewith against them, joining with any who seek to scatter them. And what
ever pretense this Spirit seeks to cover it self with, this I declare of it,
(having been kept by the good Hand of God, to see it revealed in its Ground and
End) that it is the Old Spirit of the Ranters, which now in a new Way makes
Head against the Light of Christ, and Life of his Cross; which is the only
thing that stands in its Way, by condemning its Filthiness in every Conscience:
And so they, in whom this is Entered, being exalted above the Living Witness in
themselves, would devour it in others.

And this in the Presence and Fear of God I declare, without the least
Prejudice against the Person of any man or Woman; but in Obedience to God, and
for the Seeds sake, lest any more of the simple should be deceived, and that
such as are deceived already, might recover themselves out of Satan's Snares;
no selfish End have I in it, God knows. And long time has my Soul been in
travail, ever I could obtain Power herein, so strongly has he that lets
withstood my Way.

Therefore in the Bowels of tender Love, I warn you all, to take heed how you
ever come under that Spirit under any pretense whatsoever; but let the Fear of
God, and sound Judgment in the Spirit of Meekness, you all preserve above it;
for wheresoever it enters by consent, it is hardly got out again: And if it be,
it is not without much Sorrow: And this I have found in the Depth, which for
your sakes I declare in Plainness and Truth, as I have learned of the Lord,
laboring with him without ceasing, that the rest of the People of God every
where may be saved from this Devourer, who goes daily about to deceive, and
whosoever he takes, he casts into the Earth, or into the Sea; for Wickedness is
with him wheresoever he goes.

Even the Lord God Almighty arm you all against his Wiles, being warned thereof
in his Love, and the Eternal Power of Holiness you all preserve clean to
Himself, who are dearer unto me than ever, and that in no other thing, but in
that Innocent Principle in which you are kept free from all the Pollutions of
the World, and Fleshly Liberty, and stand Witnesses for God against it, before
all Men, and in no other thing have I fellowship with any, which is that I seek
to set up above all.

And this was I moved to give forth, to go every where, as a Witness against
that unclean Spirit where ever it goes, feeling its Work is to run to and fro
to deceive; that all may be warned by what I have learned in Sufferings, and
they that will not may be left without excuse.

JAMES NAYOR.
Written in Bridewell, about the Beginning of 1658.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.


