HONESTY's best POLICY; OR, Penitence the sum of Prudence:
Being a brief Discourse, in honor of the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury's humble Acknowledgment and Submission for his Offenses, upon his
knees, at the Bar of the House of Lords, on the 25th. of Febr. 1677.
Together with the several Proceedings of the said Right Honorable House, in
order to his Lordship's late Discharge from Imprisonment.
Published for prevention of false Copies, in so weighty a matter, and for the
undeceiving of the People.
MIne eye was on diverse particulars, when first I resolved on the publication
of these Papers, viz.

1. To give a brief account of the Condition of this Kingdom, as it stood a
little before the E. of S. began to offend.

2. Of what nature his Lordship's Offenses were when they began, and the
dangerous Consequences of them.

3. The high Wisdom and Justice of His Majesty and the House of Peers, in doing
right to Themselves, and to the whole Body of Parliament, by preventing the
Dangers then threatening Them, and the whole Government, in point of Safety.

4. The necessity of setting forth some Discourse of this nature; together with
the Proceedings of the House: that the winds of such of His Majesty's Subjects
as have been intoxicated and perverted through the Offenses aforesaid, and are
not yet recovered, may be rectified from Principles and Doctrines, (both then,
and as yet) destrustive to this most Noble Monarchy.

5. The Vanity and Fate, at all times, of Popularity and Faction in great Lords
and Gentry; and of the Peoples being drawn in to a siding and driving of
Parties among each other, to second the pretenses of Male-contented Great Ones,
or the itchy humor of the lesser Fry of Government-Tinkers. And that, in this
juncture of Affairs, it is the utmost of all Treasons to be Factious, when
three Kingdoms are at stake in a Foreign War.

6. I considered also, that it can be no dishonor to E. of S. but his glory
(as it is of all true Penitents) to have his Repentance published, since it is
his happiness to survive in public, by the King's admirable Clemency, and
remain a living Lecture to turn multitudes of Transgressors from the Error of
their ways. It Is said in Holy Writ, He that turns many to Righteousness, shall
shine as the Stars for ever and ever, How happy then is his Lordship, that has
so fair an occasion thus to improve his Penitence?

7. I observed also, There are a sort of People, that not long ago were as
busy as Bees, to publish and disperse at large whatsoever they thought might
be for the Honor and Advantage of his Lordship; only now they envy him the
glory of the publication of this Ungrateful Wretches as they are, that a Noble
Lord, after so much sufferance of Imprisonment, for a Cause they professed to
own, should be so ill requited, as to have his Repentance smothered (as much as
in them lies.) for want of Air; Insomuch, that either, no Copy of it is to be
obtained from them, or but a clipped or counterfeit one! Therefore, to do Right
to his Lordship, and that the deluded sort of well-meaning People, may not be
deprived of the benefit of learning Repentance from his Lordship, with a sight
of their Errors, I reckoned it a charitable publick-good work, to give them a
sight of these Papers. Honi Soit Qui Mal y Pense, Ill betide him that evil
thinks: for I mean well in doing the business.

The Papers following, being Transcripts of the Proceedings of the House of
Peers about this matter, from the 14th. of Feb. 1677. to the 26th. of Feb. 1677.
Die Jovis, 14 Feb. 1677.
A Petition was presented to the House from the Earl of Shaftsburry, wherein he
humbly submits himself to their Lordships pleasure, and is ready to make
Acknowledgment and Submission according to their Directions, But in regard it
did not appear to this House; that his Lordship has made his Acknowledgment to
His Majesty; after debate, the Question being put, Whether this Petition shall
now be rejected? It was Resolved in the Affirmative.

Die Mercurii 20 Feb. 1677.
A Petition from the Earl of Shaftsbury was presented to the House, and read as
follow. To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled*

The humble Petition of Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner, on the 16th. of Feb. 1676. was committed Prisoner to the
Tower of London by your Lordships, because he did not obey your Lordships
Order; where he has continued under close Confinement, to the great decay of
his Health, and danger of his Life, as well as prejudice of his Estate and
Family.

In all humble Obedience therefore unto your Lordships, he does acknowledge
that his endeavoring to maintain that this Parliament is Dissolved, was an
ill-advised Action; for which he humble begs the Pardon of the King's Majesty,
and of this most Honorable House, and does in all humble Duty and Observance
to your Lordships, beseech you to believe that he would not do any thing
willingly to incur you Displeasure.

Wherefore your Petitioner, in all humble Duty and Obedience, both unto His
Majesty and your Lordships, has made his humble Submission and Acknowledgment
in his most humble Petition unto the King's most Sacred Majesty, and is ready
to make his further Submission and Acknowledgment to His Majesty, and to this
Honorable House, according to the direction thereof. And he does most humbly
implore your Lordships, That you will be pleased to restore him unto your
Favor, and discharge him from his Imprisonment.

And your Petitioner, as in Duty bound, shall, etc. Shaftsbury.

This being read, the Lord Chancellor did let the House know, That His Majesty
has received a third Petition from the Earl of Shaftsbury, more submissive in
form than the two first: But His Majesty understanding that the Earl of
Shaftsbury has endeavored to free himself from the Censure of this House, by
appealing to the King's Bench to have their Judgment thereupon, during the late
Adjournment, does not think fit as yet to signify his pleasure as to his
Discharge, until this House has taken that matter into Consideration.

After a long debate hereof, the Question was proposed, Whether an Address
shall be now made to His Majesty to discharge the Earl of Shaftsbury from his
Imprisonment, upon his Petitions to His Majesty, and to this House?

Then the Question being put, Whether this Question shall be put? It was
resolved in the Negative.

After this, the House considered the matter of the Earl of Shaftsbury's
appealing from this House to the King's Bench, to be released by Habeas Corpus,
And after debate, It is ordered, That the further debate of this business is
adjourned till tomorrow morning, at which time the Records of the Court of
King's Bench, touching the Earl of Shaftsbury's business there, shall be
brought into this House; the Judges are also to attend this House.

Die Jovis, 21 Feb. 1677.
This day the House resumed the debate concerning the Earl of Shaftsbury's
endeavoring to free himself from his Commitment by this House by a Habeas
Corpus in the Court of King's Bench. And for the better knowledge of the
mattere of Fact, the Records of the King's Bench were produced; by which it did
appear, That two Rules of that Court were obtained upon the motion of the Earl
of Shaftsbury's Counsel, Trim Term, 1677, and the Returns thereupon were read;
by which it did appear, That the Earl of Shaftsbury was committed the 16th. of
Feb. 1676. by this House for a Contempt; And then the Remittitur of the Earl of
Shaftsbury to the Tower was also read.

After this, a Petition of the Earl of Shaftsbury was presented to this House,
and read, wherein his Lordship took notice of an Order of this House of the
20th. instant, for bringing the Records of the Court of King's Bench into this
House, concerning the matter of the Habeas Corpus brought by him, that he takes
himself to be greatly concerned, and to have a right to be present and heard
when any debate of any new matter against him be entered upon; That he cannot
pretend, but that he may have erred for want of a Precedent to guide him; and
being deprived of the benefit of Counsel, by reason of his close Confinement,
and being resolved not to do any thing willingly which might in the least
offend His Majesty, or their Lordships; He humbly takes this opportunity to
give further evidence thereof, by casting himself at their Lordships feet: And
as he has humbly begged the pardon of His Majesty, so he begs also the pardon
of this House, for having offended them in any thing whatsoever.

After a long debate thereof, the House made these Resolutions following.

Resolved and declared, That it is a breach of the Privilege of this House,
for any Lord Committed by the House to bring a Habeas Corpus in any inferior
Court, to free himself from that Imprisonment, during the Session of Parliament.

Resolved, That the Earl of Shaftsbury shall have liberty to make his defense,
notwithstanding the Resolution and Declartion aforesaid.

Die Venerls 22 Feb. 1677.
The House taking into Consideration, when the Earl of Shaftsbury shall come to
this House, and in what manner, and what shall be said unto him; It is ordered,
That he shall be brought to the Bar on Monday next, by the Constable of the
Tower, or his Deputy; and then the Lord Chancellor shall say unto him to the
same effect as his Lordship was directed this day by the House.

Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That the
Constable of His Majesty's Tower of London, be, and is hereby required, to
bring Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury (now a Prisoner in the said Tower, for his
high Contempt committed against this House) to the Bar on Monday the 25th. day
of this instant February, at 10 in the forenoon; And this shall be a sufficient
Warrant on that behalf

To the Constable of His Majesty's Tower of London, his Deputy and Deputies,
and every of them.
Die Lunae, 25 Feb. 1677.
Then the Earl of Northampton, Constable of the Tower of London, acquainted the
House, That, in obedience to their Lordships Order, he has brought the Earl of
Shaftsbury, who is without, ready to receive their Lordships Commands.

Upon this, the Lord Chancellor desired to know the pleasure of the House, what
he shall say to the Earl of Shaftsbury when he comes to the Bar; which words
were written down, and being read, were approved of.

Then it was moved, That the Earl of Shaftsbury might answer (as an Aggravation
of his Offense) for some words which he spoke in the Court of King's Bench,
when he appeared upon his Habeas Corpus, which was conceived to be contrary to
the Privilege of this House, and that Witnesses might be heard to prove the
same before the Earl of Shaftsbury be called to the Bar; but this was left to
be as it is, until the Earl of Shaftsbury had been called to the Bar, and his
Answer received to what he stands already charged with.

The Earl of Shaftsbury being brought to the Bar, and having kneeled, the Lord
Chancellor said to him as was afore-directed by the House, viz.

My Lord of Shaftsbury,

The Lords have received a Petition from your Lordship, taking notice of the
Contempt for which you are Committed by this House; together with the
Submission to the Judgment of this House: And while the Lords were taking into
Consideration that Petition, there were brought before this House some Records
of the King's Bench, whereby it appears, That your Lordship endeavored* by
Habeas Corpus to free your self, by the Judgment of that inferior Court, from
the Censure of this. I am to acquaint your Lordship, that this House has
resolved and declared, That for any Lord committed by this House to bring an
Habeas Corpus in any inferior Court, to free himself from that Commitment,
during the Session of Parliament, is a breach of the Privilege of this House:
But withal, their Lordships have likewise resolved, That it shall be permitted
to your Lordship to make your full Defense, notwithstanding the Resolution and
Declaration aforesaid. And therefore I am commanded to ask your Lordship what
you are pleased to say for your self upon the whole matter.

Whereupon the Earl of Shaftsbury answered to this effect.

My Lords,

I Have presumed to offer two Petitions to this Honorable House; the first
your Lordship mentions, I do again here personally renew; humbly desiring that
I may be admitted to make that Submission and Acknowledgment your Lordships
were pleased to order: And that after a twelve months close Imprisonment to a
man of my Age and Infirmities, your Lordships would pardon the folly or
unadvisedness of any of my Words or Actions. And as to my second Petition, I
most humbly thank your Lordships for acquainting me with the Resolution and
Declaration in that point; And though Liberty be in it self very desirable, and
as my Physician (a very learned man) thought, absolutely necessary to the
preservation of my Life, yet I do profess to your Lordships, upon my Honor,
That I would have perished rather than have brought my Habeas Corpus, had I
then apprehended, or been informed, that it had been a breach of the Privilege
of this Honorable House. It is my Duty, it is my Interest to support your
Privileges; I shall never oppose them. My Lords, I do fully acquiesce in the
Resolution and Declaration of this Honorable House; I go not about to justify
my self, but cast my self at your Lordships feet, acknowledge my Error, and
humbly beg your pardon, not only for having brought my Habeas Corpus, but for
all other my Words and Actions that were in pursuance thereof, and proceeding
from the same Error and Mistake.

Then his Lordship withdrew, and after some debate the Question was proposed,
Whether Witnesses shall be now called in?

The Question being put, Whether this Question shall be now put? It was
resolved in the Affirmative.

Then the Question being put, Whether the Witnesses shall be now called in? It
was resolved in the Affirmative.

There being a Paper made mention of in the House, which was said to be a Copy
of what the Earl of Shaftsbury said in the King's Bench, but not permitted to
be read; Robert Blaney was called in, and sworn as a Witness; who being asked,
whether he was present in the Court of King's Bench when the Earl of Shaftsbury
moved for his Habeas Corpus? And whether he heard all that the Earl of
Shaftsbury said there? He answered to this effect, That he was present in the
King's Bench when the Earl of Shaftsbury was there, and he heard the most part
what his Lordship said, but he cannot tell now what he said; but he took some
Notes, and that afternoon compared Notes with Mr. Rushworth, who also had taken
Notes, and thereupon they perfected a Copy which he gave to the Lord Treasurer.

He also says, That he cannot, for a thousand worlds, say that he heard all
that is in the Paper; nor he cannot now say what it was that he took, and what
it was that he had from Mr. Rushworth, it being so long since, by reason of the
many Interlineations made in the Paper, by comparing Notes with Mr. Rushworth.

Then the said Robert Blaney withdrew.

After this, the House agreed what acknowledgment the Earl of Shaftsbury should
make at the Bar for his Offenses: which* if his Lordship should make, the House
would then Declare their Satisfaction in his Submission and Acknowledgment; The
Submission is as follows:

I Do acknowledge that my endeavoring to maintain that the Parliament is
Dissolved, was an ill advised Action; for which I humbly beg the pardon of the
Kings Majesty, and of this most Honorable House. And I do also acknowledge,
that my bringing of an Habeas Corpus in the Kings Bench, during this Session,
was a high Violation of Your Lordships privileges, and a great Aggravation of
my former Offense; for all which I likewise most humbly beg the pardon of this
most Honorable House. The Earl of Shaftsbury was brought again to the Bar; and
the Lord Chancellor told him, the Lords had prepared a particular
Acknowledgment, which the House expected he should make, and read the same to
him. And the Earl of Shaftsbury made the said Acknowledgment in these words,
viz.

I Do acknowledge, That my endeavoring to maintain that the Parliament is
Dissolved, was an ill advised Action; for which I humbly beg the pardon of the
Kings Majesty, and of this most Honorable House. And I do also acknowledge,
that my bringing of an Habeas Corpus in the Kings Bench during this Session,
was a high Violation of Your Lordships privileges, and a great Aggravation of
my former Offense; for all which, I likewise most humbly beg the pardon of this
most Honorable House. His Lordship being again withdrawn.

IT is Ordered, That the Lords with the white Staves now present, wait on His
Majesty, to give his Majesty an Account, that this House has received
Satisfaction from the Earl of Shaftsbury in the matter* of the Habeas Corpus,
and the other Contempt, for which he stood imprisoned; and are humble Suitors
to His Majesty, That he would be pleased to discharge him from his
Imprisonment; And that their Lordships do acquaint the House to Morrow what
they have done in this matter.

Ordered, that the Earl of Shaftsbury be in the mean time Remitted to the Tower*

Die Martis, 26 Feb. 1677.
The Lord Treasurer Reported to the House, That the Lords with the white
Staves, according to the Order of this House, have astended His Majesty, to
give His Majesty an Account, that this House has received Satisfaction from
the Earl of Shaftsbury in the matter of the Habeas Corpus, and the other
Contempt, for which he stood Imprisoned; and are humble suitors to His Mrjesty,
That he will be pleased to Discharge him from his Imprisonment; To which His
Majesty was pleased to give this Answer, That He will give Order for the Earl
of Shaftsbury's Discharge.

NOw that you have perused the manner of the Earl of Shaftsbury's Deliverance
out of the Tower, I shall, for Illustration of the Great Clemency of His
Majesty, and of the most Noble House of Peers, pursue my purpose signified in
the beginning, upon the enumerated Particulars, that the Government of this
Monarchy may not lose the benefit which may be improved out of an Accident of
State so memorable, and so necessary to be remembered, for Prevention of the
like in future.

1. I shall give an Account of the peaceful condition of this Kingdom a little
before the Earl of Shaftsbury began to offend.

His Majesty before that time, had enjoyed as calm and quiet a Reign, as could
possibly be imagined to have been had, in the midst of a Nation so divided into
various Opinions. A Reverence was paid to his Government by the Parliament
Nemine contradicente; And it was a much more comfortable Season for all His
Great Officers, and others entrusted with the Management of Affairs under him.

The Public Purse was frankly opened to Him upon all occasions, without
grumbling or delay; and the hearts of men were (in the best sense) Simple,
Open, and Cheerful, in their Sentiments about all his Royal Purposes and
Proceedings. Fears and Jealousies were confined in the breasts of those only
who never loved him, nor his Government; and those Fears never shifted their
Quarters among the Factions, to take up new ones in the Old Royal Party. The
House of Peers was as the Temple of Old; Not an Ax, nor a Hammer, no Noise was
heard there; Nor were the Waters of the Sanctuary there troubled, nor any of
the Vesses of it exposed to Scorn, nor any of its Utensils, nor Offices, in
danger of profanation: But all things went smoothly there.

Next, As for the House of Commons, I may say much to the same purpose in the
like strain, of its wondrous Quiet and Calmness for Twelve Years together,
before the time of the said Earls Offenses; its admirable harmony and consent
among themselves, as well as its unparalled Loyalty, Liberality, and Duty to
the King; the great assurance of mind they showed all along about his Majesty's
Royal Intentions toward the Securing of Us against Popery, and in the
Enjoyment and Confirmation of our Legal Rights and Liberties. What a mutual
confidence was there betwixt King and Commons! So those secret Snakes that were
crept into the Common Hedge, durst not so much as peep forth a head, to show
either their Factious Fork, Venom, or hissing, against the Wisdom and Conduct
of him or his Ministers. And who, I pray you, was more Triumphantly transported
to behold those happy days, than this Penitent Earl? When being exalted in the
bright Orb of Chancellor, he most worthily proclaimed before both Houses, Anno
1672. A public Praise and Blessing to the Almighty, that he has given us such
a King; That while War and Misery rages in our Neighbor's Countries, our
Garners are full, and no complaining in our Streets; So that a man can hardly
know there is a War.

Let God be blessed, that he has given this King signally the Hearts of his
People, and most particularly of this Parliament; who in their Affections and
Loyalty to their Prince, have exceeded all their Predecessors. A Parliament
with whom the King has lived many years with all the Garesses of a happy
Marriage. Has the Kings had a Concern? you have wedded it. Has his Majesty
wanted Supplies? you have readily, cheerfully, and fully provided for them; you
have relied upon the Wisdom and Conduct of His Majesty in all His Affairs; So
that you have never* attempted to exceed your Bounds, or to impose upon him, --
On the other side, He has been so tender of you, that He has upon his own
Revenue and Credit, endeavored to support even Foreign Wars, lest he might
become uneasy to you, or burdensome to His People. I can assure you, it is as
impossible for the King to part with this Parliament, as it is for you to
depart from that Loyalty, Affection, and Dutiful behavior you have hitherto
showed toward him*

Let us bless the King, for taking away all ur Fears, and leaving no room for
Jealiasies; for those Assurances and Promises he has made us. Let us bless God
and the King our Religion is safe: That the Church of England is the Care of
our Prince; and that Parliaments are safe. What more has a good Englishman to
ask, but that this King may long Reign; and that the Triple Alliance of King,
Parliament and People may never be Dissolved.

What more eloquently and truly could have been said, than was said here in
short by our noble Penitent, to set forth the happy peaceful Estate and
Condition of this Kingdom? But note the time, it was in the year 1672* that all
was well; that the King had the hearts of his Parliament and People* So that
they were like Man and Wife; it was impossible to part or Dissolve them: that
the Parliament kept within their Bounds, meddled not with the Affairs of his
Prerogative, nor imposed upon him, being confident of his Wisdom and Conduct;
and not ^apt out of Tune with Fears and Jealousies. Religion, Church,
Parliaments, Properties, Liberties, all was safe in that Golden Year 72. And
his Lordship having thus generously done the King all that Right, had reason to
believe himself safe too.

II. Having seen in what a peaceful happy state all things were before the Earl
of Shaftsbury's Offending, it is meet that in the next place you should see what
the Offenses were when they began, the tendency and dangerous Consequences of
them; that others may be Converted, who through had Doctrine have been
corrupted, and the like be avoided for the future.

Ingenious men use to have quick Motions, and Emotions of mind into Acts; and
by this means oftentimes a sudden Turn of their Minds and Fortunes, even to the
tossing of all things Topsie-turvy in a fit of ill humor. It was (you see) but
in 72. That his Lordship had nothing to find fault with at Court; how it happened
presently after this, that he was commanded to render up the Great Seal and
Office of Chancellor, is not here to be discoursed, let it sussice to know,
That it was in the very next year 1673* that it was done, and his Lordship laid
aside, and it is no part of my business to meddle with the Faults that
occasioned it, because my desire is rather to cherish him in his Repentance,
having often longed to find him in so good a humor. It is for me only to give
a few Observations about the Affairs which preceeded his Lordships departure
from Court, while he was a prime Man in the Counsels of His Majesty, which have
since been made the Subject of many a loud Clamor by the Factious Party. Some
Observations also I shall make of diverse particulars, pointing out to you how,
as soon as his Lordship went out, the World also it self was troubled, and
began to* grow out of Order. Perhaps it happened so, because his Lordship went
out of Office, his great Wisdom and Conduct not being any longer at the Helm. A
Poet of our own fancies, the Frame of the World to be bolted together with a
small Pin or two; if that be put out all falls to pieces: therefore when he
brings in Catiline in the Third Act, in a great chase, because himself was
rejected, and Cicero chosen Consul, he makes him thus vent himself in a lofty
Rant.

Repulse upon Repulse?
Oh that I could reach the Axel, where the Pins are,
Which bolt this Frame, that I might pull them out,
And pluck all into Chaos with my self!
So that you see, if but a Pin or so be out, all falls into Confusion, if there
be any Truth in Poetry. And it may be this was our Case, Who can tell? For,
Poets have unlucky Hits many times, as well as Politicians. So have Historians
too: For the Record-keeper, (or Recorder) of the Faction, I mean the Author of
the New Directory for Petty Statesmen; that is to say, The Account of the
growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government, etc. Reports to us, that the
present Lord Chancellor, another Cicero, came in his Lordships Place before the
end of 1673, as the former Cicero came into that which was aimed at by Catiline.

And then the Golden times before, and in 72. being gone, the Iron age came on.
But I must return where I left.

As to my Observations about the Affairs preceding his Lordships voidance from
Court, I find the aforesaid Recorder has been very punctual to record them,
and one may well think he is not like to say any thing in prejudice of his
Lordship, because I perceive in page 44. of his Pamphlet, he seems as if he
would speak like a Friend of his; and says, the Parliament having met the 5th
of February 1672. prepared an Act, by which the Papists were obliged to pass
through a new State-Purgatory, to become capable of any public Employment; and
that the Earl of Shaftsbury, then Lord Chancellor of England, Engaged so far in
Defense of that Act, and of the Protestant Religion, that it cost him his
Place, and that it was upon this occasion that he was laid aside.

My Lord being now a Penitent, I would not upon any terms say ought in
prejudice to him, by telling what the Occasions and Causes were, that he was
laid aside. But appearing against Popery could not be the Cause, because it is
known there had been many years before, as great an outcry among the Factious
Party against Popery and Popish Counselors, and yet it never appeared all
along those times, that ever his Lordship appeared against, or thought of any
such matter: for had there been any Cause for it, can we think that a Lord so
Pious and Zealous of Religion would be guilty of concealing it, and have stood
still and looked on, while it grew up in the fair Sunshine of all his good
Offices? Sure, it could not be; and the Recorder-keeper, in this, instead of
being a Friend to him, speaks worse than an Enemy. Besides, you may remember,
his Lordship himself in his forecited Speech to both Houses gives him the lie,
having therein told them and all the World on the same 5th of February, 1672.
That we were to bless God and the King, that the Church of England was then the
Kings Care, and that our Religion was safe by consequence then what needed his
Lordships Defense of it by a New Act? Or how can it be thought the King would
turn him out, for Defending what His Majesty Himself had under Care to
preserve? These things do not hang together: And yet the Recorder, in his
following words, in the same page, will needs become his Lordships Friend again
and says, that his Lordships Defense of that Act, etc. did not only cost him
his Place, but was the Moving Cause of all those Misadventures and obloquy,
which His Lordship afterward lay (ABOVE not) Under.

I will not say Dignum patella Operculum.

What a lucky Defender and Advocate is this for his Lordship. I mean rather an
unlucky; That he, who in a Treasonous Libellous Pamphlet, industriously now
spread and dispersed into all hands about the Kingdom, to rail down both Houses
of Parliament, his Royal Highness, all the High Officers of State, the Kings
Privy Council, the Principal Secretaries, all the Judges, all other Officers of
the Government, and the Court it self, and then concludes all with a vile
Jeering Caress of His Majesty Himself, should in the same Book appear to be a
Trumpeter of his Lordships Vindication and Praise. It looks ugly; but far be it
from us, to think that there is any understanding betwixt him and the Author.
It Is only his Lordships ill luck, that in diverse other like Pamphlets the
Knaves have been so bold as to commend him: and who can help it?

And yet on the other side, the Recorder, to serve the Faction, makes it part
of his business to reckon up before 1673. while my Lord was interested in the
Counsels at Whitehall, as many Faults (as he supposes) in the Government, as
afterward when his Lordship was gone. This is indeed a great Fault in Mr.
Recorder, to let things drop that reflect upon so good a Patriot, as well as
upon Whitehall. For, besides Roman Idolatry and English Slavery, he rails at
Compliance with the French, War with the Hollander, breach of the Triple
League, Shutting up the Exchequer; in the Counsels whereof before 73. my Lord
Shaftsbury was no stranger, and as forward as any man, and he reaped the
benefit as cleverly. For they can tell at Sir Robert Viners, who in probability
it was that knew of that of the Excequer, for as much as Sir Robert* Servants
remembered afterward, and smiled to think, that his Lordship a few days before
the Shutting it up, was so wise as to call in 3 or 4000 l. out of their hands;
for his Lordship is wont to do all things with very good Consideration.
Besides, he has been so boldly generous, as to justify all the rest of the
foregoing Particulars, which are railed at by the Recorder: For in his
forementioned Speech on the 5th of Feb. 1672 to both Houses as Chancellor, he
told them, that as to the point of Poperies having been designed, it was a
great Calumny [ His Majesty having so fully vindicated Himself from that
Calumny concerning the Papists, that no reasonable scruple can be made by any
good man. And the Church of England, and all good Protestants, have reason to
rejoice in such a Head, and such a Defender. He was born and bred up in it: It
was that his Father Dyed for. We all know how great Temptations and Offers he
resisted abroad, when He was in His lowest condition: and He thinks it the
honor of His Reign, that He hopes to leave it to posterity in greater Luster,
and upon surer Grounds than our Ancestors ever saw it.] Those very words were a
part of his Lordships (...) ^peech in 72. and may serve for Answer to the
Scandal of any design for Roman Idolatry. Besides, as to the Fear of Englands
Slavery, you had his Word and Engagement in the last page of the Speech, That
our Properties and Liberties are safe.

Then, as to the breach of the Triple League, the War ensuing with the
Hollander, and compliance with the French, and the Black Heath Army, which are
the Scandals mightily bandied about by the Recorder, and all the Factious ill
willers to His Majesty; hear also the Report of His Lordship, the good Patriot,
while he was at the Helm, and in at all the most intimate Passages of the
Cabinet, so that not a French Mouse could an wagged there without his
knowledge, to the hurt of England, and he justifies all the Counsels to the
height concerning those Matters. For in several pages of that Speech of his,
viz. the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 13. you will find things to have been thus; He
takes off the imputation of that War, and of the breach of the Triple Alliance
from the Counsels and Counselors of the King, and charge it wholly upon the
Hollanders themselves, that they brake first, for that [ besides their denying
His Majesty the Honor of the Flag at Sea, they disputed His Title to it in all
the Courts of Christendom, and made great Offers to the French King, if he
would stand by them against Us. At this Season, our King and his Ministers had
a hard time of it, and lay every day under new Obloquies. Sometimes they were
represented as selling all to France for money to make War: Portsmouth,
Plymouth and Hull, were to be given into the French hands for Caution. The next
day, news came that France and Holland were agreed: Then the Obloquy was turned
from Treachery to Folly; The Ministers were now Feels, that some days before
were thought Villains; For, if that Conjunction had taken effect, then England
had been in a far worse Case, because the War had been turned upon Us. But both
Kings knowing their own Interests, resolved to join against them, who were the
common Enemies of all Monarchies, and I may say, especially to ours] These are
his own very words. And as he charges that War, and by consequence the breach
of the Triple League upon the Hollander, So he takes off the pretended Scandal
of it from the King, and his Ministers, and lays it upon the Parliament, also
as well as the Dutch, saying in the same Speech openly to both Houses [ You
judged aright, that at any Rate Delenda est Carthago, that Carthage was to be
dectroyed; that is to say, that the Dutch Government was to be brought down.

And therefore the King may well say* to you, It Is your War. He took his
measures from you, and they were just and right Ones. And if after this you
suffer them to get up again; let this be remembered, the States of Holland, are
Englands eternal Enemy both by Interest and Inclination.] By these words our
Factions Ill-willers may see, to, the Confusion of all their Slanders against
the King and his Ministers, and his Counsels about the several particulars
aforementioned, how fairly and prudently things were carried at Whitehall
concerning them. Only one Point more is to be cleared, that is the Black Heath
Army, a thing much babbled about as a Grand Bugbear by the same Generation, and
a black Business to this day. My Lord will do this for us too. Those few Forces
which some will needs call an Army, during the Dutch War, were (if I forget
not) to have been made about 6000* to have been sent to make a descent upon
some part of Holland, and were rendezvou'd at Black Heath for that design. O,
but there was more in it! the Commander in chief was Monsieur Schomberg a
French man. What then? But he war a Protestant also, and judged fit for that
Work. In answer to this, let me mind you what the King himself said in his
Speech spoken the same day before the Earl of Shaftsbury began his; His
Majesty's words were: [ There is one Jealousy more that is maliciously spread
abroad, and yet so weak and fri^^lous, that I once thought it not of moment
enough to mention; but it may have gotten some ground with some well-minded
People: And that is, that the Forces I have raised in this War, were designed
to control Law and Property. I wish I had raised more Forces the last Summer;
the want of them then convinces me, I must raise more. But I conclude with this
Assurance to you; That I will preserve the true Reformed Protestant Religion,
and the Church, as it is now established in this Kingdom, and that no man's
property or Liberty shall be invaded:] You see the Jealousies raised about
those Forces the King slights, as a frivolous piece of Malice, hardly worth
mention. But however gives all Assurance for Religion, Liberty and Property.
And as for my Lord, he in page 13th of his Speech, calls it a Jealousy
foolishly spread abroad of the Frees the King had raised in that War: And he
says, It was so great an Error in the King, not to have raised more Forces at
that time, that nothing but the true Reason, want of Money, could have justified
the defect in the number of those Forces, And then as to the blame of their not
doing the work that they had been raised for, his Lordship answers, that the
preceding Summer was a miracle of Storms and Tempests, such as thereby secured
their East India Ships, and protected their Sea coasts from the descent
designed by those Forces. And if you will not believe so Noble a Patriot as his
Lordship about these matters, then go on to report and scatter your Scandals,
till your throats grow hoarse and sore with reporting, and become as incurable
as your Faction. Nevertheless, with men not madly obstinate, these Evidences
ought to pass, that there were no such great Offenses in Whitehall, nor in his
Lordship neither, in the years before 1673.

Now for the other part of my Observations in and after 1673 Diverse great
Offenses grew up from time to time to put the World much out of Order; And
verily these should not be repeated, were it not of so high importance for
Public Service, to prevent falling into the like again, and to restore the
minds of such as are fallen.

Never was more work done to put a Nation out of Order, in so little time as
two or three years considering the good and happy condition it was in by his
Lordships own Confession; for from 73. to 1576: was no long space, and by that
time, his Lordship had taken up Lodgings in the Tower, It seems as if he
bestirred himself to purpose, and began betimes to offend, because notice was
taken presently after a Court of his Lordships behavior, insomuch that it is
said he was forbidden coming to Court; But to be even with them for this, and
for other purposes, he took heart and hied as fast as he could into the City,
with Resolution to become a Citizen, and trod the Exchange as a Merchant, and
as constantly as any, being then to drive a great Trade in small Wares of
Popularity; how it came about you may guess, but as to a Common place for all
People, there flockt the Factors of every Faction: Soon after this, Clubs and
Committees of good Fellowship and Sedition were erected, and there all, and
more than all the Infirmities of Court, and Errors of State, were Arraigned,
and Condemned. The old Sore also, want of Trade, was rubbed, and the only
Remedy resolved on, viz. The removing of Evil Counselors, and a crying down
France, Ministers of State, and French Pensioners, Arbitrariness, and Property*
yea, all that was not at Court, was to be brought on the Stage, and the Bishops
too, and to be stripped of their Lawn-sleeves. Oracles likewise were given out,
to be delivered in Common Council at Guildhall by Mr. Jenks and his fellow
Wi^secres, and Orders issued out for a general Muster of Grievances against the
Session of Parliament; besides many a costly Dinner, and deep Potations, for
the putting as many Members as they could out of their Senses. There the
Contrivances were first set on Foot, to Institute Offices of Intelligence, to
coin News for the Coffee-houses; and an Academy for inventing Seditious and
Treasonable Pamphlets, with Directions how to Print and Spread them, to edify
both City and Kingdom into an Oblivion of their Allegiance, and a belief of
mere Inventions; that so they might be rendered tractable toward any design of
their Factious Leaders, and for the quickening of a diligent Correspondence of
their Countrey-Agents, with the supreme Council of the Directors at London.
These were the blessed fruits of the Years 1674. and 76. I am far from charging
his Lordship with any of them; but I may only observe, that all these
beginnings of Disorder followed his Lordships laying aside at Court, and were
the unhappy Consequents in time of his Courtship in the City.

After a while, ill humors, like ill Weeds, grew so fast, that now they began
to think themselves both powerful and skilful enough to play a Prize in
Parliament: and therefore seeing the Memorable Session of 13th of April, 1675.
was at hand, they provided their pranks so to play, that the Parliament should
not be in Condition to do any work, but both Houses only embroil one another
with hard Speeches, and Disputes about Privileges, etc. and thereby being in
no capacity to make dispatch of Public Business, be rendered altogether
impracticable and unuseful to the King and Kingdoms pressing Occasions. This
device was driven high, and with heat for an artifical blowing up of this
Parliament, because the But-end of it was to induce upon the King a necessity
of calling a new One: in this Point entered all the Crafts-Masters of every
Male-contented Party, as the grand Medium wherein they could agree against the
present Establishment of the Court, and ^overnment both of Church and State;
because each Party having prepared men to serve it self, by new Elections,
doubted not but so plausible a Plea as a New Parliament, would easily take
place and afford every one the advantages they hoped for by a Change. His
Majesty and His Conncil, and the Parliament, soon smelt out the desperate
meaning of this Privy Conspiracy under cover of so public a Plea, and the
Faction was soon made to understand, that their Plot was understood; and that
Crafty Tricks, with Loud Popular Clamors, and Long Speeches of their
Correspondents in Parliament, with other Machinations under the Sacred shelter
and Claim of Free speaking, and Privilege, was no honest English way to bring
on New Parliaments; the Law having left it wholly to the Judgment and Power of
the King, who has at all times had a willingness to call one, as soon as the
Public work lying before this Parliament can be finished, and the Heats, high
Cants, and Traitorous designs of Factions to make an uproar, can be evaporated.

The working of all these Evils, was plainly seen so soon as in this
April-Session of 75. to be the wretched effect of those Principles and
Doctrines of State, which by the care of the Conspirators had been most
industriously spread in Prints and otherwise, for Poisoning the Opinion of City
and Country about the King and His Parliament, and the Government, all exposed
for a subversion.

Some Noble Lords, at that Season, reflecting on their own Allegiance, and
Obligation to prevent this, brought into the House of Peers a Bill, in which
was that Oath so much clamoured at, called the Oath of Test or Trial;
conceiving it would be a good security to Church and State, if men thereby
renewed their Allegiance. It seems the Plot, after the Rate of 1641. was so
forward, that the Masters of it were touched to the quick, and feared this Oath
would touch too home also upon their Proselytes, who by it were to swear down
the Principles and Doctrines of 41. which were now again to be made use of,
such as allowed of taking Arms against the King upon Parliamentary pretenses,
and by His Authority against His Person, and of making Alterations, without
Him, in Church and State. -- If the Book called A Letter from a Person of
Quality to his Friend in the Country, published this year 75. be of any
Credit, it has these words in page 9. That the Earl of Shaftsbury was the man
in the House, that opened at large the Mischievous and ill Designs (as he calls
it) and Consequences of the Bill, and convinced many other Lords into a humor
of Protesting against the Bill. Now the design was barefaced; And because the
Church was to have been altered as well as State, therefore, he who will
believe that Book, may if he please, when as in 20. and 21. and 22 pages, it
says, That his Lordship spoke things in disgrace of those old repositories of
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, the 39 Articles, the
Liturgy, the Catechism, the Homilies and the Canons. And I am sure the same
Book, which condemned these, and vilified the Bishops too, bestows very high
commendations of his Lordships Parts, Pains, and Labor about these matters:
which, to the praise of his, and some other men's Lungs, took up the House of
Lords with a debate of Sixteen or Seventeen whole days together, the House
sitting many times till Eight or Nine a clock at night, and sometimes till
midnight. However, they could not save the Book which makes report of this
Noble Prize, from being, by Order of the Peers, burnt by the hand of the
Hangman. And indeed it well deserved so, because it charged the main stress of
the Debate upon the shoulders of his Lordship; though the Author wrote as if he
had been his Friend, by reason of the immoderate Praises that he loads him with
in diverse places. It Is an unhappy thing, and looks ill, that his Lordship
should have such dangerous Friends as deserve Execution by the Hangman: for
what praise soever the foregoing Author may have fallen short in, another
Author endeavors to make up, who seems a Friend too of his Lordship, by an
excess of praising him for the opposing of that Oath; as may be seen in pages
17, 58, 59, 69. and 61, 62 of that Author, whom a little before we named the
Record-Keeper, or Recorder of the Faction; that is more plainly, the Author of
that most Villainous Book, Entitulep, An Account, etc. in the 61 page, whereof
are these very words [ It might be injurious where all of them did so
excillently well, to attribute more to any one of those Lords than to another,
unless, because the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Shaftsbury have been the
more reproached for this brave Action, it being requisite by a double
proportion of praise, to set them two on equal terms with the best of their
Companions in Honour] And in page 62. He glories in these words concern^ng the
Issue of these doings: [ That by this means the Test Dyed, and the Matter in
conclusion was so Husbanded betwixt this business, and the business of Dr.
Shirly, and Sir John Fagg, that any longer converse between the two Houses grew
impracticable; so that His Majesty was necessitated to Prorogue them till the
13th of October, 1675. following] Let the World judge then to what height of
Crime such men's behavior does tend, when it must puzzle the most exquisite
Politician to distinguish in point of Treason, betwixt a Frustrator and a
Subverter of the Meetings of Parliament* And so you have seen what Friends his
Lordship has, and if their Prints are to be believed, you see what he did, and
how he did, and how he bestirred himself during that April-Session of the year
1675

Now we pass on to October-Session of the same year; and in this it will
appear, how the work of public Disturbance, and of Frustrating this Meeting of
Parliament likewise proceeded; for, it also came to nothing: but by whose
means, let the Reader judge by what follows in short.

The Parliament being met, the first Artifice of some was, to set on Foot again
the late Quarrel betwixt both Houses about their Privileges. In which
Masterpiece, if we may credit a Speech Printed in the name of the Earl of
Shaftsbury, his Lordship acted a principal part, and it was improved from being
a private Cause between Shirly and Fagg, to become a cause of too much concern
to the King, the whole Parliament, and Kingdom. Therefore diverse Lords argued
in their House to lay aside for a while that Cause, as a matter that would
revive their Contest with the Commons: and thereby hinder the Kingdoms business
of preparing a Navy* and other pressing Affairs and Occasions: and so most of
the Lords spoke for adjourning that Cause for six weeks. But, says the printed
Speech, in my Lord Shaftsbury's name; Take heed what you do, and argued these
Particulars following:

That then the Money-Bill for the King to build Ships would be passed. Oh take
heed of that; for though in a another part of the Speech an Outcry be made of
the Crown of the French King, yet no Money ought to be had to prepare by Sea or
Land against him. This way of arguing suits well.

That to lay Shirly aside would be to alter the Constitution of the Government.
Well argued again. That no Prince ever governed without a Nobility, or any
Army. If he will not have one, he must have the other. Well done to insiunate, as
if the King meant an Army Government.

That the King is King by Law, and by the same Law that a poor man enjoys his
Cottage. I thought he had been King by Inheritance; that is, according to Law,
and the fundamental Law of the Kingdom supposes that no Law is able to alter
it; Else the Heir of the Crown may hap to be without either Palace, or Cottage,
by I know not what Law. That a King governing by an Army, without His
Parliament, is a Government that his Lordship owns not, is not obliged to, nor
was born under. This is to set up a King of Straw, and place him in the head of
an Imaginary Army, and then rout him with an infinuating Slander.

That he cannot find that ever the Jesuits or Popish Clergy, only some of our
Episcopal Clergy, owned Monarchy to be of Divine Right. Then the Episcopal are
the best Subjects. The English Presbyterian may suit with the other, being the
same by Principle, a sort of Protestant Jesuits.

That to say this Family are our Kings, and this Partioular Frame of Government
is our lawful Constitution, and obliges us, is owing only to the particular
Laws of our Country. Well urged in Print: here is scope enough left both for
Family and Framealterations by particular Laws. All our wise men have doted
till now, they dreamed that the General Fundamental Law of the Kingdom had held
both Family and Frame so together, that they are unalterable by any particular
Law whatsoever.

What think ye now? has not that man a notable skrew in his Brains, that could
draw all these brave Points out of the Case of Dr. Shirly?

Nevertheless, a shift was made with Shirly's business to make long Speeches,
and so inflame the Reckoning betwixt both Houses, that no public business
being to be done, this Session also was made as unserviceable as diverse
foregoing Sessions had been; and the time was drull'd but till the 20th of
November, 1675. And then the main Intendment for the Destruction, otherwise
called a Dissolution, of this Parliament came to light, backed with such
Reasons in writing, afterward Printed, with the Earl of Shaftsbury*s and some
other Names to them, which no Lord could have so readily and luckily penned, as
one that formerly had an Acquaintaince with the Levellers; the Arguments being
all of a piece with theirs in the former times of Reformation; insomuch that
His Majesty finding no good to be done, was forced, for mere shame of our
Nation, and to hide it, to put an end to this Session also, the 22th of
November, 1675. And that men might have time enough to discover their own
Errors, He prorogued them to the 15th of February, 1676. In the mean time, no
Money having been raised, as the King earnestly had desired of them for
building of Ships, and other Preparations for War; but set the Saddle upon the
right Horse, or lay the Brat at the right door, and rail not at them for not
doing what was contrived, and made impossible for them to do, by with*holding
Money from them that should have done it: which lamed them and the whole Nation
in such manner, that they could not make one step toward it. And this is the
true Reason why we lost so much time, and are so behind hand and backward at
this day.

Nevertheless, the much longed for 15th of Feb. 1676. being come, the King, as
if He had forgotten all Faults, and Injuries of the former Session, (such is
His marvailous Clemency and Patience) opened this with a Speech of a most
obliging Nature, such a one as was a wonder, Considering what Provocations had
been put upon Him, and His Government in the interval of the Session, by the
many most pernicious Books and Pamphlets which had been spread by the Faction
into all parts, to inflame and prepare the People for new Commotions (if it
might be) to disturb Him this Session also, and Dissolve the Parliament; in
which work of Dissolution the Earl of Shaftsbury, at the Houses sitting (you
know) was prime man in appearing, to the utmost of his endeavor.

As for the King, He in His Speech to both Houses, in hope to reconcile all
differences, breathed forth nothing but sweetness, Kindness, and high Reason.
-- He told them, That after a long Proregation, He had given them the
Opportunity to ^^pa^^ the Misfortunts of the former Session.

That if they fell into the like Differences now again, which some men had so
unhappily managed and improved betweenn them, it would be enough to leave them
without all excuse.

That His Majesty Himself was resolved it should not be his fault, if they were
nit made happy by their Consultations in Parliament.

That he came prepared to satisfy them in all things, for securing our
Protestant Church and Religion, that may be reasonably asked, or can consist
with Christian Prudence.

That he was ready to do all things that might gratify them in the further
securing of Liberty and Property.

That then he leaves all the World to judge, who is most for Arbitrary
Government, they that foment such Differences as tend to dissolve all
Parliaments, or he that would preserve This, and all Parliaments from being
made useless by such Discentions.

That if the good ends of Government, and the necessaries of it, happen to be
further disappointed, he called God and men to witness that day, that the
misfortunes of that disappointment shall not lie at his Door.

To all which excellent particulars, my Lord Chancellor in his Speech added
many more, too large to repeat here; only one I must remember: That it would be
somewhat strange, and without all example in story, that a Nation should be
twice ruined, twice undone, by the self-same way and means, the same Fears and
Jealousies.

But all this was but Surdo canere; what was to be done was beforehand
resolved on; The Actors entered in the House of Peers, and the Tragy* Comaedy
began thus, as the Recorder of the account of the growth of Popery, etc. (pages
71, 72.) presents it, (which Book, being now in the hands of the House of
Peers, deserves their most severe Inquisition;) For he says, The Duke of B. (
one who usually says what he thinks) argued with great strength of reason, that
this Prorogation was null, and this Parliament consequently Dissolved. But
other Lords moved, That for this the Duke ought to be called to the Bar. So
that (says he) the Earl of Shaftsbury had opportunity to appear with such
extraordinary vigor, in what concerned both the Duke of B' s Person and
Proposal, that as the Duke of B. might have stood single in any rational
Contest, so the Earl of Shaftsbury was more properly another Principal, rather
than his Second.

What a virulent Scribe is this Recorder, that an ill Contest cannot arise in
Parliament, but he still brings in my Lord Shaftsbury as a main man, a
Beginner, or a Promoter of it! If he was so, ^he greater then ought to be his
Lordships Repentance all the days of his Life; otherwise, though he has done
it at the Lords Bar, there is yet a Superior Bar hereafter* which he must one
day give an Account to. In the mean while, both he and the Duke, being
Penitents professed, it sounds not well that this Recorder should now be the
Trumpet of their Praises; For, we would fain believe they are real, and mean to
give him no more the like occasion by Parliament-pelting; nor to count him in
the number of their Friends hereafter.

Whoever he was that published the Debates and Arguments that had been
delivered in the House of Peers formerly for Dissolving the Parliament, will
find it confessed in that print, that it was a parti^l Design, it having been
boasted by the Designers, That they had a Party of Members in the Commons
House, whose business it was to second the Disputing Lords, by carrying the
Differences in both Houses to the greatest height, that by this means they
might be rid of this Parliament by Dissolution: which is a new way of Blowing
up a Parliament, that calls aloud for Repentance; and God grant that in our
days, neither the same, nor the like Tricks of State, may be brought upon the
Stage any more.

When this would not do, then for my Lord of Shaftsbury, and the rest that
joined with him in Argument, to argue from the Fifteen Months* Prorogation of
the Parliament, that it was consequentially Dissolved and Null, was such a Jigg
to be brought in among wise men, as never was seen in any Age, nor could have
been seen in any but in this Age of Wonders, and wondrous boldness with Kings.
-- The vanity of it was sufficiently refuted by many Noble Lords in the House,
and afterward in Print, by a private hand, where the whole Design and Drift of
it was explained to the People.

But that which is worth all, is his Lordships own Repentance; for, ^ knew him
to be of so clear a Wit, that when the angry Clouds of Faction, and Hearts of
Dispute should be over, his piercing Judgment would quickly espy that he had
been out of the way; and that seeing the Tower agreed not with his Constitution
(as was acknowledged in his Petition to the House) it was his best way to
return to the Bar, and there to submit, and beg Mercy-of His Majesty and the
Right Honorable House, and from that most Noble Theater Preach Repentance to
all that had been perverted by his Doctrine and Example. Which he having done,
what remains, but that he may spend the rest of his days with the Blessing of a
Convert, the Comfort of a good Conscience, and in contemplating also the many
Pardons which from time to time our most Gracious King has bestowed upon him?

FINIS.

