The True CHARACTER Of A Rigid Presbyter: With A NARRATIVE OF THE Dangerous
Designs of the English and Scottish COVENANTERS, As they have tended to the
Ruin of our Church and Kingdom. ALSO, The Articles of their Dogmatical Faith,
And the inconsistency thereof with Monarchy.

To which is added, A short History of the English Rebellion: Compiled in
VERSE, By MARCHAMONT NEDHAM; AND Formerly extant, in his Mercurius Pragmaticus.

LONDON: Printed by the Assigns of J. Calvin; and are to be sold by Z. Crofton
Presbyter, at the sign of the Lay-Elder near the stool of repentance in
White-Chappel. 1661.

To the READER.
It Is not unknown to the meanest Capacity (I presume) that Presbytery has ever
been a Faction of a very hot and fiery Constitution: And since this later Age
has produced so many of these Hot-spurs and Pulpit-Firebrands, I did imagine
'twere no abuse in me to divulge what our most refined Intellects have
heretofore penned: for I do utterly disown the Piece, as the issue of my own
Brain; and am bound to confess, that it is but a Collection of what has been
penned by the best of our Modern Age; only huddled into the Mould of a
Chararacter; not out of any contradictory temper of my own, or a vindicative
spirit, but to satisfy the world, that what heretofore has been predicted or
mentioned of them, they were resolved to manifest as an infallible truth; and
prove that an Oracle, which was delivered only as an Opinion. But it is
inevitable, if we may give credit to what the Satyrist boldly and truly
affirms: Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem
Testa diu, etc.


The Vessel must of necessity relish of that Liquor that first it contained.
Wherefore, since the Original of this pretended new Light of Religion was
Rebellion, I am altogether ignorant of any Plea they have to a Jure Divino;
since to make GOD the Author of so horrid a Crime, were absolute Blasphemy.

Perhaps, Reader, thou art of an opinion contrary to what is here written; I
confess, that for a time my mind was wandering too, till some Causes made me to
reflect with an impartial Eye upon our present Government: Hereupon I took view
of their Reasons and Judgments who I knew to be learned: and supposing they
who wrote before these times were most likely to speak truth, as being
uninterested in our affairs, from them I drew my Collections: then putting them
in order, and comparing all together, they soon made a conquest over me and my
opinion.

I know the high Talkers, the lighter and censorious part of people, will shoot
many a bitter Arrow to wound my reputation, and charge me with levity and
inconstancy, because I am not obstinate like themselves, against Conscience,
right Reason, Necessity, the custom of all Nations, and the peace of our own.
But this sort of men, I reckon inter Bruta animantia; among whom to do well, is
to hear ill; who usually speak amiss of those things that they do not, or will
not, understand.

But prithee read, and then do what thou list. I have only one word more, and
that is to our Modern Pharisee, the Conscientious Pretender: If he will not be
convinced by clear Testimonies, but raise more dust about our Ears to amaze the
people, it must be concluded, that all this noise of Church-Reformation,
Conscience, and Covenant, is a mere malicious Design to drive on a Faction,
and set up themselves in the seat of Authority.

Being convinced of the truth of these things, I conceive my self obliged to
satisfy others; and therefore whatever I have been heretofore, I shall list my
self henceforth, --

For King and Parliament. Mercurius Pragmaticus.

THE CHARACTER OF A Rigid Presbyter. WITH A Discovery of those dangerous
Designs of the English and Scottish Covenanters, as they have tended to the
ruin of our Church and State.
TO give you an exact Character of him, is impossible; he is as changeable as a
Proteus: yet if you please to have his Genealogy ab origin, which may be said
to resemble a Welsh Pedigree, take it as it was left by one of the best Pens of
this Modern Age.

Never was there such a monstrous Babe, as this ruling and domineering
Presbytery; the Father of it is Rebellion, the Mother Insurrection, the Midwife
Sacrilege, the Nurse Coverousness, the Milk Schism, the Coats Armor, the
Rattles Drums, a bloody Sword the Coral, Money the Babie it delights to play
withal: it grows up to be a stripling, and goes to School to a Council of War;
its Lesson is on the Trumpet, its Fescue a Pistol, its play-days the days of
Battle, and black-Monday the Day of Judgment: it comes of age, and is married
with a Solemn League and Covenant; it begets Children like it self, whose
blessing upon them, is the power of the Sword; and whose imposition of Hands,
are broken Pates. This Monster cries down the ancient Catholic and Apostolic
power which the Bishops had, and then takes it up again, and exercises it in a
higher nature then ever Bishop did; even to the deposition of Kings, and the
delivering them up to the Executioner.

Should we trace this viperous Brood from their first rise and original, we
shall find their Designs founded on Rebellion, to the ruin and destruction
of the Prince and Bishop of Geneva, under whose Dominions the Faction first
pullulated. 'Twould be too prolix, and inconsistent with a Character, to tell
you how they have dealt likewise with our Princes here at home, verifying that
Maxim, NO BISHOP, NO KING.

But take a short Epitomy of their Actions in what follows: And

First of Geneva.

Calvin with his Gladiators having expuls'd the Prince and Bishop of Geneva,
erects a Government so losty and unexpected, that the People would have nothing
to do, either with him or it; and thereupon banished him: being in exile, he
plots and contrives the pacification of the peoples fury, by inventing his new
fangle of Lay Elders, which made them sharers in the Government, and endeared
the people to him, so that all parties were agreed.

As for our Princes here at home,

Do but observe the behavior of Knox and Buchanan, and the rest of that Gang,
to Mary Queen of Scots, as it is related by King James himself, in his
Discourse at Hampton Court to the Presbytery. These two pre-mentioned, viz.
Knox and Buchanan, came to Mary Queen of Scots, telling her, That by right no
Pope nor Potentate whatsoever had any superiority over her, in her own
Dominions, either in cases Civil or Ecclesiastical, but that she was Supreme in
both, and constituted by GOD, as the only nursing Mother of his Church within
her own Kingdom; and therefore conjured her to have a care of the Evangel of
Christ, as she would answer it at the dreadful Day of Judgment: She first
gives them her Ear, and at last her Authority; they make use of it in the first
place to the pulling down of Bishops, and exalted themselves in their places;
and when the Queen expected an absolute Supremacy, behold, all that this
Rabble would allow her, was not so much as to have one private Chapel for her
self, nor one Priest to serve GOD according to her own Conscience. She finding
her hopes frustrated, and her self so much deluded, endeavors to recall her
Authority; she takes up Arms, they oppose her, combat her, beat her out of her
Kingdom; she flees into England for refuge; they follow her with Invectives,
thrust jealousy into the Queen of England's Bosom concerning her; whereupon
she was consined, and after a long and tedious imprisonment, put to death. Thus
King James having put a period to his Discourse directed to Dr. Reynolds,
Knewstubs, and the rest, turns to the Bishops, and closes his Oration with this
Animadversion: Wherefore, my Lords, I thank you for my Supremacy: for if it
were at these men's disposals, I am very sensible what would become of it.

If you desire to be satisfied concerning their dealings with King James, her
Son, Father to the Martyr CHARLES the First, of blessed memory, you may find
it in his Basilicon Doron: Crebrae adversus me in Tribunitiis Conscionibus
Calumniae spargebantur; non quod ordinem aliquod designassem, sed quia Rex
eram, quod omni crimine pejus habebatur. Are these men fit to make good
Subjects? Did they not convene him, and catechize him like a Schoolboy? Did he
not protest unto his son Henry, that he hated their proud and haughty carriage,
ever since he was ten years of age? Did he not say, That Monarchy and
Presbytery agreed like GOD and the Devil? And have not we found it so, if we
consider the carriage of our newfangled Presbyterians in England, to CHARLES
the First, his Son? But alas! I am mistaken, they fasted and prayed, preached
and writ against it, praying for a diversion of all such black intentions: and
yet the Presbyterian took the Scepter out of his hand, in taking away the
Militia, of which it was an Emblem; cast down his Throne, by depriving him of
his Negative Voice; took his Crown, the Fountain of Honor, off his head, by
denying those Honor, on whom he had worthily conferred it, without them; took
away his Supremacy, signified by the sacred Unction, wherewith he was anointed,
in denying him the Liberty of his Conscience, in the point of Episcopacie and
Church Government: nor would they treat a minute with their King, till they had
made him acknowledge himself guilty (as they say) of all the blood that had
been spilt throughout his Dominions: and notwithstanding all the Concessions on
his part, that could possibly be granted, even to the very grating of his
Princely Conscience; when he bid them ask flesh from his bones, and he would
not deny it, if it might in any measure redound to the benefit of his people,
praying that he might keep his Conscience whole, (the Queen Regent of all good
men's actions, and he hoped there were none would force this Queen before him in
his house, as Ahasuerus said to Haman) yet not withstanding all this, was it
voted unsatisfactory so long, till the Independent Army came from Edinborougb,
surprised and murdered him. He that said, The Presbyterian held him down by the
Hair, while the Independents cut off his Head, said true enough. They murdered
him as a King, before ever they murdered him as a Man: And when time serves,
the Philosopher's Maxim will pass for good and current Logique at Court, Qui
vult media adfinem, vult etiam and ipsum finem; He that wills the means
conducing to the end, wills also the end it self: Ergo (will the Royalists say)
since the Presbyterian put such courses in practice, as tended to the King's
ruin, they certainly intended it, and are as deeply guilty as others. Nay, may
not the Independent say, You took off his Authority, and we took off his Head;
you made him no King, and we made him no Body; you made him a Man of Blood, and
we treated him accordingly. Therefore at your doors, O ye Presbyterian
Hypocrites, his innocent Blood is laid: nor is it any other then your Actions
have been all along; and those committed by your Ancestors to former Princes
and Kings. But sure there is some Excuse remaining; they fought for Religion. I
wonder when the Church did change her Weapons: Must Prayers and Tears be turned
into Pike and Musket? Did GOD refuse to have his Temple built by David, a Man
after his own Heart, because only his hands were bloody? And will he now
condescend to have his Church repaired, and her Breaches made up with Skulls
and Carcasses? Must Blood be tempered with the Mortar that must bind the
Stones of his Temple in Unity? Or are the smitings of Brethrens strokes fit to
polish her Stones withal? Has GOD refused the soft voice, to remain in
thunder? Or has his Spirit left the gentle posture of descending down upon his
Apostles, to the approaching of a mighty and rushing wind? To go about the
reforming of a Church by humane strength, is quite as opposite to the nature of
Reformation, as is the going about the repairing of a Castle-Wall with a Needle
and Thread. He that looks to find such inestimable goodness within Iron-sides,
may as well expect to find a Pearl in a Lobster. No, no, the Church must not
be defended with Helmets, the Resisters of blows; but with Miters, which have
received the cleft already; not by broken Pates, but by cloven Tongues; not by
Men clad in Buff, but by Priests clothed with Righteousness. Decisions in
matters of Faith, must not be determined by Armor of proof; nor did the Sword
of the Spirit ever make way to the Conscience by cutting through the Flesh. He
therefore who takes up Arms against his Sovereign with pretenses of defending
his Religion, does but take such courses as are condemned by the same Religion
he would defend: and indeed, he does but make Religion his stalking-Horse, to
blind him, whilst he aims at that which he would have least suspect him; which
when he has effected, he means to get up upon the Horse, and ride him at his
pleasure: they pretend the good of the Church, and intend nothing more but the
Goods thereof; and like dissembling Lapwings, make a show of being nearest the
Nest, when they are farthest off it.

But they fought for Liberty: These are piaefraudes, and Religiosi doli; pious
Frauds, religious Deceits: for pray what Liberties did they fight for? If for
Liberty of Conscience, What do you mean thereby? If by Liberty of Conscience,
you mean, That it shall be lawful for every one to make a free choice of his
own Religion, or to be of his own Opinion, these are things which we ought not
to have, much less to fight for; for then let us not blame every Painim, that
bakes his cake to the queen of heaven, or every ignorant Votary, who creeps to
his own Image, or makes his own Idol: for in this kind of liberty we do but
sacrifice unto the net wherein we see our selves caught, and burn incense to
the drag that hales us to destruction. Christians are not to be at such
Liberty: loose Christians are but lost men: true Christians will be contented
to be bound up in the Unity of the same Spirit, and with the bond of Peace: if
the bond be broken, the Sheaf of Corn is but so many loose Ears, and no way fit
to be carried into the Lords Barn: if we be Sons and Daughters, let us belong
all to one House; if we be Servants, let us be all of one Family; if we be
lively Stones, let us be all of one Building; if we be several Grapes, yet let
us be all of one Cluster; if we be several Clusters, let us be all of one Vine;
if we be Saints, let us have a Communion: for this is it which is called the
Communion of Saints; this is it which is called Religion, which is derived a
Religando, which signifies, to bind. Wherefore for the Puritan not to think
himself bound to those Articles the Church proposes, is to be of no Religion;
and ^o fight for this, is to fight for nothing.

Perhaps the Presbyter may likewise maintain, that he fought for Liberty from
Oppression: That is but a weak Excuse, and carries little of Reason or Sense in
it: for there is not any Man or Woman, of what Quality or Condition soever he
be, that understands what belongs to any such thing; unless it be some few that
have liberty to do what they will with all the rest.

But what if they took up Arms for the property of the Subject? Alas! I presume
the Subjects had then so altered the property of their Goods, that had they but
the old properties restored, they would not think it good fighting for a new;
their expectations being so much deceived, that instead of fighting for the
property of the Subject, they rather found themselves subject to have all
things in common.

If for the Laws of the Land; Whose Laws were they? Were they not the King's?
And was it probable that he would not maintain the Foundation of his House from
sinking? Would he not maintain his Legs under him? Were they not Supporters of
that Body Politic whereof he was Head? Nay, does he not maintain himself, when
he maintains them? for the King and his Laws may, without absurdity, be
compared to GOD and his Word, both inseparable: for as GOD is the Word, and the
Word is GOD; so the King is the Law, as the Life thereof; and the Law is the
King, as the Body of that Soul. Wherefore there needed not any fighting against
the King upon this account, except it were by those who were ambitious to be
Kings themselves.

As for Privileges of Parliament, which possibly may come into the number of
their pretenses: I have read of Jack Cade, Speed's Chronicle.
in the Reign of Richard the Second, who coming up as far as London-Stone, and
resting himself thereon, vowed, That within three days, there should be no
other Law but what did proceed out of his own Mouth. Now if it stand with the
Privileges of Parliament, to have a few Jack Cades, relying on their
London-Stones, to tell them what they must do, and they will have; if it stands
with the Privileges of the Presbyterian Parliament, to have Tumults to drive
away their King, Armies to awe themselves, Countries to send up their
Inhabitants in Multitudes, with Petitions in their Hats, Cudgels in their
Hands, and Threatenings in their Mouths, then they have fought to some purpose.

But admit the Puritano-Parliament fought for all these Particulars, so did the
King too: so that the King might safely expostulate with his Parliament, as St.
Paul did with the rest of the Apostles: Are ye Fighters for the Protestant
Religion? so am I: Are you for the Liberties of the Subject? so am I: Are you
for the Laws of the Land? so am I: Are you for the Privileges of the
Parliament? so am I: And in all these things, I have labored more abundantly
then you all.

Where lies the Quarrel then? It must of necessity consist in nothing but this,
That they did not believe one another: and in that they both fought for one and
the same Thing, the means of Reconciliation is taken away: for, had they
differed in their Grounds, the Law might have been Judge between them; Reason
might be Judge, the World might be Judge; but Rebus sic stantibus, instead of
having reason to fight, they did but fight against Reason: both contended for
the same Power, like the two Women that contended for the same Child: Solomon
judged the Child to belong to her who would rather part with it all, then have
the Child divided: Now the Parliament would have this powerful Child divided,
half to the King, and half to themselves; the King rather was contented to lose
all. In whom there is most affection and pity, in him is the Right of true
Parentage.

But because there were no Solomon's in that Age, we will go the downright way
to work.

The Presbyter fought in defense of the King's Person, Crown and Dignity; can
you believe him? I Am sure you may believe and be confident the King did. They
took up Arms to unite him to his Parliament, and make him a most glorious
Monarch, by reviling his sacred Person, and bespattering him with malevolent
Tongues; did they not then fight upon false Grounds? Did they not give
themselves the lie? and shall they be believed still? But instead of being
instructed by Solomon's divided Child, they divided their Solomon. But if they
had remembered what ill luck the Nation ever had by imprisoning their Kings
only, they would have desisted speedily from their hellish Enterprise: for
when they had imprisoned the old Lion and the young, within their Grates, the
third Henry and his Son, did they not make the whole Land shake? Had not the
whole Kingdom a shrewd Ague-fit at that very time? Did they not (like fire too
close besieged with Clouds) sally out in Thunder and Lightning, to the terror
and destruction of all those that stood in the way? What success had the
imprisonment of Edward the Second? Upon his Imprisonment followed his
Deposition, and the murder of his Person was the consequent of the deposement
of his Dignity. But what became of those that were the occasion of it, and did
it? Is there one remaining of the Name of Mortimer? Was not that Mortimer who
was the cause of his imprisonment, beheaded? Were not all those who had a hand
in it condignly punished? Nay, was not the immediate Heir of this too much
Conniver at his Fathers Sufferings, and too ready Accepter of his Fathers
Office, imprisoned, deposed and murdered? And pray satisfy me in this
likewise, What success had the imprisonment of Richard the Second? It cost the
Kingdom whole Ages of miseries, 80 of her Nobility, and 100000 of her Commons,
and the disposing of all her Royal Roses in their Buds, before they were half
blown, until there was but one of a color left in the Royal Garden of Great
Britain; and they being married, made a composure of Red and White, as blushing
at the former Mischiefs.

The Presbyter is a Zealous Dragooner, the Holy Man of War, that is ever
beating up his Drums against Loyalty and Nobility: search through the New
Testament, and you may learn the Genealogy of our Savior, by the Names in
their Regiments; nor need the Muster-Master use any other List then the first
Chapter of St. Matthew; which makes me admire how they could ever object to the
King, the bringing in of Forraigners, when they themselves maintained such an
Army of Hebrews. He is one that rifles Colleges, to promote Learning; and
pulls down Churches, for Edification. He had once almost put out one of the
Kingdoms Eyes, by clouding one of the Universities; and if that Scotch mist had
farther prevailed, had extinguished the other. 'Twas never a good world, since
the name of Church was turned into Kirk, and afterward dwindled into a
Conventicle; 'twas a sad time ever since a feeble By my truly did walk the
Streets as familiarly among us, as Mine Here in Holland. But now we have his
sacred Majesty restored to his right Title, we are confident of a better World,
Velit nolit Smectymnuus, in spite of the Presbyters Teeth.

He is one that has as little mind to do the Kingdom good, as the Church has
to lap Holy Water. He is a Pulpit Boutefeu, that uses to give the Congregation
a Scottish Jigg, and so tune his Nose with Hymns and Songs for the destruction
of the Nobility of our English Nation; a Butcher that exercised his Function,
Cum Privilegio, in former times, endeavoring to bring Loyalty to the Shambles:
one that never was quiet, till the Creatures of the Prerogative were all turned
into the Pound together; till the Peers were pickled up with their King, to
satisfy his ambitions on his Prince, and to feed on the Carcasses of the
People. He is one that thinks it is his Privilege, and would quote Scripture
sor't, To bind the Kings and Nobles of the earth in chains: and yet to dress
out all for his more devout palate, the name of GOD must be placed in the front
of his success, as if he were the only Darling of the Almighty, or rather, as
if he were President in all the Proceedings and Consultations of the
Presbyterian Israel. His God is his Money, and therefore will rather make Money
of GOD and the Church, then fail of an Inheritance. He did endeavor some few
years past, to convert our Times into the Primitive; and made Great CHARLES
wear Fig-leave Breeches, like Adam, by stripping him of his Royal Robes and
Revenues.

As for the Scottish Presbyter, I am sorry I must waste Paper upon him: But
being he has ever endeavored tooth and nail, according to his utmost ability,
to make himself considerable by being troublesome, it will not be amiss to
sound the depth of their constant Designs: which that I may the better do,
give me leave to trace them in their Encroachments, from the first to the last,
upon our English Nation.

When they first found themselves powerful in their own Country, they became
most zealous in asserting the Presbyterian Discipline against the Episcopal; by
which means they gained the Amity and Friendship of all the pretended Religious
Party in England: for they stood seemingly for no sinister ends, but merely for
the purity of Religion, and Liberty of Conscience, against Episcopal Power and
Innovations, as they termed the most ancient Doctrine of the Church; as also,
for the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, invaded by the Prerogative: for the
redress of which Abuses, a Parliament was called; who not obtaining such a
relief of forged Grievances, as they expected; pretended a constraint of taking
up Arms in defense of their Liberties; and the English Zealots had recourse to
the Scots for their assistance, who immediately condescended thereunto, and
thought it but Reason and Equity to join with them, without dispute or scruple,
(pretty tender-conscienc'd Babes they were, in the interim! that is clear:) But
they considering now was the time (if ever) to make their Markets, and their
own Interest as much English as might be, came not off so roundly as they
expected; wherefore they fell to bartering, like Hucksters, and no Bargain
could be made, forsooth, without a Covenant: They would not join, except they
might be (in a manner) all one with us; and this Union must be sealed with that
Solemn League and Covenant: What their meaning was therein, you shall
understand by and by, by taking a view of their Actions, which are the most
sure Interpreters. Yet even at that time, some men had their eyes in their
heads, and many Objections were made at diverse Expressions in the Covenant, and
many Desires for Explanations of some Articles more fully. But the Scots
standing stiff upon their own Terms, and no Conjunction like to be obtained
without the Covenant, and the English Presbyterians necessities requiring no
delay, (as they imagined) were glad to take it as it was offered, without
farther question, or demur.

It was no sooner taken here at London, but immediately every one began to make
his advantages, (through the multitude and ambiguity of Expressions) and by it
to promote his several Interest; as if it had been made to engage unto a
particular Party, not to unite two Nations in a common Interest. But above all,
the Scots, having had the honor of this invention, conceived themselves much
injured by any that denied them the Prerogative of making an Interpretation;
and in matter of Religion, urged their own Discipline as the only Pattern to
reform the Church by; and their Plea had been far better, could they have
proved it to be [According to the Word of GOD] which Clause was most luckily
inserted. Notwithstanding all the Reasons to the contrary, the Scottish Module
was still pressed: The Scot was willing to ride; and having (as he thought) the
English fast bridled with a Covenant, he began to switch and spur: The Throne
of the Kirk was the stalking-horse to catch Geese; and if that could have been
settled, then there had been no denying them whatsoever they could ask; they
would have seated themselves finely in this fat soil, and surely too; there
would be no removing them out of our Councils, whereof they had then been
Members and Partakers. For had the Kirk-Interest been once confirmed among us,
then by virtue of that Authority which they use, to control the Civil Power,
the Parliament must have been subservient to all their Ends and Purposes; and
since the English Puritans had been (as they say) constrained (to make their
Party strong, and maintain Correspondencies for their own preservation) to
gratify their Scottish Founders in all their Desires; so that the Scots might
easily have translated the Covenant-Union, to as good as an absolute
National-Union, by gaining a Joynt-Interest with us, in our Affairs for ever;
and consequently, in all the Profits, great Offices, Councels and Concernments
of this Nation.

Now whether this were their Design or not, in the Covenant, ab origin, I
shall not now determine; but let it be judged by their insolent behavior here
among us, after they were admitted to our Councils: And therefore in the next
place, I shall examine their Proceedings, which most evidently represent them
in their intentions. -- It sufficed them not after they were come in, that they
had an equal Power with the Factions in the Committee at Derby-House, which was
allowed them; but driving a powerful Party in both Houses, they took upon them
to meddle with matters relating to the future peace and settlement of the
Nation, much pretended, but not at all intended; and that dinstinct from their
own too; and to provide for an equal Interest with the Presbytery of England.

The first most notorious Evidence of this (though there had been many before)
was discovered at the Uxbridge-Treaty, where the Propositions of both Houses
being presented to his Majesty of blessed memory, it was found the Scots had so
far provided for themselves by their Party in the Houses, That in time to come,
the ordering of the English Militia, the power of making War and Peace, and all
other Prerogatives of Government, were to be administered by a proportionable
number of Scots, as well as English: A thing so ridiculous, and an Encroachment
so palpable, that his Majesty, in one of his Answers, took notice of it, and
said, He was not so much an Enemy to the English Nation, as to sign those
Propositions: or somewhat (I Am confident) to that purpose.

A second Evidence or Discovery of their Encroachments, was made upon the
delivering in diverse papers to the Parliament, at several times, wherein they
disputed their claim, and ventured their Logic upon the Letter of the
Covenant, to prove an Interest in disposal of matters merely relating to our
welfare (as was thought;) which they reinforced afterward, with new recruits
of Arguments, when the King came into their Army.

But not knowing how to maintain their Arguments, they were contented for that
time to quit them, and the King too, upon such Terms as are notorious to all
the world; who being at length reduced under the power of the Parliament and
Army, Propositions were sent to him at Hampton Court, wherein no such Provision
being made for the Scottish Interest, as was in those at Uxbridge, their
Commissioners here protested against them, accused the Parliament of Breach of
Covenant, and complained highly in one of their Declarations, that they should
be so neglected.

This may serve as a third Evidence of their Covenant-Design of Encroachment:
Whereto may be added one more: When the King, Father of our most gracious
Sovereign, was at Carisbrook-Castle, whither the Commissioners of Parliament
were no sooner arrived with Propositions again, but the Scots Commissioners
were at hand, and for the same reason, pro^es^ed furiously against them. By
which ^ent Demeanors and Expressions from time to time, and crying up the
Covenant for their defense, it is clear enough what their intentions were when
they urged it unto the Presbytery of this Nation^; and notwithstanding all the
specious pretenses of Brotherly Love, their Design in it hitherto, has been
only to screw themselves into an equal Interest with this our Nation.

Having smelt out their Project thus far, give me leave to trace them on to the
end, as succinctly as may be.

The Royal Party being suppressed, and so no farther occasion to make use of the
Scottish Army, the Parliament with some difficulty made a shift to send them
home into their own Country; but being defeated of their Aims and Expectations,
they could not so rest: Having failed of their Ends by pretending for
Parliament, they resolved next to try what they could do upon the Kings Score;
and so the Grandees turned the Tables, in hope of an after-Game, by closing
with Duke Hamilton, upon the Royal Account; not doubting, but if they gained
the Day this way, to recompense their Travels with much more advantage. The
Covenant, like a Nose of Wax, apt to be turned any way, served this Enterprise
every jot as well as the former; though the Design were different from what it
was, the Great ones not caring much what became of the Kirk-Interest, since
they had agreed for the security of their own; which must needs have been very
considerable, if they could have redeemed his Majesty, and restored him into
the condition of an absolute Monarch. Therefore the Kirk seeing themselves left
in the lurch, thundered out their Curses amain, upon that hypocritical
Engagement, as destructive to the Covenant.

But the Grandees being at a loss likewise, upon Duke Hamilton's Defeat, were
glad to cry Peccavi to the Kirk.

Within a while after, a new Door of Hope being opened to them, by the Right of
Succession which they knew belonged to his present MAJESTY; they to ingratiate
with him, proclaim him their King: and here the Grandees and the Kirk joining
hands again, become Friends, and offer their service for his Restitution upon
Terms of the Covenant, which was pretended to be framed at first for the
preservation of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the people, against Regal
power; but is, now that the Scots can serve their Design no longer that way,
become the ground of their compliance with his MAJESTY; being resolved this
way, since they have failed in all the rest, to try whether they could
accomplish their profane Projects through the Covenant, by insinuating
themselves into places of Honor, Profit and Power, that they may domineer in
the Possessions, as their Pharisaical Priests would over the Consciences of the
English.

Thus having made way, in discovering what the Design of the Scots has ever
been, and is at this instant; certainly no Man, that is Master of a true
English Spirit, but will abhor the Hypocritical Pretenses and Encroachments of
that persidious Nation.

Therefore it being evident that their Design in urging the Covenant upon the
Presbyterian here in England, was only to insinuate themselves into an equal
Interest with our own Nation; I shall in the next place, discover the great
Inconveniences and Hazards that our Nation must of necessity have undergone,
in case it should happen as they ever endeavored, to be knit together in a
National Union.

A National Union has been often whispered among them heretofore; and there is
no doubt but they would bid high for it, if ever they have occasion; and then
it must needs have been a very fine world, when we had been confounded with a
miscellany of Scottish and English; when Scots should have been competitors with
us in point of privilege, vie wealth with us in our Possessions, Honors and
Dignities; and they would either have imposed new Laws upon us, or altered the
old, according as they judged it for their advantage; for a Scotch Covenanters
stomach will allow no distinction betwixt Presbyter and Independent, but can
digest the Estate of an English Covenanter, without so much as a scruple of
regret or compassion.

But it is a very great wonder, since the stage play of the Covenant, and the
Actors are brought on this side the Curtain, and we know what they are, through
all their Disguises, and what they aim at, that yet many of our English Nation
should be so stupid as to be led away with their cheats and pretenses for a
Reformation; since it is evident that their chief Leaders and Sticklers gape
only after Profit and Preferment, and (according to the custom of all
Forraigners in Arms) will make no distinction between Friend and Foe, so they
may satisfy their covetous and ambitious ends.

And for a conclusion to the whole, as to their actions, that these particulars
may appear more solid then mere insinuation, give me leave to confirm what we
have said concerning them, by some Authentic Examples; it being an ordinary
case in the World, That Ab istis exercitibus quos defendendi sui causa
attraxerunt evertuntur. Peucer.

Auxiliatores ut solet fieri, postea fiunt Domini. Strigel. 2 Paralip. 28.


Commonwealths and Kingdoms have been often oppressed by those Forraigners,
that came, or were invited in, as Friends, to give their assistance; and so
would they have done undoubtedly, had their power been suitable to their will.

Here before I proceed, let me call to mind a story of the Hedgehog in the
Fable, who being almost dead with cold, chanced to light upon a Foxes Kennel;
where, asking for entertainment, the Fox more compassionate then wise, grants
his Request: but the Hedghog, as soon as he recovered warmth, began to bristle
and prick the Fox; who complaining of his unworthy carriage, the Hedghog made
answer, That if he found him troublesome, he might leave him, and seek a new
Lodging. I shall leave the Application to those that would entertain the Scots
as Friends, to consider whether they should find more courtesy from them, if
they had power here, then the Fox did from the Hedghog, or then other Nations
have had from the friendly pretenses of foreign Auxiliaries.

Concerning this, there are several Presidents.

The Macedonians being invited by the Thebans, Justin.
to assist them against the Phocians, made a shift not only to seat themselves
among the Thebans, but under the conduct of King Philip, made way to the
Conquest of all Greece.

So the Persians, Xenophon, li. 7.
coming as Friends to aid one party in a Civil Division in Caria, suppressed
both, and deprived that Commonwealth of its liberty.

And the Carthaginians in the first Punick War, received more prejudice from
the Celtae, their Confederates and Brethren in Covenant, then from the Romans,
their Enemies.

The Goths and Vandals, Pezel. par. 4. page 613.
being invited by the Emperor Theodosius for his assistance, deprived him of
Italy and Spain. Afterward, the Longbeards, or Lombards, being called in by
Narses, against the Goths, seated themselves for above 200 years in that part
of Italy, which from them, was called Lombardy.

A quarrel happening between the two Saracen Sultans of Persia and Babylon,
Circa Annum Christi 870. Chytraeus in Apoc. cap. 9.
the Persian called in the Turks, under the conduct of their Captain
Tangrolipix, out of Scythia, who seated themselves first in a part of his
Dominions.

In the time of the Emperor Frederick the Third, the Princes of Italy being in
contention, the Pope called in the Spaniard, and several other Princes, to
compose the Quarrel; In Chron. Phil. li. 5.
which being done, a new one arose betwixt the Auxiliary Princes, for the
Lordship of Italy; but the Spaniard drove away the rest, and made bold to keep
possession himself.

Thus likewise the Spaniards being invited into Sicily and Naples, to free them
from the French, did indeed expel the French, but possessed both Kingdoms
themselves.

On the other side, a controversy arising betwixt Lewis, and John Sforza, for
the Duchy of Millain; John called in the Spaniards to his party, and Lewis the
French; but the French driving John and the Spaniards away, made themselves at
that time Masters of the Dukedom, and carried their Friend Lewis prisoner into
France.

Thus, in old time, our Ancestors, the Saxons, being called in by Vortigern,
Sam. Daniel.
the British King, to assist him against the Invasions of the Picts and Scots,
turned their Arms against the Britains, and driving them into Wales,
transmitted the possession of this Island, to us their posterity.

So the Scots likewise (as Bodin affirms) John Bodin. li. 5. cap. 5.
being called in to the assistance of the Picts against the Britains, possessed
themselves of the best part of that Kingdom, which they hold at this day.

And now I would fain know of the Admirers of the Scottish Nation, what
assurance they can have, notwithstanding their five Flourishes of pretended
Friendship, that they should not serve us, as their Ancestors did the Picts; or
as others did other Nations, whom they oppressed under as glorious pretenses, in
case they should get the power into their hand; especially since of late time
they have made so many palpable Discoveries of Encroachment upon the English.

Seeing therefore, that their Covenant-Cause appears a Cause for Intrenchment
upon our National Interest, rather then for Religion or Monarchy; I may
reasonably conclude, That it concerns all Parties whatsoever (if not for the
misery that would follow it, yet out of a detestation of their Designs and
Endeavors) to shake them off, and utterly relinquish them.

As for the English Presbytery, whence it was, has been manifested already;
but for what ends brought into England, is not here to be disputed: But if we
should grant the intentions of its first Fautors to be pure in the Fountain,
(as they would fain maintain, though we are satisfied to the contrary) yet it
appears polluted in the streams, by the corruption of their Successors: for, as
the Primitive Pretenses of it were high and glorious, in its infancy; so being
grown up to maturity, it has (after the manner of all other things that
participate of worldly mixtures) in time contracted so many Adulterations of
worldly Interest, that it has lost the Beauty which it once appeared to have,
and serves every Sophister, as a Cloak to cover his ambitious Designs.

But since it is arrived, notwithstanding, to such a height, in the opinion of
many, as to be cried up for the only Pattern of Government under the Gospel,
this is to be imputed to the blind Zeal of those that are misled, and the
Deceitfulness of the Leaders, rather then the intention of its Author, Mr.
Calvin, as it appears: for he never seemed to stretch his Module so far, as the
Necessity and Universality of a DIVINE RIGHT; but seems only to have hewn part
of the Building out of the Rock of the Scriptures, and piec'd up the residue by
politic Rules, such as he conceived might sound nearest the Text, and serve
most conveniently to cement the disjoynted Members of the then broken and
tumultuous Commonwealth of Geneva, into an entire and well-compacted Body.

It was no sooner licked into Form there, but (as it is the fate of all things
new) it began to be much extolled and admired; and the fame thereof spreading
in England, as well as other parts, wrought in many of our Countrymen, an
itching desire to go thither, and instruct themselves in the Nature and Customs
of the Government; where, of Spectators, they soon became Proselytes; and
returning home with new affections, looked with an Eye of Disdain upon the
Bishops, as if themselves had indeed found out the Pattern in the Mount,
because (forsooth) the words, Presbytery, Elder, Deacon and Assembly, etc.
sound more Gospel-like, then Diocese, Churchwarden, Archdeacon, and
High Commission, etc. With these Terms the Maxima pars vulgi capitur Ambagibus.
ordinary sort of Religious Persons, not able to see through the Shell of
words, into the Kernel or substance of the business, were easily led to a
belief of high matters; whereas this new form, like the Trojan Horse, brought
an Army of Mischiefs in the belly of it, which have of late years been
sufficiently discovered.

For immediately after the Episcopal Form was abolished here, as corrupt and
Antichristian, the chief Sticklers of the Presbyterian Faction began to show
their Teeth; and sitting in an Assembly cheek by jole with the Parliament,
intermedled with their Affairs, labored to twist their Church Discipline with
the interest of State; claimed in their open Pleas, Discourses, and their
Confession of Faith, a Power in themselves, distinct from the Civil, and
demanded the voting of this in both Houses, as Jure Divino, that so by degrees
they might creep, till they had got to such a height, that none should be sole
Lords and Masters, but they and their Confederates.

These, and many other pranks they played, in hope to erect their intended
Domination: And though (being often required) they were never able to show
their Pedigree from the Apostles, or derive the Lincaments of their Form from
the Body of the Scripture; yet they pressed it on still, and wanted not their
Party in Parliament, with the assistance of the Scots (whose Interest it was)
to second them. But all is blasted, and their specious pretenses found out to
be nothing but Hypocrisy and Dissimulation.

Yet were there perpetually, when they found their Cause to falter,
Presbyterian Juglings in private, Murmurings abroad, and Mutinies in the
Pulpit; such well-acted Lamentations for the glory of the Kirk departing, and
the loss of their Diana, that every Prayer was a Stratagem, and most Sermons
mere Plots against the Government they lived under.

Thus the nature of their Design being discovered, give me leave in the next
place to manifest the vanity of their Hopes, that if men will not forbear for
shame of its hypocrisy, they may yet, in consideration of the many sad
Consequents which may follow.

For though they use all possible means to draw in the Royal Party to their
own, yet it can never be effected: for the Royalists look upon them still (and
that not without apparent reason) as the Authors of their misery; for they
reduced our most sacred King CHARLES the first, Diminutione Capitis, in the
condition of a Captive; they spoiled him as a King, before others executed him
as a private Man; they deprived him of his Earthly Crown, and kept him
languishing; whereas a reverend Father of the Church says, See the Irish
Bishop's Sermon at the Hague, in print.
Others were more courteous in sending him to an Heavenly.

As for the inconveniences which the Presbyterian Design would bring upon the
whole Nation, guess at them by these following Particulars.

Besides the many Mischiefs it would bring upon the Nation in general, the
Royalist can no ways be content with it; nor indeed, have they any Reason sort,
being absolutely destructive to Regal Dignity.

It never was embraced yet, by any one Nation, in a National Form, but by
Scotland; this, as See the Case of the Kingdom stated. Anno 1647.
One observed; was done in the Miriority of King James, when the Scotch Lairds
and Clergy doing all as they listed, at length parted stakes, (though the
Clergy then got, and still hold the better) that when be came to age, he found
the Fable of Ixion's Juno moraliz'd upon himself: for, as he embraced a Cloud,
in stead of a Goddess; so the King, when he thought to grasp his Scepter, laid
hold on a Manacle, which kept his hands so fast, during his abode there, that
he could never act but what they pleased to let him, according to their own
Directory of Church and State. And in process of time, this Heat of Presbytery
proved such an Hectique in the Body politic of Scotland, that the substance of
Kingly power was utterly consumed (and nothing left) as we see at this day, but
the bare Bones, the very Skeleton of Monarchy.

But it is taken pro confessa, the Presbyterian would have a King; yet such a
one as should only bear the Name, a Scarecrow of Royalty: and he does pretend
to maintain the Monarchical Form, yet actually destroys the very Fundamentals
of Monarchy. Now what prejudice will it be to us, if this Discipline should
take? for besides, though this mad Presbyterian Form destroys Bishops, and
clips the wings of Regality, it will not be so contented, but entrench also
upon the Gentry in their own Lordships, by a strange way of Parochial Tyranny,
and bring all People into the condition of mere Gally-slaves, while the blind
Priests fit at stern, and their Hackney-Dependents, the Elders, hold an Oar in
every Boat.

Now were these Priests seated here ((...) they are in Scotland) in a sure
Succession (as it has been long since See the Case of the Kingdom stated. Vt
supra.
observed in Print) a correspondency being cherished between a Clergy of the
same Garb and Humor, in both Countries; they might finely toss Thunderbolts of
Excommunication on both sides, to gratify each other; and so be able to
terrify all persons that durst be averse in either Nation; and promote such
only to places of Honor and Profit, whose poorer spirits will vassalize their
Genius to serve the ends of the Kirk-Domination. And this it was that at first
caused so much bauling about the Covenant.

Besides, one Reason more why Presbytery is so much destructive, is, because of
the In ordine ad spiritualia.
Popish Trick taken up by the Presbyterian Priests, in drawing all secular
Affairs, within the compass of their spiritual Jurisdiction, And this they do,
by means of that awe wherein they pretend to hold the Consciences of Magistrate
and People; the one being liable, as well as the other, by Suspensions and
Excommunications, to be exploded at pleasure, as scandalous sinners. This
appears by that large extent of their Authority, in judging of scandalous sins,
which reaches almost to every action of humane life; so that all the people,
besides their Favorites, (from the Counselor to the Beggar) must at every
Turn stoop like Asses, to be ridden by them and their Arbitrary Assemblies.

Now therefore considering what the Nature and Design of the Presbytery is,
and what mischievous inconveniences must unavoidably follow it; I leave it to
every reasonable man, whether he thinks he ought not disengage himself from
that unreasonable and factions Party.

But I must not leave him thus; I have a Word or two more for him, like it, or
leave it.

He is one whose Loins are far more fruitful then his Brain, and the Issue of
both, alike spurious. He is one of the more serious Rabbis of the time; a
Linsey-wolsey Elder of the people, who weaves his homespun Lectures with News
and Divinity, and dresses all his Politics and Discourses in a Scripturemode,
to make them pass the more current among his Proselytes; and yet will set both
Scripture and Conscience upon the wrack to bring about his own end. He has ever
had an ambition to ride a Cock-horse upon Jure Divino: but sure men will have
more wit, then to be ridden like Asses, or the foals of Asses, by the
Babylonish Jockies, notwithstanding their Jus divium.

He came out of Scotland mounted on a Galloway-Nag, to Westminster at first,
and the Houses were fain to furnish him with Provender; therefore it would be
but impudence in him to think to pra^e and caper as he has done heretofore. He
can sing a Hosanna to the Mother-Kirk, and will offer to conjure up Saint Peter
and Saint Paul, with all the rest of the Disciples and Primitive Saints, to
bear witness to her Christendom, unless it be Timothy and Titus, whom they
look upon as Bishops, and so no competent witnesses touching the right of
Classical or Congregational Elderships. He will be sure to cry down the Divine
Right of Episcopacy, and so be the cause, that like wild Beasts without
Bridling, Men wander and range as they please, with all Licentiousness in
Doctrine and Manners, and run over all the Boundaries of Civil Relations or
Propriety, to make way for a Pious Parity and Communion, whereby we may all
walk together in pure Familiarity, without either respect of Persons or Sexes.
He has a Motley Face, and a Medley Conscience; and it is a thousand pities but
that his Picture should be taken after the fashion of those squint Italian
Pieces, which present a Saint on one side, and a Monster on the other.

He Is a divine Jocky, that drives as furiously as Jehu; and will run out of his
small Wits with switch and spur, for preferment. He could willingly creep into
the Vice-Chancellour's Scarlet, or the Deanery of Christ-Church; and if he does
at any time, it is translated into the name of Mastership; to show that he never
intended Reformation should reach any farther then to change the profane names
of Bishops and Deans, into Elders and Deacons; who may enjoy the old
Possessions under a new Form, without such unsanctified and superstitions
Titles, which are the only stumbling blocks to the converted Gentiles, in the
Highway of Sacrilege.

He Is a vile Cobbler of Controversy, a dull a-la-mode-Reformer, a Translator of
Antiquity, that has pulled the Church all to pieces, and knows not how to
patch it up again; that has shaken the very Fundamentals of Religion, and then
endeavors to bungle it with odd fopperies of his own invention: for the
ancient Creed of the Church being quite out of fashion, he has cut out a
Confession of faith, according to the large proportion of his own Wisdom; and
wyre-drawn the business above twenty yards in measure beyond the Alcoran or
Talmud. He is one that drives a great Trade in the Trafficks of rich Livings,
betwixt London and the Country; and so gets a pretty Revenue to hold up Usury,
and find Candles of Consolation to cherish his Zeal, and leave Portions to the
Children of Presbytery.

He is a Stoical Pretender, a Mammonist, an Epicure of the Long Robe, and
delights infinitely to bathe himself in the Golden Streams of Sacrilege. He Is
a bleating Bell-Weather of the General Assembly; and wheresoever there appears
any Loyalty, he gives an Alarm to his Lung-pipes immediately; then out comes
the Son of the Kirk in array, with all the Bag and Baggage of Use and
Application, to bring up the Rear of his Sermon. Nay, rather then fail,
Antichrist and Monarchy shall both be brought together to the Stake, and baited
by the mad Dogs of the times, to inflame the Multitude.

But though they have done this over and over, it is all to no purpose: for the
Bag-pipes draw little or no Company at all now; and are as little regarded as
Ballad-singers, that are always in one Tune. Reformation and Chevy-Chase are
much of the same credit and standing. And since the people have seen Covenant
and Concupiscence (the two Twins of our Mother-Kirk) walk hand in hand
together, they are willing now to part them. He Is a holy Bellowsmender of the
flea-bitten Synod, that knows how (upon any occasion) to blow the coals of the
Altar, to make a Sacrifice of Cities and Kingdoms. Be confident that he
acknowledges no Holy Days, because there is superstition in Easter, but none in
Usury; and he is not at leisure to mind the Resurrection, or seek those things
that are above, having so much to dispatch about Traffic here below; which
business he prosecutes with extreme devotion. But if you see him upon a Fast
day, at a Summers Exercise, when he baits his Text, and himself into a Bathe,
you would take him in the Pulpit, for Cornelius in his Tub; and if a Cavalier
chance to preach on Good Friday, be confident he is clapped in prison, to show
unto the world, that their Easter-Devotions are suitable unto their Christmas;
and that they care as little for the sufferings, as the birth of our Savior.
For Zeal (forsooth) that fiery Gossip will not permit an Union with the
Cavaliers, by any means, unless they will yield to have their Consciences
crampt with the Covenant. He Is a Divine Puppit that is trimmed and tricked up
with the fine Phant'sies of the Directory, and Confession of the New Cut; as
also all the Whimsies of the Modish-Garb of reforming. He Is a true Boanerges of
the Kirk, that can level his Thunderbolts against all such as shall presume to
be obedient to their Civil Governors. Nor are the Governors in any better
condition then the people; for they are affronted by every ranting Presbyter,
that raves in the Pulpit, like a Conjurer in his Circle; and dares first raise
the Devil with false Doctrine, and then deliver up to him all the Peers of the
Realm by an Excommunication: from whence there can be no redemption, but at
such a rate, as shall cost them the best of their Privileges, and make them
untruss upon the Close-stool of Antichrist, better known by the name of the
Stool of Repentance. He is never well but when he is riding both King GOD bless
his Majesty.
, Lords and Commons at his pleasure, and whipping them on with sharp Censures,
that like tame Mules of the Kirk, they may carry all the Bag and Baggage of the
Brethren to the promised Land, whither they have ever been journying to fetch
that pattern out of the Mount, which will make us all weary of our lives, if we
ever be so mad as to entertain it when they get it. But if these present times
hold, wherein Loyalty flourishes, and Majesty sways the Scepter; the blew Sir
John's may return to their ten pounds per annum, and Sunday-pudding: which is a
sad thing to think on, and will sooner break the hearts, then the bellies, of
the fat Calves of Reformation.

In fine, Mr. John is all Zeal, no Knowledge; all Purity, no Humility; all
Simplicity, no Honesty: and if you never trust him, he will never deceive you.
Now as for the Northern Fraternity, whose brotherly Zeal transported them
heretofore on this side Jordan, to help drive out the Amorite and Hittite,
Heaven send them the blessing of Increase and multiply, at home; suffer
Presbytery and Bag-pipes to flourish beyond Berwick; and keep them (for the
future) from making a Mouse-trap of the Covenant to catch Englishmen; and send
them good store of Charity and Success to plant their Discipline where more
need is among their Brethren, the sons of Anak, in the High-lands.

To conclude, take this short Description of our Presbyterian-Jehu, as it was
formerly penned by diverse that in other Ages had experience of him.

A Presbyter is an Essence that needs a double Definition: for he is not what
he appears to be. He Is a Church-Rebel, or one that would exclude Order, that
his Brain might rule. In things but Ceremonial, will spurn at the grave
authority of the Church; and out of needless nicety, be a Thief to himself of
those Benefits that God has bestowed on him. A Thing of so cross-grained a
temper, that should the Church enjoin clean Shirrs, he would wear such as were
lousy. Show him a Ring, he runs back like a Bear, and hates square-dealing, as
being allied to Caps: A pair of Organs blow him out of the Parish, and is the
only Glister-pipe to cool him: A Surplice will sooner cure him of the
Chin-cough, then the sight of a Bear. He is a diseased piece of Apocrypha; bind
him to the Bible, and he corrupts the whole Text: Ignorance, and Fat Feed, are
his Founders; his Nurse is Railing Rabbis, and Roman Breeches; his life is but
a borrowed blast of wind: for between two Religions, as between two Doors, he
is ever whistling. Truly, whose Child he is, is not yet known; for his Faith
willingly knows no father. When he makes a Speech, it is somewhat ominously with
his Neck awry, as if Mahomet's Pigeon should come and prompt him in the Ear. He
gluts himself with Sacrilege, fearing no surfeit upon the sweet Morsels of the
Crown and Cathedrals: He fasts once a month, and feasts all the year after, to
starve Loyalty quite out of the Kingdom: His tender Conscience can strain at a
Gnat, and swallow a Camel: The flame of his Zeal shined so brightly, that it
once converted all the Ornaments of the Church into Tinder, to furnish his own
fancy with new Lights. He turns the Church into a stable, and stables into
Churches, that our Savior might be preached where he was born. Reformation is
his stalking-horse; and though he be no Roman Catholic, yet he is a
Parish-Pope; one that knows no subjection to Mitre or Scepter: No Jesuit
demands more blind and absolute obedience from his Vassals; no Magistrate of
the canting society, more slavish subjection from the Members of that
traveling state, then the Presbyterian Hypocrite expects from his Lay-Pupil.
Nay, they must not only be obeyed, fed and defended, but admired; and that
their Lay-Proselytes do as sincerely, as a shirtless Fellow with a Cudgel under
his arm, does a Face-wringing Balladsinger. It Is a demure creature full of Oral
sanctiry, and Mental impiety; a fair Object to the Eye, but stark naught to the
Understanding. He holds it lawful to steal, so it be from the wicked Egyptians.
He hates no Wore, like the Whore of Babylon. If he meet per accidens with a
Tabitha, he can court her with a Hail Sister to be her Incumbent; and persuade
her it is the pr -- of Zeal that moves him forward. He Is a snuffling Rabby known
by these marks; a long-wasted Conscience that can out-stride a Colossus, a
Gnomon-Nose, a wrought Cap, a swaggering pair of ears, and not an inch of hair.

Cleaveland.
If you meet any that do thus attire 'em,
Stop them; they are the Tribe of Adoniram.
He is an unlucky Bird that used formerly to croak about VVestminster-Abbey;
and if this Daw were not often crammed, you were sure to hear of it in the next
Fast-sermon: then would he beat up all his Drums in the Pulpit, and thunder
against the ungodly. He Is a pious Thief that did so pill the Royalist, that he
looked as bare as a Scotch Lord in sackcloth, sitting on the stool of
Repentance. He has trimmed the Cavalier worse then the angry Barbers of
Gray's Inn use to do a Bailiff of Middlesex. His fiery Zeal keeps him
continually costive, which withers him into his own Translation; and till he
eat a school-man, he is hide-bound: Give him advice, you run into Traditions;
and urge a modest course, he cries out, Councils. He dares not be honest, for
that loves order; yet, if he can be brought to ceremony, and made but Master of
it, he is converted. He Is a gilded Pill composed of two virtuous Ingredients,
Natural Dishonesty, and Artificial Dissimulation. Women and Lawyers are his
best Disciples: the one (next fruit) longs for forbidden Doctrine; the other,
to maintain forbidden Titles: both which he sows among them; yet he lives
religiously according to outward appearance, and will not revel it in a
shoreless excess. He can better afford you ten Lies, then one Oath; and dare
commit any sin gilded with a pretense of sanctity. He had rather see
Antichrist, then a picture in a Church-Window; and chooses sooner to be half
hanged, then see a Leg at the Name of JESUS, or an Auditor stand at rehearsing
of the Creed. He usually makes moving sermons; for most of the people go out of
the Church before he has done. His hums and has with the help of salvation,
consume the best part of the hour; and is of so good discourse, that he dare
challenge the Almighty to talk with him Ex tempore. Besides, he is so sure of
his salvation, that he will not change places in heaven with the Virgin Mary
without boot. He has nicknamed all the Prophets and Apostles with his sons,
and begets none but Virtues for his daughters. He will be sure to thwart the
Bishops, though it be accompanied with an absurdity: like the Islanders near
adjoining unto China, who salute by putting off their shoes, because the
Chinese do it by their hats. It Is such a creature as Pliny never wrote of; and
the like was not to be seen in Noah's Ark. It Is a violent Thing made up of
contradiction: if he fast on any set day, it is certainly on Sunday; but he will
be sure to feast on Friday. His opinion has turned his zeal into madness and
distraction; and out of his blind and uncharitable pride, censures and scorns
others as Reprobates; or out of obstinacy fills the world with brawlings about
undeterminable Tenants: and being once elated with the pride of his Faction,
does so contemn all others, that he does infringe the Laws of humane society.
He Is a saint of the new Translation; or if you please, a sainted Salamander,
that lives in the flames of Zeal. A stubble-goose, that has fed high in this
Harvest of Reformation: the prime Gandee of the factions flock. An Apocryphal
piece of University-Mummery: a holy Pick-lock, that can open men's consciences,
and pick the purse of the City with ease and dexterity. A Gunpowder
Politician, that loves to make Fireworks for the destruction of the Loyalist.
A Divine Squib-crack. The meek man of God, or the hypocrite in grain. An
University-Canker-worm. A grievons Plunderer of the saints in Church-windows. A
right Pharisaical Jew; one that will compass sea and land to make a Proselyte.
A pious Pulpit-Cuffer. A deadly spit-fire. Such a stubborn lump of sanctified
flesh, that you may as soon persuade the Scot to forsake his craft, the Jew his
avarice, or the Pope St. Peter's Chair, as the Presbyter to leave off his
Fanatic Whimsies. In fine, he is so much Knave, that it is nonsense to call him
Fool.

I could make it appear, how all seditions almost and rebellions in Scotland,
have been set a foot or fomented by this Government Presbyterian: how
neighborly Feuds have been increased and entertained: how moneys collected for
the relief and support of Geneva, were by the chief Gamaliels and Presbyters
interverted, employed to raise and pay soldiers to aid and assist the Earl of
Bothwel and his accomplices in Rebellion against the King. I fear I have wearied
you already; the subject is everlasting, and I am weary of it.

If I should give account of the late practices and tenets of this late
Covenant, it were possible to let you see that it has far exceeded all the
mischiefs ever their forefathers did, although they tread in the same footsteps.

To shut up all, give me leave, in the close, to give the Articles of their
Apostatical Creed inconsistent with Monarchy, which they hold as the twelve
Articles of the Apostolical Symbol. I will touch only the prime of those; for
their other Articles, they are so many, and of so vast an extent abounding in
Negatives, that as King James says well, He that would keep them, is not able
to retain them in his brain, but must keep them in a Table Book.

The Articles of the Dogmatical Presbyterian Faith inconsistent with Monarchy.
Their Dogmatical Creed.
1. THey preach and maintain, that the Church is the house of God, the civil
policy and Government are only the hangings. 2. Next they believe, all
Ministers are pari consortio honoris and potestatis praediti, that there must
be a parity in the Church. Join these two together, and you have a fair way for
Democracy. 3. They vindicate to themselves and their Consistory, a sovereign,
complete, universal, independent power in all things spiritual that concern
salvation: they have not only the directive power, but the Legislative also;
and all temporal things in order to salvation and religion, come within the
verge of their Scepter. All sovereign power, wheresoever you fix it, (whether
in one, as in a Monarchy; or in few, as in an Aristocracy; or in many or all by
vicissitudinary turns) have only the Executive power to do as they command;
and is bound to preserve by its power, Laws, and Arms, their sacred and
Celestial privileges and sovereignty. 4. Whatsoever Laws civilly enacted by
King or Parliament, they conceive to be against the Laws of the Kingdom of
Christ; by their native proper intrinsecal right immediately derived from
Christ, they may repeal and make void, discharge the subject to obey them. They
may decree not only different Laws of their own from the standing Laws of the
Kingdom; but contrary, contradictory and destructive of them. And have withal
so much co-active power, that if obedience be denied to the Laws of this
sovereignty, they can destroy the Souls of the subjects, by delivering them
over to Satan. 5. No Minister preaching in Pulpit sedition or treason, or
railing at King, Council, the prime Judges, is accountable, or punishable by
King, Parliament, Council, or any Judicatory whatsoever; but from all he may
appeal to the Sanhedrim and Consistory as the sole and proper competent Judge.
6. What Corroboration or civil Confirmation or Sanction they demand of the
King, which he is able to do civilly, (for they will give him no formal
interest in any sacred or religious thing) he is bound to grant it, and to obey
them as Christ's immediate Vicegerents: otherwise they may excommunicate him. 7.
Reformation and preservation of Religion, especially to prescribe the way and
orders for reformation, is solely theirs. 8. The King is bound to put their
orders in execution; but if neither He, nor his Council, nor his Parliament
will do it, the inferior Judges, the Nobles, the Commons, nay, every individual
man to his utmost power, at their direction, are bound to do it. 9. That they
may without warrant of supreme authority, assemble where and when they will,
for God and Christ's cause, and for the liberty and peace of subject and Kingdom
in ordine ad spiritualia; and there they may covenant together, swear and
subscribe for the glory of God, the advancement of Religion, and conspire and
combine in a mutual defense one of another in this holy Cause and League. 10.
They teach and maintain, that all sovereignty and Majesty in a King, is
originally, immediately and properly derived from the Community, and that only
by way of a fiduciary trust, so that it is habitually and radically still in
the people, and the King has no greater portion or proportion then he has by
the first popular fundamental constitution: And in case of deficiency, the
collective body may supply in Church or State the defects of his Government.
For maladministration, the King is censurable; for ernormous errors, he is
deposable; and they may disinherit his posterity. 11. That a defensive War is
lawful against a bad King, or a weak King seduced by malignant counsel. 12.
They may oppose and resist all his Officers and Commissioners by force and
violence, if they come to execute his illegal commands: and if he will be so
obstinate that he will come in arms against these good Christians, they resist
not his authority, but his will; not his office, but his person.
Besides, their practice upon these grounds, is to bring all cases, all causes,
under their cognition and judgment, sub formalitate scandali, by which the
King is robbed of his sacred prerogative, the Judges of their authority, and
all subjects of their right and quiet. The rest of their extravagant Maxims
inconsistent with Monarchy and the peace of Government, are reduceable to those
heads.

Thus not intending hereby to reproach any person particularly whatsoever, I
have writ This, but to lay open to the world how dangerous a Government this
is, not only for Monarchy, but for all Governments whatsoever: and that our
eyes being opened, we may choose rather to endure any torment temporary, then to
enter into this treacherous and damnable Covenant, destructive to Religion,
King, Church, Peace of all, and the liberty of the subject. To swear to these
things as established de jure divino, and to put on poor people to act treason
and rebellion, making them believe they are Confessors and Martyrs. If this
gives the Reader any satisfaction, I have what I desire: If he doubt of the
truth of anything, I hope I am able to make all here good by faithful and
autnentick Records or Testimony of such as are worthy of r^ust.

God save his Church, our King and Realm, from this Scourge; and give us Peace
and Truth. AMEN.
FINIS.
A SHORT HISTORY Of the English Rebellion. Compiled in VERSE, BY MARCHAMONT
NEDHAM; AND Formerly extant, in His Weekly Mercurius Pragmaticus.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1661.

A short HISTORY Of the ENGLISH REBLLION.
WHenas we lived in peace (GOD wot)
A King would not content us;
But we, forsooth, must hire the Scot,
To all-be-Parliament us.
Then down went King and Bishops too;
On goes the holy Wirk,
Betwixt them and the Brethren blew,
TO advance the Crown and Kirk.
But when that these had reigned a time,
Robbed Kirk, and sold the Crown;
A more religious sort up climb,
And crush the Jockies down.
But now we must have Peace again,
Let none with fear be vexed:
For, if without the King these reign,
Then heigh down they go next.
A Peace, a Peace, the Country cries,
Or else we shall be undone:
For this brave War we thank the wise
Confiding Men of London.
Sure now they may, as well as we,
Know how to value Quiet,
When the Army comes their Guests to be,
For a twelvemonths Cash and Diet.
Free Quarter is a tedious thing,
And so is the Excise.
None can deliver us but the King,
From this damned Dutch Device.
The Parliament has served seven years;
True vengeance then we see
Upon feigned Jealousies and Fears;
For yet they are not free.
Long Peace a Plenty did beget,
And Plenty brought forth Pride;
Through Pride to Faction men were set
In Parties to divide.
The new-form'd Priests first led the way,
And said it was no sin
By force to drive the King away,
And draw the City in.
The Lords and Commons they consent
To what each Rabbi says;
And so the Catholic down went,
TO advance the public Faith.
This brought a War and Taxes on,
TO inslave a freeborn People:
And now the work is thus far gone,
Next have at Crown and Steeple.
Our wise Reformers, brave and gay,
Have taken a goodly course
To fight, to feast, to fast and pray,
And milk each honest Purse.
The Crown's Revenue goes to wrack,
While they sing Hymns and Psalms;
And rather then themselves will lack,
The King must live on Alms.
We are, the learned Synod says,
The Church of England's Nurse,
Who make them bless the Sabbath Days,
And all the week to curse.
The Plough stands still, and Trade is small;
For Goods, Lands, Towns, and Cities,
Nay, I dare say, the Devil and all,
Pays Tribute to Committees.
A Scot and Jesuit joined in hand,
First taught the World to say,
That Subjects ought to have command,
And Princes to obey.
These both agreed to have no King;
The Scotchman he cries further,
No Bishop: it is a godly thing
States to reform by Murder.
Then the Independent meek and sly,
Most lowly lies at lurch,
And so to put poor Jocky by,
Resolves to have no Church.
The King dethroned! the Subjects bleed!
The Church has no abode;
Let us conclude they 're all agreed,
That sure there is no GOD.
Our Statesmen (though no Lunaticks,
No Wizards, nor Buffoons)
Have shown a hundred Changeling-Tricks
In less then three New Moons.
The Devils foot is cleft (men speak)
And so (GOD knows) are they:
The Factions rule by fits, then take
Their turns, and run away.
They vote, unvote, and vote with noise
What they cried down before,
As ready as if London-Boys
Were knocking at the door.
To day an Independ outside;
And then a Scotch to morrow:
Thus shuffle and cut, they do divide
Our Wealth, whilst we know sorrow:
O happy Treason! See how Wealth
Is made their Heaven! They swell
With Pride! and live by Blood and Stealth,
As if there were no Hell!
No Sadduces but must confess,
Those Monsters which are told
In Story, are risen now no less
Prodigious then of old.
Both Cain and Judas back are come,
In Vizards most divine:
GOD bless us from a Pulpit-Drum,
And a preaching Catiline.
They feed upon a Kingdoms Curse,
And prey upon a King!
The Devilish provide a second Course,
And then a Voyder bring.
Now CHARLES, thy Conquest is complete,
And all the World shall see,
That GOD which guides the Royal Scot,
Will thy Avenger be.
O House of Commons, House of Lords,
Amend before September:
For it is decreed, your Soldiers swords
Shall then you All-dismember.
But like fair Chapmen, 'twas well done,
To give you time and day
To cast accounts; for one by one
They will you soundly pay.
The Kingdom all in pieces torn!
Your time is fairly spent;
To make your selves a very scorn,
Your King but Jack-a-Lent.
Now, now we see 'twas for the Crown
The Houses both did fight:
For since the Cavaliers are down,
They put the King to flight.
The Adjutators stern and proud,
Said, He should have no Quarter,
Because he is a King; and vowed
To make the Saint a Martyr.
Their Officers cried, Hail, O King;
The rest made mocks and scorns;
The Houses vinegar did bring;
And all did plat the thorns.
Thus crucified, Great CHARLES did live
As dead, is gone away:
For Resurrection, GOD will give
A new Cor'nation day.
Rouse up! King Charles has mist the snare
Laid for his Royal Feet:
Let the Adjutators now take care
Each for his Winding Sheet.
The Army rendezvouzed are,
And do they know not what;
The Scots and they, are like to jan:
Let us thank GOD for that.
The Houses know not what to think;
The Ci^'s horn-madded be:
They must be whipped until they stink:
A joyful sight to see!
Thus Cavaliers cast up your Caps,
And tell the Rebels plain,
That Charles, in spite of all their traps,
Shall shortly rule again.
For Liberty, and Privilege,
Religion, and the King,
We fought; But, O! the Golden Wedge!
That is the only Thing.
There lies the Cream of all the Cause;
Religion is but Whig;
Pure Privilege eats up the Laws,
And cries, For Kings a Fig.
The Houses may a Christmas keep,
The Countrymen a Lent,
The Citizens (like silly sheep)
Must fast, and be content.
Then where is Liberty, (I pray)
With Justice, Truth and Right?
Sure they and Conscience fled away
With Charles, to the Isle of Wight.
Gape, gape for Peace, poor Countrymen;
The Members mean to treat:
And we shall see fair play again,
When they no more can cheat.
The King shall come to Westminster,
It may be to his Grave,
Or of a glorious Prince must there
Be made a Royal Slave.
But 'twere more wise to let him reign
Out of his Peoples sight,
For fear he should bring Peace again,
And put them in a fright.
Sure Martin lay in of a Clap,
And Say himself did dote;
The Devil too, wore a sick Cap,
When the Houses past this Vote.
Come let us live, and laugh away
The follies of this age;
Treason breeds care; we'll sing and play
Like birds within a cage.
Fetters are the only favors now
The Houses give (we see)
And since the King them wears, I vow,
'Twere baseness to be free.
Then let us all our sorrows drown
In Sack and merry Glee:
Ye Citizens of London-town,
What jolly Slaves are we!
For Common Prayer, ye have Excise,
Free Quarter too is coming
To pay you for your Mutinies,
Feasts, Covenants, and Drumming.
No Puritan, no Popish Priest,
Nor Prot'stant now shall be;
Nor Law, but to live as we list,
It Is Heaven thus to be free.
Could Babylons great King now sit
In Counsel with our Nation,
He were the only man to sit
Us with a Reformation.
The glorious Golden-Idol then
Might shine in each Dominion;
Both Factions and their Brethren
Would soon be one-opinion.
Away, thou Pagan-Cavalier,
This God must not be thine;
But for the Saints at Westminster,
Whose souls are more divine.
Live, drink, and laugh, our Worthies may,
And kindly take their fills;
The Sub^ects must their reckonings pay,
The King must pass their Bills.
No Princes now, but they; the Crown
Is vanished with our Quiet;
Nor will they let us use our own
Devotions and Diet.
All Plums the Prophets sons desie,
And Spice-broths are too hot;
Treason's in a December-Pye,
And Death within the Pot.
Christmas, farewell; thy day (I fear)
And merry-days are done:
So they may keep Feasts all the year,
Our Savior shall have none.
O happy Nation heretofore,
When Seas our Walls have been!
Unhappy now we see no shore,
But are all Sea within.
Factions, like Billows, rage and toss,
And Death mounts every Wave;
Yet in this Storm we are so cross,
We will no Pilot have.
Just such a Tempest seized upon
Blessed Paul, the Scripture says,
When he had seen no Sun nor Moon,
Nor Stars for many days.
Our Sun and Moon no beams create,
Our Stars dispersed we see:
Such as was his, will be our Fate,
We must all shipwrackt be.
A glorious Prince this Parliament
The King should be, did swear;
But now we understand they meant
In Heaven, and not here.
Let them invade the Throne, and part
His Crown, and vote his Fate;
Yet know, in each true Noble Heart,
He keeps his Chair of State.
Princes may be, like other men,
Imprisoned, and kept under
A while, as fire in clouds, but then
At length appear in Thunder.
And, as in hidden Caves the wind
Sad tremblings does create;
So Monarchs, by their own confined,
Cause Earthquakes in the State.
Farewell the Glory of our Land;
For, now the Freeborn Blades
Our Lives and our Estates command,
And ride us all like Jades.
Faith and Religion bleeding lie,
And Liberty grows faint:
No Gospel, but pure Treachery,
And Treason make the Saint.
Oh! it is a heavenly Cause (I trow)
Which first baptized the Roundhead
In Noble Stafford's Blood! but now
Must on the Kings be founded.
Yet know, that Kings are Gods on earth;
And those which pull them down,
Shall find it is no less then Death
To tamper with a Crown.
It Is true, as Harry Martin said,
The Scots away must pack;
The Covenant shall a side be laid,
Like an Old Almanac.
Come then, and buy my New, true, New,
New Almanac most true,
Such Accidents of State to show,
The like no Age ere knew.
Since that we lost our King and Laws,
Since Jealousies and Fears,
Since Peace, pure Truth, and this Poul Cause,
It is full seven years.
Poor Charles pursued in Forty one,
Unking'd in Forty seven;
The Eighth will place him on his Throne,
In Earth, or else in Heaven.
Three Kingdoms brought to a fine pass,
Whilst that our Saviors Rule,
The Country is become an Ass,
The City but a Mule.
Each University now pines,
The Church may hang and rot;
They banish all our true Divines,
The Lawyers too must trot.
Come, Sirs, more Sacks unto the Mill,
More Taxes, more Free Quarter;
It Is fit our Laws be your bare Will,
And the Excise our Charter.
Godspeed the Plough: plague Rooks and Crows,
And send us years more cheap:
For, I am sure, whoever sows,
The Houses mean to reap.
Money, the Soul of Man and Wit,
But yet no Saint of mine!
While the Houses vote, and Synod sit,
Thou never shall want a Shrine.
Reforming is a dull Device,
Dreads naught but strife and rage:
Thou putt'st us into Paradise,
And bring'st the Golden Age.
Thou art Religion, God, and all
That we may call Divine:
Thy Temple is Westminster Hall,
And all our Priests are thine.
Tush, tell not us the way to Heav'a,
Thou juggling Clergy-Elf,
That sett' if the world at six and sev'n;
Money is Heaven it self.
Betwixt those Atheists feigned of old,
And ours, there is no odds;
For, both this one opinion hold,
That Fear did first make Gods.
Hell now is thought an idle Dream
To fright men from their Crimes:
Religion but a crafty Theme,
Made to Bugbear the Times.
The Bible and great Babels Whore,
May both together burn;
For the Religious Fit is over
Now they have served their turn.
Only, one Text may escape their hands,
Since they have taken such pains,
To lay their Lords in Iron Bands,
And bind their Kings in Chains.
Copernicus, thy learned skill
We praise, since we have found
The truth; for now does Heaven stand still
Whilst that the Earth runs round.
See how the Wheel of Providence
Back Old Confusion brings!
Cashires us once more of a Prince,
To plague's with Petty Kings.
They say the Saints all rule must take,
And others must have none:
Their Privilege it is to make
A Footstool of the Throne.
The Laws of the Land say, Charles must reign,
And Conscience pleads his Cause:
But Conscience is a thing most vain,
Their Gospel eats up Laws.
Never such Rebels have been seen,
As since we led this Dance:
So we may feast, let Prince and Queen
Beg a-la-mode-de-France.
Let Conscience pine, and cry it is strange,
We'll say it is bravely done,
To make the King take in Exchange
A Dungeon for a Throne.
Away with Justice, Laws and Fear;
When men resolve to rise,
Brave Souls must scorn all Scruples where
A Kingdom is the Prize.
Then let us what our Labors gain,
Enjoy, and bless our Chance:
Like Kings let us domineer and reign
Thus, a-la-mode-de-France.
King and no King, was once a Play,
Or Fable on the Stage:
But see! it is become this day
The Moral of our Age.
Newcastle was the first best Scoene,
Then Holmby, Hampton Court;
Next, from a Palace to a Den
Translated, to make sport.
Each State-Buffoon a part did take;
Some played the Fool, some Knave;
But still the Plot was laid to make
Their King a Royal Slave.
Brave Actors! we admire your skill;
Your Play none understands;
Yet make an Exit when you will,
We all shall clap our hands.
At Westminster two wondrous Beasts
This day are to be seen, March. 14. 1648.

Called Liberty and Privilege,
(GOD save the King and Queen.)
Say, Monsters strange, what kin are ye
To Tigers or the Lion?
For shame boast not your Pedigree
From the sweet Sons of Zion.
This Liberty first whelpt the Cause;
The Cause then lay at lurch,
To gull the City, damn the Laws,
And quite cashire the Church.
But Privilege (O monstrous Thing!)
Eats up poor Cavaliers,
Feeds on the Gentry and the King;
But next have at the Peers.
Once more the Kingdom lies at Stake,
No matter then who wins;
Two Schismatics the Wagers make,
And now the Game begins.
The Scots and Sects, two godly Cheats,
Debar both Ace and Sice:
To rook each other with fine Feats,
They both bring in false Dice.
The first throws for the Covenant,
Next who shall rule and sway:
For Jocky now does swear and rant,
He Will have no more foul play.
The Sectaries cried, Have at all,
When first the Dice were thrown;
But rather then the Scots shall brawle,
They Will part stakes in the Crown.
The Devils reign is short, though fierce;
Then let our Music sound;
The Drawers all the Hogsheads pierce,
And make the Healths go round.
Here Is a Health to the King in Sack,
To the Houses in Small-Beer;
In Vinegar to the crabbed Pack
Of Priests at Westminster.
Next, to revive our fainting States,
Fill out some Aqua vitae:
'Twere pity on the Bridge such Pates
Should meet in a Committee.
Let Us water the Royal Plants with Tears
Of rich, divine Canary:
Drink on, Cav'liers, t'all Loyal Peers;
Then end with Charles and Mary.
Full forty thousand Scots, by Vote,
Must visit us ere long:
Brave Army sure! when every Scot
Is forty thousand strong!
Though the Houses have deserved these plagues,
GOD keep our Nation free:
Like Egypt, let not us, by Rags
And Vermin conquered be.
For shame, for shame, call home your King,
With Honor let him treat:
His Nature is without a sting;
His Motto, To forget.
Return, return, Disloyal Crew
Of men forsworn: if not,
Rather then thus we'll stoop to you,
We'll Idolize the Scot.
Come, Mahomet, thy Turn is next;
Now Gospel's out of date:
The Alcoran may prove Good Text
In our new Turkish-State.
Thou do unto thy Priests allow
The sin of full four Wives:
Ours scarce will be content with now
Five Livings, and nine Lives.
Thy Saints and ours are all alike;
Their Virtues flow from Vice:
No Bliss they do believe, and seek
But an Earthly Paradise.
A Heaven on Earth they hope to gain,
But we do know full well,
Could they their glorious ends attain,
This Kingdom must be Hell.
From Prison now return the King,
The Queen and Prince from France;
For Cosen Charles the Welsh-men sing,
And stoutly lead the Dance.
The Scotch-Bag-Pipes, the Pulpit-Drums,
And Priests sound high and big:
Once more the Cause and Covenant comes
To shows a Scottish Jig.
The Irish will a Voyage take,
To jon their force in one;
And whilst they frisk a Galliard, make
The Houses sing, O Hone.
Three Kingdoms thus must dance the Hay;
But ere the Members run,
We'll see they shall the Music pay,
And then the Dance is done.
Seven years by phrentick Votes and Fits,
Our Worthies bore command;
Then did they run out of their Wits,
But now out of the Land.
No more shall they the City ride
Like a fine Golden Ass;
The Navy's rigged with Wind and Tide,
They stay but for a Pass.
But if they linger long behind,
And keep their King in Bands,
I Will undertake it shall be signed
By a hundred thousand Hands.
For prosperous Gales then on the Deep;
Let their Priests prate and pray
By Order, and at Margarets keep
An Humiliation-day.
The Factions now each other rout
With Jealousies and Fear:
The Independents face about,
The rest cry, As you were.
The Presbyters put forth their Horns
To guard their Goods and Homes;
The She-Militia likewise scorns
Their Cocks should loose their Combs.
Then toll (I pray) the Passing Bell
For our new State-Committee:
These monstrous Votes, which made them swell,
Are cowed down by the City.
Sweet John-a-Nokes and John-a-Styles,
And worshipful Jack-Straws,
Of both the Junto's, leave your Wiles,
And give's our King and Laws.
Betwixt two thieves our Savior once
Suffered for us, and di'd:
So 'twixt two thievish Factions
Our King is crucified.
Caesar, not Christ, the ancient Jews
Paid tribute of their Treasure;
Our Jews no King but Christ will choose,
And rob, and cry down Caesar.
Now, for the King the zealous Kirk
Against the Independent bleats,
Whenas (alas!) their only wirk
Is to renew old Cheats.
If they can sit, vote what they list,
And crush the new States down,
Then up go They, but neither Christ
Nor King, shall have his own.
The Pox, the Plague, and each Disease,
Are cured, though they invade us:
But never look for Health and Peace,
If once Presbyt'ry jade us.
When every Priest becomes a Pope,
Then Tinkers and Sow-gelders
May, if they can but 'scape the Rope,
Be Princes and Lay Elders.
If once the Kirk-men pitch their Tents
With our Assembly-Asses,
Synods will eat up Parliaments,
Courts be devoured by Classes.
Look to 't, ye Gentry, else, be Slaves
To Slaves that cannot abide ye:
Though ye have been cowed down by Knaves,
Oh! let not Fools now ride ye.
But sev'n years of a thousand ('it is)
Our Saints must Rulers be:
So they shall loose in years of bliss,
Nine hundred ninety three.
No more then let those Rabbis trust
Unto the Revelation;
For their Interpreter is Lust,
And Pride makes Application.
Religion but a Pack-horse is,
To carry on Designs;
The Bible like a Jugglers Box,
Used by our State-Divines.
Texts are tormented one by one,
Like Votes, now here, now there:
Thus Hocus-Pocus is outdone
By them at Westminster.
The Banes are asked, the Marriage next
Goes forward in the City:
For now the Match is made betwixt
Them and the State-Committee.
Thou Strumpet (London) tell not us
Of Babel any more;
If from thy King thou partest thus,
Thou art the greater Whore.
Thy Bags their Portion now are meant,
As well as Crown and Church;
But when that all is gone and spent,
They Will leave thee in the lurch.
Thou Bawd of Treason, then for all
Thy cursed Fornication,
Thou and thy Priestly Panders shall
Be Carted through the Nation.
The Market's made; the King shall treat,
(They say) and buy his own:
But is not this a very Cheat
To set the price, a Crown?
Alas! the Members run by rote,
And show us many a Feat:
Thus all the year they will vote, unvote,
For Money, Clothes and Meat.
It Is fit that they uphold their Trades,
What ere Malignants speak:
So they can thrive, the City-Jades
Their Backs and Necks may break.
Poor, What do you lack? small gains can show,
With many an empty Shelf:
The House spoils Shops; it is Aye and No,
That brings in all the Pelf.
Rebellion makes our Nation bleed
With fresh Alarms (we see:)
But yet it is not well agreed
Who must the Rebel be.
The Roundhead first the Rebel was,
(If truth be in the Laws)
Till Treason did for Gospel pass,
To bolster up the Cause.
The thriving Cause with high disdain,
In Fortunes full Career,
Throws Rebel in the face again
Of King and Cavalier.
Thus Prosperous mischief makes it good
Against all Law and Reason:
Not to spill Royal, Loyal Blood,
But, to be conquer'd's Treason.
Five months ago, June 20. 1648.
our mighty States
Were pleased to vote No King;
But two months since, to act new Cheats,
Their Votes the Changes ring.
It Is time the Bells of Westminster
Chime Backwards, and retire
To quench the Flame, whenas we heat
The Kingdom's all on fire.
But yet (it seems) they make a stand,
And cry it is no matter:
What need they care for Fire on Land,
Whose Journey lies by Water?
GOD send them Ships, fair Winds and Tide,
With Passage quick and good;
Or else I fear (to scourge our pride)
They Will swim through Seas of Blood.
The Holy War goes on apace,
Yet brings the Saints no Pay:
In triumph now they never say Grace,
But only Fast and Pray.
They many an hungry Conquest get,
But no Thanksgiving Dinners:
The City knows they scorn to eat
With Publicans and Sinners.
The Members cannot spare one Meal;
Their Bags lie sealed in Town:
What though they broke the Kings great Seal,
They Will not undo their own?
The Country bids them starve, or hang,
They Will be no more kept under:
The Cavaliers will soundly bang
Them all, and spoil their Plunder.
Reformation, thou Stalking-Horse
Of our Hip-shotten State,
The Appendix of the Public Purse,
And Midwife of our Fate!
'Twas Thou, and Beldame-Conscience first,
That set the world a madding;
And you your selves, like Cain accursed,
Have ever since been gadding.
Pox take the unlucky Cause, for me,
It is a wild Vagary;
The Bane of Boon society;
For that first raised Canary.
Poor Sinners now must snap a crust;
Ye deadly sev'n, farewell:
For since you are all Excis'd, we must
Pay dear to purchase Hell.
What, though the Factions are agreed
The Kingdom still to cheat?
Do what they can, it is decreed
The King shall come and treat.
Come from the Dungeon to the Throne,
(Great Charles) and quell the rage
Of the Iron world; with Thee alone
Revives the Golden Age.
Those very Saints, which joy'd thy Fall,
And said thy day was done,
Will now like Persian-Pagans, all
Adore the Rising-Sun.
No more wrapped up in Clouds remain,
Secluded from the Nation:
May Thou and Thine shine bright, and reig^
A Glorious Constellation.
It is decreed (Great Prince) thy Fate
Shall check their damned Plots;
Though London jade it for the State,
And bandies at the Scots.
The Presbyters now fain would ride,
And show us to other Feat;
Therefore to quell the Saints high pride,
They say the King shall treat.
Were he in their hands, the Town's their own,
The Houses too must work,
To vote the Independents down,
And mount the Rascal Kirk.
Away, ye juggling, palty Crew
Of well-affected Knaves;
Rather then free your Sovereign, you
Your selves will live like Slaves.
Stand to 't, ye Lords, we'll stand to you,
And clip the Commons wings:
Let not the Lev'ling Rascal-Crew,
Thus domineer like Kings.
The Lower is the Upper-House,
And has been so seven years:
Your Votes they value not a Lowse,
Ye Antichristian Peers.
They give you many a Rattling Peal,
And bait you one by one;
For should a Treaty take, their Zeal
And Saintships are undone.
My Lords, of Gotam, not of Greece,
Your wisdoms I shall sing;
And sell you all for pence apiece,
If you reject your King.
No Camel like the London breed,
To drudge, pray, pay, and feast;
In Body, and in Purse to bleed:
O it is a patient Beast!
If you will needs pray, pray stay at home;
Tell GOD your sad condition:
It Is Popish to the Saints to come
And put up your Petition.
This wondrous Idol of the States,
The Stomach has of Bell:
Like Moloch it Mankind does eat,
And quick devours like Hell.
As the Horse-Leech (Give) it ever cries,
And rages like the Dragon;
As the old Serpent it is wise.
But it must fall like Dagon.
Would you know why the Plague has ceas't
These last sev'n years now spent?
Because GOD knows no greater Pest
Than this same Parliament. 1648.

How many thousands has it swept
Of Bodies, Souls, and Gold!
King, Church, and People, (none except)
Have all been bought and sold:
Our merry Pipes, for Trumpets shrill;
Our Tabers changed to Drums:
Princes are braved by Jack and Gill,
Wat Tilers, and Tom Thums.
It Is time those Bags, which caused the War,
Should make the War to cease;
For the States Music is to jar,
But our best Musick's Peace.
Now shall the King enjoy his own;
And that new Virtue, Treason,
Whereby the Saints do claim the Crown,
Be baffled with high Reason.
Great Charles, thy Virtues I desire,
Not Solomon's, nor his Stores;
For who can tell most to admire
His Wisdom or his Whores?
His Vices so eclipsed his Grace,
That wranglers cannot tell,
Whether as yet they may him place
In Heaven, or in Hell.
But all that was in him Divine,
And more, to Thee is given;
That where so many Graces shine,
A Prison must be Heaven.
Another Blow! will not the Scot,
And Loyal English do?
Sure, Jove himself is of the Plot,
An Independent too.
Is he a King, and will he see
Rebels assault the Crown?
Had they but hands to reach, it is he
Should next resign his own.
Is he a God? and shall this Tribe
Go on as they begin?
Atheists will say, They do him bribe
For Privilege to sin.
If these be Saints, it is vain indeed
To think there is Good or Evil:
The world will soon be of this Creed,
No God, no King, no Devil.
Of all those Monsters which we read
In Africa, Inde, or Nile,
None like to those now lately bred.
Within this wretched Isle.
The Cannibal, the Tygre fell,
Croc'dile and Sycophant;
The Turk, the Jew, and Infidel,
Make up an English Saint.
By these were Lisle and Lucas crowned;
Two Worlds, both great and good:
For Men, Arts, Arms, were all nere drowned
IN the Deluge of their blood.
The Trump of Fame's too low and weak,
That of the General Doom
Is only fit their praise to speak,
The World to be their Tomb.
The Treaty holds; and some men are
Convinced the Wars will cease:
Fond Folk! To think the Men of War
Will ever endure a Peace.
Go, bid the Scot quit English Ground,
The Swede the German Air;
Holland obey the Spanish Crown,
The Pope leave Peter's Chair.
Woo the great Statesman to his Grave,
Preach Gospel to the Jews;
To Turks, that Mahomet's a Knave,
Platonic Love to Stews.
Let Citizens loath sacred things,
Presbyters pride and ease;
When these are done, make Saints love Kings,
And then we may have Peace.
See in what glory Charles now sits,
With Truth to conquer Treason;
And prove he is the King of Wits,
The World, Himself, and Reason.
Angels bear witness, GOD looks down,
The Graces too attend;
Sure, none but Devils then will frown
Upon a blessed end.
Ten hundred thousand Loyal Hearts,
All bleeding at his Fate;
As many Wishes from all parts
Fly round his Chair of State.
Come then, ye dirty, Sainted Elves,
Worse then Church-window paint:
By this fair Glass abhor your selves,
Learn here to be a Saint.
The King the four great Bills must pass,
And none but Saints be free:
The Irish and Cavaliers (alas!)
Must the only Rebels be.
New Lords, new Laws, new Saints are we;
Religion's in fine pickle,
When it is resolved the Church shall be
A three-years Conventicle.
Militia too, they needs must gain,
Those pretty carnal Tools:
For Paul's old Weapons they disdain,
As fit for none but Fools.
Thus Royally Charles lets to Lease,
Lays Sword and Scepter down,
To show he values Us and Peace
Above a glorious Crown.
Give me the Dragons Gall for Ink,
His sting to be my Pen,
To blast the Scot, and make him stink
Werse then the Dregs of men.
See now the Reformation-Wirk,
For which they made us bleed,
Is to cashire King, Church and Kirk,
On this and that side I weed.
Let them with Egypts plagues be crossed,
Yet still find new and worse;
And since I have Jobs patience lost,
Give me his skill to curse.
At Home and Hell may they ever dwell;
And for quick passage thither,
As they have juggled all full well,
So may they hang together.
Let me be Turk, or any thing
But a Scotch Calvinist:
First, he damned Bishops; next, his King;
Now he cashires his Christ.
Good faith, Sir, they the Pulpit bang,
But let their Gospel down;
For, the old Savior needs must gang
Now a new one's come to town.
The Saints, whom once their mouths did curse,
Dear Brethren are, and Friends:
Which proves their Zeal a Stalking-horse
For Knavish-godly ends.
Then rail no more at Antichrist,
But learn ye to be ^vil:
And since ye have King Cromwell kissed,
Shake hands too with the Devil.
Since they have damned all Saints of old,
No new shall be for me:
Like Jews, they worship Gods of Gold,
Their King they crucify.
Were he the King of Kings, his Crown
Could not be safe from Foes:
Like Jesuits, they no Gospel own,
But Murder and Depose.
Like Turks, their Heaven lies all in Sense,
In Wenches, Tarts and Gelly:
No Hell they fear, when parted hence;
They serve no God, but Belly.
All this, and more, (by Jove) is true,
If they the Treaty cease,
To juggle with the Lev'lling Crew
That cry, No King, No Peace.
No Lord, no Knight, no Gentleman,
For Honors now are Crimes:
The Saints will form us (if they can)
All to the Frim'^ive times.
Brave days, when Adam was a King
Without Crown, Lands, or Riches!
So, stripped of Royal Robes, they will bring
Great Charles to Fig-leave Breeches.
Princes with Plowmen rankt shall pass;
Ladies, like the first Woman,
Must spin, or else be turned to Grass,
Now all things are in common.
Thus Cov'nanting, and Levelling,
Three Kingdoms have overthrown,
And made all fellows with their King,
A Football of the Crown.
Tell me, thou Presbyterian Ass,
Why thou at first did jar:
Thy peevish Plea (No Bishops) was
The first ground of the War.
Next, to thy shame, thou did combine
With the Sectarian Routs;
Our Charles should be no King of thine,
Or but a King of Clouts.
Both King and Bishops thus exiled,
The Saints not yet content:
Now with fresh flames of Zeal grow wild,
And cry, No Parliament.
Well may we then this Maxim prove,
Treason no end can know,
But levels at the Gods above,
As well as those below.
Hark, how for Peace the Kingdom groans,
That warred they knew not why!
Yield then, or else the very stones
Will out against you cry.
For shame, ye Bastard-saints, give over,
Or else the world will think
Your Mother is great Babels Whore,
If blood you love to drink.
The State's grown fat with Orphans Tears,
Whilst Widows pine and moan;
And tender Conscience in sev'n years,
Is turned to a heart of stone.
Return, hard hearts, the Treaty ends,
Our breasts with Hope do swell;
Your Bags are full, then let us be friends,
Or bid the World Farewell.
No Gods above, nor Gods below,
Our Saints (I see) will own;
Allegiance is Rebellion now,
Treason to wear a Crown.
Nor King nor Parliament will please,
It Is Gospel to rebel:
Nay, they will Remonstrate against Peace,
Be it in Heaven or Hell.
Pluto, beware, (to thee they come
When here their work is done:)
For they will break loose, and beat up Drum,
And storm thee in thy Throne.
Then John-a-Leyden, Nol, and all
Their goblin ghostly Train,
(Brave Rebel-Saints triumphant) shall
Begin their second Reign.
Brave Reformation! now I see
London's a blessed place,
To find the Saints their Quarters free,
And nurse the Babes of grace.
Oh, may they suck, and drain them quite,
Whose thousands caused these Curses;
For the tame Slaves will never fight
Till they have empty Purses.
Come then, ye lousy wanton Wags
Of sainted Chevalry,
And free their poor condemned Bags
That groan for Liberty.
March on, boon Blades, here is store of Cash,
Their King they will not pity:
Then spur them on, and soundly lash
These Dull-men of the City.
Dull Cuckolds! we are dainty Slaves,
And well may be content,
When thirty Fools, and twenty Knaves,
Make up a Parliament.
They banish all men in their Wits,
Vote King, Lords, all Offenders;
And authorize the phrentick Fits
Of our long-sword State-Menders.
It Is Nol's own Brew House now, I swear;
The Speaker's but his Skinker:
Their Members are, like the Council of War,
Car-men, Pedlers, and Tinkers.
Fine Journey-Junto! pretty Knack!
None such in all past Ages!
Shut shop; for, now the godly Pack
Will next pay you your Wages.
Gone are those Golden Days of yore,
When Christmas was an High-day,
Whose sports we now shall see no more;
It Is turned into Good Friday.
Now, when the King of Kings was born,
And did salvation bring,
They strive to crucify in scorn
His Viceroy, and their King.
Since the ancient Feast they have put down,
No new one will suffice;
But the choice Dainties of a Crown,
Princes in sacrifice.
No Powers are safe, Treason's a Tilt,
And the mad Sainted-Elves
Boast when the Royal Blood is spilt,
They Will all be Kings themselves.
Like jolly Slaves, ye goodly Knaves,
We'll bid the old year Adieu:
Old Sack, and things must pass away,
And so shall all your new.
Now for a No-King, or a New;
For the old, they say, shall pack;
The new may serve a year to view
Like an old Almanac.
New Houses, new; for, the old ones dote,
And have been thrice made Plunder;
The Saints do vote, and act by rote,
And are a Nine-days-wonder.
Then let us cheer, this merry New-year;
For Charles shall wear the Crown:
It Is a damned Cause, that damns the Laws,
And turns all up-side down.
FINIS.

