The Great Accuser cast down; OR, A PUBLIC TRIAL OF Mr John Goodwin Of
Coleman-street, LONDON, At the BAR of RELIGION and RIGHT REASON.

IT BEING A full ANSWER to a certain Scandalous Book of his lately published,
Entitled, The Triers Tried and Cast, etc.

Whereupon being found Guilty of High Scandal and Malediction both against the
present Authority, and the Commissioners for Approbation and Ejection. He is
here sentenced and brought forth to the deserved Execution of the PRESS.

By Marchamont Nedham, Gent.

Prove. 11. An Hypocrite with his mouth destroys his Neighbor. Prove. 11. 24.
Proud and haughty Scorner is his name. Difficile est Satyram non scribere.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for George Sawbridge at the Bible on
Ludgate Hill. 1657.

TO His Most Serene Highness, OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR OF THE Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland etc.
SIR,
IT is a Custom in all Countries, when any man has taken a strange Creature,
immediately to present it to the Prince: Whereupon, I having taken one of the
strangest that (I think) any part of Your Highness Dominions has these many
years produced, do with all submissiveness make bold to present him bound hand
and foot with his own Cords (as I ought to bring him) to Your Highness. He need
not to be sent to the Tower for his mischievousness; there is no danger in him
now, nor like to be henceforth, as I have handled him; For, should he break
loose again (as who knows what wild Creatures may do!) and get abroad to infest
the Stationers, and infect your People, I that have found him out once, may
soon meet with him again to keep him in order. He seems to be a Leader of that
savage Herd, which would make the Prince or Magistrate but a Man of Straw, or
like a Wooden Head, or a Golden Neptune fixed over the Stern only for a show,
but not at all concerned in the steering of the Ship.

I in all humility crave Your Highness pardon for this Attempt, it being indeed
my Adversaries fault, whose example in making bold to trample upon Your good
Name and Authority, has taught me so much confidence, that I presume to set
Your great Name before this Book, and to offer you the trouble of perusing it,
at such a time, when the Affairs of Three Nations lie all before you. If it be
worth the reading at all, it is because the matter concerns you; It defends
your Authority, and vindicateth one of your best and most Christian Actions,
together with the Reputation of those Honorable and Reverend persons your
Commissioners from common prejudice, and from the foulest Imputations that the
mouth of Folly and Envy could breath out into the open air: and though this
poor Mite can add nothing to the Treasury of your Highness Princely Wisdom and
Knowledge; yet it will serve to call many things to your remembrance, much to
your Observation --

When I heard how industriously this Book of Mr. G. has been dispersed, and
how high a prejudice arose among the more undiscerning sort, by the fine words
of the Charmer, I thought this business to be my duty, and I have done it as I
could: Where the gravity of the matter merited it, I have observed a Style
accordingly serious; in all other places I have treated the man like himself;
not that I affect it, but because it was necessary, and the most proper way of
Return, for due correction, to intimate unto him, and his admirers, as well the
insolency of his Spirit, as the lightness and vanity of his pretended
Arguments. In the refuting of them, I have given him his own to the utmost,
allowing him fair play, by reciting some of them whole, the rest by parts in
their full strength and force, which is more than ever he yet gave to any
adversary in Print, it having been his manner upon the like occasion, to trifle
about the Outworks, but never fall upon the main Fort, nor take the least
notice where the strength indeed of an Argument lay.

If this Address prove unseasonable, I shall watch to redeem my Error by a more
eminent service, upon some happy Occasion, which certainly I cannot want,
seeing your Highness proceeds in the noblest paths of Christian Piety, to leave
Posterity an Example, what Great Things it is possible for man to do with a
virtuous mind in the height of Honor and Fortune. May you live long in this
State, with the favor of God, and good will among men, to the glory of the
most High, and the rejoicing of all the People under your Highness Protection:
So prays,

Your Highness's most humble faithful Subject, and Servant, MAR: NEDHAM.
July 8. 1657.
TO THE READER.
THough there were no other Reason, yet this alone I thought sufficient to
warrant me in the present Undertaking, and quicken me to my duty, That it was
necessary the overweening confidence of this turbulent man should be taken
down; and that by proposing him a Spectacle (as he is) to men of understanding,
he may not hereafter go forth (...) with such an ostentation of words, as
formerly he has done, to deceive the Nations. There are a sort of men that
love (as the Apostle says) to 2 Pet. 2. 18.
speak great swelling words of vanity; in which number if he be reckoned, I do
him no injury, but have the general consent of the Pious and Learned to
subscribe to the Censure, together with all his own Works to confirm it: And
therefore observing him to be a man of so elated a Supercilium, so audacious a
Front, that he has dared to assault even Authority it self, and in his pompous
way of Affectation with Strains of Oratory to vilify the most pious of their
Ordinances, and trample upon their entrusted Servants, I conceived, now the
Swelling is grown to this height, it would be an act of charity both to himself
and his Friends, for me to endeavor the Cure; in order whereunto, I make use
of no other Lancet but my Pen, that I may meet with him at his own weapon,
having sharpened it on purpose to prick the fiery Phlegmon, and let out the
Corruption: Which being done, there is hope the man may love the Peace of the
Church the better while he lives, and at length go to rest with his Fathers in
more peace than yet he is like to do.

Truly, 'twere high time for him to think of this in good earnest: And he would
make us believe he does so; For, in his Epistle he tells us, that being
stricken in years, and near his peri^d, he is by the high and dreadful
concernment of his dissolution approaching, importuned to do Feats while his
earthly Tabernacle is standing; and among other things, to give a Testimony
against the Commissioners for Approbation and Ejection: And in his Title Page
he sets himself out to be an Aged Minister. True; and if you look into his
Book, you will find it so, being arrived (I will not say to Dotage, but) as one
would think, to that Age of Senes bis Pueri, wherein Old men are twice Boys,
because he trifleth like any young Lad, priding himself all along from page to
page; Ludere par impar, equitare in arundine longa: his whole Work being but a
kind of Boys-play: Insomuch as I must profess, in dealing with his Arguments, I
was possessed with an equal Temperature of Indignation and Pity; Pity, to see
him, an ancient Minister of the Gospel, and one who a good while ago had a
reputation of being Conscientious, so plainly to prevaricate in point of
Conscience, to the reviling of Authority, and abuse of his Brethren, even while
he is (as it were) sounding the trumpet to his own final dissolution, or the
great day of Account: how little these things were in his thoughts when he
penned his Book, you are left to judge by his carriage, and this my Answer. On
the other side, my Indignation arose, to observe that a man, whose Writings
show him to be a Scholar, should yet write so unlike a Scholar as he has done,
observing neither Rule nor Mood in matter of Argument; but rambling through a
wilderness of Talsities, Tautologies, Slanders, Self-contradictions, and
malicious Declamations, instead of Reasons or Instances, to make proof of what
he pretends to, he loses himself, and leads the unwary Reader quite out of the
Road of Commons Sense and Honesty.

I would not willingly be tedious; but I must needs have you a little more
intimately acquainted with the Man and his Character. He is worse than a Common
Nuisance; for, he does not only stink, and annoy savoury Christians by his
rotten Opinions, but by plain Lies (pardon the expression) and Slanders,
endeavors to make others of all sorts as unsavory as himself. His Scribbling
Faculty is his disease, which he labors under continually, and happy it were
for him if it would turn to the Hand-gout. His Reason usually rides post with
pride or passion, and so is the more easily over-ridden by a vaporing
Phant'sie; this is it which gives Law to his Understanding, cuts out work for
all the other Faculties, makes his Pen a ready writer; and the Windmill in the
Brain keeps the Press always going as if it were his Handmill; for, rather than
it shall stand still, he travels through all Shops, like a Knight Errant, to
find out the Giants in Print, making Adversaries rather than want them, that he
may grind them to powder. Of a very Paper-worm, there never was a verier
Tyrant in the world: He has a Tool betwixt the Forefinger and Thumb, with
which he scrues all things to his purpose; he has made crooked things strait,
and strait things crooked at pleasure; killed all men of same with as little
remorse as Domitian didFlies; Dan. 5 9.
and Nebuchadnezzar like, those whom he would he slew, and whom he would he
kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put down. It has
been the wretched employment of these his latter days, and is still, to go
forth in the glory of this his strength, and either to take or make an occasion
to conflict with whatsoever persons or things he lights upon, especially if the
men be in any repute or acceptance above himself; Then it is he bends his Bow,
makes ready bitter Arrows, and feathers them at the Press, that he may take
them down a pin lower. There is not an Instance to be found in this Age of such
another Hector, a man so full of Quarrels and Contests with men of Conscience
and worth, as this Mr. G. not sparing even such as he himself owneth for such,
I mean the Commissioners for Approbation; (as you may see in his Epistle) and
tells the world before hand he esteems them such; yet (as if it were because
they are such, or at least because they are esteemed by others as such) he
lifts up his Pen with all his might against them.

'Twere pity such a Champion should lose the glory of his Achievements, and
therefore to do him right, I shall give you a short Story of his Duels, and his
other public Engagements, wherein I am to enlarge a little, and yet no more
than needs must. The single persons he has been in the Field with, i. e in
Print, as his Adversaries, and whom he used accordingly when he got them under
the Press, are these, Viz. Mr Gataker, Mr Walker, Mr Roborough, Dr Williams
Bishop of Ossory, Mr Pryn, Sir Francis Nethersole, Mr John Geree, Mr Herbert
Palmer, Dr Thomas Goodwin, Mr Resbury, Dr Hammond, Dr Burgess, Dr Hill, Mr
Jenkins, Mr Edwards, Mr Barlow, Mr A. Steward, (in particular Books printed)
besides several Members of his own Church that he has written against, and
diverse others: Thus you see what a notable Duellist he has been.

But this is not all; for, this Tenth Worthy has been so adventurous as to
engage also with whole Troops and Regiments, in the confidence of his own
personal and single valor; viz. The Parliament, the Assembly of Divines, the
Ministers of the Province of London, the Ministers of Sion-Colledge, those
Ministers that subscribed a Petition to the Lord Fairfax, part of the Company
of Stationers, the Assembly of Dort; and in this Treatise he challenges forth
the Commissioners for Approving, and those for Ejecting of Ministers, men of
the greatest Eminency and worth His Highness, with the Advice of his Council,
could pitch upon in and about the City, and in every Shire throughout the
Nation. Nay, he goes further yet, and ventureth hereupon to provoke his
Highness and Council in a most uncivil and unchristian manner, causing them to
undergo the Ordeal of his fiery flying Pamphlet, turning the edge of his Pen
against them, and shamefully reproaching them in the eyes of the People, as he
himself, in his Postscript to the Reader, acknowledges his words may bear such
a Construction, viz. as savouring of an undue liberty, and want of reverence to
those that are in Authority; yet instead of excusing the matter, he goes on in
the same Postscript, to justify and exalt himself above all Authority, and
undertakes to give several Reasons for it. As 1. Because the great men of the
Earth might he in danger, if he should not give them seasonable smitings. 2.
That these smitings are more the Reproofs of Jesus Christ than of man; by which
you see how he spares not even Christ himself, but endeavors to entitle him as
Patron of his lewd extravagancies against our Rulers. 3. Because Kings,
Princes, and Rulers, are liable to these Reproofs (or smitings) as well as
meaner men. 4. Because Reprovers (or Smiters) in the Name of Christ are not in
this to respect persons. 5. Lastly, Because the Author (viz. himself) stands
particularly and publicly engaged to this; for he boasts, he has formerly
defended their Authority, and therefore ought now to have a License to smite
them. Excellent good! He, in the pride of his heart, looks upon himself as the
man that is, and ought to be, exalted above all that is called God on earth,
being no less than the Pope or Christ's Vicar, in the Name of Christ to censure
the proceedings of Princes, and reprove or smite the Potentates, Rulers, and
great men of the Earth, they being in their Actions subject to his Judgment
and Correction, he being the man out of all the Tribes and Kindreds of the
People, separated and set apart (in his own conceit) for the exercise of this
Pontifical Authority over his Highness; as if he meant to usurp the Papal
Chair, and turn out Pope Alexander the seventh. And yet this is not all; for,
as if he meant also to be no less than Alexander the great, it was well
observed lately by a Gentleman in my hearing, that as King Alexander having
conquered the world, is said to have sighed because there were no more worlds
to conquer, so he having (in his own Opinion) triumphed over a world of Penmen,
and Powers, wanting work elsewhere, has now turned his Arms against a greater
(in his own eyes) than all these put together; even against his sacred self;
most shamefully contradicting himself in many places, and thereby has given
the world to understand what a Shuttle-cock this Mr Goodwin is, who has so set
out himself with his own Pen, and in Print too, that the Nation may know he
cares not to have his wit, and reason, and honesty, and all obscured together,
rather then his sparkling Phantsie should not shine in its brightness.

And these things he has done, not in Anonymous small Kites and Pamphlets, but
in grave and (as he thinks) goodly Treatises, which he has set his name to in
Capital Letters; and out of which I shall give you three or four Instances of
the Combats he has had with himself, upon the open Stage.

One while you have him for the King; as in that Book of his, called
Anticavalierism, page 10, 11. where you may read this following Passage.

As for offering violence to the person of a King, or attempting to take away
his life, we leave the proof of the lawfulness of this to those profound
disputers the Jesuits, who stand engaged by the tenure of their professed
Doctrine and Practice, either to make good the lawfulnes thereof, or else to
leave themselves and their Religion and abhorring and hissing to the world. As
for us who never traveled with desires or thoughts that way, but abhor both
Mother and Daughter, Doctrine and Practice together, we conceive it to be the
just Prerogative of the persons of Kings, in what case soever, to be secure
from the violence of men, and their lives to be as consecrated Corn, meet to be
reaped and gathered only by the hand of God himself. David's Conscience smote
him, when he came but so near the life of a King, as the cutting off of the lap
of his Garment.

Not long after, contrary to all this, he wrote that Book entitled, A Defense
of the Honorable Sentence passed upon the late King by the High Court of
Justice. In the 73 Page whereof, writing against such as would not have had the
King put to death, he advises them to retract that Inhumane Tenet of exempting
Kings from Punishment, whereby they encourage Kings to turn Tyrants, commit
murders, and all abominations; that Tenet of theirs ( says he) I mean,
wherein they deny unto Kings the help of that Bridle for the ruling of their
lusts (more needful for them than for any other sort of men) the fear of death
by the Sword of Civil Justice upon any occasion whatsoever.

At the latter end of the same Book he concludes thus:

The late wars, wherein the King, by the sword of those men of blood who cast
in their lot with him, shed so much innocent blood in the land, being
causelessly (and contrary to the frequent obtestations, earnest solicitations,
grave advisements of his Great Council the Parliament) commenced by himself,
are so far from mediating on his behalf for the bloodshed, that they open the
mouth of it the wider, and cause it to cry so much the louder for vengeance
upon Him and His, both unto God and men.

Sic idem jungat vulpes, and mulgeat hircos. A second Instance may be taken out
of a certain Letter of his written to T. G. against Independencie, which was
printed Anno 1643. condemning Separate Congregations, ( so he terms them in his
Preface.) I am ( says he) as confident as Confidence it self can make me, that
their way of a Covenant is a mere humane Invention, and a strain of that wisdom
that desires to exalt it self, not only against men, but against God himself,
p. 1.

And p. 10. ( says he) If you have the Truth with you, woe to my Wits, Reason
and Understanding; never poor man so strangely misused by such Friends in this
world.

Again, p. 13. he has these words, I do profess in the sight of God, and in as
great singleness and simplicity of heart as ever man in this world spoke word
unto you, that I do as clearly apprehend Error and Mistake throughout the
greatest part of your way (that is, Independencie) as I do truth in this
Conclusion, That twice Two makes Four. A lusty Confidence indeed! Yet
notwithstanding, now his twice Two does not make Four: For, within a few
months after, he changed his Judgment from the Presbyterian way wherein he
then stood, and professed himself for this way which he had so confidently
decried, and took up the practice of it, gathered a Separate Church in Coleman
street, and wrote diverse Books in defense of this way, and with as much
confidence as before, as may be seen in his Books against A. Steward, Mr.
Edwards, and other Presbyterians.

A Third Instance, and which is most pertinent to our purpose, is in reference
to these two Commissions which he flies out against with so much fury, the one
for Approving, and the other for Ejecting, and which he in this Pamphlet of
his, makes the abhorring of his soul, and is angry with his Governers about
them, and tells us he ought to be angry and to smite them with as much shame
and reproach before the World, as his Pen is able to load upon them.
Nevertheless, both these Commissions are no other, not only for substance, but
also in each material circumstance, then what was laid down in certain
Proposals for propagation of the Gospel, and there distinctly commended one
after the other, to a Committee of Parliament appointed to receive such
Proposals, Febr. 8. 1651. as may be seen in Mr Scobels Office in these Words;

We whose Names are subscribed, do, with others, humbly desire, that these
Proposals be presented to the Honorable Parliament, etc. To all which Mr. John
Goodwins own self, and Mr John Price one of the Elders of his Church, together
with diverse others, then subscribed: And yet the Tenor of his present Book is
against the Magistrate for granting such Commissions, as having (in his
opinion) nothing to do with propagating the Gospel; and extreme severe he is in
his language against the Commissioners, though the purport of their Commissions
to be act according to such Instructions as Mr G. then approved under his hand.

To these give me leave to add a fourth Instance, and I have done, it being
such a one as has many Instances in the belly of it. First, in his Epistle,
you have him giving the Commissioners what indeed is their due, declaring*
himself concerning them in these Words, [ I believe them to be men of
Conscience, and worth, fearing God, and lovers of Truth] Now let us take these
Particulars in pieces, and see how he agrees with himself in his Book.

1. Lovers of Truth. And yet p. 9. he intimates a bloody dominion exercised by
them over men for holding the Truth, and says a little after, That they make
the simple owning and professing of the great and important Truths of God a Bar
against Preferment, p 12. He calls them Heterodox, insinuating, as if they held
Errors against their inward conviction of the contrary, p 17. he makes them
Counter-workers against God in the work of sending out Laborers to preach the
Truth, p 20. he says, That what the Names of some of the Commission of Triers
presaged they have effected, reducing the said Commission, in the execution of
it, to a near affinity with the Spanish Inquisition, which accuses the Romish
Religion of cruelty and blood, and so of a pregnant fiery Antipathy to the
Genius and Spirit of the Gospel, p 21. That they are such as grind the faces,
and break the bones of men of signal peity and worth, who know more of God and
his Gospel than themselves; whom he calls a little after, men of an erroneous
and mis grounded Faith, that use men so, because they will not comply with them
in Error. p 15. That their judgments are erroneous and destructive to the
precious souls of men; yet these are the men whom ere now he styled lovers of
truth.

2. Men of Conscience. Nevertheless, p 3. he tells them of famishing men with
their wives and children, only because they will not profess a belief
contrary to their Consciences. p 6. he says, They entrench upon the Spiritual
Rights and Privileges of the people of God, keep asunder those whom God would
have joined together, and reject men that are worthy. p. 7. That they quarrel
men presented, and are not overtender of the practice, whether there be any
Christian or reasonable cause for their acting so or no. Such as by their power
and subtilty bring about their own ends, and receive the tribute of thanks, if
not baser Metal, from those who are preferred. p 8. That they are worse in
their power and proceedings than the Bishops. Never such a rule-lesse,
law-less, controul-lesse generation of men in this Nation. p 9. Such as spread
Snares and Temptations in the way of men's Consciences. Page 10. A generation of
men that spread snares of death, and lay stumbling blocks in their Brethrens
way. And Page 16. That use their power to the wringing and straining of men's
Consciences. Yet these are the men whom he before owned as men of Conscience.

3. Men of worth. For all this page 5. he calls them an inconsiderable number
of men. Page 6. Such as disgracefully reject men, though never so worthy. Page
7. Such as use indirect practices for ends and self-advantage. That Thieves and
Murderers may as soon (or sooner) purchase the Seal of their Approbation to
any Benefice, as some others, though never so signally qualified for the
Ministry. P. 15. That they use their power to revenge themselves upon their
enemies. P. 16. That the day would fail him to insist upon all their erroneous
and irregular deportments. P. 22. That they were not conscious of any
usefulness in themselves for the service either of God or man. That they are
but like the Bramble in Jotham 's Parable, mere Brambles in power* Insinuating
also, that they are men of unchristian principles of immodest and dis-ingenuous
Spirits. Page 23. Men of unhandsome and unhallowed doings in their way, such as
grant Pass-ports to the firstborn of undeserving men, but deny them to the
deserving. Page 28. English Inquisitors, surnamed Tryers. Page 25. Who respect
the vile many times more than the precious. Yet these are the men whom
professingly he said he believed to be men of Worth.

4. Men fearing God. Yet Page 2 and 3. Men who are Lords and Masters over other
men's Faith and Consciences. Page 9. Men that exercise a bloody dominion over
them, because of their consciences. Men that frequently practice an unchristian
demeanor. Page 11. Men who reject such as God and Christ do recommend unto
them. Page 15. Such as are Papal in their power, principles, usurpations,
practices and spirits. Treacherous and disloyal. Makers and Maintainers of
Parties and Factions to multiply disciples to themselves, and revenge
themselves upon their Enemies. Page 17. Such who thrust forth Loiterers into
the Lords Vineyard. Pa. 22. Men who have consumed and undone persons of eminent
growth in all Christian worth and excellency, and are like to devour more. And
that they sell their brethren to poverty and misery. Page 23. Premoters of a
Faction, and that it was none otherwise from the very beginning, but that they
would steer that crooked Course which they have steered. Page 27. Men of
politic reaches, and subtle contrivances, for the bringing about secular
Projects, or by ends* Page 29. Such as can persecute the innocent and harmless
with a good conscience. Page 20, and 21. Brethren in Iniquity, Grinders of men;
men of ignorance and ambition, imbasing other men's Consciences. Yet these very
men whom in his virulent humor he thus stigmatizeth in the Book, he in his
Epistle (before the Fit of passionate Phantsie was up) seating himself (as it
were) under the shadow of death, before the great Tribunal, durst not do
otherwise, while a Fit of Conscience was upon him, but give them their due
Character, Men of Conscience, and worth, fearing God, Lovers of Truth. Pray see
now how the man and his humor and these things suit together!

Quam been convenient, and in una sede morentur!
O Corydon, Corydon, quae te dementia cepit?
What ails the man, that he should be thus possessed with an Evil Spirit of
Self-contradiction! So much for the Commissioners, though it be not one half of
the Filth that he vomited up against them. Now --

Secondly, as in his Epistle* he speaks honor of the Commissioners; so there
also he professes all Christian Loyalty, and entireness of his Respects toward
the Persons by whose Authority the said Commissions have issued, and been
established. And yet before he has done that very Epistle, he cannot forbear
slily intimating, that their two Ordinances (which he otherwhere calls
Commissions) are Apocrythal Statutes or Decrees to vex the Consciences of good
men in the Nation. And to the end he may handle them roundly with Authority, he
in his Postscript to the Reader, next after his Epistle, tells them in effect
(as I have already shown you) that he has a Commission from Christ to smite
them for their mis doings; which out of his great respect to them, he executes
in his Book to some purpose against them. As you may read Page 1. telling the
Civil Powers, they have put a great Indignity and Affront upon Jesus Christ by
issuing out the said Commissions or Ordinances. Page 2. That thereby they have
given the Commissioners an exorbitant power to exercise dominion over the Faith
and Consciences of other men. Page 3. That they connive at the Commissioners.
Page 4. That they are devisers of new Strategems, Methods and Inventions to aid
the Gospel. Page 5. That the two Commissions are Counter workers against the
Orders and Directions left by Christ. Page 6. That the Commissions entrench
upon the Spiritual Rights and Privileges of Gods People. And that they strike
(in effect) at the Civil Rights of many Bodies of People, and particular
persons likewise in the Land. Page 8. That our Governors have, in appointing
the Commissioners, set up a lawless generation of men over the Lords People;
and that there never was the like unsufferable yoke of slavery fastened about
the necks of the freeborn people here, as the power given to these
Commissioners. That they have therein done contrary both to Civil policy, and
Christian piety. Also p. 11. contrary to Christian policy; and that when they
were to choose persons to be Commissioners, they entrusted such as (for the far
greater part of them) are, and were, by a true and solid estimate of them (in
respect of their Spirits, Principles, and Tenets) like to reject and disallow
such men, whom Christ should recommend to them for Approbation. p. 14. That our
Governors have erected the Triers with power as superlative, and of the same
house and lineage with the Papal. And that they being the Founders, do underhand
indulge and connive at the Commissioners exorbitant proceedings. p. 17. That
they have an itching desire to be officious unto Christ; insinuating withal,
that they, like other professing Powers of the world, obtrude upon him their
own projections to help him through the world, etc. p. 19. That they have
invested the Commissioners with power to mould and form the Judgments and
Consciences of Fellow Subjects in matters of Faith. p. 20. That They connive at
the Commissioners, when they sell their Brethren. p. 20, and 21. That They
erected a Consistory as bad as the Spanish Inquisition. And I know not what
more: But I am weary, and so I suppose is the Reader by this time, to see a man
so shamefully contradict himself over and over, especially if you compare his
pretense of fair demeanor toward Authority, with the language that he
afterward bestows upon them as well as their Commissioners.

So that in conclusion, here now you have J. Goodwin against J. Goodwin.
proving himself to be of the same spirit with Jannes and his brother Jambres,
defying that Authority in the foulest manner, to which he but a little before
professes all Christian loyalty. A wise man he is without question, and
stronger than a whole City, because having first conquered or confuted all the
World with the help of a Printing-Press, the compleatest Conquest of all is
this last, whereby he has confuted himself. So I commit him to the Press, in
part of punishment, that he may know himself mortal, and from thence to his
windingsheet; Earth to Earth, Ashes to Ashes. Peace be to all the Church.
Farewell.

J. G.

However (Sir) take these Latin Epigrams along with you, for your own
Application, and the Instruction of your Friends in English, before you leave
them.
Mar. lib. 2. Epigr. 7. Nil been cum facias, facis attamen omnia belle;
Vis dicam, quid sis? magnus es Ardelie.
Lib. 4. Ep. 79. in Afrum. Condita cum tibi sit jam sexagesima Messis,
Et facies multo splendeat alba pilo,
Discurris tota vagus urbe. --
Haec faciant sane Juvenes; deformius, Afer,
Omnino nihil est Ardelione Seen.
Lib. 5. Ep. 81. in Mathonem. Declamas in Febre, Mathon; have esse Phrenefim
Si nescis, non es sanus. amice Mathon.
Declamas aeger, declamas Hemitritaeus;
Si sudare aliter non potes, est ratio.
Magna tamen res est; errans cu viscera Febris
Exurit, res est magna tacere, Mathon.
THE CONTENTS.
Mr GOodwin's Character and Temper is to be found in the Epistle, with an
Account of all his Duels and combats. Christ left no such Rules and Directions
(nor was it his intent to leave such) for propagating the Gospel, as exclude
the Magistrate from using his wisdom and endeavor in order thereunto. Pages 5.
6. Nor did his Apostles. p. 7. 8. 9. 10. The Sum and Substance of the two
Ordinances for Approbation and Ejection. p. 11. 12. 13. 14. The Commissioners
are no Ecclesiastical Authority, no Power in or over the Church, but a Civil
Constitution; nor are the Ordinances any other than mere Civil Acts. p. 15. 16.
17. 18. 19. 48. Approbation in use in the Apostles time. p. 22. 55. It is no
exercising a Dominion over men's Faith. p. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 59. 60. 93. 115.
A Course for Approbation settled of old, and of late by the Long Parliament. p.
29. 30. 98. 99. How that Text [Christ was faithful in all his house, as Moses
was in his] ought to be understood. p. 30. 31. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. The
Commissioners are so prudently constituted, as to prevent Partiality in their
Proceedings. p. 40. 41. The Public maintenance in Parishes, is for the
unholding of a public Profession of Religion. p. 43. Power of Presentation and
Approbation to Livings ought not to be in Parishes. p. 43. 44. 119. 120. 121.
122. 123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 130. The Commission for Approbation
has nothing to do with Gathered Churches. p. 45. It is no prejudice to the
Right of Patrons, but preserves them. p. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. Mr G. a
Self-Contradicter. Read my Epistle, and p. 40. 47. 49. 50. 52. 60. 61. 98. 102.
107. 117. 123. 124. 130. Mr G. proved a Calumniator. p. 47. 112. The Quare
Impedit now become useless. p. 53. 54. The not countenancing of Arminians is
the occasion of Mr. G. his violence against Authority, and the Commissioners.
p. 56. 93. 77. 115. How men are made Heretics. p. 57. 58. Mr G A
self-Condemner. p. 61. p. 100. p. 49. A Com^arison betwixt the wisdom of the
State and of Mr. G. p. 61. 62. Faction promoted by Abuse of Gods Ordinances. p.
63. 64. Mr G. and Mr Roger William's well met. p. 64. 65. 124. 125. Mr G. his
Arminian Tenets, and the absu^d consequences of them, collected out of his
Book, Redemption Redeemed. p. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. The lewd Consequences of Mr.
G. his Opinions, in respect of men's Conversation. p. 73. 74. Mr G. of a Papal
Spirit. See my Epistle, and p. 78. Mr G. wresting of Scriptures. p. 81. 82. 83.
84. Titles and Forms of Government Originally derived from the Power of the
Sword, in all Nations, De Facto. p. 88. 89. 90. A true state of the design and
purport of the Ordinance for Approbation. p. 91. 92. 93. 94. His Highness
Testimony touching the Commissioners for Approbation and Ejection. p. 95. 96.
His piety in his own personal care about Ministers presented. p. 103. Reasons
why the Trust of executing a Commission for Approbation ought not be in the
several Counties. p. 103. 104. 105. 106. A Refutation of Mr G. his Plea for
settling the power of Approbation in the Congregated Churches. p. 107. 108. 109.
110. 111. 112. 113. 114. 116. 117. Evidence of his malice against the
Commissioners. p. 101. 107. 108. Mr. G. Mr. Postlethwait, and William Medley
the Scribe, well met. p. 5. Mr. G. and Mr. Postletwhait at odds. p. 58. 49. Mr.
G. and Mr. Roger Williams shaking hands. p. 64. 65. 124. 125. Mr. G. pretending
friendship to those of the Presbyterian way, whom he formerly reviled. p. 118.
Mr. G. pleading for Malignant Preachers; and his Plea refuted. 126. 127. 128.
129. 130. Epigrams upon Mr. G. at the end of the Epistle to the Reader, and at
the end of the Book, collected out of Martial.
The Great Accuser cast down; OR, A PUBLIC TRIAL OF Mr John Goodwin Of
Coleman-street, London, AT THE Bar of Religion and right Reason, etc.
ARGUMENT I.
IT is a great indignity and affront put upon the Lord Jesus Christ, Mr. G. his
first Argument.
Blessed for ever, to charge or challenge him, whether formally or
constructively, with want either of wisdom and understanding, or of care and
faithfulness, in making sufficient provision for the due managing of his
affairs, or for the propagation and advancement of the Gospel upon the best,
and best-becoming terms in the world. Now there being no Order or Direction,
nor any jot or tittle of either given by him to the Civil powers, for erecting
of any such authority in the Church and over his servants, as that wherewith
either Triers or Ejectors, amongst us, are invested by the said Commissions
(respectively) They who notwithstanding presumed to do it, I mean to make and
establish such an erection in the Church) what do they less then obliquely, yea
and by a pregnant and near-hand consequence, impute either oscitancie and
forgetfulness, or else weakness and defect of understanding unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, in his own greatest and most important affairs? If either the Civil
Magistrate, or any other on his behalf, will rise up to plead or show an Order
or Commission from Christ for him to grant such Commissions and Authorities as
those now impleaded, unto men, (besides that it had been more Christian and
proper that this should have been done before the said Commissions had been
issued, and exercised, to the great scandal and offense of the far greater part
of the godly and understanding people in the Nation.) I fear that neither the
credit, nor the conscience of the Undertaker will rejoice over the enterprise,
in as much as all attempts in this kind that have been made (as many within the
compass of a few years last past have been) have miscarried, and turned to no
account, but of loss and disparagement to their undertakers. Do we provoke the
Lord unto jealousy? are we stronger then He, that we dare say we are wiser
then He?
Answer.
Vex, and praeterea nihil. Had not Mr. John Goodwin owned this Pamphlet, it
would have been known to be his by the Air and Emptiness, the boldness of
Calumniating, the frequent Mistakes, Self contradictions, groundless
Insinuations, vain Flashes, and the abusing of honest-minded Readers, by
nauseating them with Scandals, offered instead of Reasons and Arguments. And if
these things be made to appear now throughout the whole contexture of this Work
of Darkness, then the People of God, if they have not yet a full Discovery of
the Man and his Temper by his former Pieces, may here behold this Accuser of
the Brethren in his full Pourtraicture, as he has drawn himself to the Life
with his own Pencil; the wicked Spirit of calumniation in this Discourse
standing (as it were) upon the cloven foot of two false Suppositions.

The Discourse (such as it is) consists of eighteen several Heads, (as he
has made the Partition) though an upright Heart, and a sober Head not inclined
to swelling, would have been confined in a much narrower compass; and those he
calls Arguments and Grounds, as well in Reason as Religion: but by the time
that you have seen with how much spleen and devotion he has sacrificed both
his Logic and Divinity to envy and vain glory, in a few Rhetorical flourishes
(the fruits of an extravagant Fancy) the World will find but little cause to
admire him in point of Religion, much less in matter of Argumentation. Now to
the Business; in the handling whereof you will (perhaps) see cause to believe
what he tells you in the Title Page, that he is an Aged Minister, having indeed
lived beyond the use of that way of reasoning, which he had when he was a Boy
in the University.

The Sum of this his first Argument may be reduced to this Syllogism. -- It is
a great indignity put upon Christ, Mr. Goodwin's first Argument reduced into
Form.
to charge him either formally or constructively, with want of care in making
sufficient provision for the propagation of the Gospel. But, there being no
Order or Direction left by Christ for erecting of such an authority in the
Church, as that which is given to our Commissioners for approving and ejecting,
they who establish such an Erection, do constructively and by consequence, lay
such an imputation or charge upon Christ, as if he had been careless, and had
not sufficiently provided for the propagation of the Gospel; Ergo, The Civil
Powers in England, by erecting the Commissioners for approving, and ejecting,
have thereby put a great indignity upon Jesus Christ.

For Answer know, The Answer.
That this Argument of Mr Goodwin is grounded upon several false Suppositions
which being by him taken for granted, but not at all proved, it is no other
then a mere begging of the Question: For first, Mr* Goodwin his first false
Supposition.
He supposes, That it was the intendment of the Lord Jesus Christ to make such
ample provision in his Gospel, by laying down Rules for the propagation thereof
in all respects, that now there is nothing left for the Magistrate to do, in
point of prudence and discretion, for the promotion of and advancement of it in
the world: 2. He supposes, That the Commissioners for approving and ejecting
are an Authority constituted by his Highness and the Council, His second false
Supposition.
in and over the Church. These are the poor crutches upon which this, and all
the rest of his eighteen Arguments do halt. Take away these, all the rest fail,
and the Body of the Pamphlet falls to the ground; therefore it will not be
amiss to try how these will hold water, in point of Religion and Reason. And
hereunto it will be necessary to request the patience of the Reader a little
while, in order to his confutation, because if he be found faulty in the laying
of his Foundation, it will be an easy matter to bring the whole house down
about his ears.

The first Supposition before mentioned, upon which he builds, is included in
the Major Proposition; and in opposition to that his false Supposal, let this
Thesis be set down, as that which I purpose in the first place to make good
against him; A Thesis in opposition to his first false Hypothesis.
Viz. That it was not the Intendment of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ to make such ample provision in the Gospel, by laying down Rules for the
propagation thereof, in all respects and particulars, and so to answer all
occasions, that now there is nothing left for the Magistrate to do, in point of
prudence and discretion, for the promoting and advancing of it in the World.

This youthful piece of gravity has lived so (like a Salamander) the greatest
part of his days in the fire of contention, that it is now become his most
natural Element; and having heretofore had some heats with Mr. Pryn, who gives
all to the Magistrate in Gospel-affairs, he cannot keep himself from the other
extreme of denying all, and allowing the Magistrate nothing at all to do
therein; but thus it always happens, when a controversy falls into the hands
of passionate men. And yet he does not express himself with so much
extravagancy, as some others who are engaged with him in the same quarrel;
among whom is one Mr Pastlethwait, who in the Preface to a Pamphlet of his
Entitled, A Voice from heaven against the Tryers, has made open Proclamation,
That we ought to accept no Lawgiver but Jesus Christ either in Church or Common
wealth, but that this should be our Profession, the Lord is our Judge, the Lord
is our Lawgiver, he is our King, etc. Which being once admitted in the same
sense, as Mr Goodwin has insinuated his own wild Assertion, the Conclusion
follows as naturally from this as from his; That therefore the Magistrate is
not at all concerned in the making of Civil Laws and Constitutions for the
government of the Commonwealth; which worthy Doctrine, in reference both to
Church and State, is in transcendent Terms, more Metaphysically and
Hypertheologically expressed in another sad Pamphlet, Entitled, A Standard set
up, lately written and published in Order to the raising a bloody Rebellion in
this Nation; miserably arrogating the Name of Christ and his people to
countenance the design, being subscribed by one William Medley, who jumps even
in opinion with Master Goodwin in all points (though he go a little beyond him
in some) against the Authority of the Magistrate, and therefore Master Goodwin
in such Company, cannot choose but be a man of great credit and reputation. --
But it is time I proceed to the proof of my Thesis, the Reason whereof I
propose as follows:

If it had been the intendment of Christ to do any such thing, as to leave
Rules and Directions of so vast a latitude and comprehension, as to take in and
answer to all the particular Necessities, Occasions, Contingencies and
Circumstances of Affairs, which might arise in the future in all Ages and
Nations of the World, concerning every prudent way and means convenient for the
promulgation of his Gospel, so that the Magistrate, and all other men, were to
be tied up strictly to the peremptory Observation of those Rules, without
having recourse (upon any emergencie) to the Common principles of Natural
Reason and Discretion, to help on the work of propagating it among the Nations;
then doubtless the Eagles eye, and active pen of Mr. Goodwin would have spied
them out, and transcribed a Copy of them for us: But his autocratorical wisdom
is pleased either to leave the Reader to take his word for the truth of it, or
else to go look where they may be found. Whereas the truth is, if you make
enquiry into the Precepts, and the Acts and Monuments of our Savior and his
Apostles, upon the best search (certainly) no such universal golden Rules and
Directions are yet discovered. For, while our Lord and Master walked about
clothed with the garment of his Incarnation, we hear of no such matter in the
writings of the Evangelists; and after his Resurrection, in all the blessed
Interviews and Colloquies which he was pleased to have with his Friends and
Disciples, there is not the least mention of it; not at the time of his
Ascension, when being ready to cloth himself with the Robes of Glory and
Immortality, he took leave of his Apostles, and left them to carry on the work
of the everlasting Gospel, both among Jews and Gentiles: Nor are there, after
the time of his Glorification, any such Rules and Precepts to be seen in the
Acts and proceedings of the Apostles, of so various and universal an influence
and import, as in all points, upon all occasions, in all Countries, to serve to
the great end beforementioned. Next to the great Act of suffering and Dying
for the sins of Mankind, to reconcile Man to God, the special work of Christ,
to which he was designed by the Father, was, (as himself has declared, Luke 4.
18.) To preach the Gospel to the poor; to heal the brokenhearted; to preach
deliverance to the Captives; to recover sight to the Blind; to set at liberty
them that are bruised; to preach the acceptable year of the Lord: That is to
say, to reveal the way of life and salvation, and to go about doing good to
poor Sinners in their concernments both of soul and body. The scope and purpose
of his taking Flesh upon him, was to make publication of the New Testament, and
sign and seal it with his blood: But we find him not any where dictating Orders
and Decrees for the universal and perpetual Practice of men in the
communicating of it to succeeding Generations. The only Institutions which
were made immediately by himself, are the great Ordinances of Preaching the
Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper. The
Supper he instituted a little before his Death, and the other he gave in
Commission to his Disciples after the Resurrection, when he commanded them to
Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. Those things which are essential
to the founding and constituting of a Church, he took a particular care for;
but as touching the means and manner of publishing the Gospel, and the way of
planting Churches, that (for ought that appears to the contrary in Scripture)
was wholly left to the management of the Apostles, whom he promised to endue
with an extraordinary spirit for so wonderful and extraordinary a work.

Now in the next place, it will be very requisite to enquire whether or no, in
the Acts or Writings of the Apostles we can find any kind of Canons, Decrees,
or Constitutions made by them, to be as standing Rules, whereby men are bound
necessarily to frame and direct their designs, so as by no means to use any
other Mediums for the planting and propagation of the Gospel: Or, whether the
Apostles have left any Examples of their own practice upon Record, which all
men are obliged to follow, and not to recede a tittle from them, in the same
work of Gospel-propagation: For if so be that Christ neither immediately of
himself, nor mediately by his Apostles, established such obligatory Rules and
Directions (as are pretended to) exclusive of all other means, by virtue of any
Precept, or exemplary Practice; then judge ye whether this bold Assertion of
his be like to hold right in conclusion.

The first observable Medium that the Apostles made use of for the propagation
of the Gospel, and augmenting the number of Converts and Professors, was the
exercising a Community of Goods; so we may read, Act. 4. 34, 35. That as many
as were possessors of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the
things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet; and
distribution was made unto every man according as he had need. This is one
Instance of Apostolical practice and example; which no man that knows the
manner and condition of Mr. Goodwin, will so much as imagine it is his opinion,
that this is one of the Rules binding himself, or the Magistrate, or any other,
to observe in promoting the publication of the Gospel. It Is believed, neither
the Credit, nor the Conscience of the Man, will rejoice in such an Assertion;
and therefore having him herein (I dare say) confitentem reum, and Asturam
vapich servat sub pector ulpem.
Marsupio consulentem, it shall be pressed upon him no further.

Another means that the Apostles made use of for the spreading of the Gospel,
was that (...), or Laying on of hands, whereby the extraordinary Gifts of the
Holy Ghost were in those days usually conferred upon such as they converted to
the Faith; and these again made use of it in order to the converting of others;
that men seeing those miraculous Gifts breaking forth in several Operations,
and being thereby convinced of that supernatural and mighty power which then
attended the ministration of the Gospel, might be brought in to the Faith of
Jesus Christ, and be confirmed in it. But in all the Prints, and grave
Determinations hitherto published by Mr. Goodwin, our great Master of
Sentences, we do not find that he has concluded us and all the World under the
observance and imitation of the Apostolical practice and example in this
particular, as absolutely necessary for the work of Gospel-propagation: And so
I pass it over at present, till it be known how his Infallible self will be
pleased to pass a Judgment in the matter.

A third means that the Apostles made use of for promoting the Truth of the
Gospel, was, That when occasion of difference did arise among the Primitive
Christians, touching Gospel-affairs, to the hinderance of its progress; they,
to wit the Apostles and Elders, assembled together, and by Decrees of their own
made an authoritative positive decision in the Case, and gave Laws to be
observed by all the Churches, as you may read, Act. 15. And it is conceived Mr.
Goodwin never yet maintained, (but rather has openly avowed the contrary) that
this Example of the Apostles is to be received as a Rule universally binding
all men in all Ages to do the like, and to assume the same power of Legislation
and Determination, in the way of Synods or Assemblies, in order to the
promoting of the Gospel.

These are the main observable Practices mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles;
and some other there were which related to things reputed of an indifferent
nature, as the eating or not eating of certain Meats, using or not using of
Circumcision, and of diverse Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, as you
may read, Act. 21. and Gal. 2. which sometimes were admitted, sometimes
rejected, as may be seen by Paul's circumcising of Timothy, when as the same
Paul at another time was stiffly opposing and pleading against the practice of
Circumcision. Now we suppose Mr. Goodwin will not say, That this kind of
liberty so assumed and practiced, is one of the standing Rules which he with so
much confidence commends unto the Reader, as necessarily to be observed in the
promoting of the Gospel: And therefore unless our Reveernd Author can produce
some other Examples and Practices of the Apostles, which yet we have not seen,
and with good evidence propound them to the World as universally obligatory
upon men to follow, he will seem to be as a man beating the air, and that has
made a noise to no purpose. For, the truth is, whereas in all the Acts of the
Apostles, other men can perceive no such Examples of theirs, from whence such
positive Rules as he pretends to, are either directly, or by consequence
deducible; so among all the Precepts of the Apostles contained either in that
Book, or in any of their Epistles, no Rules will be found of so comprehensive a
nature, as to give direction in all particulars that may fall out, so as to
exclude all use of humane reason and discretion in the Magistrate or any other,
toward the advancing so good a work.

As to the main concernments of Church-Oeconomie and Administration, they are
sufficiently provided for by the Precepts and Directions left by the Apostles
in Writing; but as to Church-edification, and the gathering in of Believers
through the preaching of the Gospel, by employing and encouraging men to that
work, there are no Precepts by them recorded to Posterity, but what make in
justification of those two Commissions of Approbation and Ejection. which were
given out by his Highness and the Council; as will be made evident by and by,
when Mr Goodwin comes to fall more directly upon the Commissions, and those
reverend and worthy persons that are empowered by them. In the mean time, it is
submitted to the Reader, what to think of Mr Goodwins first Hypothesis or
Supposal, and whether he can imagine it was the intendment of Christ, either
immediately of himself, or mediatly by his Apostles to make such large
Provision, either by way of Precept or Example, to be as standing Rules in
perpetuity, utterly exclusive of the use and assistance of humane prudence, in
order to the publication of the Gospel.

Now to the second false Hypothesis, Mr Goodwin his second Supposition refused.
or Supposition, upon which the Argument is founded, and which is implicitly
contained in the Minor Proposition, falsely supposing and insinuating, as if our
Commissioners for Approving and Ejecting were an Authority constituted by his
Highness and the Council in and over the Church and People of Christ. For
Confutation of this, the only way is to make enquiry into the nature of the
Ordinances or Commissions themselves, by the genuine scope and drift whereof it
will be certainly known of what kind they are, and what was the Intent of our
Governors in the establishment of them, that thereby they should deserve to be
scandalized, and so rudely handled by him, who would be thought a man of
Ingenie and most high Ingenuity.

To this end, that the truth may be cleared, let both the Ordinances speak for
themselves.

The First is, that which he is pleased to call the Commission of Tryers,
rightly entitled, An Ordinance appointing Commissioners for approbation of
Public Preachers; The true intent and main Scope of this Ordinance, is set
down in that part of it which here follows:

WHereas for some time past-hitherto, there has not been any certain course
established for the supplying vacant places with able and fit persons to preach
the Gospel, by reason whereof not only the Rights and Titles of Patrons are
prejudiced, but many weak, scandalous, Popish, and ill-affected persons have
intruded themselves, or been brought in, to the great grief and trouble of the
good People of this Nation; for remedy and prevention whereof, Be it ordained
by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the consent of his Council,
that every person, who shall from and after the five and twentieth day of March
instant, be presented, nominated, chosen, or appointed to any Benefice
(formerly called a Benefice with Cure of Souls) or to preach any Public settled
Lecture in England or Wales, shall before he be admitted into any such
Benefice, or Lecture, be judged and approved, by the persons hereafter named,
to be a person for the grace of God in him, his holy and unblameable
conversation, as also for his knowledge and utterance, able and fit to preach
the Gospel; And that after the said five and twentieth day of March, no person,
but such as shall upon such Approbation be admitted by the said persons, shall
take any public Lecture, having a constant stipend legally annexed and
belonging thereunto, or take, or receive any such Benefice as aforesaid, or the
profits thereof: And be it further Ordained, That Francis Rous Esquire Dr Tho.
Goodwin, etc. shall be, and are hereby nominated, constituted and appointed
Commissioners for such Approbation and admission as is above said, and upon
death, or removal of any of them, others shall from time to time be nominated
in their places by the L. Protector and his Successors, by advice of his
Council, in the Interval of Parliament; and sitting the Parliament, by the
Protector and Parliament. And the said Commissioners or any five or more of
them, met together in some certain place in the City of London, or Westminster,
as his Highness shall appoint, are hereby authorized to judge and take
knowledge of the ability and fitness of any person so presented, nominated,
chosen or appointed, according to the qualification above mentitioned, and upon
their approbation of such his ability and fitness, to grant unto such person
admission to such Benefice or Lecture, by an Instrument in Writing under a
Common Seal to be appointed by his Highness, and under the hand of the Register
or Registers for the time being, to be also nominated by the Lord Protector and
his Successors, which Instrument* the said Register or Registers shall cause to
be entered in a Book for that purpose, and kept upon Record.

And it is hereby Declared, That the said person so admitted into any such
Benefice, shall be Possessor and Incumbent of the same, and entitled thereby to
the Profits, Perquisits, and all Rights and Dues incident and belonging
thereunto, as fully and effectually, as if he had been Instituted and Inducted
according to the Laws of this Realm; as also the person that shall be so
admitted to any Lecture as aforesaid, shall be thereby enabled, according to
the Establishment and Constitution of such Lecture, to preach therein, and to
have and receive the stipend or Profits to such Lecture belonging.

Provided always, That no person who shall tender himself, or be tendered, for
approbation as aforesaid, shall be concluded by any Vote of the said
Commissioners, which shall pass in the Negative, as to his Approbation, unless
Nine or more of the said Commissioners be present at such Vote.

And the Ordinance Concludes thus. [And it is hereby lastly declared and
ordained, that the Approbation or Admittance aforesaid, in such manner as is
before prescribed, is not intended, nor shall be construed, to be any solemn or
sacred setting apart of a person to any particular office in the Ministry* but
only by such Trial and Approbation to take care, that places destitute may be
supplied with able and faithful Preachers throughout this Nation; And that
such fit and approve proved persons faithfully laboring in the work of the
Gospel, may be in a Capacity to receive such public stipend and maintenance,
as is or shall be allotted to such places.]

The other is that which he calls the Commission of Ejectors; rightly Entitled
An Ordinance for the Ejecting of Scandalous, Ignorant, and Insufficient
Ministers and Schoolmasters; the main whereof is as follows.

WHereas by the continuance of diverse scandalous and insufficient Ministers and
Schoolmasters, in many Churches, Chapels, and Public Schools within this
Nation, the more effectual propagation of the Gospel, and settlement of a godly
and painful Ministry is much obstructed, and no authority now in force for
removing such Ministers and Schoolmasters; For remedy thereof, Be it ordained by
his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the consent of his Council, That
the persons hereafter named, shall be, and are hereby appointed and constituted
Commissioners, for and within the respective Counties within England and Wales,
for the ends and purposes hereafter in and by this Ordinance expressed and
directed, etc.

And the said Commissioners for the respective Counties aforesaid, or any Five
or more of them, are hereby authorized and empowered to call before them, or
any Five of them, any public Preacher, Lecturer, or other persons formerly
called Parsons. Vicars or Curats, settled, or which hereafter shall be settled in
any Benefice, commonly called; A Benefice with Cure of Souls, or public
Lecture, having any stipend or salary legally annexed, or belonging thereunto,
and all and every Schoolmasters, who are or shall be ignorant, scandalous,
insufficient, or negligent in their several and respective places: and shall
and may receive all Articles or charges which shall be exhibited against them,
for Ignorance, Insufficiency, scandal in their lives and conversations, or
negligence in their respective callings and places, and proceed to Examination
and Determination of such offenses, according to the Rules and Directions
hereafter specified, viz. Such Ministers and Schoolmasters shall be deemed and
accounted scandalous in their lives and conversations, as shall be proved
guilty of holding or maintaining such Blasphemous and Atheistical Opinions as
are punishable by an Act, Entitled, An Act against several Atheistical,
Blasphemous, and exercrable Opinions derogatory to the honor of God, and
destructive to humane Society, or guilty of profane Cursing or Swearing,
Perjury, subordination of Perjury; such as hold, teach, or maintain any of
those Popish Opinions, required in the Oath of Abjuration (mentioned in an
Ordinance of Parliament August 19. 1643) to be abjured, or be guilty of
Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, common haunting of Taverns or Alehouses,
frequent Quarrelling or Fighting, frequent playing at Cards or Dice, profaning
of the Sabbath Day, and such as do or shall allow the same in their Families,
or countenance the same in their Parishioners or Scholars, such as have
publicly or frequently read or used the Common Prayer Book since the first of
January last, or shall at any time hereafter do the same; such as do publicly
and profanely scoff at, or revile the strict Profession or Professors of
Religion or Godliness, or do encourage by word or practice any Whitson-Ales,
Wakes, Morris-dances, May-poles, Stage Plays, or such like licentious
practices, by which men are encouraged in a loose and profane conversation;
such as have declared, or shall declare by writing, Preaching, or otherwise
publishing their disaffection to the present Government; such Ministers shall
be accounted negligent, as omit the public Exercises of Preaching and Praying
upon the Lords Day (not being hindered by necessary absence, or infirmity of
body) or that are or shall be Non Resident; such Schoolmasters shall be counted
negligent, as absent themselves from their Schools, and do wilfully neglect
their duties in teaching their Scholars.

And such Minister and Schoolmaster shall be accounted ignorant and
insufficient, as shall be so declared and adjudged by the Commissioners in
every County, or any Five of them, together with any Five or more of the
Ministers hereafter nominated in this present Ordinance, to be assistant to the
said Commissioners, etc.

What I have here inserted, gives you the very sum and substance of the
two-Ordinances, so far as concerns the Instituted Power of Approbation and
Ejection; and though the bare Reading of the Ordinances may be sufficient to
satisfy any ingenuous man, so as to wipe off that scandalous imputation,
which, by way of false supposition, and peevish Insinuation, has been darted
at the supreme Magistrate, and the persons next him in Authority, in reference
to the power by them granted in the said Ordinances; yet it will not be amiss a
little to animadvert upon each particular.

First, as touching the Ordinance for Approbation; how can it be said to
constitute an Authority in and over the Church, seeing if the Authority therein
given, were such as he pretens, then it must be an Authority exercising either
Legislation in making Decrees and Constitutions for the odering of
Church Affairs, or Jurisdiction in respect of Church Censures? But certainly,
neither has his Highness given, nor the Commissioners themselves ever
conceived they have, nor can any rational man infer they have, from the
Contents of the Ordinance, a faculty of exercising Power in matter of
Legislation, or Jurisdiction within, or over the Church in general, or any
particular Congregation; and therefore certainly no man that is not sworn to
Mr. Goodwin's (...), will conclude, that they are constituted (or can in the
least measure be reputed) an Authority in and over the Church.

Secondly, That high and heavenly Ordinance of Preaching the Word, the due
promotion whereof is the sole declared scope of the Ordinance of his Highness,
was primarily intended by Christ for the instructing and converting of such as
were, and are without the Pale of the Church, and for the gathering of them
into Church Communion; in the next place, for the edifying and building of them
up after they are gathered in. Now the intent of his Highness and the Council
was not at all, that by virtue of this Ordinance any should take cognizance of
the Qualifications of Pastors or Preachers in private gathered Congregations or
Churches, (who, it is known, notwithstanding this Ordinance, remain as much at
liberty as before;) but they are Public Preachers, that is, such as have, or
would have a Public State-maintenance (be it either in the way of a Benefice,
or Lecture) legally annexed to the places where they preach, or otherwise
publicly allowed, (these are they) that fall within the reach of this
Ordinance. I suppose it would not well suit with Mr. Goodwin's principle and
way, to say that such Beneficed men and Lecturers, standing upon a Public
Account, and their respective Precincts or Parishes, are (in his opinion)
rightly constituted Churches. And if so, how then will this profound man of
Science be able (on his part) to make good, in reason or conscience, that the
Magistrates authorizing persons with a power of Trying such men whether they be
qualified for the employment of preaching in Parishes, can be said to be the
erecting of a Power in and over the Church?

Thirdly, Though it would be beside the present business to start that
Controversy, whether, or how far the Magistrate may intermeddle in matters of
Religion; yet certainly it is fit to consider, that the same thing may be a duty
incumbent upon a Magistrate, being a Christian, as really as it is a duty upon
inferior persons who are Christians. Now if it be the duty of every Christian
man, in his sphere, as much as in him lies, to advance the propagation of the
Gospel wherever he has an opportunity, by communicating, or by procuring the
communication of it to others, (which it is supposed neither Mr. G. nor any else
will deny) then undoubtedly the Supreme Magistrate of England, being a
Christian Professor, by continuing that Public way of Maintenance, which the
Laws of the Land, and the Bounty of the State have allowed, to support and
encourage the Public Preaching of Jesus Christ, and thereupon by exerting his
Magistratical authority, in transferring it by way of Trust into the hands of
certain persons whom he sees cause to confide in as Commissioners under him,
for the Proving and Trying of men, whether they be fit to be owned upon the
Public Account, in order to so high an employment as Preaching to the People,
has therein done his duty, and in so doing kept within his sphere as a
Magistrate, and is so far from intrenching thereby upon the Church, or Churches
(take which you will) in any kind, that there is rather abundant cause for the
Churches of Christ to bless God for the care taken, than to find fault; and to
hope, that by this means the number of Believers will be exceedingly increased,
and the Lord be pleased to add to the Church daily such as should be saved. All
that the Magistrate has done here by such an Ordinance, is an Act only of
State, a mere Civil Constitution, and by virtue thereof the Commissioners not
exercising any power of Legislation or Jurisdiction for the ordering and
governing of Churches, but only a power of Trial and Inspection concerning such
men, whom the Magistrate is to send abroad to publish the Gospel, that the
people may become fit matter for Churches: Therefore the said Commissioners
must of necessity be reputed only Officers of the Commonwealth in this
particular, and not an Authority established (as Mr. G. would have it) in and
over the Church.

This Ordinance for Approbation is in Truth, no more then that other Ordinance
of his Highness, whereby certain persons are commissionated under him as
Trustees for the maintenance of Ministers; that is, for settling of
Augmentations for the better maintenance of Ministers in Places where the means
is but small. As this Ordinance is to be reputed a mere Civil Act in respect of
its Original, so also must the other; for the same hand framed the one which
did the other; and being both designed for the same end, Viz. The due
distribution of that public Maintenance which is allowed by the Magistrate,
according to such Directions as he has prescribed, they must needs both in
respect of their Original, the regulation of their exercise, and their end, be
esteemed no other then Acts of the same nature and constitution, both alike
flowing from the same fountain of Civil power to the same purpose: And yet Mr
Goodwin has not one Tittle to say against that Ordinance, or Commission of the
said Trustees, though in the execution thereof, it comes as near his
Church-door as the other. But all the spite is it seems at the Commissioners
for Approbation; the reason whereof will be better understood anon, when I come
to fall upon some of his following Arguments.

Moreover, as concerning the Ordinance for Ejection, it is also (as appears in
the several parts of it) a mere Civil constitution. For (you see) that
Ordinance does uot enable the Commissioners to exercise the power therein
given, over any persons whatsoever employed in the work of the Gospel, save
only such who are public Preachers, Lecturers, or other persons formerly
called Parsons, Vicars, or Curats, enjoying those. Benefices formerly called
Benefices with Cure of Souls, or that are settled in public Lectures, having
any Stipends or Salaries legally annexed or belonging thereunto. So that it is
evident, the Magistrate herein gives a power to animadvert upon no other
persons, but those only who are designed by himself to the employment of
public preaching, and upon that account have a maintenance derived to them
from himself, and the Law of the Land, who as they have their rise, and their
Mission from the Civil Power, so they have their dependency upon it, and in
this respect can be reputed no other then persons publicly employed in the
Commonwealth, on the behalf of the Magistrate, to divulge the Doctrine of the
Gospel, in the public assemblies of the people; who if they be found either
scandalous in life, or through Ignorance insufficient for the work; surely then
the Magistrate who allows and secureth them their Wages by Law, must needs
look upon it as his duty to see them turned out of their employment, as he is
concerned to do in the like case of any other persons whatsoever employed in a
public relation to, and dependency upon himself.

These things being so, the Reader is left to judge whether there be not more
of vanity, then either Reason or Religion in Mr Goodwins first Argument, since
in the sifting of it, there is nothing to be found, but the chafe of two false
Suppositions; upon which he has built and flourished up the whole structure of
his slight Pamphlet. For, it being manifest that neither Christ nor his
Apostles, left any such Rules in pepetuity to promote the Preaching of the
Gospel, as to answer all future contingent occasions in order thereunto, or to
exclude the Magistrate from contributing his assistance, either in the way of
Countenance or Prudence, for the publication thereof; And it being clear
likewise, from the very scope and intendment of the Ordinances themselves,
which have been so injuriously impeached, that they are only Acts of a mere
Civil nature, investing men with power upon a Public Civil Account, we must
needs come to this Conclusion, in oposition both to the major and minor
Propositions of Mr. G. That as it was not the intent of Christ or his Apostles
to make so large provision by Rules, in all minute Particulars, for publishing
the Gospel, as to exclude the Magistrate from doing what is fit in a way of
Reason and Prudence, for promoting so good a work among the People; And that as
it was not the intent of his Highness and the Council by their Ordinances to
intermedle with Church Government, but only to have the Word universally
preached by pious and able men, for the Peoples instruction: So, by erecting
the Commissioners for Approbation and Ejection, they have been far from a
constructive charging of Christ with want of care in not leaving sufficient
Directions to progagate the Gospel (seeing to leave Rules of so universal an
extent, and exclusive a nature as is pretended, was no part of his intendment;)
nor can they be said to have established any Authority in and over the Church,
(as is by him most causelessly insinuated) and consequently they have not put
any Indignity thereby at all upon Jesus Christ.

ARGUMENT II.
Christ himself never assumed to himself, Mr. G. his second Argument.
nor ever exercised any interest of Authority or power so exorbitant or
over-bearing, as to give authority and power to any lesser or smaller number of
men, at least not of such men, to whom he was not able, his Fathers Will
standing to the contrary, to give both infallibility of judgment, and
intemerable faithfulness, in matters of Faith and supernatural concernment, to
exercise any such dominion over the Faith, Judgments, or Consciences of far
greater numbers of men, and these every way equal, at least many of them, (if
not superior) to them, both in gifts and graces, and all spiritual endowments,
as the persons commissioned amongst us by the two Ordinances specified, do by
virtue hereof, exercise over the judgments and faith of all the Ministers of
the Gospel in this Nation, yea, and over the faith of all those whom God, (as
both these Commissioners and others have cause to judge) calls unto this
ministry. For is not this the jurisdiction, lordship, or dominion, which they
by virtue of their Commissions (respectively) exercise over the Faith of that
great number of worthy persons now mentioned, even to Eject them out of the
possession and enjoyment of such livelihoods which the merciful providence of
God in conjunction with the Laws of their Nation, have entitled them unto? to
cast them out (I say) of the enjoyment of their lawful subsistence to the
extreme misery, if not utter affamishing, of themselves, wives and children,
only because they will not, or rather, because in conscience they cannot
believe or profess as they, being in this case made their Lords and Masters,
require them upon the said penalty to believe; the other, upon a like account,
shutting against others by the iron bars of their authority, the door of access
unto such livelihoods, whereunto both by the providence of God, and the
faithfulness of men legally entrusted with such opportunities, yea and their
own signal worths and ministerial abilities, do aloud call them? Doubtlese the
Lord Jesus Christ never took upon him the exercise of any such Authority, as to
appoint a few men for the devesting of any sort of men whatsoever, much less
the Ministers of his Gospel, of their temporal rights or enjoyment, only
because their faith in matters appertaining unto God, is not the same in all
points with the says of other men.

If it be replied, that neither sort of Commissioners, Triers or Ejectors, are
empowered by the tenor or words of their Commissions, to punish any Minister,
either poena sensus, or poena damni, simply for not believing, or (which is the
same in effect) for not professing, or not teaching others to believe as
themselves believe; so that when they do any such thing as this, they act
besides their Commission. I answer, first, The Commissioners themselves, at
least such of them as are generally known to understand their Commissions, as
well as, or rather better then their fellows, do so construe and understand
them, as giving them power both to reject, and eject for not finding their own
sense and belief in those that come before them. Secondly, Their frequent, if
not constant practice in this kind, being sufficiently known unto, and
connived at, if not approved of by those under whose authority and protection
they thus practice, clearly shows that the sense intended, or at present
owned in both the Commissions by those who are in authority, and who have power
to declare the sense of either Commission, is that which has been supposed in
the Argument, though deposed or denied in the Reply.


Answer.
This second Argument of his to prove the unlawfulness of these Ordinances,
Answer.
is so stuffed with the Fustian of various Terms, and false suppositions, so
confusedly extravagant, that it is not to be reduced into any handsome
Syllogistick form; and therefore let us take a view of the Verbosities and
Scandals, as they-lie in (or rather out of) order.

First, Answ.
(to omit his obstreperous Impertinencies which lie croaking in the way) he
supposes, That such men so employed as the Commissioners are, ought to have
both Infallibility of Judgment, and intemerable Faithfulness, in matters of
Faith and supernatural concernment. That they ought to be men of Judgment, I
shall not deny; but that (like Mr. Goodwin) they should have an opinion of
their own Infallibility, or of necessity be indeed Infallible, before they
undertake such a work, sure there is no need. Their Commission (the Ordinance)
impowers them to pass their Judgments concerning men, by approving, or not
approving them for the work of Preaching, according as they have cause to
believe them duly qualified, or not qualified for it, in reference to these
three particulars, viz. The Grace of God in them; Their holy and unblameable,
Conversation; Their Knowledge and Utterance. What need any Infallible Spirit be
required in men to pass a Judgment upon other men in these Respects, before
they be sent out to Preach? That which was the Apostles prescript to Timothy,
was written doubtless for our instruction and direction; 2 Timothy 2. 2.
The things (says he) that thou have heard of me, the same commit thou to
faithful men, who shall teach others also. By which Text it appears, 1. That
men ought to be tried and approved before they be sent to preach the Doctrine
of the Gospel. And, 2. That the proving of their Grace and Faithfulness does
not presuppose there ought to be an Infallibility in the persons who are to
prove and approve them; because this proving and approving of the Graces of men
that were to be employed in any work of the Gospel, was to be a thing of
ordinary and continual practice, as is clear by that of the Apostle before
cited, it being a Rule of Direction now to succeeding Times and persons, 1 Timothy
3. 10.
upon occasion, as well as then to Timothy. And by that of the Apostle in
another place, where he speaks of the proving and approving of a Deacon, and
says, That before their Approbation, they must be proved whether they hold the
mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience; and then they may use the
Employment. Which is no other then a clear Evidence of the lawfulness of the
proving and approving of men in point of Grace, before they be sent about
Gospel-work: And it being a Rule for constant practice, it carries moreover
along with it as clear an intimation, that there is no such need of a Spirit of
Infallibility, before men can be fit to act in the way of Approbation in
respect of the Graces of men. And as to the other Qualifications, viz. Holiness
and unblameableness of Conversation, with Knowledge and Utterance; these two
Points are cognoscible in Foro externo, by enquiry into men's Lives, and by
examination of their Parts, and their experiences of Gods dealing with them in
the work of Conversion.

Secondly, He supposes, That his Highness and the Council have by the
Ordinances empowered the Commisisioners to exercise dominion over the Faith,
Judgments, and Consciences of men. To prove this, he says, The Commissoners
for Ejection do eject men out of their places, because they cannot in
conscience profess and believe as the Commissioners themselves do believe; and
on the other side, the Commissioners for Approbation (he says) do upon a like
account disapprove men, and shut them out from such places of livelihood, to
which they are called by Patrons, and fitted by their own signal worths and
abilities. For Answer, know, It is no wonder that he who dares fasten so ill
and groundless an Imputation upon our Governors, as that they have empowered
persons to exercise an unchristian dominion over men's Faith, whenas there is
not a tittle in the Ordinances of any such matter to be found (it is no wonder,
I say, that he who presumes to prevaricate so unconscionably against them)
should under a pretense of making good the scandal which he casts upon them (to
show his emptiness of proof) fall to calumniating of those who are the
Commissioners under them, by raising an ill report upon their proceedings. But
this has been his usual way of Argumentation, fortiter calumniari, upon other
occasions, and to observe neither Rule in Ratiocination, nor to proceed
secundum allegata and probata, to make out an Accusation.

I suppose, whoever looks into the two Ordinances for Approbation and Ejection,
will find that the Commissioners have their work set forth to them by the
present Authority, with Rules whereby they are to proceed, and how to behave
themselves, as Servants use to have when they are employed by their Masters, so
that it appears to be a point of Service, rather then of Lordship or dominion,
wherein the Commissioners are exercised. It may with as much reason be said,
when a person offers himself to be a Member of a Congregation, and to partake
of the Lords Supper, that the trying and examining of him in this case whether
he be fit and worthy, is the exercising of a dominion and lordship over him.
Then, whereas he says, they exercise Dominion over the Judgments and Faith of
all the Ministers of the Gospel; I answer,

1. That as it is not a Dominion, so neither do they exercise it over all the
Ministers of the Nation: Mr. Goodwin can (if he please) confute himself in
this; For, I surpose he believes himself to be a Minister, and yet he knows
neither of the Commissions have been exercised over him. Alas, he was ejected
out of his Parish-Living in Coleman-street by a Committee of Parliament; but
that was before the eldest of these Commissions was born.

2. That it is not over all the Ministers of the Gospel, because it is evident
by the very letter of the Commissions, that they are not empowered to meddle
one way or other with the Ministers or Pastors of Gathered Congregations, but
only with such as seek, or do enjoy the Public Maintenance of the State to
support them in the Ministry. And this himself afterward confesses in express
terms in his 5. Argument, where he styles them Ministers of Parochial
Congregations; though here, to the end that this crazie Argument might run the
more roundly, he thought fit to let it pass on in general Terms, by omitting
the due Distinction.

3. That it is not over Ministers quatenus Ministers, as they were taken
heretofore under the notion and quality of a Sacred Function, but only as they
stand in relation to the Magistrate, a Public Ministry upon the Account of a
Legal Public Maintenance; and so the Judgment that is passed in the approving
and disapproving, or in the ejecting of them by virtue of those Commissions, is
only in respect of their being persons fit or unfit to receive or enjoy that
Maintenance, and cannot be called a Judgment over their Faith, which they are
left to enjoy at their own liberty as much as before; which being allowed them,
it is fit the Magistrate should enjoy his liberty also, to refuse them his
Maintenance, if their Faith and Persuasions be such, as he cannot in conscience
believe he ought to give countenance and support unto. Moreover, whereas he
says, that those Ministers, by virtue of the Ordinance for Ejecting, are put
out of the possession and enjoyment of such Livelihoods, which the Laws of the
Land have entitled them unto, to the affamishing of themselves, their wives
and children, because they cannot believe as the Commissioners require them,
upon the said penalty, to believe: The Answer to this is evident (as before;)

1. That the Commissioners do not eject them, because not of the same Judgment
with themselves in matters of Faith, but because their Judgment and Opinions
are such as come within the compass of those Tenets and Doctrines, which the
Magistrate has declared he in Conscience cannot, and will not give Maintenance
unto. Besides, the power of ejecting is not exercised upon men only because of
their Opinions, but it respects also the loose and ill behavior and
conversation of such as are employed in the work of Public Preaching.

2. That any power which conferreth a livelihood on any person upon certain
conditions, to a certain end, ought in all reason to have a right of resuming
that livelihood, in case neither the conditions be observed, nor the end of the
Collation be answered, while the party continues in possession of the said
Livelihood. Now it was the Magistrate and the Law which conferred livelihoods
upon the Ministers beforementioned: The Conditions whereupon they were
conferred, were that they should behave themselves in all things as becomes
Ministers; the end was, that they should with diligence and sound Doctrine feed
and instruct the people under their respective charges. Therefore in case those
Ministers do not perform the conditions on their part, but run out into any of
the licentious and disorderly practices in matter of behavior enumerated in
the Ordinance; and shall happen to make shipwreck of the Faith, by corrupting
the truths of God with false Doctrine, or be ignorant themselves, so that the
end (which was that they should instruct the people with sound knowledge) is
not answered; certainly the Magistrate in this Case may righteously (and is
questionless bound in Conscience to) resume their livelihoods into his own
hand, and dispose of them to others, who he conceives will better perform the
end for which those livelihoods and livings were first by Law appointed. And
though the wants and necessities to which themselves and theirs may be reduced
to, upon their being ejected, be a matter of Commiseration, yet it holds not
water in point of Reason, to prove that they ought to be kept in, rather then
there should be a Commission to eject them, unless Mr Goodwin (after his
wonted way of reasoning) will judge it more reasonable, that the great end of
the Gospel-ministration should be lost, and the souls of the people (without
any commiseration) be either starved for want of sound Doctrine, or poisoned
with false, rather than the false, ignorant, insufficient, or scandalous
Ministers should be exposed to run the hazard of an affamishing themselves, (as
he calls it) and their wives and children. If this Argument were of any weight,
then no man ought to be put out of his Office or Employment in the
Commonwealth, for breach of trust, or misdemeanour, or any crime whatsoever,
because it may prove the utter undoing of him, and his wife and children.

Lastly, Whereas in the close of this Argument, he flourishes, telling us,
That doubtless Christ never took upon himself any such authority as to appoint
a few men to divest any men, much less Ministers of their rights, because
their faith in matters appertaining to God, is not the same with the Faith of
other men; It Is true, for Christ pretended not to the devesting any men of
their rights, because they believed not aright; but what is this to the
purpose? Will he infer from hence? Ergo. The Magistrate does ill, because he
requires those who are Officers or Commissioners under him upon a public and
civil account, not to permit those persons to enjoy the public maintenance,
who in matters of Faith do hold These are the words of the Ordinance for
ejecting.
Atheistical, Blasphemous, and execrable Opinions derogatory to the honor of
Christ, or who hold, teach, or maintain any of those Popish Opinions, which by
the Oath of Abjuration (mentioned in an Ordinance of Parliament of the 19 of
August, 1643.) ought to be abjured. Will he infer likewise? ERGO, The
Commissioners who put this part of their Commission in execution, do exercise
Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of men. Lastly, will he infer, ERGO,
rather then seem to do so, both the Magistrate and these Commissioners who act
under him, are bound to maintain the men in the promoting of their Execrable,
Blasphemous, and Popish Opinions in matters of Faith, rather than withdraw the
Public maintenance from them? Or else, that in not admitting them to have the
said Maintenance, or by withdrawing it from them, they (according to the
invidious sense of Master Goodwin) must needs incur the guilt of Lording it
over men's Faiths and Consciences? These are the rare Inferences that must
unavoidably be drawn (for no other can be) from his most enigmatical way of
arguing, till he please more rationally to furnish us with other Conclusions
from those sophisticated Suppositions, and those illogical, antilogical
Projicit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba.
Rodomontadoes and hard words, wherewith he abounds in this, and all other his
Sophisms, circumlocutory to little purpose. By this time I suppose the Reader
is sick enough of Mr John's second Argument, and therefore I shall not meddle
with that which follows in the close of it, it being only an iteration of the
same scandals against the Commissioners, which in black Characters of envy he
had set down once before, and which we shall have occasion to take notice more
at large, in another place by and by.

ARGUMENT III.
THey who devise new stratagems, Mr. G. his third Argument
methods, or inventions to aid the Gospel, and to prevent dangers or
inconveniences incident to it, beyond or besides all that Christ either
prescribed or directed to be done upon any such account, or for any such end,
do in effect deny what the Holy Ghost expressly testifies of him, viz. that he
was faithful to him that appointed him [meaning God the Father] as also Moses
was faithful in all his house, Heb. 3. 2. For if it be supposed that the two
Commissions specified, be advantageous and benedict to the interest of the
Gospel, and that this is more like to run and be glorified in the World,
because seconded and assisted by the said Commissions, then was not Jesus
Christ faithful unto God in all his house, neglecting or forgetting to give
any order to his Apostles or others, concerning the levying or setting on foot
any such means as these, for the relief of the Gospel; nor is it easy to
imagine (but much more difficult is it to prove) when, unto whom, or by whom
Christ directed the making of any such Evangelical Engines, as either of the
said Commissions are.
Answer.
For Answer to this, First, observe, that this is but a repetition, varying the
Phrase of what he (in effect) said before in his first Argument, and grounded
upon the same Petitio Principii, a begging of the Question, which we must by no
means admit, seeing I suppose we have already made it evident, as a matter out
of question; That it was not the intendment of Christ to leave (nor did he or
his Apostles leave) any Rules and Directions of such a nature, of so universal
an extent, variety, and Influence (as Mr. G. would insinuate he did) as that
they will serve in all respect, for the publication of the Gospel, and do
positively exclude the Magistrate from doing any thing at all that is
conducible thereunto; which indeed, as thus stated, is the sole matter in
question between our Superiors, and their Commissioners, and Mr. Goodwin in
this business.

Secondly, Whereas he calls the Commissions new strategems and inventions; its
a wonder he should be a man so hot against Novelties, whose phantsie has been
used to take a flight after all: But certainly (Sir) you are not so old as to
account what has been almost from the beginning, to be unto your gravity and
long standing in the world, but a Novelty. If it has been a constant practice
in all Times, that a man should not be admitted to an employment before he be
found fit to undertake it, nor continue in it, unless he behave himself therein
as he ought, can it be a new thing now to make a Trial and Judgment of men
upon the like occasion? The practice you may find both in the old and new
Testament. Besides, you your self do tell us in you eighth Argument, that the
Trying of men thus is as old as Episcopacy, and yet now it must be a Novelty;
that is no rare matter for you to contradict your self in all your writings,
and particularly in this, as I shall show you again by and by. Furthermore, you
may (if you please) remember, it was also a Course practiced by the late long
Parliament, who when the former way of Trial and Approbation ceased, appointed
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, or a Committee of them, to do the work;
as appears by the following Order.

Die Jovis, 27. Julii, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the Committee
for plundered Ministers shall nominate none to any Parsonage or Benefice, but
such as shall be examined by the Assembly of Divines, or any Five of them, and
approved of by Certificate under their hands.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

And afterward, when the meeting of the Assembly was at an end, then the
Provision for examining and approving (which you are pleased to represent as a
mere novelty) was so ordered; that it was exercised by the same persons (for
the most part) which were entrusted with the work before by the Parliament, who
thought it (as the present Governors now have done) a duty incumbent upon them,
to settle a way for the proving of the Qualifications of such men as offered
themselves to them for the work of the Gospel, before they would own and admit
them to partake of the Public Maintenance. So that I hope by this time Mr G.
is ready to retract, and acknowledge his error, for saying that the practice of
Trying and approving men for Gospel-employments is a new Invention. If he
please a little to look upward, he will find it as old as St. Paul, and
Timothy, and Titus, etc. So far is it from being a Novelty.

Thirdly, whereas he says, Those who devise means to aid the Gospel, and
prevent Inconveniences incident to it, beyond or beside what Christ has
prescribed and directed, do in effect deny him to be as faithful to God the
Father, as Moses was: For Answer to this, observe, That the great stress of his
Allegation lies in the particle [ As,] by virtue hereof supposing, that if
Christ were as faithful as Moses, then he left as full and clear Directions for
the work of the Gospel in all points, as Moses did for the Law. But this cannot
be the meaning of the place. For, in the 14. verse of the second Chapter, he is
said to be a faithful High Priest in two respects. 1. In things pertaining to
God, having approved himself faithful in revealing the Doctrine of the Gospel,
according to the mind of him that sent him, (For, that was one part of his
Commission, as you may read Luc. 4. 18.) 2. In that he made Reconciliation for
the sins of the people. And so in these two regards he was faithful both as a
Prophet, and a Priest, or as an Apostle and Priest, as it is expressed a little
after in the first verse of the third Chapter; where we are bidden to consider
his faithfulness in both those Capacities, who (as it follows, verse. 2.) was
faithful to him that appointed him, as Moses was. Now therefore, the only
Inference that can be made from the place is this, That as Moses was faithful
to God in what he appointed him to, so also was Christ. God the Father
appointed Christ as the great Prophet or Apostle of our Profession, to preach
the mind of God in the doctrine of the Gospel; that was one end of his
mission: And he appointed him as our High Priest, to offer up himself a
Sacrifice to make an Atonement or Reconciliation for the sins of the people.
Which two particulars being the ends of Gods appointing him, and he having
fulfilled them according to the appointment, is in this respect said to be
faithful as Moses was; not because he had done things in all respects to answer
the things done by Moses; for, then he would have left us such Rules and
Directions at large (which we cannot yet see) upon Record, as Mr. G says he
has done, for the Polity or Oeconomie of the Church, and as fully and
completely set down in writing* as Moses left his; but the genuine meaning of
the place must be undeniably this, That he was faithful in all things as Moses
was, because he published the Doctrine of the Gospel, and sealed it with his
blood for the expiation of sin, and therein did what he was appointed to, as
faithfully as Moses formerly did what he was appointed to by God. The (...) or
Equiparation of the faithfulness of Christ and Moses in this place, respects
only the reality and exactness of their performance, both of them having alike
punctually performed the several Appointments made to them by God; but it does
not infer that there was, or ought to have been a similitude, correspondency,
or congruity in the whole manner, extent and fabric of their Institutions.
For, to the end of the world, let Mr. G. do what he can with the Scripture, let
him wring it by the nose, to turn it which way he please, as the Papists do, or
to force blood out of it, as too many in our times do, yet he will never be
able to make this Text to serve his purpose: Besides, even in common sense it
is manifest to any that is but the least acquainted with the Gospel, that our
Lord and Savior has not by positive Laws descended so far into
particularities with us, as Moses did with the people of Israel. And so you see
what is become of the Third Argument, grounded upon a misunderstanding of that
part of the Scripture concerning Christ and Moses. We might be far more
copious; but this is too much for him.

ARGUMENT IV.
THe Lord Christ being (as was said) faithful, Mr. G. his Fourth Argument.
as Moses also was, in all the house of God, and his wisdom and providence
every ways answerable to this his faithfulness, it cannot be conceived but that
with his precepts, counsels, and directions for the advancement and prosperity
of the Gospel, he has taken up and filled the whole roomth or space which is
capable of receiving Injunctions, Orders, or Directions in that kind. So that
no man can add, insert, or thrust in any thing by way of advice, or under the
notion of a prudential contrivance for the promoting of the Gospel, but he must
justle or thrust out, and (in our Saviors phrase) make of none effect some or
other of those precepts or directions, which have been given by the Lord Christ
himself, for the same end. Even as the Pope cannot gratify any new Saint with
a day in the Calendar, but only either by turning some of the more ancient out
of their long-continued possessions, or else by compelling them to take the
other into part and fellowship with them in their honor, because the Calendar
is from the one end of it to the other already filled with the Names of the
more ancient: In like manner the whole latitude and compass of wisdom and
prudence for the due and successful managing of the affairs of the Gospel,
being spread with the orders and charges given by Jesus Christ in that behalf,
it is not possible for men to devise or set on foot any method, means, or
device of theirs for the promoting of this end, but by disauthorizing, or with
reflection of disparagement upon some or other, or all, of the said
prescriptions of Christ. Nor is it possible for any man to invent or form any
projection, or make any provision, which upon a true account will be found in
any degree material, or pertinent, for the welfare or success of the Gospel,
wherein he has not been prevented by the Great Author and Father of the Gospel
himself. Otherwise it must be supposed that men are, either (as has been said)
wiser then God, and able to supply that which has been wanting in him; or
else, that they are more sollicitous and careful over the interest of the
Gospel, more intent upon the salvation of the precious Souls of men, than He.
Therefore the two Commissioners we implead, the one of Triers, the other of
Ejectors, being neither of them given in charge by Jesus Christ for the
promotion of the Gospel, nor holding any true or real Communion with any of his
Orders in that behalf, must needs be of another Spirit and tendency from these,
and rather counter-workers, then co-workers with them: and this experience it
self has sufficiently discovered.
Answer.
Now we are come to that which he calls his fourth Argument, and expecting here
to meet with somewhat of Reason or Religion (because he boasts in his Title
page, that the whole Dozen and half, are all Arguments of that nature) I am not
able in this to find a grain of either, only we have him sitting down in the
Reverend chair of Tautology, where he is pleased with much commiseration of the
dull heads and weak memories of mankind ( tanquam ex Tripode) most oraculously
to dictate the same things again over and over, telling us, If Christ was as
faithful as Moses in all the house of God, then it cannot be conceived but that
with his Precepts, Counsels and Directions, he has done so much, that no man
man can add any thing by way of advice, or prudential contrivance for the
promoting of the Gospel, etc.

Mr Goodwin might have done well to give us a Transcript of those pretended
copious Precepts and Directions; and till he does, he must rest satisfied with
the Answer given to his first Argument, in reference to this particular,
because we are not at leisure for Repetition. Howbeit, because he seems to lay
some weight upon these words, [ In all the house of God] some Reply must be
made to that for the undeceiving of the Reader. By (...), the House of God, is
here meant the Church of God universal, as will appear by comparing it with 1 Timothy 3. 15. where the house of God, is plainly called, the Church of the living
God. Now it is not to be denied, but that Christ took care with as much
faithfulness, as Moses did for the ordering of all this House of God. For,
whatsoever was necessary for the founding, building; and ordering of this
House, Viz. The Church universal, he very faithfully provided. He laid the
foundation of it upon the Prophets and Apostles, these latter* viz the
Apostles, seconding that Doctrine of the Gospel, which had been first published
by the Prophets. Moreover, for the planting and building up of the House of
God, it is said, That he set in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of Healings,
diversity of Tongues. Lastly, for the ordering of this House of his, he left
the great Ordinances and Institutions of Preaching the Word, Baptism, and the
Supper, which Things we ought to suppose are all that Christ was appointed to
do, in reference to the ordering of the Church, seeing we read of no more, and
therefore having fulfilled the appointment of God therein, we ought to believe
him as faithful in his house, as Moses was in his, because he omitted nothing
for the establishment of it, which the Father thought necessary for him to do
in his own person. As for other things, which were necessary to be made use of
in after-time, for the gathering and ordering of particular Churches, in diverse
Cities, Towns, or Countries, he left them to the ordering of his Apostles, to
whom, before his Ascension, he gave a promise of the Spirit, for their
Direction and Assistance, which after his Ascension was performed; for, when he
ascended up on high, he gave Gifts unto men to that end and purpose; and
therefore he was faithful in all his House, as Moses was in his, though he and
his Apostles left not Rules and Direction, at such a Latitude, as to answer so
many particularities of Affairs and occasions, as Moses did. Nor indeed was
there the same Reason for it; for, if it may be lawful to guess at the ground
of Gods proceeding thus in this particular, who transacts all things according
to the best and most excellent dictates and proportions of wisdom, there
appears to be a great deal of Reason, why Christ and his Apostles, having left
such Institutions, Rules, and Directions, which are foundational, and
absolutely necessary for the Constituting of the Church in general, should not
descend to the inferior points of Regulation touching particular Churches, so
as to leave Rules for it as amply as Moses did, or to prescribe means and
Expedients, unto the use whereof all men should be tied up, who endeavor to
propagate or promote the Gospel. For, that Christ did not mean to set down
positive and particular Laws of so wide an extent for all things, as Moses did,
the very different manner of the delivering of the Laws of Moses, and the Laws
of Christ does plainly show. Moses had command to gather the Ordinances of God
together distinctly, that concerned the Jewish Church, and orderly to set them
down, according to their several kinds, for each public duty and office the
Laws that belong thereunto, as appears in the Books themselves written of
purpose to that end. On the other side, the Laws of Christ about the affairs of
his Church, we find rather mentioned by occasion in the writings of the
Apostles, than any solemn Thing directly written to comprehend and Record them
in a Legal method and form; which I mention not (and therefore let no envious
eye make such a construction, seeing it cannot be construed) in diminution of
the said Gospel-Laws, which with a devout heart I reverence as of the most
sacred and most transcendent Divine Authority; but I hint this only to
intimate, that the very different manner of the delivery of the Laws of Christ
and Moses touching Church Affairs, does show, that the one had no intent to
leave Laws, which might answer the variety of Gospel-occasions in particulars
of so large a compass, as the other did to supply Church-occasions in the time
of the Law. Besides, be pleased to consider, that when Moses gave those
positive Laws and Ordinances both Ceremonial and Judicial, they were intended
only for that particular Nation, who then were the sole People, House, or
Church of God, and accordingly God in the framing of those Laws, had an eye and
regard to the nature of that people for whom they were made, and peculiar and
proper Considerations were upon that account respected in the composure, to
answer most of the Occasions that might fall out in the administration of the
Affairs of that Church and State; which end might indeed easily be attained by
prescribing Rules in and to a particular Nation: But when Christ came, the Case
was much altered; for whereas the House or Church of God in Moses time, was
confined to one single Nation, now it was to be made up out of all Nations: The
Laws of the Commonwealth were then made conformable to the Order of Church:
But the Church under the Gospel, being to spread through all States and
Commonwealths, was so formed, as it might without prejudice to the Civil
Peace, be entertained in any Nation; and therefore as the framing of positive
Laws, Rules, or Directions of the same nature with those of Moses, which might
serve to fit the different Tempers and Constitutions, the various necessities,
Affairs and Occasions of all the Nations of the World, or of those Remnants
which should be first converted in all Nations, and oblige them to a very
Puntilio, (as Mr. G. pretends) was in the very nature of the thing altogether
impracticable, so it must have proved no less inconvenient, then unnecessary.
For, Christ himself having appointed the principal Ordinances before his
departure, such as might be conveniently made use of by the Church Universal;
and his Apostles having left diverse Rules and Directions which are of the same
general concernment, and which may indifferently serve to the principal parts
of Economy in the Churches, in all the Nations of the world, its to be
supposed he has (by himself and his Apostles) done all that the Father judged
necessary for him to do on the behalf of the Gospel, and thereby approved
himself faithful in all his House, as Moses was in his. And whereas I
maintain, that in particular matters of lesser Importance, concerning the way
of carrying on the Gospel, there are no positive Laws or Rules to be found of
so vast a Latitude and comprehension, as to reach all Purposes, Occasions,
Accidents, and Emergencies, in all succeeding times all over the world, so as
for ever to exclude altogether the use of humane Reason and discretion from
assisting about the way and means of publishing the Gospel; this Assertion of
mine is so far from occasioning any man thereupon to infer, or imagine any
defect of wisdom and providence on the part of our Lord and Savior, that it is
rather a clear Evidence he has (as becomes his Divine wisdom and faithfulness)
therein so ordered the matter, as was most agreeable to right Reason (which is
a ray of the Divinity) and to the nature and scope of His and his Fathers own
great design and intendment; which was, and is, To gather unto him self a
People out of all Nations upon the face of the Earth. So there is an end of his
fourth Argument; in the confutation whereof, it was necessary to enlarge thus a
little more than ordinary, because as it is a supposition too much rooted in the
conceptions of men in these times, so he seems to build much upon it, and with
many flashes of Ostentation to dazzle the eyes of the Reader. The residue of his
Arguments which follow, import little else but matter of scandal, to which,
though there be no other Answer due than what Michael the Archangel gave the
Devil, yet somewhat must be said to each of them by way of Animadversion.

ARGUMENT V.
IT might be wondered why Mr. G. (but that we know the metal of the man and his
brow) presumes to call his following Paragraphs by the name of Arguments, when
as most of them, if you remove the scandalous materials, do tumble of
themselves, and drop into their first nothing. In that which he calls the Fifth
Argument, first he insinuates, That the Commissioners entrusted are an
inconsiderable number of men, Mr. G. his fifth Argument.
subject to the like errors, passions, weaknesses, and miscarriages with other
men; and what a sad business it must be to the godly people, that they should
have a Negative voice about the placing, displacing, and disposing of all
Ministers over all Parishes in the Nation; which he calls an unchristian and an
unheard of Prodigy. That the Commissioners are men subject to failings, as
other men, it is like they will not deny: But what will this great prodigious
Man at Arms in Argumentation from thence infer? Will he say, Ergo, They ought
not to be trusted in the Business committed to them? Then, by consequence,
neither they nor any other men ought to be trusted with the placing or
displacing of Ministers in Parishes, because none of the sons of Adam can be
found free from the possibility of falling into some error or miscarriage about
the business. If this Arguing hold good, then neither the Magistrate, nor any
other Officer ought to be allowed any Trust in the Commonwealth in matters
concerning men's lives and estates, because as men they are subject to
miscarrying; and by consequence also, neither Patrons nor others who have any
right or power to present to Benefices, should enjoy or exercise their right or
power of Presenting, because they may, through weakness, err or do amiss
therein; which would be a rare acute way of Reasoning indeed, and may serve on
the same manner as sufficiently to subvert men's Rights in every thing, destroy
Government, and prove that All things in this world ought to be left at random,
because men may err in point of Administration. -- But the Commissioners (he
says) are an inconsiderable number of men, and have a Negative voice to place,
displace, and dispose. How many the Commissioners, and who they are, may be
seen by the Ordinances themselves, where the Reader will find they are
considerable for number, and for worth remarkable, (over and above their Piety
and Learning) for this consideration especially, that they know not how to give
the right hand of fellowship to men of his corrupt behavior and persuasion;
and that I shall manifest anon to be the great reason why the man is so angry.
And as to the Negative voice, you may see in the Ordinance for Approbation,
that no Vote in the Negative shall pass for the disapproving of any man, unless
Nine or more of the Commissioners be present: Also, according to the Ordinance
for Ejecting, there are to be Ten present and concurring, for the displacing or
ejecting of any person. And so now the only question is, whose wisdom is best
to be relied on, either that of our Governors, or Mr. Goodwin's, touching the
conveniencie and sufficiency of the Number for such purposes. As to what he
says about placing and disposing, the Commissioners neither have, nor assume
any such power, but Patrons and others do now as inviolably enjoy their
respective Rights of Presentation, as heretofore.

Here before I go any further, I must needs take notice of one thing in this
Argument as very observable; and it is this; That he takes upon him to plead
for the power of Choice to be in Parishes, or in the well-affected in Parishes;
and in regard that they have not the power of Choosing, therein it is that he
places the greatness of the unchristian and unheard of Prodigy. Now,

1. Consider, what is this to the Commissioners? They (as I said before)
neither have, nor assume any power to choose or dispose of men to Places, nor
are they the Cause why Parishes, or the well-affected in Parishes have not all
the power of choosing their own Ministers. The most remarkable and prodigious
thing is, to see how this mighty man of Reason baffles himself ever and a non
with self-contradiction. Here you have him eagerly asserting it to be a
prodigious business, that the several Parishes, or the well-affected in them
have not the said power of choosing: And then hereafter in the Seventh Argument,
we shall find him stiffly pleading on the behalf of the Right and power of
Patrons in matter of choosing; tricking it up with many Flowers of Rhetoric,
telling us that their Right of Presentation is a Right in Law, a Royal
privilege; and looks upon it as a violation offered to their Throne and
Dignity, if they may not in the utmost freedom enjoy this Conveniencie, as he
is pleased to term it. But seeing this is as great an Intrenchment as any can
be imagined, upon the power of Parishes by him pleaded for, if Patrons ought to
have the power; therefore we have need of another Oedipus to solve this
Prodigy or Riddle in Logic, otherwise called a Contradiction; That it ought,
and it ought not to be in Parishes.

2. Consider likewise, in case Parishes were entrusted with the power of choice
and nomination, what then would be the consequence? Certainly, those godly and
well-affected ones by him mentioned, who are usually the lesser number among
them, would have the least stroke in the choice; the truth whereof sufficiently
appears in those Parishes who by right of purchase, or some other way have the
Patronage vested in themselves. It is sad to consider what woeful divisions and
distractions usually arise among them about their Choice (especially if the
living be considerable) and common experience shows, that the godly and
well-affected are usually overborn by the profane and more numerous Party.
Sure, Mr Goodwin will not easily forget the experience which himself has had
of the truth of this in his own particular.

But he proceeds to tell us, If the Triers shall be froward, or bear a grudge
at a Parish, then the Parish will come to be defeated of the Minister that is
presented to the place. This gives me occasion to observe the prudent
Constitution of the present Ordinance for Approbation, the power thereby
delegated being entrusted not in few, but many hands; and herein it concurs
with the ancient prudence of Nations, it being ever thought requisite by
Princes and Governors to put a multitude in the same Commission, when they
designed to prevent the carrying of matters of high importance in a froward and
passionate way. The reason hereof is evident, because right reason and Justice
are common Principles which all men have in them more or less, and do bear a
reverence thereto by the very light of Nature, and therefore when any thing
that is reasonable and just comes to be insisted on, all men do readily assent
to it, except some who may be biased to the contrary by Passion. Now on the
other side, Passion, though it be an Affect common to all men likewise more or
less, yet being an infirmity of nature which either clouds reason, or suspends
the use of* it in the man, or men so affected, transporting them to do things
unjust, it appears so unlovely in the eyes of others who observe it, that
instead of consenting with it, other men unconcerned in the causes and
occasions of the same Passion, are all ready to pass a sentence of
Condemnation upon it; and therefore as touching matters carried by the
Commissioners here impeached (who are many) put case that one or two among them
should bear such a grudge, as is here insinuated by Mr Goodwin, or be froward
because of some private Passion, how will he or they do to prevail over the
common Principles of Reason and Justice which are in their fellow
Commissioners? who being unconcerned in the private passion of those one or
two, as it will be a hard matter for these to persuade them to concur with
them, so those one or two will be ashamed to press them upon such a
consideration to join with them in suffrage to do injustice one way or other.
What think ye then? Is it likely indeed, that all the Triers (as he is pleased
to term them) or that the whole nine who are to be of the Quorum in case of
disapprovement, should concur in Spleen against a whole Parish? yet upon this
extreme improbability, he places the force of this part of his Argument, to
prove that the entrusting of the Commissioners for Approbation is an
Unchristian Prodigy. By this way of Arguing I will overthrow all the
Deputations, Delegations, and Commissions of men under heaven, that act in any
kind, and subvert the power of Patrons too into the bargain, if you will admit
me to make use of Ifs and Ands, and from an Hypothetical Insinuation that they
may behave themselves ill in their Trusts, permit me Categorically to infer
this positive Conclusion, That therefore they are unlawful, or that it were
better to have none at all trusted in any employment, upon any occasion
whatsoever. But this is the transcendent Goodwinian way of Argumentation, well
known at the Divinity-School in Coleman-University.

Moreover, to prove that the entrusting of the said Commissioners is an
unchristian unheard of Prodigy, he tells us, They may judge a man unsound in
the Faith, whom the Congregation shall desire for their Minister, because of
some special Opinion, one or more, for-which (it is possible) the Congregation
may in special manner desire him, and can desire and admit of none that is
contrary-minded* and so a Congregation may never be permitted to enjoy a
Minister by whom they can edify. The Commissioners are unchristian, because
they may judge a man unsound in the Faith! This is rare stuff both in Reason
and Religion, is it not? Suppose the man whom a Congregation or Parish (for
they are Parochial Congregations only, which have maintenance by Law, that the
Commissioners are concerned to take notice of) should hold some execrable
blasphemous Opinion, or some other Opinion dangerous to the Christian verity,
though not so formidable at first sight as the other, and that a Congregation
should desire him especially for that Opinion, should not the Commissioners
reject such a one, whom they find to be so upon examination? Or were it fit to
gratify the desires of a Parish by permitting such a man to be their Minister,
who would be a means of confirming them in the same condemnable Opinion? Let
Christians judge who are most unchristian and prodigious (the Commissioners by
disapproving such a man, or Mr. G. by recommending him) in reference to this
particular.

But for a more full Answer, Mr. G. may please to consider, 1. That it never
was heretofore, nor is it now agreeable to the purpose or conveniencie of this
State, to employ the Public Maintenance for the encouraging of this, that, or
the other particular Opinion; but it was first intended and settled for the
upholding of a Public profession of Religion in the Nation, and for the
support of those Ministers that agree with the Magistrate in the same Public
profession. And upon this ground it was, that the Statute of Queen Elizabeth
required a Subscription to the XXXIX Articles of Religion, which then were
established as the Public Profession; otherwise, no man was to be admitted to
a Benefice with Cure of Souls; it being most reasonable, that the State should
do what they would with their own, and accordingly dispose of the
State-maintenance, for the maintaining of such a Public Profession, as they in
Conscience believed to be most agreeable to the Word of God. 2. Suppose that
both Patrons and Approvers were removed, and all left to Parish-choice, yet I
cannot understand that the generality of Parishes are such Opinionists, as to
be indeared to some one or two special Opinions; whenas the truth is, they are
led by other Considerations, when they have a mind to receieve or refuse a
Minister. Of all men living, Mr. G. has least reason to plead for Parishes in
this respect. Was he chosen Vicar of Coleman street Parish heretofore, for his
one or two special and singular Opinions? Nay rather, did not the Parish, when
they had a season and occasion to feel their own strength, and after he had
been a painful Labourer among them many years, take the opportunity, because of
such Opinions, to eject him, and place another in his Bishopric? The truth is,
(and that Mr. Goodwin's own Conscience tells him) if there might be no other
supply made for Parishes throughout England, but such as the Parishioners, or a
major part of them can cordially reverence and affect, the man so chosen in
most Parishes would be a man in a Surplice, with the Common Prayer Book,
devoutly observing all the Ceremonies and Festivals, and giving Bread and Wine
round the Parish respectively: These are the special Opinions and Practices one
or more, for which ('it is possible) most Parishes in England and Wales may in
special manner desire such a man, and can desire and admit of none that is
contrary-minded. Yet perhaps Mr. G. his Arminian special Opinions (one or more)
may go far with the Common people, who have a mind to live as they list, and to
live so long as they list; because according to those Opinions of Mr. G. so
pleasing to flesh and blood, they may when they please set themselves on work
to mend their condition. But yet those special Opinions, though pleasing
enough, would not please half so well, and open but a few Parish-doors in this
Nation, in comparison of those that would be opened to Superstition and
Malignancie, and one or more of such special Opinions. Nevertheless, provided
the door may be large enough (so large is this dying man's Conscience, or the
dying Conscience of this man) to let in Arminians into a few Parishes, then,
though Popery, Superstition, Profaneness, and the Devil himself should by that
means get into the rest of the Parishes, he takes no care, he could
notwithstanding die quietly.

3. The power of Choice and Nomination to Livings was never yet entrusted
solely in the hands of Parishes, but it has remained partly in the hands of
the Magistrate as the grand Patron, partly in the hands of private Patrons, who
had a Right to it either by Inheritance or Purchase: But yet still the
Magistrate and the Law interposed as to the power of Trying and Approving men
presented, and settled a Course accordingly for the Trial and Examination of
them, before they were admitted to enjoy that Public Maintenance which was
legally annexed to the Places to which they had been presented. This has been
the practice from all Antiquity; and yet he is pleased to lash out against the
present Course appointed for Approbation, as unchristian and prodigious: And
therefore I think rather he (this ill-portending Comet, this wandering Star of
Error and Falsehood, who would seem to be one of those real ones fixed in the
Firmament of the Church, but hangs only in the Air, as if he were to usher some
greater Heresies into the world) is himself indeed a most unchristian Prodigy.

He ends this Argument with telling us, The Commissioners may obtrude a man
upon a Congregation (pro libitu suo) be he never so froward, insufficient, or
ill-conditioned, or unsound. Read over the Ordinance for Approbation (which is
their Commission) and you will find this to be like the rest of his stories:
For (as I have said already) if a man that is presented to a place happen to be
dis-approved by them upon examination, they have no power of placing any other
there in his stead, but such person or persons who have right thereunto.

ARGUMENT VI.
NOw to the sixth Argument (much like the former) wherein he says, The
Commissions as they have been and still are acted and administered, do entrench
upon the spiritual Rights and Privileges of the people of God, who are
invested by Christ Jesus, with power to choose for themselves, and enjoy while
they please a man to be over them in the Lord, a spiritual shepherd, the
Commissioners rejecting whom they please, and keep asunder them whom God would
have joined together, if they will not yea it, and nay it with them from the
one end of their faith to the other. This Argument being compared with the
former, supposes two sorts of Congregations in the Nation; which is granted,
Viz* A Parish Congregation made up (for the most part) of the people of the
World, and another sort, sometimes termed a separate, sometimes a gathered
Congregation, consisting only (so far as in charity we are able to judge) of
persons fearing the Lord in truth and sincerity. The Minister of the one we
usually term Parson or Vicar; and the Minister of the other Pastor or Teacher.
It is of the latter that in this place he asserts this privilege, but it is
with the former only that the Commissioners have to do. Mr Goodwin could
himself have solved this doubt without my help. He knows, that the Vicar of
the Parish Assembly of Stephens Colemanstreet may either be put in or put out,
and yet the Pastor of that remnant of sheep (usually assembling in some private
house in Colemanstreet) remain in his Pastoral relation still, and neither be
put in or out by either of these Commissions. And yet he has the confidence to
speak what he says, at large, of the people of God in general; whereas it is
well enough known, that what privilege soever the people of God in gathered
Congregations have exercised heretofore in the choosing and retaining of their
own spiritual Shepherds, they do still enjoy and exercise with the same
Liberty; and those Shepherds of theirs being not at all under the cognizance
and examination of the Commissioners, the yeaing and the naying it with them is
quirkt in here by Mr Goodwin, to no purpose but to fill up the Page; and so
there is the sum of that which he calls his sixth Argument, though (you see)
it amounts to no more but a bold groundless Affirmation.

ARGUMENT VII.
THe seventh is just such another. He says, The Commissioners for Approbation
(by him termed the Commission for Tryers) strike at the Civil Rights of
Patrons, and all others concerned in presenting, who have a Law-right of
presenting men unto Parochial Demesnes, which are called Benefices or Spiritual
Promotions. But how can that be, seeing the Ordinance admits the Rights of
Patrons and others in this kind? Yes, by a trick that sagacious Master Goodwin
has sented out; for he says, Thouh Presentations be made by such as have the
right to do it, and though the Persons presented be never so deserving, yet
they lie at the mercy of the Tryers, whether ever they shall enjoy the
Preferments collated upon them, or no. But how comes this about? even by a
device of his own forging. For first, he imagines, (but proves not a Word)
That the Commissioners practice is, to act their power in quarelling and
opposing the Clerk presented; And secondly, By means of their power, in
conjunction with their Interest, and subtilty to bring about their ends, they
become (effective) the Patrons of all spiritual livings in the Nation These are
not all his very words, but the sum and substance of that unmanly scandal,
which he calls his seventh Argument, and under the name of an Argument he will
needs obtrude it upon the Reader, whereas it is nothing less; for it
concerns an Accuser both in foro externo, and interno, that if he brings in
an Accusation of Fact against any man, or number of men, he should produce
Instances as an Argument to prove the Accusation, or else he must stand
condemned of calumniation, both before the world, and in his own conscience,
for want of due proof: But Mr Goodwin brings not so much as one single Instance
toward the making of such an Argument; Ergo, He is an errant Calumniator.

Moreover, if you look a little narrowly into it, you will find this directly
contradictory to the two foregoing arguments. In the fifth he pleads, as if it
were the Civil Right and Royalty of the People in a Parish to choose. Then in
the sixth, he pleads for it, as one of the Spiritual Rights and Privileges of
the People of God only to choose. And now again, in this seventh, he forgets
both these, and falls stiffly to pleading on the behalf of Patrons, asserting
the power of choice to be in them, as a Royal Privilege and matter of
Conveniencie intended them by the Law, by which means he now thrusts the Rights
that he before alleged on the behalf of the other two quite out of the
Calendar. Saevis inter se convenit Vrsis, Bears usually agree together, yet
these Arguments of his are so wild and savage, that it is not in the power of
man to tame them or bring them to consistency and correspondence with each
other, so as to apprehend what he intends by either. Only, this is evident,
that somewhat he would say against the Commission of Tryers (as he is pleased
to term them) and so being in passion cares not what he says, but utters what
makes rather for, than against them. For he acknowledges Patrons have a Right;
also, that their Right is a Civil legal Right (and upon that account he
pretends to defend it against the Commissioners, as violaters of it, though
neither their Commission, nor their practice do entrench upon it;) and
therefore if by his own Confession it be a Civil Right to choose, then doubtless
to examine and judge, whether the man so chosen be fit or no, must needs be a
Civil Act; and so the care of examining, and approving accordingly, cannot be
denied to the Civil Magistrate now; more then in former times, unless (like
your worthy Partner in this Plea, Mr. Postlethwait) you would have no
Lawgiver, no Magistrate but Christ in the Commonwealth. Thus you see, by
making use of that which Mr. G. himself before confesses, ( viz. that the
Right of Presentation stands upon a mere Civil account) it follows plain,
that the Civil Power has a Right to approve men to those Civil and Temporal
(which Mr. G. calls Spiritual) Demesnes, and that they have done but of what
right they ought to do, in entrusting certain persons to act under them, as
Commissioners for Approbation.

But how comes it to pass that Mr. G. is so earnest an Advocate on the behalf
of Patrons? By this I perceive, that all the Subjects of the Fifth Monarchy are
not of one mind; for his brother Mr. Postlethwait, who has dipped his Pen
likewise against the Triers (so he also calls the Commissioners) is altogether
as hot against Patrons, crying out in his Entitled, A Voice from Heaven
against the Triers.
Book, page 72, Away with Patrons -- those most abominable usurpers; durst Paul
and Barnabas exercise such Tyranny, as to impose a Minister upon the People?
and he goes on page 73 thus: Away therefore with these abominable usurpers --
Though it be under more restraint now then formerly, this will not salve the
matter. What Mr. G. pretends a crime in the Triers, his brother Postlethwait
looks upon it as a virtue, and thinks the fault is this, that Patrons are not
restrained enough by the Triers, whereas indeed the Triers (so called) do not
all streighten Patrons in their Rights, but rather preserve them. However Mr.
Postlethwait tells us page 84. he must confess, that at first he was pretty
well satisfied with the Ordinance. It Is true, he was so well satisfied, that he
came up and took Approbation from the Commissioners, but afterward being
returned, he, like his brother Goodwin, is blown about to another point in
Judgment; And though in Fifth Monarchy-Principles they are the same, and in
mutability the same, yet being carried with several winds they vary; for Mr.
Postlethwait's next words tells us, he was pretty well satisfied with the
Ordinance for the Commissioners sitting, saving that its grounded in part upon
the defense of Patron's Rights and Properties. Then says he, That which
satisfied me at first was, that their Commission gives them not power to invest
into office; but that will not answer all my scruples now (a very growing man
he is in scruples!) for, though they are not to invest into Office, yet they
are to take the beginnings of their Proceeding from the Presentation of the
Patron, who presents to benefice with Cure of Souls originally; and I know no
qualification that is put on his Presentation, but only a care taken to
preserve his Right and Property. I cannot but commend this ingenuity of Mr.
Postlethwait, which Mr. G. is not willing to imitate. Time was, when Mr.
Goodwin used these following words, [ The time was I was pretty well satisfied,
etc.] which time was just the eighth of Frebruary, 1651. for then you (Sir) and
your Elder, Mr. Price, subscribed with others, an humble desire to the
Parliament, that two such Ordinances as now you write against, might be
established by the Civil Magistrate: But you (Sir) you that have the Staggers
in the Brain, it is not for you to remember, or be of one mind long together.

As to that passage of his before-recited, wherein he says, the Commissioners
are found Patrons (effective) to all the Livings in the Nation, let me add thus
much further by way of Answer. 1. Is it likely that his Highness and the
Council should so pen an Ordinance, that one part of it should contradict and
utterly make avoid another, as Mr. Goodwin's Scriblings use to do? This is to
let the world know how little he esteems their prudence, and how much his own.
But his principal Aim is at the Commissioners; who, he says, are of Approvers
become Patrons; yes, and worse too; for Patrons do not, or should not make a
gain of their Presentations. But he dares not speak out; for, his own heart
knows, he has not the least pretense for it, yet it seems he could wish it
were so, and therefore insinuates such a baseness, in such Covert terms (which
he knows well how to do) as may not amount to a direct charge. Is this a
righteous man, who endeavors here to fasten so high and unworthy an Accusation
upon the Commissioners? whose known integrity has extorted another Character
concerning them, even from himself, in his Epistle before this very Book, Where
he says, that he believes them to be men of Conscience and worth, fearing God,
and lovers of Truth: So that you have waters of Contradiction, bitter and
sweet, proceeding from the fame Fountain. And observing this, I resolve to
inform my self more fully both from the Ordinance, and by other Enquiries,
whether it be possible, that men deserving that high Testimony which he has
given them in his Epistle, should so totally fall from grace, and all
ingenuity, as to become such as he makes them in his Book; and this pains I the
rather take, that so Mr. G. may appear the more illustrious in his Art of
Calumny and self-contradiction. As to what he objects about the Commissioners
disposing of Livings, and becoming effective Patrons. 1. Take notice the
Ordinance says no such matter. By it they cannot give Approbation to any
person who brings not a Presentation or nomination from a Patron. They give
admission to none but it is upon Record, and entered into a Book, with the name
of the Patron, the names of those who certify, and the date, etc. Which any
man may see that has a mind to it; and then will be able to say, whether
there was ever yet any person put into any Living by them, that was not first
presented by the Patron. 2. Observe, If the Person presented be disapproved, it
must be by nine, or a greater number; and certainly, for any one Commissioner
to compass his end upon such a number, it will not only require great subtilty
in him, but great simplicity in the rest, of which crime they seem as yet to
stand clear with Mr. Goodwin. But suppose a man should be rejected upon some
such design, what are the Commissioners, or any one of them the better for
this, if they should have a design to bring a friend in his room? Is it likely
the Patron will be so much in love with the Commissioners for this their
forwardness in putting by his friend every way worthy, that he will so easily
be induced to present a person of their recommending? If he should, certainly
he has little of Mr. Goodwins precious spirit of revenge in him. But Mr. G.
says further, That the Commissioners can put men by, that are presented,
toties quoties, until the six months be run out, and the Living lapsed to his
Highness; of whom, or from the Lords Commissioners of the great Seal, they will
by their Interest obtain the Living for a Friend. But (Mr. G.) can you give
Instances of any such practices frequent among them? if you can, it well
becomes you to do it. If he could give but one Instance, the world should have
heard it loud enough: For can any man that reads this Pamphlet of his, imagine
him so much in love with the Commissioners, or so indulgent to their credit,
that if he knew any thing this way, he would conceal it for their sakes? Well
then, let Mr. Goodwin be Mr. Goodwin, and give me leave to tell the world
before his face what I find. -- The Commissioners wisely foreseeing what
odious necessary work they had undertaken, and how provoking it was like to be
to witty unworthy persons, who are able to dress up surmises and jealousies,
and in revenge suggest any slander against them that has but the least color
of Truth, though never so false (I say, the Commissioners foreseeing this) did
by Joynt-Consent, among many other Orders, make this; That no Commissioner
should endeavor the procuring from his Highness, or from the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal, any such Living, for any friend or relation,
the vacancie or Lapse whereof has been occasioned by the insufficiency of a
person or persons presented, and refused by them. And I am able with the
greatest confidence to affirm, that an Instance cannot be given throughout
England or Wales, whereby you can make it appear, that they have not in the
greatest severity observed this Order; or that any Commissioner has, by any
such subtilty, or interest, preferred a man since their sitting. He that has a
large Phant'sie, and a large Conscience, may irrecoverably wrong the
innocentest person in the World.

Then, whereas he talks (like himself) of the Commissioners receiving the
Tribute of thanks and acknowledgement due to Patrons ( if no baser metal
withal) from those whom (as he pretends) they so prefer; He thereby
insinuates and tempts men to believe what he has not the least ground to
assert, namely, that they have not only wrested Patrons Rights out of their
hands, but do dispose of them in a way of gain to themselves. By the words [
Baser Metal] he would give men occasion to suspect, that they receive metal or
money in the base way of Bribery; yet in his Epistle he terms them men of
Conscience and worth, fearing God. Certainly, this man has strange Notions, as
in other Points, so about the nature of Conscience, and the Fear of God; but if
he mean to have himself so thought and judged of in such dealings as these, he
had need lend us some other Notion of a Conscionable man fearing God, then as
yet we have commonly received. I am sure, if he had but the Conscience of a
Moral Man; that is, if he thought it just and honest to prove or give Instances
when he accuses, he would not thus voluntarily have given himself up to his
service (with whom he deserves to share in Title) who is indeed the Grand
Accuser, nor have sacrificed his Pen a weapon of unrighteousness, as he does in
every page of his Book.

ARGUMENT VIII.
THe sum of the eighth is this, Mr. G. his eighth Argument.
That in the days of Prelacy when the Bishops were Tryers, if they upon a
corrupt or illegal pretense, refused to admit any presented to them, there lay
a Quare impedit against them for remedy in Law; but the Commissioners (he
says) have power now, Beyond the Bishops, and above all Law. But how does he
make this out? not with any rational Evidence, but clothes his irrational
Insinuations in Scripture Phrase, in hope to make them take the more plausibly,
and sink the deeper. In their proceedings (says he) they esteem all Laws as
Leviathan esteems Iron and Brass, who esteems Iron as Straw, and Brass as
rotten wood. This is baiting the hook with Leviathan to catch a Gudgeon, making
a great deal ado to little purpose. For first, there is no use now of the Old
Law concerning the Quare impedit, the Reason of it being gone: For, it was the
practice of the Bishops heretofore, when a Clerk had been presented to any of
them by a Patron, many times to deny him Institution and Induction, and then
use sleights to baffle off both the Clerk and his Patron from time to time,
that so the time wherein the Patron was to present being Lapsed, the power of
Presentation might fall into the Bishops own hands (as by Law it was to do in
case of a Lapse) by which means Patrons came to be defeated of their Rights,
and the Bishops gained thereby an opportunity to prefer their own Chaplains and
creatures into livings: For remedy of this abuse it was, that the Quare impedit
was appointed. But now there is no such occasion for the use of it against the
present Commissioners, because they have no power to act the same abuse; for in
case they reject a man that is presented, the Patron may present another; and
in case it shall happen at any time through his own default, that the
Presentation be Lapsed, the Commissioners have no power to place another in the
living, but the Presentation upon a Lapse devolveth of course into the hands of
the Lord Protector. Moreover, he forgets that the Commissioners act by an
Ordinance, which at first was equivalent to a Law, and is now become a Law, in
the formality of Law, and how then can they be said to be above Law? Besides,
he does not consider, That this Law, called the Ordinance, is much more
suitable to the Gospel, because it makes a more Gospel-like and strict
provision for the trying of Persons, then former Laws did, such persons having
heretofore a greater Indulgence by Law, in respect of the Qualifications
required to be in them for undertaking the Ministry, and the Bishops
accordingly had a greater latitude of power, as well as Conscience, to give
them an easy approbation and admittance to the work of the Gospel; and that
was the reason why the Benefices of this Nation became so well stocked with
numbers of strange licentious and scandalous Ministers, most of which (if not
all) were of Mr Goodwins own Heterodox opinion against the great truths of Gods
electing love in Christ, and the Saints perseverance, and held the other
contrary coincident Phant'sies, which necessitate the Owners in order to the
maintaining of them, to torment and subvert the whole Analogy of Scripture. If
Mr Goodwin were the pious man indeed that he would be thought to be, he would
rather bless God and commend our Governors, who have taken such an especial
care by the two Ordinances, that the Rules therein being observed, such brute
Beasts cannot enter the Lords Vineyard in time to come, and that if any should
(by accident) enter, they may soon be ejected. But alas, his great business is,
to propagate his own opinion, and because some of the Sons of the womb thereof
have been brought to the very birth of Preferment, yet have not had strength
enough to get abroad into possession, and so have run and complained to him who
has ambition enough to be thought their Father, (though forsooth himself be,
like them, but a mere Brat of Arminius, as he was of the more ancient
Heretics) it is for the sakes of these Sons of his, that his bowels are moved,
especially his Spleen, the dark vapors whereof have so obscured the light of
his Conscience and Understanding, that he sees not the necessity, the equity,
and piety of the two Ordinances, which provide against a return of the like men
of Belial into the work of the Gospel; and the sharp humors which proceed from
an overflowing of the Gall, have so raised his passions, that the use of Reason
being lost in the storm, it is the less wonder to see him quite out of all Mood
and Figure, foisting out Fictions and Calumnies against his Brethren, and then
by virtue of his own reverend Fatherhood imposing them as infallible Arguments
upon the belief of the World.

But he (it seems) is as bold as Leviathan, and having a Brow of Brass, it is
he that counts the present Authority and Laws but as straw and rotten wood
before him. And (if we may with the good leave of his Fatherhood make a better
use of his own Scripture-expressions;) He it is that, with the wild Ass in
Jeremy, Mr. G. his own expression.
being used to the wilderness, snuffs up the wind at pleasure, and fears not in
his reviling occasions to be turned away by any man: But for matter of
Argument, as a tame Ass you may easily take him. The Reader must pardon this
Levity, if I use it a little now and then; it is borrowed from him out of his
Book; and indeed there can no suitable Reply be made to him without it, who in
stead of Argument, spends the main of this Paragraph in Quips and Taunts
against the Commissioners, calling them A rule-less, lawless, controlless
generation of men, the like whereof were never set over the Lords people in
this Nation; And the Commission he terms the like insufferable yoke about the
necks of the Freeborn people. And all this (forsooth) he vomits up against the
present Authority, because they have given Rules and Directions by a Law to
prove men whether they be sound in the Faith, before they be sent to preach the
Faith; and against the Commissioners because they act under them to the same
purpose, and take care to do that which Paul commanded Timothy, which was, To
commit the Word of the Gospel to faithful men; and to follow the counsel of
John in refusing such as are false Teachers, and not bidding them God speed by
giving them Approbation. How then are these so lawless, who have the Law of God
and man to direct and justify them? Never was a pious public work so
impiously and shamefully traduced by any man who had the least face of
Christianity. And what is the reason of all this barking and snarling? even for
no other reason, but because some of the same Litter with himself have been
denied the State-maintenance, and not permitted to hunt for the precious souls
of men, at the charges and expense of the Public Hinc illae lachrymae. This
you shall see him as good as confessing by and by: But enough of it at present.

ARGUMENT IX.
THe next he calls his Ninth Argument, Mr. G. his Ninth Argument.
which I wonder we had not hint of in his painting the porch of his Title Page;
for, there he makes Proclamation of no other but Arguments in Religion and
Reason; but here now the man is more liberal then his word, and out of the
riches of an overflowing phant'sie, has been so bountiful (after long
experience in affairs of State) as to open his Pack and Pedlery of Politics,
to furnish out an Argument in Policy for the better instruction of the present
Authority: So that though he do only wrong and abuse them in other places, yet
in this he abuses them and endeavors to make them amends both together. For,
he tells them, Where there are great numbers of men in a State, of real worth
for Piety on the one hand, and for choiceness of Parts on the other hand, who
are divided in Judgment about many great Questions and Controversies in
Religion; it is broadly contrary to all approved Principles of State-policie,
to set up and arm one of those Parties with power and authority to judge and
sentence the other, and this without all remedy or relief, either by Appeal or
otherwise; seeing that such a course as this directly tends to beget a spirit
of insolency, extravagancie, and oppressi^n in the party thus advanced and
empowered, and on the other side a spirit of discontent, disaffection, etc.

O most Oraculous! The State is bound to give you thanks (Sir) and have reason
to consider your Political wisdom and deservings. In the mean time, I that am
their Servant shall give you part of your payment. That there are in this
Nation men of various Judgments in diverse Points, who are eminent for Parts and
Piety, we grant; and it is no little part of our glory that we have such; but
it is much of sorrow, that Mr. G. seems not to be of the number. Those Parts
which he has, he has endeavored to show them to the utmost in the holstering
up of that unhappy Controversy, for which he is ambitious to be known. Some
men have an itching pride to leave themselves a name famous upon Record, though
with infamy: This set a Fellow on work to fire the renowned Temple of Diana;
and this only humor has (I verily believe) stirred up many a vain Heretic to
kindle and blow a fire of Controversy in the Church. Far be it from us to
think that Mr. G. is so itchie; yet in all the Ink that he has scratched and
scribled with about that Question, or any other, Ostentation is one of the
principal Ingredients; upon which Account I have observed, when many a man has
been engaged, that it has drawn a cloud over his Intellectuals, so that being
in the dark, Reason has been soon led Captive out of the right way by an
active and victorious Phant'sie, which easily inforceth any thing that offers
it self (though it be but to build, or maintain an Interest) upon the
Understanding. An Intellect that is bribed with Interest, will go far to own
and uphold a matter even against Conscience; but yet there is hope such a one
may be rectified, when Interest alters in such a manner, that the man's ends
may as well be served by owning the Truth; and upon this account many a
Heretic has of himself renounced his Error, and embraced the Truth. But when
an Intellect is once baffled, subdued, and (as it were) enslaved to a lofty,
luxuriant, Lordly Phant'sie, then in such a Phant'sie it is that Satan erects
his throne, rules and reigns there; then there is never any taking the man off
by all the offers that can be made either of Reason or Advantage: Nothing less
than the mighty power of the same Spirit that raised Jesus from the dead, can
rescue such a man out of the power of darkness, and restore him to a right
Apprehension. By the one, or the other of those two ways it is, ( viz. either
by Satan's bribing the Intellect with Interest, or by his seating himself upon a
towering Phant'sie to control and befool the Intellectual Faculty) that all
the Heretics in the world have been made. I shall not apply this to Mr. G. nor
judge him so far as to fasten the odious name of Heretic upon him: But this I
will take leave to acknowledge as his due, (because all his Works do manifest
it) that he is a man of a working, capering, stately Phant'sie; and so the best
of his Parts lying therein, he might (as we find by this Piece of his) have
made a notable Poet, or a Painter: But, as a good Poet and a good Divine, a
good Poet and a good Logician, a good Poet and a good Statesman do very seldom
meet in one, (because in every Profession where the use of a sober Reason is
requisite, the more sober and solid it will be, if the Phant'sie be the less
brisk and frisking to disturb it) so Mr. G. has verified this abundantly
throughout his present discourse: The luxuriancie of a flourishing Phant'sie
manifested in the dress and super-abundance of his Fictions, do show him to be
a ready Poet and Painter both; but for a Divine, as to sound knowledge in
affairs respecting Religion and the Gospel; and for a Logician, as to matter of
Reason and Argumentation, you may perceive already by what is past, I have no
reason to allow him: And now being to see how he will play his part in the
Politics as a Statesman, I fear I shall find but playing-work, as little of
Reason and Religion in this his 9th Arg. as in any of the other; and that his
gray head, though powdered by Time, is as poetical and fantastical as any
young Boy's in the Town. Thus having rambled a little in a digression, it is
high time to return to the matter, in hope the Phantsiful man (who was not wont
to be long of an opinion) is not yet so desperately given to Opiniastrie, but
that he may be brought to see and retract his Errors. -- It Is well (I say) that
we have in this Nation so many pious and able men, though differing in some
Points from each other: But what have they in Authority done to make one Part
Judges over the other? Can any man in his senses infer, That because the
Commissioners are vested with a power to examine and try whether men be fitly
qualified for the work of the public Ministry before they enter upon it,
therefore they are made Judges over all men of parts and piety in the Nation
that are not of the same Judgment with them? This Charge stretches wide, and
with a great noise, because it is empty; for, it is only those particular men's
Gifts and Graces that they are Commissionated to enquire into, who come to
them, in order to that public Maintenance which the Magistrate and the Law
allows; and they neither have, nor do they assume any power to refuse men
because of the several ways and forms wherein they walk, or because of their
Opinions, provided they in their ways be not licentious nor disorderly, nor
their Opinions contrary to Faith and sound Doctrine; of which certainly it is
but reason that the Magistrate, or those men whom he thinks fit to trust for
the purpose, should be Judges, that he in conscience may be satisfied either
mediately or immediately, of the Fitness of those men, before he give them his
Maintenance. Moreover, lest it should be thought that the way to this
Maintenance should not be open to any but men of some one particular persuasion
or form, one would think the very Tenor of the former Constitution of
Government, and of the present, might serve to stop the mouth of Mr. G. it
being apparent both in the one and the other, that an equal regard was and is
had to all the people of God under different persuasions and several forms: And
as this has been, and is the scope of the Government in general, so
particularly in those two Businesses of Approbation and Ejection, to the end
that no partiality may be used in the execution of either, toward any man, in
any kind, because of his private Opinion, (if it be not destructive to this
Public, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the great and glorious Truths therein
contained) or because of the Form under which he walks, so special a regard
has been had in the choice of the Commissioners, that pious, sober and learned
men of several ways and persuasions are taken into the number, who being
entrusted to execute the Ordinances, are so balanced in this respect among
themselves, that it were absurd to imagine they should agree to design an
inthroning of any one Way or Opinion, for the oppressing of all the other; or
that any pious and sober man of sufficient parts, who comes to them, should
suffer because of his particular Way or Opinion. And that this is the truth of
the matter, any one may be satisfied that will but consider the quality,
constitution, and constant practice of the Commissioners. And in the next
place, whereas he suggests that there is no remedy by way of Appeal against
them, in case they should abuse their power, He himself by his own experience
knows knows the contrary, having not long ago made an Appeal upon such a
pretense against the Commissioners, on the behalf of another, to his Highness
the Lord Protector, before whom the Appeal was admitted, and the Business heard.

Besides, in this Accusation touching Non-Appeal, he does not only gainsay what
his own doings, but also what his own sayings do confirm; and there is neither
of these but are as dear to him (except Revenge) as any thing in the world. And
yet he is pleased to contradict himself also in refeence to this particular.
For, he who is so audacious here, as to say men are without remedy or relief
either by Appeal or otherwise, has forgotten what he affirms in other places
of his Book, where he acknowledges such a Power in being, as may, and (if it
be faithful) will relieve such as may have occasion to appeal. Cases of Appeal
to a higher Power are occasioned, in respect either of misinterpreting the Law,
or of maladministration, though the mind of the Law be rightly understood:
Now, if so be it shall fall out, that wrong be done to any by wresting the
sense of the Ordinances, then, as himself has said ( page 4.) in plain terms,
Those who are in Authority have power to declare the sense of either
Commission, Viz. Of either Ordinance: And on the other side, if the
Commissioners shall behave themselves otherwise than they ought in the
administration or execution of the Ordinances; He tells us in his page 20. The
Commissioners are (its greatly feared) more than connived at, by those who have
power to restrain them from their evil. If by his own confession there be a
power to whom application may be made in case of mis-interpretation of the
Ordinances, or in case of mis-behaviour to restrain the Commissioners from
evil, pray you then what can be wanting to a remedy by appeal against them?
Both these Particulars are you see now in terminis acknowledged by this
miserable, self condemned creature; so that I cannot but propose him to the
World, especially to those who are in Authority, as a Subject of Pity, rather
than of my Triumph, or their displeasure. Thus you see what his Politics
amount to, his Political advice being of the same nature with his Theological
Discourse, the one running upon false Suppositions concerning Gospel-verity,
the other being grounded upon Suppositions of Scandal which he takes a
privilege at pleasure to cast upon the Civil Government; which being proved to
be false, his Argument in Policy (whereby he is pleased to tell our Governors
how impolitick it is for them to do what they never did, nor ever thought to
do) is much of the same sort with his other Arguments, (as he calls them) in
Religion and Reason.

Now because by the wisdom and favor of Mr Goodwin, here is an occasion
ministered to discuss a point of policy, pray let me have a little leave to lay
his high prudence and charity in one balance, and the prudence and bounty of
the State in the other, that so I may do him right (as it becomes his Grandeur)
by comparing him and our Superiors together. A true State of the design and
purport of the Ordinance for Approbation.
The State have been pleased to settle and confirm a public maintenance by Law
for the public preaching of the Gospel; and because it is not like that a work
of so high and heavenly a concernment should take so good an effect as is to be
desired and sought for among the people, if so be that a course be not taken to
commit it into the hands of faithful and able men, therefore they for the
satisfying of their own consciences in discharge of their duty and concern, in
Order to the promoting of the work, have thought fit to select a number of men,
whom for the opinion they have of their piety, faithfulness and knowledge in
the things of God, they conceive they may safely trust with the trying and
examining of all persons who desire the State maintenance to support them in
that work, whether they have gifts and Parts answerable to the employment; and
accordingly they have established that selected number of persons as
Commissioners, with a power either to reject men, if they find them not
qualified for the work, or if they find they have fit qualifications, then to
approve them being presented or recommended, and give them a legal Title, to
possess and enjoy all the Rights and Profits which are legally annexed to the
places for their maintenance in so good a Work as the Preaching of the Gospel.
This on the States part, so far as concerns their Bounty and Prudence in this
particular. -- On the other side, let us counterpoise them with the better
charity, and discretion of Mr. G. His Charity is seen in this, that he would
have the Magistrate without any more ado, to give a public maintenance to any
man that offers himself to the work of the Gospel; for if such a course be not
to be taken, as is before mentioned, for the approving of men for the work and
maintenance, then the consequence is clear in the sense of Mr G. that the
Magistrate is bound to maintain them, whatever their Qualifications and Designs
be, rather then leave them (as Mr G. has expressed the matter with much
compassion) to the doom of Micaiah, to be fed with the bread of affliction, and
water of affliction, or to suffer hunger and cold, and nakedness, and all
extremity, if God will not look after them, and provide better than so for
them. A tender man (you see) he is, that neither erroneous, ignorant, nor
profane persons should want if they will but preach, and that there should be
no care at all taken by the Magistrate, but rather that he should distribute
his Bread at random, for fear lest pretending Gospellers should be starved out
of their designs and projects, usually laid to propagate their own ends and
opinions by infecting the people. This is the sum of the charitable part of his
Argument. Then, as to the politic and prudential part, whereas he tells us,
that as the impowering of the Commissioners is of a manifest tendencie to beget
in them a spirit of insolency and oppression over other men, so in the party
oppressed a spirit of discontent, disaffection, etc: the occasioning whereof he
looks on as most impolitick. But certainly, Mr. G. his Politics have very
little of Divinity, that in his Commonwealth he would not have the Magistrate
discharge his Conscience in respect to the Particular before-expressed; and all
(forsooth) because it may work up a supposed spirit of discontent and
disaffection among some in the Nation. This profound man may do well rather to
consider what it is that is the true Cause why there are so many spirits up
abroad, not only of discontent and disaffection, but also of Faction among the
People. Have they not been conjured up by men of his own loose temper, that
would not allow the Magistrate the least power to make use of his Interest and
Authority for the promoting of the Gospel, nor of his own Understanding and
Discretion for the ordering of affairs in such a manner as might be for the
encouraging of sound Preachers, and the discountenancing of men of corrupt
minds, and of aerie Fanatic Notions? How many of this sort of Teachers have we
lately seen (under pretense of zeal and high devotion) openly sacrificing the
Truths of God, and the Affairs of Religion, to serve and advance some small
Design, or petty Party, while their Hearers have had their persons in
admiration because of advantage, viz. because too many of them thereby came to
get well; which others seeing, have stricken in the same way, till the number
of the Party increasing, they have been able to let the Magistrate understand
by dumb signs, and an active temper, that he ought to remember them in good
time, or else he may hazard the high displeasure of a formidable Faction? How
often has the present Authority been put to a stand by such Demagogues, who
have abused the Pulpit, and the Ordinances of God, to make them serve their
purposes by bidding defiance to all Rule and Authority? And how many are there
abroad still upon the same design? and it is not impossible but Mr. G. may
strike in among them. Doubtless, he will deserve to be a principal man with
them, if he can but perfect what he has begun, to level the Commissioners, and
lay the Public Maintenance in Common for all sorts of Stray-Cattel to enter,
and by that means be enabled to lead the people out of the way, to the
disturbance of the Commonwealth, and their own destruction. By this you may
apprehend the more than probable effect and tendencie of Mr. G. his Charity and
Policy; which being laid in the scales with the wisdom and liberality of our
Superiors, in reference to the Particular under question, the judicious Reader
is left to turn them at his own discretion. Only, for a Farewell, let me have
leave to tell Mr. Goodwin, That these and the like Conclusions of his may stand
well in tune with the Policy and Principles of his Brother Williams, though
indeed Mr. G. has more policy then to vent them with the same plainness: For,
Mr. Roger Williams speaks out with a full mouth in a Book of his printed Anno
1652. page 24. I humbly conceive (says he) that the great duty of the
Magistrate as to Spirituals will turn upon these two hinges. 1. In removing the
Civil bars, etc. the payment of Tithes, and the maintenance of Ministers, etc
2. In a free and absolute permission of the Consciences of all men in what is
merely spiritual; not the very Consciences of the Jews, nor the Consciences of
the Turks, or Papists, or Pagans themselves excepted. By Conscience he does not
mean the Faith a man has to himself, but a Liberty to profess, and teach
others accordingly: And indeed, this is the natural consequence, and the very
Fundamental of this Ninth Argument of Mr. Goodwin's; and he may as well close
with Mr. Williams in the full latitude of every point: For the same Gentleman
in the Book beforementioned, says, If a world of Arrians deny the Deity of
Christ Jesus; if a Manichee his Humane nature; if the Jews deny both, and
blasphemously call our Christ a Deceiver; nay, if the Mahumetans, the Turks
prefer their cheating Mahomet before him: What now? must we cry out
Blasphemers! Heretics! etc.? Must we run to Cities or Senates, and cry, Help
you Magistrates! Or, must we fly up to Heaven by Prayer? -- This is a brave
Latitude indeed; and there being elbow-room enough, Mr. Goodwin and he must
needs shake hands, if he means to maintain this his Ninth Argument. And so I
leave them together.

ARGUMENT X.
BEing now arrived at the Tenth Argument of this Author, Mr. G. his Tenth
Argument.
I am come to the main matter, and shall have an occasion to lance the Tumor,
and let out all the Corruption which disturbed his Stomach, and that his Head,
and caused him to talk idly, as men use to do in great and hot distempers. The
sum of the story in short is this; For he speaks out now, and tells us at large
why he is so virulent angry at his Highness and the Council, and the
Commissioners; even for no other cause, but that neither maintenance nor
countenance is like to be given to such as are tainted with his spurious,
heterodoxal, pseudo-theological Phant'sies. For ( says he) is not the simple
professing and owning of those great and important Truths of God, Mr. G. his
Arminian Tenets.
That Christ dyed, or gave himself a Ransom for all men; That God reprobated no
man under a personal consideration, nor intended so to reprobate any man, from
eternity; That he vouchsafes a sufficiency of means unto all men to repent
and be saved; That he vouchsafes a sufficiency of means unto all men to
repent and be saved: That he neither constrains, nor necessitateth any man to
believe, or to be saved; And that those who at present truly believe, may put
or thrust away a good Conscience from them, and thereby make shipwreck of their
Faith, and perish: Is not ( says he) the professing and owning of these most
worthy Truths (with others confederate with them) a Bar against all Spiritual
or Ecclesiastic promotion, in the course of the Commissioners proceedings?

Before I make Reply to the Main, let the Reader observe this by the way; that
I cannot admit one thing which he insinuates here in the Conclusion; Viz. That
the approving of men by the Commissioners for the Public Maintenance should be
reckoned an Ecclesiastical promotion, when as I have already made it evident
(and the very nature of the thing speaks out for it self) that it is a mere
Civil Act and Provision. But to proceed;

It is not a Business proper upon the present occasion, to enter upon the
disquisition of those Arminian Points by him enumerated; and if there were an
occasion, it were but Actum agere, seeing all in a manner that is necessary to
be known for the confutation of them may be found in the Works of the late
Reverend and Learned Dr Twisse, and of these two Learned, Reverend Doctors, Dr
Owen, and Dr Kendal, who yet live, the Honor and Ornaments of the University of
Oxford. However, because he has clothed and presented them here in the
plausible phrase of Scripture, thus much may be said in general terms by way of
return.

1. That Christ died, Gospel Truths, in opposition to Mr G his Arminian Te^ers.
and gave himself a ransom for All, it is true; but then it ought to be
understood in a Gospel, not in a Universal sense, as if all men were ransomed
into such a State, that they may save themselves if they will. 2. That seeing
from all eternity God was pleased to take some (as it were) out of the lump and
common mass of Mankind, and design them to become vessels of honor, and leave
others as vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, therefore questionles there
are a sort of particular persons, whom he never loved in Christ, and so
consequently are concluded under a state of Reprobation. 3. That he does
vouchsafe a sufficiency of means to all men to repent, and believe; but not so,
that the means should be so far in their own power, that they should be able to
believe and repent when it pleases themselves. Lastly, That he neither
constrains nor necessitateth any man to believe, or be saved; yet having by
the power of his own Spirit so wrought and framed the heart of a man, that it
becomes pliant to the purpose of his grace, then the heart is of it self
induced and disposed, not constrained to believe, and by the same power of the
Spirit is enabled to persevere in believing, being sustained by continual
supplies of Grace, (through the Spirit) from Christ, by virtue of the union
with him through faith, so that they cannot make shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience, so far as to perish; forasmuch as being the Sons of God, they are
kindly led and conducted by the Spirit of God, and kept by his mighty power to
Salvation. Now whereas Mr G. is pleased to understand these great and important
Truths, and the other which depend upon them, not in the same genuine sense
that the Scriptures hold them forth, but has set the whole Canon of Scripture
upon the Rack to extort another meaning from them than was in all times
confessed by the precious Saints of God in all the Churches, I must needs make
bold to brand his Tenets upon his own forehead with the black Characteristick
Notes of great and most important Errors. Errors indeed they are of the first
Magnitude, such as have spawned a numerous brood of most monstrous
Anti-scriptural Absurdities into the World, seemingly to support a miserable
reputation, by eating out the very bowels of Christian Verity; as appears by Dr
Kendals Answer to that strange Book of his called Redemption Redeemed. But
because it is very requisite the Reader should have a Taste of them here, I will
transcribe some few out of those many consequential Absurdities, which have
been collected by the Doctor, and thereupon leave the Reader to judge, whether
the Sons of Mr Goodwins delight, whom he has adopted into the same unhappy
Cause and Opinion, ought in reason to be allowed Maintenance or Countenance by
any Christians in Authority. Some of the Notions are as follows. The Places
of that Book of his from whence they are cited, I have noted here in the Margin.

1. That the ordinary Effects, Chap. 1. sect. 11. Miserable Absurdities which
Mr. G. has been necessitated to broach to bottles up his Arminian Tenets.
Acts, and Operations in the Sublunary parts, are not so or upon any such terms
attributed unto God, but that they have their second Causes also respectively
producing them whereunto they may as truly, and perhaps more properly be
ascribed than unto God 2. That Periods of particular Beings are not determined
by God. 3. That Periods of men's lives are not fixed by God. Chap. 2. sect. 1.
4. Christ's actual dying not determined by God. Ibid sect 2
5. Christ's death not necessary for our salvation, Chap 2 sect 12.
though upon sundry other accounts. ibid.
6. For aknowledge not properly attributable to God, Chap. 3 sect. 1.
otherwise then as hands and eyes. 7. Knowledge not properly attributable to
God. Chap. 3. sect. 3
8. God intends many things, Ibid. sect. 7.
which shall never come to pass. 9. God acts nothing in time. Chap 4. sect 23.
10. God made all things at once, by one act. Ibid. sect. 21.
11. By this Act Peter was made a Believer. Sect 18.
12. This Act was God himself; Sect. 17.
yea, all Gods actions are nothing really but himself. 13. Yea* Chap 16. s. 14.
all things were God himself from Eternity. 14. That God, Chap. 4. sect 8.
if he reprobated any Creature, must needs reprobate himself. 15. For, Chap.
18. sec. 37.
all Creatures were nothing but God from Eternity; according to the most true
and common Maxim of Divines, Quicquid in Deo est, Deus est. 16. Election, Chap.
4. sect. 30.
not of Individuals, but of Species. 17. It was not in Gods power to have done
more toward the preventing of wicked men's abuse of his gifts, Chap. 16. sec.
15.
then he did. 18. Men not saved are as much obliged to God, Chap. 16. sect. ult.
as they should have been in case they had been saved. Then, by consequence,
those who are saved, owe him no more then they should have done had they been
damned. 19. For, Ibid.
God does as much to render the means of Grace effectual to those that perish,
as it is possible for him to do. 20. The Doctrine of Apostacy more comfotable
then that of Perseverance. 21. Such Doctrines as these, All men without
exception shall be saved, whether they believe or not. No man shall be punished
for any sin whatsoever, either in this world, or that to come. Men are as much
approved of God in the committing of the greatest sin, Chap 9 sect 16.
as in the performance of the greatest duty. Such Doctrines ( says Mr.
Goodwin) as these are much more sweet and comfortable in respect of their
frame, constitution, and import, that that which affirms a necessity of the
Saints perseverance. 22. Yea ( says Mr. Goodwin) which is yet more. Chap. 13.
sec. 33
I verily believe* that in case any such unchangeableness of Gods love were to
be found in, or could be regularly deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just
ground to any considering man to question their Authority, and whether they
were from God, or no.


Other stuff there is; but I am weary of it. How do you like the man now? Has
he not drawn his own picture with most lovely lines and features? When a man is
once out of the way, see how he runs out of one By-path into another, before he
comes to the end of his rambling! These are Doctrines that would make a tender
Conscience melt, and tremble at hearing them. No wonder then if the
Commissioners be startled, and think it concerns them to do what Mr. G.
charge upon them here in this Argument of his as a Crime; which is (as he is
pleased to express it) to dive as far and as deep as they know, into the
Judgments of those that come before them, to discover whether there be not some
Touch or Tincture (at least) of some propension of Judgment toward those
Opinions; those Opinions, I say, which draw such a horrible Train of
Absurdities after them, as directly tend to the utter subverting of the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

But Mr. G. says, The Commissioners lay snares and stumbling Blocks in the way
of the Young men of these Opinions, because when they come before them to be
examined, they are put to this Dilemma either to lose the hopes of their
Preferment, or get through by dissembling their Opinions; As many of them have
done, if their own Boastings may be credited; They will tell you of many
throughout England, and more than two or three now in London, that have gone
through this Test. By such dissimulation it must needs be, or else the
Commissioners deserve not to be blamed by you for being so over-strict. But
what do you infer from this wild Assertion? even as wild a Conclusion. Ergo, It
is unchristian for the Commissioners to sift them touching those Opinions: And
they (forsooth) who lay such a stumbling block as this in the way of their
Brethren will not (he says) escape the revenging hand of God more than Balaam
did, who taught Balack to cast a stumbling block before the Children of Israel.
This is like leaping over Blocks, and a running over Hedge and Ditch in matter
of Argumentation, as if Balaam were alive again and had bewitched him:
Certainly if Balaam's Beast should revive, and recover the use of his Tongue,
he would frame somewhat more like an Argument then this, or else he would
deserve his Masters cudgel. But these things we must pardon; for the old
Man-and-Boy is very angry on the behalf of those his Sons, whom he has
begotten through his perverting of the Gospel. And so I leave him, passing on
to the Eleventh Argument.

ARGUMENT XI.
I Find him here too continuing in his angry fit; Mr. G. his eleventh Argument.
yet the same good nature of his that was pleased a little before to furnish us
with some of his deep speculations in State-Policie, has condescended likewise
to acquaint us with a point of Christian Policy, that (as he thinks) may be of
high concernment; but I fear he will upon Examination be found as errant a
Peddler in this kind of Politics as in the former. He says, According to the
best Principles of Christian Policy, such men who are like to thrust the best
of those back from working in the Lords Harvest, whom the Lord of the Harvest
thrusts forward to his work there, are not to be invested with any such power
and authority by which they shall be enabled to do such d^s-service both unto
God and men. But such are the persons, at least the far greater part of them
(and such they were before their Intrustment) who by the Commissions aforesaid,
are made the authorized Judges of the judgments of all the public Ministers of
the Nation, though they are and were (in respect of their Spirit, Principles,
and Tenets) not only like to presume and undertake to prescribe unto God and
Jesus Christ, who, and what manner of Persons, they should do well to employ in
the public Ministry, and again* who and what manner of persons, it would be
expedient for them to reject and put by from that employment; but, further,
more generally to recommend and order unto them (that I say not, obtrude upon
them) for the service, men far less competent, than many of those whom they
(God I mean, says he, and the Lord Christ) do recommend daily and
providentially send unto them for their Approbation and yet are disallowed and
rejected by them.

Well said Mr. G. If these things be so, they in Authority have great reason to
ken you thanks (Sir) for the discovery; but had ill luck they had not so
foreseeing a Politician to advise with in the Council, because you (it seems)
like a wise Aruspex, are able to make an inspection into the inward parts, and
from thence collect a Judgment: You (it seems) could beforehand have acquainted
them with the hearts of those whom they chose to be Commissioners, and told
them, before the Instrument, what a sort of men they were like to prove.
Indeed, it was a mighty oversight, that you were not advised with about the
Choice of them; then doubtless the Ordinances or Commissions had been good, and
all would have been well, had the Commissioners been of your own grave Opinion
and Appointment. In the mean time, the Commissioners are such as are all well
known to the people of God throughout the Nations; and if they were not, yet it
is Argument enough on their behalf, that they were thought fit to be entrusted
by a Prince and his Council, most renowned for piety throughout the Reformed
Churches; and it is not the least part of their vindication, that your
Greatness has been pleased to cast so many Revilings and Reproaches upon them,
which (knowing who, and what you are) they are willing to wear as Garlands and
Crowns of honor about their heads.

But Mr. G. would seem to have some Reason for his displeasure against them,
because he says they take upon them to prescribe unto God and Jesus Christ who
and what manner of persons THEY should do well to employ in the work of the
Ministry, and whom to reject; and to obtrude others upon THEM, viz upon God,
and the Lord Christ, who are less able and fit for this work. This is the sum
of the business; wherein I cannot but take notice of the manner of Mr. G. his
expression in these words, [ God, and the Lord Jesus Christ] They (in the
plural) being twice repeated at length, as if he intended some more then
ordinary Emphasis thereby. I shall not make a business of it to insist further
upon the Expression; nor should I have stood still at it by the way, if any
other kind of man had used it: But when I consider who penned it, and how he
has dipped himself in other desperate Opinions and Phant'sies, a little matter
may give an occasion to fear lest he be ready to take some other new Vagary
(being already upon the way) and run over to Arius and Socinus, with the rest
of his Brother-Wits, whose ambition it was to have their Names stand upon
Record, as the great Masters of Reason in the Mysteries of Religion. But to the
business in hand.

Whereas he says, The Commissioners prescribe unto God whom he should employ
in the work of the Ministry, and whom he should reject, and obtrude others upon
him who are less able; he gives us no more for the proof of this than of the
rest of his Arguments. The Commissioners are so far from prescribing unto God,
that they follow the prescript of Gods Word in employing or rejecting men, and
make that their Rule, the Rules given them by our Governors in the two
Ordinances being all either set down in, or derived from and grounded upon the
Word by necessary and undeniable Consequence, as is evident to any man that
does but read the Particulars enumerated in the Ordinances: And you may be sure
it is so; otherwise Mr. G. being straightened in his Arguments for want of real
and solid matter against the Commissioners and their Commissions, would have
taken occasion to enlarge himself upon them all, rather than have recourse (as
he has done all along) to feeble and groundless Allegations of Falsehood and
Scandal, to fortify himself in his design against them. But the Commissioners
are (he says) to blame for approving men that are less competent, and
disallowing others whom God and Christ do recommend unto them for approbation,
and who are more competent for the work of the Gospel. But who are those whom
God recommends as more competent? Even those persons, he tells us, who are
qualified to teach the just compass and extent of the grace of God in the death
and Gospel of his Son. That is to say, those who teach the extent of the grace
of God in the death of Christ according to his sense, just as he himself has
calculated it for the Meridian of Coleman-street, yet so as that the Influence
of it may (in his conceit) indifferently serve for all the sons of Adam without
distinction throughout the world; which is indeed of such an extent and
compass, that it will stretch any man's brains, and the whole Scripture too, (as
Mr. G. very well knows) to bring the grace of God to such a latitude, as that
it shall reach to all men alike. They that can do this, are not only men of
competent, but reaching Parts and Pates indeed; and a pleasing Doctrine it is
to the carnal part of the world, who thereupon presuming that it is in the
power of their own Wills to return and repent, and lay hold (at any time when
themselves please) upon the grace of God, are by such doctrine encouraged to
make use of their young days at their own liberty, and to stretch their
Consciences to the full compass and extent of their own lusts, having this
comfortable Reserve within their thoughts, That they can leave it off when they
are old, and take their own time to think of Christ (having an interest in his
death already) and grow better at leisure; and (having the word of so reverend
and learned a Preacher as Mr. G. to bear them out) that it must be their own
fault, if for all this they do miscarry in the business. This doctrine is of a
brave latitude indeed, it including virtually as the Root, all the Fruits of
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness that break forth into the world: For, when men
grow audacious and continue in the commission of sins, it is generally upon
this account, that by some secret suggestion of Satan and their own corrupt
hearts, they are induced to flatter themselves thus, that they will mend and do
otherwise ere long, thereby posting off repentance from time to time, upon a
vain supposition, that Redemption by the blood of Christ is so comprehensive
and of such a latitude, that all men are interested therein alike; so that the
work being done on Christ's part already, there remains nothing now on their
part, but to claim an interest in it, which they can do a year or two, or
seven, or twenty, forty years hence, as well as now, seeing there wants nothing
but their own good will to the business; and rather than be wanting in that,
they can set their Wills on work when they will themselves, unless you can
imagine they would be so foolish as to neglect their own salvation, and tumble
voluntarily into hell when it is in their own power to avoid it. This is a
Doctrine of a rare Extent indeed, that fetches all manner of wickednesses
(more or less) into the world: It helps to people Bridewell, stock Newgate, and
feed Tyborn, under the protection and instruction of the Pens and Pulpits of
Mr. G. and those more competent Sons of his whom he baptizeth into that
wretched Opinion of the Universal extent of Redemption, ( viz. of the Benefits
of the death of Christ) to all the world, to wit, every individual person. And
therefore certainly, the Magistrate and the Commissioners for Approbation
cannot choose but conceive it much concerns them to assign maintenance to men on
purpose to propagate it, and the other attendant Phant'sies, by preaching for
the encouragement, exceeding consolation and conveniencie of all the impious,
dissolute, and profane persons in the world: Especially Mr. G. having passed
his word, that they are Preachers of Gods own recommendation. And so I leave
this commendable Argument, passing on to the Twelfth.

ARGUMENT XII.
THe Twelfth is nothing else but a Repetition of the Plea on the behalf of
Patrons, Mr. G. his 12th Argument.
as if he meant meritoriously to purchase their good will toward himself and
men of his own opinion. For, says he, In case a man be Orthodox in the great
Doctrines of Universal Atonements by Christ, of Conditional Perseverance, and
the rest of the same Band of Association, and a Patron should present such a
one to the Commissioners for Approbation, as a man whom in conscience he
conceives be ought to present, and that it were unlawful for him to present any
man otherwise minded, and hereupon the Commissioners disapprove him; by this
means he insinuates, that the Parish comes to suffer prejudice for want of a
Minister the space of six months, and at the six months end the Patron
becomes nonsuited of his privilege of Presentation; and so some Favorite of
the Times wearing Black, in stead of a Minister, comes to be thrust upon the
Parish, or else they must remain spiritually waste and desolate. This is the
sum of the Argument, which being put in the balance, is of the same weight with
the rest. As for the Doctrine of Universal Atonement, and the rest of the black
Guard of Errors which follow it at the heels, it seems to be of the same nature
with the Tail of the Dragon, mentioned Rev. 12. which drew down the third part
of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth. For, more than a third part
of those glorious Truths of the Gospel, which shine as so many stars in the
eyes of all, except those who are held in chains of interest, or of darkness
and delusion, are (so far as Satan's power can prevail) drawn out of the
Firmament of the Church, and cast upon the Earth by that corrupt Doctrine, and
the whole Train of Consequential Absurdities hanging thereupon. And yet, for
the sake of this Doctrine (you see) it is, and because the Magistrate sees no
reason to countenance and maintain it, that all this storm is raised against
the Commissioners. Otherwise, we had never heard Mr. G. make a needless Plea on
the behalf of Patrons, and such persons and Parishes as have power of
Presentation; for they still enjoy that power notwithstanding the
Commissioners. But we know he wants matter to fill up the pages, and so any
thing shall be foisted in that may be an occasion of saying somewhat, though to
no purpose, against the Commissioners. And therefore upon this ground it is,
that (wanting other materials) he falls to bespattering them and the present
Authority, under pretense of pleading for Patrons and Parishes, whereas there
was never yet any such injury done, as might either defeat any Patron of his
Right, or prejudice any Parish for want of a Preacher, or force any Favorite in
Black upon them. Sir, Be persuaded even to give over this black work of
scandalizing your Superiors and your Brethren; it would be more suitable for a
dying man to exercise himself in some better devotion than to be scribbling thus
instead of arguing; and not make good any thing by Instance, or otherwise: You
were never right for the Polemical part of Divinity, and never worse than now.
It Is somewhat too nimble a work for an old man; the gauderies of a little
rambling Rhetoric will not serve to dress out such a discourse; and therefore
'twere high time you would end your days with repenting and praying (you have
cause and work enough of that nature before you, if you reflect upon what is
past) and not spin out the small Remainder in reproaching your self and others.

ARGUMENT XIII.
MAster G. having in some of his other Arguments, Mr G. h^s 13th Argument.
presumed to correct and instruct his and our Superiors, in points of Civil and
Christian Policy, (and that very gravely, as he not humbly conceives) he now
comes to produce a Maxim of State to convince them of their Error; and it is
this, Nulla potentia est fida, si sit nimia, the English whereof is this, That
No Power is Trusty, if it be overgreat; he says, and such, is the Power of the
Commissioners, an unlimited exorbitant power, of the same house and lineage
with the Papal. But how does he prove this? even after his usual manner, with
a few flashie strains of Oratory to amuse the Reader. 1. He says, The Pope
holds himself infallible. 2. The Lawlesness of the Pope is such, that no man
may judge or question him. 3. The Popes assume to themselves plenitudinem
potestatis and scientiae; they suffer none to buy or sell (as the Scripture
speaks) but only those that wonder after them. There is an eye (says he) of
the same principles, practices, usurpations, in the Spirits and Practices of
our Tryers (so he calls the Commissioners.) But where is the proof? 1. He
says, If any one that comes before them shall dispute, or call into question
their judgments though never so erronesus, as in the points of Election and
Reprobation; the death of Christ, etc.) the door of preferment is shut up
against him. This is a stout Argument indeed, and if rightly stated, the force
of it would amount to this; The Commissioners cannot approve of men that are of
the Goodwinian miserable Foundation-destroying doctrine concerning Election,
and Reprobation, etc. nor judge them fit to be owned by the Magistrate in a way
of maintenance, according to such Rules as the Magistrate himself has given
them to judge by; Ergo they do as the Pope does* hold themselves to be
infallible. A man might from this rather infer this Consequence, That they do
not conceive themselves infallible, because they are willing to judge as the
Magistrate directs them, and that Mr G conceives himself infallible, implying
as if the Commissioners were bound to follow his judgment, and make that their
Rule whereby to try and approve men, rather than by those Rules and Directions
which have been given them by the Magistrate. Here (it seems) lies the core of
all the evil, and the Occasion of all this Rancor, that the Commissioners are
not ( hujus jurati in verba Magistri) sworn to follow this great Master, and to
approve such men as have shaken hands with him in the bearing up of that
Un-evangelical Opinion, against Gods electing love in Christ, in the behalf
whereof, he would compass even Sea and Land to make a Proselite. 2. Whereas he
insinuates, that the Commissioners are as lawless as the Pope, because none
may question or judge of them, and because they will approve of none but those
that will wonder after their Learning and Tenets; and though he divides these
Particulars under a second and third head, as if they were distinct, and this
on purpose to make his Pamphlet swell, yet this short Reply may serve in return
to both his hold and frothy Imputations; how is it possible that the
Commissioners should be accounted lawless in their proceedings as the Pope is,
when as it is known (and Mr. G. himself here has said it) that the Pope makes
himself above all Law and Power that is without himself? and hereupon by virtue
of such another Autocrasie, as Mr Goodwin takes to himself upon all occasions,
he proceeds in the same manner as Mr Goodwin constantly does; what he does by
his Bulls, Mr G. does by his Pen and Pamphlets, who takes upon him at pleasure
to control, censure and defy Acts of the Civil Power, and does what in him
lies by reproaches and scandals almost to Anathematize them, and to dissolve
the bond of the Subjects obedience, by rendering the Government odious and
contemptible, and to overthrow it by stirring up. Discontents and Factions
among the People; and all this forsooth, because he cannot impose upon his
Highness and the Council in matter of Faith, so as to make them the public
Patrons and Promoters of his private Opinion; if this be not Papal, I know not
what is: But now, the Commissioners are so far from imitating him and the Pope,
in any of their lawless humors, that they in their proceedings are under the
Law and direction of another, Viz. the present Authority, and can do neither
more nor less than what the same Authority has by a Law prescribed them; if
they should, Mr G. knows by experience Authority is ready to hear a complaint,
and that Law does not enable them to set men a wondering after their Learning
and Tenets; for what Tenets or Opinions soever in points of the lesser
importance may be among themselves, they are not to estimate, nor do they
measure a Judgment concerning any man according to them, nor do they
dis-approve any men because of their opinions, provided they be not of the
Goodwinian strain beforementioned, Errores in Fundamentalibus, which tend to a
rending of that very Foundation which was laid upon the Prophets and Apostles,
and a demolishing of the glorious super-structure of all the main truths which
are built thereupon. Moreover, there is not the least affinity between the
Popes power and theirs: For the Pope arrogates to himself a power in the
Church, under a pretense of being the sole Deputy or Commissioner for the
Government of it under Jesus Christ, and thereupon styles himself his Vicar;
but the Commissioners have neither assumed any power to themselves, it being a
matter entrusted to them, nor is it derived to them in any such way as from
Christ, much less from him in order to Church Government, but they have
received it in trust from the Magistrate, whose Deputies they are, to a civil
end and purpose, Viz. to see that the public State-Maintenance, allowed for
the Preaching of the Gospel to the people, may be disposed of according to the
Magistrates own appointment and direction; in any of which respects there is
not the least resemblance betwixt the Popes transcendent spiritual, and their
limited temporal Power; and therefore Mr Goodwin has not injured them so much
as himself, who though his Bishopric be not very large, might a great deal
sooner be taken for the Pope (as appears) in all his actings. The rest of this
pretended Argument is a mere idle repetition of Scandals, and of other matter
already refuted. It Is a sad thing to see a man of his garb and grave pretense,
so liberal in Aspersions throughout his Pamphlet, and yet not make so much as
an Instance to prove any one Particular.

ARGUMENT XIV.
THe Fourteenth I find to be only a quaint piece of Tautologie flourished over
with a new dress: Mr. G. his 14th Argument.
For, abstract the Rhetorical levities, and there remains nothing but the same
Crambe, which was served up again and again in the First, Third, and Fourth
Arguments; and that small Addition which he brings in here as an Auxiliary to
the other, does but help to make him and his design the more ridiculous. For,
whereas he tells us again, that the Gospel stands in no need of any Commission
or Constitution of humane device and contrivance to carry on the interest of it
in the world, but that Christ has left Rules and Directions in perspicuous
terms in the Gospel, sufficient to render the state of the Gospel flourishing
and prosperous, so as not to leave so important an affair to the care and
management, and contrivance of the Secular Powers; I shall not make repetition
of any thing that I have discoursed before to answer this, but refer the Reader
to be satisfied at large in the former part of the Book, where I have fully
answered his other Arguments relating to this particular. Only I shall examine
what he offers more to prove that Christ has left perspicuous Rules and
Directions, in all Circumstances, for the promoting of the Gospel, so as that
the Magistrate ought not to devise or contrive any thing in order to the
setting forward of that good work. But alas, among all those pretended
perspicuous Rules and Directions, his perspicacious eye has not been able yet
to find out and afford us so much as one (which might easily have been done,
had there been any such) but in stead of that he brings in a Text by head and
shoulders, and offers it as such a Rule. The words are these; Mat. 9 38. Luc.
10. 2.
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers
into his harvest. Well; but what does he infer from this? 1. Ergo, Laborers
sent or thrust forth, will, with Gods ordinary blessing upon their labors,
advance the interest of the Gospel among men; else, why did Christ pray for
their sending forth? 2. From the words, Pray ye, he infers, That Christ
prescribed no other (and consequently, according to his sense and scope it must
be, that use ought to be made of no other) course or means for the obtaining
this high favor from God, but Prayer only.

For answer to these (after a smile or two, in consideration of the rare
ingenie of this reaching Commentator) give me leave to wonder a little at the
confidence of the man, that his gravity should have time to trifle thus in so
serious a business. 1. As to the first Inference, It is not to be denied, That
the sending forth of Laborers, and Gods ordinary blessing upon their labors,
will advance the interest of the Gospel among men: But what is this to the
point in hand? Surely, it cannot be concluded hence, because Christ would have
Laborers sent out, therefore they should not, before they are sent abroad, be
tried and examined whether they be fit for so high and blessed a labor or work,
for which few among many Pretenders are found sufficient; as Paul said, Who is
sufficient for these things? Or that the Magistrate, or any other, ought not to
take a convenient course for their Trial and Approbation; but leave all to go
that gape for public maintenance, or that in case he should take a course, it
ought to be looked upon as an humane invention and contrivance, derogatory to
the wisdom of Christ: Till Mr. G. be able rationally to draw such Conclusions
as these from that Text, he might have spared the labor of citing it to no
purpose. 2. As to his second Inference drawn from the words, Pray ye; it is
readily acknowledged, that Prayer is an excellent means to procure that great
Blessing of the propagation of the Gospel by the hands of such Laborers as are
sent abroad: But is it thence to be concluded, that because Christ in this Text
speaks of no other means but Prayer, therefore he recommended Prayer
exclusively, so that no other course ought to be taken for the promotion of the
Gospel but only Prayer? Mr. G. might as well say, when Christ says, Pray ye
that ye enter not into temptation, that we need only to pray, and do no more,
not do so much as to use wisdom and discretion for the avoiding of temptations;
1 Cor. 9. 27.
nor have recourse to S. Paul's remedy, (...), for the crucifying of those
lusts, or the mortifying of those earthly members, which dispose us to the
entertaining of temptations. Prayer is indeed a general means ordained for the
procuring of Blessings upon all Occasions: And therefore when he sent forth the
Seventy Disciples to preach, and bade them pray for more Laborers in the Lords
vineyard, I suppose Mr. G. will not undertake to prove that Christ's intent
therein was, that they should only pray, and not use the least point of
industry or discretion (as occasion offered it self) for augmenting the number
of Laborers. But till he be able to make that good, I cannot see how we can
admit, that Christ's commanding his Disciples to pray upon that occasion, is
such an Institution for propagating the Gospel, as that it excludes the use of
ordinary prudent means or endeavor (as in other humane actions) on the part of
the Magistrate, or any other, upon any occasion whatsoever. Certainly if we are
bound to pray that Laborers may be sent forth, it clearly implies also, that
utmost endeavor in all other ways and means should be used, as well as Prayer,
for the sending of them forth fitly qualified. And so this Text being rightly
improved, makes rather for, than against the care and means which is and ought
to be exercised in all Christian Commonwealths in upholding Universities the
Schools of the Prophets, Provision of liberal maintenance, that they which so
labor, and are worthy, may have their reward, as it is expressed 1 Timothy 5. 18.
And that this, or the like course be taken, that such Laborers or Workmen be
sent forth, as the Magistrate need not be ashamed of, and so ably dividing the
Word of Truth, that themselves need not be ashamed; according as it is
expressed by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Unless perhaps Mr. G. will say, that we
may pray for a thing, and yet use no other means to attain it. But if he have
not forgotten all his School-boy-Learning, there is a Fable in Esop that will
better instruct him, where the discourse between Jupiter and the Carter will
show him, that if the wain be in the ditch, it is in vain for the Carter to lie
on his back, and pray for help, without setting his shoulder to the work of
heaving it out. Wheresoever God directs man to the pursuing of an end, it is
ever implied that man ought to use all means which in right reason are
conducible, if he will attain thereto. Mr. G. is the first man I have heard of
that scruples at this matter; this Sovereign Penman, or absolute
Pen-and-Inkhorn-Prince, may presume to do any thing in print. But if ever he
appear in print again, he may do well to set out his new Art of Logic, that
the world may not want an Instrument to fetch any thing from Scripture, and
make lucky Conclusions.

In the mean time, as if he thought this Text would but little avail him
against the present Authority and their Commissioners, he has recourse again
to his old refuge, and raises a new Battery of Slander to shoot his bitter
arrows at them; saying, They are so far from being Co-workers with God in
thrusting forth Laborers, that they are rather Counterworkers, thrusting those
back whom God thrusts forward, and thrusting loiterers and unworthy men upon
him in their stead. Here are the Plague-tokens of Envy; but where is the Proof?
Alas, that is reserved for some other season; in the mean time it serves his
turn well enough to chime and gingle upon these words, Co-workers and
Counter-workers, thrusting forward and thrusting backward, in and out, Laborers
and Loiterers; knicking and knacking it with such kind of Knacks and Play-games
as make a rattling noise in Rhetoric, to please childish fancy; but what are
these things to men of solidity and sobriety, that would inform their
understandings? But it is all one with him; he is every jot as light and toyish
also in managing matter of Argument. And this appears by his trifling with
another Scripture, which he has drawn in (I know not how) to prove, that
Christ has left Rules enough of such a nature, as there needs no help of any
prudence to promote the preaching of the Gospel. But what, trow ye, is the
proof? Even such another Text, save only it makes less (if that were possible)
to his purpose than the former. It is Luke 12. 49. I am come to send fire on
the earth, and what will I if it be already kindled? This, he tells us,
signifies, that Christ desired nothing in this world (at least comparatively)
before his departure from it, but only to see that fire kindled which he came
to send on the earth, that is, to see the Gospel (as it were) to have gotten
footing, and taken some hold in the world. Well; admit this be the right
interpretation, what does he infer from it? Ergo, doubtless the Lord Christ,
who was desirous to see this, was sollicitous and provident enough by himself,
or by his Apostles (at least) to order and enjoin all things necessary or meet,
for the spreading of the Gospel, upon terms of the best advantage after him,
and not to leave so important an affair to the care and contrivance of the
Secular Powers. Doubtless, while Christ and his Apostles were upon the earth,
they neglected not to order things which were then necessary and meet for the
then spreading of the Gospel. So much of Inference may be admitted: But Mr. G.
stretches it further, and infers from this Text what it never intended to
import. His Argument stands thus: Christ's great desire was, while he was on
earth, to see the fire of the Gospel kindled; Ergo, He by himself, or his
Apostles, laid down such Rules and Directions so full in all circumstances,
that the Magistrate has no liberty left to use his discretion for the kindling
or promoting of it (upon any occasion) in After-Ages. I shall not now resume
the debate whether there are such large Rules and Directions to be found, or
whether the Magistrate may exert his Civil power and wisdom, to settle any
Course upon a Civil Account for the publication of the Gospel, (the former part
of this Discourse having sufficiently cleared the Truth already concerning
those Particulars;) but the matter under question here is this, whether from
such an Antecedent as this, That Christ desired to see the Gospel take footing
while he lived, any such Consequence as this do naturally and clearly follow;
Therefore he by himself, or his Apostles, left such universal Rules to promote
it, as exclude all endeavor and care of the Magistrate from assisting
thereunto in succeeding times and generations. It must be a rare Logical Engine
that can serve in such a Consequence without the mighty help of Mr. G. who
seems to have an extraordinary faculty of tormenting his own Brains, and the
Scripture, to bring about shadowie pretenses of Reason and Religion, to cover
the peevish designs and odd purposes of an angry spleen.

But he goes on to tell us, Experience has manifested in all Ages, that for
men, whoever they be, to compound the wisdom, counsels, and institutions of
Christ, for the advancement of the Gospel in the world with their own devices
and Inventions, is the next way to obstruct the course of the Gospel. And yet
the professing powers of this world have always had itching desires to be
officious unto Christ in this kind, to obtrude upon him their own Projections
and Inventions, to accommodate and help him through the world with his worship
and Gospel. It is readily granted, that the Civil Powers of the world have been
too much engaged in mingling their own Inventions with the Institutions of
Christ, and Gospel Worship, which has been the great hindrance to a progress
of the Gospel in the Truth and Power of it. But why is this brought in here to
be insinuated against the Civil Powers now in England? and why is such a heap
of words erouded in here to incumber the Reader, and countenance the
Insinuation? Certainly Mr. Goodwin cannot charge the present Governors for
mingling their own Inventions with the Institutions and Worship of Christ.
Could he have done it, we should have seen him descending to particulars to
prove the charge, and have heard of him in a more lofty tune; but knowing in
his Conscience there is no such matter, it serves his turn well enough, by
packing and shuffling a company of words together, thereby slily to cheat, and
instill an ill Opinion of the present Authority, into the unwary Reader, as if
they compounded their own Inventions with Gospel Worship and Institutions. But
take away the Boxes, and then what becomes of the Jugler? Remove the deceptio
visus, Viz. the Mist of words from before the eyes of the Reader, and then Mr
G. his tricks and slights of Insinuation signify nothing at all to the meanest
understanding.

The Ordinances for Approbation and Ejection made by his Highness and the
Council are the present Subject of this bold man's discourse; and therefore we
are to suppose his meaning is, that by those they have compounded their own
devices with Christ's Institution and worship. If it be so, he might have done
well to have shown us wherein they have so done by naming to us some
Particulars; in the mean time the very Title and Text of the said Ordinances do
evince the contrary, there being not the least (...) or tittle that so much as
mentions any thing concerning any Institution of Christ, or concerning
Worship, further than this, that the Ordinance for Approbation, is purposedly
directed to the encouraging and preserving of that Institution of Christ which
is called Preaching, in the power and purity of it, according to the sense and
meaning of Christ and his Apostles; and the Ordinance for ejecting takes
especial care, beside other things, to preserve the sincere instituted
Gospel Worship free from any humane mixtures or additions whatsoever, by
appointing the ejection of persons that frequently use the Common Prayer Book,
or who are superstitious and Popishly minded; which is a manifest evidence not
only of this man's licentious boldness against Authority, but also how much his
Highness and the Council abhor the mingling of humane Inventions with the
Institutions and Worship of the Gospel; and yet such strange stuff he is fain
to make use of to fill up the number fourteen.

ARGUMENT XV.
THis pious Pretender having in the former Argument, Mr. G. his fifteenth
Argument.
begun to give us a proof of his extraordinary faculties, in speaking evil of
dignities, now in this takes upon him to dispute the Pedigree of their power,
and as if he were possessed with the Ghost of Plato or Aristotle, very sagely
determines what is the right constitution of a Commonwealth, and what are the
Bonds and Bounds of Civil power.

To this end he tells us, God in these days does not make supreme Rulers
immediately or by Divine dictate, but mediatly by those that are to be ruled and
governed by them, Viz. The people; now the people have no power from God, which
they can entrust unto their Rulers, either by the Law of Nature, or otherwise,
to establish any Rule or Law amongst them, unto which they shall all stand
bound every man to believe the same things with another in all points of
Christian Religion, or that the judgment of any one man, or number of men
amongst them, shall be the Standard unto which all the rest shall conform their
judgments in matters of Faith or Worship, or else incur some civil punishment:
The reason ( says he) is, because God never gives power to any to enslave or
subject the consciences of men in matters appertaining unto himself. And it is
not probable, that the People of this Land ever gave their Rulers any such
power as that now mentioned, that they might invest any one or more of their
Subjects with authority, to mould and form the judgments and consciences of
their fellow Subjects in matters of Faith or to inflict any civil Mulct or
Punishment, or to set any brand of public Infamy and reproach upon them, as by
excluding them as unworthy from places of public Trust, yea from all
livelihood and maintenance of which they are capable, because they cannot set
their judgments by theirs, or make one lip with them in some controverted
points of Christian Religion. Therefore, the Commission, by virtue whereof our
Triers sell their Brethren into the hand of poverty and disgrace, only because
they will not prostitute their judgments to the lust and ambition of theirs,
stands not upon any regular foundation of power or Authority. Here is as the
Proverb says, a great deal of Cry and but little Wool.

This is the sum of this extravagant Argument. And though the vanity and
unreasonableness of the most part of it, be of it self evident enough to any
man that has read my Answers to several of the foregoing Arguments, yet
wheresoever he is pleased to Tautologise, I have been willing to imitate and
trace him in the mystery of wording, lest perhaps himself, or some others whose
Faiths are pinned upon the Sleeve of this great Doctor, should cry out, that
diverse of the Arguments never had any Answer. Let us on therefore to the
business.

1. Whereas he says, That not God immediately, but the people mediately do
make Rulers; though it be but to little purpose to enter upon such discourse as
this now, yet the angry man having thought fit to lugg it in here by the ears,
mihi Cynthius aurem vellit, I must needs say somewhat which may perhaps sink
into the consideration of this Mongrel-Polititian, if it find him in a calm,
or out of his Currish humor: And it is this; Touching the truth of this, I
refer you to a Book written by my self, entitul^d The State of the Case of the
Commonwealth, Anno 1650. wherein this (...) is made evident by all the great
Instances out (...).
That however it has been talked over and over, and printea a thousand times,
that there have been no valia Titles to Government, but what were received from
the People; yet from the very first time, that the Government called Political
was instituted in the World, it is a most undeniable truth, that in all the
considerable Nations which have since been under the Sun, Titles to government,
and forms of Government, have in all times been de facto dispensed, and
devolved from hand to hand, mediately by the power of the Sword. There are but
few, or no exceptions that stand upon record to the contrary; and indeed, the
only remarkable Instances which are contrary, are those in sacred Story
concerning the State of the people of Israel, whose happiness alone it was,
above all the Nations upon the face of the earth, to have persons and Families*
invested with Title to Government many times, by immediate designation from God
himself. But this was extraordinary; and excepting only those extraordinary
Instances, I am able otherwise at large to make good the Assertion. But because
I live in a touchy time, when most men's brains are crowing upon points of
Government, I would by no means be mistaken; and do therefore for the Readers
more right apprehending of my purpose, take leave here to distinguish betwixt
Title to Government, and Administration of Government. I gladly acknowledge
that in all times, after Governments have been founded and established by the
sword, then they who held the Sword have been contented, and thought it their
best security (as indeed it is) to administer Government by Law, and
accordingly they have been willing to admit the People to the exercise of their
Right (more or less) in the making of those Laws whereby they were to be
governed; and so the superstructure in the Administration of Government by
Rulers, has oftentimes been carried on by their contenting themselves to rule
according to such Rules or Laws as have been (in a measure) handed out unto
them by the Representative Bodies or Assemblies of the People. This has
frequently been the way, after that Governments and Titles have been set up and
founded: But in the setting up or founding of them, the People have ever had
but little, or no share; Titles and Forms in their original having de facto
been cut out and carved by the Sword all over the world, in the more eminent
(and I might say, all) Nations. Which being considered, I suppose this
Political point of his lies flat upon the ground, and his Assertion may with
better reason be turned this way; That God has been so far from making Rulers
mediately by the People, that having ever assumed to himself the disposing of
Governments and Kingdoms to whom he pleases, as his great prerogative, he
has, in the several turns and variations of his Providence concerning it,
generally so ordered the matter, that the People have (for the most part) had
least to do in founding Governments, or in making their own Rulers; but that
the only wise God having permitted the Sword many times to be drawn for the
executing of his justice upon Nations for their sins and for the bringing about
his own great designs in the world, has mediately by the Sword exercised that
his own Prerogative in setting up Governors and Rulers (at his own pleasure)
and in founding new Forms of Government, from time to time: And the same God,
who has constantly overruled the management of Affairs in the hands of men
after this manner, for bringing things to a new settlement after warlike
commotions, has also so disposed the hearts of men to acquiesce therein, that
the Suffrages and Consent of the People have usually ex pest facto been brought
and taken in for Confirmation. This has been the general course of Gods
providence in ordering the Governments of this World, as is evident both in
Profane and Sacred Story. In the mention whereof take notice by the way, that I
dispute not the Peoples right, but only tell how things have gone de facto.
What then becomes of Mr. G. his Position, viz. That God makes Supreme Rulers
mediately by the People? Though it was to little purpose for him to start this
point upon this occasion; yet it was necessary thus much should be returned, to
hint to him his error, notwithstanding it be a Subject fitter for a set
Discourse, than that it should be touched only by the way.

2. As the beginning of this Argument is grounded upon a Mistake in Politics;
so the remainder of it runs upon a false ^upposition of Scandal, which is this;
That his Highness and the Council have by the Ordinance for Approbation,
established a Law, authorizing the Judgments of a certain number of men
(meaning the Commissioners) among us, to be as the Standard unto which all
other men must conform their Judgments in matters of Faith or Worship, or else
incur some Civil punishment, by excluding them from places of Public Trust,
and from all Livelihood. For answer whereunto, I conceive it is beside the
business to debate the Constitution of the present Powers, or what they may do,
or what the People may do; but I think it becomes us rather to consider, That
his Highness and the Council have not inthroned the Judgments of the
Commissioners (as is pretended) so as to enable them to impose them upon men in
Points relating unto Christian Faith or Worship. As to matters of Worship, the
Commissioners for Approbation meddle not with them at all, save that
Common Prayer men, and men Popishly or Superstitiously affected they reject, to
save the Commissioners of Ejection a labor; and I hope Mr. G. is not of opinion
that such as they, though they be generally men of his own doctrine, should be
allowed a Support by the Magistrate, No persons are debarred or excluded in
respect of their several ways and Forms of Worship, but the door of Admission
stands open to them all alike. Moreover his Highness and the Council have been
so far from setting up the Judgments of the said Commissioners, that They have
in the Ordinances prescribed them certain Rules, whereby to limit and regulate
their Proceedings; so that whatever their own Judgments in particular may be,
yet it is not in their power to refuse any man of any Way, Opinion, or
Judgment, provided his Qualifications for Grace, unblameable Conversation,
Knowledge and Utterance, have fitted him to preach the Gospel; and provided,
his Opinion be not tending to destroy the Fundamentals of the Gospel. These are
the Rules that they are tied up to, and they have nothing more to do, but only
to examine and judge how near the qualifications of men of all Judgments do
come up to those Rules, before they admit them to partake of that Public
Support and Maintenance which is allowed by the State.

The true and full state of the Business is this in short: -- The Magistrate
has in his hand a certain Public Revenue settled by Law to promote that good
work of Preaching the Gospel to the People. In the disposing thereof he is
willing to discharge a good Conscience. This he conceives he cannot better do,
than by sending men abroad to be settled in the several Places of his Dominions;
And before they be sent, he thinks he ought to be satisfied, that the men, in
respect of Grace and Gifts, are fitted for the Work; otherwise how can he in
Conscience conceive the Work will go on as it ought? Now, in regard the
Magistrate, being taken up with many great Affairs of State, cannot himself
possibly take cognizance of great numbers of men, by proving and trying their
qualifications; He hereupon makes choice of certain persons whom he conceives
every way fit, and whom he believes he may safely confide in, to undertake on
his behalf the business of examining and trying the qualifications of the men.
He conceives also it is his duty to prescribe Rules and give Instructions,
whereby the persons entrusted should regulate their Judgment and Proceedings,
that so he ( viz. the Magistrate) may rest satisfied he has, on his part,
taken order what lies in him to make as sure as may be of entertaining fit and
able men to instruct the people under his government. Then, having resolved
upon the said Rules, he next thinks of a way how to convey the Trust of
Examination and Trial into the hands of the aforesaid persons. This he does by
a special Ordinance or Commission, wherein, beside the conveyance of Trust, the
said Rules also directing and limiting the proceedings of the Commissioners are
set down, as also the qualifications which he expects all men should have, that
seek to enjoy any part of maintenance from him out of the aforesaid Public
Revenue. And in case the due qualifications shall be found in any persons who
come to the Commissioners upon the Account of that Public Maintenance, They
have also a power by their Commission not only to approve of the men as fit to
receive and enjoy it, but also to grant unto them Admission by a Public
Instrument in writing under a Common Seal appointed by the Magistrate, whereby
they are invested with a Legal Title to possess and enjoy that portion of the
Public Maintenance which is by Law annexed to the respective Places unto which
they are presented for the preaching of the Gospel; and if upon examination
they appear not rightly qualified, they are to have no part of the said
Maintenance. -- Here now you have ( sine suco) the whole and the naked Truth of
the matter. The Magistrate has a Public Revenue in his hand to promote the
preaching of the Gospel, and he takes care to dispose of it in such a manner as
he conceives he may best satisfy his Conscience in the doing of it. Now it
seems it is not thought fit, that men grossly corrupted, and boldly asserting
the whole Systeme of Mr. G. his rotten Opinions, should have any portion of it;
and this is the only ground of all these causeless Calumnies and Imputations by
him cast both upon the Magistrate, and the Commissioners, who are but Deputies
under the Magistrate in the business. Hence it is that he cries out upon
Lording it over men's Judgments, oppressing the Conscience, constraining it in
matters of Faith, selling men to poverty and disgrace, because they cannot
believe as the Commissioners believe, and I know not how many light Flourishes
and Flashes more, which may serve to dress out an envious Declamation, but fall
short of the frame and constitution of a serious Argument; this way of Arguing
being in all respects a reproach as well to men of Reason as Religion. In a
word, the sum of all is reducible to this: The Magistrate takes a care to
discharge his Judgment and Conscience in disposing a Livelihood which belongs
to him to dispose of; Ergo (says Mr. Goodwin) he Lords it over other men's
Judgments and Consciences, and deprives them of their Livelihood. Here (Sir)
lies the stabbing force of your Argument; Pray send this Logic along with the
next grand Volume that you dedicate to the University of Cambridge; and let my
Apology go along with it, for spending so much Ink here in repetition of
Things, which have been explained already over and over, in my Answers to
several of the foregoing Arguments: For, I am willing to do as they do who tend
children, not rail, but reel up and down (Sir) as you do, and run in and out in
Tautologie; not that I love or like it, but because so I must do, if I mean to
keep you company.

But before I part with this Argument, I must needs observe one thing more not
yet cited, which is this; That he makes the refusing of men who deserve not
Approbation, to be equivalent to a Civil Mulct, because thereby they become
excluded from places of public Trust in the matter of Preaching; and thereupon
makes an Outc^^ about it, setting the great Engine of his Pen on work to (...)
it up to the proportion of some great cruelty or oppression. Now I would fain
know how this can be called a Civil (...), when men who deserve not to be
trusted, are denied the enjoying of that reward which is annexed to such place
of Tr^^^: Give me leave to put a case; suppose that his Highness appoints
Commissioners for Inspection, and gives them authority to make a judgment of
the fitness of persons perhaps in matter of vigilance, faithfulness, skill in
Merchandise, Accounts, and other necessary Qualifications) to be entrusted with
a managing the Excise and Customs of the Nation; Suppose likewise, that upon
trial and examination of the Persons, the Commissioners do find cause to judge
them not fit for such trust or employment; shall the refusing of such persons,
and the denying of them that Salary which is annexed to the employment, be said
to be an oppression to them, or a civil Mulct and punishment upon them? For my
part, I cannot so apprehend it, nor do I believe any man else can, without the
help of Mr G. his more then ordinary understanding. Yet this is the very case
of the Commissioners for Approbation; they are appointed by his Highness to
judge whether men be fit to undertake the public work of preaching; and when
upon Trial they find them otherwise, they are to deny them that public Salary
or Maintenance which is annexed to that public work or employment, and not to
entrust them therein. And now for doing their duty herein, they are said by him
to be Inflicters of a Civil Mulct or punishment, lords over men's Consciences,
deprivers of livelihood, and I know not what more: Which how he can reasonably
infer (as the case really stands) is beyond the reach of my low apprehension.

ARGUMENT XVI.
LOoking here for an Argument, Mr G. his 16th Argument.
I find not so much as a pretense to it, unless such strains of Rhetoric and
Logic as are in use at the University of Belinsgate, may be called Arguments;
for he rails against the Commissioners, as men of the same Spirit and Genius
with the Spanish Inquisition; yea, that their exercising of the power given
them is so like that of the Inquisition, that not milk to milk, nor egg to egg
is more like. But how does he prove this? Even by playing the Tautologer again,
repeating in new Terms, what you have before in other, making us take Eggs for
our money, an Egg in stead of an Argument; and well may he do it, his Arguments
and Eggs being much at the same rate now, and so like to be hereafter.

In the mean time, whereas he most unworthily scandalizeth the Commissioners,
as if they were as dishonorable to our Religion as the Spanish Inquisition,
etc. This stands (as do all the rest of his bold Assertions) upon his own
Authority: But, if it may be no disparagement to his Greatness, I desire leave
to set against this the Opinions both of his Highness and the Parliament.

First, Of his Highness, who having occasion to declare his judgment both of
the work and persons employed in it, and that experience which he had thereof,
did in a Speech of his to the Parliament in the Painted Chamber, on Monday
Sept. 4. 1654. speak his sense at large: For, reckoning up diverse good things
provided for by the Government, he adds (among other Particulars) the erecting
Commissioners for Approbation and Ejection, The Testimony of his Highness
touching the Commissioners for Approbation and Ejection.
in these words; It (Viz. the Government) has endeavored to put a stop to
that heady way of every man making himself a Minister, and a Preacher. It has
endeavored to settle a way for the approbation of men of Piety and Ability,
for the discharge of that Work. And I think I may say, it has committed that
Work to the Trust of Persons both of the Presbyterian and Independent judgment,
men of as known Ability, Piety, and Integrity, as I believe any this Nation
has. And I believe also, that in the care they have taken, they have labored
to approve themselves to Christ, the Nation, and their own Consciences. And
indeed I think if there be any thing of Quarrel against them, it is (though I
stand not here to justify the proceedings of any) I say it is, that they go
upon such a Character as the Scripture warranteth, to put men into that great
employment; and to approve men for it, who are men that have received gifts
from him that ascended up on high, and gave gifts for the work of the Ministry,
and for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

It has also taken care (we hope) for the expulsion of all those who may be
judged any way unfit for this work, who are scandalous, and who are the common
scorn and contempt of that Administration.

To this give me leave also to add the Opinion of the present Honorable House
of Parliament, who at the very time that this railing Print of Mr. Goodwins was
put forth, and that of purpose (as himself intimates in his Epistle) and out
of design to have prevented their confirming of the two Ordinances of Ejection
and Approbation, nevertheless upon debate thought fit to establish the said
Ordinances; which is evidence sufficient of their thoughts touching the
Business. But what is the judgment of a Prince, or Parliament, to him who looks
upon his own judgment as the only Standard?

ARGUMENT XVII.
THe seventeenth is nothing else but a mere Allusion to the Parable of Jotham,
Mr G. his 17th Argument.
and is indeed a mere delusion fobb'd upon the Reader instead of an Argument;
for if his memory have not taken a nap, he may be pleased to remember there is
an old Axiom among the Logicians, Viz. Argumentum Symbolicum non est
Argumentativum. But all is one to him; the seventeenth Argument he will have it
be, though like a Conjurer he is fain to cast a Figure to make it appear so,
that by the help of Figurative and Tropical expressions, he may prove the
Commissioners to be the Bramble in Jothams Parable, who scratch and rend and
tear men; and himself and his Sons of Error to be the Cedars of Lebanon, i. e.
Men of eminent growth and stature in all Christian worth and excellency, who
are devoured by the Fire that comes out of the Bramble-Commissioners. Alas,
poor men! Is not this Scene (think you) well laid for an Argument against them?
Here is a cunning man indeed, that can gather grapes off Thorns, Figs off
Thistles, and Reasons off Brambles, and fetch rational conclusions from a
quaint Collusion of Tropes and Figures. But Mr. G. is so able a Champion, that
he dare do any thing to fill up the number seventeen.

As touching the latter part of this Argument, which speaks of a pretended
burden lying upon men, in being necessitated to come up to London from the
remotest parts in order to Approbation, he gives me an occasion to answer it
more fitly by and by; and therefore its waved here, because I would not always
lead the Reader up and down (as he presumes to do) with needless Repetitions.

ARGUMENT XVIII.
HEre he tells us, Mr G. his 18th Argument.
There is no considerable Argument yet alleged for the necessity of that
establishment of Triers. The reason is, because among pious men there has been
no need of under-propping the Establishment by Arguments, till now that Mr. G.
begins to act the Seducer; for when they were first established, it was thought
to be done upon this good ground, (which the practice of the Churches in all
Ages has been grounded upon) Viz. That men ought to be tried and approved
before they be sent out to preach the Gospel.

But (says Mr G.) what reason can there be for any necessity to exchange, or
put by such a way or method which is generally known, for another, which
besides that it threatens a disturbance and discontent, through the Novelty of
it, is not like to prevent those Inconveniences which are sometimes found in the
former, unless it be with introducing, or occasioning greater in their stead?
For, what if Patrons of Benefices, (whether Parochial Congregations, or single
persons (...) have sometim^s preferred or recommended unworthy men to some of
these Places, have not the Triers been no great or greater Delinquents in this
kind, than they? Judge ye now, whether Patrens are not beholding to him;
whether they are not bound to gratify him who has undertaken to be their
Patron, and whether they ought not in requital, to cast a favorable eye upon
the Sons of his Opinion, as occasion offers by the fall of good Benefices: But
withal, Patrons ought to be so good-natured as to forget, (as he himself does)
how in other places of this Pamphlet he is pleased to contradict himself and
their privilege of Presentation both together. But that is no wonder in the
eye of those who are acquainted with the Works of Mr Goodwin.

Then whereas he insinuates, That the settlement of the Commissioners is a new
way that puts by another which is generally known; the Reader is to consider,
that the old way generally known was the way of the Bishops, who when a Patron
made presentation of any to a Benefice, had the power of Approbation, and did
exercise it by themselves or their Chaplains, before they granted Institution
and Induction. This was the old way generally known, and it was not put aside
by the present way; but fell of it self many years ago, together with
Episcopacie. The Bishops being gone, and there remaining a necessity still for
approving men before they enter upon such places of trust, then (as you may see
in the foregoing part of this Discourse) the Parliament settled the power of
Approbation in the Assembly of Divines or a Committee of them. And the Assembly
ceasing, it was exercised by some of their number till the end of the Long
Parliament. Afterward when his Highness came to the Government, He and His
Council finding the great want and necessity of some regular way for approving
of men, and how much it concerned him to provide betimes, that the public
Maintenance which the Law allows for promoting the work of the Gospel, should
be conferred upon such men as are rightly qualified for the work, that so pious
and sound Preachers might (upon the public Account) be planted in the several
parts of the Nation: Hereupon it was, that they resolved on the present
Establishment of Commissioners for Approbation; which was so far from justling
out any old way generally known and used (as Mr. G. pretends) that it came in
when there was no good and regular way left for the carrying on of so good a
work. What ground then of discontent can any man have, or pretend, upon the
pretended putting by of another way? But Mr. Goodwin's Pen is a Quill taken out
of his own high-flying Phant'sie: If he do but fancy a thing (right or wrong)
he dares immediately print it to all the world: But would any man do so, that
were not inwardly tempted and set on work to create discontents and
disturbances in the minds of the weaker persons, and to deceive and draw them
in, upon mistakes and falsehoods, to be offended, and become Instruments in
crying down an Establishment? such an Establishment for promoting the preaching
of the Gospel, as upon a right enquiry into the matter, cannot in the least
measure be offensive to any who are truly godly; against which though Cerberus
may bark, because he and his Litter are not like to have an Offa Cerbero.
Offa (so much as a Crust) out of the Public Maintenance; yet the gates of
Hell will not prevail.

No, nor yet all the lewd and scandalous Insinuations which Mr. G. has here
packt together. For, though according to his wonted liberty he presume to
scratch the faces of the Commissioners with a licentious pen, charging them to
have preferred persons as unworthy as ever were presented by any Patrons, yet
he has not been able to produce one Instance to make the least proof of so
high and general a Charge in any one particular: But that we must suppose to be
the modesty of the man, and his great ingenuity to forbear particulars: So he
seems to intimate unto us in the following words, whereby he does as good as
confess he has no matters of Fact to make good the Charge. For (says he) I
always judged it beneath a spirit of ingenuity to hold intelligence with any
man for information of the sinister and undue practices of man, or to give
encouragement to those who l^ve to be the messengers of such tidings; nor have
I kept a Register either in my Pen or Memory of such Stories. A good-natured
man indeed* He most wisely (according to the old way, Dolus versatur in
generalibus) charge his Brethren home and heavily in general terms, but is so
full of ingenuity as to tell us why he spares the mention of Particulars, even
because he has none that he knows of, either upon record or in memory. If this
be not a man of rare Reason and Religion in matter of Argument, let the World
judge; or what credit may be given to him now or hereafter, who has here by
his own confession proved himself to be a mere Calumniator; or whether he ought
not to be marked in the Front (if it be soft enough for an Impression) with
these Capitals, THE GREAT ACCVSER.

So there is an end of his Eighteen Arguments, which (after the same rate)
might as well have been made up Eighteen hundred.

But for all this he has not done yet. An Objection on the behalf of the
Commissioners, star^ed by Mr. G.
He in the next place is so kind as to start an Argument on the behalf of the
Commissioners. If it be argued (says he) on their behalf, that it is neither
meet in point of Conscience or Religion, nor yet prudential or safe in point of
Policy, that all Patrons, authorized for such by Law, should be suffered to
prefer to the work of the Ministry* in all places where they have to do, whom;
or what manner of persons they please; For, by this means, a great part of the
Parochial Congregations in the Land should (in all likelihood) have either
Popish, or ignorant, or ungodly, or Malignant persons set over them in the work
of the Lord; the sad Consequence whereof is every man's apprehension. This is an
Argument indeed; and there is not so much as the shadow of an Argument in all
his Book beside: For, most certain it is, that if there be not a settled Course
for the proving and approving of persons presented to Benefices, then Patrons
may at random put in what manner of men they please, either insufficient,
profane, or malignant; and what the issue of that would be, is obvious to any
considering man. But Mr. G. brings not this here as an Argument to any good
intent; for he hales it in as an Objection against himself, merely to make way
for the purgation of some other odd humors, which he calls Answers to this
Objection (seven in number) and has put them to do service in the Rear, in
hope they may do somewhat to win the day: But upon examination, they are like to
prove as Forlorn as any of the Eighteen Arguments newly defeated, and serve
only to render them the more contemptible, by reason of a certain Figure called
(...), much used by Mr. Goodwin in his way of Rhetorising.

1. In his First Answer to the foregoing Objection, A Survey of the Answers*
brought by Mr. G. against the Objection raised by himself.
he implicitly acknowledges, that it would be a Disease to the Nation, that
persons presented to Livings should pass and possess them, without some
previous course for Approbation; and in this Answer he implies likewise, that
the way of Approbation is a Remedy; only this present way of Approbation, now
established in the hands of the Commissioners, is (as he says) a Remedy worse
than the Disease. As he here implies, so by and by he openly expresses
himself in the following Answers, that a Power of Approbation may be requisite
to rest somewhere, but he would have it be in other hands; the only spite is
at the men who are now invested with that power, and for their sakes it is that
he is so angry, both at the Magistrate, and at the Course which is by him
established. All would do well, if these were but out of Commission; partly
because Mr. G. himself is none of their number, and more especially because
they cannot approve men high in his monstrous Opinions.

2. This appears further by what he says in that which he calls the Second
Answer, A reply to Mr G. his second Answer.
where, like a wise State-mender, he takes upon him magisterially to censure
the Actions of his Superiors, telling them, It is no ways necessary either the
same Commissioners should be entrusted with the Inspection of the business
throughout the whole Nation, or that those who now occupy the places of
Commissioners should put no difference between the vile and the precious in
their Decrees of Reprobation. As to this latter Arrow shot at the Persons who
are Commissioners, I shall make no other Return but this, That it is a vile
Scandal against men whom himself has commended in his Epistle, and who are
esteemed precious in the sight of them that fear God in the Land; and it must
be ranked among the rest of his unchristian Calumniations; for so now I may
safely call them, seeing in the Close of his Eighteenth Argument (as has been
already shown) he as good as confesses he is not able to make proof of any one
particular: And therefore though in the ensuing Answers he takes occasion all
along to be spatter the Commissioners, no notice need be taken of it, because
being (...), a self-condemned man, it will be no injury either to him, or the
Reader, to dismiss him with this brief Retort of the Proverb, That his Tongue
(his Pen) is no slander. As touching his Censure of the present Establishment,
he adds, That it would have been much better to have framed the Commission of
Triers, according to the Model and Tenor of the Commission of Ejectors, and to
have appointed men for that service in each County respectively, by which means
the grandeur of their power and authority would not have been so
Hyper-Archiepiscopal, so Super-Metropolitan and Roming as now it is. Here the
Reader has words for his money, and his Highness and the Council have Advice
for nothing, from this Hyperphantastical Metropolitan of Bell-Alley, and all
the other By-lanes within the Jurisdiction of Coleman. But before I ken him
thanks for his Counsel, I must needs give him the Ferula once more for
Contradiction, and this within the narrow compass of three lines; one while
acknowledging the work of the Commissioners to be a SERVICE, and then
immediately talking idly of the grandeur of their power and Authority, which in
other places of his Book he in other Terms calls a Lordship and Dominion. But
this being ordinary with him, we must take the less notice of it, and make him
some return for his Counsel, it being his opinion, that men should be appointed
for that service of Trial and Approbation in each County. I shall not presume
to dive into those Reasons which induced his Highness and the Council to settle
that Commission as now it is; yet I think I have somewhat to offer that may
satisfy any reasonable man.

First, It is observable, that his Highness having near one half of the Livings
in England (one way or other) in his own immediate disposal by Presentation, He
seldom bestows one of them upon any man whom himself does not first examine
and make Trial of in person; save only that at such times as his great Affairs
happen to be more urgent then ordinary, he uses to appoint some other to do it
on his behalf: Which is so rare an example of Piety, that the like is not to be
found in the Stories of Princes. This Religious Act of his I take leave to
mention, because it stands as an Argument against the County-Project, one
Reason whereof by him alleged is, That men may be saved the labor of coming to
London for Approbation: For, place the Commission where you will, one half of
the Ministers must come to London, that they may have a Presentation: Besides,
the First-Fruits-Office, where all are to compound, is only in this place.

Secondly, It (...) to consider, whether his Highness can, in the remote parts
of the Nation, find out such men as he may judge to be equally qualified for
the Work. God be blessed, this Nation abounds with learned and pious Preachers
of the Gospel, and so much the more, by reason of the conscientious care and
industry of the present Commissioners; but it is to be feared, not a Number of
such will be found, who for Parts and Graces may be sufficient to manage a
Trust of so high an Importance.

Thirdly, Admit a sufficient number of such persons can be found in each
County, yet his Highness must put them into Commission, upon recommendation
made (for the most part) by others: And surely, his Highness cannot repose that
confidence in persons recommended by others, as in them, whose Sufficiencies
and Qualifications he is acquainted with upon his own knowledge.

Fourthly, consider whether it be fit, that the Nation should be filled with so
many new Commissions, as to have one erected in each County when there is no
necessity for it, and when there cannot be much work in a County for
Commissioners to do, seeing (take one County with another) there will be hardly
above ten persons in a year to be approved in each County, as might be
demonstrated by the Books of the First Fruits Office; and whether meeting so
seldom, and being to come together to a certain place at an uncertain time (as
men die out of their livings) and this from the remotest parts perhaps of the
County, it would be considered also, who shall summon them together; and if
they do meet, who shall bear their charges, and defraythe other incident
expenses, unless you would have a new charge imposed on each County, and the
Formality of an Office and necessary Officers erected, to bring a new
unnecessary trouble and burden upon the Counties; and all to pleasure Mr G.
who seeing no likelihood of bringing the higher Powers to his Bow, applies
himself by his Insinuations, to the People in Counties; and, as if he were to
act that part in the Poet ( Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo) would
move Hell, were it in his power, to overthrow these (...)* these Hellish
Termenters, for so the word imports, and is in his charity a sufficient reward
for their faithful endeavors; for were it not for a Zeal in them to be
faithful, they have an opportunity to please All, and that without any
Concernment or loss to themselves, unless it be of a good Conscience; which is
not much to Mr Goodwin, etc. By the Arminian Black Art, they can at their
pleasure find that again.

Fifthly, It would be considered, whether the distributing of Commissions for
Approbation in the Counties, would not be a means to occasion that which Mr
Goodwin so much charge upon the present Commissioners, Viz. Partiality,
rather than amend the matter, if any such thing were: For, it is much more
probably to be expected in Counties, where the Approvers and those who are to
be approved, will be known to one another, and may be either related to, or
acquainted with one another, or perhaps be recommended by Friends, and so upon
one of these Accounts men may gain an Approbation though they deserve it not;
and on the other side, perhaps others who are deserving, may, because of some
particular animosities, happen upon that account to be dis-approved. By this
means there will be a greater door opened to Partialities and Corruption (if
men made Commissioners in Counties should be prone thereto) than can possibly
be feared from Commissioners here above; who not being exposed to the same
Temptations through Acquaintance, Relation, or otherwise, in respect of the
generality of the persons (being strangers) that come to them, as it is not
likely they should (if they were corrupt) prove partial toward many, so it is
most probable, that wanting the same Inducements which others will be liable to
in the Counties, they will not probably run into the like enormities and
corruptions.

Sixthly, It is worthy consideration, whether that which Mr G. has fastened as
a heavy charge (though falsely as I have before proved) upon the present
Commissioners, Viz. as if their power were such that no Appeal could be from
it, and so no remedy in case they abuse the Power (whether this, I say, which
he unrighteously chargeh upon them) would not in effect be so indeed in the
hands of County-Commissioners: For here at London, if men think they have
injury done at their Trial or Examination, the remedy of Appeal (as Mr G. well
knows) is ready at hand; but should the power of Approbation be settled in
County-Commissioners, it would be a great way about for any person so injured,
before he can get remedy, because it would be one tedious work to come up
(suppose, as Mr G. does, from the remotest part of the Land) to complain and
make the Appeal; then that being done, the more tedious work would be to fetch
the Commissioners up to London to answer the charge exhibited here against
them; or else his Highness and the Council must be put to a new trouble to send
another Commission into the Country to other persons, to judge the proceedings
of those Commissioners, which by the time that the whole round of the business
shall be run out from one to another, will induce a sufficient expense (beside
trouble) to the party complaining, who by this means, in stead of once coming
up hither for Approbation, may happen to have his journey and expenses doubled
and trebled upon him. And what (I pray you) would the Consequence be? Would not
men (for the most part) be content rather to sit down by the Injury, then put
themselves upon such a tedious and expensive Course for remedy?

And therefore, 7. lastly, it ought to be considered, whether this difficulty
of the remedy by Appeal in case of wrong done by the County-Commissioners,
would not prove an occasion of making such as might be that way inclined,
presume to become the more corrupt and injurious, when they should see that it
would be so tedious a matter for men to get remedy against them. Now therefore
let the Reader put all these Considerations together in the Balance with one
single journey to London, which is so cried out on by Mr G. and then judge
whether it be not more tolerable than these, and many other Inconveniences (not
here named) which may happen, and which men must hazard, in case the Business
here impleaded were entrusted to Commissioners in the Counties.

But this is not all I have to say in Reply to Mr G. upon this particular of
men's making journies to London. For though he report the matter so, as if they
were necessitated to make journies ordinarily from the remotest parts of the
Land; yet this is most certain (and the known daily practice of the
Commissioners does confirm it) that if any man who is presented to a living be
weak or poor, or otherwise not able to take a journey without much prejudice,
then the Commissioners here are wont to make a special Reference to three or
four able and godly Ministers, neighbors in the County, and according to the
return made the Commissioners use to determine the business; they having here
always by them a Catalogue of the Names of such choice godly Ministers in each
County, whom upon occasion they can safely confide in for that purpose.

But Mr* Godwin is (it seems) a most provoked Adversary to the Commissioners;
and though in the foregoing part of his Book he has been very hot against the
Exercise of a Power of Approbation, yet now he is willing to forget himself
again, and to admit the exercise of it, provided it be any where but in the
hands of these Commissioners; and therefore he turns every stone to exasperate
all sorts of People against them. One while, he takes upon him to make a Tender
of this Power to the gathered Churches; and fearing lest they should not look
after it, he in the next place would cast it upon those of the Presbyterian
way, as part of amends for all the Injuries he has done them formerly; and if
they should refuse it, he has a third Reserve, and is willing to bestow it
upon the respective Parishes. He is content any thing should be done with the
great Trust of Approbation, let it be disposed any how, or any where, so that
he may have his will upon these Commissioners, and overthrow the present
Establishment made by Authority. These particular Humors of his I come now to
manifest in Order.

Being come to his third Answer to the Objection that was started by himself on
the behalf of the business of Approbation, A Reply to Mr G. his third Answer.
I find the Answer fall short of satisfaction; for rather then the present
Commissioners should be continued, he pleads here now on the behalf of the
Churches; and would have the power vested in them, saying, That the work is
more proper for them, Viz. The Congregated Churches throughout the Nation, then
for a handful of petty Clergiemen (as they are called) unto whom alone it is
now upon the matter devolved, sitting in one Angle only of the Nation. It is
not to be wondered at, that he who dares presume to vilify and dispute the
Authority, and the wisdom of his Prince, should so meanly represent Whitehall,
the place of his Residence, as to term it an Angle of the Nation. Had not this
been given at our Palace at Colemanstreet, surely the Princes Court could not
have been so mean in the thoughts of this Imperial Penman, as to be reputed but
a Corner: But thus it must be, in an Age when we will all be Princes; and can
he be less who looks upon his Brethren the Commissioners as but a handful of
petty Clergymen? But (high and mighty Sir!) be pleased to tell us who among
them does assume the Title of Clergy, or who ever called them so beside your
self? Nor are they all Clergymen (so called) but there are likewise men of the
Laity (if for distinction sake I may say so) among them; there are persons, men
of honor, and of greatest Trust in Civil affairs; and therefore for shame away
with these poor sly Tricks of odious Insinuation, which are foisted in out of
a corrupt design to prejudicate the Reader, and are the infallible Evidences of
a corrupt heart; and so they must be judged by all the Congregated Churches who
have occasion to take notice of this your behavior.

But now let us see what he says here of the Congregated or Gathered Churches.
And before I proceed, know, that the intent is not to diminish or detract any
thing from the reputation of the Churches, but only to show, by way of Answer,
how inconvenient a Thing that would be which he endeavors to fasten upon them.

1. For proof that it is a work more proper for the Churches to send men abroad
to preach the Gospel, he brings in two Texts out of the Acts, 11. 22. and 13.
3, 4. Which Texts do prove no more but that Barnabas in one place singly, in
another place jointly with Paul, was sent out by the Church to preach the
Gospel. That this de facto was done, it proves, and doubtless it was well done
of the Churches of Jerusalem and Antioch so to do: But will Mr. G. from the
occasional Acts of those Churches, which they did as Christians, thereupon
infer, that no other Christians whatsoever; whether single persons or
collective bodies, ought to do so good an act as to send men abroad to preach
the Gospel? Will he, because it was a good Deed done by them, conclude, that no
other men whatsoever should look upon it as their duty to promote so good a
work? Certainly, in those acts which are of Christian concernment in the
general, (that is, which all men who profess Christianity are as Christians
bound to do) what example soever we find of them either among the Apostles,
the primitive Disciples, or the Churches, that example is so far from being to
be made a ground to argue we ought not to do the like, that it rather obliges
all Christians in succession of time for ever to imitate the same upon all good
opportunities and occasions. And therefore if the preaching of the Gospel, and
the advancement of it in the world, be a work which it concerns every man
professing Christianity, quatenus a Christian, to promote, then doubtless the
Magistrate, being a Christian, is even from the example of those Churches, here
alleged by Mr. Goodwin, bound to send, and use all means convenient to send
men abroad, by Preaching to publish and promote the Gospel. Give me leave to
illustrate this by an Instance. We read 2 Cor. 8. of a liberal Collection made
by the Churches of Macedonia for relief of the poor Saints in Judaea: Now,
according to Mr. Goodwin's deep way of arguing, it ought to be concluded
thence, that because the Churches did it, therefore no particular person or
persons whatsoever (whether Magistrates or others) professing Christianity,
ought to make a collection or liberal contribution for the relief of poor
Christian Professors. The wild Inference would be upon as good a ground from
this, as that made by Mr. G. from the other; because the work of endeavoring
to augment the number of Christian Professors, and that of relieving poor
Professors, are works or duties both alike incumbent upon all Christians in
general, quatenus Christians: So that if from the one example he will infer,
that none but Gathered Churches ought to approve and send men abroad to preach,
I from the other example can as readily and naturally infer, that none but
Gathered Churches ought to exercise liberality toward the poor Saints; yea,
that no particular man ought to do it, because it was an act of those primitive
Churches. And therefore I conceive it is more fit and justifiable to conclude,
that when we meet with a noble and illustrious example among the Apostles and
primitive Churches, if it be of such a thing as concerns Christian practice, i.
e. every Christian, so far as in him lies, in matter of duty, the nobleness of
the example of those extraordinary persons should serve to raise and quicken
our affections to imitate them, in matters of ordinary duty, rather than permit
our selves to be deluded by Satan, when he suggests that we ought not to follow
them, because they have led us the way. -- Thus you see what a proper
Divinity-Argument he brings to prove, that sending men abroad to preach, is the
proper work of the Churches: But till he be able to prove, that it belongs to a
Church omni, soli, and semper, his Argument will fall.

2. The next particulars he produces are points of Prudence, to prove the said
Churches ought to have the power of approving and sending Preachers abroad. One
point is this; Because the Churches are more like to be considerate what they
should do in this kind, than the sealed Knot of Triers; these all being but a
few, and making but one Consistory, and so the whole business of Trying
throughout the Nation lying on their hands, they are in no capacity (especially
meeting so seldom Consistory-wise, as they do) to allow a meet proportion of
time for the regular traversing of matters committed unto them, at least not
without constraining many of their Suitors to dance a troublesome Attendance
upon them for their dispatch; whereas the Churches being many, the work and
business of Trying being disributed among them (as it is like it would be, if
it were committed to them) would have leisure to make a due enquiry into
matters that should come before them, and this without any tedious or
chargeable delay unto the persons. It is not my business to determine who would
be most considerate, the said Churches, or others, in the managing of this
business; but to consider, whether the way by him propounded for placing the
power in the Churches, be in reason likely to answer the end of his Highness
and the Council in the carrying on of the work, with such conveniencie, for the
honor of God, the good of the Commonwealth, and the interest and encouragement
of Preachers themselves. Not but that I believe the Churches would to their
power discharge a good conscience in the business, and are sufficient both for
grace and knowledge to do it; only I conceive, that they are Bodies, both in
respect of the manner of their constitution, and diverse other respects, not in
a capacity meet to answer the Magistrates expectation in the transacting of
such an Affair; as I shall manifest by and by. In the mean time, whereas he
says here, the Commissioners are but few, but one Consistory, and that the
work lies upon their hands, they not having time to traverse matters, without
making Suitors attend long; the Reader is to take notice, that the
Commissioners are such a number as Authority has judged convenient; and if
there were need of more, the same hands who placed these, are not so
straightened, but that upon occasion they have added, and are ready to add unto
their number. Only they are wise otherwise than Mr. Goodwin, and are willing to
tread in the steps of ancient prudence, confirmed by the experience of all
Ages. But how this point of prudence should be better answered by placing the
power in the Churches, I do not understand. Which of them (I pray) shall
undertake the business in a County? Or, 1. Admit some one Congregational or
gathered Church should have the power, would it not displease all the rest of a
County which are not of that Church, or not of the same Opinions with that
Church? 2. Whereas you say now, Congregational Churches, then it must belong to
them either as Congregational, or as Churches. If as a Congregation, then the
power rests well where it is; for, the Commissioners are a Congregation made up
of Forty persons at least, and all of them Elders of Churches, or fit for it.
If as Churches, then surely, Presbyterial or Parochial, so far as they have the
essence of a Church, ought also to be trusted. 3. Besides, it would be
considered, whether you would have the whole Body of a gathered Church, or only
some part of it to be entrusted with the said power in a County. If you say,
some part should have it; then, as it will be displeasing to the other part
neglected, so you lose your intent (Sir) because you say it ought to be in, not
parts of Churches, but Churches; and to this purpose your before-cited Texts
out of the Acts do speak, which you brought to prove that Churches sent Paul
and Barnabas to preach the Gospel; for in those Texts it was the Act of whole
Bodies of Churches. On the other side then, if you say the whole Body of a
Church, or a Church as a Body, should act therein, then I suppose that things
being carried in that Body by common Suffrage, the matter will be so far from
being mended that way in point of quick dispatch, that delays must needs be
more tedious than ever: As for the Commissioners they have their meetings
constantly two days in a week, which they find sufficient to do the work, and
yet put men to no more attendance than the necessity of the insufficiency and
doubtfulness of diverse persons does require. But says he, how often the Triers
have dashed their feet at these and such like stones, is known unto, and
lamented by many. To such unworthy Provocations whereof your Book is full, I
make no other Return but this, that you have all along proved your self a mere
Calumniator, never daring to make one Instance (which your sweet spirit of
revenge could not have omitted, had you had any thing of Fact, though but upon
surmise;) and in the Conclusion of all your Arguments (as has been declared
sufficiently already) you are so ingenuous as to shame the Devil, when you
confess you have no particulars of proof, either upon record, or in memory.
Which certainly ought to be a lamentation to your self, when you consider, it
being a matter of grief and lamentation to others who have had occasion to
observe your demeanor.

A Third Reason is (he says) Because the Church Bodies are not accomplished
with any such Politic reaches, deep methods, subtle Contrivances for the
bringing about of secular Projects, or By-ends, as our Triers are. Still this
is matter of scandal against the Commissioners, and little better against the
Churches: For, as he calls his own a company of Sheep, so he seems to make all
the rest but sheep indeed; representing them as weak heads in the general, and
implying that they may have reaches, and methods, and contrivances to bring
about by-Ends, as well as the Commissioners, only they have not such deep
Reaches and contrivances; which is in effect to say, they may be corrupt as
well as the Commissioners, only they have not so much wit as the Commissioners
have to bring ends about. Now on the other side, put case that the
Commissioners be godly conscientious men (as Mr Goodwin in his Epistle says
they are) and suppose it be admitted (as I have no reason to the contrary) that
the Churches also are, for the most part, godly conscientious people, yet
certainly Mr Goodwin having declared his opinion, that the Commissioners have
the better Brains to manage a business, then I hope the Churches have reason to
consider him, and ken him thanks for his kindness, and the Magistrate must
needs rest better satisfied to trust a select company of known able and good
men, than to commit this business of Approbation to the Churches in general,
who though they may have as much good meaning, yet Mr G. says, they have not
so deep a reach as the present Commissioners. Moreover, the Churches (he says)
are not, in respect of their numbers, and complicated variety of Interests and
Conditions in their respective Members, very capable of conspiring or combining
so much as in the proposal of any undue or unworthy ends to themselves, and so
are like to be more sincere and plain-hearted in their proceedings. It Is like
they will not be forward to propose any thing tending to an unworthy end; but
on the other side, it ought to be considered, whether that Account which Mr G.
has here given touching their constitution, be not rather an Argument to prove
that it will be a hard matter for them to come to any end or Conclusion at all,
in convenient time for the dispatching of this Business which himself has said
ought not to take up too much attendance. For, 1. In respect of their numbers,
the general Maxim is, That great Bodies move but slowly. 2. In respect of
their complicated variety of Interests and Conditions in their respective
Members; certain it is, that always according to the variety of men's Interests
and Conditions, they come to be variously disposed, they will debate a matter
round, and they will too often debate for victory, too often to gratify a
friend, too often to gratify a spleen, and too long to do any business, in
manner or time convenient as it ought to be; which is sufficiently evident, by
the experience of all Ages, where various interests and conditions of men have
met in numerous popular Assemblies.

A fourth Reason is, he says, Because the Churches being of different
judgments touching Discipline and Worship, and some other opinions much
controverted and debated among godly, sober, and worthy men in the Nation, may
amongst them* and this with a full concurrence and consent of their judgments,
and without the least regret or check of conscience, accommodate all pious and
godly persons, of what judgment soever otherwise, in all their just desires or
requests. I am very loath to rip up Sores, because it is to be done in public,
and it may more gratify the common Enemy, the Papist, than benefit our selves;
but seeing it is a matter too well known already, I may touch it a little, and
shall but lightly. Do we not know how far the minds of men have been from
accommodating upon points of Discipline and Worship, and all other Opinions,
that though (some of them) religious and sober in all other things, yet they
have been at daggers drawing in this? Have not too many in the Churches been
drawn out by a mis-guided zeal, even to the anathematizing of their brethren
who walk not in the same Church Way with them, about points of Discipline and
Worship? And is not the same humor too predominant still among too many? I
shall (for Religion and Honors sake) forbear a running out into the large field
of Particulars: But certainly, when it is known, that diverse of the Churches
have divided among themselves, and broken that unity of the Spirit which ought
to be in the Bond of Peace, and this merely upon difference of judgment
concerning some Points not Fundamental and that some have proceeded so far,
even against their fellow members in one and the same Church, so as to un-faint
one another round, and make a Schism in the Body, it would be a strange thing
if the Supreme Magistrate understanding this, and having undertaken the
protection of the people of God in general, who walk under several Forms and
Persuasions, should venture the Trust of Approbation in so great a latitude as
the hands of the gathered Churches throughout England and Wales, seeing the
generality of men in Churches are so much disposed to favor men, some one way,
some another, according to their various Inclinations, that the measure of
Approbation (were the power of it in the Churches) is not like to be taken so
often from the proportions of Grace and sound Knowledge of Fundamentals of
Faith in men to be approved, as from the correspondence and consent which they
may have with this, that, or the other Opinion held by the Majority of those
who are to approve them. -- But Mr. G. lays this as a blame upon the
Commissioners, saying, that they express wrath against men, because dissenting
in Judgment from themselves, and have laced their Consciences so strait, that
themselves profess they cannot without sin open the door of entrance into the
Ministry to any man, but those whose thoughts are their thoughts, and one
judgment with them in matters of Christian faith. This groundless imputation I
have wiped off already diverse times, upon several occasions given as I passed
through his Book; where I have shown, that the Commissioners, by the very
constitution of the Ordinance, have no such power, nor do they use any such
practice, nor can they if they would, because themselves are men of the various
Ways and Persuasions received among us, but agree in this, that they hold fast
the Foundation, Fundamental Truths, and reject none but such as hold the
contrary, in which number Mr. Goodwin's exploded. Arminian Tenets are justly
reckoned: And as it is the glory of the Commissioners, that they profess they
cannot approve such as hold them, so it is the sole ground of all his clamor
against them. He would muster up men, raise Batteries, and plant his great Guns
in all the Pulpits of England, against the GRACE OF GOD, which I may call the
Fort-Royal of Christian verity; but not being able to get Commissions for his
men, he is fain to play at small game, shooting Paper-pellets and Squibs of
Slander in Pamphlets against the said Commissioners, not sparing even his
Highness and the Council, for their great love to the Lord Jesus, manifested in
so religious a Constitution.

His fifth and last reason is, Because the Churches are commodiously dispersed
throughout the Nation, for persons from all quarters to repair unto one or
other of them, witbout the charge or trouble of long journies; whereas the
Triers (whom also he is pleased to term Inquisitors) have their Chamber of
Audience fixed some hundreds of miles off from the skirts of the Nation, so
that men must make tedious and chargeable journies to them. Thus you have him
playing the Tautologer again; therefore I must send you back to the Answer
given him in another place about long journies, where you will find that care
is sufficiently taken to prevent long Journies; and I have shown, that men
would be constrained to endure many far worse inconveniences, and the longest
Journies perhaps over and over, and to little purpose, in case but one Chamber
of Audience were settled in a County, much more when he would have as many as
there are gathered Churches in every County. Moreover, the same Reasons which I
have before alleged against settling the power of Approbation in
County-Commissioners, do much more make against settling it in the said Churches
in each County: For, is it imaginable, that the generality of Gathered Churches
can yield men of Parts and Piety fitted for the work of Trying and Approving,
in all respects equal to the persons now employed by his Highness? It would be
fit also to consider, whether whole Churches, or parts of Churches; or, there
being perhaps many gathered Churches in a County, whether all of them, or some
few, or some one of them, or part of all, or few, or some one of them, shall be
entrusted; and how either of these can be employed, without displeasing all the
rest? If you say all those Churches are to be entrusted; that would breed a
most ridiculous confusion in Counties where there are many such Churches; and
if some parts of Churches, or only a part of some one Church, then it would be
work enough for his Highness and the Council to inform themselves aright who
among them all are most fit, and who unfit for the managing of such a Trust:
And when all is done, what satisfaction would it be to those of the
Presbyterian way, to see only the Gathered Churches, or some part of them only
employed, and themselves excluded from a share in so great a Trust, and the men
of their way left (as to the matter of Approving or Disapproving) wholly to the
disposition of the said Churches? Which certainly ought not to be, seeing Mr.
Goodwin has in his very next Paragraph pleaded on their behalf, as men fit to
be made Judges in the matter of Approbation, forgetting (as in other cases he
has done the like) that in this Paragraph he produces it, as meet only for
the said Churches; but it is no wonder he should propound contradictory courses
in matter of Practice, whose sad hap it is to have his crazie Intellect
laboring under the continual distempers of self-contradiction in matter of
Reason. But waving this, it would be worthy consideration next (as touching the
entrusting of the Churches, whether whole or in part) what certain place they
shall meet at, who shall summon them, who shall bear their charges, and defray
other incident expenses, how their Records shall be kept, how their Register
and other necessary Officers shall be maintained, and by whom; and how other
things can be done with convenience, for the conveying of a Legal title to
Preachers, in those Livings to which they are presented, in so secure and
regular a course of proceeding, as is observed by the present Commissioners?
And what if a Church break to pieces? And what shall be done with the Records
of such an Office? -- But by this time, I suppose the Reader has enough of Mr.
Goodwin's Five Reasons, wherefore he would have the power of Approbation settled
in the Gathered Churches of the several Counties; and so by my foregoing
Discourse I leave you to consider, whether it be not a matter both imprudent
and unpracticable. I now come to his Fourth Answer made to the Objection raised
by himself.

4. If ( says he) a Trial of Ministers before Admission to a place of public
service be admitted as necessary, A Reply to Mr. G. his fourth Answer.
and the Churches not deemed competent to take, or make a regular Trial of
them, yet why should not those who are Authorized as competent for the
Ordination, or Creation of Ministers, be judged competent for their Trial? Whom
he means by the persons authorized for Ordination, is evident by the beginning
of his next Paragraph, where he expounds them to be the several Presbyteries.

Quo tencam nodo mutantem Protea vultus?
-- Risum teneatis amici?
What a deal of shifting is here, in hope to shift away the Commissioners? It
seems I have an Eele by the Tail, whom I no sooner worm out of one hole, but he
slips to another. But would not any man smile to see Mr Goodwin, whose pride it
was heretofore to be pulling down all the Presbyteries in England, now to
become a pretended Advocate on their behalf? He that cried (almost) Sword and
Faggot against them, and would with a good will have pulled down Sion-Colledge
about their ears? He that has written and printed as many invective Pamphlets
against them, as might serve to stock most of the Tobacco-shops? Is it not
strange that he should seem now to be for them? But he is like my neighbors
little Dog, who barks at all Passengers that appear upon the Public Road, and
when some are passed and gone, leaves them, and spends his mouth again at the
next who come in sight, (for he must be barking;) and therefore this is no
Thanks to them of the Presbytery, because they very well know the man and his
humor, and that Caninus Appetitus which he has to Printing; nor do they need
many words to give them an understanding of his restless disturbing Temper,
which (like some others that might be named) is ever flying out at any thing
that is uppermost, or that has but the face of an Establishment.

5. That which he brings in as his Fifth Answer, offers nothing of Reason, but
spends about half a Page in matter of Expostulation against the Commissioner,
thus: Why should these men be made Triers? Is no vein of men meet to make
Triers but these? He is in great pain because of these; Any Tooth good Barber,
let me have any thing rather than these, who (as he says) keep Laborers out
of the Vineyard. By all means (I pray you) down with these that keep the Romish
Bores out from rooting up the vines, and the Arminian Foxes from spoiling the
tender grapes.

6. And therefore in the sixth place, rather than endure these any longer, he
is content there should be either no Approbation at all, or else that it should
be left in the hands of the several Parishes of the Nation; which (all things
perpended) would be a worthy way, especially considering the Faction of some,
the Ignorance of many, and the Malignancy and Profaneness of too many of the
Parishes. Of this I have said somewhat in the foregoing part of my Discourse,
where, though you will find Reasons enough against it, and that Mr Goodwin (of
all other men) has the least reason to plead for a Parochial Power, yet seeing
he has, in his giddy fit of Scribbling, been willing to run the round, to court
all Parties and Orders of men to join with him against the Establishment of the
Commissioners, now confirmed by Authority of his Highness and the Parliament;
therefore I shall take a little pains more to see what is further alleged by
this popular Advocate on the behalf of the Parishes; which though it be but
Folly in me to do, yet for fear the Man's Followers should say his Book had no
full Answer, I shall deal with him according to his Folly, lest he grow too
wise in his own conceit.

If (says he) it be against Reason, that the Magistrate should restrain men
from hiring or entertaining Servants, such as they conceive would be most
serviceable and useful to them in their affairs; or that he should appoint
others to assign them what servants they please; much more unreasonable is it,
that greater Bodies and Societies of men should not be permitted to have such
to serve them in spiritual Affairs, as they are persuaded are most like to
build them up in sound knowledge, and pr^mote the interest of their Souls. Is
not this, think ye, a singular Argument? But for Answer in brief. 1. I cannot
but note the comparison as odious, betwixt Domestic and Spiritual Servants,
seeing these latter are called Overseers Pastors, and Spiritual Fathers, (with
other terms of honor) as well as Servants (which they are in a sense too) for
the sake of Christ and his Gospel; and as they have Titles of honor, so they
have Privileges correspondent, which ordinary Servants have not. 2. The
Comparison will by no means hold in reason, because the meanest of men have
usually skill enough to make choice of ordinary Servants fit for their Turn:
But there are but few men in the best Parishes, and in most of them not one of
skill and knowledge sufficient to judge of a man, whether he be qualified with
Spiritual gifts and graces to enable him to serve them in Spiritual things. 3.
Suppose some men in some Parishes may be of ability in matter of knowledge to
judge, yet those that are able to judge in matter of understanding, and most
men that have knowledge in the notion, do yet want grace in the heart, and so
it will be seldom that they will have the Will to approve an able or a gracious
man to be a Preacher. 4. Suppose yet further, that the knowing men of a Parish
should be willing to approve a knowing and a gracious man; yet the rest of the
Parish, who have a share in the Suffrage, may be of another mind, for some
respects of their own, and pretend it would be more for the Interest of their
souls to have another person. 5. Consider, that Parishes being Bodies and
Societies of men, the Magistrate has an Interest in them as they are a
Corporation or Community, and though men have a right to do as they will at
home in Private Affairs, yet he may (according to the laudable Constitution of
all Commonweals) interpose so far in all those things wherein they Act by
Suffrage as a Community; as to restrain them from, or limit them in Acting in
such matters, which are of more immediate concernment to himself. 6. And
therefore lastly, though the Minister or Preacher to be approved be to be in
some sense a Servant, a Servant to the Parish, in things Spiritual; yet he is
not to be so much their Servant, as the Servant of Christ in the first place;
Then, being not in a private, but in a Public Relation to the whole Parish,
and upon a Public account, he in the next place is also to be reputed the
Servant of the Magistrate; partly as he is to officiate on the Magistrates
behalf toward the Community of the Parish, and partly because he is to have a
Public Maintenance from the Magistrate: For, though Tithes and other Duties
arise out of the Parishes, yet they are not of the Legal Propriety of the
Parishioners, because the Propriety has been otherwise anciently disposed of,
and settled by the Law of the Land, to enable the Magistrate to hold forth and
uphold a Public Profession of the Christian Faith within the several places of
the Nation. So that these things being considered, it is vain for Mr Goodwin to
plead for a Right of Power in Parishes to Approve, upon a supposition that the
Minister or Preacher to be Approved is to be their Servant, seeing though in
one sense ( viz. Spiritually) he is to serve them, yet by reason of his Civil
Relation and Dependencie, he is not their, but the Public Servant of the
State, for the good of the Parish, in that Employment.

But Mr Goodwin, to fright the Magistrate, tells him, that it is a Crime in him
to be meddling with such sacred Edge-Tool^, as the Authoritative forcible
imposing of Ministers upon Parishes. All this will not take off the Edge of a
Religious Magistrate, who knows that having a Revenue in his hand to promote
the preaching of the Gospel, it is his duty, as he is a Christian man, to do
his utmost to see it well bestowed that way, by maintaining able and gracious
men in doing the work, and when any of them is sent to a Parish, it cannot be
so said, that the settling of him there is an Authoritative forcing of the
Parish to receive him, but rather that it is a Pious Provision for the Parish
by the Care of Authority. Nor let any man deceive his own heart by thinking
thus; That because when a Minister or Preacher is so sent and settled, the
Parish have no power to refuse him, therefore the not having power to refuse
him, is all one as if he were forced upon them: For if such a Construction
might be made, then by the same way it might be argued, that when his Highness
sends down persons into the Country to perform any office of Trust, the
execution whereof is warranted by Law, suppose it be in the several Counties,
as when he sends down Sheriffs; you know then the Counties have no power to
refuse them; and yet this never was, nor can it be reputed a forcing of
Sheriffs upon the Counties; because as his Highness has a lawful power to send
and settle such Officers as Sheriffs, so the Counties are by Law concerned to
receive, and by Law cannot refuse them, because their liberty of refusal is
determined by that lawful obedience which they owe to his Highness: So in this
case of his Highness sending Preachers legally presented and approved to
Parishes, the Parishes not having liberty to refuse them, cannot be reputed
equivalent to a forcing men upon them, because their liberty of Refusal is
determined by the Law, which obliges them to receive them, and so no injury is
done them by force or constraint; forasmuch as no man or company of men ought
to presume or pretend any further liberty in any Nation, than the Laws of that
Nation do allow. It Is pity so much Ink and Time should be lost about the
clearing of so plain a business: But it is for the sake of Mr. G. and his
Admirers, that he may not too much admire himself, nor they believe him
impregnable, when they see his Arguments are no Edge tools.

He goes on to present another scruple to the Magistrate, telling him, If he
send Ministers to Parishes, and they prove either insufficient, negligent, or
wicked; then the blood of the souls in those Parishes which perish, will fall
upon his head: whereas if the souls of the people perish through the
insufficiency or unfaithfulness of a Ministry of their own choice and
approbation, their blood will be required of their Ministers, in case the
people did at the time of approving them use their best care and circumspection
in the business. This is the sum of the story; and a shrewd one it is indeed,
that carries its own confutation in the belly: For, if he would lay the guilt
of the blood of the Peoples souls upon the Ministers chosen and approved by the
said People, if so be they (to wit the People) did their best to judge aright
of them when they chose and approved them; then, upon the same account of
Reason, I can acquit the Magistrate from the danger of incurring a guilt of the
blood of souls, if he did his best, by himself or his Deputies, to judge aright
of the Ministers by due Trial and Examination, before he sent them to their
respective Parishes; and must cast it upon the Ministers, if they shall,
notwithstanding the care of the Magistrate or his Deputies, afterward
degenerate, and prove unfit, or unfaithful in their places.

In the last place (says he) if it be alleged, that danger be likely to
befall the State or Government, by allowing Parishes the Approbation of their
own Ministers, the truth is, the danger is like to be greater by their being
denied it. And why so forsooth? He like a wise Statesman (for no less he takes
himself to be) tells us, Because States never suffered by indulging their
people in things reasonable and just; but their witholding from them their due
rights, has still been exasperating and provoking. Thus you see how he
endeavors to exasperate the people against the State, about this business;
insinuating into vulgar minds a supposition of a Right of choosing and approving
public Ministers and Preachers to be in themselves. This is to indulge the
discontented humors of some men, by filling their heads with Falsehoods and
unreasonable Phantsies, that have no other ground but his bare suggestion:
which is so much the more vile, because attended by so many
self-contradictions. For (as I have already told you) in some places of his
Book he endeavors to fasten the Right both of Choosing and Approving only
upon Patrons, in opposition to the present Commissioners for Approbation. Then
flitting thence, he pleads for it as the better Right of the Gathered Churches.
Afterward he brings it in head and shoulder for the Presbyteries. In another
place, he would bestow it upon some new County-Commissioners; and not slicking
there, he becomes a stiff pleader for the whole Right to be in Parishes. So
that what he has denied in several places, intimating that there ought to be
no Approbation at all, calling it a Project in one place, a Device, a
Contrivance, a Stratagem, a Politic Engine, and I know not what more; yet he
grants it in other places, and has been pleased to allow of it here at the
latter end of his Book, and would once again stick it as a feather in the Cap
of his best Friends, the Churches; and if they take it not, then he would
bestow it upon his Adversaries, or strangers, or any where, so it might not
rest in the hands of the Commissioners, whom he is pleased to pursue with a
whole Army of Slanders and Abuses, as his greatest Adversaries, though
implicitly he justifies the right and necessity of their Employment.

But admit that the power he pretends to plead for in Parishes, were so settled,
is it not worthy consideration what might be the consequence?

1. The Legal Right of Patrons (that of the Magistrate as Patron Paramount, and
of all inferior Patrons, whose cause he has so earnestly defended elsewhere)
must be yielded up and destroyed.

2. The way of securing and upholding a Public Profession of the Gospel in the
Nation by the Magistrate, will be utterly lost.

3. In stead of a public Profession, there will be no other but a private
Profession of every particular Parish; So that if (according to Mr. Roger
Williams) Judaism, Turcism, Papism, or any thing else come in, what remedy?
For, suppose it should please the Parish, and be brought in among them to
justle out the Profession of Christianity, who can help it? seeing their Patron
Mr. Goodwin says, they ought to exercise a Right to choose and enjoy whom they
please; and therefore he may even shake hands again here with his brother
Williams, and as well leave them to choose what Religion they please into all
the Parishes of England and Wales. This is it both their wisdoms tend to: For,
says the same Mr. Williams, in that Book of his containing Proposals for
propagating the Gospel: Is it not more conducible a thousand-fold to the
peoples eternal welfare, that each Town and Division of people in the Land be
impartially permitted to make a Stand, to examine and chose their way of
Worship, Ministry, and Maintenance? Yea, whether or no is it not absolutely
better, that they did freely choose rather a false Religion (Jewish, Popish,
Turkish, etc.) than without their free choice, to be ^^s^ed up in a way of
Traditional and Customary Religion?

4. If Parishes should have Right to choose and approve, then they ought also
to have a power to eject; else what would the other signify? seeing otherwise
after a Choice once made, they would during that man's days, be without remedy,
though afterward they should believe they have committed an Error in choosing
him, or have a desire to be rid of him: Besides, if Parishes had or were to
have such a Right, what a pickle would most of the godly Ministers of Parishes
be in throughout England? What security could they have for any long enjoyment
of their Places, seeing that men's minds in Parishes are mutable? and though
when they first came among them, they were perhaps willing enough to have them,
yet in case those Pious men that first occasioned their coming, shall remove
from the Parish to live elsewhere, or die, then perhaps men of another Temper
may be the prevailing party of a Parish, and think fit to eject them, to make
room for others more suitable to their own disposition; and so, if the Law and
the Magistrate were once concerned no further than to look on, with his hands
in his Pocket, who then could help them? What would become of the pious
Ministry of England, after a little season?

5. If Parishes had such a Right, that their Ministers were solely to depend
upon them both for choice and Approbation, as it would be a great Temptation
upon many to turn men-pleasers that were once otherwise, so it would be an
occasion to fill Parishes with such Preachers only as would sow Pillows under
the elbows of their Parishioners, and not dis-oblige them by any such Doctrines
as might unsettle them in their Lees, and disturb their Corruptions; Preachers
that would be slaves to the very Vassals of Satan, rather than Ministers or
Servants of Jesus Christ.

6. As the generally of Parishes are too ignorant, so had they a power to do in
this case what they please, it would soon be found they would like none but
such as themselves. The High-Sh^on loves his Penny better than his Pater
Noster, and had he once the power pleaded for by Mr Goodwin, the next News we
should hear of him would be, that he is seeking out for some miserable Levite
to contract underhand with him for Half-Tithes or Quarter-Tithes, or what
other Maintenance soever it be, before he will admit him; and so instead of
having a generous public maintenance for a Learned and Pious Ministry, there
would be hard-meat, hardly an allowance of Po^r John, for a Sir John in every
Parish; by which means, the poverty and insufficiency of the Ministry would
soon be reduced to an equal Standard, and men might be sure to run headlong
toward Hell at an easy rate, and have no body to stop them.

7. Lastly, I suppose it is well known to Mr G. that the generality of Parishes,
as they are profane and ignorant, so they are no less Malignant against
Authority; and he (in effect) acknowledges it.

For, in the last place (and with it he closes up his Book) rather than
Parishes should not exercise such a Power, Mr G. his pleadings for Malignant
P^^achers.
he cares not though they were all stocked with Ministers and Preachers of the
same Character throughout the Nation, and therefore pleads aloud on their
behalf; which doubtless he has reason to do, he and they being generally
allied to each other, in one common cause of Arminianism, whereof that sort of
men have been the great Defenders. For (says he) admit a Minister allowed by
the People of a Parish prove of a Malignant humor; so may a Minister, though
with the Triers, pass. This is no Amulet or Charm against Malignancie. It Is not
denied, but it is possible that a Malignant may give the Commissioners a slip
through Trial and Approbation: But then he must be very cunning, and a man of a
very concealed conversation, that no knowledge should be had of him; otherwise,
though they have neither Amulet nor Charm, they are usually able enough to
spell him, as well as other Friends of Mr Goodwin, and keep the Devil of
Malignancie from running to possess the Swine of the Parish, and hurry them to
destruction.

Moreover (says he) If a Minister's Tongue prove at any time Malignant in the
Pulpit, there is another Minister, the Magistrate, at hand to restrain him. It Is
well he will allow the Magistate may do something: This is indeed a good
Argument for putting Malignant Preachers into Parishes to find work for the
Magistrate to restrain them, or put them out (it seems the Magistrate wants
work:) But is it likely, that the Parish who chose their Preacher in, and upon
that Account may be conceived to be all of his own humor, will inform against
him? Or is it convenient for the Magistrate to maintain Spies in every Parish
to bring him information? Or must the correction of the said Malignant be left
to that Magistrate called the Constable, or High Constable, or the Justice of
Peace, who may perhaps be an Inhabitant of the Parish, or of some
Neighbour-Parish, where they also and their Preacher may (by Mr Goodwin's
favor also) be all of the same Complexion? Pray ( Sir) resolve us of these
Points in your next Plea for Malignancy.

But he adds further, that the greatest danger threatening the State from
Malignant Ministers, is not by the opportunity they may have of Public
Preaching, clandestine Insinuations, Consultations, Irritations* etc. for the
plotting and practicing whereof they may have more leisure and opportunities by
being taken off, or put by their Employment of Preaching. Thus you see what
malice against the Commissioners has brought him to. He, in other places of
his Book, has manifested a spleen sufficiently against his Highness, for
erecting of the Commissioners; now then what remains in the next place to be
expected, but that he who would knock down the Commissioners, to make room in
Parisnes for Charles Stuart's Chaplains, may ere long be of a mind to print
down his Highness, to make room for their Master. -- Would any man, whose
Senses were not sodden in the very dregs of discontent, plead thus openly for
them, in a matter that might be of apparent prejudice to the Public safety For
whence is it that Plottings usually arise? is it not from false conceptions,
mistakes, and misapprehensions of Affairs instilled into People's minds? And
what more ready way to poison the judgments and affections of the People
touching the Princes Actions and Concernments, than that their Teachers should
be disaffected to him and his Proceedings? Is it not from hence, that the
people may be easily made fit matter for Insurrections, and malleable to the
designs of men averse to the Government? What though they should be so wise as
to forbear open expressions in Pulpits? yet is it not known, a discourse may be
so artificially and craftily contrived, that by remote oblique hints and
secrets wipes, (which tickle more then downright language) the vulgar sort are
soonest charmed out of their good affections? Have we not seen this by
experience? and admit this were not; yet do we not know the generality to be
led by the example of their Minister? Whom if they know to be Malignant, they
usually take after him, and his very ordinary converse from house to house is
more then a thousand Sermons. Would any man then that were not as ill-affected
as they, plead for the maintaining of them in all the Parishes of the Nation?
Good Sir, let the Magistrate have leave to dispose of the Public maintenance
in Parishes to persons well-affected; and be you your self pleased, with the
other Sheepmasters of your own complexion, to leave playing the Foxes, and love
the Peace of the Church, more then your own private ends and proud humors,
then your Malignants will be less confident in their ways, and so on all sides
there will be little cause to fear any further plottings, or practices of
Insurrection among the people.

But Mr G. has not done yet; for, as it is one point of his anger, that his
Highness will not maintain them; so he makes it the last ground of his quarrel,
that the Commissioners will not approve of them; and with this he shuts his
Book; for, says he, when persons somewhat (it may be) malignantly inclined,
shall be contumeliously entreated by the State, or by their Officers, as
suppose any of them should be made to drink of the Triers Cup of reprobation,
is not this a direct way or means to awaken and set on work such an
Inclination? Here you see, his care is not so much for the Government, as for
them; and by this judge, whether he be not more for Them than for the
Government. What if through Malignancie, they be inclined to Treat the State
contumeliously? That is a small matter in the eye of Mr G. because therein
himself may shake hands with them as a brother, having in this Book made as
bold that way as any of them, and therefore it is contumeliously done of the
State to animadvert upon their Malignancy, and a crime in the Commissioners,
because they will not break their Trust by giving an Approbation, to enable
them to Treat the State with contumely in public before all the People. This
is the Inference; and the sum of his Discourse about the matter amounts to
this: When Preachers are inclined to the highest mischief that may be in a
Nation, if the State, or their Officers, do take a reasonable Course to prevent
the mischief, they thereby contumeliously handle those Preachers, and it were
better to let them be actually doing mischief, than irritate their malignant
Inclinations, by depriving them of the opportunity to rob the State of the
hearts of the People. This would make an Argument to prove as well, that
Robbers should be let alone upon the Rode, and Cutthroats in the City, rather
than the Inclinations of them and their Companions should be provoked, by a
contumelious sending them to Gaol, to keep them from doing further mischief. It
would be every jot as wise a Conclusion for the toleration of them, and all
other Offenders, as that of Mr G. on the behalf of Malignant Preachers.

Nevertheless, he breathes the utmost of his Conclusion in these words, (ERGO)
Therefore the Politic Consideration suggested in the Argument in Countenance
of the Triers, and their Constitution, is clearly anti-politick, and frowns
rather than smiles upon their Consistory. And so (says he) if Policy having
weighed them in her Balance, find them wanting; and Religion having weighed
them in the Balance of the Sanctuary, has found them yet wan^ing more: let
their Kingdom be divided, and given to the Congregations of the Land. That is
to say, to the Parishes; for, these are the Congregations he intends in this
Place: By which it is evident, that as many of the former Passages of his Book
are contradictory to each other; so what pretenses soever he made before, on
the behalf of Patrons, the Gathered Churches, Presbyteries, and others, he
contradicts all now; 'twas not out of any respect to them, but only to
color his corrupt design of exasperating all sorts of men, for an overthrowing
the present Establishment of Commissioners for Approbation, seeing after all he
looks over the left shoulder, with Scorn and Contempt upon the other Parties,
and in opposition to them all, concludes on the behalf of Parishes, whom in
gross he would prefer as the most competent Approvers. But notwithstanding all
that ever he has said, the foregoing Argument or Objection raised by himself,
on the behalf of the Commissioners, stands yet far more considerable than all
his pretended Answers thereunto, which being found so mean, surely no man will
look so low as to frown at them, though many may smile; but especially at his
Eighteen Arguments, in the managing whereof, he has (you see) proved himself
no less scandalous than vain in reference to Religion, and carried the matter
as illogically in this, as in most of his other Scripts, which whosoever reads
with a judicious eye, will hardly believe the man was ever acquainted with the
Schools of Reason, and will (I dare say) readily subscribe to this Censure;
That they are

-- Thus, Piper, and Scombros metuentia Scripta,
Such a sort of writings, which might be most Politickly preferred, if they
were duly divided betwixt the Grocers and the Tipling-Schools of the Land.

A Postscript to the learned Reader concerning Mr J. Goodwin's Temper.
Mart. l. 5. Ep. 59. In Mamercum. UT been loquatur, sentiatque Mamercus,
Efficere nullis, Aule, moribus possis:
Pietate fratres Curios licet vincas,
Quiet Nervas, comitate Rufones,
Probitate Marcos, aequitate Mauricos,
Oratione Regulos, jocis Paulos,
Rubiginosis cuncta dentibus rodit.
Hominem Malignum forsan esse tu credas;
Ego esse miserum credo, cui placet nemo.
FINIS.

