A PACKET OF ADVICES AND ANIMADVERSIONS, Sent from LONDON To the Men of
SHAFTSBVRY: Which is of Use for all His MAJESTY'S Subjects in the Three
Kingdoms.

Occasioned by a Seditious Pamphlet, Entitled, A Letter from a Person of
Quality to His Friend in the Country.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1676.

A Packet of Advices and Animadversions sent from London to the Men of
Shaftsbury, etc.
Ye Men of Shaftsbury, both Lords and Gentlemen,
IT IS well, that in this Interval of Parliament, we have some time for
Contemplation, and rest from Business, that so we might reflect upon what we
have done, as well as consider what we ought next to do; and in cool Blood
ponder the Nature, and probable Events of those Counsels that some of us so
fiercely prosecuted in the Last Session, 1675; together with the Byends of such
as first set them on foot, and engaged us to serve them: the danger whereof,
while we were in the heats of Passion and Transaction, it was hardly possible
for us to apprehend.

And now (SIRS) this being our season for thinking, pray you think in the first
place who gave the Occasion for so long an Interval. Why was it that His
MAJESTY was constrained to put an End to your High Debates? and by so long a
Prorogation, but that it was your Little Friend's Great Aim it should be so,
and that the KING should not be able to do otherwise? I mean Mephistophiles,
the Faery F^end that haunts Both Houses; of whom I have been told, the Witty
Duke of Buckingham likened him to Will-with-a-Wisp, that uses to lead Men out
of the way; then leaves them at last in a Ditch and Darkness, and nimbly
retreats for Self-security. This (no doubt) the Noble Duke had not only
observed long since, in his srequent Jilting with others; but had also (if he
please to remember) fresh experience of him, in his late shifting of Counsels
ere he left White Hall: So that, I suppose, all Intelligent Persons will be
wary how they imbarque with him any more. For, this is the prime Quality of the
Person; now let us next see, what the Contents of that LETTER are to the Friend
in the Country.

Truly, whoever was its Father, it looks like somewhat that would fain get out
in the World in the Figure of XLI: for, upon strict view it will appear so (as
I shall show you by and by) with every Feature, Limb and Proportion of the Old
Faction: insomuch as there can be no Man, that ever felt the sad Consequents of
that Year, or remembers the Sea of Blood that then we swam in, and many Years
after; with the Plundrings, Free-Quarters, and Desolations that followed on
every side, and what in the and we got by the Faction; but must reckon himself
bound in Conscience and Prudence, to bid his Friends in the Country and City
too, to learn, by considering the dark Contrivances past, (whose dire Effects a
little After-time brought to light) how to understand the present, and prevent
a being gulled in the future: and to take heed how they entertain fly
Insinuations and Discontents about matters above them; or give ear to the Voice
of the crafty Charmer.

Wherefore, for his Country-Friend's sake, and more particularly for your
sakes, I hasten to the unraveling of this LETTER; which I will not call his;
though those that have asked him do say he but saintly denies it, and in such
phrases as signified plain enough that he would not for all the World but be
thought the Author, or at least the Intelligencer. So pleasing is the Itch of a
little Wit in Print, that some Men would not lose it at any rate. But from you,
my good Friends of Shaftsbury, I doubt not to find more Wisdom, than to be
Witticised out of the good old plain way of Honor, Allegiance, Public
Interest, and Peace; or to be Wisp'd and Lanthorn'd in the dark by a small
Goblin, into the Briars at best; but rather (I fear) into the Pit of
Destruction.

The LETTER.
IT begins with diverse Suggestions.

1. That the Test, which was under debate in the House of Peers the last
Session of Parliament, was a State-Master-piece, first hatched among the Great
Churchmen.

ANIMADVERSION.
RIght 41. in the very Front! Thus began the STATE-MASTER-PIECE of those Days;
it is the common Method of preparing for Rebellion; and so it has been in all
Ages: For when any one designed it, he first assaulted, not the Prince himself,
(that would have been too gross) but began with some one principal Part or
Person of his Government, and so proceeded by degrees to alter it. Thus it was
in 41: For though the Designers well knew the Temper of England, that it would
not be Governed without the Old State Ecclesiastical, yet they first found
fault with the Governors the Bishops; and when they had taken off some of the
Persons, then they next devised how to diminish their Power; and lastly, took
away their whole Order; and so one Pillar of the Throne being gone, it was not
long ere they tutored the People to the overturning of the other, as useless
and dangerous; so that you know what became of the Throne it self. Nor were
they, by the Rules of Ungodly Policy, to be blamed for this: For, when once Men
are dipped in an ill beginning, they presently think they are bound to prosecute;
and each Man concludes to himself, in the Langaage of Catiline,

The Ills which I have done, cannot be safe
But by attempting greater. --
But why the Bill of Test should be Fathered on the Bishops more than upon the
other Lords of Parliament, I see not, since the major part of their Lordships
were Zealous in the opinion and promotion of it, as a thing that would prove a
notable means of the Crowns Stability, and the KING's Peace and Safety. But it
seemed more advisable to your Prime Engineer, after he had labored to render
the Test as odious as he could, then to fasten it on the Bishops, that it might
the better suit with that lucky Pattern of 41. But more of this Test hereafter,
where I particularly consider it.

LETTER.
2. THat the Bishops do design to make a distinct Party of the
High-Episcopal-man, and the old Cavalier, by tempting them with the hopes of
enjoying all the Power, Great Offices, and Advantages, by overthrowing the Act
of Oblivion, if they can get any to fight the Old Quarrel over again.

ANIMADVERSION.
LOok ye into that Book called, An exact Collection of all Remonstrances,
Declarations, Votes, Orders, Ordinances, etc. which was Printed Anno 1642. and
in the Fourth Page of that Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, which your
Masters presented the year before to His Majesty's Father, you will find the Old
Copy of your New Calumny against the Bishops; for, they were then charged with
a Design to introduce a Change; and, by imbroill^g the King and his People with
Disputes about Prerogative and Liberty, to create unto themselves a distinct
Party, under a Pretense of being for the King; that so having the advantage of
siding with Him, and under the Notion of Men addicted to His Service, they
might, in the end, gain to themselves and their Partakers, the Places of
greatest Trust, Power, and Advantage in the Kingdom.

Who would have imagined, that Men could be thus Ungrateful to His Majesty,
after so Gracious an A^t of Oblivion, as to be found reviving the Old Names of
Distinction? What is this, but to set the Old Quarrel on foot again? and to
begin it upon the same Point, of charging the Bishops as the Causers of it?
Thus Nero made it his business to set Rome on fire, and then charged the Fact
upon the Christians. Who are they that are most likely to be Projecting unto
themselves the Power and Great Offices of the Kingdom, but you your selves, who
are ready to make room with an Outcry against the Great Officers? There is one
among you, who knows how to drive a Bargain for Great Offices at the price of
your heads, if any Body thought it worth the while to truck with him; and then
we should know who they are that take Courses to overthrow the Act of Oblivion;
and in the mean while do shoot Slanders at his Majesty, and His Ministers,
through the Bishops sides, as if it were they that jointly design against it;
whereas His Majesty has been so far from breaking the First, that it is not
long since he granted a Second Act of Oblivion: and your Friend MEPHISTOPHILES
Himself had so great a share in the benefit of it, that one would even swear it
was granted for His sake, or that He principally for His own sake procured it.
Therefore he had best take heed He do not bring on a Popular State too fast,
unless they will beforehand seal him another Oblivion, lest My Lords the People
come, at length, to knock at his Door for a better Account, and set up
Brook-house anew for him hereafter.

LETTER.
3. NExt, That the Bishops design to have the Government of the Church sworn to
as unalterable; and so, tacitly owned, to be of Divine Right: toward the
attaining of which station, Churchmen easily break through all Obligations
whatsoever,

ANIMADVERSION.
THus the Blows light on the Bishops; but his Aim is at His Majesty's
Government* only it is not time of day yet to let us know what he would be at.
For in the mean time he writes fair after his 41 Copy; for, you may read in the
Grand Remonstrance of the Commons, Anno 1641. that it was charged on the
Bishops in those days, That they imposed a New Oath for maintenance of their
own Power. God forbid that that Remonstrance, which then took the Frame of
Government all in pieces, should be thought to be the Act of an House of
Commons. Many thousands are yet living, who know it was but a Party in that
House, who, by the help of Tumults continually flowing out of the City, like a
mighty Inundation upon Whitehall and Westminster, did, by Threats and Violence
upon both Houses, animate a Presbyterian Party in that House, to be able to
overawe the rest, and carry on that Remonstrance by head and shoulders; as they
did also afterward many other strange Petitions, Declarations, Votes, and
Ordinances; to the dishonor of the King, in order to the undermining of His
Authority, and the ancient Government of the Kingdom: And this way they carried
matters so long, and with such heat and fury, that in tract of time, the best
part of the House of Commons, perceiving they were not able to stop this Career
by any prudent Counsels or Endeavors, resolved to sit no longer with such
Company, to be made a State and Property to such Unparliamentary Proceedings;
and so at length departed from them to Oxford, whither His Majesty and most of
the House of Lords also had been forced to retire from the insolent Assaults
daily made by the City Multitudes, which were under the Countenance, and at the
Command of that All-commanding Party of the Commons, seconded by some few of
the Lords; who helped to hold up the Form and Shadow of a Parliament so long,
till the very Name of a House of Peers was at last Obliterated. A sad Instance
it is, to teach their Successors what they may expect in future, whenever
seduced through Discontent or Envy, to affect Popularity, they shall again
(which God forbid) separate their own personal Interests, and that of their
Peerage, from the Interests of the Crown, upon any (though the most specious)
pretenses whatsoever,

Here what the King himself said of those Tumults, in His (...); for doubtless
He could best tell, who felt the effects of them: and, What person is there
that ever loved Him, or engaged for Him, would be willin^ to see His Son, our
most Gracious King, assaulted with the like? Or that can with patience hear,
that some Lords, and other persons, are turned Tradesmen and Exchange men in
t^^ City; and become free there of the Company of Demagogues? [They were (says
he) not like a Storm at Sea (which yet wants not its terror) but like an
Earthquake, shaking the very foundations of all; than which nothing in the
World has more of horror. No Declaration from the Bishops, who were first
insolenced and assaulted; nor yet from other Lords and Gentlem^n of Honor, nor
yet from my self could take place, for the due repression of those Tumults; and
for the securing, not only our freedom in Parliament, but our very persons in
the Streets. When I found things thus, I hoped, by my withdrawing, to give time
for the ebbing of their tumultuous fury.] Note here (ye Shafsburians) first the
Bishops assaulted, then the Members of Parliament, and then the King Himself:
this was the fruit then; and, this would be again the issue of your Little
Leaders trading with ill-humours in the City against Bishops; but that there is
a Sound and Loyal Magistracy to balance Malcontents, and observe both him and
them in all their Motions; so that it will be a hard matter for that small
Boutefeu, to Blow up the Government again, by undermining it on the Bishops
side: for, one Trick of State is not to be shown twice within the memory of
man; so that now (I suppose) he has lived to see the utmost of his old Trade
of Juggling, having Jugled himself out of all at Court; and being past hope of
Juggling himself in again (all his Fears being well understood, there --) he
sets up at the other end of the Town, to Jugle up a Mutiny in the City; in hope to
find Combustible matter there to set Fire to in the Country; and, at length,
inflame a Party for his purpose in this Parliament, or rather in a New One,
which he supposes will be the likeliest Expedient: And truly, he did as good as
tell us so in that Letter written above a Twelve month since out of the
Coun^rey to the Earl of Carlisle at London, or rather imposed upon him: Which
was indeed superscribed to his Lordship, but intended for a Fireball among the
Citizens here; as appeared by the Industrious Spreading Copies of it in all the
Coffee-houses; and the effect which it, and his other Practices since had; and
which lately inspired Mr. Jenks with the wisdom of a Statesman, to instruct His
Majesty, and move the matter at Guildhall in Common Council, to be managed in
the old Presbyterian way of Petitioning; a sort of Saucy Humility, much used by
that Tribe in the beginning of their Rebellion. These things should not be
remembered, but that they themselves are pleased to revive them, and give us
cause to judge, that they hope one day to have a Pull for it in a New
Parliament with the Bishops, and then with His Majesty. In order to which,
MEPHISTOPHILES has one Expedient more upon the Anvile; and that is, to use all
manner of Tricks that may be, by LONG SPEECHES, and LONG DEBATES among the
Lords, and the STARTING of CONTROVERSIES about Privilege, betwixt their
Lordships and the Commons, to FRUSTRATE Dispatches of the King and Kingdome's
Business; and so Necessitate the Present Parliament to become Unserviceable,
that he may obtain a Plausible Pretense, to draw in the People to cry out for a
New One, as the only Cure of all our Maladies. But how improbable a thing that
is (if not impossible) you shall find evidently proved before the end of these
Animadversions.

LETTER.
4. AS the Bishops design to have the Government of the Church sworn to, as
unalterable: so in requital to the Crown, they declare the Government absolute
and arbitrary; and allow Monarchy as well as Episcopacy to be Jure Divino, and
not to be bounded by Humane Laws.

ANIMADVERSION.
MOre Sacks to the Mill upon the Bishops. Load them till ye sink 'em: That (it
seems) must be first done; then down with Monarchy: that follows of course, as
we well and woefully remember. It Is done then like a Workman, to tell the World,
that Episcopacy is alterable, that the People may not, in any sense, own it to
be of Divine Right; and so it will be easily concluded, that Monarchy also is
alterable; because his Believers cannot believe it to be Jure Divino. It Is a
great Crime indeed (Sirs) in the Bishops, that they stand thus in the way of
this Alterability, and that they maintain Kings to have any Divinity about 'em.
We have had of late many fine Points publicly Printed, and exposed to the
Debates of the Multitude; such as this, Whether Kings be made of Clouts, or no?
but, What deserves the Man that starts such Hares as these, which no man can
run down, but he must run the ready Road to Rebellion, and Alteration of
Government? which its impossible to prevent, unless we hold up the Veneration
that is due to the Head and Members of this Monarchy. But, had I any thoughts
of Rebelling; or were I a Cashiered or Broken Statesman, not likely in fair
weather to lift aside my Rivals, and get in again with the Monarch my Master, I
would (had I so little in me of a Christian, or a good Subject) take all the
course I could to gather Clouds about him, and create a Storm; that I might
force him to come to me for shelter, or take me to himself again to help him to
weather it. Had I longed, and long done any thing, for the place of Treasurer,
and unluckily mist the Bag; and, by all the good Qualities of Judas, pretended
as high merit to it as any man; or to the Seal; or to any Grand Office of
State, that such a Gnat of Ambition as I durst venture to swallow; had I been
bobb'd out of All, I would even fall to Courting the People after the same
manner, and Preach up the Mortality of Kings, till I and my Myrmidons could
fright him out of his Divinity, and replace me, and scare him our of the
remembrance also of all my Jugglery, into a new Oblivion to secure me: Then
would I remove and laugh at all my Opposites, and the Citizens too, and leave
them at last to contemplate my wisdom, and their own folly. All this (Sirs)
with the help of one of your Shaftsbury Consciences I could easily do.

And if this could not be done, then would I march on further, and follow the
dictates of Nature for Self-preservation; and sticking close to the Multitude,
drive them on to do any thing that might hamper the King, and shackle the
Monarchy; or (if need require) transform it into the hands of Conservators; or
else (in case that cannot be) precipitate my self and it to the very bottom of
Democracy, rather than not be revenged on my Sovereign Master, for favoring
and preferring my fellow servants and competitors before me: The Poet says,

We are Princes all, if we prevail;
And gallant Villains, if we fail.
Would not any Man then think it well done of the Bishops, to plead for the
Divinity of Kingly Government, and of the Epis^opal, (which is a part of the
Kingly) when there are some in the World that design to handle them without all
Humanity? and would (had they opportunity) by a commonruine both of King and
Bishops, too late convince this Nation, that by all means there ought to be a
joint Interest of mutual preservation maintained betwixt them; and that the
Monarchy cannot, in reason, be supposed maintainable without it. If this be so,
(as I shall sufficiently manifest anon, when I come to consider the late
clamor against the TEST) then it is high time for all Men that have sworn
Allegiance, to apprehend that the Government of Church and State ought to be
sworn to, as so Divine, as not to be alterable, till they can tell us a way how
to lay aside the Right of Episcopacy at this time in England, without ruining
the Monarchy.

If so be then I have a purpose to make good my Allegiance to the King, how can
I scruple to swear not to alter the Church, which is a principal part of his
Kingly Government? By the one Oath I have sworn to him in both his Capacities,
Personal and Politic, (which are never to be separated) why then should I deny
an Oath obliging me not to alter the Kingly Polity of the Church? which is as
much the Kings Government, though styled Ecclesitstical, as the other part is
which we term Purely Civil. Consider then (ye Men of Shaftsbury) the Obligation
to both parts of the Government is equal, by virtue of your Oath of Allegiance;
and if his Majesty and the Bishops, and many Noble Peers, have thought of
passing a New Oath, they did no more but what is very necessary, in the midst
of all the present Underminings of this Monarchy on its Episcopal quarter: that
is, they thought it wisdom to fortify that part, with Men's swearing to it,
expressly and plainly by a new Oath; which is no more than what was implicitly
contained before in their old Oath of Allegiance: and which is not to be found
fault with more than the old, by any but such persons as either hold it not
lawful, or have no mind to swear Allegiance at all; or else are very fairly
inclined to forfeit it. And yet what a world of fine Speeches, what a stir, and
what a pother, does our Author tell his Friend in the Country, this, and that,
and the other Lord, made in the House of Peers against the Swearing!

And every jot as wise a business it is (which indeed, considering the drift of
it, deserves a Capital Animadversion) that this Gentleman in Print is pleased
to start such a Question as this, Whether Monarchy, as well as Episcopacy, be
Jure Divino, and not to be bounded by Human Laws? What the drift is of raising
such Quaeres among the Populacy, at such a time as this, let sober Men
consider. A man might easily ghess, what a Monarch, not bounded by a Human
Spirit, would do to such a Spright as this, who ought rather* to be answered
with that old Motto, Ratio ultima Regum; which would be hung about his Neck, by
a Prince of as little Humanity as this Man himself appears to be, after all the
Graces and Bounties by him received, and thus ungratefully requited. The Kings
one single Act of sparing such a Factionist, as well as all the other Acts of
his Majesty's Government, does manifest, that he himself affects only a
Temperate Monarchy, to govern by Law: Nor can the Bishops he justly charged
with affecting any other, or ever to have had any other design about it than
this, to teach the people there is so much of a Divinity in the Rights and
Persons of Kings, that they ought in their High Station to be Reverenced and
Obeyed by the Subject, for conscience sake. This Divine Right is certainly due
to them, and to Bishops also who are Governors under them, not to be thought
alterable, under any pretense whatsoever, till his Majesty can be fairly
convinced of some better way of ordering the Affairs of a National Church,
which may more effectually answer the Good Ends of Regal Government: and truly,
till that be done by this Letter-man, it is downright Sedition, with Treason (I
fear) in its Belly, for him to design the making of a Party against Bishops, to
hinder the passing of any Expedient (be it an Oath, or any other) that might
fortify so Fundamental a part of the Monarchy.

LETTER.
5. AND to secure all this, they resolve to take away the Power and Opportunity
of Parliaments to alter any thing in Church or State; only leave them as an
Instrument to raise Money, and to pass such Laws as the Court and Church shall
have a mind to. The Attempt of any other, how necessary soever, must be no less
a Crime than Perjury.

ANIMADVERSION.
Court and Church! That is to say, The King and the Bishops; for, the Court is
nothing without the King. They are well joined together; for, take away either
of these, and they both fall together; the Government being so ordered in
England, that they stand Props to each other. Therefore, as dull a Politician
as I am, if I meant to raise Sedition, or commence Rebel, I would not say a
word against the King and Monarchy, (that would be too foul at first, whatever
my Aim were:) but away with Bishops; and then, of course, I shall be able to
talk of, and with his Majesty. But yet, in case I should so plainly discover my
purpose to imbroil the Nation, as Somebody has done, by baiting the Bishops
both in and out of the House of Peers, I confess I should hardly believe a King
would have the patience to let me go about, and discourse, and write, and print
thus, to drive on my design among the Subjects in City and Country. It would
be a wonderful Evidence of his Lenity, and such as might melt me, or the heart
of any Man, that is not in Nature a Tygre, or of the strain of the people of
Shaftsbury, into a time Repentance.

Especially, if it be considered, that the scope of this last Paragraph is, to
suggest unto the people, as if the King with his Ministers, and the Bishops,
were plotting a Destruction of the Power of Parliament, so as it shall not be
able to alter any thing in Church or State; nor be able to make and alter Laws
in future as their Predecessors have done, without incurring the crime of
perjury. This is a strange Age, that no Doctrine will take but that of
altering, or pulling down an ancient Government, before we are provided either
of Amendments for what we are to alter in the old, or of a new and better Form,
to be substituted in its room when we take it away. But a thing it is, much
more strauge, that one single Sophister, having lately undergone, and deserved
an alteration of his Fortune, so as to have been turned out of his great
Offices, and the Court too, for his Tricks, should gain the Ears and Belief of
so many Noble Peers; and seal up their Eyes too, that they should not see his
design of revenge through all his pretenses: which (alas!) had never been
thought of, but Bishops and King and Court too, had continued very good Men;
and we should have had neither Speech nor Protestation of his, as long as he
could have enjoyed (nor had we so long as he did enjoy) a Courtiers share among
them. Nor would he ever have vouchsafed the kindness of any Letters to his
Friends in the Country, but the Oath of Test might have passed current, as a
good Expedient, for preserving the Government from any unnecessary alteration:
and he would have told you also another Tale, had it happened that any
Parliament Man should have risen up then, as vile as himself, to act the same
part for an Alteration (or rather Subversion) of the Government: and he could
readily have maintained the Test very necessary to be taken by Parliament Men:
to secure both King and Parliament from the ruin designed. And moreover, he
can tell you, that it is no news for Parliament Men, before they enter the
Parliament, to take an Oath to be true to the Government as it is Established;
and yet not to reckon themselves so bound up by the Oath, as to lose their
power and liberty to debate and resolve upon such Alterations afterward in the
Establishment as shall be found needful. What needed then all this Clamor of
his? seeing the Test would have done no more than the Oath of Allegiance does,
oblige the Parliament to maintain the present Establishment of Church and State
against all Alterations, till King and Parliament shall judge them needful to
be made: As shall be made eviden^ation, when I come to con^ider it in more
ample manner. And yet what a Cl^tter h^^e we had abo^^ i^!

LETTER.
6. AND (...) of the (...) Fabric, a preten^e shall be taken from the (...)
rais^d, an^ a real (...) from the s^allness of (...) standing Army; and (...)
in due time the Cavali^r and (...) will be mad^ great^r Fools, but as (...)
Slaves as the rest of the Nation.

ANIMADVERSION.
THe Cavalier and Churchman do very well remember, when it was that they were
made Slave^, and by whom. Was is not presently after the Bishops and Church
been altered? And by what manner of persons were these things done? Even by
those very Lords and Commons, who in their great (...) of the State of the
Kingdom, Anno 1641. declared, That they conceived t^^ir Pro^eedings to be (...)
by such M^n as did (...) into the People, that they meant to aboli^h the
Church Government; or to abs^lve any M^n of that Obedien^e which he owes under
God to His MAJESTY, wh^m they conf^ss to be entrusted with the Ecclesiastical
Laws, as well as with the Temporal. And in their Declaration of the Ninth of
April 1642. they declare, That they intended only a due and ne^essary
Reformation of the Government and Liturgy of the Church; And to take away
nothing in the one or the other, but what shall be evil, and justly offensive.
And yet it is not long after, that we find them Voting and throwing down the
whole Church Government; and, at length, that of the State too, notwithstanding
all the Protestations by them made to the contrary, before God and the World.
Therefore neither Cavaliers nor Churchmen can, after so late and sad an
experience of Alterability and Alteration, be such fools, as not to understand
what they have seen and felt, by such Alterative humors as are now asloat
again; and what the Issue of them would be, if they might have way: especially,
seeing the same Presbyterian Faction are brewing afresh; and so visibly, that
we need not seek pretenses to raise jealousy about their doings; forasmuch as
they are barefaced and busy; and our Projecting Dandeprat, whose Actions are
accountable, at least within the Statute against firing of Houses, openly
acting the Kindle-cole in Parliament, to create a Party there for their
purpose: and because he cannot yet find a House of Commons for the turn, you
have him and his Agents every where about the City, Preaching up a necessity of
Calling a New One; and from London his Doctrine is spread into the Countries,
with good Counsel to dispose the People to the Old Way of Petitioning; that by
a full Cry, the King may be in a manner constrained to give them opportunity
once more to try their Fortunes by a New Election. This is more than Jealousy,
as Mr. Jenks (if he please) can tell you; so that our Author might have spared
this Frump, which he slings at those few Forces which His Majesty has been,
and is necessitated to keep up to secure the Government: of which Forces he and
his Partisans are, by their Seditious (if not Treasonous) Speeches, Letters,
and Practices, the most likely men to cause an augmentation * so that if ever a
necessity arise that they must be augmented, to prevent those men's purposes,
the Nation may from hence understand, whom they are to thank for it, and how to
excuse the hard condition of a Gracious King, who would rather rule by love,
and sets more value upon a Regiment in the universal good Wills and Hearts of
his Subjects, than in all the Regiments of force and violence in the World.
And, how small soever this Letter insinuates His Majesty's Party to be; yet, if
ever God, for our manifold sins, should suffer Incendiaries to blow up a new
Rebellion, by their tracing the same methods, that they used who promoted the
former; it will soon appear by the many thousands that abhor it, and its
Contrivers, that all the rest of the Nation will become ready Volunteers,
either in Purse or Person, to defeat their Enterprises and prevent the like
miseries and confusions, as those were, that the same Faction brought upon us
heretofore. In the mean time it is but reason they should declaim against
standing Forces, because these few do stand in their way, though they are no
great number; and are as a Bridle in their mouths; so that 'twill be a hard
matter for them to get out the Old Tools to go to Work with, I mean Tumults out
of the City; which were easily formed in those days, when they had none to deal
with but a naked King, and a Guard of Beef-eaters.

But, Why is it, that he cries out, We are like to be made Slaves? To persuade
men to the belief of it, he is pleased to insist upon four following instances,
viz. Four Acts of this Parliament, which are indeed as high and neces^ary Acts
of prudence, as could be passed by Parliament, to preserve the Monarchy; and
fence it against the Designs of any new Rebellion, that may in future be
grounded upon the old humors.

LETTER.
7. IN order to this, the first step was made in the Act, for Regulating
Corporations; wisely beginning, that in those lesser Governments, which they
meant afterward to introduce upon the Government of the Nation, they might
make them swear to a Declaration, and belief of such Propositions, as
themselves afterward, upon debate, were enforced to alter, and could not
justify in those words; so that many of the Weal^^i^st, Worthiest, and
Soberest men, are still kept out of the Magistracy of those places.

ANIMADVERSION.
Upon perusal of this Act, you will find it was high reason that moved the
Parliament to pass it, as appears by this preamble, viz. That the succession in
governing such Corporations may be most probably p^rpetuated in the hands of
persons well-(...) to His Majesty, and the established Government; it being too
will known, that notwithstanding all His Majesty's endeavors, and unparalled
indulgence in pardoning all that is past, nevertheless ma^y evil spirits are
still working. Wherefore, for prevention of the like mischief for the time to
come; and for preservation of the public peace both in Church and State,
Commissioners are appointed to see, that all Mayors, Recorders, Aldermen, and
other persons bearing Office of Magistracy, Trust, or Employment, relating to
the Government of Cities, Corporations, and Boroughs, do take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and another Oath; That they (...) declare and b^,
that it is not lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to tak^ A^^s against the
King; and that they do abhor that Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his
Authority against His Person, or against those that are Commissionated by Him.

And at the same time also, the said Commissioners are to see that such persons
do subscribe a Declaration; declaring, That they do hold that there lies no
Obligation upon themselves, or any other Person, from the Oath commonly called,
The Solemn League and Covenant; and that the same was in it self an unlawful
Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom.

This was an Act of the whole Parliament; and there is no reason therefore why
our Letter-Man should charge it on the Bishops alone, but that the main Aim is
at them first; and for what cause I have already told you. It Is conceived the
ready way to go to work, it having been the beaten way to attaque the
Government on that side: for this, the Party is a forming; the Presbyterian
has been tickled in his own way; and the other sorts of Nonconformists are to
be drawn in, if they can be brought to forget the Revenges of Presbytery, and
be persuaded they shall have fairer Quarter under them than under Episcopacy:
for this purpose ('it is known) our small Engineer turned City-Merchant; and
having driven a fine Trade in the Winter 75. in the Great Corporation, he has
the following Summers been laying a Train in the lesser Corporations, in hope
to blow up this Parliament with the noise of a new one.

The Prologue to the Tragedy must be, Down with the Bishops; this is determined
to be the only necessary Preliminary. But that (thinks he, and the whole Knot)
is not to be brought about while this Parliament sits: Ergo, the only way is,
to be rid of this Parliament as soon as may be, and shuffle our Pack as well as
we can, to get sure Cards for a new one, to play over again the old pranks of
their Brethren. This drift of theirs is so well understood by his Majesty, and
by all Persons of Discretion and Loyalty, that although the Succession of
Parliaments be a thing most commendable, yet no sober Person, that is
well-affected to His Majesty, and the Peace of these Kingdoms, can approve the
bringing on a new Parliament by Seditious Projectors, and Popular Clamours;
especially at such a time as this, when we have a Parliament in being; a
Parliament which has had the Honor to Re-settle the Crown and Kingdom, after
it had, by a wonderful Hand of God, been but newly rescued out of the Ruins of
a late Rebellion: A Parliament that has done perhaps more for the Preservation
of this well-tempered Monarchy, than many other of the best Parliaments put
together ever did before: and I may boldly say, because it can be proved by
Instances of Fact, that they have done more toward the containing of
Monarchick Power in its just Bounds, than any Parliament ever did, that may be
counted to have been the most popular and publick-hearted: And besides this,
the Journals of both Houses will show, that they have now lying before them, so
many excellent Resolves and purposes, that their sitting to dispatch them, is
the only necessary means to put the Nation into the enjoyment of quick
Remedies for our future safety and prosperity. And whereas it has fallen out,
that they have been unable to do any thing to purpose, by reason of Differences
betwixt both Houses, you are to know (ye Men of Shaftsbury) that the Occasions
of that Discord about points of Privilege, and other Matters, were but
Artificial Contrivances of some Broken-States-Men, and other Malcontents;
made such by their own ill Humors, and Emulations against Men, whose
Abilities, Integrity and Merits, have gotten place above them in His Majesty's
Favor and Preferment. Those are they that would mingle Heaven and Earth, to
create a party to keep those Differences on foot; and therefore the Occasions
are by them made much of, and carefully laid up, that they may be readily
started, when time serves, to hinder dispatches of the public Business of the
King and Kingdom; because the design of the Consederates is thus laid:

First, By Tricks to reduce this Parliament, as fast as they can, into a state
impracticable and unserviceable, thereby to introduce a seeming Necessity of a
speedy calling another.

Secondly, To make sure Work, they have stricken in with the Old Workmen, and
adopted the Presbyterian Party, the only Canker that frets in the Bowels of
this Nation, and which gathers all other naughty Humors to its self; in hope
to aggrandise a Faction, big enough, and loud enough, to uproar a New
Parliament for their Turn, if it may be: One main Plot is so to order it, that
this Parliament, who apprehend a necessity of holding fast, in a Factions Time,
to that part of the Government called Bishops, as the most needful Expedient to
preserve the Crown, may never go off with the reputation of speaking Peace and
Settlement to the Nation, by perfecting those excellent Intendments and
Resolutions, which to that end, do lie before them. By this you may perceive,
why your Letter-man seeks to destroy the Credit of the Bishops, as well as of
the Parliament. Whatever has been done, still the Bishops must be in fault,
though it be an Act of the whole Parliament, and the wisest Act that can be
Enacted.

And such, without all question, was that Act about Corporations. For of what
Temper the Corporations of England were, may be collected from the time of the
late Richard's short Reign, when those Notorious Addresses were by them made to
him in Lofty Strains of Recognition, Obedience, and Allegiance; which was but a
few Months before His Majesty's Wonderful Restitution. And therefore, though
it was miraculous, it was not to be supposed so great a Miracle, as in an
instant to transform the Hearts and Spirits of such Addressers, into a firm and
lasting Frame of Fidelity to the King and his Government: what then could the
Parliament do less for the securing of both, than put Corporation-Men under the
Test of such an Oath and Declaration, as might either satisfy His Majesty,
that those Persons were become New Men; or else might, upon their refusal of
that Test, give the King a Just occasion, for his Own and his Peoples Security
and Peace, to purge them out of their places, and put in Persons Loyal and
Faithful. Moreover, it is to be noted, that this Test upon Corporations was by
that Act, to continue but to the Year 1663; as short a time as could be set for
the doing so great a Work, as to put things in order, to go on upon a right
Wheel of Government in those places for the future; after which they were left
to proceed in the ordinary ways of Electing their Magistrates and Officers as
heretofore.

This is nothing but what in Prudence and Providence was absolutely necessary.
And the use of it hereafter may be this to all Corporations; That in all
occasions, be it of Electing Magistrates, Officers, Parliament Men, and doing
any thing of Concern to Government, they do carry themselves in such a manner
(it being indeed their true Interest so to do) as not to suffer Factions, or
particular Factions and ill-affected Persons, to grow up and get ground among
them; for the natural Consequence must be, That at length, if such considerable
Corporated par^els of the Body Politic, shall by degrees be corrupted with
Men, who by contracting particular Interests, shall march counter to the
Public Interest of Government, and employ the Interests and Credit of their
Corporations against it; then, of course, Princes and Parliaments are
constrained, whether they will or no, to provide for a securing the Public
Interest by some extraordinary course: And when they do it, it is not their
fault that the usual course is broken; but they properly are the Authors, who
by their own Extravagancies first gave the occasion, and pressed a necessity
upon them so to do. And truly, in such case, the bestnatured Princes in the
World, if you consider them as Public Persons, cannot avoid it, unless you
will suppose what is absurd to conceive, that they will relinquish the ends of
Government, and let all run into confusion.

So much for the Reason of the Act about Regulating Corporations. Now for the
next Act about the Militia complained of.

LETTER.
8. THe next step was in the Act of the Militia, which went for most of the
Chiefest Nobility and Gentry, being obliged as Lords Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, etc. to Swear to the s^^^ Declaration and Belief, with the
addition only of these words, In pursuance of such Mil^t^ry Commissions. This
Act is of a (...); for it Establishes a Standing Army by a Law, and swears us
into a Military Government.

ANIMADVERSION.
HOw the intent of this Act for ordering the Militia can be wrested to the
sense of a Standing Army, is a Construction past all Understanding: but the
blame of this also is laid upon the Bishops: It must be said to be their
Business, though of all Men none are more remote from the Concern of it. And as
little reason also there is, to persuade Men it Establishes a Standing Army, or
Military Government. (...) is indeed a constant Force: but in whose hands? Is
it not in the hands of the Nob^^ry and Gentry, the persons of the greatest
Interest, and consequently most concerned in the Maintenance of Civil
Government and Laws, Liberty and Property? Insomuch, (...) as well believe the
Men will cut their own Throats, as betray either: (...) in the hands of Men
most interested by their own Concerns for Univers^^ (...) as contrary to the
nature of a mere Mer^e^ary Army, (for, that he means by (...) as Fire is to
Water; so that the one, in the very Notion, as well as nature of (...)
preventive, and privative or exclusive of the other. And in the midst of all
the idle ^o^es, that we have had these late years, about a design of a Standing
Army, nothing ^^s a ^reater stay to sober Men's Minds than this Consideration,
That as we have a Ring (...) no (...) designs and Intrigues; one that loves his
People; wise, and confident of his No^ility and Gentry; so he knows he cannot
need Forces to maintain his Government, as long as they have the Power by Law
to raise them for him: nor can there be the least ground for Malcontents to
sow Reports of this kind, unless wicked designs of their (...) against the
Government, shall prompt them to New Commotions; and then indeed they may have
reason to fear an Army, and cry out against it, before it is in being; because
they take mutinous courses to force it on us.

But another fault here found in the Militia-Act, is, that the Lords
Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants are obliged by Oath to declare against this
Traiteroas Position of taking Arms against the King; and that Arms may be taken
by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are Commissioned by
Him, etc. Doubtless, this Provision in that Act, is a point grounded upon High
Reason: For that Position and the Cove^^^t, were two Vipers that crawled into
the World out of the bowels of Presbytery: And out of the bowels of those two,
crawled all those Monstrous Treasons which afterward were practiced. As to the
first of them, not Maria^a himself, nor all the curious Preachers of the
Mystery of King-killing among the Jesuits, ever invented a more nice and
serviceable distinction; so to split a hair, in point of Allegience, betwixt
the Person of a King and His Authority, that the Subjects might be brought to
understand, how to kill the Man, and not hurt the Authority; or, (which is all
one) how to destroy a King, and Justify the Fact, by His own Authority. The
fine spinning of such Politics, exceeds all that ever was done by all the fine
Spinners in Logic, or Metaphysics; and it is so fine a Folly, that it would
crack an honest man's brains to consider it, or puzzle a wise man how to
distinguish it from gross Nonsense in Polity. And yet when it shall be told to
our Posterity, what a world of People such a fantastic Notion, as this, drew
in to side with a piece of a Parliament against the whole; and against their
King too, under the Notion of being for Him and for His Parliament, I am
persuaded it will to them be almost incredible: And therefore, it was high
Wisdom for the Parliament, to provide in this Act of Ordering the Militia; that
the Arms of the Nation might never come into the hands of such High-Notional
Politicians in time to come; who, when Arms were in their hands heretofore,
sufficiently tutored us in the Arts and Effects of Military Government: And ye
may remember (my good Friends of Shaftsbury) this Letter-Man, your own
Countreyman, had a fair share in that Military Government, and knows the ready
road to conduct you to a New One; only (it seems) another Parliament is
wanting for the purpose, to make this King a Glorious King too; as, not long
since it was written to my Lord of Carlisle: little (I believe) to his
Lordships content or approbation.

As to that Second Viper the COVENANT, Lerna Malorum! From whence sprang Hydra,
infesting the Three Kingdoms, till she returned into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, there to stare in the Faces, or rather Consciences of its own
Authors and Proselytes? It came on in No^i^^ Domini; but whether in the D^^'is
name more properly, time did try. For, this confirmed all the miseries that
were begun, and became, as it were, the Broad Seal of the Decree of God's
Judgments upon these Nations. That Solemn League and Covenant came on indeed
with great Solemnity of pious Pretense, of maintaining us in our former
Obligations of Allegiance to the King and His Government, and the Security of
Religion by Reformation: and by this fair fraud, I am persuaded it was, that
abundance of men, Conscientious, but unwary, swallowed the Hook, and were
caught, not dreaming what ought to be considered; for then they might have
found under this Fine (...), there was Death in the Pot; seeing it had been
formed, and imposed, only by F^^^ow-Subjects, without, and against the Will of
the King; for which Reason it was indirect, and illegal; and so great a
stranger to the Right Reformed Prot^stant Profession, that Subjects should
presume, by Covenanting, with Fire and Sword, to force on a Reformation; that
we can find no example for it, but out of the Records of Presbyt^ry: Nor is
there any thing in those of Popery to be compared with it, but only that Holy
League, which engaged France into many years of Blood and Misery, before it
could be extinguished.

They might also, had they had wisdom enough and experience, have considered
what was then in the heart and foresight of His Majesty's Father, as we find it
expressed in His Writings; than the insertion of which in this place, nothing
can be more to the purpose, or more seasonable; especially in a time, wherein
many of the Old Kindlers are visibly blowing this Old Coal again, to revive it;
and with it, to over-heat the Brains and Consciences of men, into a zeal of the
same Obligation, in stead of repentance that ever they took it. But hear what
the King said of it; and it is enough to forewarn, and advise men of any
Conscience, or discretion, in the future. [That (says he) which makes such
Confederations by way of Solemn Leagues and Covena^ts, the more to be
suspected, is; That they are the common Road, used in all Factions
Perturbations of State or Church: Where Formalities of extraordinary zeal and
piety are never more studied and elaborate, than when Politicians a^itate most
desperate designs against all that is settled, or sacred in Religion and Laws;
which, by such skrues, are cunningly, yet forcibly wrested by secret st^ps, and
less sensible degrees, from their known Rule and wonted practice, to comply
with the humors of those men, who aim to subdue all to their own will and
power, under the disguises of Holy Combinations.] Wisdom and Truth greater than
this, or more Divine, never was uttered by any Prince since the days of
Solomon: And it ought to be for ever written in the hearts of Subjects; because
we can seal to it, upon the sad experience we had in our late Civil Wars, to
the utter ruin of all Religious Profession, which men ought to take care by
sincerity and integrity of life, to hold up in the height of Reputation, as the
most sacred thing in the World.

Otherwise, what we may expect of the pretenses and disguises of the most
Sanctimonious Combinations, the same king tells us in the following words:
[They are Cords and ^ythes will hold men's Consciences no longer, than force
a^tends and twists them: for every man soon grows his own Pope, and easily
absolves himself of those Ties, which, not the command of Gods Word, or the
Laws of the Land, but only the subtilty and terror of a Party casts upon him.
Indeed such illegal ways, seldom or never intend the engaging of men more to
Duties, but only to Parties: therefore it is not regarded how they keep their
Covenants in point of Piety pretended, provided they adhere firmly to the Party
and design intended. The Imposers of such a League will admit of any men's
senses of it, though diverse or contrary, with any Salvoes, Cautions, and
Reservations, so as they cross not the chief design against the Church and
their King.] There are many thousands yet living, who can witness to the truth
of it; that they had no sooner involved the several Parliamentary Parties in
the guilt of that Covenant, but they all fastened several Senses and
Constructions upon it; such as might best suit with the several ends and
designs of their particular Parties. They, like Samson's Foxes, had their heads
looking diverse ways, but were tied together by the Tails; had one common
Interest, which tied them fast to each other in Agreement, for the destruction
of King and Bishops. They easily absolved one another, and each man himself,
from the seeming obligations of the Covenant, to Loyalty and Government, as
fast as their particular occasions called them off to other Resolutions. And if
we may believe Sir Henry Va^e, it was in the penning so worded, that the Noose
might not be too strict and narrow for Conscience to escape out of it, when
occasion should require. For when that Gentleman came to Tower Hill to dye, he
told us to this purpose, that himself had been one of the Commissioners that
went out of England into Scotland, and was present there in those Councils,
then on Foot betwixt both Kingdoms, which contrived that Covenant. And when it
was objected by some, that if the Terms of the Covenant should run so high, for
preservation of the King and His Family, as they seemed to be, the King perhaps
might notwithstanding be utterly hardened against it, and frustrate all the
good intents of it toward himself; And in such case, it was propounded in
Council, what then should be done? At last it was concluded, an Addition should
be made to it of that ominous Clause [In the preservation, and defense, of the
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms]. A Clause which was made use of
afterward, to prove that the Nation might be established in a Government,
without any regard to the King or His Family.

For manifestation of this Truth, there needs no more, but to cast an eye back
upon that fatal Remonstrance of the Army, dated at St. Albans, 20th November
1648. penned by Ireton, Cromwell's Son-in-law; the main scope whereof was ^o
prove, That they ought to take away the Kings Life, with a pretense and form of
Justice, and extirpate His Family. And truly, I have the greater cause to
remember this, having at that time read the Arguments contained in several
Prints against it, to manifest unto the Authors of such Counsels, and all the
world, that such a Course of proceeding against the King of England, is
Irrational, Monstrous, and in consequence pernicious to the three Kingdoms.
Nevertheless the Argumentation of Colonel Ireton carried it: And whosoever
pleases to consult the Contents of that Army Remonstrance, shall find that the
best Arguments he had (except the Sword) were all fished out of several Topics
contained in the Covenant; among which, the main one fetched from that before
cited Clause, was like the Sword of Goliath; no^ like it, to cut asunder all
Obligations both Sacred and Civil; and was improved to this point: That seeing
these Nations were brought to such a pass (as the Argumentator was pleased to
say) That the ends of the Covenant could not be attained by a Government with
^^ King and his Family: Therefore, those ends being the Principal
Considerations of Men's Covenanting, ought to be made good by another
Government, without any regard of Him or His, who were but of a Secondary
consideration. And thus, out of the Belly of that Trojan-Horse the Covenant,
sprang that Hobbyhorse of a Republic, with Cromwell on the back of it; who
himself at length, convinced in Judgment about forms of Government, saw and
confessed, by making himself the sole single person in Authority, that no Rest
is to be ^ad by Government in this Nation, but by a Monarchy.

After this (my good Friends of Shaftsbury) I suppose you will not venture to
gainsay, but that it was well done of the Parliament, (and Bishops too, since
you will have them named in particular) to pass two such Acts, as might keep
men out of Magistracy in Corporations, and out of Command in the King's
Militia; whose Consciences can yet relish, and not abhor such a Covenant; or
such a Treasonous Maxim in State; That the King's Authority may be made use of,
or turned against his Person. And yet anon, before the end of this Letter, the
Author will tell you of very strong Instances and Cases Somebody cited in the
House of Peers; wherein it was, and may be lawful again so to do. Which
confirms the King's good fortune, and the Kingdoms too, in being rid of such ^
Squirrel out of Power, that can crack the points of Conscience, Party, and
Politics, as fast as Nuts, to satisfy his own Ambitious and hungry
Inclination.

The third Act that he finds fault with is the Act of Uniformity: Of this he
discourses as follows.

LETTER.
THat the Clergy of England are obliged to subscribe and declare, as the
Corporations, Nobility, and Gentry did swear before.

That the Clergy readily complied with it, being a sort of Men taught rather to
obey than understand; and to use that Learning they have, to justify, not to
examine what their Superiors command.

That Bartholomew-day was fatal to our Church and Religion, in throwing out a
very great number of Worthy, Learned, Pious and Orthodox Divines.

That the time set for them to sabscribe to the Book of Common Prayer,
Established by this Act of Uniformity, was so short for the Printing and
Publishing of it, that one Man in Forty could not see that Book, which he was
to assent and consent unto.

ANIMADVERSION.
AS for time to peruse the Alterations and Additions then made in the
Common Prayer Book, they had a fair space to consider, after the Printing and
Publication of it, which was till Bartholomew-day. For the principal Divines of
the Nonconforming Party sat in Commission with the Bishops; so that what
Alterations or Additions soever were made, it is known they took such care to
communicate them abroad, that it may be remembered how all their Party talked of
every Particular in the City, and all over the Kingdom; and had been carefully
fixed in resolution to find fault with every thing, long before the Printing,
and never to conform to it. Besides, the Reasons offered for Alterations or
Additions, desired by those Leading Men, were so little consider^ble, that
there were but a very small number agreed on; so that a tenth part of the time
that passed betwixt its Publication and Bartholomew-day, might have served them
all sufficiently to consider of it, had they been then to consider: but alas!
they had been abundantly schooled by Letters before, and by Prints too, sent
from their London-Tutors, to be perfect in that old Lesson, against all Reason
or Moderation, Non persuadebis etiamsi persuas^ris. So that if our Letter-Man
had pleased, he might have spared this Objection about want of time; but he had
undertaken to h^ap what faults he could upon the Bishops, right or wrong. They
must be accused, though it was the Parliament that set the time: This suits
with the rest of his design, as I told you.

But then, a very great number of good and brave Divines were throw^ out. Thus
he phrases it, whereas indeed they threw themselves out; They were (it may be)
a sort of Divines of Conscience, but whether misinformed and erroneous, it
will concern them to see, against the great Day of Account; or whether any
thing of Spiritual Pride, Singularity, Interest, or Self-reputation with a
Party, or shame of receding from former mistaken Zeal, Doctrines, Engagements,
and ways of getting a Livelihood; which of these Considerations might
intervene, betwixt the Day of Publication and Bartholo^^w-day, God alone knows,
and will one Day judge; who is a God of Order, and not of Confusion, as in all
the Churches.

However, it concerned the Parliament to fear the worst, knowing what Doctrines
those Men had preached many Years before, and what had been their behavior;
and therefore to bar the Church-doors against the like Humors in time to come,
that they might no more climb up into the Public Pulpits, to perplex Affairs
of the Church; or by mis-leading people with shows of Zeal, cause new
Infl^mmations in the State: In both which poin^s of Activity, had not our
Letter-Man very great occasion to use them at present, he would not now have
been so angry at their being kept out.

What those Worthy, Learned, Pious, and Orthodox Divines were, or still are, I
am tied up by the Act of Oblivion from telling; which Act ought to be
punctually observed as sacred, by wise Men and good Christians, that persons
who have formerly erred against His Majesty, either in Matters of State or
Church, may not be frighted into new Crimes for security, or from making open
profession of repentance for the old. Christ says, (...) is more joy in Heaven
over one Si^n^r that repents, than over ninety and nine that never went astray.
Therefore, it will be more proper to paint out those Divines by probable signs
of what we are to expect from them in future, than by Animadverting upon their
Actions past.

If any Divine will not declare his unseigned Assent and Consent to the
Common Prayer Book, which contains the Public Service and Worship of the
Church, what reason has the Magistrate to allow him a part of the Public
Church-Maintenance, which is by Law annexed to that Service? Especially, seeing
his refusal of Assent and Consent does implicitly signify, that he will do
all that ever he can, to instruct and persuade the people against it. Which of
these two then is most sitting? either for the Magistrate to comply with them,
or they with the Magistrate?

Moreover, If any Divine shall refuse to declare and swear, that he believes it
unlawful to take Arms against the King, or by his Authority against his Person,
or against those that are Commissionated by him: And that ^e beli^^es there
lies no O^ligation upon him, or any other person, from the Solemn League and
Covenant, to endeavor any Alteration in Church or State, and that it was an
unlawful Oath; what can be supposed of such a Divine, but that he is capable of
Earthly designs? And that he may be ready, when opportunity serves, to take
Arms, and preach up again the old Doctrine of S^tting the Kings Authority
against his Person; and the Covenant to boo^, to pull the Government of Church
and State in pieces? Those two opposite Principles do mutuo se p^llere; they
cannot stand together, but the one naturally and absolutely drives out the
other. Is it in reason then to be imagined, that any Prince or State, should
have less wisdom and foresight than every ordinary Animal, to provide for
Self-preservation, by Laws that may secure the Religion and Government
Established, with Church Livings also, in the hands of a Regular Conforming
Clergy? Which Laws there was high reason so to pen, that they might be as a
T^st for discovery, and disabling of Pastors, retaining Principles inconsistent
with Monarchy. Let the same Men but turn the Tables, and remember what
themselves did heretofore to the Epis^opal Clergy, for not engaging and
conforming to their wild Phantsies, upon every Revolution of Government; and
then let them and all Men consider, with what front any Man of them can condemn
this Wise and Provident Act, made against the possibility of a Return of the
like Confusions in this Kingdom hereafter, to purge out such Worthy, Pious, but
not too Learned Divines, I pray you: Men (it seems) of a narrower Swallow now,
for an Oath, than the Nobility and Gentry; yet at their own time they have been
able, and, while they retain such Principles, can be again, when time serves,
to swallow all manner of Oaths, and devour Nobles, Gentlemen too, Clergy, and
All. And this our Letter-Man knows very well: who, having at this time great
need of them in the Pulpit, is (you see) very angry they are under hatches. He
only wants such a House of Commons as he could wish; for, he reckons himself
sure of his Clergy; they are of another Kidney than the Church of England's
Clergy: These he is pleased to brand as Men of little Understanding, and of a
pitiful sort of Learning, which teaches to Obey and Justify, not to Disoute
the Commands of their Superiors. Mere Milk-Sops they: but his are the
Myrmido^s; Men of Arguments as strong as Gunpowder; Profound Men of Letters,
who have written, and can write, RATIO ^LTIMA REGUM round the Mouth of a Cannon.

LETTER.
THe fourth and last Act found fault with is, The Five Miles A^^ passed at
Oxford, whi^^ introduces the Oath in the Terms the Courtiers would have it.
This was th^^ strongly opposed by the Lord Treasurer Southampton, Lord Wharton,
Lord Ashley, and others; not only in the concern of those poor Ministers that
were so severely handled, but as it was in it self an unlawful and
unjustisiable Oath: however, the Zeal of that time against all No^conformists
^as^ly passed the Act.

ANIMADVERSION.
THat my Lord Wharton and Lord Ashley might oppose it, is not impossible; but
of my Lord Southampton it is hardly probable; but if he did, it serves for some
excuse to Lord A^hley; because his Lordships Interest, at that early time of
day, was nothing in Court without him, and so he could lose nothing there then:
For, it was afterward that he crept up like Ivy upon that old Oak of Loyalty
Southampon, into His Majesty's favor, and many a good place; which while his
Lordship enjoyed, we do not remember that ever he was angry at this Act: Nor do
we know any reason why it might not have been stretc^^ (at that time) a Mile or
two more, without grieving his Lordship, or stretching his Conscience: so that
this Story might have been very well omitted, so far as concerns my good Lord
Ashley.

If the Ministers were then so severely h^ndled, let it be noted, that now is
the time his Lordship would be thought to have had no hand in it. But whose
fault was it then? was it not their own? were they not very severe toward the
King, when they refused the Oath contained in that Act, which enjoined only
these particulars? viz. to declare,

That it is not lawf^l, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the
King.

That they do abhor that Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority
against his Person, or against those that are Commissionated by him, in
pursuance of such Commissions.

And that they will not, at any time, endeavor any Alteration of Government,
either in Church or State.

Now let us reason together; Is it rational to imagine, that any Governor will
not provide for the safety and peace of his Government? Are not Protection and
All^giance correlative? Do they not M^tuo se ponere, can either be understood
without the other? Is not the Band of Politics utterly broken by conceiving
the contrary? If a Subject will not declare it Not lawful to take Arms against
the King, Is there not a clear Implication of the Affirmative, that he may, or
perhaps will, when he shall have an opportunity? Is it imaginable then, that
any King can think himself secure of such a Man? or that he could permit him to
enjoy the Common Liberties of his Government, who refuses to give the Common
Caution required by Governors for the place of Government? Or if such person
have formerly by any Overt Acts declared, or preached to others, that it is
lawful to take Arms, can he with any color of reason find fault with the King,
when he demands only gentle Cau^ion of him, by declaring that he has altered
his Opinion, and will do so no more? And in case of his refusal, can he in his
Conscience condemn the Kings making a Law, to prevent him from doing the like
again? Come, Gentlemen, let us to the great Rule of Conscience, Whatsoever ye
would that Men should do to you, do ye so to them: for, this is the Law and the
Prophets. Now pray tell me, you that are Kings of those little Kingdoms called
Families; If any one of your Children, or Servants, has taught or shall teach
the rest, that it is lawful to dispute and fight with you (and perhaps they do
it) in your Houses, would you not think it strange, that any Man should blame
you, if you, not punishing that Child or Servant, should only demand this
gentle Caution of him, that he oblige himself never to do the like again? It Is
much rather to be supposed, that in stead of that, you would turn him out of
your little Kingdom, and no Man could find fault with you for it. Now for
Inference, If His Majesty, a Prince Gracious and Indulgent beyond all example,
has laid aside the severe part; and if you, by your refusing to give him the
Security of a Promissory Oath, have in effect declared that ye will not lay
aside or quit that unruly Principle of taking Arms against him, what could he
do less, than to take the Viper out of his own and the Churches Bosom, and not
nourish it any longer? Whereas by the Laws of God and Man, and by that Law of
Nature called Self-preservation, he might have taken another kind of Course,
for the Security and Quiet of Himself and His Subjects; and not only have shut
these Men out of Corporations, but out of the Kingdom. And yet so far has His
Majesty been from this severity, that the Five Miles A^t it self has languisht
with very little Execution: insomuch that those Men and their Friends, have, at
this time of day, small cause to complain of it: but rather much, for a
heart-melting into grateful acknowledgments of so great Lenity.

If another Pen had been ousied in this Work of Animadverting, it might perhaps
have dropped here many notable Reasons of State, justifying the Policy and
Prudence of that Act, and its Execution; as to name one for an Instance, Viz.
Seeing that, by the Constitution of this Kingdom, the Commons House of
Parliament have an Interest in the Power of Legislation, that no Law can be
made, or repealed without them: And, whereas the major part of their Members
are chosen by Corporations, it must needs be of highest concern to preserve
those Bodies Corporate, as free as may be, from the Infection of Preachers of
such Principles, as are destructive of the Kingdoms Constitution and
Government, lest in a little time the swarming Pros^lytes of Nonconformity come
to bear away the Bell at Elections, and then Trump a Major Vote in the Commons
House, to play a New Game again at the Old Sport. For (like bold Knaves as they
be) they are Cocksure (they say) of Lords enough already. And, its said, it is
one of you, ye Men of Shaftsbury, that took care to Print the Names of their
Lordships, for the honor of the Business: particularly, the Name of the Good
Earl of Shaftsbury, with special Commendations of Great Pains, Long Speeches,
and Extraordinary Honest Qualities: which our Letter-man has taken care, in
the next Paragraph, more largely to set forth to the best advantage.

LETTER.
THus our Church became Triumphant diverse years, the Dissenting Protestants
being the only Enemy, while the Papists rem^in'd undisturbed, were thought
Loyal by the Court, and by our Great Bi^hops not dangerous, etc.

ANIMADVERSION.
REcollect ye the things of time past, and you may remember, it was a saying as
old as the Reformation it self; That the Church of England was like Christ
himself, Crucified betwixt two Thieves, the Papist and the Presbyterian: and,
Is it otherwise at this day? for, in stead of a Triumph after His Majesty's
Happy Restitution, ^or all Her past Sufferings, Behold! how both the sorts of
Adver^aries are plying their separate Interests; agreeing only in this, How to
Plot Her Destruction; the Natural Consequent whereof must be this: That, after
Her ruin, the Papist stands ready to subject the Monarch to a Single Pope: the
other, to subvert the Monarchy, by Inthroning here a Many Headed Papacy. The
one would Rob the KING of Half His Power: the other, of the Whole. Both will
allow of a King, so He be nothing; that is, as long as He pleases them; If
not, they have a Whip and a B^ll, to Correct or Depose Him: of which our
Histories are full. So that if the CHURCH be not Maintained over them both, to
Defeat their Designs of Supplanting Her, tell us then, with all your Wisdom, ye
Men of Shaftsbury, What will become of us? and, What the end of these things
will be?

LETTER.
THe next Paragraph of this Letter tells us a Romantic Story of a Giant and
the Earl of Shaftsbury. The Giant (he says) was my Lord Clifford; a man of a
daring and ambitious spirit; but that the Earl of Shaftsbury was as daring, but
more able: (Some think he did not well to leave out the word more Ambitious
too.)

That he was of Principles and Interests diametrically opposite to Clifford,
yet presently closed with him in proposing the Declaration for Indulgence to
Dissenters in Religion.

ANIMADVERSION.
SInce the Earl of Shaftsbury is named, Oh! What an occasion is here for a
Comment? Thus it goes likewise in all other Romances: the small Knight, or the
Sq^ire, always appears an abler man than the Giant, and is sure to get the
better. And, it is but Reason it should be so, at this time especially; because
in the 9th Page of the Printed Letter are these words also: That the ^arl of
Shaftsbury is a man of great Abilities, and knowledge in Affairs; and one,
that, in all the variety of Changes of this last Age, was never known to be
either bought, or frighted out of his Public Principles. It may be, the
Penman of this Letter is some pleasant person, of little acquaintance with his
Lordship; or, he Dreamt all the World to be made of Oatmeal, or to have been in
a Dream these Thirty years: And, so we may, if we please, Dream on, That his
Lordship is no Changeling. Would that had been true (quoth the Presbyterian)
for, once he became ours. But, (said a certain Presbyter) let me tell you a
Story; and first, I say he is a Knave that thinks I mean it of his Lordship.
Once upon a time (as I remember) the Old King had a Dorsetshire-Eel by the
Tail; which then slipped into the hands of our Party: And when we thought our
selves sure of him, whip, he was gone, and, in a Trice, Commenced a
Brother-Independent: which was a wise part; and no trick of a Changeling, to
shift Principles like Shirts; and quit an unluckie Side, in a fright, at the
noise of a New Prevailing Party, with whom he staid, till he grew up to the
size of a great Commonwealths-man, and made Hay in the Sunshine, until the
Commonwealth and Cromwell were brought to Bed of a strange new kind of Monarchy
in the House of Commons; a Three or four hundred-headed Monarchy, called, The
Fifth Monarchy; and in those days it was also called, Cromwels Little
Parliament; in which his little Lordship became one of the Princes among a
Drove of Changelings. But there having spied out Cromwell 's purpose of Matching
to another sort of Monarchy of his own, his little Lordship then resolved, like
a constant steady m^n to his own main Point, to Trepan them, and to strike in
with him; and lent him a helping hand toward the confounding of
Fifth-Monarchy, to make way for a New One under the Name Protector. Then, in
this Scene of Affairs, be being made a Protectorian Privy-Counsellour; and,
after a while, be aspiring also to become the Protector's Son-in-Law; Cromwell
(who well enough understood him) either disdai^ing, or not daring to take him
so near into his bosom, took occasion also to be quit of him out of his
Council: So that now it was high time indeed, of necessity, to turn back to the
OLD HONEST POINT OF THE COMPASS, and get in again, to be thought a New Man of
His Majesty's Party. This was no hard matter, to be done by a man of his dapper
Conscience, and dexterity, that c^n Dance through a Hoop; or that can be a
T^mbler through Parties; or a small Teazer of Religions; and Touzer of
Factions; a Pettifogger of Politics; the very Windmill and Weathercock of
every GODLY PARTY: He, even ^e, turned again to the Tents of the wicked. For,
to go on with my Story (quoth the Presbyter) no sooner had Cromwell done his do
with him, and sented him; and, like a true Intrigu^-Master, outdone him, and
sp^ed him out; but being thrown o're-board out of Two New Monarchies, ^e
immediately tackt and got ashore again on the skirts of the King's old
Monarchy; that is, he ran in as near it as be could at that time; and, for his
own sake, resolved to be as true as he could for it, by imbarking in a new
Kindred of the Royal Party, seeing he could not catch the Cromwellian. To make
short my Tale, Sir, ^e matched himself then into a Noble Family (one of those
that in the late Troubles had best des^r^ed of His Majesty) with a Lady that
was Niece to a late Noble Lord; who (as he well knew) had Merit-Royal enough,
to answer for all the past faults of a small wandering Politico, and make him
pass for a Royalist, if Royalty came in play again. In the mean time, being out
of all Public Councils, he was at leisure to make Court to all private
Male^^^tents against Oliver; and wheresoever he found a sore, there he rubbed
hardest, till the end of the reign of Richard, and of the Wallingsordian Party,
for, by this time the Rump was got in again; and then he got in again with the
Rump; not into the House, but into the hearts of some of its principal Members
and Actors, and ^^eame a busy man to de^^y them into the reach of their own
des^^ry. And now you have him thus far on his way, you may be so charitable, if
you please, as to imagine, that all this variety of changes was meant by him,
on purpose to bring about His Majesty's Happy Restitution. Indeed one would
think so, considering the Bounties h^ immediately after received from the hand
of a most gracious King; Honors, Offices, Profits, and Preforments; and these,
in tract of time, advanced to the utmost magnitude, with many private Favors;
so that if he was never bought out of his public Principles, yet he was
soundly pa^^ for his private, though never satisfied; till at the old game of
shifting Persons and Parties also at Court, he at length played himself quite
out of Play: and ever since, in the Summertime, you have him a Fox-^^^ting not
f^r from Shaftsbury; in Winter, about London-City, to strike in with the herd
of all Opinions, for ^unting out old Principles in this Forest of Chimneys. And
because we Pre^byters are ready to start them, we pray he may have grace to
pursue the chase, and never leave us in the lu^ch any more: And, that our
Brother-Independents may be brought to forget, how he helped to train some of
them to the Gallows. May they leave off barking when he comes into the City;
and not do as dogs do at a Pell-monger, when he passes through a Country-Town:
For, even those poor Animals are more prudent, than to be at peace with any,
whose Trade it has been to hang and ^lea them. But let their mouths be stopped;
and may be never serve us, as he served them. And may this Tale of mine never
be told again to the rest of our Brethren: Nor this E^l be roasted as the Rump
was in the streets of London: For, truly i^ ^ad never been told at all, if I
thought any man could be so foolish and malicious, as to think my good Lord
Shaftsbury is meant in any part of the Story. But, it is brought in here, only
to show how curiously Contrari^s do illustrate each other; and, what Eels and
Serpents some men in the World will appear to be, if their qualities and
conditions be compared with the Excellencies of that noble Lord; who was never
bought, nor frighted, out of his Public Principles -- Thus far went the
Presbyter with his Tale; and desired any man to match it in Cha^ce^ or Bocca^e.
No wonder then if his Lordship went beyond my Lord Clifford. And, the Iess are
we to wonder at all the great things said of my Lord Shaftsbury in this LETTER,
if it were true, which was said at several Coffee-houses, when it first came
out in Print; That his Lordship was no stranger to its compilement; though it is
written in the style of some other person.

For, in the same Paragraph we are told, that when the War was to be made with
Holland, the Lord Clifford advised the King to quiet all Dissenters in Religion
at home, with granting the Declaration of Indulgence: and, that the Earl of
Shaftsbury, though a man of principles and interest opposite to the other,
presently closed with his Advi^^. But, he does not tell us the Reason, why the
Earl became hot for Indulgence: you are to know, it was then a time of day,
that his Lordship had worn out his little Interest in Episcopacy, and all
affection for it; and saw also, that many at Court began to be sick of him; so
that it was high time, perceiving an uncertainty of his Court-Station, to
provide himself a Retreat into some Popular Faction. He had long done it
before, for fear he might in an ill day have need of them; therefore ever and
anon the sprinklings of his Court-holy-water were bestowed upon many of the
Good People; and some small good Offices he did for them, that the rest of the
Persecuted might know where to find a Patron: So that with the one hand he
swept away as many Court-advantages out of the Public, and was as deep in as
any man; with the other hand he upheld a Stock going with the Pious Party.

-- Lucri bonus odor Ex re qualibet. -- God himself made the World of Discordia
Semina Rerum; Why then may not men thus build their Fortunes? but he never
loved Lins^y-Wols^y to be worn by his Loyal Subjects; nor ever liked, that men
should thus reconcile Christ and (...), so as to make their Markets of them
both together: yet this was the constant Trade since the Kings Restitution. Nor
is his Lordship without Example and Precedent for it; it having been practiced
by the old Earl of Leicester, and other Courtiers in the days of Q. Elizabeth,
King James, etc. And many times, old fashions will up again among ingenious
Tailors, who always take their measures in every employment. There is Gospel
too for this: thus did the unj^st St^ward provide, in case he should be turned
out of his Stewardship. Wisely then did his Lordship, to ^eather himself among
the Men of the World so long beforehand, that when the time should be over, and
the Chancellorship be rendered, he might; with a sure friend, Mammon, be any
where welcome, and have all deeds forgotten which were done in darkness; being
next to begin the World again, by setting up anew among the Children of Light,
the Old Trade of crying out Popery and Priests; Bishops, Evil Councillors, and
Gr^evances; and, Now also, No Parliament: but, a New One (as like the Old One
as may be) can do the BUSINESS of his Lordship and the Nation. There is no
remedy to be thought on but one* and that is a very pleasant one: Call back my
Lord to Court; then all will do well again, and he will save me the labor of
te^^ing the whole Intrigue of his Matters. Call back my Lord Clifford too, and
his Lordship shall never more quarrel him about Indulgence, Popery, Parliament,
or any thing else: Yea, and he shall ask him pardon too for so artificially
contriving that fine Fiction or S^^ne of Discourses, supposed to have been
spoken concerning himself and Lord Clifford when alive; but framed to
scandalize him after his death; not sparing reflections even upon His Majesty
also Himself, and His affairs; that so he might, by using the Style of a Third
person, act an estentation of his own being the only Statesman, that took care
of Indulgen^^, Trade, Religion, Kingdom and All; as you may find at large in
the 4th and 5th pages of this LETTER. But you have been already shown, how long
it was before his Lo^dships Zeal br^ke sorth with so bright a flame, and what
the end of it may be; even ^n universal Inflammation, if the New practicing of
the Old Delusions be not prevented.

But because here has been mention often made of my Lord Clifford, with intent
of disadvantage to his memory; therefore, ere I dismiss this part of the
LETTER, it cannot be amiss to show you a better Picture of him, as it was drawn
also by the lucky hand of the good Earl of Shaftsbury, but it was in a time
when his Lordship had a Being in Whitehall, and was willing to Court him that
was his Rival in the Treasu^^^, rather than not hold on his new Office of
Chancellor. The precise time was, when his Lordship gave the Lord Clifford the
Oath of Lord Treasurer in the Exchequer-Chamber, 5 Decem^. 1672, where, in his
Speech, he began with my Lord Clifford's Integrity, Ability, and Experience in
Affairs; and that therefore the King ^ad chosen him to be His Lord Treasurer: A
Place that requires such a man, as our Gre^ Master's Wisdom found fit for it;
from whose Natural Temper we may expect Courage, Quicknes^ and Resolution; from
whose Education, Wisdom and Experience; and from whose Ex^ract^^, that Noble
and Illustrious House of the Cliffords; an Heroic Mind, a Large Soul, and an
unshaken Fidelity to the Crown. And when he comes to conclude, he adds to him
these words: [I wish, or rather proph^sie, your exce^ding all your Pred^^^ssors
in this Pla^; The Abilities and Fidelity of the Renowned Lord Burleigh; The
Sagacity, Quickness, and great Dispatch of his Son the Lord Salisbury; and the
Uprightn^ss, Integrity, and Wisdom, of that great Man that went last before
you, the Earl of Southampton.

Now, Gentlemen, you that are Friends of Lord Shaftsbury, if you have any care
of his Reputation, advise him to desire the Printer to blot out all the
Characters of my Lord Clifford, in the Second Edition of this LETTER, and put
in these: or at least, for his Lord^hips sake, have not so hard an opinion of
Clifford: or else be pleased to do my Lord Clifford and your selves this Right,
as to suspend your opinion of this Lord, till you are sure i^ can be a good
one. But if then you find no cause to believe all the Outcries which were at
the time of Clifford's Fall, hold on still, if you can, the humor of believing
all the other Devices of his little Lordship; till he at length serve you, as
he has served all the rest of his Believers.

LETTER.
THe next Contents of the Letter are these: Viz.

That the Penner thereof wishes, The Declaration for Indulgence Vight have had
a longer continuance, and a better reception; But (says he) the Bishops took
offense at it.

ANIMADVERSION.
ANy thing to lay load of Envy upon the Bishops: That is a main design of the
LETTER. At that Corner of the Monarchy, its old Enemies are to make the new
Onset: and then what follows? The Annals of the late Reign of Presbytery will
tell you nothing but Violent Persecution. Not a word in those days of
Indulgence; ^^ynot so much as to the Brother-Independents; whose true Interest
it is as much as the Epis oparians, to preserve the present Government by
Episcopacy: For, let the Presbyter up with his Throne again, and both the other
will be alike exposed to his mercy. Suppose the worst you can of one Bishop in
a County, yet past experience has told us, we had better have him there than a
mean upstart Insulter over both, to play the Devil for Gods sake, in every
Parish. The rest of the Dissenters are therefore to con^^der, That as the
Episcoparian's greatest Jealousy is at the Presbyter, because the Aims of them
both being at a National Form, they cannot both stand together, but the one
must of necessity deprive the other; so, forasmuch as all other Nonconformers
lay no claim to a Church-National, but in Spiritual Matters seek only
Toleration and Indulgence; They cannot, if they please to lay aside old
animosities, give any Ombrage or Jealousy to the Episc^parian; because in
their way of Churching, they design only a private Rule over one another. Their
only Concern then is, by a total quitting of all Intrigues, or correspondence
in Counsels with that false Brother the Presbyter, the natural common Enemy of
their way of Churching, as well as of the National: which being cordially done
in suture, and all cause of Jealousy, on their parts, being thereby removed
from the Governors, there can be no doubt but they may be induced, to allow
them a fair and lasting Indulgence.

Moreover, it ought to be considered, though the Bishops be charged by our
Letter-Man as the Undoers of the Indulgent D^^laration; it was not They, but
the Parliament that undid it; it being by both Houses judged inconvenient to be
continued, by reason it was thought prejudicial to some Laws made for an
Uniformity in Matters of Public Worship, and consequently an Intrenchment upon
Law: so that the Parliament was therein led by Reason of State, when they
besought His Majesty for the cancelling of it: the Lords Spiritual were
concerned in it no otherwise than the Lords Temporal; and it was, upon the
Joint-Application of both Lords and Commons, recalled. The Inference then which
I would offer at from these Discourses, is; That if those aforesaid Dissenters
would by Overt-Acts of Behavior in future, make it evident to the Parliament,
that they are in heart alienated and departed from the Presbyter, the great
common Enemy of the Crown, as well as of the Church, it is not impossible (yea,
perhaps not improbable) but that the same Parliament may then come to see it
Reason of State also, to find out some Expedient to make a difference, in
execution of Law, betwixt Them and the Irreconcilable Presbyter,
notwithstanding the severity of Laws at present; especially if the Houses once
see cause given them to apprehend, That such Dissenters are resolved to become
as loyal and serviceable to his Majesty and the Government here, as Dissenters
were heretofore in France unto King Henry the Fourth.

And truly, seeing there is this difference betwixt the ordinary Dissenters and
the Presbyters; that the latter is e directo inconsistent with all Monarchy,
because Presbytery claims to be underivative from any Secular Monarch, and in
ord^^ad Spiritualiae, does as it were usurp his Power: and seeing the former,
while they seek only an Indulgence, may well enough consist with our English
Monarchy; there is no question but they may, in due time, if they behave
themselves wisely, obtain their desired Liberty. For, in the very following
Lines of the LETTER, our Author signifies, That at the next meeting of the
Parliament, the Bishops promoted the Protestant Interest so high, that an Act
came up from the Commons to the House of Lords in favor of the dissenting
Protestants, and had passed the Lords but for want of time. What has been may
be: so that if the ordinary Dissenters shall be so wise, as to mind their true
Interest, which really lies in a hearty complaisance with the Interest of the
Government, the like may soon be done in favor of them again.

Next, he tells us, There was another Act then passed the Royal Assent, for the
excluding all Papists from Office; in the opposition of which the Lord
Treasurer Clifford ^^ll: and yet to prevent his ruin, this Session had the
sooner end. As for the Lord Clifford, me thinks he might before now have been
left at rest in his Grave: but there is (it seems) another Lord in the World is
resolved he shall not; because while his Lordship tugged hard, and lay gaping
for the Office of Lord Treasurer, my Lord Clifford got between and carried it
away; for which he will never forgive his memory, nor any of his Friends.
Nothing could please after this; no not the Great Seal it self, though one
would have thought that enough to fill the Swallow of any Gnat. But Oh! the
Dear Bag was gone, the Bu^t-end of all his hopes, and so neither Seal nor Purs^
could satisfy! Nothing now but Revenge; for then his Lordship saw plain the
Mortality of his own Court-Interest drawing on* which had been long before
forfeited by many a Juggle. Then his Piety began to work, when his Covetousness
had nothing to work upon; and nothing after this could be thought of, but Fire
and Flames of Zeal, to scatter about the Court and Kingdom. A loud and sudden
Cry must be raised in fear of Popery, by pretense of which (the old trick) the
Nation was to be forthwith intoxicated, and the Lord Clifford confounded; and
all Papists also were to be put out of Office, because the Maker of this
Outcry was in fear to be so. I write not this to plead for their being in
Office; but only to observe how pat the little Adversary timed all things, for
his own purpose of commencing the new Game of Popularity. He foresaw his own
Fa^e, and labored hard to get in elsewhere, before they had quite thrown him
out at White Hall; that so when he went off, he might in a new World turn up
Trump, as the Faith's great Defender against Popery. This was the reason why he
spurred on that Act so eagerly, to run Papists out of Office; and why he
afterward appeared so vigorous in putting the Act in execution: for, in all
the time since the King's Happy Res^auration, we never heard, till this sudden
sit, of his Lordships having been in any fright before about the Papists, or
any other sort of Religion whatsoever. So that from the time of this first
fright we are to reckon the Rise of all the Jealousies and Contests that have
ensued lately, or which may ensue, about the Affairs of the Government; and of
all the late ill Impressions, which have been craftily and most industriously
made upon the minds of the people, to prepare them (if possible) for a Mutiny.

LETTER.
BUt the Letter goes on thus: In this posture matters were found in the Session
of Parliament that began October. 27. 1673. which being suddenly broken up, did
nothing.

ANIMADVERSION.
It Is a condition of Affairs much to be lamented, that so many Sessions of
Parliament have of late been broken Re infecta; and we might very much wonder
at it, considering His Majesty's great delight which he has had in the good
Advices and Affections of His Parliament, did we not know that some Envious
Ones made it their Business to sow Tares, and cast Blocks (...) the way to
impede all happy Proceeding; that either House might be Imbroiled in its self,
and both with one another; and so be utterly incapacitated for any dispatch of
Public Business. The Instances are too sad to be mentioned, and I wish they
were for ever in oblivion, which necessitated His Majesty, for the very Honor
of Parliament it self, and of His Government, to put an end to many strange
Debates and Controversies, which could by no other means be done, but by ending
the several Sessions. For, even in that House, whose true Interest is
inseparably and more especially annexed to that of the Crown Imperial of this
Realm, and cannot stand without it, there was found a new Lord, this last
Session, whose Speech (if we may believe a Paper called a Speech, carefully
Printed under the Name of the Earl of Shaftsbury) vented many strange Passages,
upon the Debate of appointing a day for the hearing of Dr. Shirley's Cause by
the Peers: which show plainly enough, who it was which backed and befooled the
Doctor to a perpetual attendance on that Business; not for any good will to
him, who (poor Man!) was made a mere Stalking-horse, but to catch other ends,
and create Mischief to King and Kingdom, by strangling the great Affairs and
Hopes of His Majesty, in the midst of His many pressing Public Occasions for
Supplies; to the want of which Supplies in good time, we are to ascribe the
late loss of Repute, with the other Public Inconveniences and Damages in our
Naval Interests, etc. which have been complained of. Such Men there are as
study first how to tie up the Hands of the King and His Ministers with
Necessity, and then make the People cry out at them, for not doing what they
were disabled to do. And therefore, that the Nation may know to what
Malcontent the King and People do owe those Damages, and the fruitlesness of
the last Session of Parliament; and from thence g^^ess who it was that drove
the design of frustrating also the several Sessions that went before it: It
will not be amiss to give the World some account here of diverse Passages of
that Speech, Printed with the Title of the Earl of Shaftsbury: which no Man
that reads but would swear it his.

This Speech confesses the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Bishop of Salisbury
had at the same time made Speeches to show, that to set a day to enter upon a
Hearing in the Lords House, of the Cause of Dr. Shirley, before the Great
Concerns of the King and Kingdom, in Supplies of Money, and other Bills should
be dispatched, would be to induce several Grand Inconveniences: As first, That
seeing both Houses had been highly engaged in Contests with each other about
their respective Privileges, occasioned by that Cause, the appointing of a
short day for their Lordships to hear it, would immediately bring on the like
Contests again, and so cause a Breach betwixt the Houses: and, Secondly, That
after such a Breach, made for the sake of a private Cause, no ordinary way
being left for dispatch of the many Public Bills depending in the Houses, or
for raising of Moneys; the whole Business of Naval Preparations, and of other
Great Affairs, and of the Reputation and Interests of the King and Kingdom, at
home and abroad, would unavoidably fall to ruin. And their Lordships were
told, They could not but be convinced in their Co^s^iences, that if that matter
of Shirley were then prosecuted, it must cause a Breach. This was the Sense
also of most other Noble Lords.

But alas! that Printed Speech makes the Earl of Shaftsbury ring another Tune,
as if his Lordship had other Public Business, or as if it had no longer been
Shirley's private Business, but his Own: so that if we may believe that Print,
the People need no other Evidence to show who was the Designer of the last
Sessions of Parliaments non-effect; or to enable them to ghess who it was that
spoiled several foregoing Sessions, by spinning the like long Speeches, to
start and cherish Controversies, instead of doing Business. And from thence
they may do well to consider, if the like shall be done again, what kind of Man
that is, who shall endeavor to render a Parliament of no Effect: And what a
difference can be made betwixt a Subverter and a Continual Frustrater of the
Parliamentary Constitution.

In the first place, that Speech tells the Lords, that the All of their
Lordships was at Stake, in that Business of Shirley; as if the House of Peers
could not stand unless they resolved to hear him that Minute: and yet many
Lords (if Prints belie them not) did seem to believe it. But those Lords (I
suppose) cannot but by this time observe this one Passage of the Print (Page
the 5th) which represents my Lord Shaftsbury being in f^ar that a Vote might
pass there, for meddling with no private Business for six weeks. O my Lords,
said he, if this be your Business, see where you are, if we are to Postpone our
Judicature, f^r the fear of Offending the House of Commons, for six Weeks, they
in the Interim may pass the MONEY, and other acceptable Bills, which His
Majesty thinks of Importance. Sure the Print has bely^d so Loyal a Heart, as
my Lord Shaftsbury, to make him speak thus: which in plain English amounts to
this; [My Lords, take ^eed what you do, the King longs to have the Bill about
Money, and the other acceptable Bills of Importance dispatched, and brought to
him; and the House of Commons would (...) have Shirley 's Business laid aside
for six Weeks, that the Work may not be hindered, but the King satisfied.] As if
it had been a matter of Danger to satisfy the King; which is a Reflection upon
Majesty, not to be darted out by any Subject in so great an Assembly: And by
it, you have the purpose of the great Design pointed out in most Legible
Characters; his Lordship openly persuading the Peers, if he can, to thwart the
King, and render the Parliament unfit to do the Kings Business: So that if the
Print be a true Copy of his Speech, then here is the Trouble-House; Ex ore tuo
condemnaberis. What need we any more witness who it is that troubles the King
and Kingdom?

But the Print goes on, and says his Lordship said further: That to l^y sweet
Shirley aside (Page the 6th) would be to alter the Constitution of the
Government: and there is no Reason of State can be an Argument to your
Lordships, to turn your selves out of that Interest you have in the
Constitution of the Government. Nothing may more make us suspect this Speech
than that it presents his Lordship as a Man afraid of altering the Constitution
of Government. I must confess I never knew him like an alteration in any
Government, as long as himself could be one in it: therefore seeing he is none
now, it is wisely done of him to insinuate the Crime upon others; for, so the
Print does very slily upon those Noble Lords, whose Judgment and Conscience led
them to lay aside Disputes about Judicature, that they might do the King and
Kingdoms Business before Shirley's: And for this they were told (Page 6th) that
they were ready to give away their Pe^rage, with its Rights and Privileges;
and ^umbling down their own House, to become Creatures as mean and low,
notwithstanding they have Titles, as they are in absolute Monarchies: And, that
there is no Pri^^e that ev^r Governed without a Nobility, or an Army: if you
will not have one, you must have t^ other. And, thus he concludes, [I therefore
declare, that I will serve my Prince as a Peer, but will not destroy the
Pe^rage to serve him.] And now let us consider, what occasion or need his
Lordship had of this high Bravade, unless it were craftily to possess men's
Minds with a secret Opinion, as if the King and those Noble Lords, which s^uck
close to His Majesty's Concerns, and the Kingdoms, in this Debate, had an end
to Overthrow the House of Peers, make the Monarchy absolute, and Rule by an
Army: A thing the most impertinently, and senslesly insinuated that can be,
from such Premises as have been mentioned. And it rather argues, that the
Arguer has some strange design or other upon the Government, if he cannot by
hook or by crook get himself in again to the Helm of it; But, his Reasons and
the Design being well enough apprehended, this, and some other little
Delusions, of late years practiced under Public good Pretenses, cannot but be
understood by the Lords and Commons, as mere Tricks to turn the Frame of
Government off its Wheels again, and to shatter it into a Presbyterian
Aristocratick, or a Popular Tyranny: for, that is the inevitable consequence of
unhinging this Well-order'd-Monarchy.

But, the Print says, his Lordship went yet farther, being resolved to search
the Monarchy to the bottom, page 10. and 11. and, by the way he digs down as
low as the Grave of Archbishop Laud. His Lordships Friends of Presbytery
tumbled him in, and, Why should not he make bold to rake him out again? The new
Canons also made in that Archbishops time are brought forth and Arraigned, with
the Bishops, for asserting Monarchy to be of Divine Right. It seems then the
Work is going on again: they mean to bait the Bishops, and undress the Monarchy
once more, and then stuff it with Presbyterian Hay or Stubble. It may amaze any
man to think of his Lordships wild way of discourse; how it was possible, from
so slender a Topic as the Case of Shirley, to improve it unto the introducing
and determining of so many great and weighty Points; and how he had the Art to
hale them in thus by head and shoulders: but, the itch of much Speech-making is
a disease that makes men sometimes delirious. For, the Print boldly infers
these following Particulars.

1. That the King is King by Law, and by the same Law that the poor man enjoys
his Cottage. What need this have been said, at a time when there was no
occasion for it, unless his Lordship had a mind to maintain, That the King has
no Right more Divine than a Cottager? For, Dolus latet in Generalibus; and
these things do not portend any good meaning.

2. That a King Governing by an Aymy, without his Parliament, is a Government
(says he) that I own not, am not obliged to, nor was born under. It Is a
pleasant thing to have thus entertained the House of Peers; First with setting
up Men of Straw, and then to defeat them; start Chim^raes, and run them down
again; by force of imagination to six a King, as Governing in the head of an
imaginary Army, and then ^out him: and, the Scene of all this must be supposed
to be England, because his Lordship was not born, nor is obliged to Government
any where else: Nor can the common Readers of his printed Speech apprehend, but
that he means, and would seem to fear, all this in England; to what purpose
else can so wise a Lord be thought to make so serious and eager a Protestation
against it? or to what purpose else was it so carefully made public in print,
but that it was the ready way to get the World to understand it so? and that
seems the sole drift of the zeal of these impertinent excursions. But yet he
goes on.

3. That ^e cannot find that the Jesuits, or Popish Clergy ever owned Monarchy
to be of Divine Right; but only some Epis^opal clergy of our Briti^h Isles.
Then the Episcopal Clergy are (it seems) the better Subjects in a Monarchy. As
for the two sorts of Jesuits, the Popi^h One, and the Presbyterian; the former
will not allow it to the Monarch, because he would leave a gap open for the
Popes Claim over Him: the latter also is of the same mind, because he would
subject Him to his Presbytery. There needs no reasoning to evince these things,
seeing there are few men in our age, who have not seen the truth in facto: so
that it is the clear interest of the Crown, That if it will have a Church
National to Govern by, it must be Protestant-Episcopal; otherwise its self
cannot be secure from the Invasions and Insolences of the Pope on the one
side, or of the Many-headed Presbyter on the other.

4. That to say this Family are our Kings, and this particular Frame of
Government is our Lawful Constitution, and obliges us, is owing only to the
particular Laws of our Country. Well urged in print, my Lord, here is a fair
Gap laid open for another Family, and another sort of Government. And Why? The
reason is plain, because it is possible we may have other laws. Let but the Game
go on, the Men of Shaftsbury, if they get it, will soon show us that the Laws
also may be changed; and then what may become of the Frame of Government? And
what may become of the Family, if it shall not give way to the alteration of
the old Laws and Government? He that makes a Crown to have no other Foundation
but particular Laws, ought first, in a Monarchy, to show me whence those
particular Laws could come, but from the Crown and him that first wore it: Law
and popular Consent came in afterward; not to constitute, but to confirm and
corroborate it on his head. I find, after long Observation and Experience of
these matters, it is among all our State-Hereticks and Spurious Politicians, an
Error in Fundamento, which leads them to dispute with Crowned Heads, and that
boldness prepares them to rebel; that they will needs suppose in the Original
of Monarchy, a Priority of Laws to make it such. As to Fact, the Histories of
Nations in general do consute that vain Hypothesis, upon which all their
Arguments are built; and do show, that for the most part Laws about Monarchy
came in after its Institution, to second it by the peoples Confirmative
Consent: Not that this gave it any Authority, but their Assent to the Laws
about it, was only a Signal of their submission and obedience to it. And as it
was thus in the beginning of Monarchies, so, as to the Reason of the Point, it
holds much the more strongly against them in Monarchies already Constituted;
for, there, no Law can be supposed Prior to the Monarch, because they all slow
from him, and cannot have being without him. Therefore that Man's Allegiance
stands upon very slippery and uncertain Terms, who concludes the King and his
Family, and their Rights, as mere Creatures of some particular Laws of the
Country, and prints this Doctrine to the whole Kingdom, to beget in them mean
thoughts of that Royal Right to the Crown Imperial of this Realm, which is
naturally inherent in his very Blood, and Person, and Family; and cannot in a
true English Political Sense be otherwise considered: So that if ever his
Lordships Notion be started again among the Peers, it is like it may, in that
House, meet with an Animadversion much more severe than mine.

5. Nevertheless, the Print goes on very roundly in the Name of his Lordship,
and says, (Page 11.) If the Doctrine of the Divine Right of Monarchy be true,
then our M^gna Charta is of no use, our Laws are but Rules during the Kings
Pleasure. Monarchy, if of Divine Right, cannot be bounded or limited by Humane
Laws; nay, what is more, cannot bind it self. All our Claims of Right, the
Rights of the Peers House, and of the Commons House, and of all People, must
give way to the Interest, and will and pleasure of the Crown; and the best Men
must Vote to deliver up all we have, not only when Reason of State, and the
separate Interest of the Crown require it, but when it is known the will and
pleasure of the King would have it so. For, that must be to a Man of that
Principle, the only Rule and Measure of Right and Justice. -- Excellent
State-Logick this! and were it my Aim to pervert the people, I would thus chop
Allegiance into a thousand Niceties, as the Schoolmen do Divinity, for making
such like Inferences, to intoxicate the peoples minds; for, the Scripture makes
Witchcraft near of kin to Rebellion; they seldom part company: and the Vilany
intended by such Arguments, is usually masqued and hid in ambiguous phrases.
What ado is here made with the word Divine Right! It may be remembered, the same
was made use of to purpose by the Presbyterians, to inflame people into the
former Rebellion. We would fain forget all their past Intrigues; but it seems
there is fresh use of them; or else these thin^s had not been thus boldly
conjured up again into the House of Peers; a place too sacred for such
discourses. In all Debates about the high Points of Polity, every Expression
ought not only to be seasoned by the Speaker, cum grano Salis; but to be
understood so also by the Hearers. If among Men of honest and fair intentions
toward the King, it be said the King holds his Monarchy by a Divine Right,
none but a Madman, or a Man of design; a Man whose Business it is to catch at
words, and cramp them with Commentaries to his own purpose; a Man that can blow
up Mol^hills to Mountains; who carries a Micros^ope in his Pocket upon
occas^on, to see all in great; who, when he pl^ases, strains at G^ats in State,
while he is out of Government; but can swallow Camels when he is in it; none
but such a Man would presently conclude, that such a Divine Right was meant, as
excludes all bounding or limitation by Humane Laws; such a One as leaves no
Obligation from the Prince to the People. A Father has a Divine Right to Rule
his Son, and a Master his Servant; else the Scripture had never made Divine
Injunctions, investing them with Rights of absolute Power over them; and yet
the same Scripture also signifies, that notwithstanding those Rights are
Divine, there are Obligations also upon the Father and Master, to the Son and
Servant. Such a Paternal absolute Divine Right it is, that the Kings of England
have claimed and exercised over their Subjects, as that in all times L^x
cucurrit, the Laws have generally run in course, for preservation of all the
Rights and Liberties of the People, as well as those of the Crown.

Now you see the Fox un^ased: the word Divine Right of Monarchy, is no such
Bugbear as we are told here in Print. And doubtless, the Lords and the Commons
of England, all people both great and small, will well consider, that as this
kind of Discourse was haled into the Lords House upon no occasion, to serve
some ends; so it was most improperly timed, to bring it forth in the Reign of
such a King, whose tenderness toward the Laws and Liberties of the people has
been most remarkable in all his Actions. And if any thing that has a Face of
Power or Force extraordinary, or unusual in the times of his Predecessors, has
appeared about him, it is no more than what these Fifteen years past has been
continued, and never found fault with by his then Lord^hip, but judged
absolutely necessary for his Guard and Defense against his now Lordships new
Friends of Presbytery; the Irreconcilable Enemies, not only of this, but any
King; because the very Constitution and Natural Temper of that Faction, renders
them incompatible with the Nature of his Crown and Dignity: Yet none shall more
kiss him, and in kissing none more diminish him. Nor can there be imagined
greater Enemies to all the rest of his people; not only because their design is
spurred on with a Religious Zeal of Domination over their Fellow Subjects; but
because also their Machinations being restless and perpetual to grasp the
Power, they necessitate the King, for defending his own Station, and his other
peoples, to become the more heavy in his demands of Supply, to sustain the
Government against such Domestic Adversaries. And if ever the Excellent Form
of it happen to be spoiled, (which God forbid) we must owe it to that sort of
Men; who have always made it their business to create Parties, and tell Noses
in both Houses, and start such Hares as can never be run down; so that there
might be neither time nor room to handle, or make an end of the important
Affairs of the Kingdom; and what is this but to destroy the Exercise, Use, and
public End of Parliaments in England?

But the Print has not done yet. Shirley's Cause has drawn hither also the
whole Business of France and Holland. We owe (it says) the two last years
Peace (by that it means the Peace we have with the Dutch) to the two Houses
differing from the sense and opinion of White Hall: And it says his Lordship
said, it is a thing to be prayed for; that there may be no general Peace made
with France; and that he himself would advise against it.

-- Quantum mutatus ab illo! See how consistent his Lordship is with himself!
Even as he was wont to be. Time was when he was an Adviser at White Hall, and
he could be of their sense then, and took pains also to bring the Houses to it.

As for example, When it was the sense of White Hall, that a War ought to be
made with the Dutch; as glad as his Lordship now is of the Peace with them, he
was at first as high as any Man against them; as appears by his Speech when he
was Lord Chancellor, at the opening of the Session of Parliament, 5 Febr. 1672.
wherein he said all he could to Inflame the Houses against the Dutch, he
reckoned up their Personal Indignities to the King by Pictures and Medals, and
other Public Affronts from the States themselves; their Breach of Treaties
^oth in the Surinam and the East India Business; their Height of Insolence in
denying the Honor and Right of the Flag, and disputing the Kings Title to it
in all the Courts of Christendom: and that they made great Offers to the French
King, if He would stand by Them against Us: but the Most Christian King too
well remembered how dangerous a Neighbor they were to all Crowned Heads. That
they were the Common Enemies to all Monarchies, especially to Ours. And
thereupon, as angry as he is now at our Kings fair carriage with the French, he
then concluded it was well done to join Interests with the French King. And he
told the House then also, That at any rate Carthago est Delenda, the Hollanders
were not only to be brought down, but destroyed. And further, to engage the
Parliament to liberal Supplies against them, he told the Houses thus: It Is your
War; the King took his Measures from You, and they were Just and Right Ones.
And if after this You suffer them to get up, let this be remembered, The States
of Holland are England's eternal Enemy, both by Interest and Inclination. You
see his Lordships Opinion then was, that the Parliament ought to bow to the
Scene of Whitehall; but in a little time after, the Scene was altered; for no
sooner went his Lordship out of Office, but his Business was to bow the Houses
as much the other way; and with the same eagerness for a Peace with the Dutch
against the Sense of Whitehall.

Quo te teneam nodo mutantem Protea? And in like manner he has labored to put
the People out of humor with Whitehall, and set them against our being any way
concerned with the French; telling the Lords in this Print, what a mighty
dangerous Neighbor that King is grown to be. But the good People of England
ought withal to consider, That King did not in a Nights time grow up to this
Magnitude. He was but little less at the time of his Lordships Greatness; yet
all was well enough as long as his Lordship was great too; for then there was
no clamor of his about it, either in or out of Parliament: therefore mistake
not his present Peek and Indignation at the Court, for a zeal toward the
Public.

So I have done with that Speech to the Lords, Printed with the Name and Title
of my Lord of Shaftsbury; and now ye Men of Shaftsbury, what do ye think of
him? Have ye not reason to be proud of so able a Speech-Maker? He Is a brave Man
indeed that can blow up a Parliament with a Breath, and a Kingdom into a Flame;
but what wise Men are they that do not yet understand him! And what a Knave is
he that thinks I mean the Earl of Shaftsbury to be the Man!

Now though I have done with the Speech, yet I cannot have done with the rest
of the Print; for I see Printed in the end of it another Business, in the Name
of my good Lord Shaftsbury. It is Entitled, The Protestation, with Reasons of
several Lords, for the Dissolution of this Parliament; Entered in the Lords
Journal, November. 22. 1675. the day the Parliament was Prorogued. So that it
seems his Lordship is not ignorant how this Protestation came on; nor can the
World be ignorant how far his Hand went in promoting it; care having been taken
by some Body during the time his Lordship was in the Country, before the last
Session of Parliament, to employ certain Emissaries and Agents, to carry up and
down, not only to many Lords in and about this City, but likewise to all the
most noted Coffe^-houses, Copies of a Letter, said in the Superscription of it
to have been first written to the Earl of Carlisle, and to have been subscribed,

Your Lordships humble Servant, SHAFTSBURY. My Lord of Carlisle is a very noble
Person, and I would not by any means mis-represent him, he having seen too many
Experiments of Male-contented Demagogues, and their little Tricks, to be caught
by them, or to countenance them. It Is rather to be supposed the Penner made
bold with him. It was necessary to direct it to some Body, and easy to send
Copies along with it, at the same time, to be communicated to every Body; for
there was no fear but among the Coffee-h^unters there would be found Copiers
enough, to furnish both City and Kingdom; the Design being laid now by this new
Epistle, to prepare Men's Minds for a crying down the present Parliament, seeing
there are too many Wise Men in it, and too Loyal to be shaken by a Shuttlecock;
and for crying out for a New Parliament, while in the mean time matters are so
labored in the Old One (as we have abundantly seen the last Session) that no
Business should be done by them; and then there may thence arise (as is
imagined) an unanswerable Argument for a Trial of Skill in Electing a New: for
his Tool the Presbyter despairing to get Dominion by the way of the King, wants
only opportunity to be Canvasing and Tugging for another Forty-One-Parliament;
and would never be at rest, till he has gotten both Houses over his Head again
at Westminster. So that if the other Nonconformists will well apprehend the
improvement of their own Interest, let them know, that as they have reason to
decline them, being their worst Enemies by principle; so they have the fairest
opportunity, in showing themselves firm henceforth to the Crown, to stand most
fair in the good opinion and favor of His Majesty, as a Party much more
tolerable in the Constitution of the Government: And then there can be no fear
of that they call Persecution, because the reason and occasion of it will be
gone. No Creditor but will be kind when he has gotten Security. Even so it is
with Kings, and other Governors: they grieve no Party more than other, when
they are once secured they will pay the Debt of Obedience and Loyalty; for,
it is their Interest to cherish, and see every Party thri^e and flourish, if it
be not dangerous.

Arguments in that Epistle his Lordship offers none, having long since arrived
to that Noble Confidence, as to think his own word sufficient warrant for any
Assertion; therefore he boldly says, it is the Interest of the King, the Lords,
and the Commons, to have a New Parliament, without any more ado. But for his
Reasons, we must have recourse to the Protestation it self; which are first for
the Dissolution of this Parliament, and they are but these few following.

First, The Protestation says, It is according to the ancient Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, that there should be frequent and new Parliaments; and
that the practice of several years has been accordingly.

It Is true, the Kings of this Realm have formerly had cause to delight in
calling them, and our Chronicles tell us also, that till the Barons Wars came,
and after the Barons Wars were ended, down to the time of King James,
Parliaments were modest in their station, and easy to the King; so that the
Business of the Kingdom went on current: without long Speeches and hot
Disputes: But in King James his time, the Presbyter or Purita^ (as Men then
called him) (whom Queen Elizabeth in her time, not without much ado kept down)
began to spread his Wings, grew numerous and headstrong, so that they were able
to furnish the Commons House with a Canvasing Party, and did it constantly at
every Election; and diverse Members of the House of Peers, who in those days
affected Preferment at Court, and wanted it, and envied others that had it, or
were otherwise malcontent, or intoxicated with mistaken Zeal of new Phantsies
about Religion, or Church Government, were not wanting to make a Party of
Lords, to second that fiery part of the Commons; who carried matters diverse
times so high, that That King was necessitated, toward the latter end of his
Reign, for the Honor of his Crown, and Preservation of the Government in
q^iet, often to dissolve them: Of which the Puritan (that is, the Presbyter)
always made advantage by exceeding Clamor against the Court, to gain the
ignorant and unwary part of the people to his party. And so you see to what
sort of Men we owe the new invention of Frustrating Parliaments.

After this comes King Charles the First to the Government, upon whom they
perpetually practiced it in all Parliaments that he called; and at length (you
know) that working upon the Kings Necessities in the year 1641. they in a
manner constra^ned him to perpetuate them in Power; which was the ruin of the
Royal Government, and at length of all Government it self. It is to be noted
also, that it was not till the beginning of his Reign, that they took up the
other New Trick of State; which was, seeing they durst not yet be so bold, as
to strike at the King himself for supposed defaults in Government, they
resolved to strike as near him as they could; and so they began to make it
constant work, to fall upon his Chief Ministers of State; and always, in the
Intervals of Parliament, made it their Business to fill the Kingdom with
Clamours against them; so preparing them thereby, as a Sacrifice to their own
ends and cruelty, and to the Peoples folly, against every call of a Parliament.
Thus it was from the time of the old Duke of Buckingham, (who by a brave
Defense in Parliament made good his Station) to the time of that most brave,
though most unfortunate Man, the Earl of Strafford, whom they worried to death
by Popular Tumults, after he had bastled them at the Bar in defending himself
most gloriously: As they did also Archbishop La^d, a Man of high design for the
Honor of the King, and Glory of the Church; which they charged on him to be
for introducing of Slavery and Popery; so that all the rest of the King's
Ministers were glad to flee for safety of their Lives. Nay, they stopped not
here; but being flusht, drew up Articles of High Treason against the Queens
Majesty. And then, we too sadly remember, how easily afterward they passed on
to a Charge against the King himself.

I write not this, as if I meant to scandalize, or cast an Odium upon that
ancient Right and Liberty of Parliaments, to Inspect the Actions and Behavior
of the great Officers of Trust, and call them to account, if faulty; it being
confessed a good advantage and security to the King and Kingdom, and necessary
to be continued: but my purpose here is only to note, when and how the Abuse
of that Parliamentary Power, and by what Faction it was first made so
extravagant, that no sooner could a Favorite or Minister of State be warm in
his Office, or in the Kings Favor, and had resolved to look strictly to a
maintaining the Rights and Constitution of Government in Church and State, but
immediately they fell upon the Back of him, and gave out the word for his
Displacing, or his Destruction. No doubt but the best of Men in great place
will have Errors and Faults, being more then other Men distracted with many
Businesses, and exposed to many Temptations, as the Earl of Strafford said at
his Trial; but that they should by Popular Breath and Faction be blown up to
the degree of high Crime or Treason, when they have perhaps, in the Judgment of
Men moderate and wise, only served the King with the best of their ^kill; this
is both uncharitable, and cruel; or the effect of Faction, or Envy; and it is
this only that I redargue: for, it is in a factious time, the great Interest
of the Crown to see to it, and to nip this Grand Abuse whenever it shall be
practiced; always taking due measure between a just or conscionable, and a
factious prosecution. Else these Inconveniences will follow.

As it is in the Nature of Man to be well-con^eited of himself, (otherwise most
Men would even hang themselves) so generally a secret Envy arises in him at the
preferment of another, because he thinks he deserves better than he; and the
King presently gets his ill will for passing him by. This Man then meets with
many other of his own sense and humor; and so by rubbing each others Sores
till they smart, they resolve presently, that the Preferree is a Common Enemy,
and as such to fall upon him: And so the Issue at last shall be this, when the
course of Accusation grows customary, that the King shall never be free of his
own Choice, nor secure of his Ministers, when he has chosen them.

Moreover, ^hen to be preferred shall be to be exposed, and shot at by all the
Darts of Envy and Danger, what Man of Wisdom or Fortune will be willing to
accept of Preferment? or be true and tight to the Kings Concern and Interest in
the Government, if he do accept it? Or will he not rather be tempted through
fear of that Accusatory Faction, to serve the Regal Interest but by halves? or
perhaps to betray his Masters Government in Church and State, (as some did in
the time of the Kings Father, when they saw him forced to leave Strafford) to
make a Friend of that Faction? For, thus Men will be too apt to do when they
cannot be sure of their Masters. So that if Kings once quit their Constancy in
this particular, nothing brings greater hazard to their own Interest of
Government, and their Persons; nor greater diminution to the Kingly Dignity and
Power, in the opinion of other Princes; while his Ministers and himself shall
remain liable to be baited, at every turn of humor, by so busy and impetuous
a Faction: as if himself were not wise enough to choose, or as if we had none
but Knaves in the Kingdom to be chosen.

Finally, It Is, and ought ever to be, an Arcanum kept, as the Jewels are, in
the Royal Cabinet, to preserve all places which are nigh the Throne, so sacred
as not to be easily invaded; for that draws a Reverence to the Throne it self;
which should be religiously fenced about, not only as the Sacrary of Royalty,
but as the Sanctuary also of other Princes; for, such are his great Men, and
high Officers of State in their places: They are as the Lions about the Throne
of Solomon, to beget a dread and sense of Majesty in all that approach to it:
and those are not Beasts for Sacrifice, nor to be offered up as such, nor to be
pulled down without very great cause of Justice require it; because the
frequency of pulling down the Fence, hardens Men; and renders them by custom so
hardy, as to make bold with the Throne it self.

This licentious Abuse of criminating the Kings Ministers, has by the same
Faction which first began it, been carried of late times to such a height, that
were a Man before reputed never so honest, yet no sooner does the King make him
one of his great Officers, but that if he sticks close to his Masters Interest
of Government, he presently becomes a public Enemy; and as such they brand him
and teaze him, and seek to tire out his Majesty with Importunities and
Addresses to be rid of him. This sort of Behavior was the reason which made
his Majesty's Grandfather and Father not so frequent in calling Parliaments;
and the Protesting Lords may do well to consider, how little reason their Son,
His present Majesty, is like to have, to become fond of New Parliaments, till
he can have some good ground to believe, that they will return to the like
temper and moderation, as they had in old time, when those ancient Laws and
Statutes for frequent calling them were made: or until the people see their
error at Elections, in suffering Men of that implacable Faction, which first
poisoned the fair stream of Parliamentary Duty, still to creep into the House,
to shelter themselves in acting their mischievous Designs, under the Covert of
Privilege of Parliament, and public good. -- So I have done with their
Lordships First Reason in the Protestation, and proceed to the Second, which is
this.

Secondly, It seems not reasonable, that any particular number of men should,
for many years, ingross so great a trust of the People, as to be their
Representatives in the House of Commons, and as good men as these Members of
the Counties and Corporporations, be so long excluded. This kind of reasoning I
never expected from the mouths of such Noble Lords. Nay, then (methinks) I see
John Lilburn putting on Robes, and uttering his old Oracles of State. What! Is
there no Smith to be found in Israel, to whet Arguments for their Lordships,
that they are fain to go down to him, and his Philistines the Levellers? for,
thus they argued nigh Thirty years ago against the then House of Commons: and
good my Lords remember, that the same Argument being but a very little altered,
served also at that time against the House of Peers. Be informed, my noble
Lords, you whose names I find in a Catalogue Printed at the end of this
Protestation; for ye cannot (I suppose) remember, because when I read your
Names, I perceive that none of you were then Sitters in the Lords House, except
one, whose name I forbear; as I do the names of all the rest, beside my good
Lord of Shaftsbury; who in those days was ubiquitarian: therefore doubtless he
could have informed your Lordships, as well as I, of what then passed in
public, if it had been to his purpose that you should have had this
information, before you were thus far transported, and your names cunningly
proclaimed in Print; which questionless was done, in hope that it may be a
means to fasten and engage you deeper.

But I say again (my Lords) be informed, and consider, that it was the general
Argument of Lillurn, and all the Levellers, that it suited not with the freedom
and Interest of the people of England, That some men should continue long in
Public Trust and Power as the Peoples Representatives, seeing the rest of the
people had as much right to govern as they, and therefore ought to have a turn
as well as they in the Government. And for such a turn also they were in the
Government of the then Army; they were for turning out all the General Officers
and Colonels; and the common soldiers were taught to demand Rule by turns; and
the clamor for it was so high, that Cromwell could by no means quiet them, till
he gave way that they should, in every Regiment, choose one private soldier to
appear for all his Fellows, to sit and consult in the General Council of
Officers. And all this was urged and extorted, by using the same Argument of an
equal Right in the Commons to come into place of Government, one as well as
another.

Nay, Further (my Lords) it may be remembered, this brave way of Arguing did not
rest here; it did not only, at that time, trouble and shake the Commons-House,
but a little after it was improved to a demolishing of your own. From a
Clamouring against Commons continuing long in Power, they proceeded to do the
like against all standing Powers whatsoever; so that of course they cast their
eyes next at the House of Peers, and the like Argument served to purpose
against them, as a Power of long continuance, without any respect at all to
their Birthright. As for the rest of their Levelling Reasons, I had rather
bury than repeat them. For, it is my great grief to live to see any Lords, to
when the Weapons of Discourse upon the Anvile of the Levellers.

But yet their Protesting Lordships go on thus:

Thirdly, The long Continuance of such as are entrusted for others, and who
have so great a power over the Purse of the Nation, must, in our humble
opinion, naturally endanger the producing of Factions and Parties, and the
carrying on of particular Interests and Designs, rather than the public Good.

This their Third Reason being the last, is also an Arrow that was formerly
shot out of the ^^velling Quiver against their Lordships. They abundantly
argued against the Commons; that long continuance of men in power and trust,
and all standing powers whatsoever, were like standing waters, they naturally
corrupt, and produce Factions and Parties for particular ends and designs, and
mind not the Public Good. I could here inject Quotations too many out of their
Published Papers, to show their Lordships, how smartly they argued also with
the same kind of Sophistry for the utter subversion of the House of Peers,
alleging, that they were but men as well as others, and subject to the same
frailties, etc. and so, being continually in power, were as likely to produce
Factions, and drive particular Interests and Ends to the prejudice of the
Public; and judged that they did so in those days, when a Party of Lords
struck in with a Presbyterian party in the Commons House, against the public
Interest and good of the Independents and Levellers; who had arrogated unto
themselves the name of The Public, and The People, and The Nation. The having
the Purse of the Nation long, as the Commons have; or a place of constant power
over the Nation, as the Lords have by Birthright, does not alter the case in
this way of Argumentation, because any men may be corrupt and factious in the
use and exercise of either. Therefore these their Lordships ('it is hoped) will
be humble in Opinion hereafter, about the matter of dissolving this House of
Commons, and calling a New One, and not fall on a sudden to Protesting, till
they see better reasons than what are borrowed from their old Levelling Enemies.

Certainly, my Lord Shaftsbury, if he had pleased, might have furnished his
fellow-Protesting Friends and himself before he Signed that Protestation, with
reasons of another strain, and those out of his own stock too; for it appears,
he has been a much more rational person; but, it was before he lost his Places
at Court; and truly, seeing a loss of so much Honor and Profit is enough to tap
any man out of Tune, and put him into passion, we ought to give allowance for
humane infirmity, and excuse his weak memory. For, his Lordship might have
remembered he was of another Opinion; and that was not long since, when he was
Lord Chancellor, in his forecited Speech to the Lords and Commons, at the
Opening of a Session of Parliament, 1672, where you had his Lordship in a Fit
of Great Devotion, offering a Sacrifice of Thanks and Praise to the Almighty,
for such a King, and such a Parliament, and for such happy times of Peace and
Plenty: which, for the Honor of his Lordship, or rather of the King and this
Parliament, shall here be repeated. The Words are these,

[After His Majesty's Conclusion of His Speech, let me conclude, nay let us all
conclude with blessing God, and the King. Let us bless God, that he has given
us such a King, to be the Repairer of our breaches, and the Restorer of our
paths to dwell in:

That in the midst of War and Misery, which rages in our Neighbor-Countries,
our Garners are full, and there is no complaining in our streets: and a man can
hardly know there is a War.

Let us bless God, that he has given this King signally the hearts of His
people, and most particularly of this Parliament, who in their affection and
Loyalty to their Prince, have exceeded all their Predecessors. A Parliam^nt,
with whom the King has many years lived with all the Caresses of a happy
Marriage. Has the King had a Concern? you have wedded it. Has His Majesty
wanted Supplies? you have readily, cheerfully, and fully provided for them; you
have relied upon the Wisdom and Conduct of His Majesty in all His Affairs; so
that you have never attempted to exceed your Bounds, or to impose upon Him;
whilst the King, on the other hand, has made your Counsels the foundations of
all His proceedings: and has been so tender of you, that He has, upon His own
Revenue and Credit, endeavored to support even Foreign Wars, that He might be
least uneasy to you, or burdensome to His people.

And let me say, That though this Marriage be according to Moses's LAW, where
the Husband can give a Bill of Divorce, put her away, and take another: yet I
CAN ASSURE YOU, it is as impossible for the King to part with this Parliament,
as it is for you to depart from that Loyalty, Affection, and Dutiful Behavior,
you have hitherto showed toward Him.

Let us bless the King for taking away all our Fears, and leaving no room for
Jealousies: for those Assurances and Promises He has made us. Let us bless God
and the King, that our Religion is safe: That the CHURCH OF ENGLAND is the Care
of our Prince: That PARLIAMENTS ARE SAFE: That our properties and liberties are
safe. What more has a good Englishman to ask, but that this King may long
Reign; and that this triple Alliance of King, Parliament, and People, may never
be DISSOLVED?]

All which being spoken of this present Parliament; may well serve for an
Answer to his Lordships Protestation, notwithstanding those Reasons therein
contained: For surely, matters cannot in so short a time be so exceedingly
altered, as to deserve this protesting, or the declaimings, in that violent
manner, (as throughout this whole Discourse we have seen) by reflecting upon
the Bishops, and against the continuance of the Parliament, that were, in his
Lordships good opinion, so sacred about five years ago. The old saying is, --
Nemo repent ^it turpissimus --; and it is a true one, that no man grows as bad
as bad may be on a sudden: and if there be any weight in what his Lordship has
said on both sides, it is more reasonable and probable for us to conclude and
understand ill of himself, rather than of the Parliament, because the Transits
of great Assemblies are not so quick: and another Proverb says, Great Bodies
move but slowly, so that their principles, purposes and designs, cannot vary
all points of the Compass, at so brisk a rate as one nimble States-man's, whose
motion is wont to be per Saltum, after the manner of Leap-Frog, from the Artick
to the Antartick in a Trice; especially if he happen to fall into foul weather
at Court, and can ride there no longer, but must make use of any wind to set
sail into some other Port. Which (we hope) will be considered by the rest of
the Lords Protesters.

And truly, their Lordships have the fairer excuse to come off, because the
thing was done in a heat, and in haste; as appears first by the printed Title
of the Protestation, which says it was on the morning that the Parliament was
Prorogued, 1675; and the printed words at the end of it are, That the Lords in
print, were all that were in the House early enough to Sign it before the
Prorogation: So that it seems his Lordship could not be at rest, till he had
given all the World to understand, why it was that he was so warm in his
Speeches upon Cross-points, which must make a Breach betwixt the Houses all
along the Session, to hinder all manner of public Business; and then, from the
non-dispatch of it to in^er, that this Parliament is not fit for it; and then
(forsooth) we are to believe what he dictates, and admit a protesting Ergo;
That there is a necessity of dissolving this, and calling a new Parliament.
For, his Lordship and the rest in print do close the Protestation with these
three Lines; That it is in their humble opinion, become altogether
unpracticable for the Two Houses, as the case stands, jointly to pursue those
great and good Ends for which they were called. That is as much as to say, it
will be so, if the case shall so stand in the opening of this approaching
Session, as it was in the ending of the last. For, some say his Lordship has
Dr. Shirley in his pocket, and can start him again at pleasure, to make the
same scuffle about privilege betwixt the Houses. But some think he will be
wiser^, because the Trick being now thus plainly understood, it will be too
ridiculous to play it over again, in an Assembly of so many noble, seeing and
knowing Men, as make up the House of Peers. Nor is it probable, that the
Commons House, filled with men of great wisdom, insight in Affairs, and
integrity, should meet together without Expedients to prevent further Contests,
and to carry on the King and Kingdoms business. Which they are the rather
obliged to do for the Honor of their House, in a double respect: First,
because if this House of Commons, which began and carried on things so
gloriously, for the Establishment of the King, and Settlement of the Kingdom,
shall be deprived of opportunity to finish what they began, What can be the
end, but to go out in a Snuff? according to the Designs of a busy Rampant
Faction, who mortally hate them for the good they have done; and whose Triumph
it would be, to transmit the memory of them to posterity with ig^ominy, and
this bitter Sarcasm: That they began to build, but could not make an end. --
Secondly, They are exceedingly concerned in point of Honor, seeing they are
represented in Print to the World, as a sort of people that may be easily played
upon, and led by the nose to do what other men please. For, in a print
published at the same time with the other prints, since the last Session, and
by the same hand, Entitled, The Debate or Arguments for Dissolving this
present Parliament, and the calling frequent New Ones: as they were delivered
in the House of Peers, November. 20th. 1675. I find, page 9. it is boasted by the
Designers, concerning the Commons House, that they have a party of Members in
that House, whom the said print calls, Many of the ablest and most worthy
Patriots among them; whose business it was to second the Protesting Lords, by
carrying this difference betwixt the Houses to the greatest height, that by
this means they might deliver the Nation from this Parliament by Dissolution,
and have a New one called. So that Here we have OPEN CONFESSION, that it was a
Design carried on by a PARTY in both Houses, to bring on, and carry on their
Fellow Members to such disputes, as might Disable them to do the Public Work;
and thence to conclude, that they ought to be dissolved. Which certainly is a
Conspiracy of such a Magnitude, that none ever exceeded it but the
Powder Treason: Especially, if we consider, what course has been taken by this
kind of Prints, spread over the Three Kingdoms, to Poison men's minds, and
render the Government Ridiculous, by exposing the Debates and Contestings of
Parliament to the Scorn and Contempt of the Vulgar, through the Artifice and
cunning of that Implacable Party, which I have so often mentioned; and whose
DESIGN is now Manifested, to be a BLOWING UP of the Parliament after another
manner.

It cannot be amiss therefore, before I dismiss this Point, to try the strength
of what they have DISCOURSED for a NEW PARLIAMENT, as it has been Printed in
the forecited Pamphlet, called, The Debate and Arguments used in the House of
Peers, etc. There are (says that Pamphlet*) Two Objections that make a great
Sound, which have really nothin^ of weight in them.

The first Objection is, That the Crown is in danger if you call a New
Parliament. This Objection they pretend to answer, by saying, there is no fear
of danger, because Men of Quality, of Estates, and of the best Understanding,
and such as will give Money will be chosen. But, I reply, this Argument has
more Malice than Reason to support it, because it reflects, as if these were
not such. The Generality of this House of Commons are known to be men of the
best Quality, and of Estates, and of the best understanding. All their Fault
is, in the Opinion of the Conspiring Party, that they too well understand them
and their Design; and what the true interest of the Crown is, and that as they
ever have been, so they still are tight and firm to it, and the Government; and
that the great interest of the Nobles, Gentry, and Commons of the Land lies in
being so. This they understand: Besides, they are men best acquainted and
expert in the management of Parliamentary Affairs, and therefore more likely
than men newly elected, to make dispatch of them, if the Projectors did not
study all ways to impede them, for other ends than the ^ase and supply of the
Crown. And therefore a New Parliament is not now to be called for these
following Reasons.

I. Because it is not for the honor of the King, to be as it were Trepanned
thus by Tricks, or worried by Clamors and Importunities, into a necessity of
calling a new Parliament, because it will, in the judgment of wise men at home,
and of Princes abroad, be no other than an imposing upon him in one main point
of his Prerogative; which is, to use His own discretion, and take His own time,
for the summoning and dissolving of Parliaments.

II. It cannot be for his safety or advantage, because if Money be wanting,
know, he must pay dear for it before the New One will give it: and, What can
they give, which may not more readily be had by the present Parliament, if the
just indignation of His Majesty, and His two Houses shall arise against the
stratagems o^ the Prime Projectors, and defeat them? I cannot forget what mine
eyes have seen in the days of His Royal Father; therefore, since years teach
wis^om; and the experience of like matters in time past, gives instruction for
the future, it cannot but be good to bring them fresh into remembrance. Let us
therefore remember how it was with King Charles the First. It was the cunning
of the same Faction, having an aching Tooth at the Bishops, and consequently a
design to alter the Government, as now they have again; which they could not
easily do without clamouring about matters of Religion; and against some Errors
and Excesses, of the Court and the King's Ministers; Therefore, as they plied
that point home, in hope to gain the people; so, in the beginning of His Reign,
they finding the King in necessity of Money to satisfy His Fathers Debts, and
for other great occasions at home and abroad; and knowing that a Parliament
must be called for Raising Money, they laid the Plot thus: First, to work upon
that necessity by high popular demands, such as must either bow the King to
comply with them, and then it would be easy for them to pursue their wild
projects of alteration in State and Church; or else it would constrain him to
break them: And that they feared not, knowing it could not be long before he
would have occasion to call a Second Parliament; which they, by the like
demands, would bring to nothing as easily as before, unless the King would
consent to them: which they presumed he would never do. And it came to pass, as
they had before contrived; that the King was frustrated of the hopes he had of
three or four Parliaments, by sending them away one after another, not getting
one penny: but he being tired out, and having perceived that they entered upon
such debates, and made such demands, as entrenched upon the Interest of His
Crown, and that a condescension to them, would have brought both him and it
into contempt; he was constrained to shift without Parliaments, to his great
sorrow; and it proved to be the great occasion of the late War, enough to show
what it is for a King in want of Money, in these days, to call a New
Parliament, of whose kindness he has had no experience; especially when he
has already a Parliament in being, most dutiful, wise, and able to do his and
his Kingdoms business, if some few persons would please to study peace, and
leave off contention. The truth of the forementioned Plot of the Commons in
those days, I shall, by and by, more particularly demonstrate.

In the mean while, you may remember, I told you, this sort of Game they began
in the latter end of the Reign of King James; and now you shall see how they
played it. Before that time the Commons never meddled at so high a rate; but in
the Nineteenth year of that King, when he called a Parliament about the
assistance of the Prince Palatine, his Majesty was in great want of Money to
relieve the Palatinate; and great hopes were given him of a Supply. What was
the Issue of this necessity of calling it? The King had a mind to Adjourn the
Parliament but for a little season, and for some Reasons which he foresaw
required it; whereupon the Faction presently interposed, and drew the rest of
their Fellow Members to Petition him against Adjournment: insomuch that the
wise King, being Jealous of his Prerogative, and not liking that the Commons
should so much as meddle with it, though in a way but Petitionary, he very much
resented it, and told a Committee which they sent to him about it, That he took
it very ill the Commons should dispute his Reasons of Adjournment, all Power
being in him alone to Call, Adjourn, and Dissolve Parliaments. This made the
Faction so bold and Mutinous in discourse every where, that His Majesty was
fain to put forth a Proclamation against talking of State Affairs with such
inordinate liberty.

The time of the Parliaments Adjournment being expired, they came together
again; and what then? The Palatine Cause requiring Supply more than before; and
the Lord Treasurer having in a Speech laid open the Kings Wants, and how empty
his Coffers were, the Faction thought they should now in his Necessity be able
to work him like Wax; therefore in stead of Money, they immediately salute him
with a Catalogue of his Faults, the growing Mischiefs of his Government, and
dictate unto him Remedies; and they called it A Petition and Remonstrance. The
King then by Letter to the Speaker, sharply complains of this Indignity,
imputes it not to the House it self, but to the boldness of some fiery and
popular Spirits in the House of Commons, which were the Predecessors of our
present Faction; whom he brands with Breach of his Prerogative Royal, by
debating publicly Matters which were above them. Nevertheless, having him at a
pinch for Money, they grew the bolder; and hereupon drew up another Petition,
and sent it to back their former Remonstrance. To which his Majesty gave a
smart Answer, taxing the Faction, and desiring the Commons henceforth not to
give car to those Tribunitial Orators among them; advising them also to keep
within their Bounds; and that the way to preserve their Privileges, was not to
pare his Prerogative, and pull the Flowers of the Crown. -- Then to show it was
indeed a Fiery Faction, they blew the Flame yet higher* and by Speech-making
got the Major Vote to come to a Protestation, that they ought to debate high
Matters, and it was their Privilege, etc. But this was done by the Faction, by
surprise, the Third part of the House not present. This so moved the King, that
to preserve his Prerogative, he was forced to send for the Clerk of the House
of Commons, to bring his Journal Book to Whitehall, and produce it in the Pricy
Council, where his Majesty thought fit, that the Protestation should be razed
out of all Memorials, and utterly to be annihilated, both in respect of the
manner by which it was gained, and of the Matter therein contained: and he did
in full Council, and in the presence of the Judges, declare it void and of none
effect, because it was Penned in such general and ambiguous words, as might
serve for future Times, to invade most of the Rights and Prerogatives annexed
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: For, his Majesty did not deny, but that
the House might Treat and Debate De Arduis Regni, which words (said the King)
were cunningly mentioned in that Protestation: but they ought to have
remembered also the word Quibusdam, which restrains the generality of the
other words, Arduous Affairs of the Kingdom, to such particular Cases as his
Majesty pleases to consult with them upon. Therefore the King did further,
Mann propria, take the said Protestation out of the Journal Book of the
Cemmons, and made an Act of Council thereupon. And in six days after, he was
necessitated to Dissolve them, having got not one Penny of Money for his Extreme
Occasions. For it was the Arcanum of the Faction even in those days, to make
High Demands, and raise Quarrels about Privileges, and other Matters
intrenching upon the Rights of the Crown; that as often as they got the
Parliament House over their Heads, they took the same Method of working upon
want of Money, to brave the King; and by not supplying him, to held his N^s^ to
the Grindstone. They clamoured ever for Parliaments, lured the King in wit^
Hopes of Money to call them, and then in stead of Money they fell to disputing
with him; so that the Parliaments in the latter end of King James's Reign, were
of no use to him, except the last, a little before he died: For, in his last
appearance with them he complained, how the Faction had made him Break the
Necks of Three Parliaments together: by which he meant the Three Preceding
Parliaments.

King James being gone, now let us see more at large how they used his Son King
Charles, in his first Parliament Ann^ 1625. which, by reason of the Plague at
London, was Adjourned to Oxford. The Supplies for carrying on the Palatine
Cause had been pressed by the Lord Keeper before at westminster; and now at
Oxford, the Kings Secretaries of State Report to both Houses the Kings great
Occasions for Money, and the great Debts left upon him by his Father. Thereupon
the Faction, having a Young King to deal with, and in Necessity for Money,
began to Rant more than ever with High Debates; reflecting upon his Ministers
as Evil Counselors, and upon himself; upbraiding him, that his Necessities
arose from Improvidence; and a world of such like stuff they ^witted him with,
and cried out also on Popery, as if it had been just coming in: but in the mean
time they neglected the Palatine Cause, (the supplying whereof ought to have
been speedy) and afterward Scandalized the King and his Ministers, in having
the blune of it upon them. Next, they sell upon High Demands from the King
before they would think of a Penny: The same (...) as before in King James's
days. So the King perceiving they were resolved against Supplies, unless they
might have their will upon himself, and tear his Ministers and some of his
Counselors in pieces, He, after three Months sitting, was forced to Dissolve
them.

About five Months after that Dissolution, his Majesty's great Necessities
urged him to the calling of a Second Parliament: which was done, and no sooner
(...), but the Faction resumed the very same Courses again; only in one
particular they altered: from calumniating the Kings Ministers in general, they
now began to fall (in stead of Money) upon the Duke of Be^^kingham; though the
King in his Speech willed them rather to remember, it was not long since in his
Fathers time, that They did so much (...) an^ Re^p^^him, that all the Honor
^^ferred on him w^^s too little. Many hot and high Debates passed;
nevertheless, in despite of the Faction, the Loyal part of the Commons made a
shift to get a Vote for Three Subsidies, and Three Fifteens for the King: but
it came to nothing; for though the King after wards wrote a Letter to them, and
otherwise also importuned them to bring him that Bill of Subsidy to pass,
telling them he should look upon Longer delay as a denial; yet the Faction so
disturbed the House with (...) and Debates, that nothing was done; the King got
not a E^^thing, and was constrained, after Four Months sitting, to Dissolve
them a Second time.

The next year after, a Third Parliament was called; and though the (...) in it
labored hard in their wonted way, yet for mere shame at length a Subsidy was
Voted, and passed by the Industry of the Loyal Party: But on the other hand,
the Faction stomaching the Matter, contrived how to show their Malice another
way, and drove on a Remonstrance to take away Tonnage and Poundage, one of the
chiefest Maintenances of the Crown: Which to prevent, the King was fain to go
Himself in Person to Prorogue them for Four Months time; and that being ^igh
expired, it was by Proclamation Prorogued for Three Months more; after which
being Re-assembled, the Faction flew out into high Fits about Priests and
Popery, and Grievances; and were so tumultuary, that the Speaker was leaving
the Chair, but that they held him in by force, till they had passed Resolves
against payment of the Kings Tonnage and Po^ndage: And so what Money they had
given with one hand, they took away with another. So that nothing being likely
but Mischief to the Crown by longer Si^ting, (...) King was glad to Dissolve
them by Proclamation afterward, and to acquaint the World with their
Behavior, by putting forth a Declaration of the Causes of their Diss^^^ion.

Thereupon his Majesty was neces^itated to have recourse unto extraordinary
ways for Supply, to carry on the Government, without Parliaments, for almost
Twelve Years after; for by the violent and unreasonable proceedings of that
desperate Faction, which, at every Election, crept in among them, they were
reduced into a state, not only unpracticable and useless, but dangerous to the
Crown.

During this Twelve years interval, the Faction now lay at lurch in City and
Country, ^retting and corroding in the bowels of the Government; and
collecting matter of new accusations against the King and his Ministers, out of
those extraordinary courses, which the necess^ty they had forced on them
compelled them to take, for upholding the Government; and which their Factions
providence re^erved in mind, on purpose to make use of, whenever time should
bring a necessity upon the King to call another Parliament. -- It was so at
length, that they contrived this necessity; for they truck'd with the Scots,
and by corresponding there, brought them into England in the Year 1639. which
put the King to a great charge to raise an Army to oppose them: But the matter
being composed, a Pacification was agreed on; the Scots were to be paid a sum
of Money, and Money the King must provide for them. So necessity at last made
him call that fatal Parliament, which began November. 3. 1641. Which being met,
the Faction began now to work on his Majesty to purpose; told him, no Money was
to be had but by borrowing, and men would not credit them, unless they could be
sure the Parliament might fit long enough to repay it. So by this means, the
King being desirous to rid away the Scots out of the Kingdom, was wrought upon,
for raising the Money, to pass that prodigious Act, which enabled that
Parliament to fit at Westminster as long as they pleased, and so to do what
they li^t. Then (you know) how they used the King afterward for his kindness;
what strange things they did, and to what Conclusion at length they came. From
whence arises this sharp Instruction for all succeeding Kings, That while this
Faction reigns upon the face of the Earth, they takeheed of relying upon them,
in a time of the Crown's necessity; and of giving them opportunity, by calling
a new Parliament, in hope of getting Money; forasmuch as woeful experience has
sh^wn us, they, at such a time, make it their business to ask, not to give; and
never to leave asking, till they come to be disposers both of the King and
Kingdom. This is it they would now be at, and have fixed their Party for it all
over the Nation, to scuffle hard at new Elections. So I suppose I have
sufficiently cleared my Second Reason, by ample Experiments; that it cannot be
for the King's advantage or safety, in such a time as the present, to part with
this Parliament, and call a new; unless it were possible that a Leopard should
change his spots, or a Blackmore his skin; or that this Mercurial Faction,
which is now, by its Leaders and Drivers, made more mad than ever for an
opportunity, should change its nature, and become tame on a sudden; and be
fixed in a greater honesty and kindness to this King, than they were to his
Grandfather and Father; or, in truth, to the established Government and
Interest of the Crown.

-- Credat Judaeus Apella, Non ego -- 3. A Third Reason arises from the
natural Temper and Constitution of the Party, in respect of the Government. He
understands little that sees not Presbytery to be the bottom of all; that
Bottom wherein we have seen embarquing many years unpreferred Clergymen,
broken Factions, cashiered Courtiers, guilty Officers, by pocritical Citizens,
mistaken Zealots of both Sexes, old Sinners, but young Saints, and their
pedling Levites; whose work it is, from house to house, to blow the Bellows
round the Kingdom: All which use to employ their Talents to draw in many of the
honest-hearted Gentry, though not into the same opinion with them in Religious
matters, yet to side and vote with them in their pretenses of redressing
public Grievances, reformation of Abuses, removing, or doing justice upon evil
Counselors; and the like: And with these charms they have been wont to hold
many publick-spirited Countrey-Gentleman fast to their side, till they have
humbled the King, the Court, and all the Fast-friends of the Government, and
brought all to their bow; they give them the slip into further proceedings,
they pull off their Visors, show their Faces, and sly higher and higher, till
they top all that is above, and tumble it down: as they did of old often in
Scotland, and of late in England.

To that Malign Ulcer of Presbytery it is, that most of the ill humors of the
Kingdom flow; because the Preshyterian is for some National Government of the
Church, though in such a way as is utterly inconfident with the Monarchy. The
reason of it is plain; because it derives no Power from the King, but pretends
only from the King of Kings, Christ; yet would have a Secular Influence, to
Govern the Kingdom in their own Spiritual way, which is by a Parity of
Presbyters; a Power purely Aristocratical, directly contradistinct to the form
of Monarchy, to which the single Bishop only is agreeable, because he arrogates
not any influence in Government over the people, but what he derives from the
King. Now then, so it is, that seeing some National Church Government is that
which must be, and the Episcopal is that which is the Kings best hold, and most
firm to him; therefore the (...) and Leaders of present Quarrels, being ^aln
from all their interests in Court, common Cunning tells them, they must strike
in with the men of the other Form, to build new Fortunes upon the ruin of the
Court, and the Bishops, if they mean to be great, and Govern; which cannot be
more readily done, than by becoming pretended Reformers of the old Government
in the Church, and by introducing a Church-Aris^ocracy into the room of it:
for, if one be not, the other must be: and if so be they slip into the head of
it, they will never be without such a Conscience, as will engage them to
maintain it, being men of a versatile principle: So that when I view the
Printed Lists of them, methinks I already see Lords States, or at least Twenty
four Conser^ators that would be, assisted by the Spiritual Aristocracy of a
General Assembly; for, they reckon all is done, if they can but come to tug for
it in another Parliament.

This brings us to take notice of a Second Objection, against their design of
breaking off the Parliament, which the projecting Polititia^s seem to flight,
and it is this, That the Church and this Parliament will fall together. 'Twere
but vain to write much more, to show the grand probability of it, and of the
debasement, or ruin, of this glorious Monarchy, if the Faction can finish what
they have projected. But why is it that they uttered and printed lately so many
severe Re^lections upon his Majesty and his Government? Why has this LETTER,
upon which I have here written these ANIMADVERSIONS, made it its main scope, to
cast all the Odium of the evils therein pretended, upon the Bishops? Why have
diverse Transactions been solely imputed to them, and they alone been
represented blameworthy, if there had been any cause of blame in things, which
many times had been first moved by the Temporal Lords, if the design were not
to exasperate men's minds principally against Bishops? Why are they so ^^^en
slandered, as if they drove an Interest, as Bishops, prejudicial to the Rights
and Interest of the people? What mean all these suggestions, if they meant not
to prepare them for ruin by another Parliament, seeing they can never do it
while this is in being? And why so great a zeal against them among the prime
drivers of the Faction, who can own nothing of Religion or Reformation, save
what they take up for cra^ty ends, but because they well know there is no way
to invade the Throne, but by first removing Bishops? which seeing this
Parliament, their defenders, will never suffer; that is the reason why some
have been so vehement in debates to imbroil the Houses, to make it impossible
for them to do any thing more for the Public; and so by taking away their
reputation, they may not be able to defend themselves against the plotted
outcries of the People, to make the Church and this Parliament fall, and sink
under the fury of the Faction both together?

Thus having taken a ^urvey of all the other holds of Reason, wherein they
fortify themselves, and infest the Government by frequent ^allies forth in
print; and having reduced them, and planted better Reasons in their stead, it is
time to return to the m^in Fort which I left; I mean the LETTER; which will now
be the more easily and quickly de^eated.

LETTER.
THe next Session of Parliament, which was January 7. following, many excellen^
Vo^es were in hand in order to a Bill. Among the rest, one was, That the
Princes of the Blood Royal should all marry Protestants.

ANIMADVERSION.
It Is rather to be supposed the Lords are here slandered. It can hardly be, that
they should take up a business which was damned by King James long ago; when
the Factions Party in the then House of Commons clamoured against the Prince's
Match with Spain, and made Addresses to the King about it, who in much wrath
told them, They should meddle with their own business, this being above them,
etc.

This point also the Faction was so bold to insist on, among the rest of their
high Demands made to his Son in the Nineteen Propositions 1642. to which his
Majesty answered, That to debar him of the free Marriage of his Children, would
be to place him in a condition lower than the meanest of his Subjects. This
debarring of Princes from marrying where they please, would be to hinder them
from making those great Advantages which many times they might get thereby, for
the general Good of the Kingdom. Therefore when it was pressed on, at the
second Reading of the Bill, the Vote went in the Negative.

LETTER.
IT notes the Duke of Lauderdale 's being a Patron of the Church, and that his
Coach was filled with Bishops; and the Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer 's
are of a just Size to the same Affair.

ANIMADVERSION.
TWo Faults, it seems, these two Lords have besides their being of a just Size
to the true Interest of the Government; that is to say, Two Good Places; crime
enough in this Age for Ministers of State; for which, while one man lives, they
are sure never to he forgiven. I will not swear my Lord of Shaftsbury had a
hand in this LETTER; but as weak a man as I am, may be apt to imagine so,
because he takes such care those two Noble Lords should not be forgotten; nor
the Duke of Lauderdale, because he keeps all quiet in Scotland; so that there
is no possibility of beginning again the Ruin of our English Bishops by the
way of Scotland; nor of getting Friends into a Scotch Parliament, to second the
fine Speeches made here in England.

LETTER.
NOw comes the memorable Session of April 13. 1675. than which never any came
with more expectation of the Court, or dread and apprehension of the People.

ANIMADVERSION.
THey were much beholden then to his Lordship, to remove their Fears, by taking
a course to convert the Houses into Cock-pits, to make sport for the Nation.
The Court indeed were so foolish as to expect better things; but this must be
imputed to the want of his Lordships Wisdom among them. But what was the
occasion that his Lordship laid hold on thus to transform them? His
Pocket-Business of Shirley did not do all the mischief: but there was another,
called The Bill of Test.

LETTER.
THis Bill of Test was brought into the House of Lords by the Earl of Lindsey
Lord High Chamberlain, a Person of great Quality, but in this imposed upon.

ANIMADVERSION.
BUt others are of opinion his Lordship did it, as an Act of high Loyalty,
answerable to that most Noble Character which his Family justly bears in the
opinion of his Majesty and the whole World; who can never forget either them,
or the memory of that great Man the Father of them, (...) Earl of Lindsey; who,
in the first famous Battle of Edgehill, being Lord General of his Majesty's
Army, most valiantly spilt his Blood in that Service, in hope immediately to
have restored the Royal Family, and to have stopped that Issue of Blood, which
^an so many years after about the Kingdom. Therefore it was no wonder that this
Noble Lord, being his Grandson, was the Man that brought in a ^ill of T^st; He
and all his being a Family that can endure a Test, in this, and all other
Concerns of the King, the Church, and ^ the Nation.

LETTER.
IT was then Read the first time without much opposition. But at the second
Reading, the Lord Keeper, (now Lord Chancellor) and some other Lords, made
Elaborate Speeches, the Keeper calling it A moderate Security to the Church and
Crown, and that no Honest Man could refuse it; and whoever should, would give
great suspicion of dangerous and Anti-Monarchical Principles. And they showed
what dangerous Times we are in, all Men not having laid aside the Principles of
Rebellion.

ANIMADVERSION.
CErtainly, it was well observed by those Lords: and therefore I suppose it was
high time to take Pen in hand, to manifest the Truth, that the late Discourses
and practices of some men, during several past Sessions of Parliament, are no
other but the same very courses that were practiced with the like heat and
violence, and with the same method against the King, the Church, and the whole
State, both in and out of Parliament, as appears through the whole Current of
these Animadversions: in which I had not been so large, but that it was most
necessary to present to view, the new Transactors of the Faction, now dressed,
and acting in the habit, principles and posture of the old Masters of the late
Rebellion; which might lie for ever buried in the Act of Obli^ion, if these men
did not rake all up again into fresh remembrance, whether we will or no. God
forgive them.

Was it not then wisely and nobly done of my Lord Ch^ncellor, and the rest of
those n^ble Lords, to think of some way of Security against such Designs as we
see on foot?

LETTER.
BUt the Earl of Shaftsbury, and some other Countrey-Lords, (the good Earl of
Shafts: a man that in all the variety of Changes of this last Age, was never
known to be bought, or s^ighted out of his public principles)

[Risum teneatis amici?]

He at large opened the ill Designs and Consequents of the Bill, and pressed it
might be laid aside.

ANIMADVERSION.
THat Clause of his Lordships great Constancy and ^idelity, you have had enough
of before, so that you see his Lordships Friend the Letter-Man, had a large
stock of Confidence to pen it; and I am apt to believe Somebody never blushed
at the reading it. Nor do I think a common Whore when she brags her self as
honest as any of her Neighbors, was ever out of countenance. It is at this
time a great question among his Friends in the City, Whether they shall take
Security upon his Lordships Honor, that he will be as hot against the Test
this time twelve-moneth: For Silk, or Cloth, or St^ffs, or the like, they are
ready enough to give him Credit; but if ye talk of State-Commodities, they
shrink the shoulder, and say nothing. It Is therefore wisely done of him, to
talk against giving Security for such matters. -- But it will next be requisite
to see what Form of Security it is, against which there ^as raised so loud a
Clamor: it is this following, as says the LETTER.

I A. B. do declare, That it is not lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take up Arms against the King: And that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of
taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against th^se that are
Commissioned by him in pursuance of such Commission. And I do swear, That I
will not at any time endeavor an Alteration of the Government either in Church
or State.

LETTER.
THe Earl of Shaftsbury sp^ke with such convincing reason, that all the Lords
that were at liberty from Court-E^gagements, r^s^lved to oppose it to the
^ttermost; and the debate lasted five several days, before the Bill was
committed.

ANIMADVERSION.
THis certainly is a very severe Reflection upon those Noble Lords, who in this
day understood the true Interest of Peerage to be, to Adhere close and firm to
the Crown. And it is known the greatest part of them had no Engagement to the
Court, but what was by Religion, the Law, their Allegiance, their Interest, and
Sense of Honor; and this is the Court-Engagement, not only of all Lords, but
of every Loyal Subject. In the other sort of Court-Engagements his Lordship was
not long since so much concerned, that when he came to lose them, no Obligation
whatsoever could hold him to ^hitehall any longer. No Penny no Pater Noster. The
Devil never wondered at Job's great Devotion toward the Court of Heaven, as
long as God held him in Pension: nor did I at his Lordships, while the King
held him in Offices. A multitude followed Christ for the lo^ves: but far be it
from us, to reckon so Noble a Peer as his Lordship among the Multitude, though
we are told here, that he carried on the Debate for five days together before
it was committed to a Committee of the whole House. So that by such a behavior
one would think he had never had any Court-Engagement whatsoever. For at
length, it seems, the Debate ended in a Protestation made by him, and 23 other
Lords, against that Oath, whose Names his Lordships Letter-Man s^ts down in a
List, Printed there no doubt on purpose to engage them to such new Resolutions,
for which he may have further occasion to use them. But knowing they are Noble
Lords; and to the end that space may be left them for Second Thoughts, and
because of the Honor I bear them and their Families, I forbear to Re-print
them. For upon a second Reading, it is past my Understanding how it is possible
any man can, from the Master of that Oath, have occasion to make many words of
Exception, and Outcry; or where the harm is, to take an Oath to maintain my
Loyalty, if I have right and good Intentions, though perhaps it were not
customary for me, or men of my quality and condition so to do, especially in
such a time as this, wherein so many Men's Hearts and Tongues have been
faltering in those Respects, and the Reverence which they owe toward the King
and His Government. Nor can I conceive, there being no other intent in those
Noble Lords who were for the taking of the Oath, but to give the Crown a
Security in a dangerous time, how it can be censured An Infringement of the
Freedom and Privileges of Peerage; when as it is clear, that if the Crown be
unsecure, the danger is more to the Peers than to any other part of the People?
For when the Popular Storm shall fall, if Monarchy fail, then farewell to
Liberties, Privileges, Peerage and all. Nor let any part of the Lords slatter
themselves that they shall fare better than others; or that if a Rebellion
should begin again (which God forbid) it would be possible for them to hold any
share in Authority, more than those Lords did who Sat and Acted against His
Majesty after he was driven away by Tumults from westminster; they may remember
themselves also were at length not only driven away by Tumults, but by
Tumultuary Proceedings, the whole Order of Nobility and Monarchy it self were
ut^erl^ extirpated. what has been (says Solomon) may be, and there is n^thing
new under the Sun. A sharp Precedent it is, sufficient to instruct you and your
Posterity to judge, that no Security can be given too much to the Crown in a
tottering time, when Popular Clouds and Heats do gather and melt in the Sky,
and when there is (as I have made appear) a visible Storm read* to fall, first
^^ on the Court and the Bishops, if some men may have their wills; then you
know what ensues to the Government, and all the rest of the Kingdom.

What a shame then would it be to me, to trifle away time much longer, by
insisting upon that unsavory LETTER, which so industriously takes care to set
f^rth the Good Parts, and other Qualities of the Earl of Shaftsbury, that one
would think it had been written on purpose?

What need we trouble our selves, how his Lordship and his Partners Signed the
next day a Second Protestation, and th^n a Third the day after that? I could
never tell before what Religion my Lord was of: Sure, he is now a very notable
Prote^tant. What need we tell that he got the other Lords, his Friends, to set
their Names to the last as well as the two former Protestations? His Lordship
took care to dip them in the In^-pot; he will have no (...); over sho^s o^^r
boo^s too; then they are seasoned, and can be no st^rters.

To what purpose should I repeat what this LETTER tells, how some Lords spun
out such DIVI^ITY about State-Oathes, that one would even swear they had been
furnished by their own new Chaplains? or how one lord argued, That no State
(...) s^curity by Oaths? I think so too among s^^e sorts of Chri^^ians: but I
remember, among the Heathens an Oath did signify Somewhat; and that of old it
was thought Wisdom, and good Policy by all the World, By Oaths to oblige men
unto Obedience and Loyal^y. We are assured, the F^ther of the Faithful,
Abraham, did so in his Kingdom, he being reckoned in those days a mighty
Prince: And it was to oblige his servant to secure the Succession of his
Principality, by such an Alliance as himself had appointed, Genesis 24. 3. and
^ Verses. I will (said he) make th^e swear unto me by the Lord, the God of
Heav^n, and the God of the Earth, etc. It follows, And h^s Serva^t put his hand
under the (...) of Abraham, and swear to hi^ concerning that matter. In another
place also we find King (...) making (...) to Swear, not to deal falsely with
him and his Pos^erity. And (says the Text) Abraham said, I will Swear. Abraham
was then within the Kingdom of (...), and had protection from him, therefore
took an Oath of Fidel^^y to him. Both which Oaths had certainly never passed
had not Abraham thought it lawful for him, both to exact, and to give an Oath
of Fealty. Which is no more than what is contained in that Oath of the Test;
about which the Protest^^s made so great a Bustle, that the Debates (as this
LETTER says) took up (...) debate together. And in the foregoing part of th^se
(...), you may remember I noted, that in the printed Arguments of their
Lordships, it was confe^^ed, ((...) Conscience about an Oath soever was
pr^t^nded) (...) part of the public (...)* and that ther^upon might follow a
fair occasion to make an Outcry, to be rid of this Parliament.

That Oath of Test differs but little from the Oath of Allegiance; and it is
shrewdly to be suspected, that he who contends against this, would refuse
likewise the other Oath, if it were tendered u^^^ him again. Nor can I see why
he should scruple the one more than the other, unl^^^ it be for the sake of
this one good Clause in it, that he was by the Test to have sworn, That he
ab^ors that Traitorous Position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against
his Person: a Doctrinal distinction used (as I told you) in the beginning of
the late Wars; a mere device to pull scruples out of men's Consciences, that
they might fool themselves into an opinion, that they fought for the King, as
well as the Parliament, though they shot their Bullets against his Presence and
Person: so that in case they had shot him dead, they were still to understand
it was no hurt to his Authority. Thus the Pope heretofore, and his party, when
by sentence they Excommunicated Kings, and Deposed them as Heretics, and
employed Villains to assassmate them, steeled their Consciences, for the doing
of the fatal deed, with a like distinction, That they killed the Heretic, not
the King. Which comes all to one end with our new Jesuitical Position, That you
may in your minds separate a Kings Authority from a Kings Person; then use it
to take Arms against him; which if he resists, you are to conceive he resists
the Kingly Authority; by consequence becomes an Enemy or Rebel: and so if in
the resistance you kill him, you kill the Rebel, not the King. But this is not
the only point of subtilty wherein our fine Spinners of Theology and Policy do
agree with the Jesuits. Was it not then (think ye) high time for those Noble
Lords to promote that Oath of Test, and insert in it that most necessary Clause
of ab^orring so damnable a Doctrine? For, whosoever he be that refuses to
declare his abhorrency of it, and persuades men publicly to the like refusal,
does as good as give an open alarm to the State, and threaten Rebellion; while
he prepares and draws a party into the same persuasion, and opens unto them so
ready a way to it. So that from a sort of people so instructed, I easily grant,
there can ^e no security by Oaths, unto any State whatsoever; as some of the
Protesters did affirm.

But the LETTER proceeds further about Oaths, and tells ^s Christ himself has
forbidden s^^h Oaths; and that Groti^s, in his Book de Jure Belli and Pa^is,
seems to make it plain from Matthew. 5. 34, 37. Swear not at all, etc. Lord! what
Absurdities will not men say and do, when they are out of humor! I showed
before how shrewdly their Protesting Lordships were put to it in point of
State, to borrow Arguments from the L^v^llers; but now for Divinity about
Oaths, they are fain to borrow of the Quakers, and would fain make Gr^ti^s a
Quaker too: but yet they con^ess he does but seem to make plain the Doctrine;
therefore, since it is no^ worth the while, nor have I time, to show them at
large their mistakes of the Authors meaning, I affirm what is plainly the sense
of those Texts. -- The Jews had among them an ill custom of mingling Oaths with
their ordinary Communi^^tion, such as these; By Heaven; By the ^arth; By
Jerusalem; and By my Head. These are nothing of kin to State-Oaths, or Oaths
before a Magistrate; but the prohibition intended there by Christ is against
idle and pr^^ane Oaths in common Conversation; as appears by these closing
words, (...) let ^our Communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay: For, whatsoever is
more tha^ th^se, (...) of ^^il. Our S^viou^ restringeth manifestly the sense
and scope of his words to men's evil Communication, and the stress of his
prohibition is laid upon common Oaths in discourse, (as is obvious to any man
well in his senses) and it cannot ^e wrest^d against Oaths of any other kind,
without the torture of an (...). And yet it must be understood of St^t^-Oaths
when his little Lordship will have it so, and has a mind to lead about, and
(...) or doze a company of his (...) Believers. But it wa^ boldly ventured, to
preach such stuff upon those Texts as he did, in the very Temple of wisdom, I
mean, that Sacred Assembly of the House of Peers, where his Majesty is supposed
to be always present.

Nevertheless, we are told by the Letter, that in the same House they had every
day, from his Lordship and his friends, one Sermon or other as good as that;
not upon Points of Divinity, but upon Niceties, and Quillets, and Quibbles, and
fine-spun Cobwebs of Policy; telling the World how to bound Monarchy, and
shackle Kings with fear of Humane Resistance; and not leave them only to the
f^^^ of God to restrain them. Thus the Cor^ of Kings is measured by his
Lordships little B^^el; He ^^ses as ^e us^s; implies the Fear of God to be of
little force to govern Kings and Statesmen; and therefore concludes, that Never
any Country, free like ours, suffered any Standing Guards to be about their
Prince. The Guards (it seems) are great Blocks in the way of the Faction, that
the design cannot march on so f^st as they would have it. His Lordship has the
wisdom of the ^olves in Aesop's Fables, and would give us such Advice, as if he
took us all to be but Sheep, silly enough, to consent, that the King should
part with His Keepers; and then the Faction knows how to HANDLE HIM without
Mittens. It was the fear of Faction and New Sedition, that first set up these
Guards; and then both Parliament and People rejoiced in them, as most needful
for the safety of their Prince and his Government. But now, when FACTION is at
the HEIGHT, and BRAVES the KING to HIS FACE in HIS HIGHEST COURT, in a MORE
AUDACIOUS MANNER than at first THEY did HIS FATHER, it is HIS LORDSHIPS OPINION
the Guards should be taken off: and then, What shall hinder the Sheep from
being brought to Slaughter?

The LETTER tells also, what other strange Instances were Preached in the same
House, and selected out of the times of some weak Princes, to show, that
sometimes it can be no Traitorous Position, to affirm, That Subjects may take
Arms against persons Commissioned by the King, though the King be among them in
Person. What is this, but to argue from particular Cases of extraordinary
Contingency, to Debauch men from Duties of ordinary Practice; contrary to all
Logic and Rule of Argumentation? and from thence also to conclude, it is an
Invasion of the Subjects Liberty, to impose upon them an Oath, to Swear for the
Security and satisfaction of the King in a time of Public danger, and the
visible Approches of Rebellion?

It tells us also, how the Earl of Shaftsbury went on next, to find fault with
that Clause of the Oath of Test, which obliges not to make any Alteration in
the Church, or State. It seems, not only his Lordship, but some others also
were touched to the Quick by it; and, it was a sign of some Conscience in men,
to startle at an Oath to be taken against Alteration, when nothing but
Alteration is intended, with an irreparable diminution of the Government both
in Church and State; as has been manifested throughout this Discourse already.
-- First, for the Church, Who can judge otherwise, when as the LETTER gives
next an Account, how the Earl of Shaftsbury in a Speech treated the Church?
some think he did it spightfully, and that he was too Comically bold in
reflecting upon the 39 Articles, the Liturgy, the Catechism, the Homilies, and
the Canons. All which were (as the LETTER says) handled at large by his
Lordship; and, To what end was it, if not to make way for an Alteration in the
Church, and all her Concerns, from the present Establishment? His Lordship well
knows it is a little too dangerous for any man, to Open his MOUTH yet a while
against the King and the State: That was not ventured on at first, by the BOLD
FELLOWS of 41. That comes of Course, after the Faction has been slusht with
baiting of Bishops. The Alteration of them is designed not too fierce at first;
but, they will begin, as their Old TUTORS did formerly, by steps. They of old
did declare at first, That THEY had No intent to let loose the Golden Reins of
Discipline in the Church; yet, in a turn or two of the year, they were so
extravagant as to destroy it, and introduce another; and then Hell brake loose
aginst the State as well as the Church. There is so strict a Connection and
Dependence betwixt them, that if you part with the one, the other lies open to
the next Assault, and you shall part with it also. Or if the least diminution
befall the Epis^opal Dis^ipline and Government, so as but t^ qualify the
Bishops Dignity, with an intermixture of Presbyters subordinate, which (I hear)
is the first part of the Design; so much of an allay will, by necessary
consequence, be given to the Crown, Kingly Power and Interest. For, a Single
Person Governing a Diocese, is, 1. More answerable in its Form to a Monarch:
and he knows nothing, that knows not what a mighty Influence mere Form has
upon the very Minds of men, and the Affairs of the World. 2. The greater the
Power and Dignity of the Bishop is, the more able he will be, upon all
Occasions, to Assist the Crown. 3. He must also be the more ready; because,
when single, he will not be impeded by a Clog of Advices and Importunities of
the cross-grained Brethren; who, by the Charm of well-acted Sanctimony, which
ever gains upon the Ignorant Vulgar, will always be stealing away the Hearts of
the People from him; and consequently from the King; because they will ever
reckon themselves more obliged to follow Popular Patrons, who will always be
concerned to favor them more than the Bishop, as Instruments more likely to
serve Popular Ends. For these Reasons, it will be the Crowns perpetual
Interest, to maintain the Episcopal Power entire and unmixt. Give the Presbyter
but an Inch, and he will soon take an Ell. The natural Genius of the Faction
is, in Activity beyond the Jes^ites, restless and proud as Lucifer, and in
hypocrisy as complete and zealous as a Pharisee. Who ever reads the Histories
of Nations, where they have had any thing to do, will find this Character is
true. And for Fidelity to Kings, I remember King James in his Basilicon Doron:
Believe me, (says he) who have tried them; that you shall find more Faith
among Highland Thieves and Robbers, then in this Faction. It Is a true Serpent;
for if he can but get in his Head among the Bishops, he will soon wind in his
whole Body into the best share of Ecclesiastical Authority; and as much as the
Bishops lose is lost from the King, whenever the Presbyters and their Patrons
shall please to join Resolutions to dispute him. There is one in the World
understands this so well, that he thinks it worth his while to spend whole Days
and half Nights in Parliamentary Disputation against this Oath; that so a Door
may be kept open for some Alteration. And if ever it comes, (which God forbid)
it may be ghessed what the Crown is like to get, whenas the 29. Page of the
LETTER says, [The Lords against the Bill of Test were in no ways satisfied,
but plainly spoke out, That Men had been, might, and were likely to be, in
either House, too much for the King, as they called it.] Which certainly was an
odd saying to come out of the mouth of a Lord: therefore I spare his Name.

But the LETTER is so crafty as to take another course; for to make sure of
their Lordships to the Faction, it tells what this, and that, and the other Lord
said, and how Wisely, and Learnedly, and Gallantly, and Wittily every Lord of
that Humor acquitted himself, and sets down every one of their Names to the
Account^ Though it be a questionable Point, whether a Twelve-moneth hence any
one Lord will think himself obliged for the Courtesy.

So I have done with that LETTER, and leave the World to judge, what he
deserves who wrote it; and what he who prepared the Materials, and then
supplied the Penman with them. As for the Publication of them, it did put so
high a Provocation upon both Houses of Parliament, that they concurred in an
Order, which condemned it (as it) to be burnt by the Hangman. And it was
accordingly executed. The Reviving o^ it now at this time, we judged most
necessary, to the end that a second Execution might be done upon it publicly,
by force of Reason, as well as by Fire.

FINIS.

