WHAT THE POSSESSION OF THE Living Faith IS, And the fruits thereof, And
wherein it has been found to differ from the dead Faith of the World, in the
learning and following of Christ in the Regeneration.

With an opening of Light to all sorts of People that waits for the Kingdom of
God;

And a Candle Lighted to give the sight of the good Old Way of God, from the
ways that now ensnares the simple.

Also a Message from the Spirit of Truth unto the Holy Seed, who are chosen out
of the World, and are lovers and followers of the Light.

Written by J. N. in the time of his Imprisonment, and now (the second time)
published by a Friend.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1664.

DEAR Friends and People, to whom this following Treatise may come, I saw, and
felt it meet, that something might be declared of the Author thereof, who was
Censured, Judged, Condemned and cruelly persecuted, by them that knew him not;
yet they that had the knowledge of him, and were conversant with him for some
years before, in the time of his sufferings, can with me bear witness, (and
that not a few) that he came amongst us in the spirit and power of Elias, and
mighty works were wrought by him, and an effectual door was opened, and many
were turned unto God, and gathered into the feeling of that power, in which he
was, and of which he testified, and it abides for ever, the fountain and giver
of every good and perfect gift, of whom he had received liberally grace for
grace, and of his fullness did he manifest, not only in words and writings, in
and of the truth, but in his conversation, which was holy, harmless and
undefiled, as one Redeemed out of the earth, in the heavenly was his dwelling,
and no other Inheritance did he seek: And though spirits of all sorts did beset
him, and temptations and snares of all were laid for him, yet the Covetous and
Wanton found nothing in him; for over the world he kept in the holy faith,
which gained the victory, and a Conqueror he died, and lives for ever in that
life which is everlasting, of which he testified, and called many to, and those
that received his testimony, and abide therein, are come to the Church of the
firstborn, where we have fellowship with him in that spirit that quickens the
dead, and brought to life our Lord Jesus Christ, in whose suffering and
Resurrection he had fellowship, and in him was he found, therefore the world
hated him; and that they might fill up their measure of unrighteousness, by him
were they tried, who being tempted out of the body, become a sign unto them
that had and did resist the substance, and in the dark they acted, and brought
forth a cruel Decree, without Law, Reason or Witness, that he had said or done
any thing contrary to Justice, Law, Scripture, or Decree of God or Men: But
those that had rejected the Light, brought forth this dark Conclusion, that
because he did not condemn what some others, whom they supposed had spoke
blasphemy, therefore he was a Blasphemer: Truly I never could (in my own
disposition) rejoice to trample on any fallen, (though an enemy) but being come
to see the fulfilling of the many Prophesies, (spoke by the Servants of the
Lord) of the woes, wrath, and just overturnings that would unavoidably come on
such, who resisted the Light, I cannot but confess to his righteous judgments,
that has given them of their own doings, and covered them with darkness, who
loved darkness better than light; though my soul desires that those of them,
that yet have abiding in the Earth, might come to repentance, now the just
punishment of their doings being brought upon them, who were themselves in the
Blasphemy, who said they were Christians and were not, said they would give
liberty of conscience, but did not; cried out against persecution, and yet
persecuted. It is the Hypocrite that did and does blaspheme, that seems to be
and is not: For these was, and is reserved the blackness of darkness, and it
increased upon them who loved it better than light, and over-turned and
overwhelmed are they by it, and shallnever come from under it, nor have
dominion over it, but by the rising of that light, to which and in which he
testified, whom they thought not worthy to live, and therefore found out and
invented punishment much worse then an outward death. But Light springs for the
righteous: And in those years of his cruel and close confinement, as he saw,
felt and learned, he gave forth, for the raising and strengthening of the
immortal Seed, (that many do, and Nations to come shall bless God for) and by
the everlasting Power (which his Persecutors resisted) he overcame, and was
gathered into the communion of the body (which the unworthy neither did nor do
discern) and so drank into the one Cup of new Wine in the Kingdom of the
Father, though in those years of his cruel close imprisonment, as he has
declared, he comba^^d with all spirits, and was under the waters, and beheld
the foundations of the Earth, and passed by the gates of Hell, and spirits of
darkness in the night-season surrounded him, and under the earth he passed, and
deaths he knew many, and when the weight of the Mountains was upon him, his
Friends and Acquaintance stood afar of him, and it was to be so, and he
declared w^^ felt the weight thereof, wha^ it was to be sepa^^^ed from his
Brethren: and that if any one, who (...) life in God, retain sin on Earth, it
is retained in Heaven. So that Power that led him through ^he many temptations
and trials, made him a living example of lowliness and subjection, not only
confessing wherein he had grieved any in the day he was tempted, but in the
spirit of forgiveness he sought to be forgiven, even of those that had been
bgotten by him; so he were a father, To Babes he did and could stoop, that the
Spirit of love and forgiveness might rise over all, for he loved Justice and
Righteousness, and bore testimony thereunto, that that was and would be the
strength of those that abode therein, being delivered from that which had
pressed him down, in the liberty and power of the free Spirit, he often spoke
of the subtilty and wickedness of that spirit that works in the Air, with which
he had been beset, and what it led to, and the end thereof to be perdition. So
he visited (after his enlargement) many of that sort, and often prophesied, as
of many things, which we have seen come to pass, that they would turn into the
earth, or to liberty and ranting, which his Soul abhorred, and therefare often
spoke and writ against the workings of those spirits, in what appearance
soever, and to holiness in soul, body and spirit, called he; and for the
removal of that which hindered, was his travel to the last day of his visible
being among men. And as at first he appeared in this great City in the power of
an endless life, togather us unto God, in the unity of the light and fellowship
of the Gospel, to the bringing forth of all virtue, in Brotherly kindne^^, and
unfeigned love; so (...) the same he passed out of thi^ City (but a few days
before he laid down the body) in perfect peace, returning to the Father who
sent him, and in whose will he brought forth unto God, and his works follow
him. This and several others that he penned have formerly been printed, and
some have given praise unto God for the benefit received thereby.

And now out of a sincere desire that God over all may be glorified (from whom
every good and perfect gift comes) and the souls that are yet afar off from
the life of righteousness may be brought nigh, is this again published; And in
the ^^eling of the everlasting spirit, the justifier of all that believe,
therein is it sent abroad, by her that is a traveller for the breaking of the
head of wickedness, and the opening of the eyes of the ignorant, and that the
simple may not stumble at the Authors name, but read this or any other of his
Writings, in Gods fear, that thou may receive counsel, instruction, wisdom and
comfort thereby, as many, who believe, have done. I have here set down his own
words, as they were written by him, and sent unto the Parliament: Concerning
Christ Jesus, that you may not be harmed or hindered by false reports, but
receive the truth in the love of it, in which it is sent to you in the good
will of God, from her that is made willing to be a servant for Christ's sake,

R. T.

This following Testimony was written by his own hand, and delivered to the
then Parliament, who persecuted him as a Blasphemer, in the time of his
imprisonment in Bridewel.
CHrist Jesus, the Immanuel, (of whose sufferings the Scriptutes declares) him
alone I confess before men, for whose fake I have denied what ever was dear to
me in this world, that I might win him, and be found in him, and not in my
self, whose life and virtue I find daily manifest in my mortal body, (which is
my eternal joy and hope of glory) whom alone I seek to serve in spirit, soul
and body, night and day, (according to the measure of grace working in me) that
in ^^e he may be glorified whether by life or death: and for his sake I suffer
all things, that he alone may have the glory of my change, whose work alone it
is in me: Even to that eternal Spirit be glory, and to the Lamb for ever.

But to ascribe this Name, power and virtue to James Nailor, (or to that which
had a beginning, and must return to dust) or for that to be exalted or
worshipped, to me is great Idolatry, and with the Spirit of Christ Jesus in me
it is condemned: which Spirit leads to lowliness, meekness and long-suffering.

So having an opportunity given (with readiness) I am willing in the fear of
God the Father (in honor to Christ Jesus, and to take off all offenses from
every simple heart) this to declare to all the world, as the truth of Christ is
in me, without guile or deceit, daily finding it to be my work to seek peace in
truth with all men in that Spirit.

James Nailor.

The Heads of the particulars contained in this ensuing Treatise.
I. What the Possession of the living faith is. page 1. II. Who they be that
are under the Law and who they be that have made void the Law against
themselves, and who they be that are under grace. p. 24. III. Of the way of
life from the knowledge that devoures the life. p. 26. IV. An opening of light
to all sorts of Rulers and people that wait for the Kingdom of God. p. 27. V. A
Candle lighted to give the sight of the good old way of God at his coming from
the ways that now ensnares the simple. p. 42. VI. The Living God glorified in
his Temples, the true worshippers that worship him in Spirit and in Truth. p.
50. VII. To the Ranters. p. 57. VIII. Deceit discovered by its fruits. p. 59.
IX. A Message from the Spirit of Truth unto the Holy seed. p. 69.
What the Profession of the Living Faith is, etc.
FOrasmuch as a right Faith is the only ground of man's Eternal happiness, and
the only thing which gains the Creature an entrance toward his Creator, and
without which it is impossible to please God; though much has been said of it
already, yet I having found by learning the true and living faith which has
the living power, different from that faith, which is dead and without that
power; And seeing that so many at this day are at ease in a dead faith, and
their souls in the grave, In tender love thereto I am stirred up to declare
something of the faith of Christ which I have found only effectual to
Salvation and Reconciliation with God. And somewhat the rather in regard the
Enemy has spread so many false reports of me touching my faith in Christ
Jesus, which here I shall declare in plainness, for the satisfying of simple
minds who desire to know Truth rather then to Reproach it; and for those who
seek occasion, I choose rather to bear their reproach that are in that Nature,
then contend therewith, for my work is not with Flesh and Blood, nor is it in
my Spirit to strive with any about words, that stir up strivings and contention
and edefie not, but with God I strive daily, and to that of God in all I seek
to be manifest, which resists not evil, but seek to overcome it with good,
waiting for the Kingdom of God in all, and the Souls Redemption out of death,
and the Seed out of bondage, and where that is not effected in measure, I look
not to be owned, nor my witness received, though it be not of my self, but
Christ Jesus in me.

And first a Faith or belief I have found in the World, of which I shall say
little in this place having found indeed little in it to the Salvation of Life:
Its a literal Faith, grounded upon the History of the Scripture, touching God
and Christ, and what Christ did in that Temple which the Jews destroyed at
Jerusalem, etc. But does not know him in Spirit, nor believe him as his Name is
EMANUEL to all Generations, and so does not necessarily work the believer into
a conformity to that head, in his then walking, by his coming again in the same
Spirit and Power, working in them the same Will, Mind, and Affections, and
Obedience to the Father in their measure which was in him the Example, Author,
Worker and Finisher of the True and Living Faith.

And of this Faith (being somewhat dressed by the several Opinions of men) are
all the unclean Spirits living in whatsoever abomination is to be mentioned in
the world, all Sects and Opinions, or whatever may be found in all Colors in
these Northern Parts of the World, with this Faith they are covered, and this
is their strength, and here they take comfort to themselves against all Reproof
wit^ in or from without, though living openly in the greatest Whoredoms
against the Spirit of Holiness, Carnal or Spiritual that can be mentioned, even
at a distance from Christ in his whole life; yet they believe Christ came to
save sinners, of which they are chief; and they that are whole need not the
Physician, etc. And so the greater their wickedness is, the nearer to Christ
they believe; And by this Faith he that came to save People from sin, and to
lead out of sin both by Example and Spirit, is made a cover for all filthiness
of flesh and Spirit, and to strengthen the heart of wickedness against the life
of holiness; some in one sin some in another; but with this Faith do all sorts
strengthen themselves and hardens their hearts against the light of Christ and
that Spirit which reproves the World of sin and convinces of it, and would
lead out of it; and hence it is that the witness of God that is holy in all, is
trampled under foot in all, and little regarded in any, but by this Faith
believed on in none to be the way to the Father, though the world have no light
but it, nor is there a Promise of Life in any other: And this to me appears to
be that Faith of the Devil or dead Faith the Apostle speaks on, James 2. Though
more hardened in it against Gods fear; for the Devils when they believe tremble
at it; So this Faith I leave, being judged already by its fruits with the light
of Christ in every honest heart that loves holiness.

And of that Faith I shall speak something, in which I have found a measure of
the Life of Christ made manifest in my mortal Body, in which life alone is the
True and Eternal union and atonement with the Holy God, into whom no unclean
thing can enter. And this is not a notion of what was done in another
generation past or to come, hundreds or thousands of years distance, but that
which leads to the beginning of the work of a new Creature at this day, and a
new birth spiritually begotten and born and brought to light, without which
none can see the Kingdom of God nor enter therein; And this Faith does not work
by the comprehensions of brainknowledge, that because I could here conceive or
declare of Christ Jesus, from the beginning to the age thereof in words or
thoughts, that therefore I have learned him, or know him as I ought to do, or
am grown up in him to a perfect man, and so to deceive others by declaring and
boasting of what God has not wrought in me, as a man may easily do and deceive
his own soul and bewitch others also, by leading them out of their measures of
Gods present work in them. But of the living Father w^h now works powerfully
in spirit by love thereto, the mystery whereof is holden forth in a pure
conscience, working out the old leven, purifying the heart and making all
things new, judging and killing and crucifying with Christ in spirit the works
of the flesh, and casting out every thing in me that is not of God, and
renewing in me the things of God in their order by his mighty working in me, in
which the soul is raised out of the grave, and the dead restored to life,
actually and not in conceit. Of the Grounds and Workings of this Living Faith I
shall speak something.

And though the foundation of this Faith or beginning of it was, that I did
really believe in that which Christ did and suffered at Jerusalem, and that
there in that vessel he bare the sins of the World, and satisfied the wrath of
God for sins past, and overcame death, hell, and the grave, and made way for
the Seed to arise in all through the whole World who would believe in his light
which then shined through him to all men, wherein he might be seen to be the
Way, the Truth, and the Life apparent, openly triumphing over all that had
passed above the Seed. And much more might be said of him there finished, all
which I did believe according to ^cripture, which was an opening of me to
receive him from Heaven in the same spirit and power, without which I could not
have received the gift of that holy Spirit, God having so purposed from the
beginning, that the Covenant of Eternal Life and power should be received no
other way but by faith in him who in the fullness of ^ime was there manifest in
flesh, for the taking away sins past, and making a way for the Resurrection of
life over all, to save from sins for time to come.

The effect of which Faith when in the (...)ight I first received it, did turn
my mind out of all my sins past, and took my mind out of them, and turned me
toward God, and holiness of life I then believed to attain in that faith, and
receive power therein to grow up in him to his fullness and stature, which then
I see no less faith could save me then the perfect Faith of the Son of God,
which before I had not received, but then received with such gladness of heart,
that it set my face and delights out of all sin toward the perfection of
Christ, in which I then believed, which was the Joy then set before me; yet was
not the work done and finished in me already, though (I having received the
Faith and Hope of the Son of God, and was turned from all my former sin and my
own righteousness, so that) if I had departed this Body, I had died in no less
Faith then the Holy Faith of Christ Jesus, and so being turned to his Spirit
out of the works of the Flesh, I was turned from my sin, and so from
condemnation, yet was there a great work to do in me before I could witness
freedom from the body of death, and the root and ground of evil removed, and
the seed raised to reign, and the soul brought into the holy City, the
resurrection of the dead, and fellowship in the Father and the Son etc. And
that glorious liberty of the new Creature, and all things to be of God in me,
as the Scriptures do witness; so this faith did not work me into a conceit of
my self, glorying in knowledge, and so to become a Teacher of others what I had
conceived below the life, but it led me down into the obedience of the Spirit
of Light, to wait therein for the Resurrection of Life, and I came to see in
that Light that the motions of sin did still work from the old ground and root,
and that must be removed by the power of Christ working in spirit, and my
obedience and watchful^ess therein was required, and that without obedience to
this faith I could not come to perfect victory over the enmity nor the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God; for though this faith had turned my heart toward
Christ, and given me hope to attain him, yet I had not th^n learned him, nor
was he yet formed in me, so was I led in the Light of Christ, to see what I had
of this treasure in the earthen vessel. which I found to be in me very little,
and that Seed the least of all Seeds; so I became little in that eye which told
me the truth, though I had been high in my own thoughts formerly.

And so to the Word of the beginning of Christ I was led, or the first
Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, that with that which teaches Christ, I
might learn Christ in every measure of him as I grew therein; so was I brought
to know him that was made under the Law, and to the foundation of repentance
from dead works, and to doctrines of Baptisms, and to Eternal Judgment; then
came I in Truth and Life to see what they were doing whom the Apostles exhorted
to work out their own Salvation with fear and trembling, after they had fully
believed what Christ had done for them at Jerusalem in that Vessel, and many
other Scriptures did he open to me as I learned him, which before to me was a
Mystery, while I learned them in meanings without the Life of Christ, which
then was opened by the Revelation of Jesus Christ as they came to be fulfilled
in me, being led by the same Spirit in that work of Faith; then came I to see
that I through the Law must be redeemed from the Law, and that my redemption
from it must not be by making it void, but by fulfilling of it, and till then
it had power over me, and sin took occasion by it to strengthen it self in me;
but as I came to grow in the Spirit and Power of Christ, I was in him brought
through it, it in him fulfilled, and I dead to it as it came to be fulfilled,
and the words of Christ I found true, I came not to break the Law, but to
fulfill it, and it is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass away then one jot of
the Law to pas^ away till it be fulfilled, and I needed not a meaning to that
Scripture, but a fulfilling thereof in Christ Jesus; and the Schoolmaster that
brings to Christ I learned, and Christ formed, and the heir under tutors,
before I knew the liberty of the Son of God or perfect freedom, and then I saw
the Scriptures could not be broken nor wrested, but it must be learned in the
life of it to Salvation, which the unlearned wrest to their own destruction by
meanings without life, and that it was of no private interpretation, but this
one Spirit must open it all in the fulfilling thereof, and this Faith in Christ
Jesus only was able to make wise unto Salvation of Eternal Life.

And then came I clearly to see Christ Jesus set before me in all things that I
was to go through, in that faith which I had first received, and that the
attaining of him was the hope of glory, and no hope without him; and this hope
was as an Anchor in all hardships and temptations, which was not a few, I was
led through but all was counted little while I stood in this Faith, for the
hope that was in me to win Christ; and I clearly saw that notwithstanding my
first faith in what he had done at Jerusalem, yet if I did not continue therein
to follow the same spirit in obedience thereto, believing therein, in all its
leadings, hoping to attain to Christ Jesus the end of that Faith, in daily
growing toward his Stature and fullness, but had turned aside, or set down
short of the leadings of that Spirit in the way, I had made void my hope of
Glory, the work of my redemption, and that which Christ did at Jeru^alem (as to
me) and had denied my first Faith, and could not have been saved from wrath to
come. That being the end of that Faith committed to me, that therein I might
faithfully without doubting follow him in Spirit through all Trials and
Temptations, of which way he was a perfect example in his walking in that Flesh
at Jerusalem, that through the Scriptures I might have hope, seeing he went the
same way before me there in which he now leads, and tha^ therein I might see
him to be the same to all generations as he was there, and in his Saints that
followed him. And as they exhorted one another to look unto him in their
Travel, who was the Author and Finisher of their Faith, and to consider him as
an example who endured such contradictions of sinners against himself, least
they should be weary of suffering and faint in their minds, and ^o their Faith
and Hope was strengthened; So also I looking to the same in him, and also in
them after him, my Faith and Patience might be doubled, and my obedience made
without doubting, and my hope firm unto the end, which end was the winning
Christ in me the Hope of Glory, the great Mystery of Faith, which is hid from
all till the Revelation of Christ Jesus; and so when the Saints and Apostles
had Christ revealed in them, they were able Ministers of him, and had the
mystery opened, and preached it without doubt; that mystery of godliness which
was great, yet hid from the world, but to them without all controversy, God
manifest in flesh, not God flesh, but manifest in flesh, which mystery of Faith
they held in a pure conscience, and so I knew my Faith to be the same Faith
once delivered to the Saints, and the good fight of that faith I came to know,
and that Faith which overcomes the world, which has the promise and
inheritance of Eternal Life, which all that go back from denies the Faith of
Christ, and sets up a Faith without Christ which is not the faith of Christ,
and so in the learning of Christ I came to see the faith of Christ from faith
to faith, and the faith of Devils, the living working faith, and the dead faith
without works, and I find that Christ never believed that he could never be
perfect nor overcome the Devil, nor overcome sin; it was never the Faith of
Christ to make void the Law of his Father unfulfilled in him; it was never his
faith to revenge evil, but to overcome it with good; it was never his faith to
respect persons, or that he could commit sin and not be the servant of sin; it
was never his faith to sue, contend, or fight, or persecute any, to judge for
rewards, or Preach for hire, or any way to serve the Mammon of this world; it
was not his Faith to observe his own will, his own times, or the worlds
customs, but to observe his Father in all things, and only what he received
from him, that he did, and could do nothing of himself* he never believed them
to be children of God who said and did not.

And much such like things as these were never by him believed, but is the
worlds faith to uphold them in sin and lusts, who are enemies to the faith of
Christ which presents perfect to God by working out such evils: All which I
came to see, not by man, but in the revelation of Christ as in his Faith I
learned him, growing into his Faith, into him and his life therein made
manifest in my body: So I see what is his in truth as the truth is in Jesus,
and what is the worlds, and but called his to oppose him; And I see that which
loves the things of this world to be none of his love, nor that his joy that
takes pleasure in visible things, nor that his liberty which is in the works of
the flesh, nor that his peace that is in sin, nor that his patience that seeks
its own revenge, nor that his glory that is in pride, nor that his worship which
stands in carnal things, nor that his honor that is sought of men, nor that his
knowledge that is after the flesh, nor that his fear that is taught by his
precepts of men, these are in the world and not in him, but have only got the
name to be his, but are enemies to his life, and were never begat of his Father
nor learned in the Son; all which and much like stuff I came to see the deceit
of, by that truth and simplicity I found in Christ, contrary to the will of man.

And so in the life of Christ I have learned to know the growth of the Faith of
Christ and the riches of it, and the end of it, which is Christ Jesus in all
its working, and I also know the worlds faith, its uncleanness whose end is not
to attain the holiness of Christ in life, but would live in the worlds delights
and have Christ for a cover, and be saved by the righteousness of another,
which they have no mind to walk in themselves; and so that faith works not by
love which loves not the life of Christ, but are enemies to his Cross, minding
earthly things, and this is the earthly faith, but the living Faith works by
love to holiness of life, and therefore purifies the heart, and the mystery of
it stands in a pure conscience within themselves that have it, and not in
telling and comprehending what was in another, for the Devils believes the
holiness that was in Christ and can preach it, but cannot inherit it, because
they love not to live the life of it, and by this I know them both for ever,
and all that prove them in the life of Christ shall witness with me, the end
of the one is the life of Christ in which himself walked, and the same
obedience of the same Spirit to the same Father by the same power, according to
the proportion of Faith received from God, which Faith is from above, and so
lays hold on heavenly things for its strength, and so brings forth heavenly
fruits: The other professes and promises great things, but ends in the world
and minds earthly things, and does not purify the heart, nor believes ever to
attain the life of Christ, his stature or fullness, but counts it an error in
such as press after such seize, and so the end of the conversation of
one is Christ Jesus to hold forth in Life and Power, the same yesterday, and to
day, and for ever: The end of the other is a liberty to sin here while they can
take any pleasure in it, and sanctification and salvation when they are dead,
and according to the end of each faith so it works, for its impossible for him
that cannot believe holiness to work holiness, but according to each man's faith
so must he inherit in this world and that which is to come.

And in the workings and seize of this living powerful faith I have found
several measures according to my growth therein, from the Word of the beginning
of Christ or the first Principle of Christ, and the fullness, age and stature of
Christ, as betwixt a Babe and a man grown in strength, and much working in
spirit I found betwixt faith received of Christ Jesus, and Christ learned in
me; for though I received the faith of his fullness in what he was at Jerusalem,
in his flesh there at once, yet had not I so learned him in Spirit and life in
my mortal flesh nor put him on at once, but in the light of Faith I saw I was
so to run as to win him before I could put him on, wherein I came to see and
know my self begotten again in him by faith toward God, who is the way to God,
in which way I came to see the begotten of the Father manife^^ in measure in me
in the pure image of a Holy Child, separate from the fleshly sinful seed, or
Christ formed in me as the Scriptures witness, and when I did behold his pure
image and his pure mind and nature so far contrary to my own, yet then was not
he in his Kingdom nor all things put under his feet, nor could I say that Jesus
was then Lord in me, but by the Spirits working by this Faith I had received,
and in hope thereof was I made to endure the loss of all things, and to deny
all things that ever this holy Spirit did War against in me, which might any
way oppress this holy plant or hinder its growth, owning his judgment in the
light, upon what ever was in my heart or affections but him alone, though never
so much gain in my account in the world, which judgment being owned and
consented to against my self and all my self lovers, therein was I parted from
them in judgment, and so then was they subdued by the powerful workings of that
Spirit and put under his feet, and I set free from them to arise with him above
them, being brought from under them, and this was not done all at once but in
order as he appeared in the light to manifest every particular evil; And as
that Faith I had received wrought by love to him a consent in my spirit to his
just judgment upon them, and I made willing to give them up to the fire, and
to come out of them and join to him in the execution, least he should consume
me with them, as it must have been had I stayed in them, and here I found the
benefit of the light which goes before his face to prepare his way, and the
salvation of Faith which saved me through hope of him, that I was not destroyed
in my sins, which Faith and hope gave me an entrance within the vail, or a
hiding place in him while the indignation was over, which was to pass upon the
man of sin.

And so a voice was heard in the wilderness, calling out of sin into a way I
knew not but as the light of his Covenant led me in the spirit of Elias,
turning my heart toward him, that he might not smite the earth with a curse at
his coming, in which w^y ere I came into the Kingdom of Christ my pure rest, I
met with many hardships and great travels, and many temptations and trials
within and without, but the greatest enemies was yet within me, which would
upon every hardship be tempring with unbelief to destroy this Faith and hope,
which was all that I had set before me to encourage me to endure such
hardships, and to follow the light in a way I had not known, and to walk in the
Cloud^ to meet the Lord, and to leave my former knowledge and wisdom, and glory
and riches, to go in a way I had not w^ll^ed, and to abide such assaults on
every hand, every foot the world which I was called out of ready to overtake me
and compass me about, and to turn me back again into what I had seen and
enjoyed, behind me, ever seeking to persuade me that I should never attain to
him that was set before me in the Faith and hope; Then come I clearly to see,
that though I had received the Faith of Christ as a shield in this War, by
which I was saved that the wrath of God took me not away in these temptings and
murmurings, and reasonings and doubting which did arise in the fleshly part,
yet the purchased possession was not yet redeemed for me to enjoy at present,
though I had heard and believed the Gospel of salvation, and was sealed with
the holy Spirit of promise till I came to be boilded up with Christ for an
habitation of God through the Spirit. And I found by daily experience that my
salvation was not complete so long as my soul was subjected under any earthly
lust or passion, nor the War over, but as by the mighty working of God in me by
that Spirit this came to be subdued under the feet of Christ, and the Soul set
above it with him to reign in the heavenly place; so was my Salvation nearer
then when I believed, for the Soul is not safe while sin lives, or the flesh
lusts, for that wars against the Soul, and every sin wounds it, and this shall
all know who are not past feeling, what ever their Faith be touching Christ
Jesus, or what was wrought in another, whilst sin defiles the Soul it is not
safe, nor the honest heart has peace and rest, for the rest and peace is
placed in the Holy City where comes no unclean thing, into which the Soul
enters not till that all righteou^ness be fulfilled upon earth, and the Soul
singled from all corruption, and have put on immortality, and death swallowed
up in victory, when the sting is taken away, which is sin, and the strength of
sin, which is the Law, which is not taken away but where it is fulfilled, there
only grace reigns through righteousness, and this I found to be truth as the
truth is found in Jesus, as I came to learn him and put him on by Faith, which
I had believed; and I see the folly of such as would make void the Law by
talking of Faith and Grace, wherein sin is yet standing, and the Soul taken
captive therewith, which I had often sought peace therein to my self, but could
not inherit liberty to my Soul any other way but as it came to be purified in
obedience through the Spirit.

And this work was not wrought in me by the knowledge of Christ after the
flesh, but as I came to learn him in Spirit, for spiritual wickedness had taken
my Soul captive, and by the Spirit it must be sanctified and set free. And I
came to see that if I had been in his company here on earth as long as his
Disciples were in the flesh, and seen as much as they did, and heard from his
own mouth, I should have been short of this work as they were, in whom the
Child was unborn when he went away in the flesh, and they knew not what Spirits
they were of, until he came again to them in Spirit and was revealed in them*
then could they preach the Resurrection of the dead and the Souls Redemption,
and desired to know him no more after the flesh, when once they had received
him in Spirit, but Preached Christ within the Hope of Glory, who till then
looked for an outward kingdom and glory, until they had received his promise,
He that dwells with you shall be in you, I will not leave you comfortless, I
will come unto you; the world sees m^ no more, but ye see me, and because I
live, ye shall live also; at that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and
y^u in me, and I in you; And this was his promise, whom they received, whom the
world sees no more, whose expectations are carnal, neither can any see the
Kingdom of Heaven but who are born of this Spirit and Heirs of this Life, and
he that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life, but
the wrath of God abides upon him whatever he may say he believes, and none has
the Son but as they receive this Spirit, and are led by this Spirit, and born
thereof. And this I found also, that this Son of God does not appear in any
within or without, but as he conforms them to his own Image, which he has
always born in this world, as says the Scripture, when he shall appear we
shall be like him, who shall change our vile bodies and make them like his
glorious body, from glory to glory by the same Spirit; And herein we have
boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is so are we in this present
world; and this is not obtained with thoughts of believing without, but by a
lively working Power, which works out the earthly image and nature, and
conforms to the heavenly in that spiritual birth which is not of flesh and
blood, nor could flesh and blood ever discern it in whom it was, but ever hared
it in whom it has appeared in all Ages; Which is of a shining nature where it
is begotten of the Father, and cannot be hid where it is formed, but by his
fruits gives light to the world contrary to the worlds ways, showing of his
coming to Judgment against the deeds of darkness; And this heavenly begetting
of the Father is to be holden forth in that clear ^mage of the Father,
according to every several measure as he grows therein without mixture, that
all may see that he is not of this world, who also takes them out of this world
as he grows in any or they in him, forth of the world they must go, bearing his
reproach, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled, they are not of this world,
even as I am not of this world, and this is the worlds light and condemnation,
even his coming. And so I find that Faith which joins to the world where it is,
and does not overcome the world, is not the faith of Christ, nor lays hold on
the power of Christ, though Faith may believe the History of the Scriptures
concerning Christ; which faith sets not up the Kingdom of God in the heart, and
casts out the world there, that faith saves not the soul from the pollution of
the world through lust, and so is but a conceit of salvation, and not the power
of salvation, as says the Scriptures: Whosoever is born of God overcomes the
world, and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith; and
the faith which works not thus, is like a body without a spirit which is dead;
but the living faith that stands in Christ Jesus, that spirit purifies the
heart and conscience, and makes toward God in Christ the example in all good
things, overcoming whatever would let the appearance of Christ in his temple,
or hinder the bringing forth his virtues which is believed to be in him, to the
utmost of whatever he has received of the Father for such believers, who
believes not in a lie, but in the truth and power of God as it is in Christ
Jesus and has been declared in Scriptures not for a discourse, but for an
inheritance of life, of whose fullness we all ^eceive according to our Faith.
till his coming and we be complete in him, and he in us; and so not come short
of the glory of God, the end of our Faith and Conversation, that to the world
he may be manifest in life and power to be the same that ever he has been,
though he have appeared in several forms in the flesh, yet one in Spirit to
make a complete body.

And therefore we find those who were of this Faith witnessed Christ present
(which the worlds faith could never receive under any form or profession, but
counted it blasphemy, and that spirit the spirit of the Devil.) And so Isaiah
witnessed this Child born to them that so believed in his time, who was the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, etc. Whose Name they knew to be Immanuel,
and this was before he appeared in that Temple at Jerusalem; and Ezekiel was
called the Son of man before that time also; and Paul said he was revealed in
him and spoke in him, and wrought in him, and in his flesh that which was
behind of the afflictions of Christ was to be filled up for the bodies sake
which is the Church, and to whom he forgive any thing in his time, he forgive
it in the person of Christ; and many more might be noted who confessed the same
Christ in them present, both before and after his time at J^^^salem, which
testimony could never be received (by the wisdom of the world) in his Temples,
before nor then, nor since to this day, for the god of this world being king in
the heart, and having blinded the eye of the mind that should see his
spiritual glory through the light of the Gospel, he persuades the world that he
is either past or to come, but never present; and as many as are brought to
confess him before men find it so at this day, who are hated of all men for
his Names sake, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled, and his testimony
finished.

And this faith which confesses him present, is that which the world cannot
bear nor receive, who will preach him themselves at a distance, what he was and
will be, but this faith cannot reach his coming at present in any measure to
grow to his appearance now, nor will this faith ever give an entrance into his
kingdom upon earth, nor the holy rest, nor is this the Faith of Christ (that
puts him thus afar off) which fills with all the fullness of God.

And by what I have learned, this is clear to me for ever without any more
Controversy, That the faith that admits of sin is not Christ's Frith, nor has
any share or possession in him; that faith which is not holy came not from God,
and so cannot build up to God; that is not saving Faith that does not save from
sins, but is deceiving faith which deceives the Soul, and suffers lust to
defile it and destroy it, and so brings it under condemnation, by believing
lies, and so letting in sin upon the Soul by consent, persuading that it cannot
be otherwise; and so gives the Devil victory and the world victory, and the
flesh victory, and sin victory over the Soul, which should give the Soul
victory over all; And what greater deceit can there be to the Soul then this
is? And therefore for ever that which I have seen and learned do I declare
openly, that this is the deceiving faith, and indeed rather unbelief then the
Faith of Christ, which makes way for the god of this world to reign and act in
things contrary to the life of Christ in the Creature, and the life of the
Soul? and that faith which gives way to the least sin is not the Faith of
Christ, whose work and coming is to destroy the works of the Devil, and redeem
the Soul from sin, and the least measure of that Faith that stands in his life
overcomes the world and sin in that measure; and he that commits sin goes out
of that Faith, and acts against it; and a lying faith I have found that to be
which persuades the soul of freedom from condemnation, but gives it not
freedom from sin, which is the cause of Condemnation, and all shall witness
this with me now or hereafter, that where sin has power, here death has
power, and the Grave, and Hell, and Condemnation has power also, for these are
the wages of sin, then shall yon say you were deceived who believed the
contrary; And may not such truly be said to be past feeling indeed, who can
commit sin and feel no Condemnation for it already? And this is the effect of
their false Faith, to harden themselves against the faithful witness of God in
their own Conscience, and the seared Conscience has made shipwreck of the
Faith of Christ, and the doctrine of devils preaches the faith of devils to
give way to the works of the Devil, which all sin is from the least to the
greatest, and he that pleads for it is a Father to it, and he that commits it,
a servant, and may look for the wages thereof if he repent not, notwithstanding
he believe the contrary.

And many may feel this truth at this day, who have a long time believed with
this faith, deceiving their own souls day u^ter day, believing they shall not
be condemned, when they are condemned already i^ their own hearts, and feel the
weight of sin daily pressing their Souls, and burthening the pure Conscience,
and the fear of death and sin keeps their Souls still in bondage, and lies
upon them all their lives, and yet they will force themselves to believe,
contrary to Holy Faith, and a good Conscience, that they are saved and
redeemed, and thus make shipwreck of saving Faith and a good Conscience, by
believing a lie, contrary to their own daily feeling, no other thing to
encourage them therein but this persuasion, which suits well with such as take
pleasure in unrighteousness, which persuasion comes not of God, but condemned
by that of God in themselves; and this is the estate of many at this day,
though some there be whose Consciences are feared, and feel not this witness
living in them, though their damnation slumbereth not, though they have lost
their Calling and Election also.

And this have I learned in Christ, that there is a great difference both in
effect and nature betwixt that Faith which is the gift of God, and that faith
which men make to themselves, for that which is the gift of God is of his own
nature, clean, pure, and perfect are all his gifts, and so it works naturally
the work and will of God in all who receive it freely, and mix nothing with it
to darken it or stop his working; and by this Faith I am saved from sin and
condemnation, and begotten to the Father thereof in Christ Jesus; which faith
is not of my self, but is the gift of God, to perfect holiness in the sight of
God; and whatever is done in this faith is not sin, and whatsoever is against
this Faith, or not of this Faith is sin, and brings Condemnation, and this
Faith approves not of it; and if I act nothing doubtingly nor against this holy
Faith, in this Faith I am justified in my own heart, and my own Conscience kept
clean, and I approved in Gods sight, and I have boldness through the obedience
of Faith in the day of Judgment, that it is not my own work but the
righteousness of Faith which is in Christ Jesus, and this effect has saving
working Faith, and this is its Nature and Grace.

But another Faith I have found which is not so in nature or effect, being not
freely received from above, but is feigned and has its ground here below, and
its ends also: The earthly man in his wisdom from the letter, or reason or
comprehensions, sets up an Opinion or Image in his mind touching God or
Christ, or Religion* Worship, Doctrine, or Manners, or any other thing and then
looking upon the likeness of it in the reasoning part, gathers strength to
believe it must needs be so, and so forms a faith in himself; And though this
faith be not perfect when he has formed it and made it with all his strength;
but many things in Scriptures and the practice of the Saints, but especially
that of God in his own Conscience will not sure with it yet the strong man
being above in the strength of his Comprehension, forces a Faith against all
these and causes all to bow under it; so this Faith brings not forth the Birth
of Christ, nor his pure Image and Life, neither in Matter or Worship nor
Manners but what he may imitate Christ and the Saints in worship and keep the
world, and escape the Cross, and save his life and credit and glory there, that
he will conform to, and glory in, and for the rest he believes it concerns not
him now in all things at this day so to walk as they did; And as this Faith is
not perfect in Worship, so in Practice also: for that evil he is not addicted
to he condemns in all, but that which is in his own heart and eye, and brings
him profit and pleasure, that he will cover, and believes it may stand with
true belief at this day though formerly it could not; And this is the Faith
made after man and not after God, and so serves in respect of Persons, Times,
and Things, but bows not all these for ever to worship in Spirit, nor brings
them under the foot of Jesus that Spirit, but being earthly by nature has
earthly effects, and God does not own that with his Power, nor goes forth with
that which man makes, but with his own Gift, which is good and perfect in every
measure thereof; And this also I have learned in Christ Jesus, and declare to
all that seek Faith in him, That I never received any measure of this Faith of
Christ in vain, but whatever I acted or suffered therein, from the least
measure till this day, in it I prevailed, against what ever the light of the
Spirit led me out therein, and a shield I have found it, and a growth in it
toward Christ Jesus in every work of it, wherein I have stood single to the
end, however tempted or tried before the end appeared, yet in the end of that
Faith I was ever a Conqueror through the Spirit, and whoever proves it to the
end in singleness of heart, shall be witness with me herein, with a Cloud of
witnesses that have gone before, who by this holy Faith have prevailed over the
powers of sin, and entered into the holy Rest, who have not sought their own
Kingdom but the Kingdom of Christ.

And only this pure Faith which works toward the appearance of Christ in all
actions and sufferings, is that which orders all things in their place and
time, and fits all Relations for his appearance therein to glorify God, for
God is not glorified in any thing upon Earth but in which the Son appears, who
is the express Image and Glory of God, and in whom alone he Reveals himself
and the glory of his Judgments and Mercy the Grace and Truth of God is in his
face in whom ever he appears; And so every measure of the heavenly Faith works
toward the heavenly appearance, and the earthly faith to the earthly
appearance; And so Faith in God is that which works effectually by love to the
Image and Life of God in this world, which is seen only in his spiritual
begettings, which being believed in and set above, shines forth in every
measure, showing the virtue and glory of the Spirit of God; but the famed
earthly faith admits of some earthly thing in the heart for its end, in love to
which it works disobedience to the Spirit, and so comes short of the glory of
God, for it cannot hold forth the fruits of the Spirit to glorify God with an
earthly lover in the heart, nor can one faith serve God and Mammon; so he that
loves the things of this world is Gods enemy, whose faith withstands the
appearance of Christ in his actions or sufferings, and so withstands the glory
of God which therein should be manifest to all men, and this is that faith
which ever of old has put him afar off, yet gets the form and words to
withstand the life and virtue; And of this sort they are of whom the Apostle
speaks, having a form of godliness, but deny the power of godliness, who ever
was the greatest enemies to the coming of Christ, being not of the Faith of
Christ, nor of the Spirit of Christ, but being from below, withstands his
coming from above to be brought forth in his virtue, or worshipped in his
Spirit; this is Antichrist.

And this spirit and this faith it is that wrests the Scriptures to seduce from
Christ, and destroy the way of his coming; and to that end what Christ really
Commands to be brought forth of his life and virtue in real appearance, this
spirit serves himself with a meaning, instead of serving Christ with real
actual obedience; And so his birth is a meaning instead of the life of Christ,
and this he sets to oppose that life, least it should be born into the world;
as for instance, when Christ says in Scriptures, Him that smites thee on the
one cheek offer him the other, and him that sues thee and takes thy coat,
forbid him not thy cloak also, and him that takes away thy goods ask them not
again, resist not evil, but overcome evil with good, and love them that hate
you, and many such like Commands which Christ means really and indeed, and led
an example in himself; and who ever receives the same Spirit, it moves to the
same things as it grows in any, and being obeyed will bring forth the same
fruits to glorify the Father thereof to all Generations, which Spirit waxes
not old, nor in its fruits barren, where it is really received in the Faith
thereof and obeyed. But says this other faith in the earthly spirit, Christ
did not mean as he spoke, you must not take him literally, those words must
have a spiritual meaning; and this spiritual meaning of his is to devour the
life of this obedience both in Letter of Christ and Spirit of Christ, and to
set up a subtle meaning without the life of Christ and contrary to his example,
and this he will have to take place in all, both against the plain words of
Christ ^i^ example in his walking, and the working of his Spirit in others; and
if he cannot destroy this faith and fruit before it be brought forth, then his
work is to render him a high Blasphemer, in whom this Child is born and brought
forth to light, and counts it high presumption for any to witness the life of
Christ in him by bringing it forth into the world, yet himself will preach
Christ in him, and the Life of Christ in him, and the Spirit of Christ in him,
and his body the Temple of God, etc. Because he finds these words in Scripture;
but if any worship in that Temple so as to believe and obey unto life openly,
that he cannot own without a meaning instead thereof, and so he sets the form
to deny the Power, and Christ's Words he wrests to deny his coming; And how long
this faith has professed him to come (and his Life and Glory at his coming) in
its own carnal Comprehensions, many may witness: but is never like to receive
him in the same Life and Spirit and Power in which he ever appeared, and so to
that generation is he ever to come, but never present, further then to make a
cover for sins past and present, and an encouragement for sin to come; and thus
the devou^er (...)s the best of things into a lie in all that believes him,
that he may keep Christ and the Soul from their present union, which he could
not long do but by consent of the Creature, there being that of God in every
one which daily draws toward him, where it is not quenched by believing lies,
whereby such as receive not the Truth in the love of it comes to be damned, as
it was in the days of old, and a strait passage I have found into the way of
Truth and life, which misseth all his subtle pretenses, and I have seen his
words true who says, Few there be that find it, the enemy being every way
ready to meet them that seek with a shadow meaning, or some deceit to believe
in stead of the substance, handling the Words of God deceitfully, using the
gifts of God to withstand the life of the giver, and turning grace into
lacivious liberty.

And thus have I learned in the light of the world, that in my turning toward
him at his reproof when I knew him not, and believing in his light whom I had
not seen, I found that Faith given which did declare the righteousness of God
in him, wherein he perfectly walked upon earth, both in doing and suffering,
which being turned toward, I found the propitiation that God had sent forth,
through faith in his blood to declare his righteousness for the remitting of my
sins past, that God might be just, who could not have past by my sins past, had
he not accepted his sufferings, nor I have had liberty from sin past to have
followed him, nor could I have been accepted therein, but in the faith and hope
of the same righteousness; so God was full in justifying, and his forbearance
magnified toward me therein, and in turning to this righteousness of his
declared in the light of faith and hope, my face was set toward righteousness
in Christ Jesus to be attained for life and salvation for time to come to walk
in, and so being turned toward God, all my sins past was behind me, and Gods
righteousness before me, and so from henceforth was I to be found in Gods
righteousness walking in a measure of it, and in the faith and hope of the
fullness of Christ and attainment of God for mine inheritance. And this great
Redemption I found in Christ Jesus at that day was in such things as these
following; As first his calling of me with his light, his holding forth to me
his life and suffering, which was so holy that I could not but confess to
them, his turning me toward, the same in hope thereof by believing, his
begetting a mind in me toward that same life, and the increase of his light
that way to lead me, and the setting of me free from the wrath of God for all
my sins of ignorance past, which else had laid upon me as a weight or chain,
binding me that I could not have walked the way of his light, etc.

But I do not say that if I turned to commit sin again, that that sin was
cast behind my back also, I learned otherwise, I found that sin then before
my face greater then the rest, and stood in my way to God, and stopped me from
following his light or growing in his life that I could no way escape it but by
repenting of it, and receiving the just sentence of condemnation in my self,
and bearing his indignation, till he that wounded me for it, healed me again,
which I never found but as I turned from the evil with my whole heart, and
accepted the punishment till the advocate did arise to intercede, whose blood I
had trampled on, and whose precious life I had pierced and his holy Spirit
grieved, by turning away from his leadings.

Nor do I say that all my sins which formerly I had committed, of which I had
been convinced by the light of the
world, when I was in the world before I believed it to be sufficient, that
they was wholly taken away as my sins of ignorance was, for this I found, that
God in this was just and merciful, merciful in that he did not lay them all at
once before me, lest they should have pressed me down that I could not have
followed the light, nor gotten any strength, but must needs have perished under
them had he not spared. And just I have found him also; for as they were not
committed all at once against the light of his Spirit, so he has at one time
or other visited for them, and laid them before me, yet not all at once, nor no
way so heavy as those committed after I believed, and gave up my self to follow
the light, and yet to an account he has brought me for them; and coming to
feel the terrors of God, I have learned to fear, and love, and have found the
ground, and rise, and deceits of that Faith, that believes Christ to have taken
away the sins of believers past present, and to come, with which many at this
day make merry over the witness of God, and the just slain in them, and that
Scripture I have learned without a meaning, if we sin wilfully after we have
received the knowledge of the Truth there remains no more sacrifice for sin,
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation to devour
the adversary, though none know how but he that comes to it, in the fulfilling,
and then shall be seen he that is born of God sins not, and he that believes is
born of God, but he that sins turns his back both on the Faith and Birth that is
toward Christ, and becomes adverse thereunto in his work whatever he says he
believes, and this I have found an everlasting truth whatever men believe or
imagine, that no longer then a man keeps his face toward the light of God, no
longer is his sins cast behind^ his back, whether they be sins past, present,
or to come, but if he turn from Gods righteousness, his own iniquities will
rise and me him, both new and old, and in vain does such believe they are then
blotted out of Gods fight, whose eye shows him his way in which he then walks,
and condemns him for it in his own heart.

Now was the ground and root of sin removed so soon as my mind was turned by
the light from sin toward God, but the motions thereof I found, and the lust
seeking to go forth to its objects, to bring in to conceive sin again afresh;
that ground was but removed as I grew in Christ and he in me, and as I came to
learn him that was in the beginning before sin was, who was learned in faithful
following and serving of his Spirit, in watching, in fastings, in prayers, and
in all spiritual wrestlings, as I came to be led into with the light, in which
warfare I came to see the hardship of him that will be a soldier of Christ
Jesus, and the baptisms into his death, the slothful servant and the faithful,
and their reward, and the parables and figures of the Kingdom opened, as that
spirit grew in me which interprets the Scriptures in the life, and opens the
sealed mysteries thereof in their season, as they come to be fulfilled; and so
I came to the gift of the Scriptures by inspiration, which only profits to the
perfecting of the man of God, which the man of this world not having learned,
wrests to his own destruction, getting the words of them in the earthly part,
before they be fulfilled in his heart through the Spirit: and such receive them
not by inspiration, nor the gift of the Holy Ghost.

And in this journey I have seen the slothful servant overtake with a (...)
which he had once cast behind him, and never intended to join to again, of
which the diligent servant is kept free and I have seen the wages of each
servant, according to his diligence in that which he has of God betrusted in
him, and not by his own strivings in the thoughts of himself, his worth, or
wisdom; and in diligent hearkening and obeying of the Spirit have I found the
right f^rthfulness toward God, though getting knowledge be highly esteemed
with men, and I have found that as I have the Spirit manifest in me to profit
withal, so the times of my profiting is only in his hand and my waitings upon
him when he moves not is my reasonable service, and a profiting time to me as
if he moved, though I see it not, and this I found a great cross to my hasty
will, which indeed is the true worship in Spirit, which when I knew not this
Spirit to hearken and bow to, and obey and observe in all things, as his will
leads I worshipped I knew not what, and my fear toward God then was taught by
the precepts of men, and I was not taught of the Lord, not being born of that
Spirit; and so all the children of the Lord are taught of the Lord; and as many
as are led by the Spirit of God they are the Sons of God, these Scriptures I
then could read and understand without meanings, not by that which my wisdom
taught me, but which the Holy Ghost taught me, and the Scriptures thus learned
and received was no more a notion to be lost, but a possession, and I came to
have an inheritance therein amongst them that are sanctified in all ages, and
no subtle ^an could either steal them or change them, or any way beguile me of
the truth of them by wresting them nor take away my comfort I had in them, my
comfort and fellowship therein being in the same Spirit and life that gave them
forth, and the word of God thus grew and endures for ever; and the Spirit of
truth that leads into all truth endures for ever and the Seed of God is one
therein to all generations, and that is one which perfects the Spirits of all
just men, and God himself is Judge over all, and leader of all by his own
begettings in all that enter into this rest of the faithful, which remains to
all his Children, out of which false Faiths and Disobedience shuts themselves.

And that which declares the righteousness of God for remission of sins
past, and for an inheritance against sin for time to come, have I found to be
Faith without falsehood, which righteousness though in the Faith and Hope beyond
declaring, yet inherited but as the virtues that are in Christ Jesus comes to
be received in the life of them. And that faith which has not that
righteousness for its ground and end and the virtues and several measures of
the growth of Christ for its life and increase, that I have found upon trial to
be a fained fancy after man's mind, and not after Gods measures: And he that
says he has faith in God and is without the hope of this righteousness for
his inheritance. Or says he, has Christ further, then he has his Virtues for
his life and growth toward this inheritance, when he comes to be weighed with
Truth, will be found too light to stand in judgment or abide the fire, or to
dwell with everlasting burnings; the trial of that Faith will leave him without
faith, then shall it be read as it is written, When the Son of (...) comes,
shall he find faith on tho earth.

Who they be that are under the Law, and who they be that have made void the
La^ against themselves, and who they be that are under Grace
GRace reigns throvgh righteousness, and the Law through Transgression; and he
that says he is from under the Law, and the transgressor alive, he makes void
the Law against himself, but is under it in the account of God.

For the Seed or Image of God being fallen, the transgressor is above, to whom
there is no Grace nor-Life promised, who has no true obedience but for
self ends; upon this is the Law added till the promised Seed arise: And a
School master the Law is till it bring to Christ, who of the woman is made
under the Law, who takes upon him the Seed after the flesh, the Soul to redeem
from under the Transgressor, that the natural Plant of God may grow, so who can
witness the Teachings and Chastizings of the Law to bring him so low till he
come under the Seed, so as the seed be set above the head of the Transgressor,
and have bruised it, and have taken away the strength of sin, there the
strength of the Law is taken away also: And as the Soul is raised up through
the Law, the Law being fulfilled by the seed through the Spirit, so it arises
above the Law into the Kingdom of Grace, which reigns through Righteousness,
and not by making void the Law; for the Grace is to the Seed, and the Law to
the Transgressour; and as these reign in the Creature, so is he under the law
or under Grace, for the Law has power over the man of sin as long as he lives,
then is the Seed of the Promise in bondage, but he being dead by which the seed
is held captive the seed rises under Grace, which as it rifes through the law
fulfils it, and being fulfilled it loses its strength, as sin dies, and so has
no more power, the Law being the strength of sin till it be fulfilled by the
seed through the Spirit; so he that is dead to sin is free from sin, and under
Grace; And he that casts off the Law while he is alive that sins, makes void
the Law against himself.

So he that's under Grace is dead to sin, and dead to the Law which is the
strength of sin, and sin has no more dominion over the soul, the power of it
being subdued, which was the Law unfulfilled; but where the Law is made void,
the strength of sin yet remains, and the Law will overtake them in the end.

And he that learns this in the Death and Resurrection, and eternal life, shall
in this work learn what the Transgression is, and how the law is added upon
him, and how it is the strength of sin in him, but not in the seed, and what it
is that makes the entrance through the Law, and how Grace comes to abound where
sin has abounded, and to reign through Righteousness unto eternal life.

So where the Transgressor is slain, there the Law is at an end and fulfilled,
and the natural Plant of God brings forth against which there is no law, but
the law is against the man of sin, and the man of sin against the law as long
as he lives, and power it will have over him, and one jot of it will not pass
away till it be fulfilled; And he that would cast off the Law and make it void,
is far from Grace, but in him that fulfils the Law does Grace and Truth abound.

Of the Way of Life, from the Knowledge that devours the Life.
Would thou know the way of Life from that Knowledge which devours the life;
then be no longer as the wild Asses Colt, but take up the yoke of the Son, in
whom thou say thou believe, that the life of Faith thou may feel and know,
for only in the obedience is the life made sure to thee of what thou believe,
and thereby is faith and knowledge made perfect.

But until thou attain power for obedience of Faith, thou art dead and knows
but words, in which thy Faith stands without life which accomplishes nothing,
but will arise to condemn thee when thy time is out.

Therefore in all thy seeking mind that which works in a lowly mind, calling
thee into the Obedience of what is there made manifest in the begettings of the
Father, and not in the conceivings of the Brain, but in the Son, For in the
Brainknowledge the Boaster Rules who glories in the wisdom of words, but not in
the words of life; but in the Obedience of the Son is the Father known and
glorified in such as walk in the Spirit and not in the mind, whose praise is of
God, and their lives hid with him from all knowledge but what is Revealed in
the Obedience of the Son: So from man you may learn the knowledge of words, but
the knowledge of life is only begotten of God; so he that has the Son has
life, not of the disobedient Nature, for the only begotten of God is
Conformable to him that begets him in all things through Obedience.

So feeling thy measure of the begettings of God, in it be obedient, and seek
not to be above it in any thing, lest the enemy thereby get power in thee to
puff up thy mind in thy Knowledge above thy life, which devours the life.

Therefore as thou feels Faith, Love, Meekness, Gentleness, Patience, or any
Godliness move in the Spirit, therein become obedient with all diligence, and
thereby shall thou know the power thereof against all the contrary motions in
thy flesh, so shall thou learn the salvation of Grace unto life eternal, which
thou can never attain by talking or any other way but in the Obedience
thereof, so shall thou not receive the grace of God in vain, nor words without
the working power of life, whereby the living knowledge of the Mystery of
godliness will daily increase.

For by Obedience of the Spirit is the soul purified from its darkness and
pollution, and made fit for the further manifestation of the hidden Mystery,
and the receiving the fullness thereof, and walking therein; And so by the holy
Ghost thou shall be able toconfess Jesus Lord over all powers in heaven and in
earth, the opener of all secrets, and only revealer of the Father who
begets, by whom thou becomes wise in thy knowledge unto salvation, not unto
vain babbling, whose words shall rise and Condemn them who glory therein.

But thou, if in Spirit thou hearken diligently and obey, shall know that he
who sometimes spoke by the Prophets does now speak by his Son, the everlasting
power of godliness, only begotten of the Father, and in all things like unto
him, in whom he is made manifest; And the Prophets have Prophesied of glory to
come, but the Son declares the Father in the present life, according to the
measure of him formed; and as he arises in fullness he opens the heavens and
gives the inheritance thereinto.

An opening of Light to all sorts of Rulers and People that wait for the
Kingdom of God, that you may not oppose him in his appearance, nor set up
another to reign upon earth in his stead.
DO you say you seek God you Rulers and People, will you seek his face upon
earth? or would you see his appearance to reign in righteousness? or can you
rejoice to see him manifest in flesh? or do you love his image who is the
Fathers of Lights from whom you look for the Son from Heaven? then be not
carnally minded in your expectation, least you know him not in his appearance
who is a Spirit, and so, oppose him as your Fathers in the flesh ever did,
except you be born of the Spirit you cannot see the Kingdom of God.

The Father dwells in the light and changes not, and the Son is the light of
the World in his own Image, by whom he changes all things that are out of him,
and overturns shadows and customs, and makes the world new; and in Spirit and
power is his Kingdom upon Earth, and the flesh is the Vail with which he was
ever hid from flesh and blood, but revealed in spirit to such as desired to
know no man after the flesh to set up or to worship; And no man could ever say
that this Jesus was Lord but by the Holy Ghost.

So with the light of the Spirit alone which sees through the vail is Jesus
known to be Lord and King for ever, with which you may all see what you set up
to be Lord and Ruler in your selves or over others. You that choose Rulers,
Judges and Justices, Mayors and Constables, etc. Do you see through the Vail to
choose Jesus in Spirit to Rule over you or over others? Is that eye open which
knows the Holy Ghost, and what Vessel is filled therewith, that you may choose
him to Rule in his Kingdom? do you seek for that Spirit to choose withal by
which alone Jesus is known to be Lord? Then it is plain yon seek Gods Kingdom
in the face of Jesus Christ who is that spirit, which turning to, causes the
vail to be taken away from all hearts, and will change you also into his image
by that Spirit as says the Scriptures. So there was none to be chosen for
Judges Kings or Rulers in Isreal's Commonwealth but who had of this Spirit and
Unction put upon them, and then the Lord Reigned over them in his Anointed,
whether King, Priest or Prophet, man or woman; but when they chused Rulers like
other Nations, then they rejected (not Samuel) but the Lord, that he should not
Reign over them. Now you that say you seek the Lord to Rule over you, and say
thy Kingdom come, mind what you choose to rule in you or over you, and with what
spirit, lest your practice oppose your prayers and make void your daily
expectation; do you choose after the ^^esh as other nations do, or do you choose
after the holy Ghost? If you choose after the flesh; then you set the vail
betwixt you and the Lord, and Gods Kingdom and his image you cannot see, and so
you reject the Lord as other nations do; but if you look through the Vail unto
that which is within the Vail, then shall the vail be taken away from all your
hearts, and you shall see him amongst you whom you wait for, and him alone set
up and worship, and choose him alone to reign over yon who is near you at hand
to all that put not his day afar off.

So if you make Rulers like all the Nations, then after the flesh they that are
rich, they that are proud, they that are full of earthly glory, etc. Here is
the earth set above, then the Vail is before your eye, and you see not the Lord
that Spirit, nor do you set up Jesus to be Lord by the Holy Ghost; but i^ that
eye be open in you, that can see through the vail of earth, and all this deal
of flesh and darkness to that which is within the vail, even the holy One in
his Temple, him to choose and set above in your minds, then your eye shall see
the Lords anointed, and the King in his glory, and he shall rule, whose right
it is, in every heart, and your Governors shall be of your selves, and all
violence shall cease, and shakings of Governments, the Government being upon
his shoulders, who is the Prince of all your peace, in the great and in the
small, who shall reign in righteousness, and judge the people with equity for
God, and not for rewards, to whose authority every knee shall bow, and every
tongue confess for conscience sake, his name being written in every heart will
then be read whose kingdom is everlasting, and in spirit and power he reigns,
and in spirit is worshipped in heaven and in earth, who fills all things with
the presence of his Glory, and his kingdom is near to all that can believe, its
within you, says Christ, and he rules where he is not known (though not to
salvation) who is made of the seed of David after the flesh by the word of God
to all Generations a King for ever, according to promise, whose Kingdom the eye
which the god of this world has blinded is putting afar off, who sees not the
light of his glorious Gospel though he be not afar off, but him in whom all
things have life and being, either to salvation, or condemnation, and this is
the condemnation, that light is come already into the world, which men who
loves their evil deeds say is to come, and so looks for that without who is a
spirit within, and therein has ever reigned more or less, but now is arising
to his day over all the world, whose sound is gone out to the ends of the
earth, and his light arises in every heart, to life or condemnation, and some
it leads into rest, and others it pricks to the heart, and they kick against it
and will not have it to rule therein, and to this day he is rejected of the
builders, who is the first born unto God in Spirit blessed over all.

And now all sorts of people who in truth wait for the Kingdom of God upon
earth, with that which in you is of him, you may all see (if you keep that eye
single) when he draws near who is born of the Spirit, and when he is put afar
off in his Government here below, when you behold in any manner of Authority,
such a spirit as is for God* alone, looking to that of God in every man without
respect of person or riches and with a single eye seeks to find out where that
measure of God is transgress^d in any, or where it is oppressed by any, and
with that measure of God in himself seeks to set judgment upon the head of the
transgressor, and to set free the innocent principle of God in all, which will
not lead any to evil, then is the judgment of God and for God, and that of God
is set above in all, that is he that is born of God; here the kingdom of God is
near, and as this increases so God draws near, and his Kingdom increases, and
that of God in you all will answer thereto, and rejoice thereat, which waits
for him, and that which is upright in every heart shall say that is the
judgment of God, and in that Vessel is God on his Throne, according to the
measure of that Spirit set up in Judgment, so is Jesus Lord by the Holy Ghost,
known and bowed to.

But on the contrary, in what place of authority soever it be, in which the
Innocent comes for Judgment against the Oppressor who is too strong for him,
and so seeks to Justice to plead his Cause and to deliver the seed of God that
is burdened; and when he comes his Cause is not heard, but is thrust away (if
not further ensnared) because he cannot oppress that of God in him more, either
by bowing to something of vain Customs or Worships never set up by God nor
owned by his witness for Conscience sake; or else because he cannot hire his
judgment by feeding a covetous Spirit which is for Rewards, and not for God
that he Judges, and so the innocent soul is not relieved at this throne, but
sent away as an offender, from that place where he should be eased and
justified with the judgment of a free spirit, for justice sake, does not that
of God in you all testify against this, that judgment is here turned backward
in that vessel, and that Jesus is not Lord therein? so the innocent heart is
sadned, but not saved and the Kingdom of God put afar off, and the Scepter of
Righteousness not seen.

Wherefore Rulers and People, who set up flesh instead of the holy Spirit to
rule over you, the wills of men, the pride and glory of this world, or any
visible thing here below born after the flesh; see what you choose, and what you
put afar off; and with that spirit you now choose you will never see the Kingdom
of God, nor be able to say in truth that Jesus is Lord; its by the spirit of
holiness, meekness, and true judgment and works of righteousness, that Jesus
is known to reign, and therein stands the sight of his Kingdom, and Lordship,
in every heart, in every Court, and in every place of judgment to all
generations, which you deny in choosing the man of this world after the flesh to
rule in you, or over you therein; and yet you say you look for him, and thy
Kingdom come daily, but deny him in the simplicity of his lowly spirit to rule
for his own in all, as all your Rulers ever did, as you have read in words, and
now may read in deeds, the world by wisdom knows not God; so that spirit chooses
its own to rule, but cannot receive him whom you say you look for.

And how should any one who sees the kingdom of God, and where the simplicity
of Christ is above, own that kingdom, or worship that Spirit and not betray the
simplicity of Christ, and give his honor to another. And if in the meekness
of mind you did but weigh this you could not think it so strange why so many at
this day (who have received the kingdom of God, in his lowly, just, and
righteous spirit) choose rather to suffer death under that spirit of this world
then to bow to worship it, or confess that due thereto which belongs only to
Jesus the Lord, neither would you say it was obstinacy or contempt of Authority
rather to suffer by the will of man then to rob the Lord of his glory, and deny
Christ in his kingly office, and set up another in his place. And herein true
wisdom may see that in so doing we resist not that power which is ordained of
God, nor the person, but that spirit we testify against by sufferings under,
which God never anointed for a Savior, holding forth the anointing as we have
received for a witness against him, in the spirit of meekness, confessing our
King in whom we receive power to suffer; so to us he is come, and by the gift
of the Holy Ghost we can say he is Lord; therefore to us there is but one Lord,
though there be many so called, whether in heaven or in earth, yet have we but
one in all, both in heaven and earth, and him we know where ever he is by the
gift of the Holy Ghost, and to him in spirit we confess and bow, and the
fruits of his spirit are manifest with the light of the world, testifying
against all the works of darkness, in all the children of his kingdom. And to
us he is born who is from above the Holy Child, wonderful in Council and
Strength, whose heavenly power and virtue takes ^u^ affections from all
earthlyobjects and worship, whose name is Immanuel, and it is written in our
hearts, and shed abroad into the world in our lives, and Christ Jesus is the
end of our conversation, him alone to put on, above all to preach by walking in
him as we have received of that lively image of holiness and truth, the
anointed of God, and so we confess him before men, who is the right heir, in
what vessel soever he appears, and the praise we give to God where this
treasure is found in the earthen vessel, and the hope of all our glory is
Christ within, and the increase of his government is Christ within, of which
there is no end, and with that spirit is all righteousness established, the
kingdom of God upon earth, and eternal life.

And where this is not seen, chosen, and followed, there men rule in their own
wills, and where men's persons and riches is respected in choosing such, there
the same is respected in judgment by such, and the Law of God is perverted,
and the sword of Justice which should defend the cause of the innocent is laid
by, and the fist of wickedness is l^ft up against that which is tender of God
in every conscience, and when this rules the righteous seed mourns in secret,
but wickedness reigns openly; and this is and ever was the state of the Kingdom
of God and the Kingdoms of the Gentiles, the one rules in the Spirit of
Holiness, and the other exercise Lordship in their own wills, chosen and set up
not by the Holy Ghost, as you may read in the Scriptures concerning Isreal's
common wealth, who when they wanted the ruling of this spirit they sold
themselves under their enemies, but when this was their Judge they had a
Savior chosen after the spirit, not after the flesh, what ever was the vessel,
the Spirit was their Savior.

Moses was a poor wandering Shepherd, yet in this Spirit a God to Pharaoh, and
Savior of Israel; Samuel a poor man who received no reward for judgment, and
when they went about to choose another after the manner of other Nations they
rejected God; who then gave them a King in his wrath; David a poor man not
chosen by the outward appearance as man looks, but by the heart, by the
direction of the Spirit, he was the Shepherd of Israel, and his seed of the
same Election has the everlasting Kingdom of promise to all generations.
Elisha a Plowman, yet by that Spirit was he the Chariots of Israel and horsemen
thereof. Deborah a woman yet a Judge and deliverer to Israel. And too long
would it be to instance in all ages how he has set up his throne and saved his
people in this Election, not of wisdom, riches or worldly glory, but the poor
of this world, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom of promise, which you say
you look for, but cannot see nor receive while you choose after the flesh as the
world has ever done, who still have bent all their wisdom and Religion to keep
the Heir out of his Kingdom, whom they have been looking for after the flesh,
but not believing in the light to give them a sight through the vail to him
that is born of the spirit have resisted the Holy One, and chosen the
murderer, as did your Fathers so do you always resist the Holy Ghost, and as
it was so it is, that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and chooses after the
flesh and worships after the flesh, for it can see no further, it cannot see
the Kingdom of God, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, and chooses
after the spirit, and worships in spirit, and these are contrary Kingdoms, and
he that's born after the flesh persecutes him that's born after the spirit, ever
did and ever will do, for the Scripture cannot be broken, which has so said
and is now fulfilled.

And now you that are called Christians, you read and Preach of this King
Christ Jesus and his Kingdom, what a One he ever has been in his appearance
upon Earth, by whom he has been received and by whom rejected and after what
manner he has ever suffered, and by what power he has reigned in all ages,
and this you will confess in words, but will you now receive him to reign in
you? Or can you own his appearance where it is set up in others and not be
offended therewith, is that eye open that knows him, or can you delight in him
who was never like the world in his walkings? was not he ever poor as to this
world, and therefore rejected of the rich and learned? lowly, and rejected of
Princes and them that was high? was not his work ever to change shadows, and
forms, and Religious traditions set up in men's minds above the life of Truth
and leadings of the spirit, and to set up spiritual worship and obedience in
its place? And therefore by the builders ever rejected and condemned, and his
new work was ever foolishness to the wise, wherefore he bare the reproach
thereof with patience; was he not ever meek and innocent and harmless in his
conversation toward all men as a Lamb indeed, separate from sinners in life;
yet seeking them to save out of sin with the daily giving up his life, etc? So
he was and so he has ever appeared on earth, now can you receive him King as
he was, you that wait for him? Or do you think he is changed? Is he now become
proud and lofty in flesh after the world, cruel and coverous and hard-hearted,
subtle and crafty to deceive the simple, strong and violent to trample on the
helpless, does the glory of his Scepter now stand in meats and drinks and fine
apparel or great earthly possessions? does he now come to take up his abode and
delight in these things, who ever has come to take the minds of his people out
of these things up into the heavenly treasure? does he now delight in earthly
glory, strife and exaltation? Is the weapons of his warfare now become carnal
wherewith he over comes his enemies? does he now come with haling and beating,
whips and prisons and cruel tortures to take the Kingdom of peace, who has
suffered such things formerly from the world himself, and will he now turn
oppressor of that which is tender in Conscience, and grind the face of the
poor, or pervert the Judgment of the needy? Should he now be seen in works of
this nature, were this to appear the second time without sin unto salvation as
he is promised? Sure the vail is thick over that heart who sees not that this
is not his Kingdom, Power nor Glory, nor his image who is the same yesterday to
day and for ever. Yet is this nature above in many, and chosen to Rule over
many who say they wait for his Kingdom, that eye being darkened with the love of
the world which should give the true sight of his coming, the carnal mind
thinks God to be like himself; But did you but honestly look into your own
hearts, with that eye which puts a difference between things that differ in
your selves, to know each motion of each Spirit, and each power, and the end
and nature of its working, the earthly and the heavenly, you would soon be able
to Judge of these two which so far differ in their fruits, and are so contrary
in all things, and to own the right heir in his Kingdom: But while you suffer
the god of this world to keep his Throne in your hearts, by letting him
captivate your minds and affections into earthly delighrs, it is not like he
will suffer you to choose aright, nor receive another to reign in you or over
you; the eye of the mind being blinded therewith, the light of the Gospel
cannot shine into the heart by which you should choose, and which gives the
knowledge of God in the face of Jesus, nor that treasure be seen or received in
the earthen vessel, as King either in your selves or others; but the wise in
heart knows what they wait for, and when they see him they rejoice with the joy
of his Kingdom which consists not in carnal things, nor comes with outward
observations, but whose coming is within, and whose Kingdom consists in
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, blessed be our King for ever,
and blessed are they who put not his Kingdom afar off..

And therefore you Rulers and People of all sorts high and low, this word is to
you, and this day is to you the day of the Lord, arise and receive your King
into his Kingdom, that he may receive you and establish you therein; the Lord
it at hand, he is near to all that call up on him in truth and righteonsness.

To you Princes, Judges, Justices Mayors and Constables and all sorts of Rulers
who are in the place to Govern, the Lord is at hand, he is near you all, the
Kingdom of God is within you, the Principle of God is within you, with which
(if you mind it) he will break the yoke of the oppressor within you and without
you by the sword of Justice, that's his Kingdom upon earth, put it not afar off,
let it arise in your hearts, set it up above the will of man, let it shine in
your hearts, let it speak in your Courts, that which is of God in you all,
which Judges justly and with equity; lay by your will, your pride, your
covetousness, and all that's above that Spirit of meekness in your minds, and
make room in your hearts for the Holy Ghost, that thereby Jesus may be Lord in
you and over others, that you may. know him to whom Judgment belongs, to be in
you; you need not say who shall ascend into heaven to bring down Christ from
above, or who shall descend into the deep to bring up Christ again from the
dead, for he is nigh you, and you may feel his witness in Spirit, and his Word
is in your hearts, the Word of Faith, the Word of Righteousness, that therewith
you may all know him, who stands in the Congregation of the mighty, to Judge
among the Gods, who Judges not unjustly, nor accepts the person of the
wicked, but that with him you may deliver the Poor and Fatherless, and Judge
the cause of the stranger, wherein they are oppressed, that his Kingdom, and
that's the Word of Faith and the Word of Righteousness that leads to it.

And if this be set up in your own hearts to love it more then gifts and
rewards, persons or earthly glory, then is the Lord near you, and his Kingdom
is above the earth in you, and your work will be to set it above the earth in
others, and so the Kingdom of your Father who begets this in your hearts his
Kingdom comes, as his Will is done upon earth as it is in Heaven, where all
obey him, there is the Kingdom his, the Power is his by which you Judge, and
the glory is his of your Righteous Judgment, now and for ever if you therein
abide: And thus shall you be of the obedient Children to that of your Father in
you begotten, who say and do, who pray and practice, and not like the Scribes
and Pharisees and Lawyers, who said and did not, who made long prayers, but
devoured the poor and needy, and judged not the cause of the stranger, but laid
heavy burdens upon others, and bowed not thereto themselves, who could not
believe in the light, nor receive Christ within them, though he told them the
kingdom of God was within them, and his word had no place in them, who was
filled with pride and wilfulness; so they had lost the key of knowledge, the
key of David, to open to them the way into the anointing, whereby to know
David's Lord to reign in Spirit, which has the promise of David's Throne for
ever: So when they lost this the kingdom departed from Israel, and the
Priesthood also; and he set up his sign to the Gentiles, preaching the kingdom
of God to rhem that were afar off, and they that were not a people ^ame to the
kingdom of his anointing, and that great mystery that had been hid from ages
was opened thereby to the Gentiles, which was Christ in them, the hope of
Glory, and Kingdom of the Father.

And now you that are called Christians, and are making great Declarations,
what a glorious Kingdom the Kingdom of Christ will be at his coming, and what
holiness and righteous Government, and many high things and great glory you
look for, etc. But above all the rest, how are you estranged, who are gone out
again from the anointing to look for this without you, while you reject it
within you? Was Christ within them, that great mystery that had been hid from
ages, which by the hearing of faith was opened to the Gentiles, and was the
hope of Glory to them (even Christ within them, whom the Apostles preached,
warning every man, and teaching every man that they might present every one
perfect in Christ Jesus, the hope of Glory within them, which Faith the Jews
not receiving, lost their King and Kingdom? And is your hopes without you, as
the Jews was? Is that the Hope the Apostles preached to the Gentiles, or that
which enters within the vail? Is there not a vail drawn over your hearts again,
whilst you read this in Scriptures? And have not you lost the key of knowledge,
who are gone out from the anointing in your hopes? Have you not lost the key of
David, which should let you see David's Lord, in which the kingdom of God is
established for ever? Did God swear this to David after the flesh, or to
Abraham after the flesh, or to any after the flesh? Then how is his kingdom
everlasting? Or why did he say, the flesh profits nothing? And why did the
Apostle say, they desired henceforth to know no man after the flesh, no not
Christ himself? Flesh and blood passes away, but this kingdom is everlasting;
so him whom the Apostles preached in Spirit by the receiving of the Holy Ghost,
wherein they were to grow up to his age, and stature, and appearance, him you
reject in spirit to be the hope of your glory and kingdom and wait for a
government after the flesh, and fo shut up the great mystery of godliness which
was opened, and the kingdom against your selves which mystery is not after the
flesh, but God manifest in flesh, Christ within the hope of Glory, and this
mystery was ever shut with carnal expectations, but opened in the Spirit, as it
was, so it is, who denies the Spirit to be Lord shuts up the kingdom.

Wherefore arise out of the flesh you Rulers and People, and receive your King*
long has he been rejected and thrust out of the Throne of Judgment, for which
you have no Peace nor Establishment; why will you not turn to him who calls you
in Spirit, what a shame is this, that you are called Christians, and know not
your anointing Christ in you? What, Christians and without Christ, Christ not
come? What do you rule withal, and discern with, and judge with? Is not all
that reprobate, who knows not Christ in you? But if you know a just, a holy, a
righteous principle of Spirit in you that is of Christ, set it up, and you set
up Christ, bow to the Holy Ghost and you worship in Spirit and thereby you
shall say that Jesus is Lord, set up his light in your hearts and his day will
arise to you all. for there must the day dawn and the day star arise in your
hearts, which will give the knowledge of God near you, and true judgment near
you, and that which rules over spiritual wickedness near you, which all must
bow to who receives the kingdom of God, honor God in your hearts, set him up
in your hearts, let him be Judge in your hearts, and first receive his Light
and Judgment there, before you pass judgment upon others, least you in
judging others before men condemn your selves before God; David had little
thought he had done that, when he said, he that had taken his neighbors lamb
should ^urely dye; and you may soon do the like if you go out from the Spirit
and judge before you receive judgment in your own hearts, and see all be clean
there first, then is your Scepter established in righteousness, and your
judgment in truth, which is the Scepter of the Throne of David in Spirit,
which condemned David in flesh, and will condemn you in the flesh if you sin
against it; and that is his kingdom, and he is King for ever, who in Spirit
condemns sin in the flesh, and for this end is he manifest, that the
righteousuess of the Law may be fulfilled in all who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit, which comes in his Name, who went away after the flesh
that the kingdom might come. And if you receive your authority and judgment in
this right principle of God, it will judge for God in all yoor selves, and
others, and it will fit you to be mediators betwixt the Offender and Sufferer
in all, and you will see what it is which transgresses, and what is
transgressed, and the nature of every offense to pass an equal judgment
accordingly, and this is of God, and he loves it, and where that of God is
pressed, not to clear the oppressor, but to judge the oppressor, and set that
of God which is innocent free; and here with that of God in your selves you
judge for that of God in all, and set that of God above the oppressor in all,
which oppressor is not of God in you nor in others, but is to be judged, and
for the Law and for the Sword, but against that of God, the Law is not; and
here is Gods kingdom already near, and not afar off, where God is all in all
and the righteous reigns, and the power that is ordained of God, the soul is
subject to for conscience sake toward God in heaven and eaeth, and that of God
in every conscience shall answer to your Judgment and Authority, and God shall
set you up therewith as a terror in every heart above the evil doer, the
murderer and traitor, and the Arrows of the Almighty shall stick in the hea^^s
of all that seek to undermine this Government, for the kingdom of God it is, in
which he Rules, who cannot forget himself, nor has this kingdom been taken
from any who once received it thus, till they go out of it themselves, by
suffering or setting up another to rule above that measure of this just and
innocent principle of God.

And if you receive this kingdom from heaven in love of it, then shall you
receive your judgment from heaven also, and your Law-to judge by, and God
shall make you rich toward him in righteous judgment, and toward his People,
and a discerning spirit will he give you in this anointing to know hard matters
that are hid from flesh and blood, which you shall receive in secret, and bring
forth openly, and all shall hear and fear, and praise the Lord for you; and you
shall no more go to the Heathen to learn judgment whom the Lord has removed
far from him, nor shall you uphold those Laws by which the servants of God has
suffered formerly in the times of Popery, nor shall the Statutes of Omri be
kept and observed, nor follow the ways of the house of Jeroboam, for you have
seen what God has done concerning them, that you may fear to follow them: But
you shall have your Laws from the Lawgiver Christ Jesus, and your judgment
from the Father of lights, whose Ministers then you are, to whose sword that of
God in every Conscience shall answer, which is written in every heart, and
which every heart shall fear to offend, when they hear that the Lord has
raised him up Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, and
the Heathen shall hear and fear, and come to you to learn Judgment, and
righteousness shall arise from amongst you to the ends of the earth, and the
break of Gods day shall be with you first, as to you it is first tendered if you
be not found unworthy to receive him, and he shall make you as a head in
Counsel, and the first ^orn of all Nations unto God shall you be if you receive
him; wherein the blessing of God is bound up by an oath, and his strength upon
earth to all generations.

And this is the love of God to you all once more, The Rulers of these Nations,
from the highest to the lowest, that love might open your hearts that the earth
has shut and sealed, that you might come to a feeling of your everlasting
establishment, and that your fears may cease in an endless ^nion betwixt
Christ your King and your own souls, to the d^ead of all your enemies, and
eternal praises lift up to him indeed, who has scattered your enemies many a
time for you, and all their dark plots brought to light, that you may love the
light wherein is your salvation, and not plot in darkness against his innocent
ones, as your enemies do, but with hearts open and naked receive the truth,
which condemns all the deeds of darkness in you and in them, least he bring
your Plots and secret Counsels against the innocent upon your heads, as he has
often done to your enemies, for he will avenge the poor, though long he suffer
with them and in them; and this is now seen concerning you, as was formerly
seen concerning them, of which they were warned in words, and witnessed against
in sufferings long before it came, who are now broken as a Potters vessel, and
cannot be made whole, but what ever they do, breaks them more. And now are you
warned and invited in love, who sees before you this day what God has done
concerning them, and suffered concerning you.

And I am bold in the love of God to send this to you all wherein there is a
Seed of God, and I know there is that of God in you which will answer to the
truth of this; and the Scriptures witness with me also, so I am not alone, but
by two infalible witnesses every word is established, either to life or
condemnation; and my prayers to God is and shall be, as long as this of God in
me has breathings, That you may receive the Kingdom of God which is near you,
through that spiritual Light and Key that opens the door of your entrance
thereinto, that you may come to be established in the Covenant of God and not
of man, and that you may not resist the Holy Ghost, as hitherto you have (many
of you) done, nor kick against that which pricks you at your hearts when you
are told hereof, least you be broken in the end, so as you can never be healed,
which is near at hand to be broken or established, as you receive God or refuse
him, who has long waited upon you that now are, and with much patience is he
finishing as large a Testimony of his suffering and forbearance among you, as
ever was since the world began, though it be little seen where the light is
rejected, which the longing of my Soul is, may be for the leading to
Repentance, that you may be established after all this shakings in that which
cannot be shaken, otherwise the most miserable Woe that ever wa^ will come upon
you, your Profession of Christ being the greatest that ever was since the
beginning; And his Oppression answerable, under which he suffers in all places
of the Nations for a testimony that the Kingdom is near you, whether you will
receive him or refuse him, whose life in measure is now manifest in mortal
flesh, and the light thereof arises in every Conscience to lead or condemn.

A Candle lighted, to give the sight of the good Old Way of God at his Coming
from the ways that now ensnares the simple.
A Voice in the Wilderness cries aloud to all you who are talking of the Lords
coming, prepare his way, make his paths strait, make way for the Just to come
to Judgment, make him way in your streets, he comes not in a corner, nor is he
kept in the secret chambers, but openly in the streets of the great Cities,
where iniquity is committed openly, whose Cry has gone up before the Lord, and
he comes to see whether it be so indeed as the Cry has been: And behold here
is no room for the feet of his Servants to pass, in whom he comes; The ancient
paths of Peace are broken up, the Sea has broken its Banks, it rages and
swells exceedingly, and the good old Ways are grown like a Wilderness, they
are filled with heaps of Rubbish, so that the Stranger cannot pass, who has
no habitation in the Earth; our streets are become as Sodom which God
overthrew, who can see and not lament? How are the paths of the Just devoured?
How is Briars and Thorns grown over the way of the Righteous, which takes hold
of the upright what way soever he turn, if he come against sin? So the Innocent
pass if he come in the Name of the Lord: All has freedom but the Heir, and
such as he sends before his face to prepare his Way; Swearers, Liars,
Drunkards, and all deceitful workers are become Freemen, have free passage, and
every one brings forth without fear; but he that departs from Iniquity, and
testifies against it, is beset about with them all, as a Sheep in the briars,
what way soever he turns, his bonds are increased. How is true Judgment driven
into a corner, and Wickedness come into the streets, which rises up without
fear against him that Reproves it? for Violence has got into the Seat of
Equity, and has framed mischief by a Law, and has turned Judgment backwards.

Should not Truth have its way amongst you Professors, and righteous Judgment
pass upon its Enemies where they are found, and plead its own cause against
Iniquity? But he that lets stands in the way with his Weapons to devour him
that is more Righteous then himself, and no man is able to restore to the
upright his path; Or can he redeem his own way, but through blood? Shall he
condemn Iniquity, and not be a prey? Or shall he reprove sin in the Gate, and
not be taken in their Dragg? And when the Innocent is caught in this Net, to
whom shall he cry for relief and not increase his bonds? Or who will plead his
Innocent Cause, and not betray him? If he would appeal to Justice, he cannot
come at it, nor does Judgment sit in the Gate? Is there help in the House of
the King, or will the House of the Priest plead his Right? Or to whom may he
commit himself with safety, whose Life and Faith is held in a pure Conscience?
Or in what Court can he appear without offense? Are not Snares laid in lower
places, and on the Mountains a Net spread? And do not these daily catch men?
Search if there be a man left that is valiant for Truth upon Earth, who for
fear or favor will not wink at Oppression, or that dare faithfully stand by
him that comes in the Name of the Lord to reprove sin openly: who is he that
has not laid Riches, or Honor, or some piece of Earth in his own way to stop
his feet from the path of uprightness, and so is every man's Arm become too
short to relieve the Oppressed, or to open the way wherein the Innocent may
serve his Maker without fear? Or the Just to proclaim the Ho^ine^^e of God
without danger, in the way that God shall choose, and not man; Or for Judgment
to come forth into the open places where wickenesse is most acted: Or for the
lively witness of the Lamb to arise against his enemy in the good old way that
he has chosen to all Generations?

Ah! how is the Ancient paths forsaken of men? How have you left the good old
Way of God, and chosen ways of your own against your own souls? How long will
it be ere you try your ways with the truth, that you may return to him who is
come to require the Paths of judgment and righteousness, and truth, that the
meek may possess his Inheritance of old, and that God may walk in his own seed
as he has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, who comes as the
lightning.

Behold you who are crying against new ways, you say it was never well since
there was so many new ways, you are the men, and your ways are the thing you
complain of, and why there is so many of your ways, is because Babel is
confounded, and many Heads and Horns are lifted up to fulfill that number, as is
written of them to withstand the way of the Lamb, and to fight against Gods
appearance in his heritage; who all are set against the way of God as at this
day, which is but one to all generations: was not this his way of Old which is
now rejected, and which is become so odious in your eyes? Was not this of old
the pure path, which you now say breaks your peace? Search the Scriptures which
testify of God and his way in his servants of old, and how he then passed in
his redeemed ones, chosen vessels for himself, to make his power known against
oppo^ers, as you may read in Scriptures, trace the steps of his servants in
whom he walked, and see how far you have erred at this day.

Was not this his way in Jeremiah? Who led him into the gates of Jerusalem, and
through the streets thereof, through him declaring against sin there abounding,
and to pronounce judgments to follow? did not he lead him into their Temple,
and therein told them who went thither to worship that they trusted in a Lie,
who cried the Temple of the Lord, but had made it a Den of Thieves by their
wicked ways? D^d not he lead him down to the house of the King, and there told
him, That if he would not amend his ways his house should become a desolation?
And which of the false Prophets did he not reprove openly by him? Was not this
his way then? And what became of them that would have slopt him? Did not he
speak words in Amos against the Wickedness of their King, Priests and
Worships, that the Land was not able to bear? Did not he lead Jona^ through the
streets of Nineveh? And in which of the Prophe^s did not he thus walk in, and
some received him in his way, and turned from their own ways and found Mercy;
and the rest that rejected him were destroyed in their own ways in which they
blessed themselves as at this day? Now read these, and read what you now oppose
in your Streets and Ste^ple-houses, and Markets, and let that of God in you be
judge if you be not of such as now say, Depart from us we will have none of thy
ways? Also search your Gospel if you can receive his way therein which changes
not. Did not he come in Christ, and in his Apostles as a wandere^ to and fro,
without a certain dwelling place, to Preach Repentance and amendment of life,
and the light of the world, from City to Village, from place to place, which
way you now call Vagabonds? And did not he enter their Temples and Synagogues,
Schools and Markets, and all their places of Worship and concourse, where sin
or false Worship was acted, and there Disputed and testified against their
whole way, and called them to the way of God, and this was his manner of
walking in them, even in times of their Worships, and in the greatest Assembly
of Meetings and Markets, which to you is become as gall and wormwood, and you
call it Disturbance and Peace-breaking.

Was not this his way in such as knew their bodies to be his Temples, and in
whom he walked and spoke the words of Life, and Judgment, and Truth, his way by
which he overturned the World, leaving all without excuse against the day of
wrath which was to follow where he was rejected, his way by which he called
many thousands out of false Worships in which they were settled (as you are) and
their Souls deceived, but this was his way to Salvation, which was not their
way (as he has said, my ways are not your ways) yet was there no other way
f^r them to be saved, which is the same at this day to all that receive his
coming, and to all that resist the Holy Spirit in his Temples; as did your
fathers, so do you says Stephen to such as worshipped God in outward
observations, but denied his way and worship in Temples made without hands:
these resisted the Holy Ghost, resisted the way of God, as do you. Read and
consider, Steven was full of God, the Spirit spoke in him, they resisted him,
they called him a Blasphemer, they stoned him by a Law: here was Gods way, and
their way, now try your ways whose work is to resist the Spirit and Light
within, which has filled the hearts and mouths of his servants to cry against
sin. Mind what you r^sist.

Had not God come in this his own Way to seek and to save by his appearance in
such vessels as he had prepared of old for that end (whom in time he filled
with himself, as they stood in need, in all conditions to pass with him through
all hardships and crooked ways of the wicked world, from place to place
seeking a seed to himself) what had become of the Saints of old, which was
covered with darkness, till he came thus to appear to them holding forth his
light, and his life and glory in vessels prepared, to show forth his virtues
and the riches of his grace, not only in declaring in words, but also in power,
to suffer for his Name long and hard Trials, with much patience and meekness,
in all which they became signs to the world, and lively witnesses of God to his
own in every Conscience, whereby the Seed of God in many, gathered strength to
arise out of darkness and come to judgment, and by their sufferings waxed
confident in the Faith, that it was the eternal God that they had seen
preached; and that was in them who thus suffered, and did not receive their
words as the words of men, but of God, who was with them and in them in all.
And this his way was not only to receive such as came to him, but with danger
of life went in to their Assemblies and public places, to bring them out of
the claws of the Devil, who beat some in their Synagogues, haled some before
Rulers, cast some into Prison; who suffered great afflictions to bring souls
from under the dark power, and in all this God was afflicted with them, and by
his own Spirit brought them out, and this was his way of ransoming and
redeeming, and of bringing to Zion as you may read of old. And thus by his
Spirit and by his working in them did he work wonders and signs, and was a
witness^ against the whole body of sin, overturning false ways and worships by
a way they knew not: nor did the world know it was he, until he had brought to
pass his work upon them, having thus gathered out his Seed from amongst them,
who then sought to stop his way, as you do at this day. And what was their end?

And in this way was the Churches of Christ gathered even blood, and
sufferings, and tumults, and beatings, and mockings, and whippings, and all
manner of cruel usage, fighting with beasts after the manner of men; and by the
patient sufferings of Christ in them, were many recovered out of the snares of
the Devil, which had he not sought them in this way, they had lived and died in
blindness. And this was the way in which God gathered the Churches (which you
who oppose this way would imitate) and in this way was the mystery of
Godliness, and the mystery of iniquity revealed, and the Kingdom of Christ
known upon earth; and in this way came the Scriptures of the Apostles and
Prophets, of which you talk, and would turn to oppose this way; like them who
read his coming in the Prophets, and would have stopped his coming in Christ and
the Apostles, so do you ever resist the way of the Holy One, and yet in words
you pray for his coming, but having erred in your hearts from that light which
should give the knowledge of him, you know not his ways, but have in your
imaginations set a new way for his appearance, every one in his own form, but
all think you are doing him service, to stop his old way by force.

Ah foolish people (and ^ull of wit) will you call on him to come to judgment,
and stop his way with cruelty? Is not the day of the Lord darkness to you who
deny the light? Gods ways are not yours, nor his thoughts yours, who are vain
therein; will you hedge up his way against him? will you set B^iars and Thorns
before him? and shall not the light of Israel kindle a fire amongst you? shall
not he go through and tread you down, and with your own tear you as a Lion from
whom none shall deliver?

Was it not thus with Israel when they builded Temples and increased their
Altars, and multiplied their Sacrifices? and what was the end, was it not all
to sin? for thereby they strengthened themselves against the way of the Lo^d in
his Prophets, and blessed themselves in their worships, and said no evil should
come upon them, for they made many prayers, but their hands were full of blood,
for the best of them was become as a Bryar in the way of the Innocent, and ^he
most upright as a Thornhedg in the way of his servants, in whon he appeared
against their backsliding evils and false worships, but they were not so to
their own Teachers, for them they fed fat, and gave gifts, rewards, and hire to
them; so having got Prophets of their own in their way, then they joined
together, and one cried peace to another, and when God came to break that peace
in his way, and to tell them it was not his peace, then they all joined to
hedge him out, and made a wall against him of their own righteousness, which
they daubed up with their increase of Sacrifices and false worships, so they
said they were innocent people; said so, and Priest, and Prophets, and Rulers
said so, for they had trimed their own ways, so they said they should have
peace, and he that told them truth then became their troubler. So having
covered themselves with this garment, they could shed innocent blood boldly,
which was found in the Skirts thereof not by secret search; and what became of
all this? did their own ways save them in the end? did not innocent blood
outcry the multitude of their Altars, till there was no remedy? So he became
their enemy whom they called their Redeemer.

So now read your ways at this day and measure them in Truth, and see what it
is you are hedging our, who it is, and what is his message against, and what is
his manner of coming, and our manner of opposing, that so, if it were possible,
you might come to see a glimps of the old way, and of your own works; is it not
he that comes to cry out against that which is wicked in your streets, and
false in your worships, that is become your enemy, and breaks your peace, whom
your hedge cannot stop nor your wall keep out? how many briars and Thorns are
set against him at this day to take hold of him if he do but open his mouth in
your streets, what Laws new and old the^e is to make him an offender for a word
in your Temples; how is he beat in your Synagogues, haled before Rulers and
cast into Prisons? how is the Scriptures fulfilled upon you, and his witness
doubled against you manifold over, above all your forefathers of whom you read,
and yet you say you are innocent, you are no persecutors but for liberty of
Conscience, they were persecutors that so used him in the Prophets and in the
Apostles, and in Queen Mary's days that so used Martyrs, etc. but cannot see
your work of the same nature, which Queen Mary's Laws are far too short for you
to accomplish, but with many additions thereto are you in much fury driving on
to destruction, yet having trimed your own way, say you, we are Christians and
have a Gospel Ministry of godly men, etc. But what Christians? did ever
Christians count it a breach of their Peace to reprove sin in the Gate or where
ever it is committed? did Christians ever cast into prison, or count it
disorder to dispute in their Synagogues in the time of their worship? did they
ever make a Law to whip strangers who asks them naught, or to force people to
swear against the conscience? and many such things are now done which in the
time of the Apostles the heathen came far short of, which now is filling up all
against him whose coming is ever as a stranger in the earth, and what hedgings
here is at this day to keep him out from his own is plainly to be seen, and
that he should not have liberty to seek up his lost ones in highways and
hedges, Markets and Steeple Houses; how have you heightened your walls higher
then your forefathers? and what daubing is at this day against the way of God,
from which your own ways cannot save you? for the way of God is perfect and
will endure to a^l Generations, wherein the upright walks and sinners falls in
opposition thereto.

But how should you know his way who denies his light within, seeing they that
rebel against the light never knew the paths thereof; you a^e they who have
erred in your hearts and therefore have not known his ways, and how should you
have peace or enter into his rest, for you that denies his light and resists
his Spirit in your hearts must needs be offended at his coming in your streets,
so you have set your selves against him, and he has set himself against you as
at this day, and therefore it is not with you now as it was when you were in
the work of making him way to walk in tender consciences, and you will find him
arise more to cross your ways as you seek to stop his way, you have begun to
walk contrary to him, and he is beginning to walk contrary to you, and unto you
is he become an enemy; so take heed what you do, for till you return will he
watch over you for evil and not for good, and the more you trim your own ways
to withstand his way, the more will he discover the blood of the innocent in
your skirts before the Sun, till all may see you are no Christians, nor what
you Profess, but open enemies to God and his people, and your hands full of
blood; Wherefore be not rash, you heady people, you that are but looking for
his coming i^ outward observations, are witnesses against your selves that his
way you have not yet learned, though you have read of it, yet you know it not,
and will you appoint him a way, and call it his way, and will he own it, who
comes a way you have not known nor can believe if you be told it? it would be
your wisdom to stand still every one and cease from your own ways, and wait in
the light, which only gives the knowledge of him and his way, which light
shines in the heart as says the Scriptures; and the Kingdom of God is within
you, and he whom you oppose is a Spirit, and comes a spiritual way to cut down
spiritual wickedness; so to the Spirit of light turn that you may see to
prepare to meet him in his own way, and not to set your way to oppose him, that
he should not break you to pieces.

The living God glorified in his Temple, the true Worshippe^s that worship him
in Spirit and in Truth.
NOw glory to God in Heaven, and the thousands of his Saints does confess him
upon earth, who bear his Name and testimony against the world, who have still
put his coming afar off, who have not that which they profess in them, but tell
of great things which they have not, who are without God in spirit, and his
worship in Spirit, such as Christ said worshipped they knew not what, and such
now worship they know not what, who worship that they have not, and profess him
they possess not, without God in the world, in whose heart there is not God,
who are not the Temples of the living God, but to this day worship in Temples
made with hands, as those who resisted the Holy Ghost ever did, and how should
such be holy vessels, holy men and women? what should sanctify where God is
not, and what should lead where the spirit is not, but the blind eye that leads
into the ditch? and what is like to govern where God is not in his throne in
the heart, how can such but be filled with unrighteousness who retain not God
in their knowledge? so it is not strange to the children of light who with the
eye of God are guided to see the whole world lie in wickedness, and to see such
things acted against God in his Temples now, by such as are without God as ever
was, so the Scriptures are fulfilled, as you may read; And ye holy i^ heart
rejoice, and lift up your heads toward the day of Redemption, and own your
generation here on earth that you may be gat^ered to the Fathers with that
which comes from above, and that spirit which perfects the just, and casts out
the unjust, where are the dogs and Adulterers, and such as know not God, and
where the hearts are gathered to the Fathers in God there the earth is blessed,
whose God is the Lord, who have received the spirit from on high, and are
filled with the Holy Ghost, as Stephen was who saw heaven open, who was full of
God, whom the great Professors stoned, who was full of wrath, and yet said they
looked for his coming from Scriptures, yet like mad men run upon him and
destroyed his Temple, so he destroyed their temple which they thought to uphold,
who resisted God the Holy Ghost, because he had no place in them, who could not
receive the light of the world, nor his word could find place in them, but in
such as they ^^st out it found place, whose bodies were the Temple of the
liv^^g God, as he has said, I will dwell in them and walk in them, and
(...)och walked within, with God in spirit, and was not, and Isaiah God ^ad
wrought all his works in him; and Jeremy wa^ full of the fury of the Lord; and
Ezekiel was the son of man; And Daniel had the spirit of them m^st High God the
spirit of light and understanding; And Paul had the Son of God revealed in him,
the same that he Preached, and said they that knew not Christ in them were
reprobates, and he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit; And to David the
Lord said, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee* and David declared
it, and the Saints were begotten of God, and partakers of the Divine nature,
and confessed the Father and the Son in them, and that the Son of God was come
and had given them an understanding, which they that looked for him to come
without, understood not, who beat him in their Synagogues and shamefully
entreated him, because they knew not the Father nor the Son, but said he was to
come; And they that had the Son had Life, and the rest was children of wrath,
filled with wrath, and so the Father and the Son supt with such as had them,
and the Lord was at their Table, and they fed with him in his sufferings and
blood, and the rest made a large Profession of him, but fed at the table of
Devils, and these grew great in violence and strong to devour and shed blood,
and the other excelled in meekness and patient in suffering, and here were they
separated into life and death never like to meet more.

And here now may all read the worship in spirit in such as know God in spirit,
and the worship in Letter in them that have not God, and know not what they
worship, and these know not what they do who know not what they worship, and
the Son of God says, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, who
says they worship they know not what, who worship not in spirit, who worship
in their thoughts of God, but not the Spirit of God in possession and
knowledge, who think they do God service to kill and destroy the Temple of God,
because they know not him in themselves that is worshipped therein, as Christ
has foretold, and must be fulfilled at the coming of the Holy Ghost; And when
God descends from heaven to walk on Earth in his Temples, and to require his
worship to himself out of all Sects and traditions, this is his entertainment
from all that look for him in observations, whose coming is within, and his
Kingdom is within you.

And now to you he is come of whom you have been long talking, and in that way
he appears among you of which you are Preaching; The Jews had but the
prophesies and shadows to know him by reading without them, but you read and
Preach in words of the lively pattern in spirit, and have heard of the same
Life and Testimony which now he bears against you in his Temples, and when he
comes you cannot receive him who suffers the same things among you. Oh England
how will thou stand in judgment, what will thou plead for thy self, when he
arises to judgment, whose Testimony against thee is drawing to an end? what
will be thy excuse, and who will thou say thou took him to be, who now endures
such contradiction against himself, such haling, beatings, scourgings, and
mockings, and banishings, imprisonings and death, without resistings? have not
thou heard of him before he came, that thou might have known in this thy day
the things of thy peace? have thou not read of him that is sent to seek his
lost, in Temples and Synagogues, in Markets, and where the greatest of the
people be, in which manner he now appears, and being refused of the rich,
gathers the poor in the high ways and hedges, and yet has no where to lay his
own head, have thou not heard of the everlasting way of his walkings in
Prophets and Apostles, and his pilgrimage in their bodies upon earth, who was
ever a stranger in the world at his coming from Heaven? what spirit will thou
say this is which has conformed so many at this day, who was amongst you like
wolves to devour others, now to suffer the spoiling of their goods, and
torturings of their bodies, and taking away their lives without seeking the
least revenge, will thou at that day say thou had thought it had been the
spirit of the Devil, as many of you now does, though in your consciences
otherwise convinced?

Alas for thee, how art thou wept over at this day? And what a lamentable
sorrow has many of the Lords servants for thee, whom thou have cast in holes
and prisons for their obedience to God and testimony of their conscience
toward God in them, whose patient sufferings, and unparaleld cruelties are no
more valued with thee then if they were dogs? and this has gone throughout
thee from the least to the greatest till there be very few left which are not
wholly hardened, so that to hear of these evil dealings exercised upon the
innocent does no more enter your hearts, then the rain enters a rock; wherefore
our souls are troubled for you, and our hopes concerning your healing grows
daily less, and our sufferings in the Lord Jesus daily greater, hasting to the
full, and what will you do in the end thereof? Or whom shall we take to witness
for you? or may you be compared with any that ever hardened themselves in these
ways and escaped destruction, that our hopes might revive and our prayers not
cease, did ever any thus deny the life of what you Preach in words your selves,
and which some of you have measure felt and suffered for, and have been
answered in by the Lord, and your eyes have seen the vengeance of the Almighty,
and how dreadful it has been both upon Kings, Priests and Rulers for
resisting? Ah how much better had it been for you never to have known these
things, which you have seen, read and Preached, then now that they should be
fulfilled upon you to the uttermost? how well had it been for you had you been
as those you call heathen, rather then to Profess Christ and thus act against
him at his coming, even in the same way your selves Preach him?

Alas, alas, what has the innocent done, why he thus is used among you? does
he cry against sin, against pride, against false worships, against corrupt
Rulers, corrupt Teachers, corrupt Lawyers, etc. And with much meekness bears
his witness against these evils in you for a testimony of light to your words,
whom he has lifted up in wrath and zeal and judgment against the same things
in the persons of others? and will not this arise against you of which you are
witnesses all in one generation? But say thou, he breaks the peace, and
breaks our Law, and is unmannerly, etc. But was he not ever so accounted, and
is he not now in the same way he ever walked? what could that peace do for you
(could you keep it whole) which is broken by reproving sin and deceit? Is there
any peace to the wicked from God? and will he keep that Law which will not give
him liberty to Reign in his Temples, and to lead his people by his Spirit? or
will you plead that Law against him in judgment when he comes to deal with
you, who should know his Law written in your hearts to limit you, and not your
Laws to limit him, not your manners must not bind the conscience where he is
known to be King? and this you know is truth and have pleaded it against
others, and now cannot own it, will not the Laws of Christ and the manners of
Christ of which you read in Scripture agree with your Government and peace, who
calls for his Kingdom to come amongst you, and profess to rule according to
Scriptures? how will this stand at that day when you must not be your own
Judges, nor by your own Laws? And why is he counted your enemy seeing his
appearance now is in love to give you light out of this (for your Eternal
salvation) against which he will certainly come in Judgment to condemnation?
Have you not heard of the love of the Father to the world, who sends his Son to
lay down his Life therein for a light to the world, that whosoever believes
therein might not be condemned? can you read and confess this life laid down in
the Prophets, in C^r^st, in the Apostles, in the Martyrs, and in all in whom
this righte^u^ blood has been shed from Abel to your time, and can you not say
they were blind Priest and People who could not see this innocent suffer in his
seve^al appearances? And what will you say of your selves, seeing the same
testimony is before your eyes, but not received? was ever his sufferings so
increased in so little a time, and for such little foolish things (as your
selves calls them) which though they seem little yet much innocent blood has
been shed, and this life is laid down daily in many? And why should you count
that so little, which your brethren count dearer then their precious life? Is
there any thing makes it so but the tenderness of the one, and hardness of the
other? But say you, they are guilty of their own blood to suffer for such
foolish things, but who is their executioners? do not you suffer fools daily,
they shall witness against you, that there is something in it more then folly?
have you not read that God chooses the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise, and base despised things to bring to naught things that are, and weak
things to confound the mighty? and can you read and Preach this and not see it
fulfilled nor understand without a meaning? then take heed how you call that
foolish which God has chosen to lay down his life in for a witness against the
murderer in the wise men of the world, will you call that foolishness whereby
the mysteries of God comes to be manifest, and that which he has chosen to
declare himself in openly in his Temples and his worship, his service, and his
suffering long in meekness, and the Devil in his Temples, with his servants,
his pride, his rash^ess and cruelty, and to lay each open to the simplest heart
by their fruits, which have been long covered withwords, but now every one that
knows a Wolf from a Lamb may see and cannot be deceived? will you call this
little which discovers so great a depth of deceit so closely hid, and opens the
painted Sepulchers, and searches the heart of the deceitful, laying it open to
your selves and others, which else you could not have known nor believed if you
were told it? could many of you have believed the Prince of pride had ruled in
you, till you see him act you in cruelty on your Brethren because they cannot
worship you? or could you have believed that the murderer had been there till
you proceed to cast into prisons your brethren and keep them there till death
for these little things? And these things some suffer under you for a witness,
and the rest are spared (though that spirit would have none to live) that the
Scriptures may be fulfilled, Satan shall cast some of you into prison, etc. And
are not these things manifestly laid open to your selves and all that are not
willingly blind, and also the contrary Spirit of Christ Jesus where these
things are patiently endured? And will you call this foolishness, which thus
leaves all the world without excuse, and prepares all for righteous Judgment?
many had little thought these little things should have opened such great
secrets, or this folly have confounded such wisdom, when a subtle spirit has
been some years getting knowledge, and words and Religion to make himself fair
without, that others may believe him to be a suffering Saint, and one of these
little things arises in his way, which discover him to be a devouring Wolf in
a moment; may not the wi^e then truly say the weakness of God is greater then
the wisdom of men, and God has chosen foolish things to confound the wise? And
now the Scripture is fulfilled to your face whether you (seeing) can perceive
or no, and the rock of offense is laid and the stone of stumbling though he be
refused; and he is come whom we have looked for, in the thousands of his
Saints, and the head over his Church, and his body he is preparing daily that
the Fathers will may be done in Earth, and that he may take vengeance of them
that know him not, nor will receive his testimony, who will not believe his
light that now shines, but take pleasure in unrighteousness, though he be come
after their own Preaching, and many are his witnesses at this day; glory to his
brightness, and let the Son arise and Reign for ever in whom alone the
Scriptures are now fulfilling, and the builders reject him, and the wicked make
prey upon him where he turns from iniquity, and the spoiling of goods is
suffered joyfully, and the havoc is made of the Church, and he is taken from
prison and from Judgment, and the reproach of many he bears, and the back is
given to the smiter, and he that sues at the Law for the coat may take the
Cloak also, and he that would have the Hat take the head and body also without
resisting, and prayers and tears is shed for them that hate and despitefully
use him, and goods are taken away and not asked again, and this is our beloved,
and this is his voice, and his sheep knows it, and follows him, and thus it is
w^i^ten of him, and thus it is now read, and glory to him that lives and
reigns for ever, who was, and is, and is come.

TO THE RANTERS.
VVO unto you Ranters of all sorts, the day of your torment approaches, your
cup is almost full, your time draws near an end, you are sed, you are grown
full for the slaughter, your swelling is reached up to heaven, and the burden
of the Innocent and Just one in you cries on high; above all people you have
dealt evil with the Lord, and treachcrously betrayed the tender proffer of his
Spirit, you have murdered the babe in the womb, and he has not resisted but
entreated. How many gentle reproofs has he visited you with? And with what
Love and Faithfulness has he followed you from one of your evils to another,
calling to you in secret, in season and out of season, before the act of your
wickedness, in the act of it, and after you have done it? If by any means he
might have overtaken you, and prevented your ruin, and won you again, that he
might have done you good and saved you from the paths of the Destroyer, all
which is written where it cannot be rooted out against the day of vengeance,
although you have done what you can to stop the mouth of Gods witness in you,
and to stifle the Just least he should reprove you, or give you light in your
dark by paths, wherein you have walked toward the Lord as wild Colts and fed
Horses, refusing his teachings or corrections, strengthening one another
against the faithful witness of Truth when you have b^^n wounded therewith,
and have belied the Lord, and said it is not he, and if it be he, let him make
me better; and I cannot make my self; and if the Devil be in me let him cast
him out; and that sin and Righteousness is all one to God; and many of you
openly denying God; and much more such blasphemies out of you has proceeded,
all which the Innocent Lamb has born since the day he first invited you, and
the Just Lord who is in the midst of you has seen it, and of you he will take
revenge for the Innocent ones sake, whom he will ease of his enemy.

Oh the terrible day that I have seen approaching toward you, and the misery
that is coming nigh when you shall be dealt withal, as you have done against
the Meek and the Holy Seed, which has stirred in you unto life, which you have
betrayed and murdered for your lusts, treacherously have dealt and
treacherously will you be dealt withal; then shall you know that there is a God
of Power and Judgment when you shall be as a mad Bull in a Net, and the Fire
of God underneath you, then shall you choose death and it shall fly from you,
who have refused the way of Life and puffed at it, and you who have scorned the
Light shall know Chains of Darkness. Ah how have you mocked at reproof, the
Lord has heard your light answers, and has born your mocking, and you have
made him to serve under your lust, he is oppressed, and grieved, and broken
with your whorish hearts, and you have made heavy the burden of the meek and
lowly, against whom you have sported, and have not considered that all this is
against your own Souls, and to make strong bonds for your own Necks, which you
must know and feel when the just arises to plead against you for all that is
written against you: Verily dread is upon me when I behold your end, and the
way you have to go, and how few there are to be saved. Alas for you, how have
you heaped deceit, and filled your Vessels with that which the pure God abhors?
You have eaten and drunken your own damnation while you have served your lusts,
you have chosen deceit rather then truth, and therewith shall you be deceived
when you look for rest; you have got words and sought out cunning ways to stop
the way of judgment in you, therefore is your cup become full ^or condemnation
from the Lord God of power, you are filled with the names of blasphemy against
the most high, yea, it is written, He has marked you out, he has set himself
against you, and while you are building a wall of falsehood, is he preparing
destruction, and is watching over you for evil and not for good, and your wall
you have made of cunning deceits will stand betwixt you and Salvation, and keep
you from finding the place of Repentance.

And you high minded Professors also who have gotten the wisdom of words, and
have preached high things of God and Christ, which in you is not wrought nor
fulfilled but in a lie: this will be required at your hands with truth, and
your own words shall arise against you in judgment, and when you should come to
him that should answer in your behalf, your Wisdom and Knowledge which you have
got in that Nature which has oppressed him, will stand in your way as thick
Darkness which you cannot remove nor pass; then shall you curse your God who
has set you on Preaching Words above Life, and lies by which the Spirit of
truth in you and others have suffered and been denied, and Gods Witness lie
waste, and been resisted in its gentle Calls, Motions, and Reproofs: All which
a just hand and unresistable will bring upon you, in that day when Chains of
Darkness has compassed you in the Horrible Pit.

Deceit Discovered by its Fruits.
YOu that call the Children of the Light blasphemers and Seducers, and many
evil Names you give out to People against them, because they Preach Christ the
light of the world, and Christ for Righteousness and Perfection, etc. Hear
what Blasphemy, and Seducing, and Deceiving is, and who are the Deceivers.

They were blaspemers who said they were Jews and were not, and this was
Blasphemy in Gods account, To profess in words what they were not in works,
Rev. 2. 9. And they were blasphemers who said, He that wrought the works of
righteousness was of the Devil, Mark 3. 22, 28, 29, 30. And James said, They
Blasphemed that Holy Name by which the Saints were called, who drew them before
Judgment S^ats, and Oppressed them. Jam. 2, 6, 7. And Saul blasphemed in
persecuting for Conscience toward Christ. Now this God call^ blasphemy, Falsely
to take upon them the Name of a Jew, seeing the Jews were to be a Holy People
to the Lord, and to be^r his Holy Name before all the world in Righteousness
and Truth, and the fruits of his Spirit; which Name they who had not the Life
did blaspheme, by taking the Name of a Jew. And Christ call^ it blasphemy, to
condemn the fruits of that Spirit ^o be of the Devil. And the Apostle calls it
blasphemy, To hale before the Judgment Seats* and persecute the poor that God
had chosen out of the world. These were the old blasphemers in Gods account,
and their children be in the same steps till this day, and therein the truth
finds them, and uncovers them.

So come to your Rule, and be tried as you are in Deed, and not in Words, in
Gods account and not in your Own: This is the blasphemy, to say, You are
Christians, and are not: To say, You are in Christ, and are not: To say, You
are of God, and do the Works of the Devil that old Murderer and Persecuter: To
say, Such as do the works of God are blasphemers, and to Oppress your brethren
for conscience sake. And this blasphemy exceeds your Fathers, by how much the
Name of Christ excels the Name of a Jew. Will you bring forth the abominable
fruits that God hates, and cover them with the Name of Christ, and father them
upon the Spirit of Christ, and say you are in Christ, and Redeemed, and
Baptized into him, and have Communion in him, and get up Likenesses, and
Imitations from the Letter to cover you with in a nature contrary to Christ?
And is not this the Height of Deceit and Blasphemy?

What, is the Name of Christ, and the Redemption of Christ, the Death of
Christ, the Baptism of Christ, the Resurrection of Christ, the Communion o^
Christ, and the Words of Christ become a Cloak for the Works of Wickedness?
And does not this blaspheme his Name, his Words, his Spirit, his Ordinances,
and his People, and all his Holy things, and cause them to be blasphemed
amongst the Heathen, and throughout the World? But to preach Christ the Light
of the world, and to confess him in us, so far as we feel the power of his
Spirit taking us out of the power of Sin, and Conforming us to himself, and to
bring forth the fruits of his Spirit in Truth and Righteouse^sse; this does not
blasphem^, but in such he is Honored, who show forth his virtues and walk in
his Spirit, such exalt his Name. This was Paul's work when he had left off to
blaspheme.

Now come to your Rule and be tried, it tells you who are Christ's, and who are
Antichrists, Deceivers, and Blasphemers, and they are known by their Works, and
not by their Words. It says, They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin: And as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ: And as you have received Christ Jesus, so walk in him: And he that
says he abides in him ought himself so to walk, even as he walked: and ye are
all one in Christ Jesus: And if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, and
all things are of God: And he that says he know: Christ, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar. And this is the blasphemer, who covers himself with
the words of truth, but is an enemy to the life.

Now here is the testimony of Truth, lay it to the testimony of your lives, and
measure your selves therewith, and we will measure our selves therewith also;
and let Truth judge the Deceiver and Liar, and Blasphemer by his Fruits, and
where he has his Seat. What will Truth say where Covetousness is found? Have
such Crucified the Affections? Have Proud men Crucified their Lusts? Have
Wan^ons Crucified the Flesh? Have Swearers, Liars, and cursed Speakers put off
the body of Sin? O^ i^ it d^^d where these work^ are alive, where there is
Envy, Strife, Suits, and Contentions? Is this to put on Christ, or to be all
one in him? Where Fl^ttering, Scorning, Backbiting, and Slandering is, and the
Vessels filled with such Wickedness, are all things of God? And are such
baptized into his death, or planted into his Resurrection? And are not they
blasphemers who persecute others for Conscience toward God? But to preach
Christ to be the Light of the World, and the Hope of Glory in the Saints our
Life, our Righteousness and Perfection, and to suffer for it is no blasphemy.

Now here is your Measure, and with Truth are you measured, weighed, and tried:
Your Baptismes, your Communion, your Redemption, your Death and Resurrection,
and your life Eternal: And in the light you and we are seen, and with the life
thereof you are found (who bring forth these fruits) to be under the power of
sin, unredeemed, and out of Christ the life, deceiving your own souls and
others of the righteous Inheritance amongst them that are Sanctified, and
blaspheming the holy Name of Christ, and grieving his holy Spirit, by
professing that in his Name which you have not, and by your evil deeds acted
under his Name whereby it is polluted, which was not given for a cover to such
Works.

In this holy Name of Christ has God placed his Covenant and Life, and in
these Holy things did Holy men and women meet with God, worship him, and dwell
with him in Spirit, as his house in which he was seen and walked: And are these
now become a cover for a Den of thieves, a habitation and hiding for all the
abominations now acted in the world? Is not this the height of Blasphemy and
Deceit, thus to profane his holy Name, and turn it into a lie, as though all
these abominable things were therein, or that he owned such as live in them?

Now lay your words and your works in the true Balance, and weigh them with
the Words of Life and Power of his Name, and measure of Truth and Honesty, and
lie not against the Truth: But you that are under the power of these
wickednesses, and in bondage thereto, who see (and are not ashamed to say) you
cannot but commit these abominations while you live, do not lie against the
work of Christ, in saying he has Redeemed you, when you are yet in this
bondage; neither count his blood an unholy thing, in saying you are washed, nor
his Work imperfect, nor mix it with the work of the Devil; but give to each his
own, that thereby they may be known, and in what Name every thing is wrought;
for now is Truth come to try you, and he is appearing who will have his own,
and nothing but his own, under what pretense soever. Now is the Heir of
Righteousness come to seek the fruit of his own; stand still you that use
those high words against o hers, and see how the Lord is dealt with amongst you
at this day: Did not he plant a Holy Vine to bring forth to himself of his own
Nature and Image? and have you let this be over^run with weeds, while you have
been asleep in your sloth and idleness, cares and pleasures of the world, till
all be filled with briars and thorns, and corrupt plants that now are spread
and bring forth? And now the Lord is come who is the light of the world, to
seek fruits of his own, and will you hold him forth these cursed fruits, an^
(...)ver them with his Name, as though they were his, and seek to force them
upon him whether he will or no, and fall violently upon him if he deny them?

Now if this be not so, what means this? That when any one in his Name is sent
to reprove sin in the Streets or Markets where it abounds, and in the Name of
Christ to declare against false worships, never set up by him (which has been
his manner in all his appearances) and to call for what is his own, and to deny
the works of the Devil, that presently all is in an uproar, and a tumult
raised, pulling and beating, and haling to Prison, beaten in Markets, beaten in
your Synagogues, shamefully entreated in your Streets, and all for no other
offense, but because he calls for his own, and denies what is not of him? Does
not this Blaspheme that Holy Name by which they are called, and which your
selves profess? Teacher cries away with him, and tumult cries away with him,
its not fit he should live. And what usage he receives from you in his members
is openly seen, and God is daily bringing your works to light. Now let the wise
^n heart, who can discern the signs of the times, read, if the Parable be not
fulfilled upon you Husbandmen: And will you guild this Cup over with fine
words, forms and professions, and call them Deceivers and Blasphemers, who in
love to your souls and obedience to Christ tells you of it, and testifies
against it, in all long suffering and patience? Who will be found the deceivers
and the deceived, when your guild^d covers comes to be pulled off, and you must
drink of the Cup your selves as you have filled: and this is certainly near at
hand to come upon you, and you are hasting toward it a pace, your Cup is
almost full, and with the light are you seen; Has not the Lamb set up his
Testimony against you almost in every place of the Nation? How many Towns have
you in which the Innocent have not suffered violence for crying against sin, in
the Name of Christ, calling for the fruits of Righteousness? How many Prisons
have you that do not speak your cruelty? How many Counties have you in which
Innocent blood has not been shed which daily speaks? How many of your
Synagogues have the Children of light born witness in against your evil ways,
wherein they have been beaten, haled, pulled and punished? And all this you
drink up as a thing of naught, and are yet thirstier then at first? Are these
the works of Christ, or of the old Murderer?

Wherefore cease to Blaspheme, for you are measured by that which will not lie,
and with your own Rule are you found in the works of the old deceiver, and the
old persecuors; and in their Opposition and Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit,
where it testifies against your evil deeds. So seeing you are found in the
works of the old Persecutors, and in their nature, take to you their name, for
that is truth, and will be your Inheritance amongst them; and cease to
Blaspheme the Name of Christ by taking it upon you to cover these abominations,
and hide your sin from your own eyes, and so deceive your own Souls, and others
that are blind; but who comes in the Name of Christ, comes in the light to
prove you openly, and sees you, and gives light in the life of Christ for all
to discern betwixt the Lamb and the Wols, by their nature and not by their
clothing.

Christ is the Holy anointing wherewith all that are in him sees out of these
things to be led, and every appearance of his from Cain the first murderer
till this day, declares these to be the works of the Devil and by works of a
contrary nature does witness against them; In which life he is the light of the
world, who though he be in the midst of Gods Throne (seen so to his own) yet as
a Lamb slain among these unclean beasts, shining forth in the life of
Meekness, Holiness, Patience and Long-suffering, enduring all things from his
enemies: which Light and Life, though to she wisdom of the wise world it
appears poor, base and contemptible, and therefore by the builders rejected;
yet it is full of Grace and Truth, and has power with God over the Devil, and
all these his works, and by Faith in his Name, and by the virtue of his Nature,
all that are in him bear his Testimony against the worlds works and nature: for
in that Name is Gods Covenant of Life and Peace, and the Ark of his strength
and safety in the great destruction that is to come upon the world for these
things: and he is ever at the Arm of Gods strength, and sits at his right hand
in heavenly places, and with him to gather and save his Elect from the ends of
the earth; and by his sufferings to redeem them from under those ungodly
powers, and to break the bonds of iniquity; and therefore they who are gathered
into this Name, holds it as a Holy Power, and dare not blaspheme it, but say,
Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity. Which Name
to such is salvation, and strength, and righteousness, meekness and peace.

Ah blind people, that have eyes and see not! What is become of your profession
of Names, your Forms and Ordinances, and how is God departed out of all (as to
you) and your house is become desolate, and where light, truth and peace should
dwell, its become a habitation of devourers, a place of Owls, and Dragons, and
Night-birds, and beasts of prey? such spirits rule in all your holy things in
which you trust. You cry the name of Christ, but see not, nor is your eye
anointed: You cry the name of Jesus, but are not saved from your sins: You cry
Christ is your King, but have not peace: You cry great is the Lord with your
lips, but the Devil prevails in your hearts, and carries you captive at his
will, contrary to the will of the Lord. So you have got the words of Saints,
but the life you have lost; Sheep in words, but Wolves in nature, and so are in
the gall of bitterness against such as retain the power of what you profess.
Now are not these vain words you trust in, which does not save? This is the
deceiver you tell on, who makes people believe in a lie, and now he is found in
your own bosom; blessed be the day which has brought his works to light, glory
to God for evermore. Wherefore let not your own thoughts deceive you, and lead
you to cast upon others that which in your selves sound, but leave your vain
and evil thoughts of others, and judge your own selves with the light of life,
and measure your works with truth, and not with thoughts. Did not they that
persecuted the Prophets think they did God service? And they that persecuted
Christ thought the same; and they that persecuted the Apostles and Saints of
old knew not that they persecuted Christ Jesus, but thought they did well to
punish Heretics and Blasphemers; and they that flew the Martyrs were of the
same spirit, and so of the same mind. And now come to your selves and your
thoughts in this your work, which is the same at this day, and many of you have
the same thoughts, though some of you act clearly against what you s^e, and so
exceed all your forefathers: and now see who are Deceivers and Blasphemers,
and where the Lamb is led to the slaughter.

Ah, you teachers of these Nations, should you thus have used your liberty you
had given of God from under the dark power that ruled (in part) in the Bishops,
under which some of you suffered? Was it not then in your hearts, that if you
had but liberty, you would go on to the rooting our of the relics of Pope^y,
and Idol-worships, and Perfecution? Should you not have gone on with singleness
of heart, as you had liberty, to the end? Then had you been faithful to God and
the Nations, then had you been as openers of the holy paths for men to walk in,
and breakers of oppression, and men should have called you the blessed of God,
then had you not inherited this cursed thing set up by your fathers the old
persecusors and oppressors, (whose children you are now found to appear) then
had you uot been at this day found fighting for their fat Benefits which spued
them out, suing your people for Tithes, Pigs, Geese, Smoke, and such like
trash, haling poor people to prison, and spoiling their Houses and lands for
your bellies: you had been at this day in a more honorable work than raking in
these Dung-hils. The Lord should not have needed to have called your own
hearers from under your elbows, and sent them against you into your Meetings to
declare your shame openly, and to cast this dung in your ^aces, laying open
your deceitful works and worships, which falls so heavy upon you, that you
have not strength left to stand before the guilt thereof, nor have any defense,
but either to fly, or cry out to the earthly Powers to help you against him
who is now become your Adversary. It was not thus with you while you were
sufferers for standing faithful to what you then knew of Gods new work. I
appeal to that of God in your own Consciences, if then a silly boy or girl, or
man or woman, had asked you a question concerning your Doctrine or Manners, if
you would have used either your feet to fly, or your hand to ^mite, o^ cried,
Away with him, Officer take him to prison, Magistrate make a Law against him.
Queen Mary's Acts were then abomination to you, you had then another weapon,
even a measure of the Spirit to inform the weak with meekness, and to convince
gainsayers: But then you were sufferers your selves for your Conscience, and
so the case is changed with you, and the Spirit also, as far as the sufferer is
from the persecuter: only here the Deceiver keeps you blind, in that you keep
the old form you then had, but prossessed with another spirit: So your sticking
in the form has deceived you of the suffering Spirit, and the power of
meekness, which had you been led by the Spirit of the Lamb, you had been at
this day in the fellowship of his sufferings, not tormentors of those that are.
Have not I heard some of you in public declare, That if a Church had
persecution in it for Conscience sake upon any account whatsoever, it needed no
further Trial to prove it to be of the Devil, and not of the Church of Christ.
But since the same person (though no mean one of account amongst the finest
sort of Teachers) have commanded them to prison who came but into the
Synagogue, and spoke not one word. Alas for your Souls! how are you fallen
under the cursed thing, that you should be they who are left to fill up the
measure of what the Bishops came short of. Ah! how are you to be pitied? Will
not your cutting them off rise against you, And will not God avenge their blood
upon you who have condemned their persons, but justify the things for which
they were cut off, by adding manifold thereto in the same nature. God is Judge
this day, and his light in your hearts, how you have dealt with him and his
inheritance, by which you should have been led out of these things, going
before you into the Kingdom of God, but are now found in the work of
gainsaying such as are coming out of darkness into light, neither entering
your selves, nor suffering them that would. So let truth for ever stand upon
the head of the deceiver and blasphemer, and let such as are seduced by them be
therewithal delivered. And blessed be the Lamb for ever, whose Life is this
day become a light to divide the Sheep from the Wolves, that he may come to
Judgment.

A MESSAGE FROM THE SPIRIT of TRUTH, Unto the Holy Seed.
To the Reader.
YOu lovers and followers of the Light, to you is this message sent, in it
abide, that the glory of the only begotten of the Father, you may behold, and
be changed from glory to glory: fill not your heads, but feel the life of what
in this followings paper is declared. For though the Thief, the Boaster, the
proud and exalted ones have, or may cover themselves with like words; yet this
birth never was, is, or shall be brought forth, but by the espoused Virgin;
pure, chaste, and spotless, true and abiding innocence; far distant from all
feigned purity, which many being puffed up in their vain minds, have or may
intrude into things they know not, and so deceive the simple by a voluntary
humility, and worshipping of Angels: these hold not fast the head which gives
the life to every member; he that is without beginning of days, or end of life;
by whom, and for whom all things were made: to him shall every knee bow, who
fills all in all, of whose fullness he has received, grace for grace, who in
these following lines salutes the whole elect of God every where, plentifully
giving forth of the great Mystery of godliness, hidden from ages and
generations, now made manifest to the meek and upright in heart, who in the
unfeigned love abide, which endures for ever.

R. T.

DEar friends, Brethren, and Sisters, of the Seed of Abraham, partakers with
him in the holy call, and who in his faith wait for that glory, and inheritance
immortal, which every one of you shall receive at the appearance of the great
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, to you all be peace, truth and love increased,
wherein you may be established to the end of your calling.

That which is set before me in the Spirit of truth, and for which my soul
travels, and breaths after in the whole Creation (but especially in you who are
already called thereunto) I am moved to impart unto you, thereby to stir you up
earnestly, to press on toward the appearance of that to which you are called
in one, which is no other then what has been holden forth from the beginning,
even the only begotten of the Father, filled with grace and truth, for the
obtaining whereof, you that are faithful have denied the delights of this
present world, and do daily undergo the enmity thereof. Of whose appearance
many of you have received a certain hope which cannot be shaken, and a measure
of him, some are come to in the same Spirit, who have seen, felt, and handled
of his appearance, and have received of his fullness, wherein alone you excel,
and are able to hold forth that life i^ the power of obedience, meekness, and
fear which no form nor knowledge without is able to bear or bring forth, which
is that alone wherein I rejoice in you, and not only so, but find cause in
heart to magnify that goodness, and glorious power of God, already manifested
in you, and through you to the world, whose praises will daily increase, as his
virtues appear in you; which that you, and all the number of called ones may
increase, and grow to the age, stature, and full appearance of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, is the full desire of my soul, and that which will give
us an assured joy and perfect peace in one, when knowledge will vanish, and that
which is in part shall be done away.

Wherefore you that have received the Spirit of Prophecy, and that light out of
darkness, which lets you see what manner of one the Son of God must be at his
appearing in Spirit and power, holiness, and great glory, I beseech you that
none of you sit down at rest in this sight, nor be you puffed up therewith, as
though you had already attained, lest thereby the Enemy prevail to assault you
above what is meet, and so others less in wisdom, who are more lowly in
spirit step in before you, and obtain that Crown and glory to which you were
called, and so while you feed on the knowledge you loose, the life, but that
every one wait in the light to feel the power and life, of the Son of God
manifest in your bodies giving you victory over your own spirits, and raising
you up out of death into the life of the Prophecies, that you may all know the
true worship in Spirit, and what you bow unto, that henceforth you may be
servants of righteousness, begotten and not made, which only has food able to
satisfy your thi^sting souls, that you may all feel the only begotten of God
in virtue, and power, working mightily the work of the Father, and destroying
the work of the devil in every particular, for hereunto were you first called,
that you should inherit eternal life and power. the true riches of grace in
righteousness, and to receive a Kingdom that cannot be moved, but that is able
to keep you against all assaults of the enemy, which ^iches is Gods only
begotten, in whom is received of the perfect fullness of God, which is only
able to satisfy all fears, and supply all wants, in all who attain to his
appearance.

And further I beseech you, that you sati^fie not your selves only with a
feeling of this working in you, but that you diligently attend an entrance
thereinto, that you may put him on whom the Father begets and forms in
you, that you souls may be bathed and anointed therein. And not only so, but
that you bring him forth before all men, even him the only begotten Son of God
in meekness, long-suffering, in patience, in righteousness, in godly holiness,
and all his virtues; the living image of him, by whom he is begotten: that it
may appear to all men whose you are, and who possesses the vess^l, and what he
is that appears therein; that it may be seen and confessed that God is in you
of a truth revealed in his only begotten, For this is he, to whom at his
appearance every tongue shall confess, and every heart be struck with fear;
though the form of his beauty, and visage of his glory has amongst false
Births, and fained professions) been more marred then any man's, who instead of
bringing forth into the world the only begotten of God, to convince and condemn
the world of all ungodliness, and save them from it, have brought forth the
conceivings of their own brains, and the child born to them is no Savior, but
their birth has left them in the world, and one with it, who are now turning
the words of Christ against his works, and their power to withstand his
appearance in others, who is the same which was, and is, and is to come to all
generations.

So that instead of holding forth that spiritual power of perfect Redemption
from above, to save his people from their sins, and set them at liberty from
the bondage of corruption to serve God in the new man, the Son of
Righteousness, of peace, and holiness, Gods image, there appears the Son of
wickedness in every form, at liberty, and pleaded for, the Image and power of
all unrighteousness and ungodliness, preached and set up: so that the very
faith and hope of Gods appearance in this generation is destroyed. So these not
waiting in faith, single in the begettings of God from above, to see in
patience that formed, born and brought forth, but mixing with their reasonings
and wisdom from below have not attained his appearance, but have turned the
truth of God into a lie, his glory into shame; wherefore God has given them up
to believe their own conceivings: And you has he called into that glorious
hope, and powerful faith, wherein you now stand; and them he has left to be
heirs of the corruptions of this world, which they have minded more than
himself; where now many of them are the great opposers of his appearance, who
were once called to bear a measure of his testimony in spiritual life and power.

And now, dear friends, the called of God you are, unto the day of his coming,
whose light has shined out of darkness, giving you a knowledge in this great
mystery, and hope, and a power you have received from above, whereby you are
come nearer the day than those before you, and many have denied the world, and
their Inheritance, that you might stand single in hope thereof; Now the day is
yours, if you be watchful, and faithful thereto, that you mix not with the
earthly seed, nor bring forth a false birth, but that your hearts be single,
and open to receive him from above, the heavenly seed in the will of God, and
not of your selves; the Son of righteousness, the Fathers glory, who has the
living Image and power of God, to make all Sons and Daughters of the most High,
conformable to himself, and heirs with him of the same Kingdom, glory, and
power; even as many of you as so receive him, as to put him on as he is, and so
walk in him as the begotten of God, Children of the most Holy, whom he has
counted worthy of so high a calling, as to receive his name, power, and glory,
and to bear testimony what he is before all men, and to hold forth the power
that you have in his name, and Image, above all names and forms in heaven or in
earth; and this with all diligence, meekness, and fear, lest Satan deceive you
of that simplicity that is in him, and so you come short of his glory, and
others be called. Now quit your selves as the beloved of God; cast off every
weight which would hinder your attaining him, that in the light is set before
you; crucify every affection after the earthly, and put away all the cares and
pleasures that would choke this seed, and whatever would mix in your minds, or
plead for a place in your hearts, let it be to you as an accursed thing, that
the blessing of Abraham may come upon you, and through you to manifest to all
the world, and that the holy name of Christ may be glorified in you, which has
long been polluted through such as have professed it in a contrary nature.

For this is he to whose appearance in the World every tongue shall be made to
confess, and the Angels of God shall worship him, for he is the glory of God,
and power of righteousness in Heaven and in Earth, Gods love and good will
amongst men, and in him is the Father revealed, whom no eye has seen. You that
have received him, and hold him forth, are the light of the world, let him
shine to the glory of your Father; It Is you that hold forth the foundation of
faith; he being lifted up will draw all men to him: hold him forth clearly, as
you receive him from above, and there is that in every Conscience, that will
answer to his appearance; for God has not left him without witness: So that he
that believes not is condemned already in himself, because he believes not in
that only begotten of God, whom the Father has sent into the world. If he do
not that work in you, which none other can do, then how should any believe, or
confess that it is he. But at his appearance his works shall declare him, and
leave all without excuse.

His Righteousness, his meekness, his patient sufferings, his lowly mindedness,
his faith and obedience to the Father, his love and tender compassions toward
all men, being richly furnished with all manner of godliness, shall declare him
whose Image he bears, and whose Son he is, and from whence he comes, for the
earth has not those fruits, power, and glory: Thus shall he be glorified in
his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, and receive his testimony;
And in this birth you shall not only save your selves, but hold forth Salvation
to all that hear thereof.

Wherefore as you profess that holy calling above others, so in the fear of God
take heed what you bring forth, be sober and watch diligently in that which is
from above, least the enemy prevail to mix somewhat of your own to hold forth
in his name, that has not the nature, power nor purity of the Son of God, and
that being above, spoil you of his appearance, and mar the true Image, which
you will find the envious one seeks to devour upon all occasions, that alone
having power over the head of the Serpent; wherefore see that you be covered
with him alone, as he is from heaven.

But above all things, I beseech you, put him on as he is the Son of Gods love,
and so hold him forth toward all men, but especially toward the brethren, so
much the more as this being that which the enemy has cast long upon the
children of light (to wit) want of love, taking his advantage while the way
has been preparing thereto, and the Spirit of Judgment and burning has passed
on the old building, a time of sorrow, and pulling down, dressing the house
where love should dwell; so that though the root of the matter was in it, yet
could not in that time spring forth toward others, nor indeed be fully shed
abroad in the heart, while that is there which God hates: which love many have
now received, and it is full time to bring forth, him so begotten in you, lest
any selfishness appear in his stead, and so prevent you of that which is most
excellent; But that you all may put him on, as he is manifest from the Fathers
bosom, and that you be clothed therewith from heaven, so plentifully, that
you may have to cast over a Brothers nakedness, a garment of the same love, who
came from above, to lay down his life for his enemies, and of the same power,
who can forgive sins and offenses, above seven times a day, beholding each
others with that good eye which waits for the soul and not for the sin, which
covers, and overcomes the evil with the good, that with him you may be perfect
in love, judging and receiving one another, in the increase of God, and not in
that which is for destruction, giving more abundant honor to him that lacks,
that in the body be no schism, nor defile one another, nor keep alive a
Brothers iniquity, nor blot out the name, and appearing of the holy seed in the
least, but keep the Lord in your eye, and the evils shall dye, and vanish away
from amongst you, and the appearance shall be the Lords, and to him shall the
gathering of the Nations be, hungry souls shall see, and be satisfied with his
likeness, and all that behold his beauty shall confess unto him, and in him
shall the upright heart delight, for at his coming shall he establish the
Throne of Righteousness, and measure every appearance; and correct every false
judgment, and that which ensnares the simple will he cast out, for by the
power of his appearance shall every thing be tried, and peace proclaimed in the
name of righteousness alone, for that which is not like him will not be able
to stand before his appearance. But we know that when he appears we shall be
like him; he that has this hope purifies himself even as he is pure, that he
may be seen in him at his coming.

Now dear friends, is your sound gone to the ends of the earth, and God has
made you famous amongst your enemies, in that you have begun to confess his
name, and nature, and that he is in you whom many are looking for here, and
there, and now the eyes of people and Nations are upon you to see your end, and
now your glory is in putting him on, and covering you with him, a Lamb without
blemish before God and man, that in him you may obtain good report,
unreproveable, and holy, so shall you stop the way of the destroyer, and put an
end to all false conceptions, and revive the hope of Israel. Let his innocence
be your armor, and put your trust in his truth, for your Salvation. The time
is full come for you to declare what he is to you, 'with boldness, with a
confession beyond words: for this appearance of him in love is that which shall
judge all likenesses, and try all spirits, actions, judgments, and appearances,
and by this shall you all be measured, what spirits you are of, and all spirits
in the world, for he shall bring every hidden, formed, fained thing to light,
at his coming, and what ever has not this love in it, is not his, nor begotten
of God, but he that has this love is begotten of God, and has him, the Father
and the Son, the end of the Law and the Prophets, the substance and life of all
knowledge, faith and works; the root and ground of every good gift, for herein
are we made perfect in love, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment,
because we have put him on, and dwell in him who is love, and as he is, so are
we in this world. But he that loves not is not made perfect in faith, in
knowledge, in judgment, having not learned Christ herein, therefore by this he
must be judged himself. So blessed is he that judges nothing before the time,
who condemns not himself, wherein he judges another; all judgment being
committed to him that can lay down his life for his enemies. Therefore happy
are you if you have him on first, for when he appears his judgment is true, and
shall stand, when all that has come before him shall pass away, for him alone
has the Father sealed.

So dearly beloved ones, my soul breaths toward you herein, that in all your
several gifts, and administrations, this Son of God be your eye and end, the
beauty and Glory of the Father, that the hope thereof to attain, may stay you
in all trials and temptations, knowing that in him alone is your lasting peace,
and that which does now befall you in all your afflictions is to shake all
other appearances, that way may be made for him alone, whose Image and life,
none can judge nor condemn. And the day is come, that happy is that man who
has nothing else to glory in, and this know that the appearance of God in his
own begotten, is your glory; and if any man boast himself and not herein, when
he is weighed therewith he will be found wanting, the sound thereof will not
save him.

As the same spirit from whence this comes, moves in any one, so let them send
it abroad amongst the called of God, to be read and known.

COme forth you children of light, come forth, depart out of the world, touch
not the unclean thing, that the holy one may make his appearance amongst you:
make have to the day of your God. If he shine forth, Salvation is with you, but
he cannot appear in that heart where the world is retained. If you be like the
world it will own you; but that image which it receives not, is your
everlasting glory and beauty. So mind what works in the vessel; for now must
every Child appear like his Father, and must bring to light of what spirit he
is begotten: and only blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, with
power and great glory, that which the world is ashamed of, is that with which
the Son of God is glorified, and again must be glorified, he that bears the
iniquities of men, and is filled with reproach, and yet appears without sin, is
our Savior. And a Lamb without spot must take away the sin of the world; his
manifestation destroys the work of the Devil; in a body prepared he delights
to perform the council of God, and to bring hidden things to light; that he
may speak mysteries to the wise therein, and hold forth a way to the simple,
leading out of the snares of subtilty.

Wherefore all that love his appearance, and seek the face of redemption, love
that which prepares his way to his appearance in his Temple, that which breaks
down the will of man, and as a fire goes before him; which is that baptism
with which all that will receive him must be baptized into death. So when
sorrow, anguish, and tribulation comes upon you, rejoice, and fly not. This
comes to destroy nothing but destruction; and to kill that which keeps you from
eternal life, and to prepare a way for your peace, and a place for everlasting
righteousness to dwell in you. For truly friends, in the threshing floor must
the Altar be set up, and where God answers by fire, there must his house be
built: and as many as look to the end of this, may not despise correction, nor
faint under the hand of reproof.

That is good which brings down into the depth, where the wonders of God are
learned, for he that will labor in Gods Vineyard must know every seed, and its
root; what feeds it, and what famisheth it, and the ground of every weed, and
cause of every curse. This many may see, when it is come to a Tree, brancheth,
and brings forth fruit: but then its strong and powerful, and not easily plucked
up, seldom got down without fire and much sorrow, therefore blessed is that eye
that's lowly, and diligent, which sees every several appearance, that he may
slay the seed of wickedness ere it bud, and not suffer the enmity to take root:
for he that suffers diverse seeds shall have sorrow therein; and he that sowes
amongst thorns and briars must reap trouble; and where this kind is suffered
to grow, there is torment to themselves, and trouble to others; for how should
the thistle change its nature?

So all that desire peace, prepare a place that the seed thereof may grow
alone, and the Sun thereof may arise and shine clearly, that nothing may grieve
his holy spirit, for Jacob must dwell alone, and not be numbered among the rest
of the Nations, neither has the Lamb fellowship with the beasts of the field.

Now as you have seen the Image of the earthly, and felt his power, and
inclination to earthly things, captivating your minds downward, to things
below: even so must you bear the Image of the Heavenly, if he reign that comes
from above. Till then think not you are perfect, nor have attained to the
resurrection of the dead. For this I know of him, in whom your life is hid,
that as he arises, he shall as strongly lead your minds into the Heavenly, as
ever you were captivated with the earthly. So he that can read the figure,
rejoice in hope concerning him that is to come; yet let none glory in the fight
of this knowledge, but press into the life thereof, that God may be seen and
glorified in you. For as he that has gone much out with his mind, and has
drunk in abundance of the earthly, is become the most subtle, selfish, and
hard, and filled with all unrighteousness, till he become incurable: even so he
that returns in, and drinks abundantly of the heavenly, does become simple,
innocent and harmless, separate from all ungodliness, till he become
incorruptible, and receive power to attain the Son of God, whose image declares
the Father, from whence he is: for he that has seen the Son, has seen the
Father, and he that has the Son has the Father also. So, dear friends, behold
the end of your calling and glory of your profession, your life in this world,
and eternal inheritance, for the which to attain, we endure all things; for
which sufferings and patience, we have a cloud of witnesses.

So we follow not fables and fancies (as some suppose) but every one as he is
proved herein, is able to set to his seal, even to the day of the Lord, with
them that are gone before, whose spirits herein are perfected.

Wherefore, dearly beloved of God, for his name sake I beseech you, be zealous
for his appearance, and with meekness and fear instruct the ignorant, who
oppose themselves; comfort the weak; in all things leading with a life that
cannot be blamed, knowing how manifold your labor of love is doubled in
everlasting glory, as he comes to be made manifest to the world. And the Lord
God of power strengthen all your hands by the appearance of his love; that, by
the shedding of it abroad in your hearts, you may be made able to overcome the
world, and willing to give your necks to the yoke of Christ, and to bear the
burdens of the weak, till the brotherhood arise, and the body of Christ be
perfected in one; that none of you suffer an evil eye or ear, which delights to
behold the weakness of others; but that your whole delight be to wait for the
appearance of God in all, and to behold his face in them, rather than their
failings. And as this arises in every particular, it shall be a sure token to
you for good, and that you are passed from the love of evil, unto the love of
God the Father, and the Son. And what you delight in, shall be your
inheritance. And as you grow herein, so shall he whom you love to see, delight
to make his appearance amongst you, and to walk in you; and you shall not seek
his face in vain, but with his likeness shall be satisfied, and shall praise
the beauty of his appearance.

Thus in honor preferring one another, you shall know, that the power of love
is a ministration of life, to that which is to be ^eloved.

Who will be on the Lords part, now in this day of darkness, when iniquity is
growing to the full? and the manchild is to be born above it? And who will give
up the vessel to bear his name against the enmity that is now arising. And who
will be glorified with the Lamb? Blessed and happy is he that is found worthy
to follow him out of the world, bearing his reproach. To as many as receive
him, he gives power to become the sons of God.

But he that will bear his name must receive his nature, and himself also so
walk, even as he walked; his name is power over sin and the world. So the
servants of sin and the world cannot bear it; he that bears his name must bear
it in his life and power, lest he blaspheme. Of flesh and blood it is not born,
nor by the will of man is it manifest, it is he that is born again, who has
his witness in himself, that must bear his name before the world for a witness
against them, who has that life in him which testifies against the deeds
thereof; but who bows thereto betrays him, and proves false in his testimony.

Moses in his house, made all things in likeness of the pattern, so it became
a Tabernacle of witness to all the Nations (of the true God therein) and
against all their false Gods, and false worships; and herein was he faithful to
him that called him, and to all that beheld the pattern, he preached Gods
presence, dwelling in the Tabernacle made with hands. How much more must he
that bears the name of Christ, follow the pattern and suit his example, holding
forth a Tabernacle of witness, and preaching the presence of the true God
therein, and against all the world, their false births, false ways and
worships, herein proving faithful to him that has called thereto, and to all
that beholds, holding forth that holiness is his habitation here on earth, as
it is in heaven, bearing a lively testimony thereof, by the Tabernacle of
witness, conformable to the heavenly example in all things. And to this end
Christ descended, walked, and suffered on earth, leaving an example to all that
follow his steps, wherein as in a lively Oracle God is found, in all that is
builded after his image, and ^eek in his name and nature for the immortality
that dwells therein. Now God was not to be found in the Tabernacle of Molech,
(though sought never so earnestly) but in the Tabernacle of witness, built
according to the pattern; neither is he now to be found in the image of the
world: nor is hi^ name born in that nature though professed never so zealously.
Therefore let every one that names the n^me of the Lord depart from iniquity;
The seed of evil doers bears not the testimony of Christ, but against him.

Did they blaspheme who said they were Jews and were not? How much more do they
who profess the name of Christ, and are out of the vine, in a contrary nature?

Wherefore all who aim to hold forth in life to his appearance, and to attain
his coming in purity and glory, must be diligent in the heavenly light, ever
minding the way and moving of the holy Spirit, him that is from above, that his
form you may see, who has the heavenly image, and the holy power; that so
beholding him with open face as in a glass, you may be changed into the same
image, and formed thereafter, from glory to glory, by the powerful working of
the same Spirit; until the Tabernacle be built conformable to the heavenly
ex^mple, and holy pattern in body and Spirit, that as he is, so may you be in
this world, that God may appear in his Temple; that as the image of the earthly
appears in the world; so the image of the heavenly you may bear, a witness
against them. And by drinking in the communion of that holy Spirit, and power
from above, you may become as able, zealous, and willing to hold forth the
heavenly in holiness, meekness, purity, patience, love, long-suffering, faith,
and obedience to God, and all the fruits of the Spirit, as the Sons of the
world are to hold forth the earthly, in lusts and pleasures, strife and envy,
cruelty, and oppression, and all manner the works of the flesh; that you may as
truly and really, give up your bodies, minds, and strength to suffer with
Christ, that he may be manifest and magnified therein, in your mortal bodies;
(as others who are without God in the world, do give themselves to act
according to the principles and power of the God of this world, his unrighteous
ways, worships, and fashions, and all his cursed courses, and the whole body
of sin, and mystery of iniquity born in them.)

And where the Tabernacle is thus edified, and the Temple thus cleansed, there
is a vessel of honor, fit for the Masters use; that being filled with the holy
Ghost, God may dwell on the earth, and take up his rest therein, his Tabernacle
being with men, the appearance of the blessed day, so many souls hunger for,
and Abraham's Seed longs to see, which the God of this world strongly opposes,
in all whose minds he has blinded, and whole spirits he possesses in
disobedience to the heavenly light, for which the wrath of God remains upon
that generation, till this day and for ever.

Wherefore all you who wait for the Kingdom of God, and love his appearance,
whose coming again is without sin, abide within, and wait in that Temple where
the witness arises against the world, that in faith and patience you may be
counted worthy to receive that witness, that it may arise and cover you, and
that in bearing it you may come out of the world, being conformable to him, who
suffered without the gates: bear his reproach, and you bear his name; touch not
the unclean thing, and he will receive you for himself, in you to appear and be
glorified; lifted up against the powers of darkness. You that have received
the earnest of this Spirit, has he not said, I will dwell in you, and walk in
you? wherefore come out from among them and be you separate. This is the joy
that is set before you, to wit, his appearance, and that glory, for the
attaining whereof, we endure the present sufferings, and reproach; not to be
compared therewith, for glory immortality, eternal life.

O friends, who shall be found worthy at his coming, and in whom may he appear,
and not consume them? for our God is a consuming fire; even in his holy Temple
is he known, and with clean hands will he take up his rest, and in the pure
heart shall he be seen; else who may dwell with everlasting burnings? and who
may abide that baptism wherein every one shall be salted with fire at his
coming.

THere is a Spirit that I feel, that delights to do no Evil, nor to revenge any
Wrong, but delights to endure all things, in Hope to enjoy its own in the End;
Its hope is to outlive all Wrath and Contention, and to weary out all
exaltation and Cruelty: or whatsoever is of Nature contrary to its self, it
sees to the end of all temptations; as it bears no evil in it self, so is
conceives none in thoughts to any other, For its ground and Spring is the
Mercies and Forgiveness of God; its Crown is Meekness, its Life is Everlasting
Love unfeigned, and takes its Kingdom with Entreaty, and not with Contention,
and keeps it by Lowliness of mind; in God alone it can rejoice, though none
else regard it, or can own its Life. Its conceived in Sorrow, and brought forth
without any to pity it, nor does it murmur at Grief and Oppression, it never
rejoices but through Sufferings, for with the Worlds joy it is murdered; I
found it alone being forsaken, I have fellowship therein, with them who lived
in Dens, and Desolate places in the Earth, who through Death Obtained this
Resurrection, and Eternal Holy Life.

J. N.

Through the negligence of the Printer, and the diligence of that spirit that
would not have truth and righteousness to Reign; some faults have escaped,
which the friendly Reader is desired to correct, and not impute the blame to
the Author, for herein he was blameless.
In page 1. line 1. for profession r. possession. p. 11. l. 21. for wherein r.
where. p. 13. and last line, for the bodies. r. his bodies. p. 15. l. 10. for
here r. there. l. 38. for Estate r. state. p. 17 l. 1. for or r. of. p. 19. l.
21. for, him r. them. p. 20. l. 27. for, toward righteousness r. toward Gods
righteousness. p. 26 l, 20. for mind r. wind, p. l. 32. for oorn r. born. p.
42. l. 3. for innocent pass r. innocent cannot pass. p. 46. l. 7. this
sentence is left out [these resisted the spirit that spoke in him] p. 48. l.
35. for our r. your. p. 49. l. 22. for the r. their. p. 53 last l. for measure
r. in measure. p. 57. l. 6. r. to come, and l. 25. for rooted r. blotted. p.
65. l. 9. for she r. the. p. 72. l. 7. for, you souls r. your souls.

THE END.

