Milk for Babes: AND Meat for Strong Men.

A FEAST OF FAT THINGS; WINE well refined on the LEES.

O Come young Men and Maidens, old Men and Babes, and drink abundantly of the
Streams that run from the Fountain, that you may feel a Wellspring of living
Water in yourselves, springing up to Eternal Life; that as he lives (even
Christ Jesus) from whence all the Springs do come, so you may live also, and
partake of his Glory that is ascended at the right hand of the Father, far
above Principalities and Powers.

Being the breathings of the Spirit through his Servant JAMES NAYLOR, written
by him in the time of the confinement of his outward man in prison, but not
published till now.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins l'Grand. 1661

The Preface to the Reader.
THis being an Invitation of Love and Life (learned Counsel indeed) from him
that has been tried in the deeps, a follower of the Lamb in many Tribulations,
wherever he went, who was baptized into his death by the Holy Ghost, and by
Fire; made like unto him through sufferings, who is the Captain of our
Salvation; clothed upon with his Virtues and Graces, thoroughly furnished unto
every good and perfect work: For he had the mind of God, and the Secrets of the
Almighty did abide upon his Tabernacle; and he prophesied of this day which is
now come, and what shall be hereafter, whiEh is not convenient to be uttered;
but the day will declare and make all things manifest; For he that does
business in great waters, sees the wonders of the Lord, and declares of the
working of his mighty Power, who wrought mightily in him; he brake the Bonds,
and cut the Cords assunder, and led him by the hand of his Power through the
Fire and the Water, and set his feet in a plain path, and brought him forth in
the midst of his Enemies, and stood at his right hand that he could not be
moved; yea before the faces of them that had persecuted his righteous Soul, and
had said his God had forsaken him, and cast him off for ever; but the Lord did
never leave him or forsake him, although Satan had power to winnow him as
wheat; yet his precious life was hid with God, and the evil one could not touch
it; and the Trial came not upon him for his own sins only, nor the sins of
others; but it was to try some, that all Flesh may be silent, and that none
should glory in his presence, who sets up, and casts down, who kills and
makes alive, according to the good pleasure of his own will; and who shall say,
Why do thou thus? For the Potter has power over the Clay, to make a Vessel
of honor, or of dishonor: For I am God All-sufficient, and man as the dust of
the Balance, and as the drop of the Bucket; and let all men know, that the
Most High rules in the Heavens, and does whatsoever he will in the Earth; for
the Lord alone does all: Therefore let none glory in his own wisdom or
strength; for all Flesh is as grass, and the glory of it as the Flower of the
Field, which soon fades away, and comes to an end; therefore let him that
stands, fear fear always, lest he fall into temptation; for none can stand in
the Day of Trial, nor dwell with everlasting Burnings, but he that lives and
walks in the Spirit, and puts no Confidence in the Flesh: [Mark this] He was
set as a Sign for the Rise and Fall of many, that the Secrets of many hearts
might be made manifest, and for to prove that Generation that then had Power in
their hands, but improved it not, but went on in the Counsel of their own
corrupt Hearts to persecute the Innocent* but the Lord God who has pleaded the
cause of the needy, a helper of him who had no helper in the Earth; I say, the
Lord God has pleaded with that generation of men which now are passed away,
and their very memorial is become an evil savor; for they showed no mercy;
Therefore in the day of their distress they could find no mercy, but the
merciful God, whose mercies are above and over all his works, He did remember
his Captive, and did not leave his soul in the Grave, but did deliver his Lamb
from the devouring Wolves, and stopped the mouths of the Lions which greedily
roared, and gave him his life for a prey, that he might magnify and exalt his
unexpressible abundant loving kindness, and unutterable love of the Lord to
him; that all that fear the Lord might trust in the God of his Salvation, who
saved him to the utmost; this is the God of the living: O let all the holy
Saints that know the breath of life, praise him that lives for ever: For all
Dominion, Honor and Glory is his, and unto him let it be ascribed for ever and
ever.

But he has finished the work his Father gave him to do, and has run the Race
that was set before him, and is come to the End of all things; the Ancient of
Days, the Judge of all; although the outward Tabernacle be gone to its place,
yet he lives, and shall never dye; and the resurrection of his most holy Life
is risen, and shall arise in many; a Name he has among the living, which can
never be blotted out, and the blessing of the Lord is upon the Seed that has
been raised by his preaching of the Word of Reconciliation and Peace, and his
Offspring shall declare his Generation for ever; for the Seed is still
multiplying, his Childrens Children are ready to bring forth, still raising up
Seed to the Elder Brother, the true Husband in the Resurrection; but now none
can add to him, or take from him; for Immortal is his Crown, and endless is his
glory; and in all that was done unto him, the Lord never smote him, as he has,
and will smite them that smote him; for he has broken them with a great
Breach, and so shall it be with all Zions Enemies; for her King is in the midst
of her, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, who will smite the Host of the
Egyptians; and fear, horror and trembling shall take hold on Israel's enemies,
and he will smite the Earth with a Curse for his Elect sake, and he will plague
hard-hearted Pharaoh, that will not let the Seed go free to serve the Lord in
the Spirit, and the Truth; and with Amalek (which will not let Israel pass
through his Land) will he make War for ever, and in the destruction of his
Enemies will he get himself a Name, and his Name shall be dreadful to all them
that know him not; but all that know his Name they put their trust in it, and
unto them it is a strong Tower of Defense, and into the Ark of his Strength
will he gather all the Righteous souls, whilst he ease and avenge himself of
his enemies; and for ever blessed are all they that hold out unto the end, and
keep the Word of his Patience, they shall be hid in the hollow of his hand,
kept safe in his Pavilion, and a defense will he make about his people, and
Zion shall be the praise of the whole Earth, a beautiful City, compact,
compassed about with salvation for Walls and Bulwarks, and the Mountain of his
Holiness shall be on the top of all Mountains, and no Destroiers shall be found
in it; the pure in heart shall see it.

M. B.

Milk for Babes, AND Meat for Strong Men, etc.
TO you tender hearted ones, who have felt the Call of the Father's, Love, who
now see more Desireableness and Beauty in Innocence and Meekness then in all
the Mountains of Prey, or self-conted Exaltations arising from the airy
knowledge, My Soul is with you herein; And in that which has given you the
sight of this Excellency, wait low, and diligently hearken thereto, until the
thing it self spring up, which naturally has this Riches in it, which comes
from above, and yet is felt far below all fleshly affections, high thoughts,
and hasty desires, and with these is veiled and hid from you, so that you
cannot come to the Life and Spring of it, but as you deny these, and put them
off, by sinking down through them, all these Earthly Foundations and Ends to
rise up; For under all these your Beloved suffers, while these are above in
your minds; and through the the fall of all these, must he arise, and over all
these take the Kingdom, ere you come to have a quiet dewlling place in him, and
he in you. So under all these must you pass, and into the likeness of his Death
you must come, and be planted therein, that the fellowship of his sufferings
you may feel, and partake of his Meekness and Patience therein, who bears all
things; and your Faithfulness with him therein must be thoroughly proved In
which Faith and Patience you shall learn him whom you love; his Reproach
without, his Temptations within, even such Trials which cannot be declared to
another, shall you learn in him, with his Love, Obedience, Patience, Meekness
and Long-suffering under all; and how through all these he arises, in which
Resurrection he chaineth his Enemies, and takes them captive, whose Captives
you are; and thus shall you have fellowship in his Resurrection, wherein you
shall attain to the Resurrection of the dead, and the Inheritance of Eternal
Life.

But dear Children who seek this to attain, think it not strange when for the
attaining hereof, you come to be rejected of all, denied, condemned,
contradicted, and tempted with all manner of Spirits and Evils, Assaults within
and without, with fears and dread, in weakness, watchings and fasting, with
tears of sorrow night and day; to be led into the Wilderness, and there
tempted, tried in the night with great temptations, and see no way out, led on
a way you know not, a way of Wrath and Terror, and passing by the Gates of
Hell, and none to pity you, nor take your part; Chastened alone, that you may
be proved to the uttermost. And when this you come into, then faint not, nor
look back, but lift up your head through all, and know, that now he deals with
you as with Sons and Daughters of his Love: Take heed you murmur not, nor
measure him with your selves, nor repine at the Rod; cast not your evil eye
upon the Instruments, who or what ever they be; for that will beget Wrath in
your minds, and then you will lose the Life you aim at, and suffer in vain; but
in the greatest Floods keep your eye to your beloved Beauty, retain Patience
and Meekness in Long-suffering, with Faith: Let these be ever in your heart as
the end of all; and still believe that all that befalls you is but to waste
that which would hinder you from being joined into the thing you so highly
prise. So in all things keep with him, let his joy be strength unto you in all,
and the appearance of his Beauty will refresh you in the new, as the old does
wast, and with him make war against the enmity, and let his Love quench all
wrath that would arise; let him be your shield of Faith; and what ever you are
led into while you retain him single in your minds, it shall be profitable to
the end expected; but without him you can do nothing: So if you pray to the
Father, let it be with him. In all your wrestings, his Meekness, Patience and
Long-suffering, with Faith, prevails much with God. If you resist the Tempter;
let it be with him, it is his Good that only has power to overcome the Evil;
and here is your strength in all, if you hold him steadfast in your minds; in
the Fire, and in the Floods he will be with you, and be your Power and Peace,
and make your way through all.

Though at some times the Clouds may be so thick, and the powers of Darkness so
strong in your eye that you see him not, yet love him, and believe, and you
have him present; you shall feel his patience calling you down out of the
storm, and his meekness moving you to follow him who has gone the same way
before in all his Saints. This is your Beloved, who now goes before you; hear
him alone, then are you faithful, when you look for no other to be with you in
all, nor to redeem you out of all but him whom you love: So that though the
Tempter should tender you relief some other way (for herewith he will prove
you, if he see he cannot drive you from the meek and patient One by Sufferings
and Threatening, then will he flatter and promise, to draw you from him) yet
this is your faithfulness, that you abide till Meekness and Patience bring you
out.

For whatever you own for your Redeemer out of trouble, that must be your Lord
and Master, and you its Servant: Wherefore take heed you own nothing for a
Helper, but what you look to inherit; so he that makes Flesh his arm, inherits
the Curse, and the Earth comes over him, and he must serve it: But stay you in
the meekness of Christ, his Peace and Patience, and you enter the earnest of
your Inheritance in the day of your trouble; and when you come out, none shall
be able to take it from you, nor any contrary Nature shall be Lord in you, nor
over you, but the same in which you have trusted, shall rest upon you, and his
glory shall cover you, and become a Life in you and your Leader for ever.

And being faithful in this trial, you shall learn Christ, and find out the
Wiles of Satan, and perfectly feel what he has of his own in you, to work
upon, even by their present working in your minds; For that which thinks
Sufferings hard, and time long, that is not to be trusted; for it will work in
the Reasonings a distrust, and tempt to look out for Freedom and ease by some
visible Help; or if it cannot prevail to hunt about for freedom, yet if any
Carnal Way be opened, it will form a fair pretense as though it were of God,
which is not of God; and this seeks to betray the just and faithful one from
you; and would part you from your chaste waiting upon him whom you love, taking
his advantage by your have, weariness and weakness in the journey: But that
which only minds to be obedient to God in suffering and acting, with faith and
diligence, nearkning with all Long-suffering, what Meekness and Patience says,
thinking it a greater thing to obtain Counsel from that, then ease from
another; believing that no other thing can give an expected end but that, to
wit an inheritance in that you wait for; and therefore count nothing dear that
you may win him, thinking no time long, nor any thing hard to endure, for the
joy and beauty that is set before you: This will never deceive you of the
Redemption of Truth; your Love, and Redeemer, and Lord is One, and you shall not
be put to your sleighty shifts as they that go out from that Spirit are; for
you shall feel and see your Redeemer in the misst of you, and with his body shall
you rise and live, and you shall not be ransomed with silver or gold, from the
hand of the Opressor, but by the precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb without
spot; not with any corruptible thing, but his Long-suffering, Faith and
Patience, his Love and meek Spirit shall set you out of all darkness, and above
all fears; and your freedom will be perfect, and inheritance large, when all
that would not stay upon him alone, are consumedin the fiery trials, which
haste, ease and distrust will never bring to an end; til which you are not fit
to be joined to him you love in everliving obedience and everlasting praises,
the portion of all who have waited on him, and have found him faithful in the
End.

And having Learned this mystery of Godliness, and found the worth of it, you
having found his way perfect and pure, and him faithful to such as walk
therein, you may be able to direct the simple and unlearned in their desirable
way to rest, and your words have in them a manifestation of life, and quickening
power is with you, and this shall be your everlasting strength, that you are
redeemed with that you so dearly loved.

And this you shall feel in the way, that the more diligently you wait upon him
in all Conditions you pass through; even so the more do you receive of him, by
drinking in of that heavenly virtue that is in him, who is the meek and patient
one; and by supping continually with him, and he with you, will you come so to
be filled with him, that all haste and impatiency, and distrust, will be
covered and overcome with him, and so your Mortal be swallowed up of the
Immortal, till it become your whole Life and Being; and all your Thoughts,
Words and Actions, have their Rise and Being therein; so that Self be seen no
more, nor that appear in which Death and Condemnation have any entrance or
power: And this shall you find to be the House from Above, and Heavenly City,
in which the holy Spirits live and walk, and have Communion, as they come to be
perfected; of which the LAMB is the Light and Salvation, into which none enter,
but who through his Meekness and Long-suffering are ransomed, and by Faith
therein redeemed.

Who being thus builded, see no more sorrow nor fear of falling, the Foundation
being everlasting, elect and precious, and every Stone therein tried in the
fire, and in faithfulness chosen for that end.

So with all diligence sink down to feel the Election, not minding that which
boasts in high words, before it be tried; but when it comes into the fire, will
not stand patient in the Trial, but through that being given up to death, seek
for that which lies under in the sufferings, which calls you down from every
high thought. To him come down into the pit, who bears all things without
complaining, that with him you may suffer, and with him you may obey, and in
all things he may be with you, and you with him; this is the Election, make him
sure to your selves in life and death, so shall you be changed with him; and
though you go down into the lower parts of the Earth in the carnal body, he
shall raise you spiritual; though sown weak, yet raised in Power; if you rise
not but with him, as he raises you; if you cast not off the Yoke, nor fly the
Cross, nor heal your own wound; though your wound be mortal, yet the cure is
immortal; though you go down in shame and reproach, yet raised in glory, and
covered with immortal honor, and eternal life, with power and strength to
fulfill the will of God, and the answer of a good Conscience; through this
Baptism and Resurraction you shall attain, and so become one Spirit with him
that dwells in the light, in death, in sufferings, in patience, in faith and in
obedience, which otherwise no mortal man can approach to, there being that to
be fulfilled which the Light requires, which the first man born has not in
power, so by that Law (his life he must lose) which has power over the
Transgressor as long as he lives, and joined to Christ cannot be till to that
Law he be dead; So the first which is earthly the Law kills because of sin, and
want of obedience, but he that is born again is of the Spirit, and lives
because of righteousness and obedience, so the boaster is excluded, being
concluded under sin* that the mercy may arise in the meek principle over all,
to fulfill all.

The Light says, Love thy Neighbor as thy self; This the first born cannot
do, so the boaster is excluded, and the Law lays hold on that life, which wants
this love, and the Creature must give up that to death, that he may come to the
meek Spirit for the power of that life and obedience that has righteousness in
it: and the Creature drawing his mind, and affections, and faith from the first
who has words without power, and giving these to the second, the first falls,
withers, and dies in that vessel, and as the mind is diligent in the second, he
rises in the Faith, and raises the power of obedience in that vessel, and so
as he rises through the Law, he brings forth fruits above the Law, against
which there is no Law; so he in whom the Covenant is, and has the power of
obedience to righteousness, puts an end to the Law: So he being denied, dead,
and buried, whose life arose through disobedience, who is the Transgressor, and
because of whom the Law was added, that Law becomes dead also; he that fulfils
the Law is he that gave it forth, and is the end thereof, in whom by Faith you
live, and inherit this right eousness, as you put him on, through death who is
this life; So being faithful in the Light shall you learn him that kills and
makes alive, that casts down and raises up, that condemns and justifies, and so
shall know the way of death and the way of life, and who that is that is hardened
by the Law, and who fulfills it, and the life and end of both, and you will see
the cause and end of all the tribulations, earthquakes and thunders, and
several voices, clouds, smoke and darkness, and great temptations, and the
trial of your faith herein will be as that of gold, and will bring to inherit
the knowledge of God and eternal life, and power to judge the Prince of the
Air, and over the mystery of iniquity, and to deny the God of this world with
all his snares and traps wherein the unlearned Professors are caught, and held
captive at his will, though some of them have a knowledge and form of the Truth,
taught from what others have thus learned, all which you shall judge and have
power over, and all ministration under the Son, shall with this be comprehended,
whether Angels or Spirit: Even he that is faithful and diligent unto the end of
this great tribulation, shall be made white, and have judgment committed to him,
and the Key of David's house, to bind and lose, and shall sit in the Lambs Throne
of Judgment and Righteousness in heaven; and the Grave nor Hell shall have no
more power, nor shall his old iniquities have any more power over him, the
strength of sin being dead.

Wherefore Brethren, in the Light be faithful, when you come into this
condition; take heed of Unbelief, and have not out of it, least you tempt the
Lord of your Life, and grieve his meek Spirit, and provoke him to leave
chastening, and so your spot remain, and you prove but Bastards, and not
freeborn Children of this Kingdom, Power and Glory; and so in time your old
Iniquities overtake you again.

For whatever of the old man comes out of the fire unconsumed, dead and buried
in this Baptism, will be a continual Canker seeking to eat, and an Enemy, daily
waiting his opportunity upon all occasions to get up, and overspread the pure
Plant of Innocence, and so spoil you of your Beloved, and so make void all your
sufferings past, and bring in the old Evils like a Flood upon you, as it has
befallen many at this day; but be faithful to the end of all Iniquity, the Root
as well as the Branch; so shall your Righteousness arise clear and unspotted,
and your old sins shall therewith be buried, and never arise again, neither to
accuse nor reign; and this is your victory over death.

And this know (whatever others imagine) let none deceive you) That though sin
(the evil Seed) be sown when men sleep, and take root with pleasure, and spring
up with ease and delight; yet the end thereof is bitterness and great
Tribulation; but the precious Seed is sown with tears conceived in sorrow, and
brought to light with sighing, nights of watching, days of mourning, and with
much labor of spirit, and travel of Soul, must you come to see your desire;
for though the World have conceived a Faith in the air, and so brings forth
naught but several sorts of Winds striving upon the Earth, without Foundation,
and so builds nothing to perfection; Yet with you it must not be so; for to you
the Light is sprung up which leads to the Foundation of God; and you have
received a Faith that gives you a sight of the Stone which the Builders see
not; and to you it is given not only to believe in him, but to suffer for his
sake in the behalf of him; and so to run, as to win him, so to strive, as to
obtain him, his Name, his Power, his Nature; for this is that your soul groans
for, to possess and inherit his Power, his Love, his Meekness, his Patience in
all Tribulations; his Faith in all fears, and to have the Power of all his
Grace and Virtue living in you, whereby you may be men of able Spirits, rightly
furnished to every good work, and against all evil, that in him you may
overcome when you are tried, and be more then Conquerors; and your Work is to
war against whatever would keep you from coming to this Foundation and
Cornerstone. And it is not beating the air, that will fight your Battle; for
it is against all these deceits you are to fight, and airy notions, and all
spirits that would possess you with words and forms, without the Power of
Righteousness, and what ever lies under the power of sin; the true Light gives
you to see the cursed deceit that lies in all this, and that these are the
subtle paths of the destroyer; and nothing less then Victory over sin and
subtilty will satisfy your souls; so that it is only Life and Power that can
give you peace, and therefore yours is work, and not vain words; and that which
strikes at the root of sin, is your best Weapon: So it is not Flesh that
profits you, it is the spirit that must quicken through hardship, that which
ease has slain, ere you come to perfect peace.

For though the Letter tell of a Child that is heir of all things, and gives
this Inheritance to all in whom he is formed, whose Name is, Wonderful in
Counsel and Strength, yet is not this brought forth without hard labor and
travel, and the pangs of death gone through; for when you come to the Lord for
Counsel, and feel that there is two manner of Seeds in the Womb, then will you
see that great Work is to be done ere you come to rest; There is the strong man
to be bound before the Babe can reign; and strongly is he armed with all manner
of Wiles to save himself; and it is not words and thoughts that will cast out
the Mother and her Son which must not inherit; and this must be done, or all is
in vain: He that is born of Flesh, is in bondage to things here below; this
cannot inherit Immortality, for sin has power in him, and dye he must, that
the Son of Righteousness may arise to life in you, and bring your life to light
with him, as he appears; and though the Light be above the Transgressor, yet
the Son is lowly that gives it.

So being faithful in the Light which from the Son comes, which condemns all
the lofty ways of the firstborn, you will beled into ways lowly, to cross
your life in him; through Watchings and Fastings, and great Tribulations, must
he be famished, into which the Spirit will lead you, where there is nothing for
the Lust to live on, nor for that Wisdom to walk in that loves it self, or
seeks its ease and pleasure. Then be faithful to your Guide, however he storm
that is to be destroyed.

And with all diligence press into that which calls in the wandering mind, and
give heed with watching and wrestling to get abiding therein, which as you are
faithful therein, it will be enlarged, till it become a habitation for your
pure minds to dwell in, and take up its rest, which has been tossed to and fro
as in a Wilderness; and by killing in the Watch all that would draw you out,
and sinking down into this meekness and steadfast lowliness, you will come to
feel the Plant of God that brings forth this meekness and holiness, and springs
of living virtue; and there will you meet the Lord in his Kingdom on Earth,
where he delights to walk as in a Garden; for in these things he delights, and
in such as delight therein, and there wait to feel his fellowship, and receive
his Counsel in purity and coolness, in which he will let you see whatever it be
that would break his Covenant with you, and whatever leads out from the
Eternal Life, and will with his Spirit lead you out to war against it; in
which Spiritual War being faithful, you shall not fail of Victory, till every
cumbrance in your minds be cast out, and so heavenliness become a quiet
habitation, that in the meek spirit you may feed upon the heavenly food and not
to have that ravenous earthly spirit to steal and devour it from the soul.

And as you get an entrance into this heavenly Mansion, so diligently watch,
and in the Light stand armed against the Thief, and keep out whatever would
enter into your affections or desires, under what pretense soever; for if it
enter into your affections, it will steal away your minds from this pure
innocent Plant; and this is Adultery, Treachery and Whoredom, which you must
wrestle against in the power of his love.

And with willingness of mind to put off all the old Idols out of your
affections, what ever has any place there; for by the entrance of that through
lust, has the Son of Righteousness suffered, and the Innocent been slain; and
until that be condemned and cast out, which has come over the Just in your
affections, the Son of Righteousness arises not into his Kingdom, who must
fulfill all righteousness before the entrance be made; Which Work you stop,
whilst you retain the unrighteous, having a Seat in your heart uncondemned and
cast out; and hence it is that many seek to enter, but are not able, the cursed
thing not being cast out, which can have no place in Gods Kingdom, with which
the just has not communion, nor the Temple of God with Idols.

And this I say to you, which is a learned Truth in this Journey, That if you
either retain your old Lovers, or suffer any thing now to enter your
affections, or draw out your minds from this pure Plant of Righteousness and
Truth, you shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for this is the
Way, and must make your entrance; therefore fight against whatever would draw
you from it, and with violence break through it, and take the Kingdom; for
only he that has been faithful in the Baptism of John, to fulfill all
righteousness, shall receive power to press into the Kingdom; and when you come
here, you will find violent Powers to keep you out, which with the Lamb in War
must be overcome violently; for the strong man having got a possession within,
is not easily bound and cast out, for it is a spiritual wickedness, and in
heavenly places, with which you are to wrestle; therefore a Heavenly Virtue
contrary thereto, and of a greater Power, must give you you Victory.

So press into the Heavenly Spirit with its power, to overcome the Earthly
Spirit with its powers; strive earnestly in the meek spirit to obtain a
measure of Faith and Patience, larger then the Temptation, and that will endure
to the end of it a Meekness and Love to cover all strife and wrath a
Long-suffering to famish all have, and that which seeks its own ease; and so in
all things with desire, drinking in of the Heavenly Virtue from above, whereby
you may become strengthened with all might, to stand all assaults of the Enemy,
within or without; and so in the cross come to put on every measure, Christ
Jesus, the great Power of God unto Salvation, and Well-springs of Eternal Life
and Glory, which is done by sinking down into the Heavenly feeling, contrary to
the Will of the exalted Life, whereby you will be overshadowed from above, from
whence the Savior is looked for, to overcome things below.

And as you come into the feeling of these Virtues, hold them fast till he come
who is the fullness, and with that you have, wrestle against what ever would
draw out your minds from it; for with that of him must you make War against
whatever is contrary thereto; and as you are faithful to abide therein, you will
feel every high thing fall before you; for that which cleanses the Vessel of
all corruptible things, is your Weapon; and that which springs up in a contrary
nature, is your life. The beholding whereof as it rises, and keeping your eye
constant in the Faith and Hope of attaining to his fullness, will make your Work
the Work of Love, your obedience delightful, and all your sufferings easy, and
your loss of your former glory will in that eye appear great gain; and this is
your acceptable service, and that Faith which works by Love, which avails
much with God, and being follovved, overcomes the World, and sets free from it
in all things.

So with the Light mind to be led down into that Life that is not of this
World; come to him that seeks not himself, who has not his rest in things on
earth, who is rejected of men, denied of his own kindred, and forsaken of
all; and as you come to him, you vvil come to be proved whether you can forgo
all these for him alone, and that he may make his appearance in you, and cover
you with himself, his contempt and reproach, and his patient power to bear
all; for it is he that can bear all things, that shall never be moved; and he
that thus overcomes, shall know the white stone, and that Rock which breaks the
Nations, but builds the House of God.

But in all your Journey take heed of the Adulterous mind, for it secretly
devoureth the precious Life; Wherefore take heed of that which looks out,
give not way to that eye not for a moment; for if you consent to it upon any
pretense whatsoever, you enter into a Covenant therewith, against the holy
Seed, to destroy the chaste mind; but whether it be rough or smooth, yet hold it
as an Enemy, and that which if it get in by consent, must out by suffering
double to the delight it brings with it; but if as an Enemy you withstand it by
constant and patient resistings, it will fly, and grow weaker upon every
assault; and he that gives you victory, will grow more in your esteem and
delight.

Wherefore think it not strange (so long as any of the old leaven is within,
unpurged out) That the nearer you draw to God in the lowly-suffering-meekness,
the deeper you sink into tribulation, and your suffering increase upon your
fleshly part, for that is the Sons way to perfection; and the wondrous works of
the Father are learned in the deep; for by the hand of God upon you (being
faithful in suffering to the end) shall you see the old Foundation of the World,
the root and offspring of all Wickedness, how it came to be laid, and how the
Lamb is slain, and what he is; and the Foundation of God shall you see and
feel, upon which the Saints were raised up and built in the Spirit, and how all
the Chaff, Hay and Stubble comes to be cleansed off; for his fan is in his
hand, and the words of his mouth are a consuming fire to that Nature, who
refineth the Gold, and quickens the Soul, and divides the clean from the
unclean. And the nearer you draw to God, the nearer will he draw to you in
Righteousness, and Judgment, and Truth, to make an end of sin, and bring in
everlasting Righteousness, and to establish you in his inheritance who appear
in his Temple through the Refiners fire, and Fullers Soap, the end of all
sufferings, and entrance into everlasting joy, purity and peace, and weight of
Eternal glory, to which there is no other way but through affliction.

But as you come down to the Foundation of God, watch with all fear and
diligence, that nothing exalt you, or lift you up in mind, conceit, or
comprehension, faster then with that Foundation you are builded; for many
temptations of haste will present themselves with fears and distrust, to get
you from off the Foundation of Life; but if you keep lowly, steadfast and
faithful thereto, with it you shall be raised out of the Pit, and set above the
Earth. And for that end is it laid within you, that in Spirit you may be built
thereon, in order like the Cornerstone, a new man, not the same that goes
down, and none knows the way of his rising, but as he keeps to the
foundation, and minds the head of the Corner, which as you diligently mind,
you shall know the sure Foundations of the holy City, even from the Word of the
beginning of Christ, as you grow to his fullness, the Foundations of Repentance,
of Faith, of Doctrines, of Baptisms, of the Resurrection of the dead, and of
eternal Judgment.

And as with the Foundation of Life and Power you come to be edified, you will
be led through the dominions of Death, where you shall learn wherein it has its
power, and by what it reigns, and how it captivates the Seed, and how its Bouds
are broken, and with what he is taken and chained, who has the power of death;
and so come to see what binds, and what looses; kills, and makes alive; the
Life of the Law, the Life of the Prophets, and the Life of the Apostles, as
they passed before you, will you come to know, their in heritance therein to
possess, and with them in Spirit have fellowship, as they passed the time of
their Pilgrimage here, that to the Life of Christ you may come, for the
fulfilling of the Word of God, which endures from Generation to Generation:
This being the end of all the travels of the souls of righteous men and women
here below, which that they might attain the fulfilling thereof, and so
return in peace to him from whence they came, clothed on with their heavenly
House, for which prize they counted all things loss here below, casting off the
Earthly pleasures, and killing every affection thereto, estranged therefrom in
all their vvalking while they are here, knovving that the love to the earthly
things, is the enemy to their spiritual ascending, and that the Earthly
Adulterous Spirit daily hunts to devour the precious Life, and to keep the soul
in things below; presenting daily its delights carnal, and opening the paths
of the destroyer, with pleasures to the carnal eye, which whosoever joins to,
cannot ascend into the heavenly Inheritance, but with the dark World daily go
downward, who are degenerated from the Life of God, and estranged from it, even
from the Womb; so that they are never able to attain the knowledge of God, nor
in truth and righteousness to call him Father, nor to say they came out from
him, nor ever to him can return; This they being willingly ignorant of, that no
man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, who is born,
not of the corruptible Seed, nor begotten, but by the Word of God which lives
and abides for ever.

But with you it is not so, (neither are you going that way) who feel the
heavenly motion drawing your minds out of all earthly delights, the taste of
the Heavenly Life overcoming the Earthly in your affections; so that to the
World you dye daily, and you feel something quickened in you, that cannot feed
on earthly pleasures, but hunger after righteousness, and see a beauty in
holiness, and thirst daily after the Heavenly Virtue: So to that sink down into
its likeness, which is yet in the bonds of death, and hunger with it, and
suffer with it, and join to it in all its counsel, so that with it you may be
raised; for that is it which is on the foundation of God; and coming to him as
a living stone, you will be built on the same Foundation, the same Spirit being
your Head; by whose Resurrection all the Vails will be done away, the Vail of
Death, the Vail of the Law, the Vail of the Prophets, and the whole mystery of
godliness will be unsealed, and the way to Heaven opened by him, even the slain
Lamb, who has his power from the midst of the Throne of God, even for you, if
you join to him in his sufferings and ascendings, who makes the way betwixt
Heaven and Earth, and keeps it open in all them who mind him, therewith to
possess the Vessel in holness and fear toward God, so that nothing shall
hinder your prayers from coming to the Throne of God, nor the dew and blessing
of Heaven from falling upon the Seed; and here is Heaven opened, and the way of
grace and salvation for the wayfaring man here on Earth to walk in; in which if
you wholly exercise your minds, you shall not err; nor shall any thing be able
to hinder you from receiving Gifts from the Father, so long as nothing of a
contrary Nature stops his own from arising to him in praises, and you with it.

So let nothing cut off your Communion with God in that measure you already
have received; but let the breathings of your souls, and your hearts be
continually open toward him, and therein you shall not only receive, but
become faithful improvers of what you have, by the blessing that is the
Covenant that is with all that love him that dwells in the Light; for where the
conversation is in Heaven, there the Earth becoms fruitful.

Wherefore give all diligence, that nothing have your affections here below, or
stop your heavenly mind from its constant ascending; for that is the spirit of
Bondage which has got power, by letting some carnal thing in upon you, to
press you down; which Spirit waits upon you continually to ensnare the Heavenly
Life, and get above it in your minds, and so as a weight beset you in your way,
lest that which comes from Heaven should have free passage through a clear
Vessel to Heavenly Seed, free from cares, cumbrances, and earthly pleasures,
and from Earth to the Heavens; for it is he that comes from above, which
declares to man his way, and his wants, presents his prayers, and receives the
answer; and by him alone does God work all his Works in you, and for you, in
Heaven, and in Earth: Now if you join to another, and give your strength of
heart and mind to his Enemy, then the Work of God ceases, the way being stopped;
for the Adulterer, the Covetous, the Idolater, the Wanton, the Sloth, or what
ever of that Nature you join to your consent gives him strength to stop the
Way of Life: And this is your condemnation, witnessed with the Light; and
herein had Death its power at the first, which can be no Head, but where he is
hearkened to, let in, or obeyed, (but being resisted, flies) but being let in,
he seateth himself in the Heavenly way, with much policy and power, and is not
easily got out, nor seen to be what he is; so when you feel your way darkened,
or affections grow cold toward Heaven, then take heed with all diligence in
the pure Light to search, for your Enemy has got some entrance, which by
faithful and patient waiting in the Light, you will come to see, and through
the power of the Cross to kill that life, and cast out that in which it was
conceived, for that must not abide in the House with him that is Heir of the
Heavenly Inheritance, but is an Enemy to his coming; for it is he that lets
till he be taken out of the way, which while he is in the way, dulls the
affections, and clogs the Heavenly mind, that it cannot ascend: wherefore that
which you have received of the Holy One, his Unction hold fast till he come,
and with it stand armed against whatever would enter to lead out to any outward
observations; but with all diligence observe that which you have of his in
Spirit, which the adversary seeks so much to draw you forth from, least you
should increase your Lords money, and herein you maintain your daily watch, and
war with that you have of Life and Power, and not with that you have not; so
are you faithful Stewards, and are accepted in what you have, and not in what
you have not; for the World is in darkness, and so wait for they know not what,
and have no ground for their Faith, nor power to prepare his way to his coming,
further then words of others, or their own conceivings, but are not in him who
is true; but you are in him who is true, who have his Light received, and are
in it to observe hhis appearance in all things, and the Messenger of his
Covenant you know, who goes before his face to prepare his way, turning your
hearts from every evil way, and out of the paths of the destroyer, that you may
be fruitful upon earth, that so he may receive you into himself when he comes
to smite the Earth with a Curse, which that which brings forth Briars and
Thorns is nigh unto, whose Seed is not of himself, his root and offspring at
his coming, which is begot in the Adulterous mind.

For the mind feeding from without upon any knowledge, form, or observation
(but what the life leads to in Spirit and power) is the ground of the mystery
of iniquity, and the woman of Witch craft, which hunteth for the precious life
of the holy Child, seeking to draw your strength of affections from him after
the harlot, that so he may fall and die daily in your hearts and affections,
while the Lust goes out to another, covered with some fair pretense, whereby
the worldly Spirit gathers strength daily, as you shall feel who are watchful
and diligent in the Spiritual War, so shall that Truth appear to you; That as
your love waxes cold, so will iniquity abound, with an unresistable power,
whatever you know to the contrary, which is not in the life; Or whatever you
believe without that faith which works by love to the life of Truth more then
to the knowledge of Truth: So let your wrestling be into the power and life of
God, and thereon feed, and your life shall endure for ever, and your strength
and virtue shall be daily renewed: But you read of some who had the form of
Knowledge, and of the Truth, but being out of the life of Truth, held the Truth
in Unrighteousness; and such when they knew God did not glorify him as God in
life: So he gave them up, who became vain in their imaginations, who retained
not the life in the knowledge, turned the Truth of God into a Lie: So that
knowledge could not keep them from being filled with unrighteousness, which
stood not in the life and power of righteousness, and who received not that
Truth in that Faith which loves to live the life of it.

Wherefore let your food be in the life of what you know, and in the power of
Obedience rejoice, and not in what you know, but cannot live; for the Life is
the Bread of your souls, which crucifies the flesh, and confounds that which
runs before the Cross. So let your labor and diligence be in that which
presses into the Heavenly Being, and seeks a Conformity to Christ in
obedience of what you believe, and hearken in love to that, not in that mind
which would save your own lives, nor feed you where you are; but in love to
that which seperateth you from self-life, and changes you into his life whom
you wait for from above; so in receiving his commands in that which loves to be
like him in life, your Faith works by love, and his Commands are joyous through
love: That Faith works obedience, quickness and willingness; it works out
the old, and works into the new; and so through the hope of that which you
love, and obedience of Faith, the entrance is made with the Life, into the holy
Kingdom, and the Immortal Glory is put on, which in the Light is seen, and in
the Life obtained, as with the Word of Faith the separation is made, and the
Life that is Mortal put off, whose Life is without the Vail, and is for death,
with that Life who makes the entrance through his Blood, and through his Flesh;
a living Way, a Way of Life, a new Way to all who are seeking the Door in old
Ordinances and Traditions, and outward Observations, feeding their minds with
thinking or talking of what others did long since, or what may be done in times
to come, and so are in Times, but out of that Life which endures for ever, and
only has the promise of the Father, and Power to make the entrance to him,
from whom all the World are driven, who are in the Lust, and in that Nature
which loves it self, and works iniquity; yet wearying themselves to find the
Door, without the Light of that Life which is not of this World.

And as you mind only to feed on the Plant of Life, you will come to know the
Work of the Father in his Vineyard, and who the faithful Labourer is, and what
must be his Work; and the sloathful servant, and what his Work brings forth;
and the cause why the field of the sluggard is overgrown with evil fruits, and
why his Vine brings not Fruit to perfection. For you will find many Plants
besides the Tree of Life, all which seek to be fed and strengthened in the mind
and affections, and many grown Trees tall and strong, which have got fast
rooting, spread and bring forth abundantly after their several kinds; and all
these present themselves to the eye of the mind, to be fed from thence, which
is as the feet, fetching food from far, without which they cannot live long,
but must pine away, and fall, as they dye in the affections, and as the mind is
withdrawn from such objects as they are fed withal. So the Work of him that is
faithful, is to number these to the Axe, and to the fire, and not to suffer
these any place in the mind, how strongly soever they tempt, and try every way
to spread Root to keep life; that so through the death of these, the Vine may
grow alone in the clean affections, and holy mind, and honest, chaste heart,
which is the good ground, and where the pure Plant will bring forth of it self
in all, where it is not cumbred with that which is contrary to it; Which
contrary fruits all that mind the Light may see; but the sluggard not being
diligent to dig up the Root, as well as to condemn the Fruit, therefore they
are daily growing, and the good ground ever cumbred with them; and such ever
know what they should do, but are never able to abide there, their life being
lost in the midst of this Wilderness, and overgrown with wild Plants.

But you being diligent in your Watch, you will see that the cause of all your
troubles and confusion (when you come to the true labor indeed) is not for
nothing; for you will find many plants of several kinds (for the World is in
the heart of man, as he is droven from God) And every kind has its several
life, which lives have their several feedings, all which you may feel in the
Light, by their temptings to lead out your minds; and though they are of
several motions, and live upon several objects, yet the least of them being fed
by consent in your mind, will overrun the Vine, and in time bury it, by
growing up in your affections: Wherefore all must down, that Truth alone may
rise in your affections, and the Word of Life have place in your hearts, who is
purer then to dwell in the Adulterous mind, and whose eye cannot behold
iniquity, who has no communion with darkness, nor fellowship where any Idol
stands in the Temple.

So this is your faith in your labor, even that which overcomes the World, and
suffers nothing thereof to take place in your minds, but with the Spirit of
Life to watch, and wrestle against every lust, and kill every affection that
would go out for food; for whatever goes out, betrays the innocent; and every
pleasure of the flesh, as a Canker does eat out the Life of the holy and just
one; but by Faith the Just lives, and in faithfulness does he judge, and make
War against all his Enemies, in every one who are exercised therewith.

And in this Work, mind what you follow; follow nothing rashly, but prove all
things with the fire; and that which will not endure the Temptation, and bear
the Cross, is the Adulterer, who will look out every way for ease; and the
Serpent will present many likely ways to her under fair pretenses, which she
that would live at ease, will hastily hearken to; and if you hearken to her,
you will betray the Work of Life, which is bringing forth in hard travel and
labor, which is flain in the birth, where ease and sloth is consented to; and
with living at ease and pleasure, has the Life been slain from the beginning
of the world, and has been kept under by her Sorceries, who fares deliciously
upon Earth; and by consenting to her pleasures has the Election been lost, and
covered with the Seed of Wickedness, which God hates, which Wars after the
flesh, and lusts after the flesh, to strengthen it self above the holy
spiritual Seed; but minding to make that sure to you which calls in your mind,
and being obedient thereto, it will lead down by the Power of the Cross,
through that which is above, to the feeling of the Election; and a separation
being made betwixt that which God chooses in this Working-Power, and what he
condemns, you will come thereby to know to what to join, and from what to
withdraw, that you may be Workers together with him, and not against him, which
the subtle one will lead you to do, till with the Light the separation be
made; and so joining to it in faith and obedience, the Election will arise, and
by diligence thereto it will be made sure.

And once feeling the Innocent to move under the Oppressor, give your selves no
rest until the strong man bow; for with great Plagues upon that Nature, and
with a strong hand against that will must the Seed of Promise be redeemed from
under his Power, which like Pharaoh, if he get but rest, will not let Israel go
from under his Power; and if you keep with the Spirit, and hearken low, it will
let you see what must be the Plagues you must pour upon him, till he be brought
down, that a little Child may lead him, and reign over him; and he that was
oppressed by the Beast, may ride upon him: And as that Nature got head and
strength by having its Lusts fulfilled, so it must be subdued by having its
Lusts famished; which if you be not faithful to the seed of God herein, you
sell your Birthright, and betray your own redemption, and are found deceitful
Workers against God and your own Souls.

Wherefore run not with that which is in have, but lie down in that which is
meek, lowly and patient, that which is vvilling to vvait the Fathers time,
and seeks to obtain by the obedience of Faith, and not in the Will that would
have in its own hand; For a Nature there is which runs out for help, and
raveneth abroad to be satisfied, which God will famish; And this will seek
to lead the mind, if it be follovved, and will hunt about and murmr if it be
not satisfied: This goes about the City, but enters not; and this must
suffer hunger, and feel the Lambs wrath, and plagues upon the head thereof,
what way soever it turns, till it bovv and comeunder, which it will not till
it be pined with famine, and vvearied upon the mountains of prey; then shall
the Lion lie down with the Lamb, and the little Child lead to rest, and no
ravenous beast shall take his feeding from him. But in this work take heed you
be not betrayed with that Spirit, for it is very subtle, to run to the one
hand or the other; either into the eagerness and have, which is its first way
after Convincement; Or else when it gets not its ends there, then into sloth
and idle carelessness, and both these keep it alive in strength above the Seed;
but a straight Way there is betwixt these, in which the Seed arises, which
is a diligent, vvatchful, patient meekness, feeling the godly Principle moving,
and following it in faith and obedience in all things without have or ends,
further then what is opened in the life of obedience, constantly diligent,
least any thing slip out of the mind, which is freely given, either for
practice or teaching; for only the diligent mind holds the true living
Treasure; but the sloathful and disobedient are leaking Vessels.

So as wise in the Light, prove your Freedom, from that nature which is high,
and fierce and hasty, or any way above the meekness, for therein stands your
perfect Redemption to know that, that you are not servants to that nature; for
it is the same that hastes into the greediness after worldly things, and fears,
and distrusts, if it has not in its sight and possession what it lusts after;
which being convinced of an inheritance in heaven, would have that also in all
have by Sight; but not through Faith, Patience and obedience; which if it may
not obtain into its own sight, and in its own way and time, it will be ready to
faint and distrust, and this will never strip himself of all, in hopes of an
inheritance it has not seen; so this is in Bondage, and not to be Heir; but
the just live by Faith, whose Birth is free from this World, and your
redemption from the other into the leadings of this, wchwil bring to the
inheritance of the purchased possession.

Wherefore prove your Freedom in all things, that you may not glory in vain,
but in the Liberty of sons; Do not say; All things are lawful, all things are
pure, etc. and so sit down and say, You are redeemed, and have right to all;
but first pass through all things, one after another, as the Light leads
you; and with a true measure see, if you be from under the power of any; when
you have proved this throughout all things, and found your freedom, then may
you say, All things are lawful, and know what is expedient, and what edifies
your selves and others, and the Rest to reign over, without Bondage thereto:
And this is the Liberty of the Sons of the new Creation, born again, not in
Bondage; whose Liberty is glorious above all created things; and these are the
pure, to whom all things are pure, who have proved all things with that which
is pure, and hold fast only that which is good, and the rest are free from.

And this ever mind, That whatever Freedom you obtain through the sufferings
and patience of Christ in Spirit, you part not with it to please the flesh, but
hold it as your everlasting possession purchased for you, not with corruptible
things; so that which is dearly purchased, let not lightly go; but remember
Israel, who was redeemed out of Egypt with much hardships, and many signs and
sufferings, but soon in have got up that which said, Let us return back again;
and this grieved God above all: And this you will find ready to rise upon every
further hardship and want, as it was with them. Wherefore stand fast in that
which you have proved to be Liberty indeed, and by no means look back nor
hearken to that which is behind, to let it overtake you again: Remember Lot's
Wife; and the Wrath of God will ever be upon that mind which looks back into
old things, which are judged in the Light, and led out of with the Life:
Wherefore stand single in your minds to follow nothing new or old, but what
the Holy Spirit leads into; for the Work is a Work you know not, nor the Way
you know not, but as it is learned in the obedience by which the Soul is
purified and cleared by purging out the old Earthly Leaven, which has darkened
the Temple of God, and God's Work is not seen in that Nature.

Wherefore give all diligence to the Spirit's motion and leadings, what it
moves against, and what it leads to; for now will God make all things new; A
new Creation, new Heavens, and new Earth, and new heart and mind, and a new
Law, a new Man to walk therein with his Maker with cheerfulness, as the old
Bonds are broken by the Spirits leading, and to serve in newness of Spirit. And
as you mind the pure Leadings of the Spirit, and willingly follow and obey, you
will come to know your Creator in the days of your youth, and how he makes the
Worlds by the Word of his Holiness; and how he is your Father, and in what; and
how he begets you again into the Heavenly Delights, who was gone out from him,
and drove into the Earth with your hearts and affections, and so those will
lead out still further from God, if you look into them, but can never come into
God again, but must dye, and be changed by the Spirit; and the new Creature is
accepted into God, the new Heart, and Mind, and Spirit, which is renewed after
God, by following of his Spirit who creates him.

And this Work will be darkened to your understanding, if your minds come not
clear out of the old, into the new: For Wrath will arise, and confusion will be
to that mind which is double, where the eye is not single, kept forward in the
belief of the Spirit only, but looks back into the loss, and to that which is
dying and condemned; there is the smoke, and darkness, and torment, and
temptations, being enticed back into the old; but if the eye be single, the
whole body is full of Light, and the Faith arises to endure to the end of the
world, and to look to the beginning and finishing of the new Work of
Regeneration. And standing single to God herein, though the World pass away
with Thundering, Earthquakes, and a mighty Noise, yet shall ye not fear nor
faint, abiding in the meek, patient, and suffering-spirit, and the leadings of
that which endures all things to win Christ: And coming out of Babel, you
shall not fall with her, nor be darkened with the smoke of her torments, as all
that abide in her must, and of her Plagues must partake; but the pure mind
rejoiceth over her in midst of all.

A Psalm of JAMES, the Servant of JESUS, or a Song of Praise which he sung in
the day of his Deliverance, declaring the wonders of the most High, which he
wrought in the day of the deep trial of his Innocent Lamb; even how the Lord
was with him when he was beset with darkness, and assaulted with strong
temptation; and how he brought him through the Fire, and through the Sea, and
under the Mountains and Hills, and slew his Enemy which had Dominion over him;
and so brought him to know himself, and then exalted him over death, and
delivered him out of the pit in the sight of his Enemies; and brought him to
the pleasant Valleys and Springs again, and caused his glory to descend upon
him, in which he met the Flock of his Father, in whose Love he became joined
and knit unto them that had forsook, or stood at a distance from him. Also many
other weighty Sentences; all which are set forth, that the wonders of the
Lord may be seen, and that flesh may not boast nor glory in the time of
prosperity, though much of God may be opened and known, and that the
tenderhearted may not despair in the times of deepest sufferings, temptations
and trials; but patiently vvait on him who works all things in his people,
according to the counsel of his own vvil, that he over all, and in all things
may be glorified, whose right alone it is: So be it; Allelujah.

IT is in my heart to praise thee, O my God; let me never forget thee what thou
have been to me in the Night by thy Presence, in the Day of Trial when I was
beset in darkness, when I was cast out as a wandering bird, and when I was
assaulted with strong Temptations, then thy presence in secret did preserve me,
and in a low estate I felt thee near me, when the floods sought to sweep me
away, thou set'st a compass for them how far they should pass over; when my way
was through the Sea, and when I passed under the Mountains, there were thou
present with me, when the weight of the hills was upon me thou upheldst me,
else had I sunk under the earth, when I was as one altogether helpless, when
tribulation and anguish was upon me day and night, and the Earth without
foundation; when I went on the way of wrath, and passed by the gates of hell;
when all comforts stood afar off, and he that is mine enemy had dominion; when
I was cast into the pit, and was as one appointed to death; when I was between
the milstones, and as one crushed with the weight of his adversary: as a father
thou were with me, and the rock of thy presence when the mouth of Lions roared
against me, and fear took hold on my soul in the pit, then I called upon thee
in the night, and my cries were strong before thee daily; thou answeredst me
from thy habitation, and delivered from thy dwelling place, saying, I will set
thee above all thy fears, and lift up thy feet above the head of oppressi in: I
believed, and was strengthened, and thy word was salvation: Thou did fight on
my part when I wrestled with death, and when darkness would have shut me up,
then the light shone about me, and thy banner was over my head; when my work
was in the furnace, and as I passed through the fiery spirits, thy faith stayed
me, else through fear I had fallen; I saw thee, and believed, so the enemy
could not prevail: When I looked back into thy work I was astonished, and see
no end of thy praises: Glory, glory to thee, says my soul, and let my heart be
ever filled with thanksgiving; whilst thy works remain they shall show forth
thy power: then did thou lay the foundation of the earth, and feddest me
under the waters, and in the deeps did thou show me wonders; and the forming
of the world by thy hand: Thou least me in safety, till thou shewedst me the
pillars of the earth; then did the heavens shower down, they were covered with
darkness, and the powers thereof were shaken, and thy glory descended; thou
fill'dst the lower parts of the Earth with gladness, and the valley was opened,
thy showers descended abundantly, so the Earth was filled with virtues. Thou
made thy Plant to spring, and the thirsty soul became as a watered Garden:
then did thou lift me out of the pit, and set me forth in the sight of mine
enemy; thou proclaimedst liberty to the captive, and called my acquaintance
near me, they to whom I have been a wonder; and in thy love I obtained favor
in those who had forsaken me; then did gladness swallow up sorrow, and I
forsook all my troubles. And how good is it that man be proved in the night,
that he may know his safety, that every mouth may become silent in thy hand,
until thou make man known to himself, and have slain the Boaster, and showed
him the vanity that vexes thy soul:

DEar Friends, dwell in the pure Power of God, and in the undefiled Life walk
toward one another, and feel one another in harmless hearts, and in the bowels
of our Lord Jesus Christ judge all straightness in your selves, rather then one
another; How good a thing is Unity of Spirit and Mind. And how precious is that
Soul that seeks peace with self-denial! God is near you, who sees all your
Works; and evil thoughts slay the Lord of Peace, and grieves God exceedingly:
But that is the Child of his Love, and Son of his Bosom, that seeks not
himself, but can lay down his life for another; O feel that Spirit and Life, my
dear Friends, and wait for his appearance, who is that Life in whom he comes
with Power; thy Peace shall be as a River that is clear and broad, which shall
not be dried up; but thou shall drink into Eternal Rest, and Quietness shall
fill thy dwelling, and the God of Peace and Holiness will delight in thee, and
in the end thy Fruit shall break out, and thou shall not long be hid, but thy
God in whom thou delightest, shall cover thee with his Glory, and make thee to
shine in his Light; and the Lamb shall speak out of his Temple, and shall be
confessed too; but the self ended Spirit will wither, and that which lifts up
it self, will fall to nothing; and back-biters, and whisperers, and they which
carry tales to make debate, will God thrust away far from him, and the meek
shall enjoy his Inheritance alone, who has sought his praise from God, and not
from men; Therefore take heed to your spirits in Gods fear, and keep the Unity
and Covenant of God, and grieve not Gods Spirit, nor provoke any to Wrath: And
again I warn you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ, speak not evil, nor think
evil of Brother or Sister; for if you do, you cannot be guiltless before God,
nor stand before the Enemy in the time of trial; for evil thoughts will eat out
your peace and precious Life, and devour your strength with God, and make way
for many Evils to enter and prevail upon you. Even the Lord God of Eternal
Power preserve you all, who has called you, and given you a Name amongst the
living; for in him is my Hope and Confidence concerning you all, for the
Adversary is near you; but to him that is true and faithful I commit you all,
whom many of you have known from the beginning; and as you dvvell and walk in
his Power of Life and Holiness, Love and Peace, God will keep you from all
evil, bear you, and lead you into growth and improvement of what he has
committed to you, and in Faith and Peace you will be kept from running to the
Hills to save you, or (...) making a refuge of a lie; but with the everlasting
Truth will you all be girded and armed with the Word of Life against all
Wickedness of Flesh and Spirit, within and without. And God Eternal kill the
World in you all, and thoroughly crucify you to it in every affection, and
out-leading Power, so that you may all witness him come who is the end of the
World, and Eternal Life, and in him walk in the singleness of your minds as
freeborn-Children, redeemed into perfect liberty with him: And dear Friends,
meet often together, and so build up your selves above visibles, that you may
enter into peace and life everlasting: The day of God hasts on apace, which
will try every man's Spirit, and every man's Work, of what nature it is, and none
will be saved, but who are of God; and such he receives into himself, who is
builded up to him in that which is from above: But the wandering and unstable
spirit he will shut out, and punish with perdition from his presence evermore.

Wherefore dearly beloved in my soul, above what I can write, this I lay upon
every one of you in particular, and warn you, That you prove and examine your
selves herein, what spirit you are of, and what is your freedom herein; and
note that Spirit which steals your minds into earthly things, and wandering
thoughts, for that is not of God, but is of this world, and works after the
power of the Prince of the Air; and in this Spirit all have fellowship with the
world, and are in the Power which works against God and the Lamb; nor can any in
that Spirit serve God, nor have fellowship with him in the Light; for it is
carnal and devilish, and shut out from God the Father of Light, and so becomes
a Vagabond, wandering, chaffie Spirit, not capable of God's Counsel nor
Service; nor can you have fellowship with the Brethren in the Light and Power
of Truth, so long as this reignth and is followed by you; and so this must be
judged in every motion of it, that it may be subdued and put under foot, lest
being once enlightened, you become wandering Stars from God's presence for
ever. So be you faithful to God who judges you, and gird up the loins of your
minds, and wait for stable, heavenly Spirits, that you may be born thereof, and
rule therein over your selves, and so overcome the world, that you may walk at
liberty in God, and in Christ Jesus whom he has sent; and herein is life
eternal, and rest to your souls, what ever befall you; and only blessed is he
that enters thereinto; and it is the faithful that enters, and in faith and
obedience is the Covenant kept, which keeps quiet the mind, and in perfect
peace in all Conditions, the purchased possession of every redeemed soul,
thorough the blood of Jesus. So God cover you all with his Spirit, being buried
into his Death; and the Almighty arise among you, and judge every evil root in
its first motion, and give you the knowledge of himself in Love, and build you
up above all strife and enmity, and fill you with his Grace, and season your
hearts therewith, and make himself your delight, and bless you all, and
increase you, my dearly beloved ones, to whom bowels of dear Love runs, even
unto the least of you all; in your innocent simple desires, I am one with you
all, and with my God for you all, that not one of you that ever have tasted of
the Call or Power of God, may be lost, or offended, or driven away; God Eternal
build you up into his Life, and give you an Inheritance in him that seeks the
lost, and brings back that which is gone astray. Dear Friends, read me here,
and feel my Bowels toward all that are tempted, or fallen; and treasure up
Mercy against the day to come; even as ye look to be forgiven, so forgive one
another unfeignedly, and keep your selves separate from the world, and every
pollution: O fear not the world, neither covenant with man, nor say, A
Confederacy; but fear the Living, Powerful God of Heaven and Earth, who is a
Sanctuary to every clean and faithful heart; and to him I commit you all, who
is over the world, and works in you, to make you eternally as he is, that you
may be his Sons and Daughters for ever, to whom give thanks and praise for
evermore, Amen.

You are often in my remembrance. J. N.
This Epistle foregoing was given forth since the former part of the Book,
about the fifth day of the fifth Month, 1660.
THE END.

