THE Catholic Letter TO THE SEEKER: OR, A REPLY TO THE Protestant Answer.
SHOWING, That CATHOLICS have Express Scriptures, for Believing the Real
Presence; and, That Protestants have none at all, for Denying It.

St. Mark IV. verse. 11, 12. To Them that are Without, all these Things are done
in Parables; That they may See, and not Perceive; Hear, and not Understand.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for John Lane, at the Golden-Anchor, the Corner Shop of
Wilde-Street, next Duke-Street. 1688.

THE Catholic Letter TO THE SEEKER, etc.
SIR,
I Hope These Lines will over-take You, e're You proceed to pass Sentence upon
what has been said by Either Party, in Answer to your Request, concerning the
Real Presence; and the rather, for that in my Answer, I was (as it were)
Silent, because of the Ties You had put upon Us, to satisfy your Conscience by
the Scripture only; for, Request, P. 4, 5, 7.
That your Design was to see what Scriptures We had for it, and what the Others
had against it; and, That nothing but Scripture, (without troubling our selves
to tell You the meaning on it,) should satisfy You in the Matter: To which I
submitted, as near as possible I could. And I humbly conceived the Protestant
Answerer would have done so too; but, on the contrary, he has not only quitted
the Question, but has crowded Three Sheets and an half of Paper, for the most
part, with pretended Reasons and Figures, without producing so much as One
Text, pertinent, to disprove the Real Presence; or to prove any One Text, by me
alleged, to be either Figuratively or Parabolically spoken; or that, for Such
they must be understood: But says, (by no Authority, but his own) Protest. Ans.
Page 7, 8, 10.
That the Sense of Eating the Flesh, and Drinking the Blood, Must be
Figurative; and, right or wrong, they are Figurative, and must not be properly
and literally understood* For I am (says he) as (...) as (...) Words that the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is (...) Literal, th^n it (...) be the Rational
Meaning of them, etc. But, to have made You as sure as himself, methinks, he
should have proved, by express Scripture, that those Texts which I produced
were Figurative or Parabolical; and that they are not to be understood in the
plain and proper Sense wherein they were spoken; otherwise how does he think we
shall take his bare Word, or that his private Meaning of the Text shall pass
upon us for Gospel: But, not to delay on this particular, pray observe how the
Gentleman has evaded the Question, which was of the Real and Immediate Presence
of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, "Whether we believed it or
not? if We believed it, We were to produce what Scripture We could to justify
Our said Belief; and, if They denied it, They were to produce what Scripture
They could, to prove That their Negative." But, instead of speaking to the Real
Persence, he has betaken himself to Transubstantiation, a Word devised by the
Church to express the Conversion that is made in the Sacrament, by the Divine
Word; as the Word Consubstantial or Consubstantiate, was devised against the
Arians, to express the Substance of the Son's being Coequal, the same with the
Substance of the Father; and, if the Request had been of the Consubstantiality
of the Son, the Arians, with as much Reason, might have Answered, That 'twas
enough for them to show, that Consubstantiality is not Taught in Scripture, as
the Protestant Answerer has done; where ( Page 3.) he says, That it is enough
for them to show, that Transubstantiation is not taught in Scripture, though the
Being of Christ 's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, is: At which rate, if
permitted, he will Sham off the rest of their Negative Doctrines; insomuch, that
when you come to the Infallibility of the Church, Invocation of Saints,
Purgatory, etc. and require him to show Express Scripture, to prove, That the
Church is not Infallible, That we must not Invocate the Saints to Pray for us,
That there is no Third Place in the other Life, besides Heaven and Hell; he will
think to stop your Mouth with his, It Is enough for them to show, that
Infallibility is not Taught in Scripture; though, That the Church can never Err,
be: That Invocation of Saints is not Taught in Scripture; though Prayer to
Saints, and that they do Pray for us, be: That Purgatory is not Taught in
Scripture, though a Third Place in the other Life, be; whereby he quits the
Substance, to wrangle at the Word, by which the Substance is expressed: He
might as well say, The Trinity and Incarnation are not Taught in Scripture; the
Words being no more there, than Transubstantiation, Purgatory, or the rest: But
how far this way of Answering will take with You, I know not. For My part, I
humbly conceived your Meaning was purely to be satisfied in the Substance of
what We believed of the Real Presence; and to show You what Authorities We had
from Scripture, for such Our Belief; not doubtings, if We agreed in the
Substance of the Thing Believed, that ever We should differ about a Word
sufficiently proper to express it.

The Gentleman proceeds, and tells you, ( Page 3.) That You are but lately
engaged in this Employment, or else You would never (says he) think it
reasonable, to oppose the Authority of One Unknown Answerer of that Communion,
to the professed Opinion of so Many great Divines of that Church, etc. And from
thence infers a Concurrence of some of our Divines with him, in this
particular, to wit, ( Page 4.) That there was not One place of Scripture so
Express, that without the determination of the Church, it would evidently
compel a Man to receive Transubstantiation: And the same might as well be said
of the Consubstantiality of the Son "That there is no Scripture so Express, as
without out the determination of the Church, it would evidently compel a Man to
receive it;" But what is this to the Being, or not Being of the Body and Blood
of Christ in the Sacrament? Had he produced Scotus, Bellarmine, or any of the
Holy Fathers, to disprove the Real Presence, it had been something, tho not to
your purpose; for the Request was, ( Page 4.) To satisfy You by the Scripture
only; and not by citing of (our Modern Divines, or) Ancient Greek and Latin
Fathers; but by the Express Text, and plain Word of God, as Written, and set
forth in our English Bibles, and no otherwise: And this was the Rule that I
walked by, in my Answer; not that I thereby Renounced the Determination of the
Church in this, or any other point of Faith: God forbid, but that I should
always prefer their Universal Consent, to my Private Opinion! Wherefore, if
what Scotus and Bellarmine have said in that Matter, will do the Gentleman a
Kindness, he shall have it, not only from them, but from all the Faithful; that
although the Scripture were never so plain, we would yet submit to the
Determination of the Church, for the true Sense and Meaning thereof: But if so,
as we must go to the Determination of the Church, for the Sense of Scripture;
what then becomes of their Bible-only- Rule-of-Faith?

The Gentleman go's on, and ( Page 5.) advises You to Consult even Those, who
are most concerned; and particularly, (says he) The Author of your Catholic
Answer, who has Undertook (what the abovesaid Learned Persons despaired of) to
Prove Transubstantiation to the full of your Request, by Express and Plain
Texts of Scripture: And, in the same Page, tells you Your Catholic Answerer,
it seems, has Read That, which Cardinal Bellarmine had not seen; and that he
had found out a great Part of a Chapter, which the Cardinal had Overlooked.
But to turn his own Cannon upon Himself, I may, with more Truth Retort on him,
That he has Read, it seems, in my Answer, what I never Writ; and has found a
great part thereof, for which You, and I, are yet to Stek: For I do not find
the Word Transubstantiation so much as Mentioned in either your Request, or my
Answer; for Justification whereof, I refer to Both: Wherefore, how Sincere the
Gentleman has been, in this particular, let the World Judge. Indeed, the Title
of my Answer says, Proving the Real Presence by Scripture only; and so does the
Current, throughout the whole Discourse; but not one Word of
Transubstantiation: For that the Controversy was not about the Word
Transubstantiation; but, about the Real Presence, or Substance Believed and
Denied in the Sacrament. But, here you will say, (perhaps) What Is this to the
Purpose? Is not the Real Presence and Transubstantiation all as one? No, truly,
they are not so all one as you may think: For, there is a great deal of
difference betwixt a Man, and the Name by which he is distinguished; and the
Measures that are taken to prove him a Man, are not the same with Those which
are used to prove his Name is Thomas: And so of the LORD's Supper. It Is one
thing to prove the Real Presence, and Being of CHRIST's Body and Blood in the
Sacrament; and it is Another to show Reasons, why this Mysterious Change of
Bread and Wine, into the Body and Blood of CHRIST, is, by the Church, called
TRANSVBST ANTIATION; though, whoever believes the One, cannot in Truth deny the
Other: For, if what our Savior said, (when, Matthew. 26. Verse. 26. JESUS took
Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples; and said,
TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY) be true, That it was, as He said, his Body; then it
implies a Change from its former being Bread, to its present being his Body.
And this Mysterious Change, the Holy Catholic Church does properly call
TRANSVBST ANTIATION: Not that the Substance of Bread is Changed, according to
Sensual Taste, but according to Divine Faith in JESUS CHRIST. Wherefore the
Gentleman, methinks, should not have Banter'd altogether, as he does, at the
Word TRANSVBST ANTIATION; but have spoke to the Substance; and have either
Confessed the REAL PRESENCE, or have produced nothing but SCRIPTVRE to Disprove
it, as was Requested.

The Gentleman proceeds, notwithstanding; and tells you, Page 6. That this
Discourse of our Savior 's, (meaning That in the 6th. Chapter of St. John) had
no special Reference to the Sacrament; for that the Sacrament was not
Instituted, till (says he) above a Year after, as the Time of this Discourse
shows, Verse. 4, etc. Very well! On which please to remark: That the Sacrament
was not then Instituted, I grant, as I did before, in my Answer, Page 6. where
I said, First, I prove Christ 's Promise before He Instituted the Sacrament,
etc. and so far the Gentleman might have spared his Labor: But, that the
Sacrament was not Instituted till above a Year after, is what he can show no
Rule for: For the Text, which he cites to prove his Assertion, is this, John 6.
Verse. 4. And the Passover, a Feast of the Jews was nigh. Now, that this word
Nigh should signify Above a Year after, is such a Figure, as never was.
Whereas St. Luke has the same Word, saying, Chap. 22. Verse. 1. Now the Feast
of Vnleaven'd Bread drew Nigh, which is called the PASSOVER; and immediately
the Passover followed, as appears by the Chapter. And St. Mark treats not of
the Passover, till within Two Days of it, saying, Chap. 14. Verse. 1. After Two
Days was the Feast of the Passover: So St. Matthew. 26. Verse. 2. Ye know, that
after Two Days is the Feast of the Passover, etc. I do not say, That the Word
Nigh, in St. John, signifies so near as Two Days; nor do I find, by express and
plain Scripture, that it is to be taken for above a Year after. But, whether
what is said in the 6th. Chapter of St. John, have any Reference to the
Sacrament, is the Quaery? For, though our Savior did not then Institute the
Sacrament; yet He says, Verse. 51. And the Bread which I will give, is my Flesh;
which I Will give for the Life of the World. By which You see, that, though He
did not then give us this Bread; yet He promised, He would give us Bread to
Eat, which should be the very same Flesh, which he would, and afterward did,
give for the Life of the World. Now, Whether this absolute Promise has any
Reference to the ensuing Performance, be You the Judge? when, at his Last
Supper, He took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his
Disciples, and said, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY. If therefore this Bread, which
He here gives us to Eat, saying, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY, be not that Bread,
which He promised He would give us to Eat, which should be his Flesh, pray ask
your Protetestant Answerer, Where, When, and How, did CHRIST give us Bread to
Eat, which should be his Flesh, if This be it not?

The Gentleman goes on, and ( Page 7.) tells You: These Verses, ( viz. 53, 54,
55, 56, 57.) do show, where our Savior says, EXCEPT YE EAT, and WHOSOEVER EATEIH,
etc. in all which the Present Time is spoken of. But, why the Gentleman should
begin at Verse. 53. and thereby skip Verse. 51. I know not; where CHRIST told
them before, That He WOULD (in the Future Tense) give them Bread to Eat, which
should be his Flesh; and then tells them, That EXCEPT THEY DID EAT, and WHOSOEVER
EATS, etc. Not that He did then GIVE, or that they did then EAT his Flesh, or
DRINK his Blood; which they could not do, before He took it, blessed it, brake
it, and gave it: For at that Time when He spoke, as in the 6th. Chapter of St.
John, He only told Them, He WOULD give it; and, the Eve before his Passion, He
PERFORMED it: And from that Time, I suppose, the Obligation bears force, Verse.
53. That, Except ye EAT the FLESH of the Son of Man, and DRINK his BLOOD, ye
have no Life in you: He does not say, Except ye EAT it, before I GIVE it; but
first said, He WOULD give it; and then, EXCEPT THEY DID EAT, etc. The
Gentleman, however, from the abovementioned Texts, insinuates, "That CHRIST's
Flesh and Blood may be Eaten and Drank out of the Sacrament, as (says he) is
evident from the Sense and Letter of it: If so, then (continues he) it could
not be understood of that Flesh and Blood, which the Bread and Wine are
Converted into, in the Sacrament; nor (adds he) of Carnal Eating his Flesh, and
Drinking his Blood." -- As to his Carnal Eating; We beg his Pardon, if he
means, as we Eat Beef, and other Meats: For that We Truly and Really Receive
the Body and Blood of CHRIST, in the Sacrament, (to use his own Words, Page
12.) after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner: And so far We should Agree, did We
not Differ in This, That They Receive it in Figure and Fancy only, and We
Receive it in Substance and Truth. -- "But, that it is evident, (as he says)
from the Letter and Sense of it, That the Flesh and Blood of CHRIST may be
Eaten out of the Sacrament, and even Before it was Instituted," etc. -- is
indeed such a Figure, as none but Himself can unriddle. For my part, I have
read St. John on this Occasion; and I cannot find it so evident, as he says it
is: Pray, Sir, do you Consult the Words, and see, whether those Texts do imply,
the Eating and Drinking the Flesh and Blood of CHRIST, Out of the Sacrament, as
well as In it; or in any other manner, than under the Forms of Bread and Wine,
according to both the Promise, and Institution? Or, Whether they could Eat it,
before He Gave it? For, in the 6 th. Chapter of St. John, CHRIST did not give
them his Flesh to Eat, nor his Blood to Drink: But told them, He would give
them BREAD to Eat, which should be his FLESH; but, before He GAVE it, 'twas
impossible for them to EAT it.

He further proceeds, and tells You, ( Page 8.) "That it must not be Properly
and Literally understood: For then (says he) all that thus Properly Eat and
Drink the Flesh and Blood of CHRIST, would have Eternal Life, according to our
Savior's Assertion," Verse. 54. -- Very true! The Worthy Receivers (who
persevere to the End) have so; but the Unworthy, quite contrary: And we can
show You a Rule for it, viz. 1 Cor. 11.27,29. Wherefore, whosoever shall Eat
this BREAD, and Drink this CUP of the Lord Unworthily, shall be guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord: For, he that Eats and Drinks UNWORTHILY, Eats
and Drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the LORD 's BODY: Wherefore
the Worthy may receive to Eternal Life, and the Unworthy to Eternal Death. And
the Words, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY, may be properly understood; the
Protestant Musl-bee's to the contrary, notwithstanding.

The Gentleman tells you further, in the same Page; "That then, the Sacrament
in both Kinds, will be necessary to Salvation," etc. -- As to this of Both
Kinds, it does not properly Relate either to Your Request, or My Answer; but is
a Controversy deserving to be Argued by it self, in convenient Time and Place:
And, besides, I do not see where the necessity lies, of defining the Sacrament
in Both Kinds, to One, that believes it in Neither; not but that I am ready to
satisfy You in this particular, where, and when You please.

The Gentleman ( Page 8.) sharply reflects upon what I said in my Answer, p. 8.
That if they went to Figures and Parables, we knew how to handle them. From
whence he Insinuates some Extraordinary way of handling: For my part, I take
GOD to Witness, I had no other meaning in it, than to handle them by the BIBLE,
as I said, to Rule them by their own Rule: Wherefore, let the Evil be to them
that think it.

As to what he says, Page 8. "Of the Antipathy I should have to Figures and
Parables; and Cross my Self, wherever they are Named:" -- I do not see, by
what I have Writ, where the Gentleman can have the least Ground for this Cross
and Antipathous Reflection: For, to the contrary, I highly venerate those
Discourses, wherein our Savior was often pleased to express himself by way of
Parable, etc. But that which I abhor, (and which, indeed, would make a Saint
Bless himself) is, To see Men mould GOD's Word into what Form they please, and
make every thing a Figure, that does not square with their Fancy: Is it because
our Savior spoke some things by way of Parable, that All he said was such? or,
That he never spoke otherwise? If so, and that the Scriptures are so full of
secret Meanings, How comes it, that mean Capacities are (by the Church of St.
Martins) left to themselves, to Judge of the true sense of Scripture, according
to D. T. who tells you, in his True Account of a Conference, p. 18. "That a
Man, after using all Christian means, and the help of all Ministerial Guides
possible, must at last Judge for himself." -- A special Assertion indeed!
which, if true, What need of Teachers, seeing that every Man must teach
himself, by being a Judge of the Text to himself at last? But, not to detain
you on this particular,

Let us come to what the Gentleman desires, page 8. "That I should tell him,
without a Figure, what is that Meat which endures to everlasting Life, whereof
our Savior speaks in the Sixth Chapter of St. John, verse. 27. Labor not for
the Meat which Perishes, but for THAT MEAT which endures unto everlasting
Life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you; for him has God the Father
sealed:" Why, truly, for my part, I do not see where the difficulty lies in
these words of Laboring for that Meat which endures to everlasting Life,
which the Son of Man shall give unto you; it being but a Preamble to what
immediately follows, in the same Chapter, of Giving us his FLESH to EAT, which
is the true Meat that endures unto everlasting Life: And besides, He tells us,
That the Meat which endures unto everlasting Life, should be given us by the
Son of Man; agreeable to what he says, verse. 51, 55. And the BREAD that I will
give, is my FLESH, which I will give for the Life of the World: For my FLESH is
Meat indeed, and my BLOOD is Drink indeed: which, without a Figure, I humbly
conceive, is that MEAT which endures unto everlasting Life. As to his, How the
Son was Sealed by the Father, and the rest of his How Is; they are such Jewish
expressions, as that all Christian-pretenders ought to be ashamed of them: For
CHRIST no sooner spoke of this Doctrine of giving us his FLESH to Eat, but the
Jews came up with their How too; saying, verse. 52. How can this Man give us his
FLESH to Eat? So Jewish it is, to question GOD, how he could do it? how this?
how that? and if, How he made the World of Nothing be asked? Can we Answer, but
by his sole Word? And, shall it not be sufficient for us to take his Word, when
he tells us, The Son of Man was Sealed of GOD the Father? and Believe him,
without calling of GOD to question How, or diving into the secrets of Heaven.
So, How he came down, etc. and the rest of his How Is, if they are not
sufficiently plain in the Bible, so as to be clearly understood, I Will agree
with the Gentleman, and submit to the determination of the Church; and so must
YOU, and all the SEEKERS in England, if what the Protestant Answerer
Insinuates, be true: For, if these express and plain words of Christ be a
Figure, where he says as plain, as plain can be, That he would give us BREAD to
Eat, which should be his FLESH; and accordingly, He took Bread, and Blessed it,
and Brake it, and gave it; saying, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY; I say, if these
words are Figurative, and must not be properly understood, I see no Reason, why
the whole Bible should not be a Figure too: For, if ever CHRIST was Plain in
any thing, 'twas in this; especially in a Point, wherein there was never more
occasion to Expound, if a Figure, than when the Jews (to whom He came)
murmured, and said, How can this Man give us his Flesh to Eat? and when some of
the Disciples said, It was an hard saying; who could hear it? and thereupon
walked no more with Him: He, that, in Cases of less Moment, always explained
his Parables, should yet be Dark and Figurative in This, of that Importance,
which occasioned not only the Murmuring of the Jews, and Departure of the
Disciples, Then; but also occasions (as CHRIST well foresaw) our differences at
This Day: Should He, I say, explain Himself in matters of less weight, and yet
be Dark in this great Concern, is what would be contrary to his Wisdom and
Goodness. But, so far was CHRIST from meaning otherwise than plainly, as he
spoke, that to the murmuring Jews he confirms it, ( verse. 53.) with a Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Except ye EAT the FLESH of the Son of Man, and DRINK
his BLOOD, ye have no Life in you; and to the Unbelieving Disciples, (verse. 61,
62.) with a Does this offend you? What if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend
up, where he was before? Whereas, when he spoke by Parables, He explained
himself to them; as Mat. 13.3. And he spoke many things to them in Parables,
saying, Behold a Sower, etc. or, when he spoke by way of Similitude; as Mat.
18.23. Therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven LIKENED unto a certain King. Mat.
20.1. For the Kingdom of Heaven is LIKE unto a Man, that is an Householder. Mat.
22.1,2. And JESUS answered, and spoke unto them again by PARABLES, and said,
The Kingdom of Heaven is LIKE unto, etc. Mat. 23.1. Then shall the Kingdom of
Heaven be LIKENED unto Ten Virgins, etc. See Mark 4.2. Mark 12.1. Luke 12.16.
Luke 13.18,19. Luke 15.3. Luke 19.11. Luke 20.9. and you will find, that in all
Cases, CHRIST spoke not by PARABLES, without telling them it was so, and
Expounding the same unto them. But, because the Gentleman is more particular,
page 22. upon that of CHRIST's being a Door, a Vine, a Rock, etc. let us see,
whether the Parity 'twixt, I am the DOOR, the VINE, etc. be the same with, The
BREAD that I will give, is my FLESH, which I will give for the Life of the
World; or, with what he said at his Last Supper, when He took BREAD, and
Blessed it, and Brake it, and Gave it, and said, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY;
without ever Explaining a Syllable to the contrary: Whereas, in that of the
DOOR, John 10. the Text tells us, It was a PARABLE, saying, Verse. 6. This
PARABLE spoke JESUS unto them, etc. Wherefore, if the Protestant Answerer would
be so kind, as to produce as plain Scripture for this of the Sacrament's being
a Figure, as I have done for the Door's being a Parable, he will doubtless oblige
YOU, and certainly gain a Proselyte of ME. And, in like manner of the Vine;
CHRIST says, Joh. 15.1. I am the True VINE, and my Father is the Husbandman;
as before, Mat. 20.1. where he likened the Kingdom of Heaven to a Man, that is
an Householder,; and so goes on, Explaining the same; saying, Verse. 4. As the
Branch cannot bear fruit of it Self, except it abide in the VINE; no more can
ye, except ye abide in ME; which (if you read the Chapter) you will find to be
more plain: And, in like manner, of the ROCK; That he was the CORNER STONE,
upon which the Foundation was laid; and no other Foundation can any Man lay,
than what CHRIST has laid; for on Him is Built the whole structure of our
Salvation: Wherefore, whether these Parables of the DOOR, the VINE, etc. be as
plain, as, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY, be You, or any Impartial Soul, the Judge
in his own Conscience.

As to what he says ( Page 9.) "That if the Words are Literally to be
understood, they would rather Infer the Conversion of Christ's Flesh and Blood
into Bread and Wine:" -- For Proof whereof, let us go to the Words of Conversion
themselves, Mat. 26.26,27,28. where it is said, Christ took Bread, and Blessed
it, and Brake it, and gave it, and said, Take, Eat, This is My BODY; he does
not say, Take, Eat, my BODY is this BREAD: And in like manner of the CVP; For
this is my Blood: which Words, This is my BODY, This is my BLOOD, are the Words
of Conversion, and do no ways imply a Change of Christ's Flesh into Bread, nor
of his Blood into Wine; but, to the contrary, they plainly Infer the Conversion
of Bread and Wine into both the Body and Blood of Christ. As to the Texts he
brings from the 6th. of St. John, there was no Conversion then made; nor do
They make for him: Besides, that he, who but just now ( Page 6. of his Answer)
told us, "That this Discourse in St. John, had no special Reference to the
Sacrament," -- should now apply them, notwithstanding, is an odd way of
shifting; however, as it is, these are the Words, ( John, 6.48,55.) I am that
Bread of Life. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed: Had
the Words been, My Flesh is Bread indeed, as the Gentleman would fain have
them, if you observe it, ( Page 6.) then indeed he would have had something of
his side; but as they are, they make clear against him. As to those Words, ver.
48. I am that Bread of Life; methinks, they are sufficiently explained by the
following Texts; where he says, v. 50. This is the Bread which comes down from
Heaven. ver. 51. I am the Living Bread, etc. which Bread he tells us plainly,
is his Flesh, saying, Ver. 51. And the Bread that I will give, is my Flesh; and
not, that the Flesh which He would give, was Bread; But that, That Bread was
his Flesh; which, as said, is sufficiently plain; if not, rather than differ,
I Will join in Opinion with the Protestant Answerer, and those other Divines; and
with Him and Them, submit to the Determination of the Church.

There is one Argument yet, on which the Gentleman seems much to depend, ( Page
9.) where he says, "Since if Christ be not, but where he entirely is, then
(says he) he must be Eaten entirely," etc. -- From whence he concludes the not
Being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, because (as he conceives) he is not
there Entire, for Reasons (not Scripture) of his own. To which I Answer, and
grant, That Christ is Not, but where He is Entire; for that there is no
separation to be made of his Natures, nor division of his Body into Parts; but
that He is to remain One Christ Entire for ever: But, as all things are
possible to God; so, whether Christ, who is perfect God, may not be Entire in
the Sacrament, and in many places, at one and the same Time, is the Quaere?
which, if fully Resolved, will overthrow all his Reasoning Ware besides:
Wherefore, that Christ is Not, but where He is Entire, is granted; and that
Christ may be Entire, though Unseen, Unfelt, or Tasted in the Sacrament, is
proved, by what we read in John 20.19. When Christ entered the Room where the
Disciples were Assembled, the Doors being fast for fear of the Jews, and came,
and stood, and spoke in the midst of them. And after Eight days (as we read in
the same Chapter, ver. 26.) Christ entered again, when the Doors were close
shut, and stood, and spoke in the midst of the Disciples: Now, that Christ was
Entire when He stood, and spoke in the midst of them, must be granted: But how
came He through? was his Body Entire, Extended, Finite, and Circumscribed with
Limbs, Bones, Flesh, and Sinews, when He entered through Walls or Doors that were
close? That He was Entire when He past through, must be, by the Gentleman's own
Argument, as well as Mine, Of Christ's being Not, but where He is Entire;
wherefore, Christ was Entire when He came through, or He came not through at all:
but Christ came Through, was There, and was Entire too; for Christ is Not, but
where He is Entire: Nay, such is the infinite Power of God, that though they were
enclosed in Walls, every where a Mile thick, 'twould yet be possible for Christ
to enter Entire through all, and return in the same Incomprehensible manner: And,
by the same Reason as Christ's Body passes Entire through Stone-Walls, by the
same Reason his Body may be Entire in the Sacrament; and by the same Infinite
Power, the Body of Christ may be in Heaven, and on Earth in Innumerable Places,
at one and the same Time; the Gentleman's Arguments ( Page 16.) to the
contrary, notwithstanding. For that Christ has said, Mat. 18.20. That where
Two or Three are gathered together in my Name, there am I (says Christ) in the
midst of them: By which you see, that wheresoever the Faithful are Assembled
together, in his Name, that Christ is there in the midst of them; if then,
Christ be in the midst of those Assemblies, He is there Entire, or He is not
there at all: But Christ, though Invisible, is in the midst of them, or the Word
deceives us; which to think, is Blasphemy; it being, by God, again confirmed,
saying, Mat. 28.20. And lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
World: By all which is proved, That Christ may as well be Entire in the
Sacrament, as be Entire when he passes through Walls and Doors, that are close;
as also it is proved, That Christ may be in more places than One, at the same
Time; for, How many Assemblies of the Faithful are there in the World, that are
gathered together in his Name, at the same Moment, and Christ in the midst of
every of them? Nor can the Protestant Answerer ever be able to deny the same,
without denying Christ to be a Perfect, and an Omnipotent God.

Wherefore to his 10 Page where we find the Gentleman hot at the Word This, to
know what it means, which, of it self, wants Sense; but to know its meaning
here, ask the Question, What? and our Savior will resolve you; where, Mat.
26.26. As they were Eating, Jesus took Bread, and Blessed it, and Brake it, and
gave it the Disciples, and said, Take, Eat, This is (what?) MY BODY; he did
not, after he had Blessed it, say, Take, Eat, This is BREAD; but, Take, Eat,
This is my BODY: than which, nothing can be more plain, than that it was his
BODY; and that the Word Hoc, or This, referred thereto: For if it were to
remain (as the Protestant Answerer says, Page 15.) as really and properly
Bread, after Consecration, as before, the Word Hoc, or This, in the Neuter
Gender, had never been applied to a Substantive of the Masculine; for it would
be Nonsense, and Improper to say, Hoc est Panis: Wherefore, it is plain, that
the Word Hoc being of the Neuter, related properly and truly to the Word Body,
which is also of the Neuter; and not to the Word Bread, which is of the
Masculine: But, because the Gentleman gives us our choice, let us suppose it
otherwise, that the Word [ This] referred to the BREAD, and not to the BODY; as
suppose the Words had been thus, This BREAD is My BODY: It yet follows, that it
is his BODY, and not that it was to remain BREAD; for that He had said, It was
his BODY: And although it was first BREAD, yet He afterward concludes it to be
his BODY; saying, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY. But how plain soever God or Man
could speak, Sophisters will find whereat to quibble; for the sputter he makes
at the Word This, is indeed nothing else; and for such the Gentleman designs
it, as he does all the rest of his Arguments, by what appears in the same Page,
(10.) where he assures me, "That They have not Faith to believe that, which the
Scripture has not Taught." -- From whence I gather, That notwithstanding all
his Arguments to disprove the REAL PRESENCE; yet he has not Faith (though Face)
to deny it. For, that ( Page 3.) he tells you, "That besides their Positive
Articles, they have a great many Negative Ones; and to require plain and
express Words of Scripture, to prove that such a Doctrine is not there Taught,
is to demand a Proof the thing is not capable of:" -- Wherefore the Gentleman,
how Ingeniously soever he may argue against the REAL PRESENCE; yet he has not
Faith to believe, That in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is not contained
the True, Real, and Substantial Body of Christ; for, that he has not Faith to
believe, what the Scripture has not Taught; and the Scripture has no where
Taught, That in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, is not contained the Body
and Blood of Christ: The Gentleman, therefore, can have no Faith to deny it;
all his Arguments to the contrary, notwithstanding.

But before we part his Tenth Page, let us note his ( Where Is:) Where (says he)
is there one Word? Where, That this True Body and Blood? Where, That the Bread
and Wine are, upon Consecration, turned into the True Body and Blood of Christ?
etc. Which truly, are Where Is indeed; and one should think, that so many
Where Is, were not without a Wherefore; And, because the Gentleman desires to
know the Where, he shall also know the When: Mat. 26.26,27,28.
Jesus took BREAD, and Blessed it, and Brake it, and gave it to the Disciples;
and said, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY; and He took the CVP, and gave Thanks, and
gave it to them; saying, Drink ye All of It; for, THIS IS MY BLOOD. And There
it was, and Here it is, by Power of these Words of God, THIS IS MY BODY, THIS
IS MY BLOOD, that the Bread and Wine are turned into the Body and Blood of
Christ: He does no say Here, as He did when He spoke the Parable of the DOOR,
the VINE, and the rest, That this Parable spoke He unto them; or, that this
BREAD is Like, or Likened unto his BODY, or a Figure of his BODY; but
absolutely, TAKE, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY: And for such we ought to take it, and
believe it, till the Protestant Answerer be able to produce as plain Scripture
against it, as I have done for it.

The Gentleman proceeds, and ( Page 11.) tells you, what their Church holds,
(he should have said of the Real Presence, for that was the Quaere) and
delivers their Opinion in different manners; to wit:

1. "Our Church holds (says he,) That Transubstantiation is Repugnant to the
plain Words of Scripture, and overthrows the nature of a Sacrament," Art. 28.

2. "That the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain after Consecration, in their
natural Substances; and the natural Body and Blood of Christ, are in Heaven,
and not Here. Rubr. after the Com."

3. "That the Body of Christ is Given, Taken, and Eaten in the Supper only,
after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner; and the means whereby the Body of
Christ is Received and Eaten, is Faith, Art. 28, 29. -- And in three Lines
after, he tells you, That there is no other Substance distributed among the
Communicants, than that of Bread and Wine." -- And these, put together, make
such a Medley, that a Man knows not what to believe of it: First, It Is
Repugnant to the plain Words of Scripture; though they are not able to produce
one Syllable out of the whole Bible, to disprove it. Secondly, The Natural Body
and Blood of Christ are in Heaven, and not Here; though, at the same time, they
tell you, That the Body of CHRIST, (who had but One Body) is Given, Taken, and
Eaten, in the Supper, after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner; and in Three
Lines after, denies it again; which are such Contradictions, that a Bushel of
Figures will never reconcile 'em: For, If the Body and Blood of Christ be
confined in Heaven, and not in the Sacrament at all, How can the Body of Christ
be Given, Taken, and Eaten in the Supper, after any manner, Heavenly or
Vnheavenly, if the Body of Christ be not There at all to be Given, Taken, or
Eaten? or, how can the Body of Christ be (as he says) Given, Taken, and Eaten
in the Supper; when, at the same time, he tells you, "There is no other
Substance distributed to the Communicants, than that of Bread and Wine?"

As to the Words, Heavenly and Spiritual Manner, I would They did truly believe
it so; for then They would believe it as We do; that is, That the Body of
Christ is truly Given, Taken, and Eaten in the Sacrament, after an Heavenly and
Spiritual Manner; for after a Carnal, Sensual Manner, We receive it not; but
this Heavenly and Spiritual Manner, We believe to be a True and Real Manner;
and not a Deceitful, Figurative, Fictitious Manner; as if all that is Heavenly,
were but Figure and Fancy. If You grant the Body and Blood of Christ to be in
the Sacrament, after a Spiritual Manner, you must also grant it There after a
True Manner; or, to be There after a Spiritual Manner, is not to be There after
a Real Manner: If Christ be There in Spirit, He is also There in Truth; and if
There in Spirit and Truth, all my Arguments are granted, by the Gentleman's own
Concessions, as well as Mine, Of CHRIST's being Not, but where he is Entire:
Wherefore, if Christ be in the Sacrament after any Manner, He is There after
such an Entire, Real, and Substantial Manner, as We believe and profess Him, or
He is in no Manner There at all; for Christ is Not at all, but where He Truly
and Entirely is.

In the Twelfth and Thirteenth Pages of the Protestant Answer, the Gentleman
produces all the Scriptures he had, or at least, all the chiefest Texts he
could, to disprove our Doctrine of the Real Presence, and Being of CHRIST's
BODY and BLOOD in the Sacrament: Which Scriptures, by Him produced Against it,
together with those by Me alleged and assigned For it, are as follows:

The Catholic Texts for the Real Presence.
I. St. John 6. v. 48. I am that Bread of Life, says Christ. II. Verse. 49. Your
Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are Dead. III. Ver. 50. This is
the Bread which comes down from Heaven, that a Man may Eat thereof, and not
Die. IV. Verse. 51. I am the Living Bread, which came down from Heaven; If any
Man Eat of this Bread, he shall Live for ever; and the Bread that I will give,
is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World. V. Verse. 54. Whosoever
Eats my Flesh, and Drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him
up at the last Day. VI. Verse. 55. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is
Drink indeed. VII. Verse. 56. He that Eats my Flesh, and Drinks my Blood,
dwells in Me, and I in Him. VIII. Verse. 57. As the Living Father has sent
Me, and I live by the Father; so he that Eats Me, even he shall Live by Me.
IX. Verse. 58. This is that Bread which came down from Heaven: Not as your
Fathers did eat Manna, and are Dead: He that Eats of this Bread, shall Live
for ever. X. St. Matt. 26. v. 26. And as they were Eating, Jesus took Bread,
and Blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples; and said, Take,
Eat, This is my Body. XI. Verse. 27. And he took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and
gave it to them; saying, Drink ye all of it. XII. Verse. 28. For, This is my
Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the Remission of Sins.
XIII. St. Mark 14. v. 22. And as they did Eat, Jesus took Bread and Blessed,
and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, Eat, This is my Body. XIV.
Verse. 23. And He took the Cup, and when he had given Thanks, he gave it to
them, and they all Drank of it. XV. Verse. 24. And He said unto them, This is my
Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many. XIV. St. Luke 22. v. 19.
And He took Bread, and gave Thanks, and Brake it, and gave unto them; saying,
This is my Body, which is given for you; This do in Remembrance of Me. XVII.
Verse. 20. Likewise also the Cup after Supper; saying, This Cup is the New
Testament in My Blood, which is Shed for you. XVIII. 1 Cor. 11. v. 23. For I
have Received of the LORD, that which also I Delivered unto you; That the Lord
JESUS, the same Night in which He was Betrayed, took Bread. XIX. Verse. 24. And
when He had given Thanks, He Brake it; and said, Take, Eat, This is my Body,
which is Broken for you; This do in Remembrance of Me. XX. Verse. 25. After the
same manner also, He took the Cup, when He had Supped; saying, This Cup is the
new Testament in my Blood; This do ye, as often as ye Drink it, in Remembrance of
Me. XXI. Verse. 26. For as often as ye Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye do
show the LORD's Death till He come. XXII. Verse. 27. Wherefore, whosoever shall
Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup of the LORD Unworthily, shall be guilty of
the Body and Blood of the LORD. XXIII. Verse. 28. But let a Man Examine himself,
and so let him Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup. XXIV. Verse. 29. For he
that Eats and Drinks Unworthily, Eats and Drinks Damnation to himself,
not discerning the LORD's Body.
The Protestant Texts against It.
I 1 Cor. 11. v. 23, 24. The Lord JESUS, the same Night in which He was
Betrayed, took Bread; and, when He had given Thanks, He brake it, and said;
Take, Eat, This is my Body, which is Broken for you; this do in Remembrance of
Me. II. St. Mat. 26. v. 27, 28, 29. And He took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and
gave it to them; saying, Drink ye all of it; for, This is my Blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission of Sins: I will not Drink
henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine, until I drink it New with you in my
Father's Kingdom. III. St. Mar. 14. v. 23, 24. And He took the Cup, and when He
had given Thanks, He gave it to them, and they all drank of it; and He said
unto them, This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is Shed for many. IV.
St. Luke 22. v. 19, 20. And He took Bread, and gave Thanks, and Brake it, and
gave unto them; saying, This is my Body, which is given for you; This do in
Remembrance of Me: Likewise also the Cup after Supper; saying, This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood, which is Shed for you. V. Act. 2. v. 42. They
continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in Breaking of
Bread. VI. Act. 20. v. 7. Upon the First Day of the Week, when the Discipies
came together to break Bread. VII. 1 Cor. 10. v. 16, 17. The Cup of Blessing,
which we bless, Is it not the Communion of the Blood of CHRIST? The Bread which
we break, Is it not the Communion of the Body of CHRIST? For We being many, are
one Bread, and one Body; for We are all Partakers of that one Bread. VIII. 1
Cor. 11. v. 26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the LORD's Death till He come. -- Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup of the LORD Unworthily. -- Let a Man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. IX. Act. 1. v. 11. -- This same
JESUS, who is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as
ye have seen Him go into Heaven. X. Act. 3. v. 21. Whom the Heaven must
Receive, until the Times of the Restitution of all Things. -- XI. St. Luke 24.
v. 39. Behold my Hands, and my Feet, that it is I my Self: Handle Me, and see;
for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones, as ye see Me have. XII. Act. 1. v. 3. To
whom also He showed himself alive, after his Passion. -- Being seen of them
Forty Days. XIII. 1 John 1. v. 1. -- Which we have seen with our Eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our Hands have handled. XIV. Heb. 9. v. 28. So CHRIST was
once Offered, to bear the Sins of many; and unto them that look for Him, shall
He appear the Second Time. XV. Heb. 10. v. 12. -- This MAN, after He had
Offered one Sacrifice for Sins, for ever sat down on the Right Hand of GOD.
XVI. Phil. 3. v. 21. Christ has a Glorious BODY.
Thus having truly laid down the Scriptures on both sides, I doubt not but it
does appear, that the Texts brought on the Catholic Part, are abundantly
sufficient and plain for the Being of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament;
and that Those produced on the Protestant Part, are also expressly For it, or
not at all Against it; for that it is impossible to bring one Text out of the
whole Bible, to prove, That the Body and Blood of Christ is not in the
Sacrament, as in effect is confessed by the Protestant Answ. Page 3. where he
says, "That the Church of England do hold several Doctrines, which are not
contained in Express Words in Scripture; for (says he) besides their Positive
Articles, they have a great many Negative Ones: -- So that to require plain and
express Words of Scripture, to prove that such a Doctrine is not there Taught,
is (says he) to demand a Proof, the thing is not capable of." -- Wherefore, the
denying of the Real Presence being one of their Negative Doctrines or Articles;
it is plain, That the Gentleman does not pretend to produce those Texts to
prove, That the Body and Blood of Christ is not in the Sacrament; but lays 'em
before you, hoping you will think they do, because the Word Bread is mentioned
(says he, Page 15.) Five times by St. Paul, after he recited the Institution.
Very good! and why not the Word BREAD, I pray, as well as the Word CVP, seeing
by the Word BREAD is meant the Communion of the Body of Christ; as by the Word
CVP, (1 Cor. 10.16,17.) is signified the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And
besides, St. Paul mentions not the Words CVP and BREAD, but he explains them to
be the Body and Blood of Christ; as, 1 Cor. 11.26. where he tells ye, As often
as ye Eat this BREAD, and Drink this CVP, ye do show the Lord's Death till He
come; which Death of the Lord was not shown, but by Offering up of his True and
Real Body and Blood: And Ver. 27. he tells ye, Whosoever shall Eat this BREAD,
and Drink this CVP of the LORD UNWORTHILY, shall be guilty of the BODY and
BLOOD of the LORD: Wherefore, if it were not the Body and Blood of the LORD,
how could they be guilty of the Body and Blood, if the Body and Blood be not
there to be guilty of? And further, Ver. 28, 29, He that Eats and Drinks
UNWORTHILY, Eats and Drinks DAMNATION to himself, not discerning the LORD's
BODY: which still confirms it to be the BODY of the LORD; or, how does he say,
Condemned, not discerning the LORD 's BODY, if the Body of the LORD be not
there to be discerned? Wherefore St. Paul speaks not, but in Confirmation of
its being the Body and Blood of CHRIST; or 'twould be hard, a Sinner should be
Damned, merely for Moderate Eating and Drinking of bare Bread and Wine: For,
according to the Protestant Answerer, the Sacrament is no more; who tells you,
Page 11. "That there is no other Substance distributed among the Communicants,
than that of Bread and Wine:" And Page 15. "That they are as really and
properly Bread and Wine," after Consecration, as before.

And further, The said Texts are laid before You; for that, in some of them, it
is said, THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME: To which I Answer, and say, That those
Words, This do in Remembrance of Me, do no way Relate to the Laiety, who only
receive the Sacrament; but to the Priests, who Consecrate and Administer the
same; for it is no where said, This Eat, This Take, This Receive; but, This do
in Remembrance of Me; whereas it is not at all the Office of the Laiety, (nor
have they the Power to do as our Savior then did, Bless and Administer the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood to Themselves or Others;) but the Office of the
Priests, to whom was given (by these Words, This do, etc.) a particular Power
to do the same as Christ then did, Take Bread and Wine, Bless it, and
Administer it, as he did for his Body, and his Blood.

Nor do the Words IN REMEMBRANCE any way serve Their turn; for, as You
unanswerably have observed, ( Page 7. of your Request,) That the Remembrance of
its Being, does no way make it cease to Be; which Argument the Protestant
Answerer would fain Confute; where, Page 19. he tells You, "Though the
Remembrance of its Being, do no way make it cease to Be; yet (says he) it
supposes the Absence of the Being:" which is to suppose the Body to be Present
and Absent at the same Time: A piece of Sophistry so weak, as I admire a Man of
Sense should insist thereon; as if my Remembrance of your being with me, when
present, did any way suppose your Absence from me, at the same time: It is
surely Nonsense to think, That the Remembrance of a Thing present, did, or
could in the least, suppose the Absence of the same Thing, at the same time;
for, though it be confessed, we may Remember the Being of a Thing, when Absent;
yet the Remembrance of the same Thing, when Present, does not at all suppose
the Absence and the Presence too, of the same Thing, at one and the same time:
Wherefore the Remembrance of Christ's Body and Blood's being Present in the
Sacrament, does no ways suppose the Absence of the Being, nor make the Being
cease to Be.

And further, The said Scriptures are produced; for that, in some of them, it
is said, THIS IS MY BODY, which is Broken for you, "Before ( says he, Page 14.)
it was Broke:" Whence he concludes it not to be the Body of CHRIST, because (as
he conceives) the Body of CHRIST was not Then Broke. But before We proceed,
it is requisite to inform your Self, whether CHRIST had Two Bodies, One
Figurative, and the Other Real; I suppose, 'twill be resolved, that CHRIST had
but One Body; and that was a True, Real, and Substantial Body; and not a
Figurative or Delusive Body: Wherefore, if CHRIST had but One Body, 'twas of
that Body he spoke, when He said, THIS IS MY BODY, which is Broken for you; and
to doubt, that what CHRIST said, was either Improper or Untrue, is to profess
our selves Infidels and Jews at once; for none but such, can question GOD's
Veracity: Wherefore, as what he said, was certainly true; so it was undoubtedly
proper, when he said, Which is BROKEN FOR YOU. For proof whereof, I answer,
That though his Natural Body be There, yet the manner of its Being, is Spiritual
and Sacramental; and the manner of its Breaking, follows the manner of its
Being; his Body is There Broken in the Sign, not in the Substance: Moreover
those Words, WHICH IS BROKEN, do prove (as the Holy Catholic Church always
did, and ever will hold) it to be a True and Proper Sacrifice; for the Being
Broken, does explain the nature of a Sacrifice, which imports the destruction
of the Thing Offered, if Corruptible, and liable to Destruction: But the Body
of CHRIST being Incorruptible and Immortal, cannot be really hurt; therefore,
the manner of Breaking, is only Mystical and Representative: But if this manner
of Breaking do not please the Gentleman, let us (to verify the Words of
Christ, whose Truth he so much doubts) see, whether the Body of Christ were not
otherwise Broke, before He Instituted the Sacrament; or rather, whether his
Body had not been Pierced, and his Blood had not been Spilt; for that it is
written, John 19.36. A Bone of Him shall not be broke: And another Scripture
says, Ibid. Ver. 37. They shall look on Him whom they Pierced: Wherefore, the
Body of CHRIST was not otherwise Naturally Broken, than by Piercing of his
Body, and Spilling of his Blood. Now, that his Body, at that time, had been
Pierced, and his Blood had been Spilt, appears, etc. when at Eight Days Old He
began to smart for us: Which Piercing of his Flesh, and Spilling of his Blood,
at his Circumcision, was followed by Unspeakable Pains, Restless Labors,
Travels, and Fastings; insomuch, that his whole Life, from the Hour of his
Birth, to the Moment of his Death, was but One Passion-continued: What, I pray,
his Agony in the Garden? What His being Crowned with Thorns, and Bloody
Whipping at the Pillar? That, in the Opinion of this Gentleman, his Body was
not at all Broke, nor his Blood in the least Shed, till Consummate for us upon
the Cross: Wherefore, with Truth, our Savior might have said of his Body which
is Broke, and of his Blood which is Shed, without supposing that any thing he
said, was either Improper or Untrue.

And the said Scriptures are produced, for that it is said, I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until I drink it new with you in my
Fathers Kingdom; which our Savior might have said, and not at all Recall his
first Assurance: for we do not deny the use of Figures in Expression; as the
Word CVP, for his Blood contained in it; and the Word BREAD, for his Body
contained under that Form: But there is no Figure in this Mystery which
excludes, but asserts the Reality of CHRIST's Body and Blood in the Sacrament:
For the terms CVP and BREAD, sometimes used by the Apostles after the
Institution, as by us at this day, do not at all destroy the Substance, for
which our Savior gave them, when he said; EAT, THIS IS MY BODY; DRINK, THIS IS
MY BLOOD: Nor do I see, what Reason they have to Carp at either of the said
Terms, CVP or BREAD, seeing Both are explained by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.16,17.
One for the Communion of the Blood, the Other for the Communion of the Body of
Christ: Nor do the Words of our Savior, where he speaks of the Fruit of the
Vine, signify the Wine which was Consecrated into his Blood; for that they
were spoken of the CVP, whereof they Drank at Supper; and not of the
Consecrated CVP, which He Instituted not till after Supper; as appears by St.
Luke, who gives the plainest Order of it, Chap. 22.14,15,16,17,18. where it is
said, And when the Hour was come, He sat down, and the Twelve Apostles with
Him: And He said unto Them, With desire, I have desired to Eat this Passover
with You, before I Suffer: For I say unto You, I will not any more EAT thereof,
until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. And He took the Cup, and gave
Thanks, and said, Take This, and divide it among your selves: For I say unto
You, I will not drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God shall
come. Where you see, our Savior spoke of not EATING, as well as not DRINKING;
that is, of the Pascal Lamb and Cup at Supper: for that He did not Institute
the Sacrament of his Body and Blood till afterward; as we read, Ver. 19, 20.
That, He took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them; saying,
This is my Body, which is given for You; This do in Remembrance of me. Likewise
also the CVP after SVPPER; saying, This CVP is the New Testament in my Blood,
which is shed for you: Wherefore, we are to distinguish the CVP, which He bid
them divide at Supper, and of which He said, He would not Drink until the
Kingdom of God shall come; from the CVP, which He Blessed, and gave to them
after Supper; saying, It was his Blood; for nothing can be more plain, than
that what our Savior said of not Eating, and not Drinking, was of the Passover
or Sacrifice, according to the Law; and not of the New Sacrifice, or Testament
in his Blood, according to the Gospel: But if this Order, wherein St. Luke has
it, which speaks of Two Cups, and which is certainly true, be not acceptable to
the Obstinate, let us suppose it otherwise, and that the Words, Fruit of the
Vine, were (as they were not) said of the Consecrated Cup; it would yet follow,
That the meaning of them could in no wise be applied to the Substance of Wine,
proceeding from an Earthly Vine; but to the Substance of his Blood, the Fruit
of the Heavenly Vine: For that it was to be Drank New with them in His Father's
Kingdom; and in His Father's Kingdom, which is Heaven, they neither keep
Taverns, nor Drink Wine, the Fruit therefore of the Vine, serves for neither
Fruit nor Wine to them.

As to what the Gentleman says ( Page 15.) of the Order observed in St. Mark's
Relation of it; -- "Who says, (says the Protestant Answerer) That all the
Apostles first Drank of the Cup; and that then our Savior said unto them, THIS
IS MY BODY," Chap. 14. v. 23, 24. -- For my part, I find no such thing in St.
Mark, as, That all the Apostles first Drank of the Cup; and then that our
Savior should tell them; It was his Body: Wherefore it is a great Mistake
'twixt the Writer, and the Printer; and when they Mend their Bill, We'll
Answer: But (in the mean time) whether St. Mark expresses the Words in the
same Order as they were spoke, or no, it matters not; seeing he has the
Substance of what was said, and wherein they all agree; to wit, That it was his
Body, and his Blood: And it is also apparent, That CHRIST first Gave Thanks, and
Blessed it, before He Gave it; and before He gave it, they could not have it;
nor before they had it, could they either Eat it, or Drink it.

The Gentleman continues ( Page 15.) to tell you, That the Letter is for Them,
(meaning, That in the Sacrament is not contained the Body of CHRIST;) for, That
CHRIST's Body had the Natural Properties belonging to a Body, Extended, Finite,
and Circumscribed: And therefore, like another Didymus, he will not Believe,
except he see, and into the Prints of the Nails of his Hands, put his Fingers;
and into his Side, thrust his Hand: So Sensual was he, that to feel with his
Finger the Wound in his Side, would not suffice, unless therein he thrust his
whole Hand. Even so this Gentleman: For, GOD's Holy Word, so often repeated to
Confirm the Being of his BODY and BLOOD in the Sacrament, will not suffice,
unless he See and Feel the Body, Extended, Finite, and Circumscribed. But,
methinks, the Reproof our Savior gave to One Didymus, might be a Warning to
All the Didymus's, that should ever happen after him; when, John 20. v. 29. he
told him, Thomas, Because thou have SEEN Me, thou have BELIEVED: Blessed are
they, that have NOT Seen, and yet HAVE Believed. Wherefore, to Believe but what
we See, Feel, Taste, and Smell, is to be Brutes, not Christians; and worse than
Thomas, who Saw but the Humanity, yet Believed the Divinity of CHRIST. Pray,
how was his Body to be Seen, Extended, Finite, and Circumscribed, when He
penetrated and passed through Walls and Doors that were close, as proved Page
15, 16. For, by the same Reason that You prove, That CHRIST's Body can pass
Entire through Walls or Doors, when close; by the same Reason will I prove,
That CHRIST's Body may be in the Sacrament Entire, though no more to be seen
There, than to be seen passing through the thickest Walls. But, upon the Whole,
the Gentleman argues most Perfidiously of CHRIST, as if He were not GOD; nor
distinguishing between his Glorious Body, and Ours, or any other Corruptible
Carcass: As He is Perfect GOD, all Things are possible to Him; If so, Where
then is the Difficulty to believe, but that CHRIST may as well be Contained
under the Forms of BREAD and WINE, as the Holy Ghost under the Form of a DOVE,
Mat. 3.16.
with Feather, Beak, Wing, and all the Properties of a Fowl? Or, as the same
Spirit, in the Form of TONGVES of FIRE? Act. 2.3.
both which to our Eyes were but as a perfect Dove, and as perfect Tongues: Yet
those different Objects to the Eye of Flesh, were but one Holy Ghost to the Eye
of Faith; whereas, if Faith had been grounded upon Sense, they could never have
believed that Bird in Feather and Form, and those Tongues of Flesh in Flame, to
be one and the same Holy Ghost. Therefore, nothing can be more plain, than that
Objects may be one thing to the Eye of Flesh, and another thing to the Eye of
Faith; for to our Sense, it was a perfect Bird; but to our Faith, it was the
Holy Ghost. Even so the Sacrament, to our Sight and Taste, is but plain Bread
and Wine; but, to our Faith (in GOD's Word,) it is the Real and Entire Body and
Blood of CHRIST; and the Authorities we have from Scripture, are far more ample
for believing the Latter to be the Body and Blood of CHRIST, than for believing
the Formers to be the Holy Ghost.

As to the Eight last Texts, which the Gentleman has produced to disprove our
Doctrine of the Real Presence, (to wit, Act. 1. v. 11. Act. 3. v. 21. St. Luke
24. v. 39. Act. 1. v. 3. 1 John 1. v. 1. Heb. 9. v. 28. Heb. 10. v. 12. Phil.
3. v. 21.) they no way relate to the Sacrament, but to the Resurrection and
Ascension of CHRIST's Body: From whence he concludes; "That CHRIST is confined
in Heaven only, and can be no where else, till He comes to judge the Quick, and
the Dead; and, of consequence, fixed at the Right Hand of the Father; and cannot
be, as We suppose, in Heaven and Earth, in so many Places at the same Time." --
Which barren Conceit of CHRIST is sufficiently Answered, Page 15, 16. where it
is proved from Scriptures, That although CHRIST Ascended, and be in Heaven; yet
it argues not, but that He is, and may be on Earth too: For, That He is a
Perfect, and an Omnipotent GOD; and has promised, Mat. 28. v. 20. That He will
be with us always, even to the End of the World: And, Mat. 18. v. 20. That,
Where Two or Three are gathered together, in his Name, that He is in the midst
of them. And further, it appears, That our Savior is not so Confined in
Heaven, as that He cannot also be upon Earth; for we read, That He Descended,
and overthrew Saul in the Way to Damascus, and spoke to him; saying, ( Act. 9.
v. 4, 5.) Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou, Lord?
And the Lord said, I am JESUS, whom thou persecutest. Wherefore the Gentleman's
Notion, of CHRIST's being only in Heaven, you see, is frivolous; for that
CHRIST not only spoke with Saul in the Highway; but has promised, as before,
To be with us always, even to the End of the World. And it is further proved,
That CHRIST may be actually Present, without being Seen: For, when He spoke to
Saul, the Men that Traveled with him to Damascus, stood by ( Act. 9. v. 7.)
speechless, hearing a Voice, but seeing no Man. By all which it is plain, That
CHRIST may be on Earth, and in many Places, at the same Time, as well as in
Heaven; or else He could not be with us always, even to the End of the World;
nor with Saul in the Way; nor in the Midst of all the Assemblies of the
Faithful, that are gathered together in his Name, in so many Places, throughout
the World, at one and the same Time. The Gentleman's Arguments are therefore of
no Effect, which ( P. 15, 16.) he brings to prove Christ only in Heaven, and no
where else: For, although those Texts do prove the Resurrection, Ascension, and
Being of CHRIST in Heaven; yet they do not at all destroy the Power of CHRIST's
being in diverse Places, at the same Time, according to his Divine Will. And
please to note, That it is impossible for any thing to be in the Will, which is
not in the Power of GOD. Wherefore, as it was in his Will, (proved by his Word)
to give us Bread to Eat, which should be his Flesh; so it was in his Power,
that, That Bread should be his Flesh, tho no more Tasted in the Sacrament. than
Seen when He spoke unto Saul: And that He (whose Greatness the Heavens are not
able to contain) had both the Power, and the Will, to be Conceived in the Womb
of the Blessed Virgin, contrary to the Course of Nature; where, from almost
Nothing, He increased to be Born a Child-God, and to Die a God-Man; and in
whose Power it was, to pass, with his Body Entire, through Walls or Doors, that
were close; in his Power likewise it is, to be Contained in the smallest
Particle of Bread. Wherefore, with the Believing Disciples, let us Believe; and
not, with the Murmuring Jews, Doubt, how he could give us his Flesh to Eat, and
his Blood to Drink; nor, with the Incredulous Disciples, say, It Is an hard
Saying, who can hear it? nor for this Cause, go back, (as they did) and walk no
more with CHRIST, as They do, who deny the Being of his Body and Blood in the
Sacrament, so expressly confirmed by Him, in whose Word there is no
Contradiction: Wherefore, the Defect is not in the Word; but in the Carnal
Imagination of Those, who have not Faith to Believe it, nor Scripture to
Disprove it; nor is it Hard, but to the Obstinate; nor Incredible, but to the
Incredulous.

Wherefore, to conclude, I humbly submit the whole to your Prudent
Consideration, and Remind You of your Resolution, ( Page 5.). "That You would
be either Catholic or Protestant, as the Verdict upon this Trial should go;
and that the Success should depend upon the Evidence; which Evidence (in your
Opinion) was the Bible; and that whoever produced the fullest and clearest
Testimony, had the Truth on his side." -- Wherefore, as you Value the Eternal
safety of your Soul, please seriously to distinguish and Peruse the Texts,
which I have assigned for it; and those which the Protestant Answerer has
brought against it; and I doubt not, but it will appear, That the Scriptures
assigned on the Catholic part, are abundantly Expressive and Plain for the
Being of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament; and that the Scriptures
produced on the Protestant part, are also Expressly for it, or not at all
against it: For that what I have offered, is the Express Word of GOD; who,
promising, said, That the Bread which He would give, was his Flesh, which He
would give for (...) Life of the World; and performing, Took Bread, Blessed it,
Brake it, (...) gave it; saying, Take, Eat, This is My Body; which Words of
Promise a^ Performance, are Positive, and have never yet (by Divine Authority)
b^ contradicted; for that it is impossible to produce one Syllable out of t^
whole Bible, to prove the contrary: Wherefore seeing, that Protesta^ cannot
prove, by Express Scripture, That the Bread which Christ Bl^sed, and gave at
his Supper, was not his Flesh; and that Catholics ca^ and do, that it was; I
hope, You will be so much the more convinced (...) believe the REAL PRESENCE,
by how much the Words of GO^ are more powerful than the Arguments of MAN; I
say, than the A^guments or Words of Man; for, that the Arguments alleged by t^
Protestant Answerer, against the Real Presence, are all of Man, and n^ of God,
they are His Words, and not the Words of God: Whereas tho^ Absolute and
Express, Take, Eat, This is my BODY, are the Words (...) God, and not of Man;
and He neither has, nor can produce one Tex^ to contradict them: Wherefore, I
expect to hear of your Satisfaction and Declaration for the Catholic Faith, in
this particular; and n^ that You behave your Self like those Frivolous, Vain,
and Impertine^ Enquirers; who, when convinced of One Point, mind it no more, b^
desire to be satisfied of Another; assuming, as it were, an assurance (...)
themselves, that though We are right in the Real Presence, we may be wro^ in
reference to the Infallibility; and if right in That, such is their Ign^rance
to think We Err in Praying to Saints, use of Images, Purgato^ or in something
else, they know not what: And thus, like Mag-Py^ they Chatter, and Hop from
Bush to Bush, from Point to Point, witho^ fixing upon Truth, as they ought to
do, where ever they find it.

Wherefore, I pray, be Satisfied in This of the Real Presence, or Pr^pose your
Doubts, before You proceed to the Infallibility of the Church or to any other
Point of Faith, in Difference betwixt Us, and t^ Church of England; for so You
will be Steadfast to something, and n^ be wavering, and Carried away with every
Wind of Doctrine; b^ Fix your Standard among the Faithful, and Encamp with the
Host (...) the Ever-Living and All-Powerful GOD, for the Security and Etern^
Peace of your Soul: Which Peace, that You may Enjoy for all Ete^nity, is Prayed
for by Him, that is,

SIR, Yours in all Christian Duty, N. N


