COLLECTIONS OUT OF THE Late Lord Chief Justice HALE'S Pomponius Atticus.

In Reference to FACTIONS That arise in a STATE or KINGDOM; And the Mischievous
Consequences thereof.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

COLLECTIONS OUT OF THE Late Lord Chief Justice HALE'S Pomponius Atticus, etc.
AS States and Kingdoms (says that worthy Author) have certain Periods of
their Duration and Consistency appointed them in the Divine Providence, and
sometimes end in a final Decision; so there are some Things in the very
Constitution of some Governments, that are occasions of Factions necessarily
arising in them: As in Rome, when the Government was partly Aristocratical, and
partly Popular, and with some shadow of Monarchical Power in the Consuls. And
if that Government had been Aristocratical by a Senate of Three hundred
Persons, Reason and Experience shows, that Factions are apt to arise in such a
Council, but much more when the Common People were Sharers also in the
Government, etc. and in Truth the said Roman Government gave too much Head, and
too much Power to Ambitious and Intemperate Spirits.

Thus Marius arose, a Citizen of Rome, to be too Great, who being a high
Spirited and Factious Man, who had been Six times chosen Consul, and once he
made himself so; and Sylla after him was such another, and the like might be
instanced in Pompey, Caesar, Anthony, Bratus, Octavius, etc. that they grew too
Big for the Commonwealth, and the Senate and People bore only the Name, but
were but Ciphers; for they exercised as great and greater Monarchical and
Tyrannical Power, than ever did Octavius, when he came to be Augustus.

The Roman State in its first Institution seemed to be principally Monarchical,
yet ended in a Senate first of a Hundred, afterward of Three hundred Persons,
called Patres or Patricii. And after the Expulsion of their Kings they fell
into a Commonwealth consisting of their Senate, and Two Consuls yearly
Elected, who had a Power in some Things Regal; afterward their growing
Contests, between the Consuls and the Patricii of the one part, and the rest of
the People of the other part, the Constitution of their Commonwealth was much
altered by the Admission of a Popular Power of the Tribunes Elected by the
People. Thus this mixed Republic grew Great and Powerful, and continued many
Years in great Strength and Power, though there arose sometimes Jars and
Contests between them, etc. But there arose at last the said Marius, a Rough,
Firey, and Bold Person, a Man of Wit and Courage, a Good Soldier, a
Successful, Ambitious Man, that could not endure any Opponent or Rival; who
began that Fire in the Commonwealth of Rome, that scarce ever left Burning,
till the Commonwealth was at last necessarily resolved into the Monarchy of
Augustus.

In all which Civil Wars and Disorders, all those Rapines and Violences, those
Murders and Banishments, that in the space of about Fifty Years after the Sixth
Consulate of Marius, filled the City and Empire of Rome, were the Success of
that Faction that he began, and of that Breach that he first made in the
Texture and Contignation of the goodly Structure of the Commonwealth of Rome.
And indeed all the Troubles and Changes, that happened afterward between Caesar
and Pompey, between Brutus and Anthony, between Anthony and Augustus, did
spring from those Parties and Factions, whose Foundations were laid in Marius
and Sylla.

And it is truly noted by the Florentine Politician, That the Romans, when
Victors over their Neighboring Nations, never used any Mediocrity; but either
used so great Benesicence toward the Conquered, that they thereby obliged them
from a future Revolt, or else dealt so severely with them, that they utterly
disabled them from it, etc. But in their Civil Wars, as they never used
Mediocrity, so they never used the former extreme, but always the latter,
omitting no Severity that might render the subdued Party incapable of ever
making Head again; and this they evidenced by their bloody Slaughters,
Consiscations and Proscriptions, not only as to Opposites, and upon such as
they suspected were not real Friends; but if any were Neutral his Wealth became
his Crime, and rendered him Obnoxious to Confiscation or Banishment.

Now to acquaint us what a Faction in a State is, The said worthy Author thus
Discourses. By a Faction in a Commonwealth I do not mean that Government,
which is by Law or Custom settled; and therefore, where the settled Government
is Monarchical, I do not take the Adhearing to the King a Faction, or where the
Government is Aristocratical or by a Senate, as was sometime in Rome, or mixed,
partly Aristocratical, and partly Popular, etc. that Established Government,
or the Adherance to it was no Faction; but it is so far from it, that the
Adhearance to the Government Legally Established, is the Duty of every Subject
and Citizen.

But this I call a Faction; When a party of Men shall Conspire, and Unite
themselves against the Established Government to subvert or alter it; and this
is the greatest Faction, Crimen laesae Majestatis.

Secondly, When a party of Men shall Unite and Confederate themselves together
to gain either Something to themselves, or to others by Force or Fraud, against
the Will and Consent of that Power, that by Law is entrusted with the
Concession or Denial thereof.

Thirdly, When any Person entrusted by the Sovereign Power, with a Particular
Power or Authority shall endeavor by Force or Fraud to extend that Power,
wherewith he is intrused, beyond the bounds of it: As if the Tribunes of the
People in the State of Rome should, by stirring up the People, or by Force or
by Secret Confederacy incroach upon the Power of the Senate, etc. And therefore
in such an enterprise they are no more Excused from being a Faction by their
Authority, than if they were without any such Authority; for herein they Act as
Private Persons.

Fourthly, When Two or more Great and Eminent Persons or Parties, and it may be
of a considerable Interest in a State or Government, engage one against
another; at first it may be privately, and then after more openly and visibly
crossing each other, and at last to Affronts and Rencounters, and all this
while the True real Government sit still and look on, either out of Fear or in
Policy; and many times look on contenting themselves with the Complement and
Profession of Subjection, till at last one Party get the better, and at last
pull off the Disguise and gives Laws to his Lawful Governors.

Fifthly, When some particular Persons, that are or are not in any Authority,
in a State or Commonwealth, design some Matter either for themselves or
against any other, and to effect that Design, do by Secret Means or Power, or
Fraud, or otherwise, draw over the Power of that State, wherein they live, to
be their Engines and Instruments under the Countenance and Signature of their
Authority to effect their Design. For though
the Authority of the State is engaged therein, yet that being obtained by
Force, Fraud or other Engine, and to serve the particular Interest and End of a
Party, and not acting according to the True and Native Freedom and Integrity of
their Institution, excuses not this from being really a Faction, though
sometimes it be speciously Gilded over with the Countenance of Public
Authority. And for the most part the Factions of Rome, before mentioned, were
of this latter Sort or Kind, and managed under the shadow and umbrage of the
Civil Authority, though in their Original they arose from the Pride and
Ambition, Envy and Emulations, Jealousies, Designs, Disgusts and Animosities,
of particular Persons, who could not brook any whom they suspected might be
Rivals of their Greatness, Honor, or Power; and these prevailing, bore down
the Magistracy of Rome before them.

Now though it may be true, That those Decrees of the Authority
Established by Law, though by these means obtained, are binding while they
stand in Force, yet the manner of obtaining such Decrees by these, and the like
means, are Unjust and Factious; and in true Intrinsic Justice, do not Excuse
or Justify the Obtainers thereof from Oppression and Injustice, etc.

And as these several Factions were extremely Cruel and Severe unto one another
(as is before mentioned) so they were all infinitely pernicious to the
Commonwealth; which by the Competitions of these Turbulent Spirits was torn in
pieces. For
these Factions were, in Truth, no other than certain Excrescences, Tumors and
Diseases, arising in the Roman State, by the Power, Ambition and Unquiet
Spirits, of certain busy Men in Rome, that either thought their Worth
neglected, or not sufficiently rewarded, or were provoked to Animosities by
mutual Jealousies and Emulations one of another. And although it is true in the
several Vicissitudes, and the prevalency of any Faction, they did so handle the
Senate and People, by Artifices and Tricks, Threats and Affrights, that they
minted their Factions oftentimes with the Stamp and Face of the
Senate and Public Authority, yet the Truth was, They were really still no
other than Factions and Parties, which like Prevalent and Noxious Humors, or
Putrid Distempers in the Body, overpowered the true State and Genius of the
Civil Government, and rendered the whole Body in Disorder; and it could no more
be esteemed the true Complexion of the Roman Government, than a Fever or a
Calenture, though it overspread the whole Man. And although the Paroxysms or
Fits of the Roman State, which it was put into hereby, were various and
contrary each to other, according as one or the other prevailed. like the hot
Fit and cold Fit of an Ague, yet still the Commonwealth of Rome was Sick, and
labored under the Distemper
of either Faction whichsoever of them prevailed.

I do confess (faith my Author) that commonly all Factions, to gain to
themselves Credit, at least make some pretense for the good of their Country,
something that they would pretend to reform; and it may be really, there was
something in the State of Rome that was necessary to be reformed, and the
Disorder might be so Powerful, Stubborn and Obstinate, that they thought it
could not be done by ordinary means, and that at the first attempt might be the
Thing that they, or at least many of them, really, and it may be only, or at
least principally, aimed to set right. But Wise Men see, That many
times Reformation was pretended, but the great Design was private Interest or
Revenge; or if some Men in the simplicity of their Hearts meant well to the
State of Rome, that were engaged in those Factions; yet when once a Faction is
set on foot, Men that have other Designs, either of Ambition or Covetousness,
mingle in it, and commonly in a little time become prevalent, and distort all
to their private Ends and Advantages, and engage others in the like, who are
fed, or do feed themselves with the like hopes. They well know that in a very
little process of time variety of Success, and Occurrences, and New Emergencies
and Counsels, carry Factions quite beyond their first Designs, into greater
Rapine, Fury, and Cruelty, and Revenge, then ever they themselves (it may be at
first) thought they should have been guilty of.

And as my Author goes on, In the first motion of Enterprises of this nature
(as he touched upon before) the Pretenses are commonly Fair, Modest; nothing
pretended but Reformation of Abuses, and great Moderation professed; and this
to cover partly their Designs, partly to gain to themselves Credit and good
Esteem with good Men, or at least with the Vulgar.

Therefore this Wise Man Pomponius Atticus, (as says my Author) would never be
drawn into any of those Factions in the State of Rome; for he knew well, that
if he were once engaged, he must follow not only the Fortune, but also the
Commands and Counsels of the Party and their Governors, and so be engaged in
all the Villainies and Injustice that attended their Success; and (the motions
of a Powerful prevailing Successful Faction, being ordinarily very
Ungovernable) he knew besides, that very often a Faction grows utterly unlike
to what it was at first; so that if he could have persuaded himself to have
engaged in any Faction, he must have resolved to have kept those plausible
Principles, which first led him to that Engagement, and then he had been quite
outrun by his own Party, or else he must have resolved to hold pace with his
Party in all their Changes and Practices, and then he must outrun his
Innocence, his constant Integrity himself.

Thus not only in Prudence, but from the very Habit, Complexion and
Constitution of his Mind was this Wise Man, Pomponius Atticus, admirably
secured against all Temptations to Factions: For (as my Author observes) there
is in most Men
a certain Intemperance of Passions, that render them very obnoxious to fall
into Factions; but among them there are Three sorts of Passions, or rather
indeed Putrifactions of Passions, and Diseases of the Soul, namely, Ambition,
or the Desire of Honor, Power, Place, or Preferment; next, Covetousnes, or the
Desire of Riches; or Vindictiveness, or the Desire of Revenge; and of which the
crafty Heads of Factions make great use, that where they find a Man that is
under the Regiment of any of these Distempers, it is a thousand to one but they
win him over; yea the Magic and Enchantment that arises from those
Intemperances of the Mind, that without any Solicitation from without, they
carry Men headlong that way they think shortest to satisfy themselves; and
therefore are easily caught and entangled in a Faction, as that which promises
the most compendious Method for the Attainment of their Desires. But the
Complexion or Constitution of the very Soul of Atticus (says my Author) was
such, that those Distempers of Ambition,
Covetousness or Revenge, dwelt not there: And by this means he was Proof
against Temptations from within or from without, to side with a Faction; which
he avoided as a Pest or a Plague Sore, wherein he was sure, if he were once
engaged, he should loose either his Safety or his Innocence, or both. And as he
was so happy as never to have received any such Injury as might provoke
Revenge, so he had such a Calm, Serene, Even frame of Mind, that that Passion
could get no hold upon him; and he had abundantly well learned the best Lesson
of the Stoical Philosophers, Not to injure himself by Passion or Perturbation,
because another did him Wrong.

Besides (says my Author) Atticus did it upon an Account of greatest Prudence;
For it was evident to him, by great Experience, and by a wise Prospect of
Things, That these Factions and their Successes were strangely mutable and
uncertain: Tanta varietas iis temporibus fuit fortunae, ut modo hi, modo illi
in summo essent fastigio, aut periculo; (i. e.) Though Successes of Factions
were so uncertain, and the Vicissitude so strange and various, that those that
now prevailed, and seemed in an impregnable Condition, were suddenly tumbled
down: And again those that seemed in an irrevocable and desperate Ruin,
regained the Government even to a Miracle; therefore by engaging in any
Faction, he was sure to undergo the common Fate which that Faction had, which
was either wholly to be ruined, if the adverse Party prevailed, or at best in
case the Party wherein he should be engaged prevailed; yet they were but in a
tottering, uncertain, unquiet, restless Condition, and were not like to hold
that Power or Interest which they had so difficultly gotten.

Secondly, He did it (says my Author) on the account of common Justice and
Honesty, For these Factions in the State
of Rome were not the True, Lawful, Settled Government thereof, for therein
Atticus and all good Men ought to have been engaged, for it had been their Duty
and Glory to have assisted it; and a certain Baseness and Pusillanimity of Mind
to have deserted it: But those Factions were certain Excrescences, Tumors and
Diseases (as is mentioned before) arising to the Roman State, by the Power,
Ambition and Unquiet Spirits of certain busy Men.

And as a Third Expedient he used for his safety it was this; That although he
was always ready to oblige all Men by all Offices and Kindnesses, Yet he never
would receive overgreat
Kindnesses from great Persons, as also avoiding public Offices, Atticus was
so far from seeking that, (says my Author) that he would not take them when
offered; this being his Principle, that he would do all the good Offices he
could, either for particular Persons, or for the Commonwealth in the state and
capacity of a private Person. And it seems a Wonder to me (says the Author of
this Discourse) to see the Folly and Vanity of Men so fondly to hunt after
public Offices, and that they should be so much mistaken, and no better to
understand themselves, for those even that are more Honorable and more
Profitable, yet are more Dangerous and Hazardous. And the Truth is, (says he)
That it has been the Skill and Art of the Wiser sort of Mankind to annex to
such great Employments, those Blandishments of Honor, Esteem and Profit to
invite Men to the undertaking them; as Physicians guild their Pills, that they
may be the easier swallowed; it is true, these are indeed Necessary for the
good of others. But it is most certain that any Man that Ambitiously hunts
after them, nay that Man that does not Industriously decline them (if possible
he may)
understands not himself nor his own Peace and Happiness, or Contentment. For,
first, he draws necessarily Envy upon himself; and Envy is a busy active
Humor, and restless until it unhorses those upon whom it fastens, or break it
self in the attempt, whosoever Possesses that which many Desire, has as many
Enemies and Enviers, as he has Rivals and Competiotrs, and as many Competitors
as there are Ambitious or Covetous Men in the World. And as all great Offices
have commonly somewhat of Power annexed to them, and although Societies of Men
can never subsist in Order without some Power be over them, yet particular
Persons commonly hate and envy any Power in any but themselves. Further also, a
Man that undertakes a public Employment yields up, and loses his own
Tranquillity, and Rest, and Quiet, that his private Station yields, and even
divests himself of himself: And as his Faults and Defects in that Condition are
more easily observed and seen, so they are very diligently watched and
observed, yea he wants not such Spectators as make it their Business to be
diligent Searchers and Observers of them; and then they are sure to be the
Objects of most severe Censure and Animadversion. And further the Mischiefs of
his Mistakes are of a vast and comprehensive Concern, and the ill Consequences
irreparable; yea let a Man manage his public Employments with all the
Integrity and Wisdom imaginable, yet the Race is not to the Swift, nor the
Battle to the Strong; so that ill Success will attend the best and wisest
Endeavors sometimes. Again there is no public Office in the World, but must
necessarily make a considerable part of Mankind his Enemy, for he cannot
satisfy and please all; he that is disappointed in his Expectation, or that
finds less than he Expected, hates him; and it will not be material to the
safety of him that is hated, whether there be Cause or not, for his Enemy's
Indignation is as high, as if it were just. And though it may be objected that
he makes as many Friends as he does Enemies, this mends not the matter; for
supposed Injuries are longer remembered than real Benefits.

But supposing (says my Author) that in a calm and sedate Time this wise and
good Man might have been persuaded to take an honorable public Employment,
yet considering the
Time wherein he lived, his declining of public Employments was not only
Excusable and Justisiable but also very Commendable, and an Abstinence full of
Prudence and great Discretion: For he that takes a public Employment in a
troubled State, is (without the intervention of a mavelous Providence) first,
and before any other, exposed to the Shock of all public Commotions; if he
oppose the Faction, he is in danger of Ruin for opposing their Designs; if he
take their part, he is under an Engagement not only in the hazard of their
Fortune, but also in pursuit of all those desperate Enterprises that such a
Faction thinks Necessary or Convenient for their Establishment, and then, he
will lose his Reputation and his Innocence, and be entangled in a most base
Servirude, etc. And if ever there come a turn of Affairs, he shall be sure to
be one of the first that is crushed by the prevailing Party, and this Cicero
found to be true to his cost. And therefore Cato Vticensis, who the greatest
part of his Life had been concerned in public Offices; yet when he found
himself overborn by the Cesarian Party, learned (though too late) Atticus his
Wisdom, and left this Legacy to his Son; That he should never engage himself in
the public Administration of Offices or Employments of the Commonwealth.

Now in further tendency to our Safety in troublesome Times, my Author thus
Discourses. Things (says he) that create a Man many Enemies, are these that
follow. First, When a Man is an Accuser and Informer against any Man, for
Matters of Crime or Misdemeanour, which makes the Party and all his Relations
his Enemies. Secondly, When a Man is Litigious and Contentious, going to Law
for every Trifle. Thirdly, For a Man to be a Publican, or Farmer of Custom,
etc. Fourthly, When a Man deals much in Goods or Lands that are Confiscate.
Fifthly, That which create Men trouble, especially in a troubled State, is too
much Prodigality of Speech, as an overfree
inconsiderate Commendation of some Persons of one Party, or too liberal
Invectives or Censures of Persons engaged in an other. Sixthly, Pride, and
Haughtiness of Deportment also does Infallibly create a Man more Enemies, than
any one Distemper besides, and is commonly the Root of all Contentions and
Animosities both in public and private Persons; therefore Atticus always kept
an humble Mind, and an humble Deportment. An humble Man in all States and
Conditions stands square upon his own Basis, without any great Disorder or
Trouble, so that (as my Author tells us) it was a hard thing to tell whether
the same Men did more Love, or Fear him. It is (says he) the common Folly of
great Men in Place, Power, or Wealth, to think themselves above the reach of
Enemies, especially of the meaner Sort. But this is certain, there is no Man,
though never
so mean, but once in Seven Years will have an opportunity to do the greatest
Man much Good or much Harm. As in the Fable; When the Mouse troubled the sleepy
Lion, and happened to fall under his Paw, he desired the Lion to spare him, he
was but a Mouse, and yet might live possibly to do him a Kindness; but however
he was not worth his Indignation: The Mouse afterward served to eat in sunder
that Net that entangled the Lion, and so delivered him, that for all his
Greatness could not deliver himself.

Now my Author considers and represents to us these Things, which were in this
Good Man that were honorable, and had a great tendency to his Safety, viz. his
Beneficence, the Principle of which was higher and nobler than his own Interest
and Safety. For (says he) it arose from the Nobleness of his Disposition, it
was a certain native Generosity and Beneficence to Mankind, and this appeared
by his extending it toward such who were in greatest Distress, and below the
expectation of ever making a Retribution. And as his Beneficence was full of
Sincerity and Integrity, so it was full of Equality and Impartiality; and also
attended with singular Prudence; and lastly he was very constant to his Friends
in all Conditions.

And my Author concludes his Discourse upon this Great, Excellent, Prudent and
Good Man, Pomponius Atticus, thus. First, That most certainly Virtue, Goodness
and Integrity, is the best Policy and the greatest Means of Safety in the most
dangerous Times and Places. Secondly, That most certainly Virtue and Goodness,
and Integrity, is the truest way for any Man to gain true Honor, Veneration
and Esteem among Men; yea it is more conducible to it than Riches and Armies,
than Victories and Triumphs. Thirdly, That as it is the truest way to get
Honor so it is the best means to keep it, because such an Honor has not its
Dependence on any thing without a Man; his Fortune, Wealth, Power, or Success,
these are changeable and variable; but a Good, Wise and Virtuous Man carries
the Root and Spring of his Honor in himself, he shall never cease to be
Honored till he cease to be Good. Fourthly, There is a secret Veneration of
Goodness and Virtue in all Men, even in the Worst and Vilest; a Man cannot so
far put off Humanity, but that Goodness, Wisdom and Virtue, will have so much
of Party and Interest in his Nature, that he cannot choose put pay a secret
Approbation and Esteem toward those that have them. Fifthly, That consequently
Wisdom, Benesicence, Virtue and Goodness, have a great Connaturality to Human
Nature, and are the true genuin Spirit, or genius of it; and that it is so, is
evident. First, By the great Good it procures to human Nature, Honor and
Safety. Secondly, By the great Esteem Mankind has of it, and the common
Interest it obtains in the common Nature of Mankind.

FINIS.

