A Profitable Adventure TO THE FORTUNATE, And can be UNFORTUNATE to NONE. BEING
A PROPOSAL for Raising One Million of Money, by settling a Fund of One Hundred
and Forty Thousand Pounds per Annum for Fifteen Years only for it.
THAT there be Tickets Numbered from One to an Hundred Thousand, given out at
Ten Pounds a piece, to make up that Million of Money. The said Tickets to be
answered by such another Hundred Thousand of Tickets, whereof Two Thousand Five
Hundred to be Benefitted, in such sort as is herein after expressed, besides One
Pound Yearly which every Ticket will have; so that whoever puts in Ten Pounds,
will be sure to have One Pound Yearly for Fifteen Years; and therefore cannot
lose, but may possibly gain very much by it: Nor can the Objection made use of
as a great Argument against any sort of Adventures, viz. The taking away Money,
and losing it quite from Servants, and such as have but a little, weigh at all
in this Case.

For Note, Whoever puts thus in his Money, viz. Ten Pounds, though he meets
with none of the Two Thousand Five Hundred Tickets, which are to be called
Benefits, he will have Twenty Shillings Yearly for Fifteen Years, which is near
Six per Cent. certain for the Money, and so can be no loser by it, and
consequently there will be no prejudice to any sort of Mankind that thus shall
lay out his Money.

'Twill draw much Money from abroad, as also a great deal that is in this
Kingdom laid up; and make many Thousands, who only have small bu^s, and cannot
now bring them into the Public, to engage themselves in this Fund. And the
Money upon it being made easily transferrable, in all probability on One Hundred
Forty Thousand Pounds Yearly, so seteld, there would soon a Million, and all
Ready Money, be raised.

The Numbers, Blanks, and Benefitted Tickets thus:

One Hundred Thousand Tickets, Numbered from One, to One Hundred Thousand, to be
drawn from one Box, against One Hundred Thousand other Tickets, to be drawn
from another Box, whereof Ninety Seven Thousand Five Hundred (though Blanks)
are to entitle the Numbers against which each is drawn to one Pound Yearly, for
the Fifteen Years. And the other Two Thousand Five Hundred, which together,
make up the One Hundred Thousand Tickets, are to entitle the Numbers against
which they are drawn, to the several Benefits here-under expressed; which with
the Benefit allowed to the First and Last drawn, makes up the Forty Thousand
Pounds Yearly, the Fortunate will gain by this Thing.

The Benefitted Tickets are Proposed to be as follows; Viz.

To the First Number drawn, besides the Benefit may come up with it, the Sum of
150 l. Yearly 1 Ticket of Yearly 1000 9 Of each 500 l. Yearly 4500 20 Of each
100 l. Yearly 2000 80 Of each 50 l. Yearly 4000 90 Of each 25 l. Yearly 2250
300 Of each 20 l. Yearly 6000 2000 Of each 10 l. Yearly 20000 2500 The Last
Ticket drawn, besides the Benefit that may come out with it 100 Money 40000 l.

Note, The Two Thousand Five Hundred, called Benefitted Tickets, not being to
have the One Pound Yearly allowed for such Ticket as shall have no other
Benefit, there will be Two Thousand Five Hundred Pounds out of the One Hundred
and Forty Thousand Pounds Yearly saved, for the Charge of Trustees and Office,
which must be employed about it, if any such thing should be done.

T. N. Groom-Porter.
Printed December. 5. 1693. Reprinted Feb. 6. 1693/4. Note, Instead of 15, it is
likely that 16 Years will be allowed.
London: Printed by F, Collins, in the Old-Bailey. 1693/4.


