A TREATISE OF A Consumption, AND THE VENEREAL DISEASE: THE Signs or Symptoms
OF THE VENEREAL INFECTION; WITH Various Methods of Cure. By T. NEDHAM, Surgeon.

Experientia est Medicina Anima. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be
Sold at his House, the Surgeon's Sign, in Martlet-Court, in Bow-street, in
Covent Garden; and Eliz. Harris, at the Harrow, in Little-Britain. 1700.

To the HONORED, Capt. THO. WARREN, One of His Majesty's Commanders, FOR THE
SEA-SERVICE.
Good SIR,
HAving had the Honor, as well as the Happiness, for these Four Years past,
all the Time I was at Sea, to be your Surgeon, in His Majesty's Ships, the
Monk, and Windsor, as an Acknowledgement of the many Favors, I have received
from you, I humbly beg leave to Dedicate this small Treatise to you.

Sir, It is a difficult Matter, for all that know you, to say, whether your
Goodness, Courage, or Care be greatest.

As to your Goodness, your Friends, Relations, Officers, Sailors, Prisoners,
Menial Servants, and private Enemies, I have seen and known, sufficiently to
taste thereof.

As to your Courage among others, that Action at Camarett Bay, where you
Commanded the Monk, will for ever speak for you; when all your Decks were
covered with Blood, and the poor shattered Remains of dead Bodies: Your
inimitable Courage then, like Lightning, struck such a Spirit and Life through
all your Men, as made them eager, even to engage the Stone-Walls, which secured
the Enemy from them: And you like a Second Alexander, as one of the Admirals
was pleased to style you, for that Day's Action; or rather Hannibal, would have
broke your Way through Rocks and Piles of Stone, to serve your Country.

As to your Care, you have been pleased to make your self a perfect Slave to
it, early and late; remarking still all Action, during our tedious Voyage.

In a Word, His Majesty can never want a Faithful, Good, Brave, and Careful
Commander while you live, to serve him. And that all I have here mentioned of
you, is perfect Truth, and not Flattery; the frequent Subject of other Men's
Dedications, I defy, Envy it self, to maintain the Contrary.

Go on, Good Sir, and may you be prosperous in all your Undertakings; may you
meet with a suitable Reward here for all your just, useful and painful
Services, and in Heaven hereafter, an immortal and incorruptible Seat of Glory,
is the hearty Wish of,

Your most Humble, and most Obliged Servant, to Command, T. NEDHAM.

TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Lines, on a Consumption, are the Subject of what I have drawn from
Ten Years Experience and Observation.

I am sensible, that there must be many Errors contained therein, there being
not a Syllable in the whole Piece corrected by any Person whatsoever.

I expect no Quarter from the Generality of the Physicians, Surgeons, and
Apothecaries, on the Account of my publicly telling the World, that I had a
Medicine, a few Doses whereof would Cure the Venereal Distemper, when
confirmed, without Fluxing: However, what I say, is Truth, and Matter of Fact,
as is confirmed by daily Experience.

The industrious Dr. Colbatch tells us, in one of his Books, that he designs to
publish a particular Tract of Consumptions; and that he has cured many with
Acids, either manifest or inveloped; but, I believe, mostly with the latter:
For, I find by Experience, that most hot Ingredients, either temperate or
extreme, as Symptoms and Constitutions indicate, are most effectual in a
Pthisis or Consumption.

Whereas, in the Flying Post, I have often mentioned a Medicine, about Six
Doses whereof would Cure the Venereal Distemper, when confirmed as effectually,
as with the most strict and regular Course of Salivation; and often where that
should fail, drinking a Dyet-drink afterward, without Fluxing, Danger, or
Confinement, I resolved to write something of it here, in order to give a short
Account of the Medicine, and in what other Distempers it is most effectual.

It works chiefly upwards, and often downwards by Stool; sometimes by Sweat, at
other times again plentifully by Urine; in about Two Hours time the Operation
of the Medicine is generally over, and the Person that takes it may go Abroad,
if the Weather be any thing favorable.

It cures all manner of Scabs, or inveterate Breakings out of the Body, old
Ulcers, or running Sores in any part of the Body; it takes away most Pains of
the Limbs, though of many Years continuance; cures the King's Evil, the Scurvy in
its highest degree, the Dropsy, and ill Habits of Body; for it cleanses and
purifies the whole Mass of Blood in a most powerful manner, and cures many
lasting and languishing Distempers, not yielding to most other Medicines.

I would not be understood, that I looked upon Fluxing as an ineffectual Course
for the Cure of the Venereal Distemper when confirmed, but daily take the same
Measures my self, with those whose Affairs will permit them to be closely
confined, and are desirous of it; on the other Hand, I daily Cure People
without Fluxing, or Confinement, and some few where once or twice Fluxing has
failed.

When very Young, my Genius inclined me to the Study and Practice of Physic
and Surgery, and early met with great Advantages from the plentiful Practice of
both, under an Experienced Master, late Surgeon of St. Thomas's Hospital; and
if Surgeons may not be allowed to employ their Thoughts and Study in the
Practice of Physic, I would then know how His MAJESTY's Ships, and our
Merchants theirs, must be taken Care of, on which the Wealth and Glory of this
Kingdom depends.

To make a truly Accomplished and Thorough-pac'd Physician, he ought to live
Two Years in the House of some Apothecary, to acquaint himself with all Manner
of Drugs and Medicines, Simple and Compound, and the dispensative Part of
Physic, before he goes to the University; so will his Study there, and Reading
on Diseases and Medicines, be more useful and advantageous to him: For want of
such an Introduction thither, when they come from thence at first amongst us to
Practice, what odd and indifferent Prescripts do they generally form for their
Patients; such as a Concordantia Discordantiarum, that every Apothecary's Boy,
behind their Backs, shall smile, and readily point at.

The Life of Man is too short, especially for a Physician, that would be useful
and serviceable to Mankind in his Practice, to expend his Time on any Thing
else, but the Knowledge of the Fabric of Humane Bodies, Diseases, Medicines,
and strict Observations thereon: It Is not the Extremity of Learning, or being a
great Philosopher, that makes a Man the better Physician. The most learned Man
bred up in the Law, is not always the best Lawyer; or in Divinity, the best
Divine; and he that values himself on that alone, in my Opinion, is no better
than a learned Blockhead, and well-read Fool.

I would not be thought to undervalue Learning, but with due Reverence and
Submission bow my Head to every Master thereof; of all that want it, I admire
it most; and that very small Portion I have of School-Learning my self, teaches
me better Manners than to speak irreverently of it. I should never enough
lament the Want of a greater Perfection therein, did I consolate my self with
the Thoughts, that what I mist of in that, I had abundantly made use in the
Practice and Experience in my Profession.

The most Learned Man bred up in the Study of Physic, without a true Notion of
Method in Practice, Medicines and Diseases joined with Experience, is but the
greater Instrument of Mischief; for his Learning gives him an unquestionable
Character, and whole Droves of Miscarriages shall not be able to lessen it.

The Management of Chronick Distempers is the true Touchstone of a Physician,
to be well acquainted with the Force and Virtue of Antimony, Steel, Opium,
Mercury, Vitriol, Jesuits Powder, Spices, and other Eastern Drugs, to be
thoroughly Experienced in the Knowledge of what they will do, and what they
will not do: All which are like Violins in the Hands of several Men, where all
are not equally alike Masters. Among the unquainted Error will be endless, the
Distemper, Indication, Constitution, Medicine, Preparation, Quantity and Time,
being of so great Moment. The Ingenuity of a good Physician is not so evident
in his Treatment of Acute Diseases, many of which have a usual Stage and
Termination, either in Health or Death, whether there be any Physic
administered or no; but in Chronick or Languishing Distempers, of a long
Continuance, the Case is otherwise; and whatever Physician (though never so
Learned) is not generally successful therein, where the Disease shall be
curable, may be reputed to be an ingenious, well-bred Gentleman, and know
almost every Thing, but his own Business.

A TREATISE OF Consumption, etc. The INTRODUCTION.
IF to save a Roman Citizen of old was esteemed so meritorious, as to be
gratified with Freedom of the Empire, and those glorious Immunities of those
famed SOCIETIES, as the Roman Historians relate at large, it cannot be less
deserving for Physicians, at all times, to redeem the Captived from the Chains
of Diseases, and loose them from those Bonds, which have been ever inveterate
Oppressors of Humane Nature. I do not believe any Man so intentionally
mischievous in Practice; and am unwilling to think any Man so negligent, as to
pick Straws; or with Domitian, to catch Flies, when the Screecks of a
Distressed calls to withhold the ready and prepared Hand, from cutting his
Throat: No, it rather proceeds from those various Hypotheses, and different
Theorems Men make to themselves, in all Ages; and thereby erect too frequently
the Structure on a Foundation of Blood, and the Sculls of Men, than any
Proficiency in that Science, that has the Body of Man for its Object, in order
to the Preservation of the same: For, certainly the Doctrines of so many
Volumes of Ages are so insufficient from answering the Phenomenon of Nature,
that they are rather Promoters of Quarrels, and made the Philosophers die old in
Controversy; than produce the least Peace or Ease to Nature, to tell us of
Four Elements and those Principia quibus nihil est Prius; and at the same time
to allow a Transmutation, viz. one Element to be changeable into another, is to
allow of one only Element; which if it may be yet changed into something else,
it is not before; it is not then certainly a Principium, the Mutability arguing
some other Original besides it self. Principles by the known Rules of the
Schools, are not to be multiplied; nor can they, since they must be found
abroad, and existing otherwhere than in the Brains of fanciful Men: Why,
without torturing of our Brains, may we not take one for all? Why not with
Thales Milesius, may we not as well think Water the Cause and Fountain of all
Things, because, even like the Soul of the World, it pervades the Universe, and
penetrates the most intimate Recesses of Nature? If you say it is too much a
Fluid to constitute such concreted Bodies as we see, and the various Species
that are in the World, you may know that the most refined Water is not without
a Capacity of producing a solid Body and Concrescence; for you cannot distill it
so long, but it shall show you Sabulous and Topaceous Grains; which by the Rule
of Addition, may make Mountains, or Rocks, or Gems, or any solid Body, you can
imagine, to be compact, or substantial in the vulgar Account. What may not be
said of Fire next quick to Lightning? What stupendous and amazing Effects does
it produce, making a crass Body, as Gold, and other solid Metals fluid. And
then again, a Fluid by its Power on many Objects become compact, and firm, and
solid to a Resistance of the Touch; to Insects, it renews Life, and restores
Nature; and a thousand Advantages it brings to the Being of Things, which are
not very easily intelligible. Wherefore, Plato allows it a Pyranide Form always
aspiring to the Gods from whence it came. And Cicero will have the Soul Light
like Fire, that it may ascend to Heaven; yet, glorious as it is, and how
wonderful soever it is in its Operations; yet we know for certain, there is no
such stated Species in the World: It is a Creature of every Day and Moment, and
nothing more than a Confluence of Minute Parts put into a quick and nimble
Motion. The many Objections against the other remaining Elements, are as
irresistible as Sense and Demonstration can make them: And no less material are
the Scruples about the Four first Qualities and Temperaments arising from them;
which Qualities have, it seems, been substantial enough for the Galenists to
erect their Quaternion of Humors, and by a successive Mistake imposed upon the
World their own Habits, acting by such Notions only as might by Speculative
Deductions arise there from. Hence it is, that your Specificks have had their
Value, being looked on as the only Adaequate to cope with those various Humors
in the Body, which by reason of their several assigned Appartments, have gotten
distinct Appellations, when, in Truth, it is one and the same Thing presented
in a different Figure and Change of Shape, occasioned by the Shape of the
Receptacle, in which it lies, or else the Figure of the Ducts through which it
passes: Nor is it any wonder, that the Blood in the Large and Capillary Vessels
should present it self under the Aspect of Purple or Red; and yet by Virtue of
several Percolations become Phlegm or Choler, or the like; when thereby the
Figure of the Fibers thereof are changed, and consequently reflect a Color far
different from what it was before. I say, we need wonder at this no more, than
in the Consecutive Colors of Leaves that run the several Stages of Nature; or
of Clothes that have the Advantage of Art to make them what they are. It Is not
without good Authority attested, that a blind Man with a Touch of his Finger,
could distinguish the Nicities of Colors, on the Superficies of any Body; and
was abundantly recompensed in the Loss of his Retina, by the Excellency of
another Sensory. We are sure, whatever may be thought of this Man, that in the
Ant of Dying such Things are used as contract or dilate, without speaking of
any other Division, and thereby making more or less room, or space between the
Threads of the Cloth, must thereby cause a Smoothness or Roughness, and
consequently afford more or less place to Shade and Light, as the Figure of the
Thing necessarily requires. And therefore, since Nature is one entire undivided
Being, though on the account of Place, she acquires different Aspects; the
Mangling of her in Speculation must be Butcherly in Practice, and very
hazardous to the Being of Man. As for Instance, were I to prescribe according
to those Rules a Phlegmagogue, I must consider the Passages to the Head are
tedious, and the Burden to be brought from thence heavy and difficult; in
order whereunto I order Coloquintida, Scammony, or some other Elaterious
Medicine, which I must be sure is stout enough to bring thence the Oppressor,
against which the Complaint is made; and what, after all the Catalogue of those
Things we call Phlegm-purgers, do we see but a violent Contortion of the
Membranes, which by reason of their Twistings and Strainings, pour forth great
Quantities of Serum, the better part of Life, the Viscous Phlegm still
remaining behind, and may have this Motto infix'd on it, Vestigia nulla
retrorsum. True it is, that in Headaches that proceed from Plethora's, or any
violent Impulse of the Blood through the Carotidae, where the Serum is not much
changed, nor grown lentiscent, it is very usual to receive Benefit and Ease only
by Depletion of the Vessels; which amounts to no more than the thrusting away
the most necessary Force out of a besieged City; because, forsooth, they make
too much Noise, and disturb those who would die sleeping and unawares: For, as
it is said before, the Serum being so precious a Part of Life leaves being
purged forth all other Parts, to which it was a Vehicle immovable and
defenseless, and Funus Tacitum behind it: And by too sad Experience, it is known
many, even after moderate Purgation, have not only been left too obnoxious to
the Circumambient, but altogether incapable of Cure for those Distempers they
labored under, 'twere too great a Task for me to oppose my self against all
the Sons of Art; That were for a single Person to wage War with the whole World
but in the Name of Peace; would I know since that a Diarrhaea is in it self a
Disease, and that very often irrefragable and fatal: How it comes to be a
Remedy by Art, and where those Humors are to be found, which we pretend to
bring forth of the Body by such Operations; the not considering this has slain
his Thousands and Ten Thousands: And 'twere to be wished, the whole Tribe of
Purgers, some few for the first Passages excepted, were by common Consent,
either banished the World, or destined only to the Use of Brutes, which are
less dear to Heaven, than Mankind is; nor does the Error terminate in the
Hydragogues, and those other Boutefeus to the Body, but diffuses it self in the
Alterants, and whole Course of Practice. That Diseases are to be cured by
Contraries, is neither true, nor intelligible, though the constant Maxim of
almost all Ages, nay; though we should be content to take the immediate Cause
for the Effect, it is not reconcilable to Reason or Experience; for we are not
only ignorant in the Ratio formalis of Diseases, but as much, if not more, in
the Energetical Power of Medicines that are Relatives to them: For, as a good
Author says, We know not the Virtue of the smallest Herb that grows, nor the
Reason of that which is a common Life among us; for Heat, and Cold, and
Dryness, and Moisture, which are Degrees given to Herbs, as well as
Temperaments of Bodies, are the ultimate Effects. And so far remote Qualities
from the first Cause, as that we want Ariadnes Clew to lead us through the
Meander, and to the Primary Causes, from whence those said Qualities do
proceed; and for that Reason alone, and because of such an Indication as is
perceptible only by Sense: For any Man to direct the Antidote contrary, and
diametrically opposite in the first Notion to that Quality represented, is not
only the Way to run the Risque of Disreputation, with a Re infecta, as to the
Cure, but very often the Hazard of the Patient's Well-being and Life.

And that this may yet more appear, let us argue it in a Case or two that are
obvious, and illustrating this Point to the meanest and most ordinary Capacity.
And,

First, As to Manual Operations, a Phlegmon is a Tumor with Inflammation,
where, by reason of the great Plenty of Blood restrained, we perceive an
unusual Heat, even like Burning; as when a Member is too near a Fire, the first
Sign here of Indication is Heat, affecting the Sense; for, we cannot only see
the Inflammation, and angry Color, but at the least Touch perceive an
extravagant and most intense Heat, and, that before we consider any other
Quality of the Tumor: Wherefore, according to the said Position in this Case,
we ought to apply such Things as are directly opposite to this Inflammation;
and those in an abstracted Notion must be Coolers, and nothing else, and then
the Energy of those Coolers must appear, either by repelling this Humor into
the Vessels, that it may no more affect our Senses with the Quality, which we
call Heat, in the aforesaid Part. Or,

Secondly, It must appear in digesting and extracting this included Matter, and
so leave the Part ulcerous, which requires all the Intentions to heal and unite
again, which yet answers not the Position, because the Digestion required for
this Purpose increases the Heat to some Degrees, there remaining no other
possible Means besides evacuating this Humor by Evaporation, which cannot be
done by cold Stupes and Baths, other then what we have mentioned before, we
must conclude, that reiterating this Tumor, is in answer to the first
Indication. Now if I repel back, or reiterate into the Vessels this before
stagnating Humor, I taint the Blood with Corruption, and entail a soft
Destruction at least on the Patient; for, with the Blood it fares as with the
Limbs, Pars vivens mortuae consortis impatiens esse solet; there can be no
Agreement, no intimate Mixture betwixt them: The wounded Deer shall not mix
with the Herd, least it hazard the Destruction of the whole Body. There are
Thousands now living, that owe their Cachexys to such a male Treatment and
Practice; if they remove the present Evil, they bring in far worse Inhabitants
than before: And like cruel Statesmen in a Commonwealth, multiply a grievous
Burden, and diffuse it as an equal Torture to all, which before was very
containable and supportable enough by any one Member or Person. It Is no less
Art in a Physician to provide for a future Health, than to deliver from the
Jaws of a present impending Death; nay, it is more desirable to die at once,
than see Death and feel it every Day, and that for sore lingering Years
together, Vivens vidensque perit, sets the House always in Mourning, and brings
that not over-lov'd Spectacle, a Coffin, into their Sight many Years before the
Grave: These Ignoramus's, however they came to have the Liberty of Killing,
have yet no License for Torture and Cruelty: It Is far beyond their Commission
thus to play the boundless Executioners, and Curst-like Indians, that poison
for Months and Years at their Pleasure: I say, most of the Cachexies owe
themselves to this sort of Practice, which is a Possession like that of other
Devils, to be cured by our Prayers, that they may enter into Swine only, and be
hurried to their Exit by choking.

The next Instance, concerning this Position of curing Diseases by their
Contraries, shall be Physiological, viz. a praeternatural Heat of the Body, I
mean such as is perceived by us in Fevers, etc. where it is usually attended by
Vomitings, Diarrhaea's, great Drought, Inquietudes, and Soreness of Bones, and
the like: Notwithstanding which dismal Concomitants, which have one and the
same Cause and Parent, though more immediate with the Heat, and very often
appear as soon and as manifest as the Heat it self; yet, because upon the Touch
of the Flesh, we find some intense Warmness, and upon the Touch of the Pulse,
we find the Strokes nimbler and faster than before; we presently conclude, the
Blood enkindled, the House is on fire; and therefore, by all means, this Fire
ought to be extinguished, and put out by its contrary, a (Cooler) this
Pathognommick of Heat has made so great an Impress on almost all Men, that this
far-fetched Accident of Heat is admitted into all their Definitions of Fevers;
it is a Calor accensus, cries one; it is Calor praeternaturalis in cord, cries
another; a Sanguis ebbulliens, says the third, and a Luctus internus, such an
Effervency as is caused between Spirit of Wine and Aqua fortis, or between
Vegetatives and Acids, which causes a Hissing, a Smoke and a Heat, the Chemist
defines it to be. Now, for Mercy's sake, what Satisfaction can this be for an
enquiring Man, when he finds a Definition made up of poor Accidents, and such
too as are common and incident to many other Causes; and not only to Diseases,
but to the State of Health and Encrasie: For, certainly a Man that walks
stoutly at any time, but the space of few Hours, shall be unavoidably attended
with many Symptoms common to a Feverish Body, his Pulse shall be far more
rapid, his Flesh extremely hot, his Muscles much fatigued, and his Color for
the most part increased to the Degree of Beauty; and yet this Man is most
improperly said to be in a Fever: No, not so much as a Diary-again-immersion in
a Bath will frequently procure an extraordinary Heat, a rapid Pulse, mighty
Flushings, not any ways unlike those Accidents we find in a Febricitant Man, in
his Discumbiture; yet were this Person to be treated as a Febricitant, viz.
with Bleeding and Blistering, and the like, as is the common Practice in
Feverish Cases, his Life would be most miserable, since his Physician must
attend him always as close as the Shadow does his Body, for the curing those
supposed Devils, which the innocent Non-naturals inevitably bring upon him. Now
if this Definition be so deficient and unaccountable, what must the Practice on
this Definition be but pernicious, or else useless, either destroying the Body,
or emptying the Purse; and so leaving him fuller of the Disease than before: On
this Definition, the Indication for the Pharmaceutick part requires such Things
as refrigerate, and mitigate, and overcome this Heat which is thus enkindled
and praeternatural, and so depraving the Actions of Life and Motion. The
thorough Nature and Energy of those Things we call Coolers, we are ignorant of;
and therefore, if after the Use of those Things we reckon so the Patient
survives, it is no Fault of the Doctor's. I say, poor Man, it is not his Fault if
the Patient lives, for he, good Soul, with his Notion of Coolers, does as much
as in him lies, to stop the Motion of the Blood, and that because the immediate
Origin of Life it self is naught. But Heat procured from Motion, this certainly
is shooting at the Deer, and killing the Man; for let such an Arrow fly as
this should be, he wants for a Cooler, you would see it fledged with Death, as sure
as the Sun shines at Noonday: It Is a Mercy then he knows not a right Cooler;
if he did, he would be mischievous as a Plague, and fatal as the Biting of a
Serpent. I remember a remarkable Observation of Hildanus, of a robust,
labouring-like Fellow, who, when a Town was a fire, employed himself amongst
the rest, to quench the Rage, which was so violent, that to the great Hazard of
perishing by the Flames did these Men venture; that were thus employed to
prevent their being caught by the Flames, care was taken to plant Engines to
that Advantage, as might spout Water on the Laborers, to cool their Clothes
and Flesh; this Person, of whom the Observation is made, being in an excessive
Heat and Sweat, was from the Engines plied with their Coolers to the Purpose;
for, no sooner was this Person from his Labor, but went Home to Bed, and next
Morning had throughout his Body a Gangreen and Cadaverous Flesh; and all this
from the cooling Water alone, chaining up the Blood in the Muscular Fibers, and
hindering it from Circulation. This Observation is too notorious to omit any
Evasion; and I bring it to show every Man is a Sufferer in some like measure,
that is under the Misfortune of such an Hypothesis; only, perhaps, there is not
always such an Occular Demonstration for it, nor so plain and manifest a
Prophasis in every Circumstance, to prove the apparent Danger, and dolorous
Consequence of such Means and Maxims: For, if we consider the Quickness of the
Pulse in Fevers, together with Pains of of the Head, and Soreness in every Part
of the Body, and all the Effects besides of a Febricitant Body, we find
Stop-pages enough, and to too many without their Coolers, to make us fear great
Danger, and always suspicious of the worst of Evils, even Death it self. As for
the Celerity of the Pulse, that certainly must be from some Straitness and
Contraction of the Vessels, quoad Latera, by reason of some Heterogeneous Body,
from the fluid Blood, got into those Vessels, and by their Bulk forcing the
Fluid into a narrower Channel; as Dirt or Sand on the Banks of Rivers restrain
the Current; or like the Rays of Light in a Burning-glass, which by more
intimate Unition become mighty powerful and dextrous; as by the wonderful
Effects we may easily discover this must be allowed, unless you will grant some
greater Quantity of Blood, full 'twice as much, suitable to the Ryshmus of the
Pulse in Feverish Bodies, as was before in the same Bodies when sane and
uncorrupted, which no Physician can allow; for, upon Supposition that the Pores
of the Body are then shut up, for which Cause the Miasmata's and Habitus of the
Body are recoiled upon the Blood, and consequently augment it, and swell it as
Rain does Rivers; though no manner of Sense can or must persuade us to believe
all this, yet considering the usually large and sensible Evacuations, as
Diarrhaea's, Vomitings, Sweats, etc. which in those Cases happen; those
Evacuations we say are equivalent to the Halitus, detained by the Pores of the
Body, being shut up; nay, they must be far superant (Maugre all the
Observations of the Staticks) and the imprisoned Halitus; and that for this
Reason, because there is no Universal Swelling, nor any sensible Action of the
Bulk of the Body observed in any Fevers, either Acute or Cronick, except
Malignants and Pestilential, which belong not to this Treatise, whatever may be
pretended by some Eagle-ey'd Men to have observed in those Cases, or gathered
by Consequence, by the Soreness and Load that then seems to be upon the
Muscles: Yet, be they pleased to consider that what is spent upon the Flesh, is
lost in the Channel of Blood, like the Sea, what it gain in one place, it must
lose in another, being not able to afford Spring-Tides in all places at one and
the same Hour; Let their Pretensions be what they please, they cannot deny, but
many Parts in the Increment grow flaggy and loose, and in Articulo Mortis a
seeming loss of Substance appears, as the Sharpness of the Nose, the Hollowness
of the Orbit of the Eye, do most woefully demonstrate: So if this be observed,
the Blood seems rather diminished, and abundantly lessened, and is perverted
into somewhat different from its former Mode and Figure, viz. of a Fluid, which
requires Extension; it is become a thick, heavy Lump, compact and solid, which
takes up and requires lesser room and space than before. The true Aitiology of
the Celerity of the Pulse is a Work for the greatest Philosophers; it is enough
for me to consider, that as Death is naught, but the grand and ultimate Bar to
Motion; so must every Disease agree in the Genus, with Death it self, and
differ only in Point of Time and Degree, from the grand and ultimate Bar to
Motion, even Death it self: And now I hope by this time, we know what their
Coolers mean, and what in abstracted Notion, we must conclude of their Energy,
even an Explotion from all Hypotheses, wherein the Life of Man is concerned.
Let the Philosophers take the Dispute to themselves, and be content innocently
to bandy it in the Schools, where there is no Blood spilt, nor any thing else
but Time: For, already innumerable are the Errors and Evils that have been
brought upon the World, by allowing the Principles of the Schools, in the
Schools of Physic: The World, though five thousand Years old and more, had the
pretense of Physic almost coeval with its self; yet has not shown a true
Foundation of it scarce more than fifty or sixty Years. The Builders which are
the Chemists alone, have not squared to the Basis; but have bewildred us with
their Principles and Divisions, as much as the Peripateticks did before. But we
shall now content our selves with the best Reasonings and Observation we can
make on this present Treatise of a Consumption: Which is, Definition. -- A
wasting of the whole Body, by some sensible Evacuation from the Lungs.

A Fever, and a great Ptyalismus; together with an Inveterate Cough, are the
almost constant con commitants and propria quarti modi of this Distemper, and
shall be considered in their due Places: Mean while we are to examine the Genus
and Difference of this Definition, in Opposition to the Description other Men
have given of it: It Is very rare to be found in any Author, without a heavy
Charge and Complaint against the Lungs, as if those Parts, by reason of some
Male Conformation, gave Rise to the present Malady: Whereas the Lungs in many
Bodies Dissected on this Occasion, have been found innocent and free from that
Ulcer pretended to be generated there in Consumptive Bodies: Sometimes, indeed,
we may allow a Laceration of the Vesicles of those Parts, as in case of a
direful Hemoptisis, it many times happens, which proceeds from an over Plethora
of those Lodgments of the Blood; -- but not always attending the present Case,
is to be exploded from the Difference already given.

The wonderful Expectoration, and that for so long a Time, seems to indicate an
over Distention of those Vessels, caused by somewhat very Troublesome and
Mischievous, till it be thrown off by frequent Coughings through the Ductus of
the Trachea, whereby the Part is eased and relieved for a Time, by a Truce
only, and not by Peace; for there is a continuum Generans left behind, which as
soon as it is recruited with a fresh Supply, renews the Assault, and ceases not
till it be forced out by Trachea Ductus, as before.

By Expectoration alone, frequently more than the weight of the Body is
expended; and this is not hard to be understood, when we consider
Expectoration, and that very large is the Work of every Day for six or eight,
some few Months more, or less, without Intermission or Abatement; yet are we
not to understand thereby, as if the Lungs were the only Passives in this Case;
for all the Parts suffer and waste alike, the Head and the Feet partake of the
middle of the Body, and the Discrasie of the Blood, is the same in all, only by
reason of some proportion of Figure, it has to the Pores of the Air-Vessels, it
follows the Course of its Fibers, and Lodges where it finds the most agreeable
Rest, and Necessity.

It Is a worthy Query, why a putrid Synochus, where the small Vessels are most
affected, (the Lungs, where usually the greatest Vessels are, remaining free)
should kill in seven, fourteen, or one and twenty Days, and why in a Pthisis,
the great Vessels as well as small, being affected, the Patient should survive
so many Months, as we usually find they do? To this we answer, That the
continual Evacuation, through the Lungs, is the alone Cause of the Tabid's
Duration, and Life. -- For, because, by this Expectoration, the Lungs are
discharged from the Burden, they groaned under before: The Traveling Blood
therefore, has now more room, and is less obnoxious to Entanglements, and
Stoppages, then it would have been, had the Expectoration not been made,
whereas in a putrid Synochus, the lesser Vessels, being affected, as those of
the Head and Limbs, and the Lungs being free, as we observed before, Nature has
no such Emunctuary in those Parts, through which, she can so certainly, and
easily, discharge enough for the Preservation of Life, and Continuance of the
Motion of the Blood; But yet, if at any time, a Parotis, or other Critical
Swelling arises, in a putrid Synochus, it is great hope, the Bitterness of Death
is past, and all Clouds for that time are blown over, and away.

As Expectoration only, is the Cause of Continuance of Life, in Tabid Bodies;
so does it continually require, a new Expense of Blood, for the Perpetuity of
the Work; even to the last Drop, that is capable of Motion. There cannot be
supposed any intimate Mixture of Chyle and Blood, because the Blood throws off
every thing, so soon after its being taken into the Body, either by a
Diarrhaea, or Vomiting, or dreadful Sweatings, at Night, which ways exceed the
Tant-a-mount, by some Degrees, of what we introsum'd, but a few Hours before;
so that the Blood spends somewhat of its own Stock every Day, and lives upon
the wasting Remainder; (some very little part of the Aliment excepted) 'till it
be swallowed up in that Gulf of Phlegm, that gives a Quietus, to its Motion,
for evermore. How far the Blood is corrupted, or perverted, in this Case, will
allow different Reasonings, and fine Arguments, by reason of the various
Degrees of Gluten, that is thrown off through the Aspera arteria, by
Expectoration: Withal, we must allow, though the Course of a Phthisis be
usually short of a Year, by some Months; yet, we must observe on the other hand,
that it will take off some Persons, some considerable Portion of Time, sooner
than the usual Course, or Stage, of the Distemper, is by virtue of the first
Impetus of Corruption, or Degree of Violence, it first seizes them withal.

And of an extraordinary Degree of Violence, in the Corruption of the Blood, in
this Case, I have seen a most demonstrative Instance: A Man of Thirty Years of
Age, and upwards, was through too much neglect of himself, seized with so
violent a Cold, that immediately, though of an Athletick Body, he became
enervate; and withal, labored under all the Symptoms of a Tabid Body, to a
Degree, beyond all the Observations, I ever yet could make of Consumptive
Bodies, even when they were in the Jaws of Death; for, besides all the rest of
the Maladies he underwent, in a high Measure, his Expectoration was extreme,
and so intolerably faetid, as no inveterate Ulcer could exceed it, though near
a Gangreen, and utmost Peril of Life: I need not conclude, it was from any
Ulcer so suddenly produced in the Lungs, but rather from a bare Perversion of
the Blood, and other Humors of the Body; as we find in Cadaverous Flesh, when
it is exposed to some Tempers of Air, easily contracts an ungrateful Odor,
which our Sensories cannot well undergo. -- I scarce remember a more ungrateful
Smell from a dead Body, and though I certainly know pestilential and malignant
Distempers, (those Thunderbolts to Nature, that cut Men off presently) cause
the Blood to suffer in the highest Degree of Degeneracy; yet, scarce is the
Author to be found, that relates more of a Faetor in those Cases, than this
Example mentions to us.

What we were wont to call, the Recrements of the Blood, (amongst which Phlegm
is reckoned) is here the Blood it self, in Substance and Quantity, under this
Discrasie and Disaster; which, indeed, is in so great a measure perverted and
degenerated to such a Degree, as far exceeds all your celebrated Receipts, and
Practice that is ordinarily shown, in this Case, to make a Regress, to the
Habit of the Body, from that almost Privation, the suffering part, to wit, the
Blood undergoes, in this Perplexity.

I would not be understood, as if this Case were incurable, but I mean, that
this hardened Phlegm cannot be comminuted by the highest List of Practice, that
has now obtained amongst all the Pretenders, to the Cure of this Evil; -- Not
so comminuted, I say, as to remix with the more fluid part of the Blood, but is
by them sent away, as a Pepasmus, pretending, by the same Expectoration, to
preserve that part of the Blood, that is yet capable of Motion and Life, from
striking on the same Rocks and Shelves, the other parts had done before.
Whereas by this Pepasmus, they pretend we see nothing less, than perfect Life,
exhausted and diminished, the Weight of the Body, many times over-spent, and
the last Drop ready, and necessitated to the same Corruption, and Expectoration
as the first.

Of the Inefficacy of this Method, by way of Expectoration, is sufficiently
evident, and we persuade our selves, that notwithstanding this Faetor, and
those other direful Symptoms we speak of, we see no Impossibility at all, why
this unhappy Man was not as capable of a Cure, as one that has a cutaneous
Ulcer, or has in any Limb contracted a Faetor, treatible by Manual Operation,
and bare Surgeons Art.

The several Degrees of Corruptions, in the various Species of Things, is no
less curious a Speculation, than the Ways of Preservation of Bodies, if not the
same; for, without the one, we can but blindly, and fortuitously perform the
other, nor preserve the Body, on which we are concerned, but at the greatest
Uncertainty and Random. -- It Is the Work of many Tomes and Years, to consider
the several Degrees of Corruption and Perfection, as they all deserve; and I
wish, I may live to see it done, by the Hands of some few Men, who I Am sure
will make Demonstration of most of what they write, and satisfy the Knowing
part of the World, that Democritus's Well is not bottomless to the industrious
and sedulous Enquirer of Nature's Treasures; -- of this we may be abundantly
satisfied, that the Qualities we are now speaking of, are as comprehensive, as
the Objects of that Sense can be, which they effect in their Genera's, and far
more delightful in their Speculation, since we are assured, that the ultimate
Corruption in some Species of Things, is as grateful and pleasing, as the most
odoriferous Drug; while on the contrary, other Things in their Putrefaction are
detestable, to an utter Aversion and Abhorrency, as most unpleasing and
intolerable to our tender Sensory, and Nature.

The Fever that accompanies this Distemper, is called Hectical, ab (...)
habitus, having enkindled the whole Mass of Blood, and other Juices of the
Body, even all the Stamina's of Life and Nature: -- But by the Learned's leave,
this is obtruding upon the World verba pro farinis; -- here is Authority instead
of demonstrative Reason, and Bunches of Multitudes for revealed Truths: For,
though I should grant and allow, a Fever in this Case, yet I hope, they will be
pleased to let us know, what an Hectic is, and whether by any means, it may
not be adapted to any other sort of Fever, to be called Hectical, more
properly, and Specifically, than to this: For, in this sort of a Fever, we call
a Consumption, we find People for the most part Cold and Languid, and
abundantly wanting the pleasing Comforts of Heat and Warmth; as we shall see by
and by: Most true it is, while the extreme parts suffer, under a Fit of
Exhorrency, the middle Region, like Fire in a reverberatory Furnace, can only
reflect upon it self, to grow thereby the more intensely Hot, not being able by
reason of its Clausure, to extend it self any way, either for its own Liberty,
or Refreshment of other parts, that stand so much in need thereof; and by this
Straitness, and this Imprisonment of the Blood, in the middle Region, they may
apprehend some Cause for a Hectic, the Inflammation being so extreme, and
sensible in that part: Which, yet methinks, argues no more a Hectic, than a
Phlegmon, or an Erysipelas, in any Member, or Part, could do; for, in both
those Cases, there is almost an intolerable Inflammation, there is the Blood
chained up, with a non ultra, citrave; and yet, he that should pretend to be
such an Alpheist in Physic, as to call either of those Hectic, might be
rightly concluded, to have an Inflammation in his Brain, great enough to amount
to a Frenzy, and wants the Air, and Hellebore of the Anticyra's to cure him.

Besides, I look on Hectic, as importing somewhat Habitual, to be Universal
like the Soul, all in all, and all in every part, and not Topical, as is this
our Instance, where the Blood being pent in a strait part, is forced to defraud
all other places of its benign Streams, and pleasing Reflections. But however,
a Fever we allow it, and as such, it differs from a Synochus, not only in the
Duration of time, but likewise, because it has long Intermissions of Heat; and
then again, it differs from intermitting Fevers, because it is wholly free from
the Fit of Exhorrency; and besides, is not obliged to the strict Paroxisms of
Heat, and Cold, and Sweat, at certain Hours, as the Intermitting essentially is.

Whether the Paroxisms of an Intermitting Fever depends on the Succus
Nutritious, is not easily proved, nor credited: But thus much is certain, in our
Case; -- Our Paroxisms of Heat, owe their Original, for the most part, to
Things introsum'd, or other of the Non-naturals and Accidents, from without.
It Is observable, that after eating, though a small Pittance, which is as much
as their poor Stomachs can dispense withal, the Blood seems troubled, and
appears in Scarlet Flushings, and greater Quantities in the extreme Parts, than
at other times it usually does, no less is observed, in Drinking, or Motion,
the least of which, is some Violence to Tabid Bodies; the drowsy Blood is
awakened, and shows a mighty Muster, and a more seeming numerous Force, than in
Sane Bodies is commonly to be found: Now this Heat, and those Flushings, which
continue a considerable time, are very rarely followed by any such Sweats, as
we see are the constant Concomitants, and eternal Periods of intermittent
Fevers, and Agues.

It Is true, there are Sweats in Consumptive Bodies, more certain and constant,
than any Paroxism again that belongs to this deplorable Evil; but as we said
before, those Sweats are no ways depending, nor by any means consequent to
those Heats, or Flushings we spoke of just now, but due purely to Sleep and
Discumbiture; for, in Sleep, the Pulse moves not only faster than in vigilant
Bodies, and consequently drives more Blood to the Habit of the Body; but the
Weight and Warmth of the Stragulae press the Muscles extremely, all which
contributes to that Expression, we call Sweat, and this as constant and
periodical as Night it self. After which Deluge of Sweat, (for it is in extreme)
the Body grows cold, and languid, and enervate, being so great a Sufferer, by
the Loss of so much Strength and Spirit; so that the extreme Parts, seem to be
left even Bloodless, till refreshed by means of the Non-naturals, or the like,
it begins the Dance of Heat and Fury, as we said before.

Those are the constant Scenes, and this the usual Prophasis, during the whole
Stage of this grievous Malady: As to that part of it, which respects the Fever;
which, indeed, by reason of its Expense, and mighty Profusion, were enough of
it self, to cause a Phthisis, (though here it be only as a Concomitant, or
somewhat Symptomatical,) as it frequently happens in long Quartane Agues; but
yet, as if this were not enough to precipitate the Body to the Grave; beside
this mighty Expense and Profusion, we have been talking of, there is frequently
a Diarrhaea Colliquativa, and sometimes a Lientery; wherein it is observable,
that this Diarrhaea does not tread on the Heels, nor follow so close the
Introsumption of Meats, and Drinks, and the like, as the Feverish Heat and
Flushings, we have been just speaking of, certainly does, but has the
Intermission of some Hours, sometimes four or five; the Time Dr. Glisson allows
after Refection, for natural Stools, before it follows; yet, then the Mischief
is, it is more than ordinary fluid, and loose, as if it were caused by
Elaterium, or some poisonous Purgation, inwardly taken.

This Diarrhaea disheartens more Physicians, than all the other Symptoms,
attending this Case, and makes them cry out with a Conclamatum est, all is in
Despair, and irrevocably lost and gone: Certain it is, the whole economy is
disturbed thereby, especially, if we go the old Way of Reckoning, three
Digestions, then we must conclude an Error in the first Concoction cannot be
corrected in the other two that follow; and therefore, the Blood is too much
burdened with an ungrateful Load, it knows not how to dispose of, nor
discharge; but suffers a Secession of Parts, which is ever pernicious, in the
Consequence, to the suffering Creature, in its well-being of Life and Health;
-- pernicious, and sometimes fatal it is, when it is a Disease of it self,
without the Adjuncts of any other Discrasie; But when it is the Consequence of a
greater Disease than it self, as in this Case it is, it carries an Ilias
malorum with it, and portends the greatest Difficulty, if not Despair and
Ruin; for it does not only accompany those other expensive Evacuations, we
mentioned before, but through want of Appetite, the Body is denied the Recruits
and Refreshments, which should supply the Place of the aforesaid Profusion; And
no Wonder is it then, if those Rivers of Blood and Juices are at last dried up,
since the Sea upon the same Occasion, would become dry Land.

In a Word, a Diarrhaea is not only as mischievous in this Confederacy, but
somewhat more unnatural than any of the rest; for here we have Water for Solid,
we have Faintness instead of Appetite, we have a Deluge instead of the natural
Flowings of Life and Well-being: If you compare it with Expectoration and
Sweating, you will find it more unnatural; for by Expectoration, of what soever
it be, we find the Recrement much of the same Consistence and Texture; we
observe that Sweating is no more than Transpiration precipitated, and the
Fugitive Miasmata's being now collected, become obvious to Sense, as much as
the Miasmata's of Transpiration were to reason before: But in this of a
Diarrhaea, those Excrements that usually were solid and compact, are now thin
and fluid as Water. Neither is the Frame of the Lungs such, nor the curious
Texture of the Skin any way so made, as to comminute a thick Body into a Fluid;
but on the contrary, their Frame is such, as to elaborate those Recrements they
receive from a Fluid, to a Consistence, before they send them forth by
Excretion.

To those Sallies of Life, and almost constant Sluices of Tabid Bodies, we may
add, as a Catastrophe, an Haemoptysis, which though it happens usually not till
the last Stages of this Distemper, yet equals them all in a direful Aspect and
Prognostic: In the other Profusions, we mentioned even now, there are
Recrements and elaborated Corruption, but in this, downright Blood and Life,
Strength, Nectar and Spirit alone; as if Nature, giving up all for lost, came
forth unattended, and blushed at the cruel Dealings of its offending and mortal
Enemy. It Is then commonly it appears, when all its Channels are crammed with
Corruption, and it self forced (not without strong Palpitations) to take that
Passage, Qua data porta. -- Those are the Profusions of Life, and those, the
usual Ways, by which Nature decays and flies away in Consumptive Bodies, which
we see are little inferior, to what we find in the most fatal and pestilential
Distempers; for in the Enumeration of the Evils that attend the Pestilence,
none seem more direful than Haemoptysis, and Haemorrhages, strong Palpitations,
and Syncopes, which sometimes in this Case, may likewise be found, which if
Nature alone, the Subject of Sense; viz. of Pains and Ease, were to be
consulted, might pass for Mercy, since they take away Ex improviso, without the
Warnings of Pains and Torture, while Tabid Bodies die by Peice-meals, and see
themselves cut down alive, by the Cruelty of those Executioners.

Thus much of the Disease it self, together with the Concomitants, and usual
Adjuncts which we meet with in the Course of this Disaster: We will next
consider the several Causes, both procatarctick and evident, from which this
Malady may have its Origin, or Beginning: -- But first, we may understand, that
it is either Primary, without the Precedence of another Distemper, or else
consequential to some Distemper that has produced it, and by its Tyranny so
perverted the Blood, as to cause this Malady in the Body, we call a Consumption.

If we consider it as Primary, without the Precedence of another manifest
Distemper, it proceeds from these following Causes:

First, From a natural Discrasie of the Blood it self, such as is ex traduce,
or in the Elements of Generation from the Parents, and is what we call a
natural Consumption: -- And this is so apparent, that whole Families have been
prostrated, and that to a certain Number of Years, which was a non ultra, they
could not by reason of the Infirmities of their Constitution pass over, and
leave behind them: And this without any evident Cause, as is required, to the
Reducing of an Athletick Body, to the like Case and Misery.

A Person of a macilent, but laborious Constitution, was seized without any
evident Sign of Error in the Non-naturals (which usually are the Causes in
other Persons that labor under this Disease) with a horrid Haemoptysis, as
affrighted all the Spectators and Friends that were about him, and continued by
Periods for some Days in that bloody Condition, with loss of Appetite, etc. By
the repeated Instances of some of his Companions, he addressed himself to an
old Woman, who stops the bleeding, which was presently succeeded by a
Hoarseness, and small Cough; for which he takes the Country Air, where he was
delivered from those troublesome Companions; but returning again to London, he
brought those troublesome Companions again with him, and relapsed to much the
same Condition as before he went, bleeding excepted, he declined all further
Means; for, that he too freshly remembered the lamented Exits of Three or Four
of his near Relations, who from Athletick Bodies, were reduced by an unhappy
Constitution, even to Shadows of Humane Bodies, before they reached the Grave.

Indeed, this sort of Consumption, which is a traduce, is accountable to
nothing but a slender, and a very weak Contexture of the Blood, either
positively as to the Fibers, which being brittle and too terrene, after the
exhausting of so many Years, not only diminish themselves, but become
insociable to all other Parts; or respectively in regard of the Mixture, are
forced through length of Time, to forge that Contract, and Association
irrecoverably, which before they had with other Parts, and to which they were
united.

Secondly, This Distemper is produced from an evident adventitious Cause, and
that usually by the Air, or Meats, or Drinks, or Passions of the Mind: That
it is produced by the Air, is known and acknowledged by the most vulgar and
meanest sort: The Frigus Susceptum is a Stranger in no Country, nor Nation
under the Sun. -- We live in a State of War not only among our selves, but even
with the Elements; as if they (if any such be allowable) do with one another
those very Things that incur our Senses, viz. Earth, Water and Air, allowing
them only for variety of Beings, that make up a Part of the World, those very
Things enjoy every one their respective Places only by Force and blind
Necessity, and prey upon one another, as professed and irreconcilable Enemies;
and on all other Things, as well as themselves, taking Advantages of thrusting
out, or pressing too hard all such Bodies as are within their Sphere.

Of the Elastick Power of the Air, such stupendous Things are related, as now
the poor, unhappy Philosopher, of whom Cicero speaks, is more pitied than
blamed, for esteeming it a God; -- for it like a Deity, can kill as well as
make alive; witness the wonderful Effects of the Pneumonick Engines, and
Neighborhood of great Warlike Instruments of Death; and like a mighty Empire,
were it not poised by its own Weight, there is nothing in the World, but it
would precipitate to Death and Destruction, quick as Lightning, or the Thoughts
of the most active Soul in the World: And, although the wise Architect has
confined it, and said to it like the Sea; Thus far shall thou go, and no
further: -- Yet such is the Extensiveness and Struggling of its very Being and
Essence (and the Essences of Things we know GOD will never destroy) that
through the minutest, and (to all other Things) imperviable Passages it extends
self, and rejoices in the Expansion and Liberty it can procure, though to the
Ruin of other Bodies: And since it lies in wait, like a slumbring Lion, to
seize that Body, which, by reason of the Tenderness of its Texture and Weakness
of Frame, must either shrink, or give way to its Springiness and Force; no
wonder, if very often the Blood of Humane Bodies, that by reason of its Fluidity,
cannot be very compact and resisting, couch under the Load of a Force much
greater than its own.

We have already said, the Air has its Aequilibrium, as a Circumambient of
Bodies, and nothing else to keep it from destroying those Bodies to which it is
a place; and therefore, if at any time, either side, or part of the
Circumambient be pantherous and violent; as we find it is in the Case of
Gunpowder, etc. we see all Bodies set in any Neighboring Parallel, suffer
thereby, and seem to complain of an unwonted Violence done unto them. And
though, when the Cold does seize us, as often it will, when after great
Agitation and Fatigue, the Body shall be exposed, or by bare Session in an
Evening-Air, or by putting off Clothes, or by walking in malevolent Winds; of
which Hippocrates speaks so Divinely: I say, in those and many other Cases,
though in that instant we find no Alteration; yet shortly after, in a few Hours
or Days, we may digitate the Cause, by complaining of Soreness and Thickness,
and a thorough Indisposition of the whole Body, and by recalling our Thoughts,
point out that unhappy Moment which first began the Dance and Torture we at
present feel: -- We find this so general, and to that degree, that the most
Pancratick Bodies are not exempted, but frequently become the lamented Subjects
of the Tyranny of this Circumambient, which we justly have made, and proved to
be a Cause of this deplorable Evil.

Thirdly, Besides the Air, there is another of the Non-naturals, viz. Aliments,
Meat and Drink, that is very frequently an evident and most manifest Cause of
this Consumption: As it is said by the Philosophers, we are nourished by Things
of like nature with our Consistence; so sure it is, we perish and die daily by
what we are nourished. -- There is no Person, but after a Refection finds
himself not only not so lightsome as before, but withal, very much in heat
(except cold Weather be the Hindrance) that seems to proceed from some
Reluctance and Contention that is within, some difficulty the Blood finds in
receiving the gross Fibers of those Foods we usually eat. It Is the Observation
of some very learned Men, that all the World, before the Flood, abstained from
the Flesh of Animals, dedicating it to a more noble Deity than what dwells in
the Belly, and temperating themselves to a more delicious Variety of what the
Earth, either of her self, or by being cultivated, did produce, outlived the
now Wonder of half Decads of a Thousand Years, even to that time, when the
Thread of Life not wounded nor cut, but quite worn by Age and Time, brought them
to the Grave in a good old Age, and Peace. -- This was the Golden Age, of which
the Poets speak of no acute Distemper then like a Chained Shot, to cut a Man in
two, no Chronick to torment him, his Body was the least of his Care, and Ease
and Peace were inseparable Jewels of his Life, because he knew not how to
destroy himself, and that Gluttony was a stranger to him.

Not only to the Quantity of Things introsum'd, but to the Quality, is
imputable a great part of those Miseries, we everywhere find Humane Nature
oppressed withal; there are your Dyspepta served up to the Table every Day, and
Death garnished round in many disguises. -- There are but few that can digest
Blood, and not many more that can away with the inherent Crudities, that are
inseparable from the Constitution and Being of Multitudes of Things, we daily
use.

I know not why Antipathy should be reckoned an occult Quality, when a Person
shall be sensible of the Vicinity of some disagreeable Body, though nothing
shall appear to Sight, or trouble him: Doubtless, from some former Injury
received, either by himself or Parent, by this very thing which now by its
diffused Miasmata's alarms the Blood again, a dangerous and irreconcilable
Enemy: -- Seldom, indeed, is there any greater hurt done in this Case of
Antipathy, than raising some Disorder and Disquietude in the Blood, which by
this means is sufficiently forewarned of meddling with what it knows is averse
to its Nature and Well-being; the Danger is then only when we either greedily
take in such Things as are either crude of themselves, or by some present
unhappy Circumstance of our Bodies, becomes so to us in that juncture of time
only.

A young beautiful Virgin, the Child of most robust and hail Parents, feeding
one Night on Pigeons, somewhat too green, fell into a grievous Vomiting and
Looseness, and soon after grew Tabid irretrievably, notwithstanding the best
Application of Means could be procured for her.

A Man of a moderate Constitution, by eating heartily of Eels (though well
prepared) greatly hazarded the Tone of his Blood, and with very great
difficulty was saved from an Atrophy caused thereby.

Those are Instances to be pitied and deplored, because those were but single
Acts, not voluntary Habits of Gluttony and Luxury, and would have been avoided,
either by a Pre-experiment, or present Counsel of Abstinence therefrom, while
others, rich and luxurious, set no Boundaries to their Desires, but satiate
with the present Dainties, are quick in the Pursuit, and daring in the
Entertainment of other Novelties, they are altogether ignorant of.

It Is in this Case, methinks, a great Advantage to be poor and needy, to eat
the Bread with Care, and digest it with Labor; the Savoury Appetite is a
greater Mark of the Deity's Favor, than the mighty Treasure of the luxurious
Man; who like Tantalus is set in the midst of Viands, but cannot taste, he is
beset with Delicacies, but for a Curse and Reproach, as no way belonging to
him; -- Nulla aconita bibuntur fictilibus, tunc illa time cum pocula sumis
gemmata, etc. The Cottage fears no Poison, the Earthen Pot is filled from the
Fountain, whilst their Bowls of embost Gold carry Death with them; and every
Draught is as much Poison taken into the Body, in very deed.

This Crapula has destroyed more than Wars or Plague; and though the Mischiefs
that arise from Edibles are very many; yet, what arise from Drinks are
innumerably many more; they are like the Caterpillar and Locust, what the one
spares the other devours, if they are let loose on the Subject of their Prey.
Every one that has subjected himself thus miserably to a boundless Luxury,
endangers his Health as well as Reputation.

When this languishing Distemper, a Consumption, is consequential to some other
Disease, it is to be duly considered accordingly, that we may strike at the
Root of it, on which it grows. Sic quoniam variant Morbi variabimus arts.

Melancholy is often a Cause of this Distemper: For, a troubled Spirit, who can
bear? Sad Thoughts gather together in anxious Troops, to afflict the
Distressed; every Person being just as unhappy as Thoughts suggest: We find our
blessed Savior himself complaining of it: But be what will the Parent of it,
Obstructions are the constant Concomitants, or Introductives of it, evident
from Reason and Experience. It is observable, some very few Days before
Consumptive Persons expire, their Coughing and Spitting ceases; for, the Blood
then being extremely lessened by several Profusions, heretofore mentioned, can
now send no further Supply, for a Maintenance thereof; so soon after the
immortal Soul takes a Departure from its corruptible Mansion.

A Person taking Cold, by lying on the Grass, soon after was seized with a
violent Coughing and Spitting, which continued for some Weeks; he had likewise
expensive Sweats in his Sleep, together with Loss of Appetite, and a visible
Wasting of his Flesh: He was treated as follows;

Sulphuris Antimonii, gr. v. Elect. ^ Sassaphras, j. M. ut fiat Bolus uno vice
Sumendus.

It gave him Three Vomits, and Two Stools.

The next Day he had about Eight Ounces of Blood taken from his Arm; and the
Day following he began to take Pills Morning and Night, and a restorative Drink
afterward.

Pulv. Piperis albi, iij. Vitrioli Martis, ss. Balsami Sulphuris anisati, j.
Laudani Liquidi, Cydoniat. gut. xl. Extract. Gentianae, q s. ut fiat massa pro
Pil. Medietat. Magnitud. Dos. No iv. bis in die.

Rad. Sarsaparillae iij. Fol. hederae Terrestris Manip. No iij. coq. in Aquae
fontis lbvj. ad Dimid. partis Consumptionem, dos. lb ss. omni mane and nocte
post Pilulas.

He continued taking the Pills and Drink for the Space of Three Weeks, during
which time he daily grew better: And was at last restored to his former Health.

A young Man was taken with an Acute Consumption, by over-heating his Blood
with too much Exercise, and exposing his Body soon after to the Air, by
sleeping on a Bench: He was first taken with a Fever, afterward with a violent
Coughing and Spitting, which held him for some time, and daily increased upon
him. He requiring my Assistance, I first advised him to part with about Ten
Ounces of Blood; and at Night to take the following Sudorisick Draught:

Aq. Theriacalis, iij. Sir. de Meconio, vj. M. hora somni Sumend.

The next Day he appeared to be somewhat better, and his Cough somewhat
palliated.

Repetatur haustus hac nocte sumendus.

After which, being apparently amended, I advised the following:

Entis Veneris, ij. Extract. Centaur. minor. q. s. ut fiat massa pro Pil. No
xij. Cap. iij. Omni mane and nocte.

Decoct. Amari sine Senna, lbj. add. Tartari Vitriolati, ij. Dos. iv. bis in
die post Pilulas.

Syrup. de Meconio papar. Errattie ana, jss. Ol. Amygdal. dulc. j. Sacchari
penidiati, ij. Spr. Sulphuris p. Campan. q. s. ad Gratum Saporem M. Cochleatim
Sumend. Vrgente tusse.

This Method was continued about a Fortnight, to his great Relief; about which
time, being taken with a violent Looseness, he took the following Clyster:

Lactis Vacc. xiv. Confect. Fracastorii, j. M. ut fiat enema tepid. injiciend.
hora quarta Pameridiana.

Confect. de Hyacinth. ij. Terrae Japonicae, croci Martis astring. cum, ss.
Theriac. Venet. q. s. ut fiat Bolus hora somni Sumendus.

Spr. Cinnamomi, ss. Aquae Germ. Quercus, j ss. M. ut fiat haustus post bolum
sumendus. Repetatur enema Pomeridiana sequente injiciend. etiamq. Bolus and
haustus hora somni sumend. Bibat pro potu ordinar. Decoct. Alb. sequent.

Decoct. Alb. lbiij. Spr. Cinnamomi. iv. Sir. e Succo Cydoniorum, iij. M. ad
usum dictum.

Croci Martis astring. ij. Balsami Peru. ss. Conservae fructi Cynosbati q. s.
ut fiat massa pro pil. No xviij. capiat, iij s. ter in die horis medicinalibus.

Cortic. Granat. confract. j. flor. Balaust. j. rosar. rubrar. M. j. Cinamomi
acuti contus. j. coquantur simul in Aquae fontis, q. s. ad lbij. colaturae ad
Sir. de Rosis siccis Myrtin. ana, j ss. Spr. Cinnamomi, iiij. M. and capiat,
iiij. ter in die post pilulas.

Laudani Liquidi Cydoniati ij. capiat gutt. viij. nocte maneq. in haust. potus
ordinarij.

By this Method, his Looseness was taken away in some few Days. I then Advised
the following:

Salis Martis, iiij. Aquae Rosarum dam. lb ss. M. dos. Cochlear. j. omni mane
in haust. fortis decoctionis Centaurij minoris.

Laudani Land. j. Balsami Peru. ss. Balsami Sulphuris anisat. ij. pulr. cubeb.
piperis long. ana, j. extract. Gentianae, q. s. ut fiat massa pro pil. No lx.
capiat, iv o. quaque nocte.

I also advised him to the Country Air. Accordingly he went, and in some Time
after, returned to Town in perfect Health. About Eight Years since, a
Gentleman, living at Peterborough, in Northamptonshire, from Melancholy and
great Anxiety of Spirit, had brought on himself a Consumption; some few Things
he had taken in London, by the Advice of a Physician, but daily grew worse and
worse. I meeting with him here, advised him to go into Northamptonshire (which
if I mistake not) was his Native Place, assuring him, that Medicines would have
much better Effect on him there, then in London; a Place, which when well, he
did confess, did never agree with him: Having at that Time my self a
Dwelling House within Sixteen Miles of him. He desired me to take Care of him;
accordingly he went into the Country, where I soon visited him: He had a most
violent Cough, especially in the Night time, and spit great Quantities of
purulent viscous Phlegm; and when ever he slept or slumbred, he fell into faint
and expensive Sweats, was for the most part Cold and Languid in the extreme
Parts, as Hands and Feet, a Pain in his Side; was much wasted, and had a
Hippocratick Face. I begun with him, as follows:

Pulr. Corticis Winteraui cubebar. piperis longi ana, j. Salis Martis ss.
Balsami Sulphuris anisat, ij. Laudani Liquidi Cydoniat. guit. xl. extr.
Gentianae, q. s. ut fiat Massa pro Pilulis Medietatis magnitudinis Capiat, iv.
bis in die.

After taking of which he was somewhat better.

Repet. Pil. Specific. sine sale Martis sumend. ut antea.

Limatur. Martis crudi, iv. Caryophillorum, Macis, Zinziberis incis. ana, j.
Radic. Gentianae incis. iij. Vini albi, lbij. Macer. in Balneo Maria spatio
Septimanae saepe agitando, post residentiam filtra ad usum. Dos. Cochlear. vj.
Nocte Maneque post Pilulas.

The Pills and Steel-Wine he continued taking for a Month, or Five Weeks, and
was recovered thereby to a great Degree; but presently returning to London
again, his former Symptoms increased daily, which soon obliged him to leave the
Town, in hopes the Country Air alone might relieve him: As I remember Norfolk
was the Place, where he staid about a Month; and in his return to Peterborough,
called upon me, at my House in Wisbich, in a very weak and bad Condition; he
again implored my Assistance, I endeavored to do him all the Service I could,
by the frequent Administration of Spices, Chalybeates, Opiates, Sarsaparilla
Drinks, Milk-waters, etc. as I saw occasion; but not finding any thing to
avail, I declared my Opinion of his Case, to be incurable: He afterward
confulted the ingenious Dr. Denham, the younger, of Stamford, in Lincolnshire,
who remarking the extreme weak Condition he was in, advised him to lay aside
all Medicinal Compositions, and betake himself to the drinking of the German
Spaw-water; but growing weaker and weaker, he left off the Use of the
Spaw-water, and drunk Asses Milk to his dying Day, which was soon after.

This Gentleman, on whom this Observation is made lived under this Distemper
about Eleven Months, which was longer than I ever could observe any one to
continue, where the Disease terminated in Death. I remember, that he told me,
that he had been troubled with a Cough, and frequent Spitting of purulent
Matter for several Years; but without any evident Decay, or Diminution of his
Strength or Flesh, or Loss of Appetite, except within the aforesaid time; and,
until that appears, I think, we cannot properly pronounce any Person to be in a
Consumption.

A Country Farmer, near Wisbich, in the Isle of Ely, upon the going off of a
Fever, fell into a Cachexia, and soon afterward grew Tabid: I gave him some
Pills composed of Spices, Balsam of Sulphur, Anisated, Ens Veneris, Liquid
Laudanum, and Extract of Gentian, drinking a Decoction of Sarsaparilla, and
Hedera Terrestris after them. Likewise, I ordered him a middling sort of Drink,
to be brewed for him, with good store of Hedera Terrestris, to be put into the
Copper with the Malt; and in a small time, he regained his former Health.

A poor Woman at Boston, in Lincolnshire, by taking Cold, was seized with a
great Pain in her Side, and Difficulty of Breathing, which was soon followed
with a great Coughing, Spitting and Sweating at Night, in her Sleep; she was
much altered in her Countenance, and evidently decayed, and wasted every Day:
She took much the same Pills as the other, drinking after them an Infusion of
Semen Sinapi in Stale-beer, which soon took off her Pain in her Side, and much
abated the other Symptoms. Lastly, I gave her the following Electuary:

Pulv. Herbae Rorismarini in Clibano siccat, ss. Mellis Despumati, q. s. ut
fiat Electuarium Capiat quantit. nucis Moschatae ter quaterve in die.

By which, her Coughing, Spitting, and Shortness of Breathing, was totally
taken away.

A Husbandman near Dounham, about Ten Miles distant from Wisbich, in the Isle
of Ely, from frequent taking Cold, at last grew Consumptive; he cough'd, and
spit purulent Phlegm very much, especially in the Night time; had faint Sweats
in his Sleep; complained also of a Stoppage at his Stomach, and Pain in his
Side; he was much wasted when first I saw him. I advised the following:

Pulv. Piperis albi, iij. Balsami Peru. ss. Laudani Liquid. gut. xl. Extract.
Gentianae, q. s. ut fiat Massa pro Pilulis, No xxxvj. Capiat iv. quaq mane and
nocte superbibendo Cochlear. vj. Vint Chalybeati cum Aromattie. parat.

Upon this he mended apace; for his ordinary Drink, he made use of a plain
Decoction of Sarsaparilla, and Hedera Terrestris, without the Adjunct of any
other Ingredient; and, in about Six Weeks time, he was restored to his former
Health. For a Restorative Diet, I advised him to a strong Broth, made of the
Lean of a Leg of Pork, and seasoned very high with a great Quantity of Pepper,
and moderately with Salt.

A near Neighbor of mine, now living, about Ten Years ago, was far gone in a
Consumption, he was cured by a strong Decoction of Spices, Cortex Peru
intermixed with Chalybeates, and Opiates.

I could insert more of the like Nature, and cured much after the same Manner;
but, for Brevity sake, I shall omit them.

We shall next insert a Materia Medica, from which an experienced Person may
form such Compositions, as are suitable to the Cause, Symptoms, and
Constitution of his Patient, viz.

Radix Jalapae, vel Mechocannae nigrae, Rhabarbari, allii, Sarsaparillae,
Chinae, Enulae Campanae, symphyti, eringii, Capparum, ari, Raphani sylvestris,
Gentianae, Zinziberis.

Folia Satureiae, Cardui benedicti, Centaurii Minoris, absinthii vulgaris,
Thymi, Majoranae, Salviae, anthos, Hyssopi, Tussilaginis, Capillorum Veneris,
Hederae Terrestris Pulegii.

Cortex Peru; Tamarisci. Balsam. Peru, Crocus Britanicus, limaces, Icthiocolla,
Viperae, Ambragisea, Terra Japonica, Aloes, Succotrina, capita papaverum
alborum. Piper nigrum, Macis, Mars crud. Flores Rosarum Rubrarum. Balaustiarum,
Semina Anisi, cannabis, recentis, sinapi. Aquae Minerales, vinum Scillitticum,
Oxymel Scillitticum, Pil. de Cynoglossa, Laudanum Londinensis, Elixar
Proprietatis, Balsamum Sulphuris Anisatum Tinctura Balsami Sulphuris Anisati,
Spiritus Sanguinis Humani, Sulphur Antimonii auratum, Sal Martis ens Veneris,
Sal Nitri, Tartarum Vitriolatum, etc.

But, before we take our leave of this Treatise, we cannot omit taking Notice
of a general Error among many People, as to the Duration of a Pthisis, or
Consumption, which they allege often to be of many Years continuance; and are
not wanting, in relating Instances and Examples of that Kind: But, as we said
before, the usual Stage of it is (for the most part) short of a Year, but never
beyond, as ever we could observe on many Instances, but what terminated within
that time, either in a State of Health or Mortality; for, though some People
may cough and spit a Quantity of Phlegm for several Years together, yet, while
their Apetite remains reasonably good, their Digestion laudable, and are free
from any of the other Profusions and Expenses of Nature, incident to this Case,
without any sensible Decay of the Body, as to Bulk or Strength, they can in no
wise be properly said to be in a Consumption, although inclinable thereto, and
on the least Occasion may slide into a Confirmation of it.

In a Word, Consumptions are to be cured (where the Party is not too far gone)
by Measures far different to those of the Ancients, by a Method absolutely free
from all nauseous Sweets, which clogs and vitiates the Stomach, and destroys
the Appetite; and more fatal Coolers, which create Stoppages in the Blood, and
cause it to suffer in the highest Degree of Degeneracy and Corruption. Brisk,
active, attenuating Medicines, being the only Adequates, to cope with this
Distemper; and shall often (contrary to all reasonable Expectation) effect a
Cure.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
PUrging Pills which Cure the Venereal Distemper, and Scurvey, without any
manner of Confinement, or Disturbance to the Body, and prevents the Infection
from getting up into the Head; purges also the Head, Limbs, and Urinary
Passages. At Three Shillings the Box, with Directions.

Dyet-Drink at Eighteen-pence the Quart; or Papers of Ingredients to make it,
at Eighteen-pence each Paper, which will keep without losing their Virtue a
long Time; the Drink is pleasant and grateful to the Palate, cleanses and
sweetens the whole Mass of Blood, from the Scurvey and Venereal Infection:
Also, the immoderate Use of Mercury, with Directions; such as cannot be
Confined, may be Cured without Fluxing, Danger, or Confinement. Those who
desire it, may have it performed after the safest and most effectual Manner, by
T. Nedham, at his House, the Surgeons Sign, in Windsor-Court, in Drury Lane,
near the Dog-Tavern.

Note, He has a particular Method, which speedily and effectually Cures most
inveterate Ulcers, in any Part of the Body, stubborn and rebellious Scabs,
running Sores, or any Breaking out: Also, the King's -Evil, all Fistula's, that
are curable, having sufficiently experienced the same Abroad, in His Majesty's
Service, where no one Person was left by me uncured; and all People may
generally expect a Certainty thereof, where there shall be a Possibility of it,
by T. N. etc.


