THE Solemn LEAGUE and COVENANT, Commonly called The Scotch Covenant.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity, and the true public liberty, safety,
and peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is concluded:
And calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion and Professors
thereof in all places, especially in these Three Kingdoms, ever since the
Reformation of Religion; and how much their rage, power, and presumption, are
of late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof, the deplorable
estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the
Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous state of the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public Testimonies; We have now at last
(after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and
Sufferings) for the preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter
ruin and destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms
in former times, and the example of Gods people in other Nations, after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual SOLEMN LEAGUE AND
COVENANT, wherein we all subscribe; and each one of us for our self, with our
hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:

I. THat we will sineerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, against our common Enemies; the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the word of God, and the examples of the best Reformed
Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the Three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, form of Church Government, Directory for Worship, and Catechizing; that
we, and our posterity after us, may as Brethren live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us. II. That we shall in like manner,
without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that
is, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and
Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other
Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy,
Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound
Doctrine, and to the power of Godliness; lest we partake of other men's sins,
and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues; and that the Lord may be
one, and his Name one in the Three Kingdoms. III. We shall with the same
sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our several vocations, endeavor with our
Estates and Lives mutually to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the
Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the
Kings Majesty's person and Authority, in the preservation and the defense of
the True Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms; that the world may bear
witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or
intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness. IV. We shall
also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as have been, or
shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering the
Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or one of the
Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or Parties amongst the People,
contrary to this LEAGUE AND COVENANT; that they may be brought to public
Trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall
require or deserve, or the Supreme Judicature of both Kingdoms respectively, or
others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient. V. And
whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace betwixt these Kingdoms, denied in
former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted unto
us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both Parliaments; we shall
each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they may
remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all posterity, and that Justice
may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the
precedent Article. VI. We shall also, according to our places and callings in
this common Cause of Religion, Liberty, and peace of the Kingdoms, assist and
defend all those that enter into this LEAGUE AND COVENANT, in the maintaining
and pursuing thereof; and shall not suffer our selves, directly or indirectly,
by whatsoever Combination, Persuasion, or Terror, to be divided and withdrawn
from this blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the
contrary part, or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or Neutrality
in this Cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the
Kingdoms, and the honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives,
zealously and constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote
the same according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatever; and
what we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and
make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed: all which we shall do
as in the sight of God.
And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
danger, the fruits thereof; we profess and declare before God and the World,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and the sins of these
Kingdoms; especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel; that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our Hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our Lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; and our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor; for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
Man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation; that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation,
and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And this COVENANT
we make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all Hearts, with a
true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when
the secrets of all Hearts shall be disclosed; most humbly beseeching the Lord
to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, and the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

The Negative OATH.
I A. B. do Swear from my heart, that I will not directly or indirectly adhere
unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause against the
Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the Two Houses of
Parliament, in this Cause or War. And I do likewise Swear that my coming and
submitting my self under the power and protection of the Parliament, is without
any manner of design whatsoever, to the prejudice of the proceedings of this
present Parliament, and without the direction, privity, or advice of the King
or any of his Council or Officers, other than what I have now made known. So
help me God, and the help of this Book.

Thus you may see how the inclinations of the Disaffected Party were bent when
this COVENANT was made, and how solemnly it was taken by many of them,
notwithstanding the very Learned and Elegant Reasons given against it by the
University of Oxford, (which Reasons, if desired, you may expect in a small
time.) How near this comes to our own times, I leave it to the judicious Reader
to judge, so that the ill consequences may be avoided.

MA. NEDHAM.

FINIS

