C: NEPOS, Veronensis.


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN.

Written in Latin BY CORN. NEPOS, AND Done into English BY SEVERAL HANDS.

OXON, Printed for HEN. CRUTTENDEN, and are to be Sold by ANTH. STEPHENS,
Bookseller near the Theater, 1684.

Imprimatur,

TIMO. HALTON, Pro-Vice-Can.
October. 9. 1683.
To the Right Honorable JAMES EARL OF ABBINGDON, Lord Lieutenant OF THE County
of OXFORD, etc.
MY LORD,
THESE Lives of Cornelius Nepos, which I now Present your Lordship in English,
have had the good Fortune to survive in their Original (the Latin) seventeen
hundred years: And tho the Observation of the Excellent Lord Bacon be very
Ingenious, That Time is like a River, which bears up the Stubble and such light
things, but lets the more weighty and substantial sink; yet must this be taken
for a Similitude, and as such is only applicable to the Abuses which the
Authority of precedent Ages, as well as other Humane Concerns, is and may be
subject to. For to suppose, that those things which have past the Test of the
wisest and severest Ages, have at last nothing of intrinsic value in
themselves, but owe the long possessing of Fame to a Hit of Fortune, to the
Humor or tame Obsequiousness of a long Succession of Admirers, is so bold an
Attempt upon the Reason of Mankind, that he that makes it must either have much
of the God, or a great deal of the Fool; By invincible Argument to demonstrate
the Mistakes of the Learned World in all its Stages, requires a Soul of a
Divine Perspicacity, clear from those Encumbrances that have misguided the
Prospect of other Mortals. To oppose a single capricious Opinion to the
collected Force of so many Men's Judgment, looks like the Hero in the Play, or
the Knight Errant in the Romance; who with two Legs and two Arms, Fights and
Routs whole Millions. I do not (My Lord) Apologize for our Author, as if He
need beg a Blessing from Antiquity, or wanted the Testimonials of Precedent
Ages to support his Credit; had he been Written in this time He is Translated,
there is worth enough in Him to recommend Him to all Lovers of History.
Cornelius Nepos Lived in an Age, that had the greatest Taste of Good Sense of
any possibly since the Creation. Eloquence did not then consist in the gaudy
Trimming of Metaphors, or the forced acuteness of a short cut Period, but Good
Sense naturally and cleanly Expressed, was the Language Augustus and his Court
encouraged. Our Author cannot indeed pretend to the Politeness of Cicero, but
yet He has nothing but what is Manly and Strong; and if my weak Judgment
informs me right, there runs through his Writings a Gentile Vein of speaking
unaffectedly, which declares Him a Man removed above the Pedant or Plebeian.
Here it must be Confessed, He is now and then rough in the Period, and negligent
in the Expression; but the judicious Quintilian allows this to be sometimes a
Beauty; and it is the opinion of most Critics, that if there be any fault in
Tully himself, it is that He is too Set and Formal in his Style. There are some
Faces that are very exact in the Symmetry of their Parts, and the mixture of
Color, and yet they are not pleasing; While on the other Hand, there are
others in which Nature seems to have made agreeable Mistakes; Eloquence is only
the Beauty of Language. in which a too formal observance of Exactness is
disgustful. There is as much difference between the Gentile practice of
Rhetoric, and the heavy Regularity that arises purely from the attendance upon
its Rules, as there is between the Gentile Address of a Gentleman, and the
fulsome Compliment of a Schoolmaster. Such is his Style, that it seems to give
Cornelius Nepos a pretense to the Patronage of your Lordship, whose Ancestors
have reflected greater Honor upon Learning and Learned Societies, than They
could ever receive from them. It Is in the Great Name of the Bartu's, we meet
the two greatest Ornaments of Mankind conjoined, Learning and Nobility; and in
that Generous Noble Blood, not only Honor, but Wisdom are conveyed. The
reason Petronius Arbiter gives, why good Sense and true Reason were in his Age
in the decline, is, Because every Man must fish with such baits he thinks will
take, but says the same Ingenious Author, We have lost the generous Palate; Had
your Lordship Lived in that time, there could have been no occasion for this
general Complaint. In your Lordship a Virgil or a Horace might have found an
Agrippa or Maecenas, who did not only receive the Compliments of those Great
Men, but understood their Worth. Our Author has in short drawn the Greatest
Heroes that Athens, Sparta, Thebes, Corinth, and even Afric it self could
boast, and it is to Him that Rome does owe its Atticus. It often happens, that a
Prince is better represented by his Coyns, then by his Statues; so without
detracting from the just praise of others, Nepos may possibly give as lively an
Idea of an Alcibiades or Themistocles, as those who have drawn out their
Descriptions to a greater length; For as in Men's Faces, so in their Actions,
there are certain peculiar Airs that distinguish one from another; if you hit
these, you give the Character as effectually, as if your Canvass was as large
as the Object, and you took in every Hair. The design of History is to instruct
by Example, and Correct the Infirmities of Life; to Trace out the Roads by
which Great Men arrived at Fame, and the Rocks they have split against. All the
reward We can pay to defunct Virtue, is a grateful Remembrance of it, and Vice
is a Detestation to Posterity. Phocion's Beneficence will be an Eternal
Monument: Eumenes his unshaken Loyalty to the Posterity of his Prince will
never be forgotten: And Alcibiades his tender Passion to an ungrateful Country,
will last as long as Sense remains in the World. Such Examples may afford Your
Lordship's leisure Hours a Divertisement, but cannot pretend to Direct. The
History of your own Family is a Treasure of Greatness and Bravery, which
affords Instances (of both Sexes) for every Virtue and Duty of Life. And here
we cannot enough Admire the inimitable Gallantry of Katharine Duchess of
Suffolk, whose Zeal to the Protestant Religion at least came up to the Example
of the most Primitive Confessors; who supported all the Variety of Her numerous
Afflictions with the Meekness of Her own Sex, and the Courage of Ours: While
every Country proved more Hospitable to that Admirable Lady than Her own; and
Foreign Nations thought themselves obliged to Reverence that Virtue which we
could not Bear. Nor need I instance in those Heroes of your Family, to whose
Noble Atchievments the Great Henry of France was so highly obliged, and the
Dutch owe so great a part of their Liberty. Nor perhaps was the very attempt of
Civilizing Ireland an undertaking of less Gallantry and Spirit, since it is
easier to Create then Restore. When at length the unhappiness of an Headstrong
Nation recalled them from Foreign to Domestic Wars, with how much Courage,
how much Loyalty did the Heroic Lindsey espouse his Royal Masters Interest! He
despised both the Allurements and Forces of a Faction, then almost
Irresistible, and received the Assaults of the Rebellious Army, as unmoved as
an Isthmus does the shock of contesting Waves. He opposed his Person to the
most eminent Dangers in the Defense of oppressed Majesty, and dyed like one
that had a true value for Life, and knew how advantageously a few minutes of
Life were changed for an Immortality of Fame.

To be Nobly Born is (My Lord) questionless one of the greatest worldly
Happinesses kind Heaven bestows; and Nature for several Ages seems to prepare
and refine the Blood of a Family, that She may at last work out and introduce
one Perfectly Great Man. That this is Your Lordships Case we have reason to
believe, in whom all the Virtues that are thriftily divided amongst others, are
United. Well then may Cornelius Nepos be Proud of Your Lordship's Name to Lead
up his Horoes, and protect those that were, while they lived, the Patriots of
their Country.

Each Virtue takes its proportion from the Exigences of time and Place. He that
stands upon the secure Shore, and undauntedly views the ungoverned rage of the
Ocean, does not, on this account, deserve the Praise of a Valiant Man; but He
is the Master of true Courage, that all the time sedately stemms the Ship;
endeavors to be safe, yet fears not to meet Death in its most dreadful shape.
Amongst the polluted spawn of Pamphlets which have crawled about during this
Ferment of the Government, there have been a few who have compared it to a Ship
tossed by dangerous Waves. Let the design of these Parable-Makers be what it
will (as in most of them it has been bad enough) yet the similitude is to the
purpose; and Your Lordship has had no small share in preserving this leaky
Vessel from Destruction. It Is an observation too well known among Politicians,
That the Virtue of a Prince may sometimes turn to his Destruction; of which we
have had a sad Example in the Blessed Martyr Charles the First, Who Suffered,
and Dyed for being Good; and the same Jews that acted that sad Tragedy,
designed a second upon the Son of his Loins and Inheritor of His Virtues; As if
they were resolved by repeated Experiences, to revoke that Axiom of the
Moralists, That the Natural effect of Benevolence and Goodness, even in this
World, is a reciprocal Love and Felicity; and so it is in all except the
Fanatic, whom both the Father and Grandfather of our Gracious Prince, assures
Us, that no Benefit can oblige. And really the Fanatic is no more to be
comprehended within the general Rules of Reason than the Brute; because as this
acts according to the instinct of its Nature, which often carries it contrary o
the principles of a Rational Creature, so the Fanatic is moved by the giddy
Impulse of Enthusiasm, which has abundance of more points then the Compass.
This is that Monster who ever since His Majesty's Happy, Happy Restoration, has
endeavored to lay an open and easy way to the Destruction of the Government,
by endeavoring by their unreasonable Calumnies to make the chief Ministers of
It Contemptible to the People. They have been indeed, like cunning Artists, a
long while heating and preparing the matter; and in Seventy-eight, when they
found the Bent and Bias of the People worked into a Temper, then it was, that
Corah showed Himself and pronounced, That the Prince and the Priest had
donspir'd together against our Liberty. This carried on under specious
pretenses, put the People into a fit of down right Madness, and when the
Zealous Alarm was made on that side of the imaginary point of the Compass
whence Popery was to come, the Fanatic had just planted his Colors on the
contrary part of our City. It Is enough to confound a Man and make Him (if
possible) to forswear being in the same Class of Nature with these sort of
Animals, to consider the unaccountable Whims in their Proceedings. All that
dyed for Dr. Titus his Plot with their last breath asserting their Innocence
were not believed, because, Popery allowed Dispensations for Lying, and could
easily elude, not only the Dictates of Christianity but of Nature too; And now
it comes to the Fanatics turn to Hang, one would think on such an occasion
they should not only sing Hopkins very heartily, but speak true too; and yet
all these unfortunate Gentlemen that died, having, in part at least,
acknowledged the matter of Fact for which they were Condemned, tho they seem to
deny the Guilt of it, the Brethren matter it not; and yet could these believe,
that a Madman with a Fire-ball upon a pole, set London into flames.

My Lord, we had felt the dismal effects of this mixture of Villainy and
Madness, had not the most Wise Conduct of His MAJESTY (assisted by such Loyal
and Courageous Hands as Your Lordships) delivered Us from the Dreadful
Precipice, which we saw and trembled at. The Fable of the Viper, which the kind
Countryman having warmed into Life, stung its Benefactor, was by Antiquity
thought to express Ingratitude in its highest Extent. The Faction outgoe this;
They hiss at and wound a Prince, who is not only so far their Redeemer, as that
He restored them to Life when they were Dead in Law and Justice, but showed
Himself of that Forbearance and Clemency, that He seemed to deliberate whither
he had best revenge their Insolence, or fall Himself. Such extraordinary
Goodness deserved the Expense of all the Miracles Heaven could lay out for its
Deliverance!

We who are happy in living near Your Lordship, felt the warm Influence; The
same Plague of Republican Principle, which had infected the Capital City of
this Fortunate Island had gained too great a Party among the Citizens of this
place. The very Men that eat Our Bread were keenly prepared to have invaded
those Sacred Seats which support them, and have continually rescued both them
and their Predecessors from Beggary. Affronts are not to be measured by the
real Loss we undergo, but that uneasiness of Spirit they bring upon the Men
that suffer them; To be slighted by a Superior is a thing we may calmly (tho
with some grief) submit to; to be neglected, contemned, and trod upon by an
Inferior, who depends upon Us for his very Breath, is so insufferable Usage
that nothing but the Meekness of a Primitive Confessor could forgive it. And
how have the Gownsmen deserved this? Because we are Popishly affected, by
Religiously observing the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; because we were
Pentioners of France, and undermined the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, by
asserting one of the most Sacred Essentials of the Government, the LINEAL
SUCCESSION, which could neither by the Dispensation of a Pope or the Power of
Parliament be altered. Your Lordship (tho Personally Affronted by this
ungrateful illiterate Society) durst stemm this Torrent, which threatened an
easy Ruin to all its Opposers; and possibly, that the very Brutes that graze
and fatten upon the Hill of Parnassus, have not made Food of Us its
Inhabitants, is in no small measure due to Your Lordships Care. Which the
Ingenious Gentlemen concerned in this Translation (who did me the Honor to
Commission me, tho of all Men the most unfit, to recommend it to Your Lordships
Patronage) do gratefully acknowledge; and it was not the vanity of having a
Name prefixed to two or three Leaves done into English that prompted them to
join in this small concern, but the desire they had to make a public
Resentment of those many Favors Your Lordship has been pleased to bestow upon
this Our Sacred Learned Athens.

And now having Executed my Commission to the utmost of my small Abilities, I
must not in good manners trouble Your Lordship any further then to beg leave to
assure You, that I am with all imaginable Respect,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's LEOPOLD WILLIAM FINCH.

THE LIFE OF CORN. NEPOS.
THere is no part of Human Learning so universally Advantageous to Mankind, as
History. It rescues our Ancestors from Oblivion; It can Instruct and Delight
the Present and Future Ages. We are obliged by all the Laws of Natural
Religion, to preserve our Relations as long as possibly we can: Even then when
their Lives are scarce worth the keeping, when Old Age has rendered them
useless both in Public and Private Capacities, by the nauseous Methods of
Physic, we endeavor to keep them among us. And certainly our Piety should not
end at the Grave; but employ it self in securing all that remains of them. Urns
and Pyramids can only preserve their Ashes; which are, even to the most curious
Observer, undistinguishable from those of other Men. Pictures and Medals
represent only their outward Lineaments; which are often not unlike in Fools
and Wisemen. But History gives an Account of their Nobler Parts; their Wit,
their Learning, and their Virtue: And the Reader has, what will be no
inconsiderable part of our Happiness in the other World, the Conversation of
all the Great and Good Men of past Ages. And their Examples will prove to him
far greater Incentives to Virtue than all the grave and serious Precepts of
Philosophers. They assume to themselves the Boldness and Majesty of a
Legislator, lay down rigid and severe Rules of Life, treat us with jejune and
abstracted Notions, which few Persons can understand, much less deduce to
practice: But the the force of Example is intelligible to the meanest
Capacities. We Read, and Admire; and, having naturally an Itch after Glory,
pursue the same Methods our Forefathers so successfully proceeded in.

But tho History in General be so Pleasant and Instructive, yet certainly
Biography is more Eminently so. The General Historian is wholly taken up in
giving the Relations of Great and Glorious Exploits; of the Rise and Fall of
Empires and Great Men. You have Alexander at the Granic, and Caesar in the
Fields of Pharsalia: But an account of their daily Conversation, of the Menage
of their Estate, their Behavior to their Friends and their Family, their
Government of their own Passions, is below the Dignity of the Subject; and if
the Author should oblige us by an useful Digression (it may be, of more real
Advantage than the whole Series of the History) it would be called by the Men
of Art, an impertinent Excrescence; and the whole Work be esteemed Monstrous,
that in one part so swells beyond the lawful proportion. As the poor Poet is
Damned in Horace, that because he had got a delicate Description of the Rhine,
was resolved to insert it into his Poem, tho wholly impertinent to his Design.

Yet certainly the History of these Actions, tho of a meaner nature, is
infinitely more useful. The other, it is true, are more Heroical and
Illustrious, extremely fit objects for our Admiration, but usually unimitable.
They do indeed raise our Attention; but then they debauch our Reason: For, as
the Stomachs of those who have indulged themselves in the use of Spirituous
Liquors, can afterward admit of no wholesome Diet: So, after these Miraculous
Accounts of Knights and Giants, all sober and sound Sense proves Nauseous to us.

In the General History, we see the Hero at the Head of an Army, or in a
Triumph; but by what Steps and Degrees he raised Himself to this Greatness, we
are unacquainted with; which would yet more improve and delight the Reader. The
Acquisition of Glory, is like that of Money: The greatest Art consists in
getting a Stock at first; which afterward, if managed with an ordinary
Prudence, increases prodigiously.

Biography is indeed of a limited and confined Nature; since it respects only
the Actions of particular Persons, and is not obliged to give the whole Process
of an Expedition. And therefore, since the Mithridatic War was managed by
Sylla, Lucullus, and Pompey, successively, an accurate Description of it is not
to be expected from the Biographer. But then the General Historian is as
imperfect in the Lives of particular Persons; takes them only as they fall in
his way, and cannot insist long upon them, without transgressing the Laws of a
Methodical History. But the Biographer attends his Hero from the Cradle to the
Throne: Shows him at first, it may be, mean and contemptible, despised and
depressed, till at last by Virtue and Industry he breaks through all Impediments,
and in despite of Envy and Detraction, mounts Himself above his peevish
Enemies. He accompanies him in his Retirements, gives his Carriage to his
Friend and Relations, acquaints you with his Divertisements, lays aside the
State and Grandeur, the Pomp and Parade, draws the Scene, and shows you the Man
himself, divested of his Gaudy or Formal Dress. And then, whereas the General
Historian, like a false Courtier, takes notice of him only in his Greatness;
and when he becomes unfit for Service in the Camp or the Senate (as some ill
Masters do their wornout Servants) deserts him; Biography still waits upon him,
tho discarded the Court; and tells you with what Courage and good Grace he
bears the Affronts of his ungrateful Countrymen, his Sickness, and Death it
self. Which certainly (unless you read History as Ladies do Romances) you would
as willingly be informed of, as his Gallantry in the hottest Engagement. 'Twere
easy to enlarge upon this subject, were I to write a Panegyric of Biography,
and not the Life of a particular Historian.

Among Authors of this Nature, there is scarce any so considerable as C. Nepos;
who has had the good Fortune to please the most Judicious Critics of all Ages;
but in this is strangely unhappy, That having been so industrious in
Immortalizing other Men, and having wrote a particular Volume of the Lives of
Historians, he himself has been almost forgotten, and we have very little left
us concerning him. Nay, and to add to the Misfortune, even this very Treatise,
of the Lives of Excellent Generals, which is the only one left us of his
numerous Writings, has by some very ill Judges been attributed to an obscure
person, one Aemilius Probus, who lived in the Barbarous Age of Theodosius. But
of this below.

He was born in Hostilia, a Village depending upon Verona; whereof Pliny,
Antonine in his Itinerary, etc. make mention; and is at this day subject to the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Verona. Verona lies near the Po; upon which
account Pliny calls our Author Podi Accola: It is situated likewise in that
part of Italy which the Romans (for to us it is otherwise) called Italia
Transpadana, that part of Italy which is on the other side the Po: So that
Catullus, in his Dedication of his Excellent Poems to C. Nepos, might very
justly call him an Italian. But because the same Country was called Gallia
Togata (or that part of Gall wherein Gowns, the Roman Habit, were worn, in
opposition to Gallia Braccata, so named from the Garments of the Barbarous
Inhabitants) Ausonius, alluding to Catullus's forementioned Epigram, tells his
Pacatus, That he had found a more Learned and Obliging Patron than Gall
furnished Catullus with. But these two Poets may be easily reconciled,
considering that the same place was, with different respects, reckoned part
both of Gall and Italy. Now, that Nepos was a Veronese, was the constant
opinion of that City, where in the Senate House his Statue was erected among
those of the Illustrious Men born there. Elios Vinetus would indeed persuade
us, that there is nothing of certainty when Nepos was born; but besides the
constant Tradition of the City of Verona, and that his Statue was placed among
those of the Veronian Writers, (which certainly would satisfy any man of a
tolerable ingenuity) we have the Authority of Leander, Albertus, Paulus Merula,
and of the Learned and Illustrious Alexander Becellus, Chancellor of Verona.

The Territories of Verona enjoy a delicate thin Air; the Soil as healthful, as
well watered, and supplied with Fruits of all kinds, as most places in the
World; as if it were designed by Nature for the Country of Great and Witty Men.
It Is not impossible for a great Genius to proceed from an unhealthy and boggy
Soil, where the Air as well as Water stagnates, and is corrupted: But it is very
improbable there should. Plutarch and Pindar were born in Boeotia, but not one
eminent Writer more, as we hear of. Erasmus came from Rotterdam; and yet the
greatest Judge of the last Age was pleased to say of Gretser, It Is a Witty Man
for a German. And if we consider the dependence which our Souls have upon our
Bodies, as to their operations, we need not wonder, that thick and foggy Airs
should so seldom be blessed with extraordinary Men. It Is certainly a mighty
Advantage to be Born in a place eminent for Wit and Learning; where great
Examples daily appear before us, and raise in us a generous Emulation to equal
or surpass them. Upon this account it is, that Cities have become famous for
some particular Excellence; and Wit, as some Herbs, if once rooted in a ground,
cannot without difficulty be got out. Verona has indeed produced as great Wits,
and as Learned Men in all Faculties, as any City perhaps in the World. Here
were born the two Plinies, Macer the Botanic Poet, Vitruvius the Architect, and
(in a later Age) that Prodigy of Wit and Learning Hieronymus Fracastorius, the
best Phyfitian, Mathematician, and Poet of his Age.

As Nepos was Born in a Place famous for polite Learning, so likewise in an Age
when Wit and Elegance of Style were advanced to their utmost perfection; in
that Age which the Critics call, The Golden Age of Elcquence. There is no
question, but Junius the Rebel, M. Valerius the Dictator, Menenius Agrippa, so
famous for Reconciling the Patricians and Plebeians, did make Orations to the
People; tho not so fine ones as Historians ascribe to them. They were certainly
Men of incomparable Valor and of sound Sense; but they had only a good
unpolished rough Eloquence, and with that attained their Ends upon a People
rude and illiterate; and wanted only a Grecian Education, to render 'em the
greatest Wits in their Age. But as the Roman Empire began to extend it self
into Greece, and People admired the Oratory of that Nation, the Roman Language
was daily refined. It at first became neat and clean, the Words and Phrases
proper and easy, not florid, much less ranting and fustian. This is that which
is so admirable in the ancient Comedies, of which Plautus and Terence are the
only now left us; which as Scaliger well observes, our misfortunes have
endeared to us; we admire them the more, because we have none else left us to
admire. In the Eloquence of that Age, there was nothing affected, nothing of
Paint and Daubing, but pure Natural Beauty, undebauch'd, and preferable upon
account of its Native simplicity to all the swelling Rhetoric of some after
Ages. But at last the Roman style was Illustrated with Tropes and Figures;
which, if Modestly made use of, are the real Ornaments of a style, but if used
with Imprudence, become nauseous, and more like the Sayings of a Madman than
an Orator. In this Golden Age, the Romans had raised themselves to the utmost
pitch, they had gone as far as Prudence would permit them; which when their
immediate Successors endeavored to surpass, they swelled into Bombast, and
their Wit was more like an Hydropic Tumor, than a Natural Plumpness. The
Spaniards brought this disease of style into Italy; and Cicero in his Oration
for Archios the Poet, exposes the Barbarous and Greasy Wit of that Nation. And
yet there are some Men who compare and prefer Martial to Catullus, between whom
there is as wide a difference, as betwixt the sordid Drollery of a Buffoon and
the Ingenious Raillery of a Gentleman. They have had a greater esteem for the
Heat of Lucan, than the just Greatness of Virgil. But the best Judges rather
pity these mistaken Gentlemen, that dispute with them.

Now to be considerable in such an Age as this, to be infinitely esteemed and
Caressed by the greatest Persons in it, is an infallible Argument of the real
Excellence of an Author. When Cicero, Catullus, Atticus, etc. appear as
Witnesses, it must needs be a vile Ignoramus Jury that will not find the Bill.
Catullus, the most accurate and delicate Epigrammatist that ever writ,
dedicated his Poems to him. Cicero was his most intimate and bosom Friend;
there was a constant Intercourse of Letters betwixt them. Sueton in his Life of
Julius Caesar takes notice of a Letter from Cicero to Nepos, and Lactantius
quotes an Epistle of Nepos to Tully. Nay their Epistolary Commerce was so
great, that Macrobius makes mention of the second Book of Epistles from Tully
to Nepos. His intimacy with Atticus is evident from the Life of Atticus, here
annexed to his Lives of Excellent Generals; for Atticus himself was so far from
being one, that he never engaged in the War either for Caesar or Pompey, and
yet had the good Fortune (which I believe very few of that Humor ever met
with) to be Honored, esteemed, and unmolested through the whole course of his
Life.

He left many Learned and Curious Works behind him, which the injury of time
has deprived us of; and we have only just enough left us to see the greatness
of our loss in the rest. He was Author of a Book, which he called his
Chronicle, wherein (in three distinct Volumes) he gave an account of those
three great Intervals of time, which Historians so much talk of, The Obscure
and Uncertain, the Fabulous, and the Historical Ages of the World. As to the
first and second, Tertullian informs us, that Nepos affirms, there never was
any Saturn but what was a Man; and Ausonius tells his Pupil the Emperor, that
he sent him Titianus's Fables, and Nepos's Chronicles, which were not much
unlike 'em; and Catullus in his Preface to his Poems, tells us, that Nepos did
Omne Aevum tribus explicare chartis.

Besides this great Work, he writ the Lives of Illustrious Men, of which
twenty-two, which respect the Grecians and Barbarians, are transmitted to us;
and likewise the Lives of the Roman Hero's (as is evident from his Life of
Hannibal) and the Roman Kings. But what through the Invasion of Foreign Nations,
and the Ignorance and carelessness of Superstitious Monks, who let them ly and
rot unobserved in their Libraries, we have only their Titles from other
Authors, which had the good fortune to survive. Aemilius Probus has by some
Critics bin supposed to be the Author of the Lives of Foreign Generals; But
it is a palpable mistake occasioned by an Epigram prefixed to some ancient
Manuscripts of this Author, wherein Probus commands his Book, if the Emperor
Theodosius enquire after the Author, to tell Him it is one Probus. But then it
follows, Corpore in hoc manus est Genetricis Avique Meique, viz. that his own
hand, his Mothers, and Grandfathers were concerned in the work. Whence it is
clear beyond contradiction, that this Probus was only a Transcriber. Besides,
can Robortellus who writ a Treatise of the Art of Criticism, or any Man of
common Learning and Sense, persuade himself, that this wretched Poet could be
the Author of this most delicate and Judicious piece of History. But from the
cleanness and tersness of Expression may undeniably be evinced, that the Author
of this Book lived in the Age of Julius and Augustus; and besides all this
there are forty places in the Lives themselves that prove Nepos was their
Author, and lived in the Age aforesaid, for which if you please consult Lambin.

But Nepos has not bin more abused by ascribing his Works to other Men, than
in making him the Author of some pieces wholly Unworthy of him. Thus the Book of
Illustrious Men, which usually was said to be Pliny's, but is really Aurelius
Victor's, some Critics Father upon our Author, and the Translation of Dares the
Phrygian is said to be his: But the very style it self is sufficient to
convince any Judicious Reader. Nepos, in the Judgment of some Men lived after
the Nativity of our Lord, but if you consider how Celebrated he was for his
Learning in the days of Catullus, Cicero and Atticus, you will find no great
reason to subscribe to their opinion.

THE CHRONOLOGY TO CORN. NEPOS. Olympiad Year of Olympiad. Before Christ.
Miltiades Overcomes the Persians at Marathon 72 3 490 Dies in Prison 72 4 489
Themistocles Overcomes the Persians at Salamis 73 1 408 Banished 77 2 471 Dies
79 2 463 Aristides Banished by Ostracism 74 2 483 With Pausaniqs overthrows and
kills Mardonius 75 2 479 Pausanias Conspires against Greece 75 4 477 Is starved
75 4 477 Cimon Overcomes the Persians in a Naval Fight 77 3 430 Is banished by
Ostracism 82 3 450 Overcomes the Persians by Sea and Land 82 3 450 Dies 82 4
449 Lysander Beseiges Athens 93 4 405 Takes it 94 1 404 Alcybiades Is banished
92 1 412 Recalled 92 2 413 Dies 94 1 404 Thrasybulus Commander of the Athenians
92 2 411 Overcomes the thirty Tyrants 94 4 401 Dies 99 4 308 Conon Overcomes
the Lacedaemonians at Cnidus 96 3 394 Fortifies the Piraeum 96 4 393 Dion His
flight and Preparation for War against Dionysius 101 3 358 He dies 106 2 355
Iphicrates General of the Athenians Obtains the Victory at Corinth and lays
down his Command 96 4 393 Chabrias General of the Athenians 99 2 383 Chabrias
Overcomes the Lacedaemonians 100 4 377 Is killed by Fraud 101 4 376 Timotheus
General of the Athenians 101 1 376 Datames Lived about 94 4 400 Epaminondas
Made Commander of the Thebans 101 2 375 Overcomes the Lacedaemonians at Leuctra
10^ 2 371 Beselges Sparta 102 4 369 Dies in the Battle at Mantinea 104 2 363
Pelopidas Taken Captive 103 1 368 Recovered 103 2 367 Agesilaus Makes War in
Asia 96 2 395 Against the Persians in Egypt, where he dies, His Age eighty
four, His Reign forty-one 100 1 380 Eumenes Is made Tutor to Alexanders
Children 115 2 319 His War against Antigonus 115 4 317 Is taken and slain 116 2
315 Phocion Put's to flight Clitarchus the Tyrant 109 4 340 Timoleon Delivers
from slavery Corinth and Syracuse 159 2 143 Overcomes the Corinthians 159 4 140
Dies 106 2 137 Hamilcar Governor of Sicily for the Carthaginians 132 4 259
Hannibal Passes the Alps 104 4 218 Gains the Victory at Cannae 141 2 216 Is
overthrown by Scipto 144 3 202 Flies to Antiochus 146 2 195 Dies, His Age
sixty-three 149 3 182 M. P. Cato. Consul 146 2 195 Censor 149 1 184 Dies 157 4
149 T. P. Atticus Lived 178 4 63 C. Nepos Lived 178 4

A Catalogue of the Lives, with the Names of the several Gentlemen by whom they
are Done into English.
Miltiades. Mr. Tullie. Themistocles. Mr. Gardener. Aristides. Mr. Mitchell.
Paufanias. Mr. Hoy. Cimon. Mr. Greed. Lysander. Mr. Kirchevall. Alcibiades. Mr.
Peers. Thrasybulus. Mr. H. Gilman. Conon. Mr. Jenefer. Dion. Mr. Clark.
Iphicrates. Mr. Allam. Chabrias. Mr. Kennett. Timotheus. The Honorable Mr.
Booth. Datames. Mr. Edwards. Epaminondas. Mr. Lane. Pelopidas. Mr. Creoch.
Agefilaus. Mr. Scott. Eumenes. Mr. Chapter Allestree. Phocion. Mr. Todd. Timoleon.
Mr. Carry. Hamilcar. Mr. Brideok. Hannibal. The Honorable Mr. Finch. Cato. Mr.
Robinson P. Atticus. Mr. Morgan.
THE PREFACE OF CORN. NEPOS.
I Do not doubt (my Atticus) but a great many will censure this way of Writing,
not only as frivolous, but unworthy the Persons of Excellent Men, when they
shall read these little Memoires related of them; As who was the Master that
taught Epaminondas Music; and that it was reckoned amongst his chief
Accomplishments, that He had an handsome way of Dancing, and sung skilfully to
the Flute. But this is the opinion only of those who being ignorant of the
Grecian Learning, think nothing right but what strictly quadrates with their
own Manners; but if these would but once Learn, that things Decent and Uncomely
do not appear with the same Aspect of Honesty and Turpitude to all Persons, but
that everything ought to be measured by the Institutions of our Ancestors; it
will suppress their admiration, that in Celebrating the Virtues of the Grecians
we have followed their Customs; for it was not objected as a Scandal to Cimon,
who was one of the Greatest Personages amongst the Athenians, that he Married
his half Sister which his Father had by a former Lady; since it was a familiar
usage, that obtein'd amongst the rest of the Citizens, tho it breaks in upon
our ways of Living, and is counted Irreligion. It was a thing highly applauded
in Greece, that young Lads were Catamites, and had many Rivals in that
unnatural pleasure; and at Lacedaemon there was not a Widow, tho of the Noblest
Extraction, but would act her part in a Comedy, and take Money for it; In the
same Greece, likewise it was matter of singular Triumph, to be proclaimed a
Conqueror in the Olympic Games; and yet to come forth upon the Stage, and be a
spectacle of diversion to the People, was not looked upon by that Nation as any
ways opprobrious; all which things notwithstanding kindle our Aversion, as
being partly downright Infamous, and partly below the Dignity of our
Characters, and very far from being seemly or becoming; on the contrary, a
great many actions carry with us the impression of Decorum, which are thought
very lewd by them; As for instance, what Roman blusheth to lead his Wife to an
Entertainment? And what Mother of a Family will not reside in the most
frequented part of her house, and contribute her share of Conversation at a
Public Feast? And yet it is much otherwise practiced in Greece, for there they
never come to any jolly Assignation, unless invited by their near Relations;
and are never seen but in the most inward Apartments, which they call from
thence (Gynoeconitis) the Chamber of the Women; and no one's approaches were
permitted thither, but of those, who gained access by the privilege, either of
Blood or Affinity; but the bulk of the Volume will not let me run through any
more Examples of this kind; and Expedition calls upon me to give the last hand
to those things which I have begun; therefore we will come close to the
purpose, and in this Book draw to your view the Lives of these Illustrious
Commanders.

THE LIFE OF MILTIADES.
Done into English by Mr. Tullie, M. A. of Queen's College, Oxon. and Sub-Dean
of York.
WHEN Miltiades, the Son of Cimon, an Athenian, had got himself a great and
illustrious Name, as well for his own native modesty, as by the ancient and
renowned Family whence he was descended; and was now arrived at those years
which were sufficient to confirm his Fellow-Citizens in the high opinion they
always had of him: It happened, that the Athenians were upon a new project of
Conquering and transplanting Colonies to the Chersonese. And The Thracian
Chersonese, or Peninsula.
since the design was generally applauded, several being come in Volunteers to
offer their service in the Expedition, it was thought fit to depute some of
them to go to Delphos, and there consult the Oracle of Apollo about the choice
of a General. For at that time the Thracians were Masters of those Countries,
who were not to be dispossessed but by force of Arms. When they were arrived at
Delphos, and had addressed themselves to the Oracle, the Answer it returned was
positive and express in the choice of Miltiades; whom if they would elect, they
should be successful in their Undertaking. Miltiades confirmed in his Command
by so great an Authority, sets Sail for the Chersonese, with a select Band of
men; and touching upon Lemnos in his Road, would willingly have reduced the
Inhabitants of that Island under the Dominion of the Athenians, requiring them
immediately to surrender themselves. But they laughed at the demand, and
replied, That yes they would, when he should Sail from home to Lemnos with a
Northerly Wind; which is contrary to them who come from Athens to those Coasts.
But Miltiades's Affair would not admit of delay, and therefore without any
farther attempt, he steered his course directly for the Chersonese, where he
safely arrived. And having, in a short time, defeated the Forces of those
Barbarians, and made himself Master of the Chersonese, he fortified the most
convenient places of it with Castles and Citadels, and planted all the Country
with his own Soldiers, whom he enriched with the booty of frequent Excursions.
Nor had Fortune a greater share in the success of this Expedition then his own
prudence. For having routed the Enemy's Forces by the Valor of his own, he
managed the whole concern of the Victory with the greatest Equity imaginable;
and made the Chersonese the place of his Residence. For he acted as King
amongst them, tho he had not the Title; and yet owed not his Power so much to
the Absoluteness of his Command as to the Justice of his Actions. For
notwithstanding the greatness of his Fortune, he was ready to do any acts of
kindness for his Countrymen the Athenians. By which means he established his
Authority not only in the Hearts and Affections of the Athenians who gave it
him, but of those also over whom he was to exercise it too. And having thus
settled the Government of his late Conquest, he comes back to Lemnos, and (by
virtue of his former Compact with the Inhabitants) demands the Surrendry of
their City into his hands: For they had promised to yield themselves up to him
when he should Sail from Home to Lemnos by a North Wind; which was now
performed from his Habitation in the Chersonese. The Carians who then inhabited
the Island, tho they little expected such a demand of the performance of a
jocular promise, yet were forced to comply and quit the Island; not so much out
of the sense of any obligation they conceived themselves to lie under, as of
the power and great success of the Enemy whom they were to encounter. Nor was
he less happy in reducing those other Islands, called Cyclades, under the
Athenian Dominion. In those days Darius, the Persian King, resolving upon a War
with the Scythians, built a Bridge upon the Danube, for the passing over of his
Army, and gave the chief Command of it, and of their respective Cities, to the
Forces which he had raised in Ionia and Aeolis. For he went upon this ground,
that it would be the best Expedient to keep the Greeks who inhabited Asia, in
subjection during the War, to entrust their Friends and Countrymen with the
Command of his Towns, who could expect no Quarter if he chanced to be defeated.
Amongst the rest of these Governors was Miltiades; who, when he had continual
news brought him of the ill success of the Persian Arms against the Scythians,
exhorted the Commanders of the Bridge, Not to baulk so fair an opportunity of
freeing Greece from the Persian Yoke; alleging, That if Darius and his Forces
were but defeated now, not only all Europe would be free from the apprehensions
of his Arms for the future, but that the poor Greeks likewise who inhabited
Asia would be rescued from the slavery they underwent, and the dangers they
were exposed to from their Persian Masters; and that if the Bridge were but
demolished, the Design must of necessity take effect, and the Persians perish
either by the Sword or Famine in a few days. When several of the Company had
joined with, and seconded Miltiades, Hestiaeus Milesius craved leave to dissent
from them, objecting, That tho it might be expedient for the generality of the
People to be freed from their subjection to Darius, yet it could by no means be
so to them, who bore Command under Him: That their power and interest was
embarked in the same bottom with Darius 's Empire; which if once overthrown,
their Employs must expire with it, and they suffer by the hands of their own
Fellow-Citizens. And therefore, that he was so far from concurring with them,
that for his part he thought it highly their interest that the Persian Empire
should be upheld and established. When Miltiades understood by the sense of the
Company, that the point would be carried against him, and easily imagining,
that of so many who were privy to the Consult, some would certainly come in and
inform the King of the Plot, He thought it his safest way to leave the
Chersonese, and return to Athens. And tho indeed the majority of the Cabal
thought not fit then to concur with him in the Design, yet was it a generous
proposal in him, in that he rather consulted the Liberty of his Country than
his own private Interest.

Darius, after his return from Europe into Asia, being advised by his Council
to try if he could reduce Greece under his Dominions, fitted out a Fleet of
Fifty Sail of Ships in order to that design; whereof he made Datis and
Artaphernes Admirals, and gave them the Command of 200000 Foot, and 10000
Horse; alleging the affront that the Athenians had put upon him in assisting
the Ionians in the taking of Sardis, and putting the Garrison to the Sword, as
the ground and occasion of the War against them. The Persians landing at
Eubaea, immediately made themselves Masters of Eretria, and sent the
Inhabitants of the Country into Asia to Darius. From thence they marched as far
as Attica, into the Fields of Marathon, which is but about ten miles from the
Town. The Athenians, tho they were in a great consternation at the near
approaches of so powerful an Enemy, yet solicited they none but the
Lacedaemonians for their Assistance; to whom they dispatched Philippus (one of
those Couriers whom they called * Hemerodromi) to acquaint them what urgent
occasions they had for their speedy Stout young Fellows, who were dispatched
abroad upon State affairs, and performed their Errand with great expedition
Relief. In the mean time they chose ten Great Officers to command the Army,
whereof Miltiades was one; amongst whom it was hotly debated, Whether it were
more advisable for them torely upon the strength of the Town, or to march out
and fight the Enemy. Miltiades pressed them with greater earnestness then any
of the rest, to pitch their Tents as soon as possibly they could; for that by
this means the Citizens would be excited to behave themselves more bravely,
when they saw how highly their Valor was relied upon; and the Enemy's Advances
would be retarded, when they should observe with what a small handful of men
they resolved to fight them* There were none who actually assisted the
Athenians in this juncture but the Plataeans, who sent them a thousand men,
which made them completely ten thousand strong; a small number, but fired with
a wonderful desire to be in Action. Miltiades, by this Counsel of his, became
more considerable then his Colleagues; for 'twas upon the great Authority his
Advice had amongst them, that the Athenians marched their Forces out of the
Town, where they encamped conveniently, and the next day after, at the foot of
an Hill, joined Battle with all the Courage imaginable, and the advantage of a
new stratagem, on their side: For they had blocked up the passages with Trees
in several places, to the intent, that they might both be sheltered by the tops
of the Mountains, and that the Trees in the way might hinder the Enemies Horse
from breaking in upon them. Datis, tho he saw that the Athenians had manifestly
the advantage of the place, yet relying upon the vast odds he had in the
number, and considering also, that the Spartan Auxiliaries were not yet
arrived, resolved to engage them; and accordingly led up an hundred thousand of
his Infantry, and ten thousand Horse, with which he gave them Battle; wherein
the Valor of the Athenians so far exceeded that of their Enemies, that they
defeated ten times the number of their own Forces; and so affrighted the
Persians, that they never offered to make toward their Camp again, but fled to
their Vessels. Than which Fight never certainly was any thing more
illustriously great and glorious* For never did so small an handful of men
conquer so numerous and powerful an Army. And here it may not be improper to
remarque, what Miltiades had for the Reward of so great an Action; whereby we
may perceive, how the same Humor and Genius runs through all Bodies Politic. For
as the Marks of Honor which the Romans formerly fixed upon the bravest Men,
were very rare and inconsiderable, and for that reason more signally
honorable; tho now indeed they are grown common and extravagant: So we find it
was anciently amongst the Athenians; for this great Miltiades, to whom all
Greece as well as Athens owed their safety, had only this Honor done him, that
when the Fight at Marathon was painted in the Gallery called (...), so called
from the variety of Pictures wherewith it was adorned.
Poecile, he was drawn the first of all the ten Commanders, exhorting his
Soldiers, and giving Battle to the Enemy. And yet the same People, after they
had enlarged their Territories, and became once corrupted with the Bribery of
their Magistrates, decreed no less then three hundred Statues to the Honor of
Demetrius Phalereus. After this Engagement at Marathon, the Athenians made him
Admiral of a Fleet of Seventy Sail of Ships, to make War upon those Islands
which had assisted the Barbarians. Several whereof submitted without
resistance, and some he took by assault. Amongst the rest that held out was the
Island Parus, a rich and arrogant People, whom when he couldby no means
persuade to a Surrendry, he landed his men, made his Works about the City, and
deprived them of all supplies; and had by the help of Sconces gradually made
his approches so near to the Walls, that he was just upon the point of carrying
the Town, when there happened, I know not how, a Grove of Trees to be fired a
far off in the Continent in the night time; which as soon as it was perceived
by the Burgers and the Besiegers, they both imagined that it was some Sign
which was given by the Scouts to the Persian Fleet: whereupon the Besieged
became less inclined to a Surrendry; and Miltiades fearing a sudden onset from
the Royal Navy, set fire to his Works, and returned to Athens only with the
full number of Ships they had at first given him the Command of. Whi^^ so
enraged the Athenians, that they impeached him of Treason against the State,
That when he might have took Parus, he was Bribed from prosecuting the Design
by the King of Persia. He was at this time laid up of the Wounds which he had
received in the Siege, and therefore because he was not in a capacity of
answering for himself, his Brother Tisagoras appeared for him. When the whole
Evidence was given in against him, the Crime was not found Capital, but he was
fined however fifty Talents; which was as much as was expended in Equipping the
whole Fleet. And being non-solvent, was cast into Prison, where he died. But
tho the business of Parus was the pretext, yet was it not the real cause of his
prosecution: for the Athenians, who still retained the Tyranny of Pisastratus
(which had raged but a few years before) fresh in their memories, were extreme
apprehensive of the growing power of any Fellow-Citizen. And they imagined,
that Miltiades, who had born so great Offices and Commands, would not
afterward be easily content to move in a narrower and private Sphere; and that
since he had been used to Rule, the force of mere Custom would incline him to
aspire after it still. For all the while he dwelt in the Chersonese he had the
Government wholly in his own hands, and was styled a Tyrant, but Governed
according to Law: for he owed not his power to the hands of Violence, but to
the good Will of his Subjects, which he maintained by his own gentleness and
moderation. Now they who had the supreme Government in any Commonwealth during
Life, which formerly enjoyed the liberty of Electing, were called Tyrants. But
Miltiades was a person of great Humanity, and so exceedingly affable and
obliging, that the meanest of his Subjects had free and easy Access to him. A
mighty deference was paid him every where. His Name grew great and venerable;
and he had the character of an incomparable Soldier. And upon these motives the
People thought it more secure to take him out of the way (tho he deserved it
not) then to live under the continual apprehensions of danger from so great a
Man.

THE LIFE OF THEMISTOCLES.
Done into English by Mr. Gardener L. L. B. and Fellow of All Souls Coll. Oxon.
THE MISTOCLES, the Son of Neocles, was an Athenian. The Vices which debauched
the beginning of his Youth were reformed by many eminent Virtues which appeared
in his more mature Age; so that he was excelled by none, and there were but few
who might be thought his Equals. But to trace him from his Cradle. His Father
Neocles was a Gentleman, who married a Citizen of Acarnania, of whom
Themistocles was born. His profuse and dissolute Authors differ concerning
Themistocles's Mother, both as to her Name and Country.
life when he was young, with the neglect of his Estate and worldly concerns,
were so displeasing to his Parents, that they disinherited him. Which Disgrace
did rather animate then depress his Spirits. For when he considered, that his
Reputation thus lost, could not easily be regained, he devoted himself wholly
to the service of the Common wealth, grew very complaisant to his Friends, and
made it his business to be popular. He was often made an Arbitrator to
reconcile private Differences, and was very frequent at the public Assemblies.
There was no business of more then ordinary concern but it passed through his
hands; for he quickly apprehended what was most necessary to be done, and
expressed the same in an easy and familiar style. Neither was he less ready in
the managing of any affair then in the contriving of it; because (as Thucydides
says) he had a true judgment of things present, and would give a shrewd guess
at what was to come. So that upon the account of these his extraordinary parts
he in a short time became of great repute among the Athenians.

The first Honor which was conferred upon him, was the Government of the
Commonwealth in the Corcyraean War; for the carrying on of which he being
chosen General, made the Athenians, not only in that, but also in all
after-Expeditions, more warlike then they had formerly been. For whereas the
public Money, which their Silver-Mines brought them in, was every year lavishly
spent by the prodigality of their Magistrates, he prevailed so far with the
people, as to persuade them with that Money to build a Fleet of an hundred
Ships. Which being in a short time effected, he first subdued his Enemies the
Corcyraeans, and then scowr'd the Sea of all the Pirates, with which it was much
infested. By this Action he mightily enriched the Athenians, and made them most
expert Sea-Soldiers. And how much this conduced to the safety of all Greece,
may be easily gathered from the Persian War: For when Xerxes invaded all Europe
both by Sea and Land, with such puissant Armies as no Prince, either before or
since his time, has as yet had; with a Fleet of twelve hundred Men of War,
attended by two thousand Victualling Ships; and Landforces, to the number of
seven hundred thousand Foot, and four hundred thousand Horse. The news of whose
approach being brought to Greece, with a report that his designs were chiefly
against the Athenians, to revenge his defeat at Marathon, they immediately sent
to Delphos to consult the Oracle, what would be best for them then to do as to
their present affairs. Pythia advises them to fortify themselves with a Wooden
Wall. The meaning of which Answer, when no body understood, Themistocles thus
expounded it, telling them, That it was the advice of Apollo, that they should
take their Families and their Goods with them into their Ships, for those the
Oracle meant by the Wooden Wall. Which Counsel they approved of, and they built
as many Galleys as they had Ships before, and so carried all their Movables,
some to Salamis and some to Troezene. Their Tower and their Images they
delivered up to the care of their Priests and a few old men, and so they left
the Town.

This Counsel was very ungrateful to most of the Cities, because they had much
rather have been engaged in a Land War. Therefore a select Company are sent
under the Command of Leonidas King of the Lacedaemonians, to possess themselves
of Thermopylae, and to stop the farther progress of the Barbarians. But they
were overpowered by the Forces of so great an Enemy, and were all cut off in
that very place. The first Engagement of the two Fleets (that of the Greoians
consisting of three hundred Sail, whereof two belonged to the Athenians) was at
Artemisium, between Eubaea and the Continent. The reason why Themistocles made
choice of those Streights was, lest so great a multitude might have surrounded
him. Here, tho both Navies retreated upon equal terms, yet the Athenians durst
not maintain their station; because they feared, that if part of the Enemy's
Fleet should get beyond Eubaea, they would engage them on both sides. Upon
which account they were forced to leave Artemisium, and sail to Salamis, which
is over against Athens.

But Xerxes having gained Thermopylae, immediately marched to Athens, where
meeting with no opposition, he killed the Priests which he found in the Tower,
and fired the City. At the news of which the Seamen were much terrified; and
when they durst not stand to their Colors, and 'twas the advice of most of
them, that every one should go home to their own Houses, and defend themselves
as well as they could within their Walls, Themistocles alone stood undaunted,
telling them, That so long as they held together in one Body they might equal
the Enemy; but protesting, if once dispersed they must necessarily perish. And
that that would be their fate he affirmed to Eurybiades, a King of the
Lacedaemonians, who then was Admiral. Whom when he found not to be concerned so
much as he could have wished, he sent one of his Servants (in whom he could
most confide) to Xerxes by night, to tell him, That his Enemies were upon their
flight; and that if they should now escape, he must expect a long and difficult
War; for then he would be forced to pursue them singly; but if he would now
Engage them, he might in a short time destroy them all. This stratagem so far
prevailed, that his own Soldiers were compelled to fight, tho against their
wills. Whereupon, Xerxes not in the least suspecting the trick which was put
upon him, fell upon them the next day in so narrow a Sea that his whole Fleet
could not engage; a place very disadvantageous to himself, but on the contrary
mighty advantageous to his Enemy: So that he was Conquered rather by the Policy
of Themistooles then by the Arms of Greece.

Although Xerxes managed this Action extremely ill, yet after all he had so great
Reserves, that even with them he might have beaten the Athenians; but for the
present he was forced to retreat. For Themistocles fearing least he should go
on with the War, sent him word, that the breaking down of the Bridge which he
had built over the Hellespont was then in agitation, to exclude his passage
into Asia; and made him believe it. For that Journey which cost him six months
travel when he came for Greece, he performed the very same way in less then
thirty days at his return; looking upon himself not as conquered by
Themistocles, but preserved. Thus by the Policy of one man, Greece was restored
to its liberty, and Asia made subject to Europe. This other Victory was not at
all inferior to that at Marathon: For here also at Salamis, after the same
manner a few Ships defeated the greatest Fleet that has been in the memory of
man.

Great was Themistocles in this War, and as great in Peace. For when the
Athenians had only the Phaleric, a small and inconvenient Port, by his advice
they built a triple Haven at Pyraea, and encompassed it with such Walls that it
equaled the City in glory, and excelled it in usefulness. He also rebuilt the
Athenian Walls at his own hazard. For the Lacedaemonians having got a plausible
reason, viz. the Incursions of the Barbarians, denied that any City ought to be
built but at Peloponnesus, lest there should be any Fortifications which might
harbor their Enemies; and therefore they endeavored to put a stop to their
Buildings. But their designs were quite contrary to their pretenses: For those
two Victories, that at Marathon and the other at Salamis, made the Athenians so
considerable all the World over, that the Lacedaemonians were afraid they would
have contended with them for the Sovereignty; wherefore they used all means to
keep them as low as possibly they could. For after they heard that the Walls
were begun, they sent Ambassadors to Athens to forbid their proceedings. Whilst
they were there they desisted, and told them that they would send Ambassadors
to treat with them about that affair. This Embassy Themistocles undertook, and
went first himself, ordering the rest of the Ambassadors not to follow till
they thought the Walls were high enough. In the mean time all the City, of what
condition soever, whether Bond or Free, assisted in the work; neither did they
spare any place, whether sacred or profane, public or private; but took from
all parts what materials would most conduce to the Fortifications. So that
their Walls were built with the Ruins of their Temples and Monuments.

Themistocles, when he came to Lacedaemon, did not immediately desire Audience
of the Magistrates, but spun out the time as long as he could, making this his
excuse, that he expected his Colleagues. But whilst the Lacedaemonians complain
that the Works nevertheless went on, and that Themistocles endeavored to
deceive them, in the interim the rest of the Ambassadors arrive; by whom when
he was given to understand, that the Fortifications were almost finished, he
addressed himself to the Ephori, the chief Magistrates among the
Lacedaemonians, and told them, That what they heard concerning their
Fortifications was false, wherefore he thought it but reasonable that they
should send some persons of Trust and Quality, to whom credit might be given,
to enquire into that affair; and in the mean time they might keep him as their
Pledge. They granted his request, and accordingly three Ambassadors are sent,
Men of great Honor and Repute; on whom Themistocles ordered his Colleagues to
attend; forewarning them, not to suffer the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors to return
till he himself was sent back. When he thought they were arrived at Athens, he
waited upon the Senate and Magistracy, and told them very frankly, That by his
Advice the Athenians had Walled in their Public, their Tutelar, and Household
Gods, that they might with the more ease defend them from their Enemies (which
thing was justifiable by the Common Law of Nations); neither did they do this
with a design to incommode Greece, for their City was as 'twere a Bulwark
against the Barbarians, having twice routed the Persian Armada. He told them,
That they did not act like just and honest men, who rather regarded what
conduced most to their own Greatness, then what might be profitable to all
Greece; wherefore if they thought ever to have those Ambassadors return whom
they had sent to Athens, they must release him, otherwise they must never
expect to receive them again into their own Country.

Yet after all this he could not evade the envy of his Fellow-Citizens. For
even the same jealousy which condemned The Ostracism?
Miltiades banished Themistocles. After which he went to Argos; where living in
much splendour, upon the account of his great Endowments, the Lacedaemonians
sent Ambassadors to Athens, with this Accusation against him, That he had made
a League with the King of Persia to destroy Greece. For which Crime, tho
absent, he was condemned of Treason. Which thing so soon as he heard of, not
thinking himself safe at Argos, he went to Corcyra; where understanding that
the Governors of the City were very fearful lest the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians should declare War against them upon his account, he fled to
Admetus the King of the Molossians, who had formerly entertained him. But at
his first arrival, not finding the King, that he might be received by him with
the greater fidelity, he took his little Daughter and carried her with him into
the Sanctuary, a Custom which is very religiously observed among the
Molossians; and from thence he would not stir, till the King had given him his
Hand, and received him into his Patronage; which he afterward faithfully
performed. For when he was demanded by the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, he
would not deliver him up, but advised him to consult his own safety; for 'twas
not likely that he should be secure in a place so nigh his Enemies. Therefore
he commanded him to be carried to Pydna, and sent a sufficient Guard with him.
Whereupon he went a Shipboard incognito, but a great Storm, which then
happened, drove the Vessel upon the Island Naxus, where at that time the
Athenian Army lay. Themistocles thought that if they should put in there, he
must necessarily perish; so that by this ill fortune he was forced to discover
himself to the Master of the Ship, promising great Rewards if he would preserve
him. The Master commiserating the condition of so great a man, kept his Ship at
Anchor for a day and a night, at a good distance from the Island, and would not
suffer any man to go out of it. From whence he sailed to Ephesus, and there he
landed Themistocles, who afterward sufficiently rewarded him for his great
service.

I know that many Authors have reported, that Themistocles went into Asia
whilst Xerxes was King, but I think Thucydides is rather to be credited, who
living about that Age, wrote an History of those times, and was also of the
same City; and he says, that he came to Artaxerxes, and wrote him a Letter
after this manner: I Themistocles am come unto you; I, who brought so many
Calamities by the Grecians upon your Family, when I was forced to make War with
your Father to defend my own Country. But I did him greater Services
afterward, when I was safe and he in danger; for when he would not go back
into Asia, after the Battle at Salamis, I sent him word, that it was then in
agitation, that the Bridge which he had made over the Hellespont should be
broken down, and that he should be surrounded by his Enemies; by which message
he escaped the danger. But now here I my self am come, banished from all
Greece, humbly to entreat your Alliance, which if I may but obtain, you shall
find me as great a Friend to you, as I have been a dangerous Enemy to your
Father. But I would desire a Year's time to consider of those Affairs,
concerning which I intend to treat with you, and when that is expired, to
permit me to come unto you.

The King admiring the greatness of his Spirit, and being desirous to make such
a man his Friend, granted his Request. All which time he spent in his Studies,
and in Learning of the Persian Language; in which he became so great a
Proficient, that he discoursed the King more Elegantly then any of the Natives
could. And when he had made several promises to him, and one especially of that
which was most grateful, viz. the destruction of Greece, if he would be pleased
to follow his Advice. Being highly Rewarded by Artaxerxes, he returned again
into Asia, and dwelt at Magnesia, which City the King gave to him, using this
expression, That it would keep him in Bread (for the Revenues of that Country
amounted to fifty Talents yearly), Lampsacum would afford him Wine, and Myuntes
Victuals. There remained but two Monuments of him in our time; his Sepulcher,
near the Town, in which he was buried, and his Statues in the Forum of
Magnesia. Concerning whose death Authors much differ; but Thucydides seems to
us to be most authentic, who says, that he died of a Disease at Magnesia.
Neither does he deny, but that there was a report of his voluntarily poisoning
himself, when he despaired of Conquering Greece, as he had promised the King.
The same Author also says, that his Friends buried his Bones in Athens by
stealth, because the Laws forbid any one to be there Interred who is Condemned
of Treason.

THE LIFE OF ARISTIDES.
Done into English by Mr. Mitchell, M. A. of Trin. Coll. Oxon.
ARISTIDES, the Son of Lysimachus, an Athenian, came so near to Themistocles,
that he contested his Preeminence; which made them detract from each other's
Reputation; and gave a full Example of the great Power which Eloquence has over
Innocence: For although the Integrity of Aristides was such, that (for ought we
yet know) He was the only Person whom the World has hitherto thought fit to
Entitle The Just; yet He was so run down by Themistocles, as to be Condemned,
by the Ostracism, to Ten years Banishment. Perceiving, that the angry Multitude
would not be appeased, he yields to the Necessity of his Misfortune. At his
going off, he observes one subscribing to his Banishment, and asks him his
Reason for it, and what has Aristides done, that he must be punished in so
severe a manner? The Accuser replies, That indeed he did not know Aristides;
but was not satisfied, that He above all men should so earnestly endeavor at
the Name of Just. He did not stay out the whole time of his Banishment; for,
within six years, Xerxes falling into Greece, he was recalled by an Act of the
People. He Engaged in the Sea Fight at Salamis, which was before his
Restoration. He led up the Athenians in the Battle of Plataeae, wherein
Mardonius was slain, and the Persian Army routed. I find nothing of his
Exploits in Military Affairs, except in this Command; but the Effects of his
Sincerity, his Justice, and his Goodness, are not easily related; particularly,
'twas by his Conduct, that, when He and Pausanias (who was Commander at the
Overthrow of Mardonius) were in the same Grecian Fleet, the Dominion of the
Seas was transferred from the Lacedaemonians to the Athenians; the former,
before that time, having been Lords both by Sea and Land. The Insolence of
Pausanias, and the Justice of Aristides, were the Cause, that most of the
Cities of Greece made a Defensive League with the Athenians, and offered to
fight under them, against the Persians, if there should be occasion. Aristides
was the man pitched upon to settle the Quota of each City, for the Building of
Ships, and Raising an Army. 'Twas by His Advice, that four hundred and sixty
Talents were every year laid up at Delos; which was appointed to be the place
of the Common Treasury; but afterward all the Money was removed to Athens. As
for his Moderation, there can be no greater proof of it, then that, whereas he
had so great Preferments, yet he died so very poor, that he left scarce enough
to defray the Charges of his Burial; so that after his Death (which was about
four years after the Banishment of Themistocles) his Daughters were maintained
at the Charge of the Public; and, at their Marriage, had Fortunes paid them out
of the Common Treasure.

THE LIFE OF PAVSANIAS.
Done into English by Mr. Hoy, Fellow of St. John's Coll. Oxon.
PAUSANIAS the Lacedaemonian was a Great Man, but various in all Conditions of
Life; for as he was conspicuous for eminent Virtues, he was no less overborn by
the contrary Vices. The Glory of that famous Action at Plataeae is ascribed to
him. For in that Fight two hundred thousand chosen Foot, and forty thousand
Horse, were shamefully beat out of Greece by an inconsiderable Handful of Men
under his Conduct; and their Lieutenant General, Mardodonius a Mede, the King's
So Gener is also used by Justin, and in this place cannot be meant otherwise,
because his Lady was Xerxes's Sister.
Brother-in-Law, of singular Personal Fortitude and Prudence above all the
Persians, left dead on the place. Flusht with the success of this Victory, his
Ambition began to be tampering, and he carried an Eye upon greater designs: But
in the very beginning he met with this rub in his way; having sent to the
Temple of Delphos a Golden Tripod, found amongst the Spoils, with an Epigram
inscribed on it, to this effect, That by His Conduct the Barbarians were cut
off at Plataeae, and in Acknowledgment of the Victory that Present by Him
Dedicated to Apollo. The Lacedaemonians caused the Verses to be Razed out, and
in their stead Engraved only the Names of such Confederate Cities as had been
instrumental in defeating the Persians.

After this, Pausanias was again entrusted with a Common Fleet of the
Associates for Cyprus and the Hellespont, to dismantle the Garrisons of the
Barbarians in those parts. In which Adventure meeting with the like success, he
began again to behave himself more insolently, and aimed at greater things then
ever. For in the Sack of Byzantium taking many of the Persian Nobility, and
among them some of the Blood Royal, he remitted them privately to Xerxes, and
sent with them Gongylus an Eraetrian, with Letters to the King (as Thucydides
delivers) in these words; Pausanias the Spartan General, understanding that
some taken at Byzantium were nearly related to you, has made you a Present of
them, and withal desires to Contract an Alliance with you. Wherefore, if you
approve of the Proposals, he sues for your Daughter in Marriage, on Condition
that by his means both Sparta and the rest of Greece be put into your Hands. If
you think these things worth your Consideration, send an approved Minister, to
whom things may be communicated more particularly. The King extremely well
satisfied at the safety of so many Personages so near to himself, immediately
dispatched away Artabazus to Pausanias with this Answer, That he applauded the
Design, and desired nothing should be omitted which might be serviceable to it;
promising, in case it took effect, he shoul'd never meet a Repulse in any thing
he would sue for. Pausanias being informed of the King's pleasure, grew so
forward in the Business, that he incurred the Suspicion of the Lacedaemonians,
who remanded him home; where he was questioned for his Life, but the
Allegations charged upon him amounting to no more then High Misdemeanors, he
was only Fined, and discharged from returning to the Navy.

Yet, not long after, of his own head he went back to the Army, where he
followed such indiscreet and rash Practices as confirmed what hitherto had only
been suspected of him. He laid aside not only the severer Moralities of his own
Country, but their Fashions and Dress. He appeared in Pomp and Splendor like a
Foreign King; and came into public in the Median Habit. His Person was guarded
by a Retinue of Medes and Egyptians; his Entertainments were after the Persian
manner, with greater Luxury then his Friends thought allowable; he was hard of
Access; he answered proudly, and commanded cruelly. In fine, he refused to
return to Sparta, but withdrew to Getonae, a place in the Country of Troas,
where he engaged in Measures destructive to his Country and Himself. The
Lacedaemonians being certified of this, sent Deputies to him with the A sort of
Tally, by which the General was informed of their Will. Described by Plutarch
in the Life of Lysander.
Scytala, in which after their manner it was specified, That unless he
immediately returned home they would pass a Bill of Attainder against him. Upon
the receipt of this news he went home, hoping to disperse the Clouds which hung
over him, by the power of his Money and Interest there. But the Ephori secured
him immediately, in the Name and Behalf of the Community. For by the
Constitution of that Government this Power over the Prince is reposed in the
hands of any one of the Ephori. However, in some time he got rid of that
Grievance, but could not so easily remove the Suspicion he lay under; for it
was still mistrusted he dealt underhand with the King. There are a sort of
People among the Lacedaemonians, they call Helotes, who are employed in
manuring the Lands, and performing all other offices of Slaves; These also it
was thought he had endeavored to debauch to his Designs with hopes of Liberty.
But the Evidence against him being merely Circumstantial, they deferred
proceeding against a Person of his Name and Quality upon Surmises and
Presumptions, till time should make a fuller Discovery.

While these things were in agitation, Argilius (a young man whom Pausanias had
formerly defiled to satisfy his unnatural Love) being sent by him with a
Packet to Artabazus, a suspicion ran in his head, that there was somewhat in
it nearly concerned himself; because he had observed, that none who went
thither on the like Errand had ever returned back. Upon this, breaking up the
Seals, he found that on the delivery of the Letters he was to have been made
away; besides many things relating to the transactions then on foot between the
King and Pausanias; all which, with the Letters themselves, he immediately
communicated to the Ephori. But here the wariness and moderation of the
Lacedaemonians is not to be passed by, who suffered not themselves to be
wrought upon, even by such proof, to take Pausanias into Custody; but forbore
to use any rigor toward him, till such time as his own Verbal Evidence should
be produced against himself; and accordingly they gave Instructions to the
Discoverer how to manage this affair. Now there was a Temple of Neptune at
Taenaris, which the Greeks held inviolable; hither the Discoverer was to fly
for Sanctuary, and kneel down before the Altar; near this they had contrived a
place underground, from whence any one might hear what was discoursed to
Argilius; where several of the Ephori had privately posted themselves.
Pausanias, as soon as he heard that Argilius was fled to the Temple, hastening
after him in great disturbance, found him on his Knees before the Altar; and
enquiring into the occasion of that sudden motion, he opened to him the
Contents of the Letters. At this Pausanias's disturbance increased so far, that
he entreated him not to discover or betray one who had formerly deserved so
well of him; promising for the future, if he would gratify him so far, and be
assisting to him under the present Distress, he should find it of very great
Advantage to him.

The Ephori, after this Discovery, concluding it safer to apprehend him in the
City, returned thither. And Pausanias having, as he thought, made up the
business with Argilius, was arrived on the place where it was ordered he should
be siez'd; when he perceived a Design out against him, from the looks of one of
the Ephori, who had a desire to advertise him of it. By this means he got into
the Temple of Minerva, called Suid. says, from ^er Brazen-Tem^le.
Chalcioecus, a little before his Pursuers; but to hinder his Escape thence,
the Ephori caused the Gates to be blocked up, and threw down the Roof upon his
Head, that he might have the speedier Death. His Mother is reported to have
been living at that time; and, although then of very great Age, when satisfied of
the Treasonable Practices of her Son, to have brought the first Stone in order
to block up the entrance into the Temple. Thus Pausanias sullied the Glory of a
Great General by an Ignominious Death. Being taken out of the Rubbish halfdead,
he immediately expired. And tho some were for disposing the Body as was usual
to such as had been Executed, yet the majority were against it; so he was
buried far from the place where he died. However afterward, by the Advice of
the Delphic Oracle, he was tookup again, and Interred where he ended his Life.

THE LIFE OF CIMON.
Done into English by Mr. Creed, M. A. of Corpus-Christi Coll. Oxor.
CIMON, the Son of Miltiades, an Athenian, was very unfortunate in his Youth;
for his Father not being able to pay his Fine to the People, and dying a
Prisoner of the State, Cimon was committed to the same Confinement; Nor by the
Laws of Athens could he be Released till he had paid the Mulct imposed on his
Father. But he had Espoused his own Sister Espinice, not so much to gratify
his Affection as to follow the Mode of his Country; for 'twas common with the
Athenians to marry their own Sisters. One Callias (a man of a fair Estate, but
of mean Extraction and Parentage; for out of the Silver-Mines he raised his
Fortune and Wealth) being his Rival, made this proposal to Cimon, that if he
would yield to a Divorce and Resignation of her to him, he then would pay his
Debts. But when Cimon generously scorned to part with his Wife and Sister on
such base and mercenary Conditions, She (out of Affection and Charity to him)
declared, That she could not suffer the Son of the Great Miltiades to be
perpetually Damned to a Prison, when it lay in her power to procure his
Enlargement. Therefore she resolved to marry Callias, provided he performed his
part of the Covenant.

Cimon having thus obtained his Liberty, soon became a Chief Minister of State.
For he was a great Master of Rhetoric, a very Generous Person, an admirable
Civilian, and an expert Soldier; for his Father gave him his Youthful Education
in a Campaign. Therefore he kept the Citizens in awe and subjection; and in the
Army he was almost Absolute. When he was first a Commander, at the River
Strymon, he routed a vast Body of the Thracians. He built the Town of
Amphipolis, and planted there a Colony of ten thousand Natives of Athens. At
Mycale he also Triumphed over the Captive Cyprian and Phoenician Navy,
consisting of two hundred Sail. Neither were his Enterprises by Land that day
less signal then his Victory by Sea; for having made himself Master of his
Adversary's Fleet, he Landed his Soldiers, and at one onset gave a total
Overthrow to the Barbarian Army. Having enriched himself with the Booty of this
Conquest, he returned homewards. For now some Islands had Rebelled, under the
pretense of Tyranny and Arbitrary Government. Those whom he found Loyal, he
confirmed in their Principles; those who had traitorously Revolted, he
compelled to their Duty and Allegiance. He Banished the Delopes from the City
and Island of Scyrus (the present Inhabitants thereof) because their Behavior
was stubborn and obstinate; and divided their Estates among the new adopted
Denisons. At his arrival, he defeated the Thasii, who trusted in the Fortress
and Sanctuary of their Riches. With the Spoils and Ornaments taken in these
Wars the South Side of the Castle at Athens was beautified.

When this his prosperous Management of Assairs should have Entirl'd him to the
greatest Name and Reputation in the City, he had the Fate to be Envied, as his
Father was, and other Athenian Worthies; for by the majority of Votes inscribed
in Shells (which they called Ostracism) he was condemned to a Ten Year's Exile.
For which unnatural usage the Athenians sooner expressed repentance then Cimon
his sorrow. For when with a generous and undaunted Fortitude he bore the Envy
of the ungrateful Citizens; and the Lacedaemonians had proclaimed War against
the Athenians, They immediately perceived the want of so much Experienced
Valor and Conduct. Therefore after five Years Banishment he was Restored. He
(because he had been courteously entertained The Nemeguen Edition of Corn.
Nepos, is in this place followed, all the other Impressions of this Author,
having omitted a material sentence.
by the Lacedaemonians) esteeming it the Interest of both Cities, that the
Difference should be Composed, without the Decision of the Sword; voluntarily
went Ambassador to Lacedaemon, and by his successful Negotiation reinstated the
two great Rival Cities in Peace and Amity. Not long after he was Commissioned
to go into Cyprus with 200 Ships; and when he had subdued the greater part of
the Island, he fell mortally Sick, and Died in the Town Citium.

For many years afterward the Athenians (both in times of War and Peace) found
the want of their Patriot. For he was so free and generous a Gentleman, that
tho he had several Farms and Gardens in his possession, yet he never
substituted Bailiffs with a design that they should preserve the Fruits for
him, lest any man, that desired them, might be deprived of his Satisfaction and
Enjoyment. His Footmen were always furnished with ready Money, that he might be
provided on all occasions to relieve the Necessities of the Indigent, lest the
Delay of his Charity might be misconstrued a Denial. If he saw any man that had
the misfortune to be in a beggarly Habit, he frequently bestowed on him his own
Coat. He kept so constant a Table, and such plenty of Provision, that he daily
invited all those to Dinner (who were not preengag'd) that he met in the public
places of Assembly. He never refused to be any one's Surety; nor denied them
his Assistance, or the use of his Goods. Several grew Rich on his Bounty and
Benevolence. Many poor Wretches, who left not enough behind them to pay for
their Burial, he Interred at his own charges. Therefore it is no wonder, if by
this his Carriage and Behavior, his Life was free from Danger and Detraction,
and his Death untimely and lamented.

THE LIFE OF LYSANDER.
Done into English by Mr. Kirchevall, M. A. of Corpus-Christi Coll. Oxon.
LYSANDER of Lacedaemon has left a great Name behind him; which he rather
acquired by the Kindness of Fortune then by any Valiant Enterprise. It is clear
indeed, that he gave the Athenians a signal Defeat, in the twenty-sixth year of
their War with the Peloponesian State; The vulgar Editions read, idque ratione
consecutus sit, latet, but others are of opinion, that the original Copy had,
nonlatet, which last we follow, as most agreeable to the Authors design.
but then we are not ignorant how He gained that Victory; for it was never
procured by the prowess of his own-Army, but by the unruly behavior of his
Enemies; who, through their disobedience to their Commanders Orders, and by
leaving their Ships unmann'd, and being disorderly scattered up and down the
Fields, came at length into the power of Lysander's Forces. Thus the Athenians
yielded themselves Vassals to the Lacedaemonian Yoke. Lysander, tho always
Seditious before, and a stout Stickler in Factions, yet being pufft up with
this late Success, he now took so much upon him; that by his means the
Lacedoemonians were rendered extremely odious to Greece. For, whereas they had
given it out, that the only motive of their War, was to take down the too
powerful Dominion of Athens; Lysander, after having made himself Master of the
Athenian Fleet, which rode on the River Egos, made it his whole business to
keep every City under his own Jurisdiction; all the while pretending he did it
purely by the incitement of the Lacedaemonians. For they who had favored the
Athenian proceedings being turned out of Office every where, he selected Ten
out of every City, who were to be entrusted with the Sovereign sway and power
of all things; none being received into the number of these, but who would
either enter himself a Member of his Family, or else would take this Test, That
he would be wholly Lysander 's Creature.

Thus the Decemvirate being established in every City, all things were carried
on as he pleased. For an example of whose Cruelty and Treachery, it is enough
to produce a single instance, that we may not tire the Reader's patience, by
reckoning up more of his base Actions. When he returned Conqueror out of Asia,
and had visited Thasus by the way, he greatly desired to demolish that City,
only for its surpassing fidelity to the Athenians; as if the Thasians would now
prove their firmest Friends and Allies, who heretofore had been their
neverfailing Enemies. But he foresaw, if he had discovered his intention
herein, that the Revolt of the Thasians would necessarily have ensued, and that
they would have stood upon their own guard, in defense of their Lives and
Fortunes.

Therefore that Decemviral Power, Sibi ab illo constitutam sustulerunt.
which he himself had erected only for his own ends, the contrary party pulled
down; whereat being grievously vexed and enraged, he contrived and plotted how
to depose the Lacedaemonian Kings. But he found he could never compass this
design without the Assistance of the Gods; for the Lacedaemonians had always
accustomed themselves, to bring every thing to their Oracles determination. His
first Attempt was to seduce that of Delphi; but failing there, he ventured next
upon the Oracle of Dodona; and meeting with a repulse here, then he noised it
abroad, that he was under an Obligation of paying some Vows to Jupiter Ammon;
thinking to tamper with the Africans at an easier rate. After his arrival into
Africa, being buoyed up with these alluring hopes, he found his Expectations
mightily frustrated by Jupiter's Priests. For to wheedle 'em into the
acceptance of a Bribe, was not only a thing unfeasible, but it also made 'em
dispatch away their Deputies to Lacedaemon, to accuse Lysander of Subornation.
Being impeached of this Misdemeanour, he was acquitted by his Judges; and
afterward being sent to relieve the Orchomenians, he was slain at Heliartus, by
the hands of the Thebans. How true a Judgment had been past upon him, that
Speech discovers to us, which was found in his House after his death; in which
he endeavors to persuade the Lacedaemonians, that after they had nulled the
Power of their Kings, they would single him out for their General to carry on
the War. Now this was penned with so much Art, that its whole frame and
composure seemed to suit and humor the Oracular way of expression and delivery;
the procurement of which he never questioned, relying upon the strength of his
Purse. Cleon of Hallicarnassus is the reputed Author of this Copy.

And here we must not pass by the cunning contrivance of Pharnabazus, a Persian
Lieutenant, of a Royal Extraction. For when Lysander, Admiral of the Navy, had
been guilty of many cruel and covetous miscarrages in the War, and was
suspicious, that his Fellow-Citizens had notice of 'em already; he made his
request to Pharnabazus, that he would bear him witness before the Ephori, with
what Sincerity he had managed the War, and treated the Allies; and because his
Authority and Patronage would be very serviceable to him herein, he farther
requested an accurate description of his Integrity in writing. Pharnabazus,
after his large promises, filled a great Book with many high expressions in his
Commendation; which after Lysander had perused and approved, in the very nick
of its Sealing, Pharnabazus slily puts down another ready Sealed in its place,
of a size so uniform and so equal to the other, that no eye could perceive the
difference; in which was drawn up a very full Impeachment of Lysander's Avarice
and Perfidiousness. After his return home, and after his Harangue before the
Chief Magistrate, as much as he thought fit, upon his own Exploits; at last he
produced Pharnabazus's Book and Gift, as an Authentic Evidence of his
unblemished Carriage and Deportment. Lysander being ordered to withdraw, the
Ephori employed the interval of his absence in the perusal of this Manuscript,
and after full cognizance of its design and purport, they redelivered it him to
read. So this inconsiderate man at the same time read his own Indictment and
proved it.

THE LIFE OF ALCIBIADES.
Done into English by Mr. Peers, M. A. of Christ-Church Coll. Oxon. and
Superior Beadle of Physic and Arts.
ALCIBIADES was the Son of Clinias, an Athenian. Nature seems, in the
production of this Man, to have exerted the utmost Abilities of her Skill and
Power; all Authors, who have written concerning him, agreeing in this, That
such a mixture of the most eminent Virtues and Vices was never found in any
other person, as in Alcibiades. The Greatness and Splendor both of his City
and Parentage, Ennobl'd his Birth: And as for the Gifts of Nature and Personal
Qualifications, he not only excelled all his Cotemporaries in Beauty and
Comeliness of Body, but had likewise a Mind so richly and variously endowed,
that he applied himself to all matters (whether of Business or Pleasure) with
unparalled dexterity. Accordingly we find, that he acquitted himself as an
excellent Commander both by Sea and Land; and was likewise so thoroughly
accomplished in the whole Art of Oratory, that he gained the precedence of all
others, as well for a powerful Eloquence as a graceful Elocution. Although he was
exceeding wealthy, yet could he, when the exigence of affairs required, endure
the severest toil and hardship; no man living at other times with greater state
and affluence, either in what related to his Table, or in his usual Attendance
and Equipage. He was moreover extraordinary courteous and affable in his
Conversation; and observed to be Master of an exquisite Art of Dissimulation
and Compliance with all Persons and Occasions. Lastly, as often as he had a
Release from public Business, and some respite allowed from labor and
intention of Mind, he gave himself entirely over to Lust and Luxury, being
Dissolute and Intemperate to such a degree, that those who reflected upon the
other Scenes of his Life, were struck with Admiration at the wonderful
dissimilitude and inconsistencies of Nature in the same Person; no man being
found to differ more from Alcibiades then Alcibiades himself.

He had his Education in the House of Pericles, his Stepfather (for so he is
recorded to have been); but for his Learning he was obliged to the Care and
Instructions of Socrates. So that marrying moreover the Daughter of Hipponicus
(the Diverse Copies have it Omnium Grace Linguae Eloquentia disertissimum: but
this seems not very consistent with the high Commendation given already to
Alcibiades upon the score of Eloquence: and therefore the other Lection [omnium
Gracorum ditissimum] may be thought more genuine; especially since it is
collaterally supported by the authority of Plutarch, who only mentions the
extraordinary Riches and high Quality of Hipponicus.
wealthiest Person thorowout all the Grecian Countries) if he had been to have
made his own choice, he could not have pitched upon greater Advantages and
Endowments, then had been freely conferred upon him by Nature and Fortune. In
his greener years he was Beloved after the manner of the Grecians, and that by
several; in the number of whom was his Master Socrates, as we are informed by
Plato in his A Book so called because it contains Table-discourse and
entertainment.
Symposium, where he introduces Alcibiades relating, that he lay last night
with Socrates, and rose from him in the morning no other then a Son ought to do
from his own Father. When he came to maturity of Age, he as industriously
prosecuted the same kind of Love toward others, wherein he proceeded as far as
the The ancient Grecian Laws are observed to have been too favorable and
indulgent to that unnatural kind of Love.
Laws were thought to allow; doing many offensive and distasteful things, in
the way of humor and Some of them may be seen in Plutarch; particularly, his
taking away half the Cup-board Plate of his Paramour Anytu^, who resented it so
little that he only said he was obliged to him for taking but half.
frolic, throughout the course of his amorous Intrigues; diverse of which might
be related by us, were we not provided of greater matters, and more fit to be
transmitted to Posterity.

In the time of the Peloponnesian War, his Advice and Authority prevailed with
the Athenians, to break with the People of Syracuse, and Rig out a Fleet
against them. For which Expedition Alcibiades himself was also chosen supreme
Commander; two Colleagues being joined in Commission with him, Nicias and
Lamachus. But before all Necessaries were provided, and the Navy in a condition
to put to Sea, it happened one Night, that all the Statues of Mercury thorowout
the City ( This circumstance was perhaps taken notice of by our Author, because
(as Plutarch tells us) Andocides was thereupon not only suspected of having had
a principal hand in the Action, but committed to Gaol and prosecuted for the
same, etc.
except that which stood before the Door of Andocides, and had from him its
usual denomination) were overturned, and thrown down from their Pedestals. Upon
this unusual accident a strange consternation seized the minds of the People;
for they considered, that the Sacrilegious Fact had a public aspect One of the
Evidences being asked, how he discerned the Faces of those he accused; replied,
by the Moon light, and tho it was answered, that that could not be, because it
was then the Dark of the Moon, yet had not this the least influence upon the
stupidly prejudiced Multitude. Plut.
and tendency, and therefore that it must have been committed by no small
number of persons; which made them apprehensive of an Associated Force within
the City, able of a sudden to oppress their Liberty, and enslave the
Commonwealth.

No man was thought more capable of Heading such a Party then Alcibiades, he
having already attained to a greater power and sway then usually was, or safely
might be, in the hands of any Pri^atus cannot be here applied in the strict and
common acceptance of the word to Alcibiades, he being apparently no private
person in that sense; because the* Athenians had themselves advanced him to a
high station among the principal Magistrates of their Commonwealth.
single person; so extraordinary was his influence and authority among the
common people; many of whom he had won by his frequent Largesses, and many more
by his Patronage and Assistance in Lawsuits and When a Catalogue of Criminals
was brought into Court, he would usually strike out the names of such as he had
a desire should not be prosecuted.
Prosecutions. By which Arts he was become so popular, that the eyes of the
Multitude were (with a disregard to the rest of the Nobility) continually fixed
upon him whenever he appeared in public; so that for this reason he came at
length to be looked upon as the principal object of the Athenian Hopes and
Fears; all men esteeming him equally capable of promoting the Welfare and Ruin
of his Country. Besides this, he lay under the scandal of holding Religious
Conventicles in his House; which thing in it self was accounted a Crime of the
highest nature among the Athenians; it being moreover the general opinion, that
such Is there any thing (says Solomon) of which it may be said, see this is
new? it has bin already of old time which was before us.
Meetings were not really intended for Devotion, but for carrying on of Plots
and Conspiracies against the State.

An Indictment was For breaking down the Statues of Mercury, tho Plutarch tells
us, his accusation ran for having celebrated in a profane and ludicrous manner
the Mysteries of Ceres and Proscrpine.
therefore brought against him in open Court; but he considering, that the time
of his departure upon the Sicilian Expedition drew near, and reflecting upon
the usual proceedings of his Countrymen against absent Criminals, made it his
request, to be presently brought to a Trial, and not to be exposed at a
distance to the craft and malice of his Enemies. But these, on the contrary,
perceiving that they should not otherwise prevail against him, desisted from
prosecuting till such time as they concluded him arrived in Sicily; for then
they renewed the accusation with so much vigor and artifice, that he was
presently recalled by the Magistracy, being ordered to appear, and put in his
Plea and Defense. Whereupon he readily obeying the public Summons, and (although
he had the fairest hopes of having the Administration of his Province Crowned
with Honor and Success) going on board the Gally which was sent to convey him
to Athens, landed at the City of Thurit in Italy. But here, his Prudence
prevailing over his Resolution, he began to consider the boundless Power which
the Athenian Populace assumed to themselves, and the Cruelty with which upon
such occasions they ever treated the Nobility; and therefore judging it more
advisable to withdraw from the impending storm, he made his escape from those
who had the custody of him, and fled at first into the Country of Elis, and
afterward to the City of Thebes; tho it was not long e're he removed from
thence to Lacedaemon; word being brought, that Judgment of Death was passed
upon him, and that his Estate was Confiscated to the Commonwealth; besides (as
was usual in such cases) the Sentence of Excommunication denounced against him
(the Priests The Successors of Eumolpus, the Son of the Poet Musa's, in that
sacred Office.
Eumolpidae being thereunto compelled by the Multitude), and a Pillar erected
in the most public place, with an Inscription engraven thereon, to perpetuate
the memory of this Religious Execration.

Arrived (as is aforesaid) at Lacedaemon, he frequently protested, that he had
no hostile intention against his Native Country; but only against such Men as
were equally Enemies to It and Him; for, being sufficiently sensible how much
his Service contributed to the prosperity of the State, they had nevertheless
thrust him into Exile; as evidently preferring their own private revenge before
the public welfare. However, it was not long e're by his advice the
Lacedaemonians contracted an Alliance with the Persian King, and strongly
fortified Dec^^ia in Attica; by the Garrison of which place the City of Athens
was reduced into much the same condition as if it had been blocked up by a
formal Siege; so that the Country of Ionia being also by his endeavors won
over from the interest of the Athenians, the Lacedaemonian Arms began in all
places to prevail and be victorious.

Yet did not these their Successes so much increase their Love, as awaken their
Fears, and alienate their Affections from him; for considering him to be a
person of the acutest parts, and most experienced prudence in all manner of
affairs, and fearing withal, lest prevailed upon by the dictates of an inbred
tenderness for his Native Soil, he should one time or other desert their
Service, and purchase a Reconciliation with his offended Country; they judged
it expedient, e're this should happen, to have him privately assasinated. This
design could not long be concealed from Alcibiades, he being a person of so
wonderful a sagacity, that it was impossible for any thing to escape his
knowledge; especially when the least surmise or suspicion had raised his
jealousy, and quickened his observation. Withdrawing therefore privately from
Lacedaemon, he fled to Tissaphernes (one of King Darius's Li^utenants) with
whom although he was e're long admitted into the strictest Bonds of Friendship,
yet being much troubled at the rising Greatness of the Lacedaemonians, and the
languishing condition into which the Athenian Affairs were fallen by their
Losses in Sicily; he contrived, by special Messengers, to treat with his
Fellow-Citizen Pisander (Praetor, or Commander in Chief over the Army at Samos)
concerning his Pardon and Readmission into his Country; Pisander's concurring
with him in an aversion for the Commonalty, and an equal favor for the
Nobless, encouraging him thereunto. And although he quickly found himself
disappointed in his expectations from this man, yet was he sometime after
received by Thrasybulus, the Son of Lycus, into the Athenian Army, which lay at
Samos, and made a principal Officer in the same; nor was it long e're, assisted
by the influencing suffrage of Theramenes, he obtained a public Act of
Restitution and Indemnity, and was joined in equal Commission with him and the
foresaid Thrasybulus.

Under the Command and Conduct of these three Generals the face of Affairs in a
little time appeared wonderfully altered; nay, it was not long e're the
Lacedaemonians, whose Arms had hitherto been every where triumphant, found
themselves obliged to become humble Supplicants for Peace; and that not without
good reason, having been beaten in five Land-Fights, and two Engagements at
Sea; in which Engagements their Enemies are recorded to have taken no fewer
then two hundred of their Trireme-Gallies. Add to these Successes of the
Athenians, the Recovery of Ionia and the Hellespont, with many Grecian Towns
seated upon the Coast of Asia. In the number of those Cities that were
forceably subdued was Byzantium; there being diverse others which were won over
to an Alliance, by the politic Clemency with which all places were treated by
them, as they happened to be successively Conquered.

After these great Achievements the three Generals returned to Athens,
bringing back an Enriched and Victorious Army; the same being equally Laden
with Spoil and Glory. But as soon as they were entered into the Harbor of the
It lay at a considerable distance from the City; to which it was joined by a
strong wall. See the life of Themistocles.
Piraeeum, the City being in a manner deserted by its Inhabitants, so great was
the confluence about Alcibiades's Gally, that the sight and reception of him
alone seemed to have drawn forth the gazing and transported Multitude; who at
this time firmly believed, that the present happy and late calamitous condition
of their Affairs were both entirely owing to him; yet blaming themselves for
the loss of Sicily, and the victorious Exploits of the Lacedaemonians, since
the same were wholly to be imputed to the Expulsion of so brave a Man out of
their Commonwealth. Nor indeed was this an ill-grounded opinion, seeing that
from the very time of his Readmission into Command their Enemies could never
prove an equal Match for them either by Sea or Land.

No sooner was he come on shore, bat (without the least notice taken of
Theramenes and Thrasibulus, who landed at the same time, and had a joint
interest with him in the late Atchievments) the whole Body of the People
crowded up toward Alcibiades; many of them presenting him, according to their
different abilities, with Coronets of Gold or Brass; an Honor never done
before, but to such as were Victors in the Olympic Games. Calling to mind his
forepast Sufferings, he could not abstain from Tears as he received these kind
Testimonies of Reconciliation from his Fellow-Citizens; and as soon as he came
into the City, a solemn Assembly being held, he made so passionate a Speech to
them, that he forced the natural expressions of Sorrow in equal abundance from
the Eyes of all that heard him; those even of the most unrelenting temper among
them lamenting his hard usage, and declaring themselves utter Enemies to such
as had procured his Banishment; So that any man who had been a stranger to
their Affairs, would certainly have concluded, that some other People, and not
the very same Persons by whom he was now surrounded, had passed the former
severe Sentence, and condemned him of Sacrilege. Hereupon his Estate, which had
been Confiscated, was Restored to him by public Edict; the Priests Eumolpidae
being also commanded to take off his Excommunication, and the Pillarson which
the same had been engraven, to be thrown into the Sea.

These obliging Smiles of kindest Fortune were of no considerable duration to
Alcibiades; for when the highest Honors had by solemn Decree been conferred
upon him, the Conduct and Management of all Affairs, both Civil and Military,
being put into his hands, and Thrasybulus and Adimantus at his request assigned
him for Colleagues, passing over with a Fleet into Asia, and Fighting
unsuccessfully at Yet are we told by others, that the most fatal miscarriage in
this Expedition happened upon the Coast, of Ionia; where Antiochus (a hotheaded
Vice Admiral) in Alcibiades's absence, and contrary to his express command,
engageing the Lacedamonian Fleet, was soundly beaten by the same.
Cuma, he fell again into the Displeasure of the Populace. The reason hereof
was, that they universally believed him able to accomplish whatsoever he took
in hand; so that every ill Success was imputed to his Negligence or Treachery;
to the later of which they attributed the unprosperous Attempt made upon Cuma;
none of them doubting, but that he could have taken the place, had he not been
corrupted to the betraying of his Trust by the Persian King. Indeed the
principal cause of the several Calamities that befell him, seems to have been
the extravagant opinion that all men had conceived of his Valor and Prudence;
from whence sprung the two different Passions of Love and Fear; and from whence
at length it came to be generally dreaded, lest pufft up with his great
Successes, and supported by as great Riches, he should grasp at the
Sovereignty, and endeavor the Enslaving of their Free State.

These were the Considerations that induced them to pass a Vote for depriving
him, tho absent, of his high Office, and substituting another in his place; the
news whereof being brought to Alcibiades, he judged it not expedient to return
home, and therefore passing With certain Forces raised and maintained at his
own charge. Plus.
over to Perinthus, he completely fortified the three strong Holds of Bornos,
Bisanthe, and Macronteichos; and from thence marching with a sufficient Body of
Men, he seems to have been the first Grecian that made an Inrode into the
Countries of Thrace; and this he did, as being unwilling to infest any part of
Greece; and judging it more honorable, to enrich himself with the Spoils of
This word has been a long while used to signify savage, illiterate and
unciviliz'd; but was at first applied by the haughty Grecians (as a term of
distinction) to all Nations whatsoever that spoke not their Language.
Barbarians; by which means he not only made great acquisitions in Wealth and
Reputation, but obtained of certain Thracian His incursions and depredations
being (as we are informed by Plutarch) made upon a sort of free People, and
such as were subject to no King.
Kings, to be admitted into their Friendship and Alliance.

But by no kind of Fortune could Alcibiades's Soul be divested of a tender
Affection for his Native Country; and this he sufficiently manifested about
this time, by the Advice given to Philocles, Commander in Chief over the
Athenian Fleet in the River Aegos; Lysander, the Lacedaemonian Admiral lying at
no great distance from him, and desiring by all means to prolong the War,
because he knew that the Athenians had nothing left besides their Weapons and
Galleys (their public Exchequer being quite exhausted), and that the Forces of
his own Country at the same time were supported and maintained by a constant
supply of Money from the Persian King. Neither were these things concealed from
Alcibiades, who therefore coming to the Athenian Army, spoke publicly in the
hearing of the common Soldiers to this effect, That if they pleased to accept
of his Service, he made no doubt of forcing Lysander, with his whole Fleet, to
come to the decision of a Battle, or else to make submissive Overtures of
Peace. That the Lacedaemonians were indeed unwilling to run the hazard of a
Sea Fight, because their main strength and confidence lay in their Landforces;
but that he could easily prevail with Seuthes, the Thracian King, to drive them
from Land, and that then they would be necessitated, either to come to fair
terms of Accommodation with the Athenians, or venture all upon the doubtful
issue of an Engagement at Sea.

This Advice, as it was not really disliked, so neither was it embraced by
Philocles; who well knew, that if Alcibiades were admitted to a conjunction
with him, he himself should be but an empty Cipher in the whole Action; and let
the Event prove prosperous or otherwise, that on the one hand, he should have
no share in the Glory; and on the other, no Partner in the Discredit and
Ignominy of such an Undertaking. Alcibiades therefore, finding that his Counsel
was not accepted, told Philocles at his departure, that he would only leave
this short caution with him, To ly as near the Enemy as might conveniently be
with his Naval Camp; and to take care, lest by the licentiousness and loose
Discipline of his Soldiers, the Lacedaemonians should have an opportunity put
into their hands of surprising his Fleet, and ruining the whole Army. Nor did
the event prove this a groundless apprehension; for shortly after, Lysander
being informed by his Scouts, that the main of the Athenian Forces were gone
ashore, and were eagerly employed in harassing and plundering the Country
(their Ships in the mean time being left almost empty and defenseless), by one
brisk and sudden Attaque gave their Navy a Conon escaped only with eight
Galleys out of about two hundred (if we believe Plutarch) tho our Author in the
Life of Conon mentions it as a great unhappiness to the Athenians, that he was
absent at the time of that Engagement. However this was, certain it is, that
the Athenians were hereupon little less then absolutely Conquered, Lysander
shortly after taking the City of Athens it self, and putting the Government
thereof into the hands of thirty special Magistrates of his own choice and
appointment.
total Overthrow, and put an unexpected period to the War.

After this fatal blow received by the Athenians, Alcibiades judging it unsafe
for him to make any longer stay in those parts, withdrew into the more inward
Regions of Thrace, lying above the Propontis; not doubting but in such a place
his Fortune and Quality might easily be kept undiscovered. But it was not long
e're he found that he was mistaken; for a Body of Thracians, who had
information of his great Wealth, placing themselves in Ambuscade, surpised and
plundered all his Carriages; wherefore, having himself narrowly escaped out of
their hands, and considering that (by reason of the great Power and Authority
of the Lacedaemonians) no part of Greece could afford him a safe Retreat, he
fled into Asia to Pharnabazus, who was presently so taken with his courteous
Deportment and obliging Address, that the first place in this great Man's
Favor seemed to be given to Alcibiades; who shortly after received from him,
as a special testimony of Affection, the Fortress of Grunium in Phrygia; the
Castellany whereof yielded him no less then fifty Talents yearly Income.

But this plentiful Fortune brought no real contentment to Alcibiades; of which
his mind was absolutely incapable, so long as the Athenian continued in
subjection to the Lacedaemonian State. The whole bent of his Soul was therefore
toward the delivering of his Country from that Inglorious Yoke and Bondage.
But this he foresaw could not be effected without the assistance of the Persian
King, whose Amity was therefore to be procured in the first place; and of that
he assured himself, if he might but obtain free access to his Person. For
having secret notice of the Our Author does not term it a Rebellion or
Conspiracy, because Cyrus was no Liege subject to Attaxerxes, their Father
Darius (as we are told by Justin) having by Will given the former the absolute
Sovereignty of those Territories over which he had before presided as his
Lieutenant.
War intended against the King by his Brother Cyrus, with the assistance of the
Lacedaemonians; he questioned not, but by discovering this Confederacy, he
should purchase to himself the highest degree of Favor and Affection.

While Alcibiades was contriving how to put this design in execution (having
already requested of Pharnabazus, that he might be admitted into the presence
of the King), Critias and the rest of the Athenian He means the thirty
Magistrates set over the Athenians by Lysander, and called by them Tyrants; a
name originally not only of innocent but most honorable signification, being
used simply for a King, or supreme Governor, and applied by the Grecian Poets
even to Jupiter, and the rest of their kindest and best respected Gods: but by
a Republican Abuse of the word brought to connote the greatest cruelty and
oppression; tho the truth is, if a man would be acqainted with Tyrants and
Tyranny in that sense, (in which indeed the words have long ago universally
obtained) he may most probably find them where thirty or forty, or perhaps
rather (as some Nations have sadly experienced) three or four hundred Persons,
are (by what means soever) possessed of the Sovereign Power.
Tyrants dispatched certain Messengers into Asia, by whom they gave Lysander to
understand, that the Articles agreed upon between Him and the Athenians must be
Ratified by being Sealed with the Blood of Alcibiades; and that the Death of
that Man was to be pursued by him, as he tendered the Establishment and
Perpetuity of his own Exploits and Constitutions. Lysander was so far wrought
upon by this positive This must be taken not for a menace, but a piece of
advice from the Thirty to Lysander, their Interest and His being embarked in
the same bottom; and they (as may be collected from Plutarch) beginning now to
be apprehensive of no small danger from Alcibiades, whom they perceived (tho in
exile) to be in a fair way of recovering his former esteem and authority with
the common People.
Message, that he resolved to deal effectually with Pharnabazus, and therefore
sent him express word, that the Alliance between his King and the
Lacedaemonians should be null and void, unless he took care that Alcibiades,
either alive or dead, were delivered into their hands; wherefore the Persian
Governor (preferring his Master's Interest before all the Laws of Humanity and
Friendship) immediately employed Susamithres and Bagoas to surprise and murder
him, as he lay in Phrygia, and was Others say, that Pharnabazus being informed
of Cyrus's design by Alcibiades (who had in vain desired by his means to have
admission to Artaxerxes, and was therefore about giving notice of the same to
another of the Kings Lieutenants) resolved to have him cut off, that so the
merit of the discovery might be wholly his own.
providing for his Journey to the King. These Assasins arrived accordingly with
great speed and expedition at the place of his abode; and not daring openly to
assault him, they set Fire on the House wherein he lay; as hoping to accomplish
by Stratagem what their Courage despaired of effecting. And yet had they like
to have been disappointed in their expectation; for Alcibiades being roused by
the crackling of the Fire, and missing his Sword (which it seems had been
privily conveyed away) he took the Dagger of his Tho our Author terms him
hospes and samiliaris (which last word may indeed be taken to signify a menial
servant) yet by what sollows (viz. qui nunquam discedere voluerat) he should
seem before this time to have worn off those inferior and distant relaons.
Friend and Companion (a certain Arcadian that Lodged with him, and could never
be induced to desert him in his lowest condition), and biding him follow after,
passed boldly through the Flames; the violence whereof was somewhat abated by
the throwing in of such Clothes and Household Stuff as came next to hand. But
before he could make his escape, and get quite off, he was overtaken and slain
by the He was slain with Darts and Arrows, says Plutarch.
Darted Weapons of the distant Assasins; by whom his Head being carried away as
a welcome Present to Pharnabazus, an affectionate Timandra; supposed by many to
be the Mother of Lais, the famous Corinthian Courtezan. Plut.
Female (the constant sharer both of his good and bad Fortune) took the Body,
and wrapping it in her own Vestment, committed it to the Flames; the same Fire
that had in vain been kindled for his Destruction when alive, being now
converted to the kinder uses of a Funeral Pile.

Thus died Alcibiades, about the Fortieth year of his Age; a person of whom we
find but a scurvy character given by the generality of Writers; yet has he
obtained the highest commendations from three very grave and authentic
Historians; Thucydides, his Cotemporary; Theopompus, a somewhat more modern
Author; and Timaeus: The two latter of which were persons of the most
censorious humor, and observed (by I know not what strange Fate) to have
concurred in the Praises of no other man but Alcibiades. For even by them are
the same advantageous particulars delivered concerning him, which are already
related by us, and to which may moreover be added, from the same Writers, That
being born in Athens, a City for State and Grandeur Second to none, he outwent
the Noblest of his Fellow-Citizens in Splendor and Magnificence of Life: And
yet when driven from hence he arrived at Thebes, he so far complied with the
Genius of that People (the Baeotians in general employing their time in
acquiring a Robust Habit of Body, and not in improving the Faculties of the
Mind) that he excelled them all, as well in strength and firmness of Limbs, as
in cheerfully undergoing the most toilsom Labor. When he came among the
Lacedaemonians, who account it the highest pitch of Virtue to endure such kind
of hardship, he so readily accommodated himself to their penurious way of
Living, that in a little time he had not his Equal for Abstinence and
Parsimony, either in Garb or Diet. After this, dwelling among the Thracians, a
People generally addicted to the Enjoyments of Love and Wine; even here had he
also the Precedence allowed him beyond Competition: And coming at length into
Persia, where Labor and Industry in Hunting, and Luxury and Excess in Feeding
are of greatest Reputation, he acquitted himself to the admiration of all men.
So that wheresoever he came, he got the general Love and Respect of the People;
being presently accounted the most Accomplished Person for such Qualifications
as were in every Country of highest Estimation. But enough of this Man; let us
now proceed to give an account of others.

THE LIFE OF THRASYBVLVS.
Done into English by Mr. Gilman, M. A. of Magdalen Coll. Oxon.
THRASYBULUS, the Son of Lycus, and by Birth an Athenian, was a Person whom I
should not stick to place in the front of all the Grecian Worthies, if his
Fortune had been any way answerable to his Deserts. Without doubt he outshone
them all in Fidelity, Resolution, Greatness of Soul, and an inviolable
Affection for his Country. And although many boasted themselves born of more
Ancient Families, yet none outstripp'd him in any other Accomplishment of a
Great Man. Whoever Rescues his Native Country from the Oppression of one
Tyrant, does so Brave an Action, that many Men have Attempted, but few have had
the Honor of Atchieving; yet was it this Man's good Fortune, to Free His,
groaning under the intolerable Burden of Thirty at once. His Valor was first
fledged in the Peloponnesian War; where being in a Joint-Commission, he did
many great Exploits without Alcibiades, tho Alcibiades did nothing without Him;
all his Actions expressing an ardent desire to promote the Good of the
Commonwealth. But in pitched Battles the Strength and Number of Forces is as
much to be relied on as the most excellent Conduct; and the private Soldier
justly claims a share in the Glory of the Action with the Commander. Besides,
Fortune sometimes lets them know, that Success depends neither upon one nor the
other; but is solely at her disposal. Wherefore, the most Glorious of all
Actions Thrasybulus may justly claim to be properly his own; For when Athens
was miserably harassed and torn by the Arbitrary Proceedings of those Thirty
Burgomasters, set up (as it were a Council of State) by the Lacedaemonians;
during whose uncontrolable sway, many of the Eminent Citizens were killed, some
(preserved by Fate from the danger of the War) were banished, and many others
had their Estates confiscated and divided amongst the Usurpers: He only (not as
a General, but) singly Proclaimed open War against them; and when he fled to
Phyle (the strongest and best fortified Castle in Attica) he had scarce Thirty
Confederates. So weak were the Foundations of the Design by which the Liberty
of that Illustrious City was asserted. He was not despicable for his Person or
Parts; but was contemned for his inconsiderable Party; which at last proved of
great consequence to him; as the accomplishing his Design for the Relief of his
Country, and the utter and final Ruin of it is Enemies. For they, lulled in
their own security, neglected a speedy and vigorous prosecution; and
consequently gave him a longer time to make himself more considerable both for
Men and Money. Whence is evinced the truth of that common Axiom, In War no
Advantage is to be slipped; and it is not without reason said, The Mother of a
Coward need never Fear. Yet all this while Thrasybulus's Supplies and
Assistances bore no proportion to his Expectations. For even in those days men
were more lavish of their Words then Actions; and more hotly disputed their
Liberty with their Tongues then their Swords. From Phyle he marched to Pyraeum,
and fortifies Munichia; which place his Enemies twice attempting to take by
Storm, in two general Assaults, were as often beat back with considerable
Damage, and at last forced to retire into Athens with the loss of all their
Arms and Baggage. Thrasybulus in the mean time manages his Affair with as great
Wisdom as Courage, and commands that Quarter should be given to all those who
would accept it; saying, it was but reasonable, that Fellow-Citizens should
spare one another. Neither indeed was there any person hurt afterward, but
those who continued in a posture of Hostility. He suffered none to be stripped of
their Clothes; nor touched any part of the Plunder, only Arms (for which he had
urgent occasion) and Victuals. In this second Conflict fell Critias, the
primier Burgomaster, after he had fought valiantly. Critias being slain,
Pausanias, King of the Lacedaemonians, comes to the Assistance of the
Athenians; and at length concludes a Peace between both Parties on these Terms:
First, That no Citizen (except the Thirty Tyrants, and the Ten Pretors, who
exactly Copied those Originals of Cruelty in their Actions) should suffer
Banishment. Secondly, That no Person's Estate should be Sequestered. And
Thirdly, That Democracy should be Reestablish'd, and the Sovereign Power remain
in the hands of the People. One more remarkably great Action of his we must by
no means forget; When Peace was settled, and he bore a great sway in the City,
he Enacted a Law, That no man should be accused, or any way punished, for any
thing that was past. This was afterward called An Act of Oblivion. But not
satisfied with the bare Enacting of such a Law, he took a mighty care in the
just and strict Execution of it; and checked some of the Partakers of his
misery in Banishment, who would have made havoc of those men they had so
lately received into Favor. For these great and illustrious Actions,
Thrasybulus was Honored by the People with a Coronet made of Olive-branches; a
mean Reward indeed, but attended with these Advantages, that it was in no
manner extorted, but a voluntary and hearty Testimony of the People's
Affection; and was therefore an Honor, free from the Detractions of Envy or
Emulation. For as Pittacus (a man justly registered in the Catalogue of the
Seven Wisemen of Greece) well observed to the Mitylenaeans, when they would
have given him many thousand Acres of Land for a Reward; Don't ye, says he,
give me so Noble a Present, that many will Envy, and more will Covet; I will
only accept of an hundred Acres, which is sufficient to show your Good Will,
and my own Modesty. Great Favors are often snatched away, whilst little ones,
below Envy, are longer enjoyed. Thrasybulus therefore, highly pleased with this
petty Crown, sought no other Satisfaction; but looked upon himself to be as
much Honored as any of his Cotemporaries. In process of time, going Admiral to
Cilicia, and his Soldiers being very remiss when they were upon their Guard, he
was in a Sally surpised in his Tent, and slain by the Barbarians.

THE LIFE OF CONON.
Done into English by Mr. Jenefar of Magdalen Coll. Oxon.
CONON, an Athenian, became Great in the Esteem of the Commonwealth at the
Peloponnesian War; where his Conduct was signally Heroic. For he was
Captain General of the Landforces and Admiral at Sea; and performed noble
Atchivements; which made him the Darling of the People, who Constituted him
Governor of all their Islands; in which Commission he took Pharae, a Colony of
the Lacedaemonians. He was also Captain General in the last Peloponnesian War,
when the Flower of the Athenian Army was destroyed by Lysander at the River
Aegos. But Conon was not in Person at that Battle; from whence may be concluded
the Misfortune of that fatal Day. For he weighed every Military Action; and was
even jealous in acquitting himself like a General. Which makes it highly
probable, that his Personal Valor and Conduct might have diverted that
Massacre of the Athenians.

Yet in this sad destraction, when he heard the groans of his Country, he
consulted not his own Safety and Retirement, but the Relief of his disconsolate
Countrymen. He hastened therefore to Pharnabazus, Lieutenant of Ionia and
Lydia, who was Son in Law to the King; into whose Favor he insinuated himself,
tho not without great intrigue and hazard. For when the Lacedaemonians (Athens
lying gasping) had broke their League, which they had made with Artaxerxes, and
had sent Agesilaus with an Army into Asia (where he was often Caressed by
Tissaphernes, who was formerly the Familiar of the King, but had revolted from
all the Endearments of his Prince, and combined with the Lacedaemonians);
Pharnabazus marched against him as General,; tho in reality Conon was Chief,
and his Warlike Judgment Controlled the whole Council. He stopped the carier of
Agesilaus, that so much renowned Captain, and confounded all his Stratagems;
and 'twas the wise Conduct of Conon which prevented Agesilaus from renting that
part of Asia on this side Taurus from the Persian Empire. Agesilaus being
remanded home by the Lacedaemonians, who were embroiled in a War with the
Boeotians and Athenians; Conon took that opportunity to ingratiate himself with
the Persian Nobility; and soon became their only Oracle.

At this time the Malecontent Tissaphernes had quitted the Court, of which the
King was only incredulous; so great a share had Tissaphernes in the Royal
Favor, tho in this very time of his disloyal Villainy. Neither is it strange,
that the King was unwilling to mistrust this his Creature, when he called to
mind, that by his Prowess he quelled his Brother Cyrus. Therefore Conon was
sent by Pharnabazus to Accuse Tissaphernes before the King; who being arrived,
according to the Custom of the Persians, he came to Tithraustes, a Tribune and
principal Officer of State, requesting that he might be introduced; without
which ceremony none are admitted. To whom Tithraustes said, there should be no
delay; but (said he) you must consult whether it were better to have an
Audience, or to signify your Business by Letter; for if you come into the
Royal Presence, you must fall down before the King; which they call Graeci
vocant (...) venerabunde salutare.
Divine Homage: But if you cannot comply with this, trust me to interceed for
you, and you shall certainly attain your desire. Then Conon replied; I could
very cheerfully pay any Honor to the King, but I fear lest it should be a
dishonorable blemish to my Country, if I should prostitute my self to the
Slavery of a Barbarian, who came from that People who by Nature are accustomed
to Govern. He therefore delivered his Business in a Letter; which being made
known to the King, he was so taken with his Commanding Deportment, that he
proclaimed Tissaphernes a Traitor, commissioned Conon to Fight the
Lacedaemonians, and to elect whom he pleased to raise Money for the War. Which
choice Conon modestly denied to be in his Province, but in the King's, who best
understood the Condition of his People; yet that it was his humble Advice, that
he would confer that Office on Pharnabazus. After this, being honored with
great Presents, he was commissioned to Sea, that he might convey the Galleys to
the Cyprians, Phoenicians, with the other Port-Towns; and that he should Rig a
Navy, to secure the Seas the following Summer; in which Commission Pharnabazus
was his Colleague, as he had petitioned. So soon as the Lacedaemonians heard
this, they acted with great judiciousness, because they foresaw a more
dangerous War, then if they had been engaged only against the petulant Persian.
For they were now to grapple with a bold and wary General, entrusted with the
whole Persian Power; against whom their Stratagems of War were as ridiculously
vain as their Strength. With this resolution they contract a formidable Navy,
and set Sail under Pisander; whom Conon assaulted at the River Cnidus, and
after a desperate Fight routed; many Ships he took, and many he sunk; by which
Victory not only Athens but all Greece was freed from the Yoke of the
Lacedaemonians. Conon with part of the Navy returned to his own Country, was
very solicitous in rebuilding the Walls of Athens, with the Haven Pyraeeum,
which were demolished by Lysander; and gave his Fellow-Citizens Fifty Talents,
which he had received of Pharnabazus.

Yet it happened to this Great Man as to the Ignoble Pesantry, who was more
improvident in the smoother then in the rugged part of his Life; for having
vanquished the Peloponnesian Squadrons, and satisfied the revengeful thirst of
his Country, he aimed at higher things then his Policy could possibly reach;
all which Attempts were Pious and Honorable, in as much as he preferred the
welfare of Athens before the King's. For when he had acquired a splendid
Eminency by the Sea Fight at Cnidus, he began slily to whisper among the
Persians and all the Cities of Greece, that Ionia and Aeolis should be
surrendered to the Athenians. But this design taking vent, Teribazus Lieutenant
of Sardis, inveighled Conon to come to him, pretending to send him to the King
upon an Embassy of great importance. Conon obeyed the Message; and as soon as
he arrived, was secured in Fetters, which he bore for some time. Others write,
that he was brought to the King, and died there. Yet Dinon the Historian, in
whom we most confide in Persian Story, informs us, that he escaped; and seems
only to doubt, whether it were by the design or inadvertency of Teribazus.

THE LIFE OF DION.
Done into English by Mr. Clarke, M. A. and Fellow of All Souls Coll. Oxon.
DION of Syracuse, Son to Hipparinus, descended from a Noble Family, and was of
Kin to both Dionysius's, the Tyrants. For the Elder of them married his Sister
Aristomache; by whom he had two Sons, Hipparinus and Nysaeus; and as many
Daughters, Sophrosyne and Areta. Sophrosyne he gave to his Son and Successor
Dionysius, and Areta was allotted to be Dion's Wife; who, besides his Noble
Relations, and the Reputation derived to him from his Ancestors, was obliged to
Nature for many rare Endowments; among which, an Plate says the same in his 7th
Epistle.
Aptness to Learn, a Contradicted by Plutarch in his Life, and Plato in his 4th
Epistle, at the end.
Courteous Behavior, and a Disposition to brave Actions, were conspicuous: Nor
was he less happy in a comely and graceful Presence. Besides, his Father left
him a vast Estate, which was increased by the The Treasurers ^^d orders to give
him what ever he desired. Tlut.
Gifts of the Tyrant. He had a great intimacy with Dionysius the Father, to
which his Personal Merits were as instrumental as his Affinity; for tho he
liked not Dionysius's Cruelty, yet he endeavored his Safety, upon account of
their Alliance, but chiefly with respect to his own Relations. He was consulted
with in matters of the greatest concern; and the Tyrant was very much swayed by
his Advice, unless in those things where the prevalence of his own Affections
overruled. All Embassies of note were performed by him; in which his Civility,
together with his faithful and diligent Administration of Affairs, took off
from that Imputation of Cruelty, which Dionysius generally lay under. The
Carthaginians, to whom he was sent by the Tyrant, honored him highly, insomuch
that they never had any Grecian in more Admiration. Neither was Dionysius
ignorant of these things, nor unsensible how great an ornament he was to him;
from whence it came to pass, that Dion was most in his Favor, and loved by him
as a Son: So that when 'twas reported in Sicily, that Plato was come to
Tarentum he did not only give the young Man (who had a great desire to be one
of his Hearers) leave to invite him thither; but after the grant, brought him
in great state to Syracuse. For him Dion had so great a love and veneration,
that he wholly yielded himself to his disposal; which was answered by Plato,
who took no less delight in him. For although he was cruelly misused by the
Tyrant, who gave order he should be sold for a Slave; yet at Dion's request he
had leave to return. In the mean time Dionysius fell sick; and his Distemper He
surfeited at a Feast which He made for joy he was declared Victor in Poetry.
Diod. Sicul. lib. 15.
increasing upon him, Dion went to the Physicians, to enquire how he did; and
withal entreated them to let him know, if his Life were in great danger,
because he intended to discourse him about dividing the Kingdom; part of it, in
his opinion, being due to those Sons his Sister had by him. This Enquiry, the
Physicians did not conceal, but carried it to Dionysius the Younger; who was so
much concerned, that to prevent any conference between Dion and his Father, he
forced the Physicians to give the later a sleeping Potion; which the old man
took, and slept his last.

Such was the beginning of the quarrel between Dionysius and Dion; which many
things afterward fomented. However, for some time there remained an appearance
of Friendship; so that Dion being urgent with him, to send for Plato from
Athens, and make use of his Counsel, he complied with his desire, that in
something he might be like his Father, and at the same time brought Plato calls
him Philistides. Epist, 3.
Philistus the Historian back to Syracuse, a man who was equally a Friend to
the Tyrant and his Tyranny. But of this I have said more in my Book of the
Greek Historians. As for Plato, his Eloquence and Authority so much influenced
Dionysius, that by his persuasion he was resolved to restore the Syracusians
their Liberties, and put an end to the Tyranny; but being deterred by Philistus
from executing his intention, he became more Cruel then before. Finding
therefore, that Dion had the advantage of him in Parts, in Authority, and the
Love of the People, he feared their staying together might be an occasion of
his own Ruin; upon which he gave him a Gally to transport him to Corinth;
telling him withal, that what he did was for both their sakes; lest out of the
mutual fear which was between them, one might be apt to supplant the other.
This action was highly resented by many, and drew great'envy upon the Tyrant;
who to make the World believe, that he did it not out of hatred to the man, but
merely for his own security, Shipped off all his Movables and sent them to
him. But Plutarch says, that the Marriage of Areta to Timocrates was before
Dion's Preparations for War.
afterward, when he heard that Dion was raising Forces in Peloponnesus, with
design if he were able to fall upon him, he married his Wife Areta to
Timocrates.
another; and ordered his Hipparinus, or Hipparion, or as Timaus says, Aretaus.
Sons Education in such manner, that by giving him his swing he might be
tainted with all sorts of Vices. For while he was yet a Boy, they brought him
Whores, and so plied him with Wine and Feasts, that he never had leisure to be
sober. Insomuch, that when his Father returned, and set Governors over him, to
reclaim him from his former way of living; he, not able to endure such a change
in his course of life, threw himself from the top of the House, and ended his
days.

But to return; After Dion was come to Corinth, and Heraclides, General of the
Horse, Being suspected to be the cause that the Veterans mutiny'd, when
Dionysius was about to leslen their pay. Plato. Epist. 7.
driven away by the same Dionysius, fled thither also; they hastened their
preparations for War, with all diligence, yet made but small progress; for few
adventured to run the same risk they did, because a Tyranny of so many year's
continuance, was by every one esteemed very formidable. But Dion, who more
relied on the ill will that all people bore the Tyrant, then the strength of
his own Forces, with only two Merchant-Ships, undauntedly went against a
Government which had stood for Fifty Syracuse was taken the 48th year of the
Tyranny. Plut. Olymp. 106. an. 1. Diod. Sicul.
years, guarded with five hundred long Ships, ten thousand Horse, and an
hundred thousand Foot; and to the astonishment of the World, so easily overran
it, that within three days of his landing in Sicily he entered Syracuse it self.
From whence it is evident, That no Empire is Safe which is not Guarded by Love.
At that time Dionysius was in Italy, expecting the Fleet; and did not imagine,
that any of his Enemies durst venture upon him without considerable Forces. In
which he was mistaken; for Dion, with those very men which were under his
Adversary's dominion, abated the Tyrant's Arrogance; and made himself Master of
all that part of Sicily which was in subjection to Dionysius, as he did of
Syracuse likewise, except the Citadel, and the Island adjoining to the Town.
Whereupon the matter was brought to that pass, that the Tyrant was contented to
make Peace on the following Articles: That Dion should have Sicily, Dionysius
possess Italy, and Syracuse be in the hands of Apollocrates, a man in whom
Dionysius reposed the greatest trust. But this unexpected prosperity was
attended with a sudden change; Fortune by her fickleness attempting to ruin
him, whom just before she had exalted. The first token of her malice, she
showed in his Son, whom I mentioned before; for having brought back his Wife,
who was given to another, and being desirous to rescue his Son from the
Debauchery in which he had been bred, and reduce him to his former Sobriety, he
received a grievous blow by the Death of his Child. The next misfortune, was
the Dissension between him and Heraclides; who made a Faction, rather then he
would yield the priority to Dion, and had as much interest among the Nobility
as he; for by their consent he commanded the Naval Forces, at the same time
when the other did those at Land. This Dion could not brook; and repeated those
Verses in the second Iliad of Homer, to this purpose, That a State cannot be
well ordered, where the Government is in the hands of many. The Saying raised
him much envy, for by it he seemed to discover an intention of getting all into
his own power; which opinion he endeavored not to lessen by complaisance, but
suppress by rigor; and caused Heraclides, when he came to Syracuse, to be
killed. An action which struck every body with fear; no man thinking himself
safe, now Heraclides was thus taken out of the way. But Dion, being rid of his
Adversary, with more license distributed the Estates of the contrary Party
among his Soldiers. After which division, by reason of the greatness of his
daily expenses, he quickly began to want Money; which he knew no way to be
supplied with, but by siezeing his Friends possessions; upon which it happened,
that the gaining the Soldier proved the loss of the Nobility. These things he
took very much to heart; and being unaccustomed to be ill spoken of, could not
endure to be in disrepute with those who a little before had praised him to the
Skies. For the Rabble perceiving the Soldiers were offended with him, spoke
more openly, and often reproacht him with intolerable Tyranny. As Dion was in
this perplexity, not being able to appease their Commotions, and was afraid of
the consequence; Callippus. Plus.
Callicrates an Athenian, one that accompanied him from Peloponnesus to Sicily,
a cunning fraudulent Fellow, without any sense of Religion or Honesty, came to
him, and told him the danger he was in, by reason of the disgust of the People,
and hatred of the Soldiers; which, without employing one of his Friends to
seign himself his Enemy, 'twas impossible to avoid; but if he found one fit for
this affair, he might easily know their designs, and ruin his Adversaries, who
would certainly declare their intentions to one that seemed at variance with
him. The Advice being approved, Callicrates took upon himself to put it in
execution; and being advantaged by Dion's unwariness, sought for Associates to
kill him, had Meetings with his Enemies, and confirmed the Conspiracy. But many
being privy to the business, it was divulged, and brought to Aristomache,
Dion's Sister, and Areta his Wife; who in a fright ran with the news to him,
for whose Safety they were so much concerned. He assured them, that Callicrates
meant him no harm; and what he did, was by his order. However, the Women not
satisfied with this, got Callicrates to Proserpine's Temple, and forced him to
Plutarch tells us, the manner of his taking this Oath: After some Holy Rites,
he had the Goddesses Purple Robe thrown about him, with a burning Torch put in
his hand, and so forsware what he was accused of. It was called (...), or the
Great Oath; of which there were several sorts.
swear, that Dion should receive no mischief from him. Which Religious Act was
so far from making him quit his design, that 'twas a means to hasten the
execution; he fearing the Plot might be discovered before it had taken effect.
Being thus resolved, the next (...)* sacred to Proserpine, for on that day they
shaved their Childrens heads, (and sacrificed to Her) one of the ceremonies
used at the Enrollment of their Children in their Tribes, which was done at
this time. Suid. and Plut.
Festival-Day, when Dion was laid down privately at home in an upper Chamber,
he put the strongest places of the City into the hands of the Conspirators; and
having surrounded the House with Soldiers, commanded some of them not to stir
from the Doors. And that he might not be destitute of means to escape, if
Fortune should prove cross to his Designs, he furnished a Galley with Men and
Arms; and ordered his Brother Philocrates, who commanded it, to keep it moving
in the Port, as if he only intended the exercise of the Rowers. Besides, he
chose some Zacynthians of his own Family, strong daring Fellows, and bid them
go to Dion unarmed, that so it might seem they came only to pay him a Visit.
Their familiarity in the Family immediately gained them admittance into his
Chamber; where, as soon as they were entered, they fastened the Doors, fell
upon him in his Bed, and bound him; which was not done so silently, but the
noise was heard without. Hence it is evident, as I have often said before, how
odious a thing the Government of a single Person is; and how miserable a Life
they lead, who had rather be the object of their Subject's Fear than Love. For
his very Guards, had they bore him any kindness, might have broke open the
Doors, and saved his Life; the Conspirators being forced for want of Arms to
keep him alive 'till they could procure a Weapon of those who were out of the
Chamber. But no body coming to his rescue, one Lyco a Syracusian, reached them
a Sword through the Window, with which they dispatched him. The multitude after
his death came to look upon him, and not knowing the Murderers, killed several
whom they suspected of the fact. For it being noised that Dion was slain, many
who disliked the action ran thither, and upon a false surmise killed the
Innocent instead of the Guilty. As soon as his Death was publicly known, 'twas
strange to see how the People's minds were changed; for they who in his
Lifetime afforded him no better a name then Tyrant, now called him the
Expeller of the Tyrant, and Deliverer of his Country; and so suddenly was
Hatred succeeded by Compassion, that if it had been possible, they would have
redeemed his Life at the expense of their own. Wherefore by public Order he was
buried in the most Honorable place of the City, and by the same had a Tomb
erected. He died in the five and fiftieth year of his Age, and the fourth after
his return from Peloponnesus into Sicily.

THE LIFE OF IPHICRATES.
Done into English by Mr. Allam, M. A. of St. Edmund-Hall, Oxon.
IPHICRATES, the Athenian, became famous to Posterity, rather by his accurate
Skill in the Art of War, than the Gallantry of any Noble Achievements. For he
was so perfectly furnished with all the necessary Accomplishments requisite to
complete a General, that he not only attained the Excellencies of his most
eminent Cotemporaries, but might justly dispure Preeminence with the Chief of
former Ages. He was so very well experienced in Martial Affairs, that being
often entrusted with the Command of entire Armies, he never was defeated by any
failure or default of his own; and what Victory soever he obtained, it appeared
principally to be owing to his Prudence and Conduct. So great was his Judgment
in all things relating to War, that he both advanced the Military Discipline by
additional Rules to a far greater perfection than it ever had before his time,
and improved those few scattered ones he met with to the best advantage. He
also made most commodious and beneficial alterations in the Arms of the
Infantry; for whereas before his time broad unweildy Shields, short Spears, and
little Swords were only in use, he changed the first of them into a lighter
Target, made somewhat in shape of an Half Moon, called Pelta, from whence the
Foot afterward received the name of Peltastae; and by this more portable
Buckler, he did not only expedite their Marches, but made them capable of
receiving their Enemy's onsets with greater readiness and activity. As for the
Sword, he augmented its length, but doubled that of the Spear; changing
moreover their Breast-Armour from Iron and Brass to those made of Linen; which
rendered his Soldiers fitter for Action; and by thus lessening their weight, he
at once provided for their ease and security too. He was engaged in a War with
the Thratians, and restored Seuthes, an Ally of the Athenians, to his Kingdom.
At Corinth he kept the Army to so strict Discipline, that there were in no part
of Greece to be found better Trained Forces; or any who with so great readiness
received and performed the Commands of a General, even in the most minute
particulars; for by his pains and industry they grew so expert in all Military
Orders and Postures, that as soon as ever he had but once given the Word of
Command, they would immediately form themselves into as regular a Figure, as if
the most skilful Commander had ranked each private Soldier in his particular
place. With this Army he intercepted a select Party of the Lacedaemonian Horse;
which Action was very much extolled throughout all Greece. In the same War he
gave their whole Strength a second total Defeat; which also procured him a
large stock of Honor. Artaxerxes purposing to fight the King of Egypt, made it
his request to the Athenians, that they would grant him Iphicrates, whom he
designed as Commander in Chief over his Mercenary Forces, the same amounting to
the number of twelve thousand men; and having obtained his desire, he
instructed them so fully and exactly in the whole Art of War, that as formerly
the best Roman Soldiers were distinguished from the meaner sort by bearing the
name of their Leader Fabius; so the Grecians had those under the Command of
Iphicrates in the highest esteem. When he went to assist the Lacedaemonians, he
soon put a stop to the Attempts of Epaminondas; for had he not hastened his
March, the Thebans would not have raised the Siege of Sparta, till they had
laid it waste in Ashes, and utter ruin. The greatness of his Spirit bore an
equal proportion with that of his Body; his Presence being very Majestic and
Commanding, did so clearly bespeak him what really he was, that his bare look
of it self was sufficient to strike all Beholders with an Admiration of his
Person. Theopompus has recorded, that he was remiss in matters which required
continued Labor, and that he could not well brook the hardships of War; yet he
had still the character of a good Citizen given him, and was always reputed a
Man of a steady and untainted Fidelity; of which, as on several other occasions
he gave most undeniable proofs, so he did in a more peculiar manner signalize
it by protecting the distressed Orphans of Amyntas the Macedonian. For Euridice
the Mother of Perdiccas and Philip, upon her Husband's death, presently fled
with her two Fatherless Children to Iphicrates for succor and patronage; who
being rich, generously asserted their just Rights against all kinds of wrong
and oppression. He died old, in the Love and Favor of his Fellow-Citizens; tho
their Affections had been for some time alienated from him; for he, and
Timotheus, were forced to make their public Defenses in the Associated War; and
he was acquitted by those who were constituted his Judges. He left behind him a
Son called Menestheus, whom he had by a Thracian Woman, Daughter to King Cotus;
who being asked, which he loved best, his Father or Mother? replied, his
Mother. And when all the Company wondered at the seeming strangeness of the
Answer, he told them, That he did not return that Answer, but upon very good
reasons; For my Father, says he, by Marrying a Barbarian used his utmost
endeavors that I should be one also; but my Mother did as much as in her lay
to make me the Son of an Athenian.

THE LIFE OF CHABRIAS.
Done into English by Mr. Kennett, of St. Edmund-Hall Oxon.
CHABRIAS was an Athenian; one that bore a Name in the Catalogue of their
greatest Commanders; and performed several Exploits that very well deserve the
Recording. Among which, there ought more especially to be remarqu'd, that
Stratagem which he made use of at Thebes, when he came to assist the Boeotians:
For in that Engagement Agesilaus, the Lacedaemonian General, being very
confident of obtaining the Victory, and having made so great a step toward it,
as the putting to flight all the Mercenary Forces of the Adverse Party;
Chabrias procured the other Troops to keep their station, while by his own
example of kneeling down upon his Buckler, and holding out his Spear or Pike
aslaunt, he taught them in that manner to expect the onset of the Enemy.
Agesilaus being surpised at so unwonted a sight, durst make no farther attempt
upon them, but immediately sounded a Retreat, and thereby summoned his Soldiers
to fall back, when they were just ready to have made the assault. This
contrivance was so much applauded throughout all Greece, that Chabrias ordered
himself to be drawn in that defensive posture in the Statue which was erected
for him in the Forum at Athens, at the public charge of that City. And from
hence it commenced a custom, that ever after all Gladiators, and other Fencers,
were wont to have their Statues carved to the same posture wherein they had got
their respective Victories. But to return, Chabrias waged several Wars in
Europe, while he was commissioned a General of the Athenians; and behaved
himself bravely in Egypt, when he served as a private Voluntier. Going to the
help of Nectanebus, he got him settled in his Kingdom. He came off with as good
success at Cyprus; tho there indeed he was publicly appointed by the Athenians
as a Colleague with Evagoras; nor did he dispatch from hence till he had subdued
the whole Island; and from the happy management of this Enterprise, the
Athenians purchased themselves a vast credit. In the mean while arose a War
between the Persians and Egyptians; the Athenians entered into League with
Artaxerxes King of Persia, and the Lacedaemonians sided with the Egyptians; of
whom Agesilaus, King of Lacedaemon, made a very considerable advantage.
Chabrias taking notice of this, and thinking himself no way inferior to
Agesilaus, frankly offered his Service to the assistance of the Egyptians; and
was made Admiral of their Fleet, Agesilaus being Commander of their Infantry.
Upon this, the Captains who were employed by the King of Persia, dispatched
Messengers to Athens, to complain that Chabrias took part with the Egyptians in
a War against their Master. The Athenians hereupon fixed a day, by which time
if Chabrias returned not, they threatened he should forfeit his Life, for
disobeying the Summons. Chabrias at this news comes back to Athens; yet stayed
there no longer than was just necessary to avoid the penalty which was
otherwise denounced against him. For he was not fond of residing among his own
Countrymen; having lived so splendidly, and fared so high, that he could not
but raise the Envy of the Rabble. For this indeed is a common fault in Great
and Free Cities, That Envy is always fastened upon Glory; and most Persons are
extreme forward in detracting from those, who are promoted to be their
Superiors. And, what is ordinary to observe, the Poor cannot without regret at
their own harder Fate, cast an eye upon the more ample Fortunes of the Rich.
Chabrias upon these considerations was as much abroad as his Affairs could
dispense with. And herein he was not singular, in his caution of staying little
at home in Athens; for almost all their eminent men took the same course;
thinking themselves so far removed from Envy as they were distant from their
own Native Country. Conon for this reason lived the most part in Cyprus,
Iphicrates in Thrace, Timotheus in Lesbus, and Chares in Sigaeum. This Chares,
it is true, was different from the rest both in Temper and Action; yet he was a
Person of great Honor and Wealth at Athens. But finally, Chabrias came thus to
his end, in the Social War; The Athenians laid Siege to Chium, Chabrias was in
the Navy only as a Reformade, yet he had greater Authority than any who were in
places of Command; the Common Soldiers paying more respect to him than to any
of their Officers, which proved the occasion of hasting his Death: For whilst
he was ambitious of making the first Entrance into the Harbor, and accordingly
had directed the Pilot to steer in, this Adventure cost him his Life; for when
he was got in, none of the other Vessels would follow; whereupon, being
surrounded with the Attacks of the Enemy, he fought courageously, till the Ship
sprung a Leak, by some damage toward the Head, and began to sink under him.
Hereupon, being unable to make any escape; for if he had thrown himself
overboard, the Athenians would have took him up as he swum; he therefore chose
rather to dye in his station, than to lay down his Arms and quit the Ship. None
of the other Seamen would run the same hazard, but leaped out, and escaped
safe to shore; while Chabrias, preferring an honorable Death before an ignoble
and slavish Life, fighting hand to hand upon the Deck, was at last killed on
the place.

THE LIFE OF TIMOTHEVS.
Done into English by the Honorable Mr. Booth, of Chapter Chapter Coll. Oxon.
TIMOTHEUS, the Son of Conon, an Athenian, increased his Hereditary Honor by
his own Acquired Virtues; for he was Eloquent, Stout, and Industrious; and no
less famous for the management of Civil than Military Affairs. He performed
many eminent Exploits; but these following seem the most notable: He conquered
the Olynthians and Byzantins, and took Samos; in which Enterprise (the year
before) the Athenians had spent two hundred thousand Talents, yet Timotheus
gained this Island without putting the Public to any Expense. He managed the
War against Cotys, and took a Booty from him, for the Commonwealth, worth two
hundred thousand Talents. He also raised the Siege of Cyzicus; and accompanied
Agesilaus when he went to assist Ariobarzanes; of whom when Agesilaus received
present Pay, Timotheus chose rather to increase the Possessions of his
Fellow-Citizens, then accept of that his own private Family could only partake
of; therefore he took Erichthon and Sestus.

Timotheus being made Admiral of the Navy, sailing along by Peloponnesus, he
wasted the Country of Laconia, and beat their Fleet. He reduced Corcyra under
the Government of the Athenians, with their Confederates of Epirus, Acarnania,
and Chaonia, and all the Countries that bordered upon that Sea. By which Action
of his, the Lacedaemonians were forced to let fall their old Quarrel, and
voluntarily to offer the Athenians the Dominion of the Seas; a Peace being
Concluded between these two Commonwealths, one Article was, That the Athenians
should be Lords at Sea. So great Joy was there at Athens upon the news of this
Victory, that then it was that public Altars were first Erected to the Goddess
of Peace, and a Pallet appointed Her. The Memory of which noble Act, that they
might perpetuate, they erected a Statue for him in the Forum; which Honor was
never paid to any man before him, viz. That the same People who had set up a
Statue for the Father should give the Son one to; the last serving to revive
the Memory of the former.

When Timotheus was very ancient, and had quite left off all public business,
War began to threaten the Athenians on every side. Samus and Hellespont
revolted; and Philip of Macedon, being very powerful, made great Preparations
for a War. Against whom, when they had sent Chares, they thought him not strong
enough to oppose him; and thereupon make Menestheus (the Son of Iphicrates, and
Son-in-Law to Timotheus) their General; and order him to go to the War. They
also send along with him his Father and Father-in-Law, to be his Counselors;
Men excelling in Experience and Wisdom, whose Advice he should always follow,
because they were Persons of such Authority, that there was great hopes by
their means they might recover all they had lost. When these two were gone to
Samos, and Chares had intelligence of it, he drew all his Forces thither, lest
there should be any Action in his absence. It so happened, that when they came
near the Island, there arose a great storm; for the avoiding of which, the two
old Generals thought it very expedient, to cast Anchor. But Chares, without any
consideration, not obeying the Commands of his Counselors, but as if he had
Fortune in the Ship with him, draws near to Engage; and sends a Messenger to
Timotheus and Iphicrates, commanding them to follow him. This Attempt having
succeeded ill, and losing a considerable number of his Ships, he retires back
again from whence he came, and dispatches an Express to Athens, to let them
know, that he could easily have taken Samos, had he not been deserted by
Timotheus and Iphicrates. Upon this Accusation of his, they were Impeached. The
Commons, who were fierce, jealous, factious, changeable, and Enemies also to
all in Power, call them home; and accuse them of betraying their Country. In
this Trial Timotheus is cast, and Fined an hundred Talents; and so being
compelled, through the ill will of an ungrateful City, he retires to Calcis.
After his Death, the People repenting of the Sentence they had passed upon him,
remitted all but a tenth part of his Fine, and oblige his Son Conon to repair
part of a Wall. In which Action may be seen the various turns of Fortune; for
those very Walls which the Grandfather Conon had Rebuilt with the Spoils of the
Enemy, is the Nephew forced to Repair, out of his own Estate, to the great
Scandal of his Family. We might produce many instances of the Wisdom and
Moderation of Timotheus; but one shall suffice; from whence we may easily
conjecture, how dear he was to his Friends. When he was but a young Man, he was
forced at Athens to plead for himself; and not only his Friends and private
Acquaintance came to his Assistance, but also Jason the Tyrant, who at that
time was a Man of very considerable Power. This Man, tho in his own Kingdom,
never thought himself safe without his Guards about him, yet came alone to
Athens, valuing his Friend at so dear a rate, that he rather chose to endanger
his own Life, than not assist Timotheus in vindicating his Honor. But
notwithstanding all this, Timotheus soon after, by the Command of the People,
fought against him; accounting the obligations to his Country greater than
those of Friendship. This was the last Age of the Athenian Commanders; for
after Iphicrates, Chabrias, and Timotheus, there was no Commander of any note
in that City.

THE LIFE OF DATAMES.
Done into English by Mr. Edwards, M. A. and Fellow of St. John's Coll. Oxon.
DATAMES a Carian, the Son of Camissares by'a Scythian Lady, was the most
considerable, for Valor and prudent Conduct, of any of those of the Barbarous
Nations, except the two famous Carthaginians, Hamilcar and Hannibal. What he
did was great, and out of the usual road; yet so little known, that we are
obliged to be the larger in our Account of him: For he never owed his Success
to the greatness of his Army, or to any of the common causes of it; but always
to that which seemed his peculiar Talent, a most extraordinary Policy. His
first Employment was in the Guards at Artaxerxes his Court; but his Father, as
the Reward of his eminent Courage and Constant Fidelity to the King, had the
Government of that part of Cilicia which lies upon Capadocia, and is inhabited
by the Leucosyrians. Datames having a Command in the Army, first signalized
himself in the War against the Cadusians; in which there were many thousands
killed, and chiefly by his means; for which Service, Camissares likewise
falling in the Battle, he succeeded him in the Province.

Autophradates being sent by the King to reduce some to their obedience who had
revolted, he behaved himself with equal Gallantry; for by his management a
small Party surpised the Enemy in their Camp, and destroyed them; the greatest
part of the Army doing no service at all in the Action. After this, he was
removed to higher Employments; for Thyus, the Prince of Paphlagonia, (descended
from that Pyloemenes which Homer says was slain by Patroclus in the Trojan War)
not sufficiently complying with the King, Datames (who was his Cousin-German)
was sent with an Army to force his submission to the King's Pleasure. But he
intending to use his utmost endeavors, to make his Relation sensible of his
Duty upon easy terms, and not suspecting any Treachery from a Friend, went to
him without any Attendants; Although his Confidence put him in extreme danger; for
Thyus had resolved upon a private Assasination, Datames having intelligence of
the design from his Mother, who was Thyus's Aunt, and understood his
intentions, made his escape, and immediately proclaimed the War; which he
vigorously continued, tho he was deserted by Ariobarzanes the Governor of
Lydia, Ionia, and all Phrygia; and made not only Thyus, but his Wife and
Children too, his Captives.

He made all the haste imaginable, that the news of this Exploit might not get
to the King before him, and got privately to Court, without any one's knowledge.
The next day he showed his Captive, who was a vast black hairy Man, with a
frightful and ghastly countenance, dressed very richly in the Habit of a
Persian Nobleman; with a Golden Collar, and all other Princely Ornaments. He
himself appeared meanly, like a Peasant, in a Hunter's Headpiece, made of the
Skins of several Beasts; with a Club in one hand, and Toyls in the other; and
brought him out in such a manner as if he had been some cruel Monster, just
subdued. So unusual a sight drew a great many Spectators; one being
accidentally there that knew Thyus, informed the King of it. But he at first
suspecting so strange a story, commanded Pharnabazus to go and bring him a
certain relation of the thing; from whom, when he had received full
satisfaction, he commanded him to be brought into his Presence, and was
infinitely pleased with the humor; but especially, that so great a Prince
should so unexpectedly come into his hands. After he had for this nobly
rewarded Datames, he sent him to the Army which was then raised against Egypt,
under Pharnabazus and Tithraustes, and gave him a Command equal to theirs; and
after Pharnabazus was recalled, He was made Generalissimo. But whilst he was
hastening the general Rendesvouz of the Army, and preparing for his March to
Egypt, he received an Express from the King, that he should go against Aspis,
the Governor of Cataonia; a Country which lies above Cilicia, and borders upon
Cappadocia. For Aspis depending upon his Woods and strong Frontier-Towns, not
only disobeyed some of the Kings Commands, but robbed his Carriages, and made
incursions on all about him. Tho Datames was at a great distance from Cataonia,
and then in the management of greater Affairs, yet he yielded to the King's
pleasure; and in order to the execution of it, set Sail only with a few, but
very stout Men; supposing, (as indeed it afterward happened) that he could
have more advantage over him with a small Company upon surprise, then with a
great Army after open defiance. Being arrived at Cilitia, he continued his
Marches 'till he had passed over Mount Taurus, and was come to the end of his
Journey. Enquiring for Aspis, he understood that he was hunting near that
place. The occasion of Datames's coming was presently suspected; and therefore
Aspis immediately put the Pisidae, and others he had with him, in a posture of
defense. Upon notice of which, Datames mustered up his Men, and commanded them
to follow him; and being mounted on an excellent Horse, rid briskly up to the
Enemy. But Aspis perceiving the vigor of the first onset, the least endeavors
of resistance were discouraged; he immediately surrendered himself; and was
sent in Chains to the King, by Mithridates.

Artaxerxes, whilst these things were in agitation, recollecting, that he had
called one of his best Commanders from a considerable Post, and sent him upon a
trivial employment; but thinking that perhaps he was not yet gone, dispatched a
Messenger to Ace, with orders that he should by no means leave the Army. But
the Command was superseded; for those that guarded Aspis were met upon the way.
Datames having accomplished his business with such unexpected Expedition, was
greater in the King's Favor then ever; and became so considerable, that he was
the Envy of the whole Court. For they perceived, that his single interest was
greater then theirs in conjunction; and therefore all jointly conspired his
ruin. Pandates the Treasurer, who was his Confident, made him acquainted with
all their designs, and told him by Letter what danger he was in, if any
miscarriage should happen during his Conduct in Egypt; That Kings took the
Honor of great Actions to themselves, but always imputed ill success to their
Ministers; and therefore were easily inclined to disgrace those whom they
thought the occasion of it; That His condition was worse then any others,
because it was the temper of the King, to hate those most who had before been
his chief Favorites. Having received this news upon his coming back to the
Army at Ace, and knowing the advice was not to be contemned, he resolved to
leave the King's Service, but did nothing that was inconsistent with his Trust;
for he left the Army under Mandrocles a Magnesian, went with a Detachment of
his own Men into Cappadocia, and siez'd Paphlagonia, which lay next to it,
without discovering his disaffection to the King. After which he held a secret
correspondence with Ariobarzanes, got some men together, and placed them in the
fortified Towns for the defense of the Garrisons. But it being Winter, the
season of the year hindered some of his designs.

Hearing the Pisidae were preparing some Forces against him, he sent his Son
Arisideus thither with an Army. The young General was killed in the Engagement.
But his Father, concealing the loss he had received, went with some more men
into the Field, being willing to get to the Enemy before his Soldiers had the
report of the Defeat; for he thought the news of his Son's Death would very
much discourage them. Being arrived at the place he designed, he so Encamped
that he could neither be oppressed with the numerous Forces of the Enemy, nor
yet hindered from making any advantageous Assault. His Father-in-Law
Mithrobarzanes, Captain of the Horse, was then with him; but thinking their
condition very desperate, went over to the Enemy. Of which Datames having
notice, he presently considered, that the noise of his being deserted by so
considerable a man might make the rest revolt; and therefore gave out, that
Mithrobarzanes was by his orders gone away like a Renegade, that he might be
admitted by the Enemy, and so destroy them with less difficulty. That therefore
they ought not to deliver him into their hands, but immediately to follow him;
which if they did with resolution, the Pisidae could make no resistance, for
they would be slain both in their Camp and in the Field. The Design being
approved of, he led out his Army, and pursued Mithrobarzanes; upon whose
approach to the Enemy, Datames commanded his Standard to be set up. The Pisidae
being in great confusion at the suddenness of the business, suspected the
Renegades, and imagined they came with a treacherous design of doing the
greater mischief. Therefore they first fell upon them; which surprising
Accident put them in such disorder, that they were forced to fight with those
to whom they had fled, and assist those whom they had deserted; but being
spared by neither, were all presently cut off. Datames afterward falling upon
the Pisidae, forced them to fly, killed many in the pursuit, and took
possession of their Camp. By this Stratagem he at once punished the Deserters,
and gained a Victory over his Enemies; and made that which was intended for his
Ruin, the means of his Success. And perhaps it was a Design so cunningly laid,
and in so little time effected, that History can show nothing parallel to it.

Notwithstanding these great Exploits, Scismas his eldest Son left him, and
gave the King an account of his defection. Artaxerxes being troubled at the
news, (for he knew he was to deal with a man of undaunted Courage, one who
never designed any thing but what he dared venture to effect, and never
attempted any thing but what he had sufficiently considered) sent Autophradates
into Cappadocia. Datames endeavored to possess himself of the Forest, which is
the passage. to Cilicia; but not being able so suddenly to get his men
together, he was obliged to take other measures; yet he chose so commodious a
place for his Camp, that the Enemy could neither enclose him, nor pass by him
without being attacqu'd in several places; and was posted so advantageously,
that in any Encounter their Multitudes could do very little damage to his small
Company.

Although Autophradates was sensible of all this, yet he was resolved rather to
engage him, then either to continue long in that place, or go back with a great
Army; for he had in the Field twenty thousand Horse, an hundred thousand Foot,
and three thousand Slingers; which were the Cardaces, a people of the Lesser
Asia; besides these, eight thousand out of Cappadocia, ten out of Armenia, five
from Paphlagonia, ten from Phrygia, five from Lydia, about three thousand of
the Aspendii and Pisidae, two from Cilicia, as many of the Caspians, and three
thousand Mercenaries, which he had out of Greece; besides a considerable number
of Light Horse. All Datames's hopes of doing any thing against such mighty
Forces, were in himself, and the convenience of the place wherein he was
Encamped; for he had not the twentieth part of the men which were brought by
Autophradates. Nevertheless with these he ventured to give him Battle; and in
it, with but the loss of about a thousand men, cut off several thousands of
His. In memory of which he erected a Trophy, the next day, in the place where
they fought. After he had removed his Camp from thence, tho his Army was ever
the least, yet he was still greatest when the Fight was done; for he understood
the Country, and always contrived, that the Enemy should be confined to such
narrow places, where he had no room to manage any considerable number of men.
Autophradates finding the War proved more unsuccessful to his Master then to
Datames, solicited him to a Peace, and promised to restore him to the King's
Favor. He accepted the Conditions, tho he did not think them real; and said he
intended to send his Ambassadors to Artaxerxes, in order to an Accommodation.
And the War being thus ended, Autophradates went into Phrygia.

But the King hated Datames so implacably, that when he saw his destruction
could not be accomplished by any open Force, he endeavored by some secret
Methods to take him off. But he defeated several of their designs; of which the
most remarkable was this: He had intelligence, that some about him, and such as
were reputed his Friends, had contrived his Death; this he thought, because it
came from his Enemies, was neither to be overmuch credited, nor perfectly
slighted; but being willing to see the reality of the thing, he went to the
very place where he was told they intended the Assasination; To one that
exactly resembl'd him for shape and stature, he likewise gave his Habit, and
commanded him during the Journey to represent him, by riding in his place. He
himself was Accouter'd like a Common Soldier, and Rid amongst His Guards. And
charged all the Company to observe his motions, and second them. When the
Conspirators saw the Company; they were deceived by the place and dress, and
assaulted the Counterfit; which when Datames perceived, he presently threw out
his Darts, and the rest (according to the Sign) doing so too, they were all
killed upon the spot.

Yet at last this sagacious Man was over-reached by a project of Mithridates,
the Son of Ariobarzanes; who assured the King of his Death, upon condition he
might act as he pleased with impunity. The liberty being granted, and the
Promise (according to the Custom of the Persians) confirmed by the Hand, he
pretended an open Defiance of the King, raised Forces, besieged his Towns, and
vexed his Provinces; by Agents desired a correspondence with Datames, and after
a Distribution amongst his Soldiers, complemented him with a Present of rich
Spoils. By these Actions he persuaded Datames, that he had engaged himself in
an everlasting Quarrel with the King; but however, to prevent the least
suspicion of his designs, he neither desired a Conference with him or an
Enterview; but managed his false Friendship so well at distance, that nothing
should seem to be the foundation of it, but their common Hatred of the King.

When he thought he had sufficiently settled him in this opinion, he sent him
word, that it was necessary they should prepare greater Forces, and engage
themselves in an Actual War with the King himself; and if he approved the
Proposal, that he would meet him at any place he should choose, to consult
farther about it. The time and place being appointed; Mithridates, going
thither some days before, with one that was his Confident, hid several Swords,
and nicely observed how they lay. When the day came which they had fixed upon,
they both sent some Servants to view the place, and then met according to the
agreement. After they had spent some time in the debate, and were parted,
Mithridates (that he might not be at all suspected) before he was got to his
Company, returned to the same place, and sat down where he had buried one of
the Daggers, as if he had designed only to rest himself. But having taken up
the Weapon, and concealed it under his Clothes, he sent for Datames, under
pretense that he had forgotten some important matter; and told him, that as he
passed along he had 'spy'd a very convenient place for their Camp. Datames
turning, and looking with some earnestness upon the place which he showed him,
was immediately stabbed in the Back, and died before any one could come up to
his assistance. Thus he that had over-reached many by generous Stratagems, but
none by any base Treachery, was at last deceived and ruined by the plausible
pretenses of Friendship.

THE LIFE OF EPAMINONDAS.
Done into English by Mr. Lane, Fellow of Merton Coll. Oxon.
EPAMINONDAS the Son of Polymnius, was a Theban. But before we begin our
account of him, it seems necessary to desire the Readers, that they would not
make an Estimate of other People's Manners by their own; nor suppose, that
things of small value with them, bear the same rate amongst all the rest of
Mankind. Music (we know) according to our sentiments is below the Dignity of a
Prince; to Dance, the mean Employ of Slaves; yet amongst the Grecians these are
Gentile Accomplishments, of great repute. Epaminondas's Character deserves to
have nothing omitted, that may conduce to the knowledge of so great a Man;
wherefore we shall in the first place discourse of his Parentage, in the next
of his Education, then of his Manners and Disposition, (and if there be any
thing else on those heads worth relating); and in the last place, concerning
his Actions; These are the great concern of life, and are by most preferred
before all the solitary Habits of a lazy Virtue. His Father's name you have
heard before. His Family was Gentile, yet such as might receive, not give a
luster. Poverty seemed entailed upon him from his Ancestors; yet never was
Theban more Gentilely Educated. He learnt to play on the Lute, and to Sing,
from Dionysius; whose Fame in Music was not less then the celebrated Names of
Damon or Lamprus. Olympiodorus taught him the Flute, and Calliphron to Dance.
His Tutor in Philosophy was Lysis the Tarentinian, of the Pythagorean Sect; He
was so great an Admirer of this old Man, that his reserved severe Conversation
pleased him better then the gay Company of his Equals; Neither would he leave
him, till he had so far outgone his Fellow-Pupils, that it was apparent his
Excellence in other Arts would be proportionate to his happy success in these.
If you give a judgment according to our Customs, these things may seem mean and
contemptible, and not proper Theams of Praise; yet were they anciently in
Greece of as great concern as good Breeding could make them. After he was
fifteen years old, he betook himself to the Academy, for the Exercises of the
Body; where he did not so much aim at greatness of strength, as nimbleness in
motion; The first he knew might gain applause in a Ring, the other was of the
greatest use in War. Therefore he designed to himself such a perfection in
Running and Wrestling, as he might be able while he was standing on his Feet to
grapple and close with his Enemy; but neglected the other tricks of these
Exercises, which were performed by the Parties tugging and tumbling one another
on the Ground. These were his Recreations; Arms were his serious business. This
Strength of Body thus gained, was attended with a more numerous train of the
Goods of the Mind. He was modest, prudent, grave in his Behavior, of great
Address, and none more wise in managing each juncto of time to the greatest
advantage. He was well Skilled in the Art of War, Valiant in the Duties of it,
and of an undaunted Courage; So severe a Lover of Truth, that he would not Lie
in Jest; Chaste, compassionate, and patient in an eminent degree; easily
forgiving, not only the Injuries of the Multitude, but of his Friends; Above
all things, careful to conceal Secrets committed to him; which sort of Silence
is sometimes of as great advantage as the clearest Eloquence. He thought the
readiest way to Learn was to Hear; therefore when he came to any place in which
Debates were held, either in Politics or Philosophy, he never departed until
the Discourse was at an end. Poverty was so easy a thing to him, that Glory
was the only advantage he made of the Commonwealth. In his Necessities he was
perfidiously deserted by his Friends; yet was his Kindness so constant to
others in their Wants, that one would guess his Principle was, That Friends
have all things in Common. Thus, when any of his Countrymen were taken
Captive, or any of his Acquaintance had a Daughter Marriagable, who could not
be preferred for want of Fortune, he called a Consult of Friends, allotted to
every one (according to the proportion of his Estate) what he should give, and
when the designed sum was made up, he would not himself receive it; but
introduced the person who was to receive the benefit, to collect it, that he
might know how much he owed to every one's kindness. He gave a brave experiment
of his Integrity in the repulse of Diomedon the Cyricenian, who at the request
of Artaxerxes had undertaken to corrupt Epaminondas; in pursuit of this design,
he comes to Thebes with vast Sums of Gold, and with a Present of five Talents
brings over to his Party Micythus, a young Man whom Epaminondas dearly loved.
Micythus addresses himself to Epaminondas, and acquaints him with the Gift he
had received, and the reason of Diomedon's coming; whereupon he sent for
Diomedon, and thus speaks to him; There is no want of Money; for if the King
desires such things as are for the Interest of Thebes, I am ready to comply
with him without the Bribe of a Reward: But if they are of another nature, he
has not Silver and Gold enough. For the Love of my Country weighs more with me,
then all the Riches of the Universe. That you, who did not know me, and thought
me like your self, made this Attempt upon my Virtue, is no wonder; and I
forgive you: But haste you hence. Such Temptations may prevail on others, tho
they cannot on me. And you, Micythus, restore him his Money; which if you do not
presently do, I will deliver you up into hands of Justice. Diomedon, dejected
at the resolute Honesty of the Man, now only desires, to return safely Home,
and carry his Treasures along with him. You shall (replies Epaminondas), not
for your sake, but my own; lest if your Money should be taken from you, any one
should suspect, That I accepted that as a Spoil, which I had before refused as
a Gift; and did not so much contemn the Bribe, as hate the Obligations of it.
Then he asked him, whither he would be conveyed; and Diomedon answering to
Athens, he gave him a Guard to conduct him thither; and not content with this,
he took care, by his Friend Chabrias the Athenian (whom we have mentioned
before), that he should securely take Shipping there, I suppose this is a
sufficient testimony of his unshaken Honesty. We might produce a great many
more of the like nature, but we must deny our selves that liberty* because we
design in this one Volume to comprehend the Lives of many Illustrious Persons;
upon each of whom other Writers before us have bestowed large Commentaries. He
was the most eloquent of the Thebans; nor less acute in extemporary Repartee,
than persuasive in continued Discourses. One Meneclides was his professed
Enemy, always opposing him in the Government of the Commonwealth; He was a Man
ready and bold in Discourse; that is, he was a Theban; to which Nation Nature
seems to have allotted more of Strength then Wit. When this Man found, that
Epaminondas's Conduct in Military Affairs gained him ^eputation, he began to
advise the Thebans, To lay aside the thoughts of War, and enjoy themselves in
Peace. This he did, not out of any Love to his Country, but to stifle the
occasions of Epaminondas's Glory. To this Epaminondas replies, War indeed is a
dismal Word; and it is the Sound alone that you make use of, to affright our
Citizens from their interest. It Is Ease that you pretend, but Slavery is meant;
for the Foundations of Peace are best laid by the Sword; and they that propose
to themselves an undisturbed and flourishing Tranquillity, must be well
Disciplined in War. Therefore (O Thebans) would you raise your State above the
rest of Greece? This Glory is to be gained in Camps, not Schools of Exercise.
At another time, when this same Meneclides objected to him, that he was never
married, and had no Children; and principally insisted on this, as a great
height of insolence, that he durst compare his own Actions with those of
Agamemnon's. He answered, Meneclides, do not object the want of a Wife; for I
should in that affair sooner take any Man's advice than yours, (for Meneclides
lay under the suspicion of a very incontinent Fellow): But you are mistaken, if
you think it my Ambition to reach Agamemnon's Glory; for he, with the
Assistance of all Greece, scarcely at last, in ten years time, took one City;
whereas I, on the other side, with the single Forces of one City, and in one
day, routed the Lacedaemonians, and delivered all Greece from Slavery. When he
went to the Convention of the States of Arcadia, to engage them in a League
with the Thebans and Argives, he found there Callistratus the Athenian
Ambassador, to oppose his designs, who was esteemed the best Orator of his
time; he very bitterly inveighed against the Thebans and Argives, who were then
Confederates; and amongst the rest of the Invectives, were these, That the
Arcadians should consider what kind of Men both Cities had produced, and from
thence give a judgment of the rest; Orestes and Alcmeon were Argives, and these
wickedly murdered their Mother; O'dippus was born at Thebes, who when he had
Killed his Father, Married his Mother, and had Children by her. When
Epaminondas had answered the rest of his Speech, he came at last to his
Railing, and said, He wondered at the Folly of the Athenian Orator, who did not
consider, That these Men were born Innocent, but when they had contracted
Wickedness enough to be Expelled their own Country, were yet thought good
enough to be Received and Caressed at Athens. But then did his Eloquence most
eminently appear, when before the Battle of Leuctra, all the Ambassadors of the
Confederates were met at Sparta: Here, in this great Assembly, he so clearly
set forth the Tyranny of the Lacedaemonians, that his Discourse did as much
shake the Greatness of that State as the Battle at Leuctra; for then it was
(which appeared afterward) that they were deprived of the Assistance of their
Allies. That he was a very forgiving Man, and thought it unlawful to be angry
at, or revenge, the Injuries of his Country, take the following instances: When
Envy had so far worked him out of the Affections of his Citizens, that they
would not choose him General, but supplied that Trust with a very unskilful
Commander, whose imprudence led their Forces into such Streights that they were
enclosed by their Enemies, and now near Ruin; they began to reflect upon, and
wish for, the good Conduct of Epaminondas, who was at this time a Common
Soldier in the Army; To him they apply themselves for Assistance; who taking no
notice of their Ingratitude, raised the Enemy's Leaguer, and secured a safe
Retreat to the Army. Such Actions as these he often performed; but that which
bears a greater luster then any of the rest, is his brave deportment when he
led the Army into Peloponnesus against the Lacedaemonians; in which Expedition
he had two Colleagues, one of which was Pelopidas, a very valiant Man; who
falling under the Envy of some Crimes that were fastened upon him by his
adversaries, all their Commands were taken from them, and new Pretors appointed
to succeed. Epaminondas refused to obey this Act of State, and persuaded his
Colleagues to do the like; and so they proceeded in the management of that War.
The reason upon which Epominandas acted was this, He foresaw (if he complied)
the Ignorance and Folly of the designed Commanders would ruin the Army: The Law
was, That it should be Death for any man to retain his Command longer than was
limited by his Commission. This Epaminondas well understood, and the danger of
it; but did not think fit, That the Law which was made for the Preservation of
the Commonwealth should be turned to its Ruin; therefore he durst continue his
Command four months longer then the the People had Enacted. After their return
home, his Colleagues being impeached upon this Crime, he permitted them to cast
the whole guilt upon him, and to plead, that it was wholly through his means they
had not obeyed the Orders of the State. Which Plea brought them clearly off;
but none could believe Epaminondas would make any Reply, because the Crime
being plain, they could not fancy what Defense could be made in the Case. He
makes his Appearance, pleads Guilty to his Indictment, and confesses all that
his Colleagues had laid to his Charge; and tells them, that he was very ready
to undergo the punishment the Law appointed; but now, being a Dying Man,
desired this one favor of them, that this Inscription might be wrote on his
Tomb, Epaminondas was put to Death by the Thebans, because at Leuctra he forced
them to overcome the Lacedaemonians; whom, before he was General, not a Man of
the whole Country of Boeotia had the Courage to look upon in the Field; and
that in one Battle he not only raised Thebes from out of its Ruins, but
restored all Greece its Liberty; and so far changed the Scene of Affairs, that
the Thebans besieged Sparta, and the Lacedaemonian Pride was brought so low as
to be contented not to be Slaves; Neither, tho commanded, would he lay down his
Arms 'till he had Fortified Messena, and by that means laid a perpetual Bridle
upon the proud City of Sparta. This Speech raised Admiration, Laughter, and
Applause in the whole Assembly; so that not one of the Judges durst give their
Verdict. And thus he came off this Trial for his Life with great Reputation.
The last time he was General, was at Mantinea; where, pressing too boldly
amongst the Enemies, they soon apprehended the advantage, and (knowing his
Death would be the safety of their Country) turned their whole Force upon him,
encompassed him, and would not leave the pursuit, 'till after a great Slaughter
on both sides, and a brave resistance made by Epaminondas, they saw him
(wounded with a Dart) fall to the ground. This sad accident did at first
somewhat discourage the Boeotians; but recollecting themselves, Revenge
succeeded Grief, and they gave not over till they had utterly routed the Enemy.
Epaminondas finding himself mortally wounded, and knowing, that should the
Shaft be pulled out of his Head he must immediately dye, kept it in so long
'till 'twas told him his Army had got the Victory; Then (says he) I have lived
long enough, for I shall dye unconquered. So the Iron being drawn out, he
immediately expired. He was never Married; for which Pelopidas (who had a very
Debauched Son) thus reproving him, that he took but little Care of the
Commonwealth, who would not leave Children behind him to support it after his
Death. He replies, Consider whether you do not perform worse Offices to it, in
leaving so lewd an Heir, who may help to destroy, but cannot maintain a
Commonwealth: But as for me, I cannot want Issue; the Leuctrian Victory is my
Offspring, which will not only survive me, but will immortalize my Name. At the
time that the Exiles, under the Conduct of Pelopidas, surpised Thebes, and
drove the Lacedaemonian Garrison out of the Castle, Epaminondas (so long as his
own Citizens were engaged in the Fight) kept himself at home, and forbore all
Action. The reason of which proceeding was, that he could not in Honor join
with these Betrayers of their Country, nor would he appear in Arms against
them, because he would not stain himself with the Blood of his Countrymen; for
he well knew, That Victory in a Civil War was at best but an unfortunate Prize.
But this same Man, as soon as the Battle was drawn off as far as the Cadmea,
and the Lacedaemonians only concerned, thrust himself into the foremost Rank. I
think I shall have said enough of the Virtues and Actions of this great Man, if
I add but this one thing, which none can deny, That before Epaminondas's Birth,
and after his Death, Thebes was constantly subject to a Foreign Power; but on
the contrary, while he Presided in that Commonwealth, it became the Leading
State of Greece. Whence we may draw this conclusion, That the Bravery of one
Great Man does more advance a State than the whole Mass of People.

THE LIFE OF PELOPIDAS.
Done into English by Mr. Creech.
PELOPID AS, the Theban, is more famous in History then common Talk; of whose
Virtues I cannot tell in what manner I shall treat; for should I give a full
descriptionof of his Actions, it is justly to be feared, that I should rather
seem to write a History than his Life; and if I should only touch upon the
heads, that then I should cloud his Reputation; and those who are unacquainted
with the Greek Histories, would not perceive how great a Man he was: Therefore,
to the best of my power to prevent both, I shall provide against the satiety as
well as ignorance of my Readers. Phaebidas the Spartan, as he led his Army through
Thebes toward Olynthus, at the instigation of some few Thebans (who, that they
might the more easily check the contrary Faction, sided with the Spartan
interest) surpised the Citadel Cadmea; and this he did, not by any order from
the State, but upon his own head; for which the Lacedaemonians took away his
Commission, and set a Fine upon him; but refused to surrender the Castle to the
Thebans; concluding it more politic, now distaste was once given, to continue
a Guard upon them, then permit them to be free. For after the Peloponnesian
War, and the Athenians overcome, they saw the Thebans only stand in
competition, and dare to oppose their Empire. Upon this account they put their
Friends in power; and as for the Heads of the contrary Faction, some they
Butchered, and some they Banished; amongst which, this Pelopidas (whom I
mentioned in the beginning) was an Exile. Almost all these fled to Athens, not
to live lazily, and at ease; but as being the nearest and most convenient
station, whence on the first opportunity they might endeavor the freedom of
their Country: And therefore as soon as time appeared, upon agreement with
their friends at Thebes, they made choice of that day in which the Governors
used to meet at a public Banquet, to destroy their Enemies, and free the City:
Great Actions are often performed with no great force; but certainly never
before from so mean a beginning as this, was so great an Empire overthrown: For
not above twelve of the banished Youth undertook the Enteprise, and not above
an hundred would join with them in so dangerous an Attempt; and yet by this
despicable number was the Power of the Spartans Ruined: for these did not so
much Attempt the contrary Faction in Thebes, as the Lacedaemonians, the then
Lords of Greece; and whose Empire, first wounded by this Action, was a little
while after in the Battle of Leuctra, brought to the last gasp: Now these
twelve, Pelopidas their Leader, leaving Athens in the daytime, that about the
dusk of the Evening they might reach Thebes, to prevent suspicion they put
themselves in a Country dress, and appeared like Hunters, with Hounds,
Hunting-poles and Nets; and entering the City at the very nick of time, they
refresht themselves at Charon's House, by whose appointment the day for the
Attempt was set. And here I crave leave to break my story with a short
Observation, To what great Calamities does supine security expose! For the
Theban Magistrates were quickly informed, that the Exiles were in Town; but
being eager on their Entertainment, they slighted the discovery so much, that
they would not trouble themselves to examine a matter of so great concernment:
Besides, which is a clearer demonstration of their madness, a Letter was
brought from Archias the chief Priest of Athens, to Archias the chief
Magistrate of Thebes, which made a full discovery of the Plot: This being
delivered him while he was at Table, without opening it, he clapped it under his
Cushion, with these words, I adjourn Business till to morrow. In the dead of
the night, when they were well drunk, the Exiles, under the Conduct of
Pelopidas, dispatched them all: And that work once over, and the common People
called in to Liberty and Arms, many from the Country as well as Town came in to
their Assistance. They beat the Spartan Garrison out of the Castle, freed their
Country, and as for those who enticed Phaebidas to Surprise the Cadmea, some
they Executed, and some they Banished. All this unquiet time, Epaminondas (as I
hinted in his Life) whilst the Citizens only quarreled amongst themselves,
never stirred; and therefore the freeing of Thebes is the peculiar Glory of
Pelopidas. In almost all other Exploits Epaminondas had a share; for in the
Battle at Leuctra, Epaminondas was General, and Pelopidas Captain of a Select
Band, which first broke the Main Body of the Spartans; and in all Enterprises
he made one. Thus when Sparta was stormed, he Commanded one Wing; and that the
old Messenians might quickly recover their own Country, He himself went an
Ambassador to the Persian. In short, he was the other Man at Thebes; tho but
second, yet so as to be next Epaminondas. He had also cross fortune to
Encounter, for first (as I have already mentioned) he lived in Banishment; and
when he designed to bring Thessaly under the Theban Power, and thought the
Character of an Ambassador, which all Nations hold Sacred, was a sufficient
Protection; He and Ismenias were seized by Alexander the Pherean Tyrant, and
clapped in Chains. Epaminondas Warred on Alexander, and releiv'd him; but never
after that could he be Friends with him that had offered the affront; and
therefore he persuaded the Thebans, to undertake the Protection of Thessaly,
and expel the Tyrants: He being chief Commander in that Expedition, and having
led his Forces into Thessaly, as soon as ever he came in sight of the Enemy,
hasted to a Battle; In which Fight when he saw Alexander, fired with rage, he
spurred his Horse toward him, and advancing a great way before His Soldiers,
was shot throw: This happened in his second Victory, for the Tyrants Forces
were already routed: For this Action, all the Cities of Thessaly Honored dead
Pelopidas with Golden Crowns, and Brazen Statues; and gave his Children a
considerable piece of Land.

THE LIFE OF AGESILAVS.
Done into English by Mr. Scott, M. A. and Fellow of Queen's Coll. Oxon.
AGESILAUS of Lacedaemon is a person highly applauded by the greater part of
Historians, particularly by Xenophon, Scholar of Socrates, who treats him with
a singular respect. At first he stood in Competition for the Crown with
Leotychides, his Brother Agis's Son. It was a received Custom amongst the
Spartans, to Dignifie two Persons at a time with the Name of King, tho in
effect neither of them had much of the The greatest part of the executive Power
was devolved upon the Ephori, only the Power of Peace and War, and imposing of
Ceremonies in Religion, remaining in the King, Arist. Pol. lib. 3. c. 10.
Power. These two were always to be of the two Eminent Families of Proclus and
Eurysthenes, formerly Kings of Sparta; who had both descended from the ever
famous Hercules, and from him had derived their Titles; yet especial care was
taken, that the two Lines should not mix and confound, but that each should
descend in its proper Channel; and that in both these the Eldest Heir Male
should always succeed; and in defect of him, the next Prince of the Blood; the
Female Sex being excluded* Agis in his Life time had denied Leotychides to be
For Leotychides was supposed to be Bastard to Alcibiades, who when Agis was
absent in the Wars, was observed to entertain too secret a Correspondence with
the Queen Timea, which being made known to Agis, he looked upon her Issue as
Spurious. Plutarch vit. Alcib. Athenaus.
Legitimate, but being better advised at his Death, declared him to be his Son;
which gave encouragement to Leotychides, after the decease of Agis, to dispute
the Empire with his Uncle Agesilaus, but by the Prevalency of Lysander, a
Turbulent and Potent Man in those times, Leotychides was rejected, and
Agesilaus preferred.

No sooner was he invested in the Kingdom, but being of an active Spirit, he
persuades the Lacedaemonians to make an Invasion upon Asia, and to Commence War
against that King in his own Territories; holding it a Maxim of good Policy,
rather to remove a War into an Enemy's Country than to entertain it at home:
besides, the noise of At that time King of Persia.
Artaxerxes's Arms had already reached Greece; to invade which, he had Equipped
a well furnished Fleet, and set a Potent Land Army on foot; and therefore to
prevent him, Agesilaus, as soon as he had got his Forces in a readiness, enters
Asia with such an incredible Expedition, that his unexpected presence
anticipated the Fame of his coming; and that King's Lieutenants found him set
down in the midst of their Country before they had any notice of his design, to
their great astonishment and confusion, they not being in a posture to make any
defense. The news of so unexpected a Guest could not long be concealed from the
ears of Tissaphernes, Artaxerxes's Viceroy there, who upon the first
Advertisement of it, politickly desires a Truce with the Spartans, under
pretense of his friendly Interposition, to accommodate matters amicably and
fairly betwixt both parties; but really for nothing else, but to gain time to
levy Forces. However it was, a Truce was agreed upon for three months; the two
Generals binding themselves with a solemn Oath to observe it. And accordingly
none was ever more punctually observed by Agesilaus, and less by Tissaphernes,
who improved the time in making preparation for War. This the generous Spartan
knew very well; but yet could not be induced to violate his Oath and make a
breach, saying, That he should be the greatest Gainer at length, for
Tissaphernes by his Perjury must nceessarily expose himself and his
undertakings to the just indignation of the Gods and Men: But that he by his
Religious observance should gain both Reputation and strength to his Party;
since the Gods are always more propitious to, and all wise Men will the rather
favor and wish well to those, who put a value upon what they say, and are true
to the Trust which is reposed in them.

The Truce expired, Tissaphernes draws down his Forces into Caria, partly to
secure his own Possessions there, and because that Country being of all the
Richest, would in all probability be the object of the Enemies first Attempt.
But he was mistaken in his conjecture, for Agesilaus suddenly wheels about into
Frontinus lib. 1. c. 8. speaking of this Expedition, instead of Phrygia reads
Lydia, but the mistake is not great, for Phrygia, which is a Province in Asia
Minor, has Caria, Lydia, Mysia and Bithynia bordering so nearly upon it, that
as Strabo says, they are not easily distinguished, but are often promiscuously
taken one for another.
Phrygia, which he overran with such celerity, that he had depopulated the
whole Country before Tissaphernes had advanced one foot forward to its relief.

Having here gratified his Soldiers with the Spoils of the place, he brought
them back to their Winter Quarters at Ephesus, where he set the Artisans on
work to prepare and furnish him with all sorts of Arms; and those of his
Soldiers who were industrious to fit and Accoutre themselves therewith, he (for
the encouragement of others) obliged with some special Reward or Mark of his
Favor; as likewise every one who in their daily Military Exercises
particularly Signalized himself above the rest; by which means he effected,
that in a few days he had the best appointed, and the best Disciplined Army in
the World. When it was time to leave his Winter Quarters, he publicly
Proclaimed what way he really designed to direct his course; having Learned by
good Experience, that the Incredulous Asian would never believe the protests of
his Enemy, but would certainly send his Forces to Guard those Provinces which
were most distant from that which he declared himself ready to invade.
Accordingly it proved, for Agesilaus manifesting his design to make an inroad
into The Royal City of Lydia, Her. Ep. 11. lib. 1. Quid concinna Sam^t? quid
Cresi Regia Sardis?
Sardis, Tissaphernes (whose own fault it was thus to be deceived the second
time) again advances into Caria to defend it, but by the event discovering his
error he returns with all speed to the assistance of Sardis, but it was almost
too late; for by that time he had reached the place, the Active Agesilaus had
posted himself in all the most important places of the Country, and had loaded
himself with the Spoils of it. The Asians were much stronger in Horse, and
therefore the wary Spartans declined all opportunities of engageing in open
Campaign, and made choice of places the difficulty of which rendered the
Enemy's Horse of little or no advantage to them; by which policy he always
remained absolute Conqueror in Asia, tho much inferior in Power; ballancing the
inequality of Number with the excellency of his Conduct.

But whilst he was consulting to extend his Victories into the very bowels of
Persia, and to make the Sultan himself sensible of the heavy stroke of his
Arms, he receives an Express from the Ephori of Sparta, commanding his speedy
return thither; the Athenians and Baeotians having denounced open War against
that State. And here we have a fair opportunity of discovering the excellent
Piety as well as Fortitude of Agesilaus, who when he was at the Head of a
Victorious Army, and might in despite of the World have put himself in
possession of the whole Empire of Persia, did yet notwithstanding so
advantageous a prospect, submit to the Commands of the absent Magistrates with
so much readiness and condescension, as if he had wore the character of a
private Commoner in Sparta rather than of so great a Prince. A rare example,
worthy of the best of Emperors! Agesilaus, the Incomparable Agesilaus! to the
scorn and Contempt of the Ambitious World, chooses rather to be Master of a
good Reputation then of the most flourishing Empire; rather to Command the
Affections of his Country then to be Lord of Asia. Accordingly he is resolved,
and in pursuance of this so generous a resolution, uses such Expedition, that
he passes the Hellespont with his whole Army in thirty days, which Xerxes could
not accomplish under a whole year. But when he came near to Peloponnese he
found his way blocked up at A City in Boeotia.
Coronea by the Athenians, Boeotians, The Thebans, Athenians, Argives,
C^^inthians, Eubaans, and Locrians, as Xenophon gives the account.
and their Confederates, who had posted themselves there to impede him in his
passage: But in vain did they contend against him who had Fortune at his
Command; for at the first encounter he gave them a total rour. The Victory was
great, but yet the praise of it was further enhansed by his Religious Clemency,
for when some of the Enemy, escaped from the Battle, had taken Sanctuary in
Which was at Itonia, a City in Thessaly, so called (...), says Stephonus from
I^on.
Minerva's Temple, and he was asked, what he would be pleased to determine
concerning them, he strictly forbid any violence to be offered to them; tho he
might justly have Sacrificed them as proper Victims to his deep Resentments,
and to that Noble Blood which he Himself had expended in the Quarrel, having
received some considerable wounds in the Fight. But his Religious respect
toward the Sacred Temples did not only evidence it self in Greece, but in Asia
too, where he expressed the like concern to preserve the Sacred Altar and the
Images of the Gods from violence and Profanation; and he was often observed to
say; That in his opinion he was equally Sacrilegious who offered violence to
the Altar or the Votary at the Altar, and that in effect he was the same
Criminal who was an Enemy to the Sacred place, or the Religion of the place.

After this, Corinth was the chief Seat of Action, from whence this took the
Denomination of the Corinthian War. Here albeit in one Engagement he had left
10000 of his Enemies breathless upon the ground, and had so far weak'ned the
Enemies Forces that in all Men's opinion they were perfectly broken, and
incapacitated ever to Rally again; yet the Generous Agesilaus, no less a Master
of himself then the Enemy, was so far from entertaining himself with any
Insolent Conceits of his own Atcheivments, that with a noble Compassion he
deplored the unhappy State of Greece, which through its own divisions should
lose the Lives of so many brave Men; whose Valor, if it had been placed on a
right level, and directed accordingly, would inevitably have proved the Ruin of
Persia. After this, having pent up the Enemy within the Walls of Corinth, he
was advised to lay close Siege to that place; but Generously replied, That it
was beneath the Prudence of his Conduct so to do, for although he knew very well
how to reduce a Criminal to a sense of his Duty, yet he did not think the
Cities of Greece proper objects of his Valor, for whilst Greece fought against
Greece, and destroyed its own Members, whose concern against the Common Enemy
the Barbarian was one and the same, every Member, which by this means was Rent
and Torn off, was lost to the whole Body, whose Strength was thereby impaired,
and it Incapacitated to Resist the Attempts of the Enemy, who would improve the
Advantage of their Divisions to their Confusion.

In the mean time happened that unfortunate Battle at Leuctra, fatal to the
Lacedaemonians, whither Agesilaus, as if he had been Conscious of the Event,
could not by any Art be persuaded to go; but afterward, when Epaminondas had
Invested the City Sparta Thucydides in his Proem says, that the Cities of
Greece had no Walls, but afterward the Spartan Tyrants, distrusting the
strength of their Arms, encompassed Sparta with a strong Wall. Justin lib. 14.
, it being at that time naked, and not defended with any Wall; Agesilaus
behaved himself with so much Gallantry and Resolution, that in all Men's
opinion, if Sparta had wanted her Agesilaus, she had not long been Sparta. One
remarkable instance there was, wherein his expedite and seasonable Counsel
discovered it self to the advantage of all. For when some rash young Men,
terrified with the report of the Thebans approach, had taken up a Resolution to
pass over to them, and in order thereto had possessed themselves of a Post
without the City, Agesilaus foreseeing the ill consequence and example of it,
if any of his Men should be known to go over to the Enemy, He cunningly joins
himself with them, commends their choice of that place where they were Posted,
and tells them, that he himself had designed the same before, and therefore
that he would be their Leader, and the Companion of their Fortunes. They,
caught with this Stratagem, presently returned to their Allegiance, and having
some of Agesilaus his Followers joined with them, lay aside all thoughts of
Surrendering the place; for their numbers being augmented with Men of good
Experience and Conduct, they durst not embrace any Treacherous design, and
desisted the more willingly because they thought that their Treason was not yet
discovered.

After the Battle of Leuctra, Sparta could never recover it self, or regain its
pristine Majesty and Power, yet Agesilaus bravely bore up under all Fortunes,
and never wanted a helping hand to Sublevate the sinking State. Particularly,
when the Lacedaemonians were one time in great want for Money, he by Protecting
those who had been defective in their Duty, and had incurred the censure of the
Laws, obtein'd great sums of Money from them, all which he frankly bestowed
upon the Public. And this was more signally remarkable in him, that of all the
Rich Presents which were given him by Kings, Noble Persons or Cities which he
had obliged, he never converted any to his own private use; neither did he ever
deviate from the laudable Frugality and Thrift of the Spartans, his Diet was
homely, his Apparel plain, his Lodging not adorned with the novel Bravery of
the Times, but the same with that of Eurysthenes the Founder of his Family;
into which, if you should enter, you would find no provision for Lust, none for
Luxury; but Patience was the Ornament of it, Abstinence its best Furniture,
with these it abounded, but in other things it was not distinguished from the
House of a poor Man or private Person.

But Nature was not more indulgent to this Great Person in bestowing upon him
so many Excellent Qualities of Mind, then She was niggardly in dispensing the
Graces of his Body; for he was low of Stature, and lame of one Foot; which
latter defect made him appear something deformed; and Strangers that beheld his
face and the outward frame of his Body, slighted and contemned him; but those
that were acquainted with the inward Accomplishments of his Mind, could never
admire him enough. According to his former custom, when he was eighty years
old, and was come into Egypt as Auxiliary to Thacus having been constituted by
the King of Persia chief Commander of all his Forces in Egypt, had
treacherously caused Egypt and the Forces under his Command to revolt from the
Persian, and made himself King, which gave occasion to the World to reprehend
Agesilaus for this action, it being thought unworthy of so great a Man, and a
Grecian too, for lucre sake to give assistance to so base a Rebel. Plutarch.
Thacus, he lay down to sleep upon the shore amongst his Followers, without any
Roof above him but that of Heaven, or Bed under him but the Earth, which he
covered with Straw, a Beasts Skin being his Coverlet. In the same manner lay
all his Companions round him, in mean, and very contemptible Habit, and which
was so far from signifying the Person of a King to be amongst them, that it
rather gave cause to suspect him to be some despicable mean Person. When the
noise of his coming was bruited abroad, and had reached the Ears of the
Persian, Messengers with Presents were instantly sent to him; tho when they
came and inquired, which was Agesilaus? they could scarce be induced to believe
that he was one of those that lay down in that neglected manner. But when after
their Complements made, they had tendered their Presents to him, he only made
choice of some Veal-flesh, and other Victuals for present use, and had
distributed amongst his Servants the sweet Ointments, the Coronets, with the
more curious fare, and reserved nothing for himself, but sent back all the rest
again, the Barbarians then looked upon him with greater contempt then before,
imputing it to his ignorance, that he made choice of those less valuable
things. Afterward when he left Egypt he was Presented by King Diodorus affirms
this King Nectanabes to be Tachus himself, who thus rewarded him for confirming
him in his Kingdom, but Plutarch will have him to be Cousen to Tachus, who
being during these Commotions declared King, was grateful to Agesilaus for the
good service he had done him.
Nectanabes with 220 Talents, all which he liberally distributed amongst his
Followers the Lacedaemonians. Coming from thence into a Haven betwixt Cyrene
and Egypt, commonly known by the name of Strabo mentions this Port of Menelaus,
so called from Menelaus the Grecian, who coming into Aethiopia, and from thence
Sailing into Africa, came to Land with his Ships in the Coasts about Ardania,
which from thence forwards took his name.
Menelaus his Haven, he unhappily fell sick of a fatal Disease, of which he
After he had lived 84 years and reigned 41. Plutarch.
died. His Friends, in order to convey his dead Body, in defect of Honey,
anointed it with Wax, and carried it home to Sparta.

THE LIFE OF EVMENES.
Done into English by Mr. Chapter Allestree, M. A. of Chapter Chapter Coll. Oxon.
EUMENES was a Native of Cardia; and so eminent for Personal Courage, that had
his Fortune or Success been in any degree equal to it, he had not, it is true,
been really Greater then he was (because we measure the Greatness of an Hero by
his inward Virtue, and not by any outward circumstances of Fortune) but still
he had been more Honorable and Illustrious, and Fame had rendered him more
considerable in the Eye of of the World. It was his unhappiness to be born in
an Age wherein the Macedonians flourished, and were at that height of Renown,
as to eclipse his Merit; neither was it any small matter of Reproach and
Detraction to him (who lived constantly amongst them) to be ignominiously
upbraided with the Appellation of a Forreigner, and a Man descended of a mean
Stock; and yet he Himself was the Chief of the Family he sprung from. So that,
upon these reasons, they envied him the Glory of Precedence; and yet were
forced to be content and submit to it: For he surpassed them all, in the
Qualifications of a Statesman, in Care, Industry, and Patience; in Subtilty of
Contrivance, and Quickness of Invention. These Endowments recommended him early
to the Acquaintance of King Philip; which in a very short time he improved into
a most intimate Familiarity and Friendship; for as young as he was, there
appeared such a Genius, and Generous Spirit, as promised much future Greatness.
So that the King Constituted him his Secretary; which is an Employment of
greater Reputation and Honor amongst the Grecians than it is with the Romans;
for we justly esteem Persons of that Character, as they really are, to be only
Mercenary Scribes, and employed for Gain. But, on the contrary, no Man was ever
in Greece advanced to the Dignity of that Station, but such as were born of
honest Parents, were of approved Integrity, and had Abilities fit for the
Service; and the reason is, because their Office gives them Access to Princes,
makes them necessarily acquainted with great Intrigues, and the secret Measures
and Resolutions of all their Councils. He enjoyed this Honor, and place in his
Affection, during the last seven years of King Philip's Reign, and (after his
Death) was continued in the same Character under Alexander the Great for
thirteen more; and at last was preferred to Command that Wing of the Horse
which was called the SOCIAL WING, from the Confederacy of the Allies that
Constituted it. In short, he was Privy-Councellor to both these Princes, and
entrusted with the sole management of their Business, and all matters of
Importance.

When Alexander was dead at Babylon, his Provinces came to be distributed
equally to the several Officers who enjoyed his Favor; it was Perdiccas's
Fortune (since Craterus and Antipater, tho more in esteem with Alexander, were
absent at this Delegation; and Haephestion, whom Alexander loved as
passionately as himself, was dead also) to have the Command or Superintendency
of the Whole lodged in his hands; and this was conjectured by the Ring that
Alexander (when he lay speechless) took from his Finger and gave, as a peculiar
instance of his kindness; intimating by this Pledge, that he nominated him
Protector of the Empire, and entrusted the Government of his Dominions to his
Conduct, whilst his Children were in their Minority, and remained under his
Guardianship. In this Distribution of Provinces, the Government of Cappadocia
fell to Eumenes's share, or rather was Assigned to him; and the Title only of
Lieutenant conferred upon him, the Country at that time being actually in
possession of the Enemy. It was the policy of Perdiccas to make this Man his
Friend, and gain him to his interest, which he endeavored to accomplish by all
the endearments imaginable, because he knew him industrious in the Employment
of War, and unalterably true to the Principle of his first Engagement;
presuming with much reason and confidence, that if he could move him to espouse
his cause, his service would be more than ordinarily instrumental to bring
about those great Affairs which he had then in hand; for he intended (that
which almost all Men in Empire propose to themselves) an Universal Monarchy,
and to grasp all Power in his hands. Neither was he single and alone in this
design upon the Sovereignty of the World; for the same lust of Power equally
spread it self, and run throw all the Governors of Alexander's Provinces; and
accordingly we find Leonatus affecting the Command of Macedonia, and Attempting
to invest himself in the Government of that Province; and in order thereunto,
plying Eumenes with the bait of Preferment, and proposals of Honor to desert
Perdiccas and make a strict League and Alliance with him; and when his
arguments and promises were ineffectual to corrupt his Honesty, or seduce him
from the Friendship he bore Perdiccas, he treacherously sought his Death, and
had certainly accomplished it, but that Eumenes privately made his escape by
night, and so avoided the danger.

In the mean time, whilst these ambitious Designs were forming, there seemed to
be laid the Foundation of those ensuing Wars, which (after Alexanders Death)
raged even to the Excision of the several Parties in the Contest; and all of
them (as one Man) joined themselves in a Confederacy, to suppress Perdiccas,
and prevent his growing Greatness. Now, tho Eumenes was sensible of the danger
of his Friend, and knew that he was unable to stem the Tide, or with his single
Forces overpower that formidable and united Body of Men, that were raised
against him, yet he would not desert him in extremity, but was more mindful of
his Honor, than the consideration of his own safety; Perdiccas had put him in
a place of Trust, and Constituted him Governor of that part of Asia, which lies
betwixt Mount Taurus and the Hellespont, and fixed him commodiously at that
Post, for the convenience of stopping the Europaeans, and keeping them from
falling in upon the Rear, whilst he in the mean time undertook an Expedition
into Egypt, and designed to encounter Ptolemy. And yet Eumenes was left in no
good condition to Fight, for the Troops he had with him were not considerable
either for Number or Courage, being for the most part raw, and unexperienced,
ignorant of all Discipline, and raised hastily from the Refuse of the People;
So that when Craterus and Antipater (Men of Renown and Terror in the Art of
War) were said to have passed the Hellespont, and advancing toward him with an
Army of old Macedonian Soldiers (where by the way I must tell you, that these
Macedonian Soldiers were thought as terrible in the Trade of War, as the Romans
are now with us; for those are ever counted the best Soldiers, that are levied
from that Country which is the Seat of the Empire) Eumenes was confident, that
if his Men should know the Power and Strength of the Enemy, and against whom
they were drawn out to Fight, they would be so far from going cheerfully upon
the Expedition, that they would drop down dead with the news; It was his care
therefore to preserve them in ignorance of his design, and to lead them through
unknown and by-roads, where no certain or authentic Intelligence could
possibly come to disabuse them; and to bear them in hand, that their Arms were
to be employed against the Barbarians, to revenge the insolence of a sort of
People, that had offered Affronts and acts of Hostility to their Country:
Acting therefore by these measures of secresy, he had Marshalled and disposed
his Army in the best Array in the World for the Engagement, and had quite ended
the Battle, before ever the Soldiers knew their Adversaries, or against whom
they drew their Swords; and yet it is to be confessed, that this overthrow is
to be ascribed to another reason, viz. to the advantageous choice he made of
the ground, wherein his Horse alone (which was the strength of his Army) might
bear the Onset and Attaque of the Enemy, and He not obliged to expose his
Infantry to the Shock, which was very inconsiderable:

In this smart Conflict, which lasted almost till night, Craterus the General,
and Neoptolemus, who had the second place of Command in the Field, were both
slain: Eumenes engaged Personally in the Fight with Neoptolemus; and so violent
was their hatred and animosity to each other, that when their Grapling had
dislodged the Riders from their Horses, and thrown them both to the Ground,
they could not be disengaged from their hold, or parted by any thing but the
death of one of the Combatants; so that they seem to have bore an internal
malice, and to have waged War principally in their Minds, and made their Bodies
only seconds and Instruments in the quarrel. In this Conflict Eumenes received
some small Wounds, but they were not so dangerous as to induce him, for his
Cure, to sound a Retreat and leave the Field, but rather animated him to a
fresh Pursuit, and a more vigorous Slaughter of the Enemy. So that when he had
entirely routed the Horse, slain Craterus, and taken a vast number of Prisoners
(of the best Rank and Quality in the Army), the Foot seeing themselves
destitute of Succor, and lodged in such narrow places, where 'twas impossible
for them to make their escape with safety, surrendered themselves upon
Discretion, and prayed for Quarter. They no sooner obtained this Grant of their
Lives from Eumenes, but treacherously, upon the first opportunity broke their
Faith, and (contrary to the Engagement of Captives) revolted with as much speed
as they were able to the Enemies Camp, and took part with Antipater. However
Eumenes generously labored to recover Craterus from his Wounds, who was
brought from the Field with some faint Breathings and signs of Life, to his
Tent; and when he saw that 'twas impossible for Art to cure him, out of
deference to the Character he bore, and to the Friendship that was once betwixt
them (for they were intimate Companions in Alexander's Lifetime), he
Celebrated his Obsequies with great Pomp, and sent his Ashes to his Wife and
Children into Macedon.

Whilst these great Actions were Achieved about the Hellespont, Perdiccas was
treacherously killed, in an Engagement upon the River Nile, by Seleucus and
Antigonus; so that the whole Administration of Affairs devolved upon Antipater.
Here those who had deserted the Army, by a Council of War, were proclaimed
Traitors, and (tho absent) condemned to lose their Heads. Amongst the number of
those who lay under this hard Sentence, Eumenes was Chief; who was really
disturbed at the Injustice of his Fate, but not to that degree as to make him
despond, or desist from the prosecution of the War. And yet this Proscription,
tho it might seem insignificant to affect a Man that was really in Arms, yet it
had this effect, as to rebate the Greatness of that Courage which it was unable
utterly to overthrow. Antigonus, (who was provided with good store both of
Ammunition and Men) in pursuance to this Decree, followed Eumenes in the Rear,
and gave some disturbances to his Troops by small Skirmishes on the Road; but
was never able to force him to a pitched Battle, only in such narrow places,
where a small Party was sufficient to engage the Front of his whole Army. And
yet at last, when he was not to be undermined by Policy or Prudence, he was
supplanted and almost ruined by the Treachery of a Multitude; but yet, even
here, he extricated himself out of this difficulty; and, with the loss of some
of his Men, retired safe to a Citadel in Phrygia, called Nora; wherein he was
so close besieged by Antigonus, and abridg'd of room to Air his Horses in, that
he feared their dissuetude from Exercise would speedily breed a Murrain, and
cause a destruction amongst them; so that to prevent this inconvenience, he
made use of an expedient, whereby they might in the same Stall procure a better
Appetite to their Fodder, and yet not want the benefit of Riding. He devised
this way; and tied their Heads so high to the Rack with Halters, that they
could by no means touch the Earth with their fore-feet; and then his Grooms,
with the Discipline of the Whip, laying on behind, obliged them to leap and
kick backwards, to revenge the stroke. This motion, or agitation of Body,
caused as much Sweating as if they had been actually Breathed in a Course. So
that (what was the most wonderful thing of all) by this Management the Horses
were brought from the Castle, after many Months Siege, as clean and in as good
liking as if they had been air'd every day in the Fields. When he was thus
blocked up, as often as he thought convenient, he made Incursions into the
Enemy's Camp, and either burnt or demolished the Fortifications and
Entrenchments of Antigonus; but still he kept himself close in his Garrison
during the Winter season, because he could not in the Field have the advantage
of a Castle for his defense and shelter; but as soon as the Spring approacht,
under the pretense of yiedling the place, and making Conditions of Peace, he
imposed upon Antigonus's Officers (who had the management of the Treaty) and
delivered himself and his Soldiers both from the straitness and danger of the
Siege.

To him Olympias, the Mother of Alexander, made her application, and addresst
from Epirus (where she then dwelt) Letters to him into Asia, to importune his
Aid, and desire his Assistance to recover Macedon, and invest her in the
possession of that Empire. Eumenes, in his Answer, advised her to desist from
her Pretensions, or at least to wait the time, when the Son of Alexander should
assume the Government; but if her Ambition should hurry her, against this
Advice, to invade Macedon, by all means she ought to forget old Injuries, and
not exercise any Acts of Cruelty against her Subjects. She followed none of his
Counsel; for She did go into Macedonia, and Reigned there with all the Tyranny
and Barbarity imaginable. So that her Government becoming generally odious, she
was forced to write again to Eumenes, and beseech him not to suffer the
inveterate Enemies of her House to extirpate the very Race and Memory of
Philip, but to bring speedy Relief to the poor Remains and Posterity of
Alexander; which Request of here is, if it were so reasonable as to be closed
with, she further entreated him, to raise what Forces he could and bring to her
Assistance; and that he might the more readily comply with this motion, for his
encouragement, she had already obliged all her Officers (who had not yet shoke
off their Allegiance) to obey him, and submit themselves to be regulated by his
Orders. Eumenes was so exalted with the Honor of his Employment, and the
Greatness of the Character he was put into, that he chose rather to embrace
Death (if the Gods would have it so) in a generous Return of Service to his
great Benefactor, than to live ignominiously, and with security, under the
brand and appellation of Ingratitude.

Accordingly he makes a new levy of Men, and prepares himself for a War against
Antigonus; Now there were at that time several of the Macedonian Nobility with
him, and amongst them Peucestes, who was of the Bedchamber to Alexander, and
had the Government of Persia conferred upon him, and Antigenes, who commanded
the Macedonian Phalanx; Eumenes thought it was impossible to decline envy, or
prevent disgust, if He, who was a Stranger, should arrogate the Command, and
prefer himself to be General in the Army, when there was so vast a concourse
and appearance of Macedonian Noblemen with him; and yet being unwilling to be
laid aside from the Employment, he takes a middle way to avoid the danger; he
erects a Pavilion in the Camp, and calls it by the name of Alexander's Tent;
and there orders all the Royal Furniture of a Golden Throne, a Scepter, and a
Diadem, to be placed where the Officers met constantly to treat of public
Affairs, and the negotiation of War; being of opinion, that by this means he
should not be oppress't with envy, if under the pretense and umbrage of
Alexander's name, he carried on the War; which point he accomplished according
to his design; for when the principal Officers met and concerted their measures
seemingly at the Royal Pavilion, and not at Eumenes his Tent, his Superiority
in a manner was concealed, and yet in effect he managed the whole Business of
the Consult.

When the point of Precedence was in this manner accommodated, Eumenes met
Antigonus, and had an encounter with him in Paraetacis; not in a formal pitched
Battle, where the whole Army was engaged, but in small skirmishes by Parties,
where Antigonus was constantly worsted, and obliged to retire to his Winter
Quarters in Media; He in the mean time lodged his Forces in the Country of
Persia, not as if he had chose the place for any advantage to himself, but the
obstinacy of his Soldiers obliged him to it; for that Wing of his Army (with
which Alexander overrun Asia, and Conquered Persia) were so insolent with the
sense of their former Victories, and the Glory they Achieved there, that they
thought it their Business to Command and not Follow their Leaders. Which really
is the true character of our Veteranes; and there is this danger in employing
either of them, for fear their unruliness and untractable Spirit should have
this effect of destroying all before 'em, and their pride turn as prejudicial
to their own Party, as their Valor is fatal to the Enemy; and if any one will
take the pains to examine and compare the Actions of both, he must necessarily
find a great parity and resemblance betwixt them, and no other difference but
in point of time. But to return from this digression; Eumenes Quartered his Men
in Posts, not convenient for the Business of War, but accommodate to the Luxury
of his Soldiers, and for this end they lay scattered in the Country, in no
order at all, but at a great distance from each other. Antigonus was sensible
of the disorder they were in, and withal conscious of his inability to attack
them with success, if they were formed into a Body, or put in a posture to
receive him, and therefore changed his measures of assaulting them openly, and
upon warning, and took new resolutions; of doing it by surprise. There were two
ways leading from his Winter Quarters in Media, to his Enemies Camp on the
other side, the one of 'em was short, exactly in a line, and lay cross the
Country, where there was nothing but Desert and uninhabitable places, by reason
of draught and the penury of water, and was only ten easy days journey at the
most; The other, which was the more beaten Tract, went round about in a
circumference, and was much the longer passage, but still had all the
conveniences and accommodations of Travel. He foresaw, that if he undertook to
pass in the more public Road, the Enemy must necessarily be upon their Guard,
and have intelligence of his March, before he had accomplished the third part
of his journey; but if he moved with his Army, in a straight line, through the
Desert part of the Country, he might have hopes to oppress 'em unawares, and
unprovided for his coming; upon this resolution, he ordered several Pitchers
and Vessels of water to be prepared, and a great deal of Provinder to be in
readidiness, to supply the defect of the Country; and then took care for his
Soldiers, that there should be Bread and Victuals enough baked, to serve for
ten days; and this he did, because he would not be put to the necessity of
making fires upon every occasion of Eating, for fear the Enemy should discover
his approach at a distance, and he should have the secret of his journey
betrayed.

In this Equipage, he sets forward and begins the Compaign, who notwithstanding
this care, had not traveled above half the way, but from the smoke in his
Tents, and the dust which his Army raised, Eumenes had great reason to suspect
that the Enemy was nigh. A Council of War is therefore presently called, to
consult what was fitting to be done in this Exigence: It was the Judgment of
most that were present, that their Troops could not be imbodied or collected,
so soon as Antigonus, with the swiftness of his March would be upon them; at
this debate (when almost the whole Council were at a loss, and despaired of any
Expedient of safety) Eumenes assured the Board, That if they would use
Diligence and obey Orders, which hitherto they absolutely refused, he would
even yet bring things to a happy Issue; for whereas the Enemy might easily
approach them in five days time, he would order matters so, that he should be
retarded full as long, and be put back ten; wherefore, says he, let every
Officer go his Round, and collect the Soldiers that belong to his Company, and
that lie scattered and dispersed at large in the Country: Now this was the
project that he used, to put a stop to Antigonus his motion and divert his
course; He Commanded a Party of Men to lodge themselves at the foot of the
Mountains, where the Enemy was to pass, and at the beginning of the Night, to
make large fires, and extend them very wide in the Front, but to diminish the
number and make them less in the second Row, and so proportionably to render
them more considerably small in the third and hindmost Flank, that so, by this
resemblance and show of a Camp, the Enemy might be induced to think, his design
was discovered, that they were alarmed at his approach, and moved their Tents,
in order to meet him in the Road and give him Battle in the Desert; This task
the Officers were to renew every night; who according to their instructions
performed their charge; Antigonus by this piece of subtility was deluded; who,
as soon as it was dark, observed the fires, and fell into a Belief, that these
were really the Tents of his Enemies, and that the whole whole Army was
Rendezvous'd and Encamped there to Fight them; so that he changed his
resolution, and since he saw himself defeated of his design, and could not
possibly surprise them in disorder, he turned his Course, and took the longer
passage, which lay round about the Hills in a fruitful Soil, and tarried a day
or two in the Country, to ease and refresh his Soldiers (that were tired with
the Fatigue) and to give rest to his Horses; that after such a Respit and
Recruit, both Man and Beast might be in a better condition to oppose the Enemy,
and more vigorously maintain the Fight.

By this stratagem Eumenes overreach't the policy of the General, and prevented
the suddainness of his Attaque; and yet it was without any real advantage to
himself in the end; for such was the envy of his Officers that maligned his
Glory, and so great was the perfidiousness of the Veterane Soldiers, that 'tho
in a brave Engagement (when they had put things to a push) they returned
Conqueror from the Field, and gained signal Trophies of Victory, yet they
delivered their General Prisoner, and in Chains, to Antigonus; and this
Treachery they acted, after they had thrice Religiously sworn to defend him
with their Lives and Fortunes, and never to desert his cause; but so
predominant was their envy above the consideration of their Oaths, or the
obligation of their Fidelity, that they chose rather to violate their Faith,
than not turn Instruments of his Ruin and betray him. Antigonus had certainly
spared his Life (tho he was his most mortal and inveterate Enemy in the World)
if his Council could have bin induced to have given way to it, because he knew,
that no Man Living could be more serviceable to him in the management of the
Business of War, which he had then in hand, and saw a necessity of continuing
it; for both Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Ptolemy, (who were all Men of Power and
Strength) were ready to oppress his Grandeur, and contend with him for
Sovereignty and the prize of Empire; But those who were of Antigonus his
Council, would not suffer such a failure in Politics, as to be willing to have
his Life preserved, whose promotion in a little time would certainly supplant
their Esteem, and render them inconsiderable in the Army; and besides,
Antigonus himself was so enraged against him, for the Outrages he done, and the
havoc that was made in the Army, that there was no hopes of his
reconciliation, or pacifying his Anger, unless he had an assurance of a full
compensation by future Services in War.

When he was therefore committed to Custody, and the Governor of the Prison
asked Antigonus, in what manner he would have him kept, With the same care,
says he, as you would keep a wild Lion, or the feircest Elephant, under the
strictest Guard: For he had not yet determined with himself, whether he would
preserve his Life or no; Now there came all sorts of People to visit Eumenes in
his misfortune; some, out of hatred, to glut their eyes with the sight and
triumph over him in Affliction; Others, upon the account of Friendship, that
formerly had bin betwixt them, went to comfort him in his Adversity, and pay
their Complement of Condolence to him; but the greatest number came out of
Curiosity to contemplate his form, and to know the shape and figure of the Man,
to be able to remember and talk to their Acquaintance that they had seen the
person, whom so long and so justly they had stood in dread of, and in whose
destruction all their hopes of Victory and Peace were placed; Eumenes (whose
Spirit was troubled more at the impertinence of the Visits, than at the grief
of his Confinement) told Onomarchus, one day in Company, when he had bin long
in Prison, That he wondered, he had bin kept three days without Death or
Releasement; that it was not suitable to the methods of Prudence to use a
Captive so, but that Autigonus ought either to Execute him presently, or
dismiss him safe, loaded with apprehensions of Gratitude to his Friends.
Onomarchus, startled at the boldness of this Discourse, What? says he, If you
have really this Courage and Bravery which you pretend, why did not you choose
rather, to dye Honorably in the Field, than fall ignominiously into the hands
of your Enemy? Oh! would to God, says Eumenes, this had bin in my Power or
choice; but this could not possibly be my Fate, for I never in all my Life time
had the Glory to Encounter a Braver Man than my self, and never contested the
point of Valor with any Hero yet, but forced him to yield and own me the
Conqueror; and now tho I am basely in your Power, yet my ignominy is to be
ascribed to the Treachery of my Friends, and not to the Prowess of my
Adversary. Neither was any thing of this Discourse, tho it seemed a Rant,
false; for he had both a Majesty in his presence, that struck an awe and terror
into the Beholder, and such a Gigantick firmness in his make and Limbs, as
seemed to be composed only for Work and Labor, and yet there was such a
Symmetry and proportion of parts, as rendered him both August and Comely.

Antigonus durst not hastily and alone determine of this Man's Fate, but left
his case to the Consideration and Wisdom of his Council: Here many of the
Board stood astonished at the neglect of Justice, and wondered that Execution
was not presently done upon an Enemy, who for many years had laid wast and
ravaged their Country, slain the chief of their Commanders, and put such a
Terror and Consternation amongst the Rest, that they had bin brought even to
extremity and despair; and if the sense of these injuries is not sufficient to
justify or provoke his Ruin, yet let the danger of his Person weigh something
toward his Death: As long as he is in Being, there can be no security for our
Preservation, but we shall be constantly afraid, lest he should be violently
released from his Prison to head a Mutiny or Sedition in the Camp; but at his
Death these dangers cease, and there can be no apprehension of Disturbance to
be raised from his Ashes; but however, pursued they, if Antigonus was inclined
to give him Life, they humbly entreated to know, how he would new model his
Council, or where he would find Officers to have place there; for with Eumenes
none of the old Commanders would either Correspond, or join Interests, or be at
the same Board together. Tho the Sentiments of the Council were in this manner
made known, yet Antigonus takes seven days time to deliberate and pronounce his
Doom; and then fearing an Insurrection might be caused by the delay of
Execution, he orders his Warders to be removed, his daily sustenance to be
withdrawn, and forbids all Mankind his presence (for still he would not offer
violence to the Man who once had bin his Friend) that so he might perish with
Famine, without involving others in the guilt of his Blood; and yet Eumenes
after three days languishment with hunger, when his Spirits were impaired and
sunk, unknown and without order from Antigonus, was killed by his Keepers, to
prevent the care of tending him, in following the Camp.

Thus Eumenes (who, as we told you before, at twenty years of Age, was received
at Court withal possible demonstration of kindness, who for the space of seven
years was a constant Favorite and Attendant to King Philip, and afterward was
admitted to the same place in Alexanders esteem, and enjoyed it thirteen years
more, to that degree, that in his time, he was constituted Master of the Horse
in the SOCIAL ARMY, who also, after his Death, was Commander in Chief of the
whole Army, and either repelled the violence of his encroaching Competitors, or
slew them in the Fight, maintaining the Boundaries and just Limits of their
Power) thus I say, dyed this Great Commander, in the forty fifth year of his
Age, and fell a Victim to the treachery of his Soldiers, rather than overcome
by the Prowess of Antigonus. It is easy to judge, what opinion the Officers
(who styled themselves Kings after Alexander's Death) had of this Man's merit
and Valor, by this single instance of their Pride; since, in his Lifetime,
they durst not assume that swelling Title, but were content with the Name and
Appellation of Praefects; but after his Fall, took the Honor of the Name, and
all the outward Ornaments that belong to Sovereignty and a Crowned Head;
neither did they perform what was the pretense and Ground of War, The Office of
Guardianship, or seck to preserve the Kingdoms for Alexanders Legitimate or
Natural Issue: But as soon as Eumenes, the only Defender and Asserter of their
Cause was gone, they showed themselves openly in their own colors, and that
their design was prinpally to raise and aggrandise themselves: In this
Conspiracy against Eumenes, Antigonus, Ptolemy, Seleucus, Lysimachus, and
Cassander, were chiefly concerned, and passionately sought his Ruin; however
Antigonus had this Honor in him, to give the Corpse to be buried by his
Relations. Who performed his Funeral Rites in a Military Pomp, with the
Attendance of the whole Army at his Hearse; and after this Ceremony was over,
transmitted his Urn into Cappadocia, to be Religiously kept by his Wife and
Children, and preserved there.

THE LIFE OF PHOCION.
Done into English by Mr. Todd, Fellow of University Coll. Oxon.
PHOCION the Athenian, tho he was many times Forty-five times, says Plutarch,
before ever he was free of the City. He was the darling of the People, while
out of favor with the Government.
Chief Commander of the Forces of his Country, and One who bore the highest
Offices in the City; yet is He much more known for Integrity and Agreeableness
of Life, then for any Military Exploits. Hence it is, there is no account of
These upon Record, but very much said of his exact way of Living, and other
popular Qualities, which gave him the Title of The Beneficent The Greek name is
(...) Hesych.) which was conserr'd upon him, says Suid. (...), in a Common
Hall, nemine contradicente, because He relieved maxy indigent Citizens, and
contributed to provide for their Children.
. He was never Rich, tho the several Places of Honor and Profit freely given
him by the People might have plentifully filled his Coffers. When King Philip
Plutarch says, it was his Son Alexander that sent this Gift, as a Reward for
the good service he had done him, in keeping Athens true to His Interest while
he was upon his Asian Expedition. The sum was 100 Talents, about 8000 pound
English.
presented him with a vast sum of Money, and by his Ambassadors pressed Him
earnestly to accept it; advising Him withal, That, tho He for his own part,
might easily dispense with the want of it; yet he ought to be concerned for the
good of his Children, to whom it might be difficult in a low Ebb of Fortune, to
maintain the Greatness of their Fathers Character: He generously refused the
Present, and told them, If my Children prove such as my self, then that small
parcel of Ground will keep them, that has advanced me to this: But if they
degenerate, I should be loath their Luxury should be supported or encouraged at
my Provision.

When he had enjoyed a continued series of Prosperity, till very near the
eightieth year of his Age; in his latter days he grew extremely out of favor
with his Fellow-Citizens. 'Twas laid to his Charge, that he conspired with
Demades to deliver up the City to Antipater: And by his Advice, Demosthenes,
and the rest, whom they now looked upon as Persons that deserved well of the
Commonwealth, were by Decree of Common Council Banished. Nor was
Maladministration his only Crime; they accused him for violating the common
Obligations of Friendship: For, whereas he had been advanced, to those Honors
which he had, by the Eloquence and Interest of Demosthenes; and particularly
when he took his part against Cares An Athenian Captain, who went to assist the
Byzantines against King Philip; but managing Affairs imptudently, He was called
home, and Phocion sent in his Place.
, in a Capital Cause, had been defended by him, and clearly brought off in open
Court; He did not only not defend Demosthenes, but as was said, perfidiously
betrayed him. But, the Crime that most of all caused his Ruin was this; When
the Government of the City was in his hands, and he had notice given by
Dercyllus, Who defended Athens on the Land-side, (...). Plut.
that Nicanor, Cassanders Lieutenant General, had a design to surprise Piraeus;
and also was desired to take special care, that the City should not want
Provision: He said publicly in the hearing of the People, that there was no
danger at all; and promised them that He would engage his Life for their
security. Not long after, Nicanor took Piraeus: And, when the People rose in
Arms to regain it (without the Possession of that Fort Athens cannot long
subsist) he not only neglected to Summon the rest of the Citizens to their
Assistance, but refused to put himself in the head of those that were ready to
make the Assault.

At that time, there were two Factions in Athens; One stood for the Liberties
of the People, the Other (amongst whom were Phocion and Demetrius Phalereus A
famous Athenian General, who persuaded Ptolemy King of Egypt to have the Holy
Bible translated out of Hebrew into Greek, by the LXXII. Jes. Ant. lib. 12. c.
2.
) asserted the Prerogatives of the Nobility: Both courted the Protection and
Favor of the Macedonians; for the Chief of the Popular Party favored
Polypercon The one General ((...)) and the other a Captain ((...)) in
Antipaters Army: Upon whose Death they fell out betwixt themselves, and by
their interest divided the Athenians.
; the Nobless sided with Cassander The one General ((...)) and the other a
Captain ((...)) in Antipaters Army: Upon whose Death they fell out betwixt
themselves, and by their interest divided the Athenians.
. During these Heats, Polypercon drove Cassander out of Macedonia. By this
Victory the People getting the upper hand, immediately condemned all the Heads
of the opposite Faction, and banished them the City: Amongst whom were Phocion
and Demetrius Phalereus. This done, they dispatch an Express to Polypercon
about the business, and desire Him that he would confirm their Decree (...).
Plut.
; Phocion understanding this, went thither in Person, and as soon as he
appeared, order was given that he should plead his own Cause, in form indeed
before King Philippus Aridaus, an Effeminate, weak Prince.
Philip, but in effect before Polypercon; for He was, at that time, Protector
of the Kingdom. One A violent, bawling Lawyer, who run down Phocion with noise
and clamor: and was afterward, when the Athenians better understood
themselves, condemned for his pains.
Agnonides accused him, that he had betrayed Piraeus to Nicanor, and thereupon
by Order of Council he was committed: to a Messenger, and remanded to Athens,
that he might be proceeded against according to the Laws of his own Country.

At his entrance into the City, (by reason of an Impediment in his feet he
being forced to be carried in a Coach) there was a great concourse of People to
see Him. Some, remembering the greatness of his former Renown, extremely pitied
his old Age: many, were highly exasperated against him, upon suspicion of
Treason about the business of the Fort: but, that which enraged them most was,
that now in his latter days, he should so much oppose the Liberties of the
People. When he came to the Bar, they would not give him leave to plead his own
Cause, but after a slight formality of Justice, publicly condemned him, and
delivered him to the Eleven, to whom according to the custom of the Athenians,
the public Execution of Traitors does belong. As he was drawn to the place of
'Twas on the nineteenth day of March, which was a Festival in honor of Jupiter,
that the punishment might be more exemplary.
Execution, one Emphyletus, formerly an intimate Acquaintance, meets him, and
with tears in his eyes cried out; O Phocion! how Unjust and Unworthy are these
punishments thou endurest? They may be Unjust, replied the Prisoner, but they
are not in the least Unexpected; for very many Eminent Athenians have gone this
way to their Deaths. The Odium of the Mobile was so violent, that no Freeman
durst bury him: therefore his Body was interred by Slaves Plutarch says, that
one Conopt^n, a Common Officer burnt his Body, and that an old Woman gathered
up his Bones and buried them with this Wish, O Athenians, when you return to
your wits, give these Bones a more Honorable Burial. It happened accordingly,
for within a short time finding their Error, in taking off so brave a Man, They
reverted the Sentence, solemnly Interred his Body, Erected a Statue in Honor of
Him at the public cost; and condemned, or banished all that had any hand in
his Accusation.
.

THE LIFE OF TIMOLEON.
Done into English by Mr. Carry, M. A. of St. Mary-Hall Oxon.
TIMOLEON, a Corinthian born, was without doubt, in the general esteem of the
World, a very Eminent Man; for he had the happiness to which few or none could
arrive, of freeing his native Country from the oppression of a Tyrant, of
redeeming the City of Syracuse, to whose assistance he was sent, from a long
continued Bondage, and of restoring all Sicily to its former condition, which
had been long harrass'd by War, and the inhumane usage of the The Carthaginians.
Barbarians. But in the managing of all those Affairs, he met with many
different Adventures; and what is thought to be the hardest encounter of the
two, he behaved himself rather the more discreetly in his Prosperity, then in
his Adversity. For when his Brother Timophanes, who was made General by the
Corinthians, by the help of his Mercenary Soldiers had invaded the Sovereignty,
and Timoleon might have had a share in the Royalty with him, He was so far from
a betting any such piece of Villainy, that he put a much greater value upon his
Fellow Citizens Liberty, then he did upon his Brothers Life, and looked upon
himself infinitely more obliged to live in obedience to the Laws of his Country
then to rule over it. Being a Man of these principles, he contrived to have his
Brother the Tyrant Murdered by a certain Soothsayer, and another who was
related to 'em both, as having married their own Sister both by Father and
Mother. In which Murder he was so far from having any hand, that he would not
so much as look upon his Brothers bloodshed. For while the thing was putting in
Execution by them, he took a Post at a distance, that none of his Live-guard
might come to his Rescue. This notable Action of his, was not looked upon by
all with the same eyes, for some took it to be a breach of Piety, and by a
Sinister interpretation represented the whole matter as unwarrantable. Nay, his
Mother, after this would never let him come within her Doors, nor as much as
admit him into her presence; but out of a detestation of the Fact, would brand
him with the name of unnatural Assassine of his Prince, and Brother. At the
hearing of which words, he was so mightily concerned, that he had sometimes
thoughts of being his own Executioner, and by embracing Death to abandon the
sight of an ungrateful World.

In the mean while, after Dion was slain at Syracuse, Dionysius made himself
again Master of the Town; But they of the contrary Party, Petitioned the
Corinthians for succor, and desired a General over their Forces. In which
Expedition, Timoleon was sent, and with wonderful success, beat Dionysius quite
out of Sicily, yet spared his Life, when it was in his Power to have taken it
away; and took particular care to see him safely conveyed to the City of
Corinth, which had been frequently supported by the aid and assistance it
received from both the Dionysii. Of which Favor Timoleon was willing to leave
a Memorial; esteeming that Conquest much more Honorable, which had in it more
of Mercy than Cruelty. In a word, he sent him thither alive, that the World
might not receive it by Tradition only, but be eyewitnesses, what a Personage
he had reduced, from so great an Empire to so mean a condition. After
Dionysius's departure, Timoleon engaged in a fresh War with Icetas, who had
acted contrary to Dionysius's interest, not so much out of dislike or hatred of
his Tyranny, as out of private interest, as was plain from his unwillingness to
quit his Command, when Dionysius was deposed. Icetas being defeated, Timoleon
routed a very formidable Army of the Carthaginians at the River Crimessus, and
obliged them to rest contented, if they might be permitted to live quietly in
Africa, who for many years past had been in possession of Sicily. Besides all
this, he took Mamercus an Italian Commander Prisoner, a very Warlike Man, and
one of great interest, who had come over into Sicily to the Assistance of the
Tyrants.

These things being happily Achieved, and finding by a long continuance of
War, that not only Countries, but Cities also were depopulated, he drew
together all possible Recruits, first of the Sicilians, then of new Planters
which he brought over from Corinth, because the City Syracuse was by them
Originally Founded. To the old Inhabitants he restored their own; he divided
among those of the new Plantation, the Estates of such whose owners had been
lost in the Wars, he repaired the ruinated Cities, and demolished Temples, he
Erected anew the several States upon their old Laws and Liberties, and after a
most dreadful War, settled so great a Peace and Quiet through the whole Island,
that he might rather be taken for the Founder of those Cities, then they who
had at first Planted 'em. The Citadel of Syracuse which Dionysius had
Fortified, on purpose to block up the Town, he eras'd from the very Foundation,
slighted all other Bulworks of Tyrannical Government, and did what in him lay,
that as few marks of Bondage as could might remain. Having so great Power, as
that he could have extorted obedience from them, and again being such a
Favorite of all the Sicilians, that he might have come to the Crown, by a
unamimous consent, he chose rather to be Beloved then Feared. Therefore as soon
as conveniently he could, he laid down his Command, and passed the remaining
part of his Life there, as a private Person. And this was not done unadvisedly;
for he maintained that Grandeur and Authority through a mutual good will, which
other Princes could never compass by force. Every Man paid him constantly a
very great respect, and no public Business was ever after Transacted at
Syracuse, of which any Decree was made, before Timoleon's sense of the matter
was understood. No Man's Counsel was ever preferred before his, nor as much as
stood in competition with it. And so to do was not more their Affection, then
Wisdom.

When he was grown old, he lost his Eyesight; which Affliction he bore with so
much Patience, that he was never heard to complain of it, nor was yet less
useful in private concerns or public Affairs. For he came to the Theater, when
the People met there in Counsel, drawn by a pair of Mules, by reason of his
infirmities He was Aged, Blind, and had the Gout.
, and so from the Coach delivered his opinion concerning the matter in debate,
which no Body looked upon as a piece of pride in him, for never did any thing
like Insolence or vain Glory come out of his mouth. If at any time he had heard
himself magnified, he would only reply, that he did signally bless the Gods,
and was bound upon that particular account to be always thankful, for that,
when the Gods were graciously pleased to raise Syracuse, they made choice of
him as their unworthy Instrument. For he thought, that no humane actions were
brought to perfection without an overruling Providence. And therefore he
Erected a private Chapel in his house to Fortune, where he with much constancy
and zeal paid his Devotions.

Besides this most excellent temper of his, several remarkable Accidents
concurred to render him famous. For all his most memorable Battles happened to
be* fought upon the day on which he was born; so that it fell out, that all
Sicily made their Anniversary Feasts on his Birthday. When one Laphystius, an
inconsiderable, saucy, and ungrateful Fellow, required stipulation of him for
an appearance, under color of an Action that he had against him; and the
Multitude flocking together, endeavored forcibly to curb the pretenders
insolence; Timoleon beseech'd 'em to desist; Alleging, that he had gone
through great hardships, and extreme dangers, chiefly upon the account, that
Laphystius and others might enjoy their Liberty. For the true nature of
Freedom is, that any one may try out whatever Cause he has by due Course of
Law. When another Fellow, much like Laphystius, Demaenetus by name, in a
Harangue before all the People Assembled in Counsel, had detracted from the
Glory of Timoleon's Actions, and had sharply inveighed against him, he made no
other answer, but that he now found that his Prayers were heard; For he had
ever made it his humble Request to the Gods, that the Syracusians might enjoy
such a Liberty, whereby every one might be free, to speak his Sentiments of
whom he pleased. When he died he was interred at the public charge of the
Syracusians (in an Academy, which had its denomination from him) all finely
attending his Funerals.

THE LIFE OF HAMILCAR.
Done into English by Mr. Brideoke, M. A. of Trin. Coll. Oxon.
HAMILCAR, a Carthaginian, Sirnam'd Barcas, the Son of Hannibal, at the later
end of the first Punic War, tho then very young, was Constituted Generalissimo
of the Forces in Sicily. In which Employment he behaved himself so well, that
(tho before his time the Carthaginian Army was always worsted, both by Sea and
Land) he still kept his Ground, and was so vigilant, that his Enemies could
never find him unprovided; but on the contrary, when opportunity served, would
fall upon them, and always made himself Master of the Field. Moreover, when the
Carthaginians by their ill success had very near lost all footing in Sicily, he
so prudently defended the City Eryx, as not to leave the least sign of a War
behind him. But in the interim, C. Lutatius, the then Roman Consul, having
beaten the Carthaginian Fleet at the Islands Aegates, the Carthaginians
resolved to Conclude the War, and to that end made Hamilcar their
Plenipotentiary. Who, tho naturally more inclined to War than Peace, yet in
that Juncture of Affairs, He preferred Peace; because his Country being then
poor, could no longer endure the hardships and expenses of War; yet he reserved
this to himself, that as soon as the Carthaginians were a little refreshed,
again to renew the War, and by Arms oppose the Romans, until Fortune had
determined the Conquest. With this resolution he concluded the Peace; in the
settling whereof, He was so stout, that when Catulus refused to sign the
Articles, unless He, with the whole Garrison of the City Eryx, would depart
Sicily without their Arms; He bravely and sharply replied, that tho his Country
being poor, could yield him no assistance, yet he would rather dye, than return
to his home with such Ignominy and Reproach. For it would not consist with his
Valor, tamely to deliver up to his Enemies those Weapons which were committed
to his Trust for the defense of his Country. Upon this his resolution Catulus
complied.

But Hamilcar, so soon as he arrived at Carthage, found the Commonwealth in a
condition worse than he expected. For by the long continuance of the Foreign
War, Intestine discords were so much heightn'd, that Carthage was never in the
like dangerous condition, unless when it was quite razed and demolished. For
the Mercenary Soldiers who were twenty thousand strong, and (who had formerly
fought against the Romans) Revolting, drew all Africa to their Party, and
likewise besieged Carthage. By which great misfortune the Carthaginians were so
Terrified, that they sought for Aid and Protection from their greatest Enemies,
the Romans, and obtained their Request. But in fine, when they were almost
reduced to the utmost extremities of misery and despair, they voted Hamilcar
their General. Who not only made those Rebels, who were above twenty thousand,
to raise their siege from before Carthage, but also forced them to that
extremity, that shutting them up in places where they were void of all relief,
more perished by Famine than were killed by the Sword. He brought back again
the revolted Towns to their former Duty and Obedience; and amongst the rest,
Utica and Hippo, the two wealthiest Cities of all Africa. Neither was He
satisfied with this; but he also enlarged the Empire, and all Africa was so
settled, that none could imagine that there had been any War there for many
years before.

These things being finished by him so successfully, out of a courageous and an
exasperated mind against the Romans, and that He might more handsomely pick a
Quarrel with them, he contrived, that he himself should go Commander with an
Army into Spain, taking along with him his young Son Hannibal, then but nine
years old. With him marched Hasdrubal, that Beautiful and brave Youth; whom some
think to have been beloved too much by Hamilcar, in a manner not allowed to his
Sex: For great Men seldom escape ill Men's malicious Tongues. And upon this
account, the Youth Hasdrubal was forbid by the Censor to attend the General.
But Hamilcar giving his Daughter in Marriage to Hasdrubal, found out that way,
as the best expedient, of enjoying the Youth's company; for their Laws did not
forbid the Son-in-law to converse with his Father. I thought this passage
worthy of my notice, because when Hamilcar was killed, he Commanded the Army,
and was Successful in many remarkable Exploits; and during his Command, by
large Gifts he so corrupted the ancient manners of the Carthaginians, that
after his Death Hannibal received his Power from the Army.

Hamilcar, after he had crossed the Sea, and entered Spain, with great success
undertook vast Designs; he subdued the most Warlike, and the wealthiest
Countries: and furnished all Africa with Men and Horses, Arms and Money. But as
He was designing a War on Italy, in the ninth year after his entrance into
Spain, Fighting against the Vettones, He was unfortunately slain. His
implacable hatred against his Enemies the Romans, was the chief cause of the
second Punick War; for his Son Hannibal was so exasperated by the daily and
repeated Conjurations of his Father, that he often declared, He had rather
perish, than not try the Courage of the Romans.

THE LIFE OF HANNIBAL, THE CARTHAGINIAN, THE Son of HAMILCAR.
Done into English by the Honorable Mr. Leopold William Finch, Fellow of
All Souls Coll. Oxon.
AS it is a Truth of undoubted Certainty, That the Romans did exceed all other
People in Bravery, so likewise must it be confessed, That Hannibal was as far
above all other Commanders for his Wisdom and Conduct, as the Roman Valor was
more eminent than that of all different Nations. For during the whole time that
Italy was the Seat of his Action, Success continually waited on his Arms;
insomuch, that had not the Envy of his Enemies at home unfortunately, hindered
his Progress abroad, He seems to have been sufficiently able to have made an
absolute Conquest over the Roman Empire. But too numerous were his detracting
Foes, to be Encountered by the Gallantry of a single Person. He so improved the
Hatred that his Father bore the Roman Nation, and which was in a manner
Hereditary to Him, that He would sooner have parted with his Life, then in the
least have abated of his Aversion to that People. For tho he lay under the
unhappy circumstances of a Banished Man, and consequently was obliged to
Foreign Princes for their assstance, yet He never ceased (at least in his
intention) to wage War with the Romans. Not to instance in King Philip (whom he
rendered an Enemy to that Nation, tho he had not the advantage of Consulting
with him in Person) He possessed King Antiochus, a Prince of the greatest
Strength and Power of those times, with so eager a desire of making War upon
them, that he raised the whole Force of his Empire, as far as the Red Sea, with
a design to Invade Italy. To this Antiochus it was, that Ambassadors were sent
from Rome, to the intent they might inform themselves of his Resolutions, and
use all possible endeavors, by underhand Polices, to bring Hannibal into
suspicion with the King, by assuring Him, that (as if they had withdrawn him
from his Fidelity) He now espoused a quite different Interest than He had
formerly served. They effected this with no small success, as Hannibal soon
perceived, when he found that He was turned out of the Privy Council; so that
at a convenient time, He first waits on the King, and having put him in mind of
his great Loyalty to him, and his Hatred to the Roman People, he added over and
above, When I was a Boy of about nine years of Age, my Father Hamilcar being
upon his departure from Carthage, as General into Spain, offered up Sacrifice
to the Great Jupiter; during which Solemnity, he asked me, whither I would bare
him company to the Camp; which when I readily accepted of, and began to
importune him, that he would not scruple to take me along with Him; I will
(says he) grant your Request, provided you will take an Oath, which I shall
propose to you; Upon which he led me to the Altar where he designed to
Sacrifice. And when (according to Custom) I had laid my Hands upon it; the rest
of the company being at a distance, he commanded me to swear, That I would
never be in Friendship with the Roman People. This Oath, which my Father then
gave me, I have preserved so inviolably to this very day, as not to give any
Man the least ground of suspecting, but that I shall be ever of the same
Disposition. So that now if you entertain any thoughts of contracting any kind
of Friendship with the Romans, 'twill be your wisest course to conceal it from
my knowledge; but on the other hand, whenever you design a War with them, you
will very much mistake your measures, if you do not principally commit the
management of it to my hands.

'Twas at this Age he accompanied his Father into Spain, after whose Death
Hasdrubal succeeding as General, the Command of the Cavalry was conferred upon
Him; and Hasdrubal not long after being Murdered, the Army unanimously chose
Him in his place; an account of which no sooner reached Carthage, but was
received with the public Approbation of the State. Thus Hannibal, not yet
twenty five-years of Age, was actually General of all the Carthaginian Forces,
and within the space of three years after, subdued all the Countries of Spain;
He took Saguntum (a City in Alliance with the Romans) by Storm. He raised three
vast Armies; one of which he sent into Afric, another he left with his Brother
Hasdrubal in Spain, and the third he Commanded in Person into Italy. He passed
the Pyrenean Mountains, and all along as he marched, having frequent Encounters
with the Inhabitants, He Conquered all He Fought. Coming at last to those Alps
which divide Italy from Gallia, the Inhabitants opposed his Passage, which He
soon laid open by cutting them in pieces. He was the first Man that ever led an
Army over these Mountains, except Hercules the Grecian, from whose passage they
took their Name. Here Hannibal opened the Way, and fortified the Pass, making
so great an alteration, that the Elephants, together with their Furniture,
could march conveniently in that very place, where before a single Man, tho
unarmed, could scarce creep along. From hence leading his Forces into Italy, he
had an Encounter on the River Rhone with P. C. Scipio the Consul, and put him
to flight. He fought him likewise near the River Po, for the Town Clastidium,
where Scipio himself was wounded, and his Army utterly routed. He had a third
Battle with him and his Colleague Tiberius Longus, who advanced toward Him near
the River Trebia, where he engaged them and defeated them both. Marching at
length through Liguria, he crossed the Appenine Hills, intending for Hetruria.
In this march he was extremely afflicted with a destemper in his Eyes, to that
degree, that he could never recover the perfect use of his right one again; But
notwithstanding his indisposition was such that he was forced to be carried in
a Litter, he obtained a very signal Victory over C. Flaminius the Consul, at
the Lake Now called Lago di Perugia.
Thrasimenus, where having circumvented him by ambush, he cut him off with his
whole Army. In a short time after, he served C. Centenius in the same manner,
who with a chosen party of Men, had possessed himself of the Tops of the
Mountains. He came from hence into Apulia, where the two Consuls C. Terentius
Varro, and Lucius Paulus Aemilius advanced toward Him, and in one Battle he
routed both their Armies; In which Engagement Lucius Paulus the Consul was
killed, with many more who had sustained that Dignity, amongst whom was Cn.
Serilius Geminus, who had enjoyed it the foregoing year. After this Action, He
marched to Rome without any Opposition. He halted for some time on the
neighboring Mountains, and in a few days after decamped from thence. In his
return to Capua; Q. Fabius Maximus the Roman Dictator, opposed himself to him
in the Falernian Field. Tho the Streights were so very narrow, that Hannibal's
Army was perfectly shut up, yet by the advantage of the Night he got away
without any damage. Here it was, that he outwitted that subtle Commander
Fabius: For in the dead of the Night he commands his Soldiers to set fire to
the Bows of Trees, which he had before ordered to be fastened to the Horns of
a considerable number of Oxen, which he drove in a hurry upon them. This
unexpected sight was no sooner beheld, but it put the Roman Army into such a
consternation, that not a man offered to stir out of his Trenches. A fews days
after, he defeated Marcus Minutius Rufus, General of the Cavalry (whose Command
at that time, by the Votes of the People, was made equal to that of Dictator)
whom he had cunningly decoyed into a Battle. And tho he was not present at the
Action (as being then in Lucania), yet at a distance he laid an Ambush for
Titus Sempronius Gracchus, the second time Consul, and slew him; as he did
Marcus Claudius Marcellus, who had five times bore that Office. 'Twould be a
tedious work to give a distinct Relation of each particular Action, so that
this short Account shall suffice, to show the World how extraordinary a Person
he was. That so long as he was in Italy no man was able to resist him in
Battle; neither durst any one after the Defeat at Cannae make Head against him
in the Field. Being thus far a Conqueror, He was at last called home to the
Relief of his own Country. He was employed in the management of the War against
the Son of that Scipio whom he had formerly beaten on the Rivers of Rhone and
Po, having likewise defeated him near the River Trebia. But the Affairs of his
Country being in a desperate condition, he was very willing (in a Conference
with Scipio) to put an end to the War at present, that he might be in a better
condition to renew it. Accordingly they had an Interview; but the Conditions
proposed were such as could not be agreed upon. So that in a few days
afterward he fought him at Zama; in which Battle, Hannibal being utterly
routed, with incredible speed, in the space of two days and two nights, arrived
at Adrumetum, which is three hundred miles distant from Zama. In this flight
the Numidians (who quitted the Battle at the same time with Hannibal) conspired
against him; but he had not only the good Fortune to avoid their Treachery, but
to suppress them. Here he rallied together all those who had saved themselves
by flight; and new Musters being made, in a few days he listed a considerable
number. While he was thus earnestly employed in making preparations for a War,
the Carthaginians conclude a Peace with the Romans. Hannibal notwithstanding
had the Command of an Army, and (together with his Brother Mago) was in Action
in Afric till the time that P. Sulpicius and Caius Aurelius were Consuls; for
'twas during their Magistracy, that the Carthaginian Ambassadors were sent from
Carthage to Rome, to return thanks to the Senate and People for the Peace they
had granted; and in consideration of the Favor, to present them with a Golden
Crown; entreating them withal, that their Hostages might be removed to
Fregellae, and their Prisoners Restored. To whom the Senate gave this answer,
that as their Present was very grateful and acceptable to them, so likewise
they consented, that their Hostages might be lodged where they had desired; but
that their Captives should by no means be released, because they still employed
Hannibal (the Author and Beginner of the War, and the irreconcilable Enemy of
the Roman Name) with his Brother Mago, in the chief Command of their Armies.
They no sooner received this answer, but Hannibal and Mago were recalled home
again. Hannibal at his return, was chosen Praetor, after he had been King
twenty-two years. For as it was customary at Rome, yearly to elect two Consuls;
at Carthage two Kings were annually chosen. He acquitted himself in this
Employment, with the same Prudence as he did in War; For he took care, that the
new Imposts should not only furnish Money for the Tribute paid to the Romans,
but that some over and above should be left to lay up in the Exchequer. The
year after his Praetorship, Ambassadors arriving at Carthage, Hannibal
suspecting they came to demand him, privately takes Ship before they could have
Audience of the Senate, and flies to King Antiochus in Syria; which when the
Carthaginians knew* they immediately sent out two Ships with orders to
apprehend him if they could overtake him, which not being able to effect, they
confiscated his Goods, razed his House to the very ground, and proclaimed him a
Banished Man. In the Consulship of Lucius Cornelius and Quintus Minutius (which
was three years after his departure from his own Country) He Cruis'd for
sometime about the Coast of Cyrenaica with five Ships, endeavoring to persuade
the Carthaginians to renew the War, upon the confidence of Antiochus his
strength, whom he had already persuaded to invade Italy; then He engage'd his
Brother Mago in the design of which, the Carthaginians being informed, they
used him with the same severity they had inflicted on his Brother. Thus their
Affairs being in an ill condition, they set sail for Asia to King Antiochus.
There are two different accounts given of the Death of Mago, some Authors
affirming that he perished by Shipwreck, others, that he was murdered by his
own Servants. Had Antiochus hearkened to Hannibals Council, as well in the
management of the War, as he had done in the undertaking it, the decision of
the Empire of the World might have been nearer the River Tibur then the
Streights of Thermopylae. But notwithstanding, this Great Commander well
understood the Imprudence of his Conduct, yet he would never forsake him in any
Enterprise. He was made Admiral of a small Fleet, with orders to convey them
from Syria into Asia, with this he engaged the Rhodian Navy in the Pamphylian
Sea, who being very much Superior to him in number, his party was beaten, tho
that Squadron which he himself fought in, had the advantage of the Enemy. After
the Defeat of Antioohus, Hannibal fearing least he would deliver him up to the
Romans (as certainly he would have done, had not He prevented him) went into
Crete to the Gortynians, that he might have time there to consider, how to
dispose of Himself hereafter. And here, out of his extraordinary subtility, He
foresaw he should be in great danger, by reason of the Covetous humor of the
Cretans. For he brought a considerable sum of money with Him, the rumor of
which he knew was already spread abroad. This therefore was his device; Having
filled a great number of Vessels with Lead, and covering the top of them with
Gold and Silver, He places them in the Temple of Diana, in the presence of the
Gortynians; pretending that He committed his whole Fortune to their Trust.
After he had put this cheat upon them, He fills up several Brass hollow Statues
(which he had brought along with Him) with his money, and throws them
negligently in the outward Court. In the mean time, they guard the Temple with
the greatest strictness; not so much suspecting other people, as fearing least
Hannibal, without their knowledge might remove the prize He had committed to
them. Thus our Carthaginian, having saved his Treasure entire, and finely
deluded the people of Crete, He came at length to Prusias the King of Bythinia
in Pontey; where He still preserved his old inclination toward Italy, and made
it his endeavor to engage the King against the Roman People. But when He
perceived He was not strong enough of Himself to oppose them, He Associated
other Kings, and Warlike Nations in a Confederacy. Eumenes, as being a great
Friend to the Roman Interest, refused to join in the Alliance; so that they
maintained a War with each other, both by Sea and Land. But being backed by the
Romans, He was infinitely too hard for them. Now Hannibal perceiving, how
necessary it was for the better success in His Affairs, that Eumenes should be
cut off, he resolves upon this way to rid himself of Him. They were in a short
time to engage at Sea; but Hannibal being overpowered in number, Stratagem was
to supply the place of Strength; Accordingly he charges his Men to get as many
poisonous Serpents as they could, and put them into Earthen Vessels; of which
they procured (as commanded) a considerable number. On the day that they were
to fight, having called his Seamen together, he gave them order, that they
should all rush together upon the Ship in which Eumenes was, and that in the
mean time, they need not doubt, but that they were able enough to defend
themselves from the rest, since they were provided of so great a number of
Serpents. It should be his business to show them which was the Ship he would
have assaulted, and likewise to reward the person, who should either kill the
King, or take Him Prisoner. After he had given these directions, the two Fleets
being set in order, and about to engage; That his Soldiers might plainly see,
where this Eumenes was before the sign was given, He sends out a Messenger in a
small Boat, having a white Wand in his Hand (as a token of Peace) when he was
come near to the Enemies Fleet, he shows them a Letter, asks for the King, upon
which he was immediately Conducted to Him, every one taking it for granted,
that Hannibal had sent him to treat of Peace; the Messenger having thus
discovered to his own Party which was the Kings Ship, returns again. When
Eumenes had broke open the Letter, He found nothing contained therein, but what
tended to Laughter and Contempt of his Person; He very much wondered what the
meaning of this should be, which tho he could not understand, without any more
ado, He engages the Enemy; At the very first Onset, the Bythinians, according
to their orders, rushing on altogether, beset Eumenes his Ship, who being not
able to withstand their shock, saved his Life by flight, which he could never
have effected, had he not betook himself to his Guards in the neighboring
Shore. When the rest of the Navy of Eumenes began more fiercely to Attack the
Bythinians, they poured in their Vessels upon them, which at first the Enemy
only Laughed at, who could not devise what their intent could be. But when they
perceived that their Ships were full of Serpents, being affrightned with the
strangeness of the thing, and knowing not what danger chiefly to avoid, at last
they tacked about, and made to their Port; So that the Cunning of Hannibal was
too Powerful for the Force of the Pergamenan Navy; Who by the same kind of
Stratagem had frequently obtained great Victories at Land. While these things
were Transacting in Asia, King Prusias's Ambassadors (then at Rome) being
accidentally at Supper with Caius Quintus Flaminius the Consul; somebody
accidentally happening to mention Hannibals Name, one of the company said, that
He was in their Kingdom. The next day Flaminius acquaints the Senate, with what
had been affirmed by this person, who imagining that they should be never free
from Treacheries, so long as Hannibal was alive; despatched Ambassadors into
Bythinia, (one of which was Flaminius) who were to demand of the King, that He
should not protect their most inveterate Enemy, but forthwith deliver Him up
into their Hands. Prusias could not deny, but that Hannibal was in his
Dominions, tho He refused Himself to betray Him to the Ambassadors; desiring,
that they would not Request any thing which was so much against the Laws of
Hospitality; But let them take Him if they could, who without any difficulties
might find Him out. Hannibal constantly confined Himself to one place, being a
Castle, with which the King had Presented Him as a Reward for his Services,
which He so contrived, that he had Sallies on all sides, through which he might
escape, if he should have occasion; for he always suspected that that would
befall Him, which at last did really happen. The Roman Ambassadors accompanied
with a great number of Men, having at length surrounded this Castle on all
parts; his Servant perceiving them from the Gate, runs to his Master and
acquaints Him; that there appeared a more then usual company of Armed Men; upon
which He commands him to go round all the doors of the House, and speedily
bring Him word whither there was any way to escape. When the Boy had
immediately acquainted him how the case stood, and had farther assured Him,
that all the passages were stopped, he was soon satisfied that this could not
happen by accident, but that they came to seize his person, and that
consequently he could not long enjoy his Life, which He was resolved should not
be in another Man's disposal; upon which he immediately swallowed a dose of
poison, which he was always accustomed to carry with Him. Thus, this our most
Valiant Hero, harrass'd with numerous and various Labors, reposed himself in
Death the seventieth year of his Age. Authors do not agree in whose Consulship
He dyed. For Atticus in his Annals affirms, that Claudius M. Marcellus, and Q.
Fabius Labeo, did then bare that Office; Polybius on the other hand asserts,
that it was in the time of Lucius Aemilius Paulus, and Cn. Baelius Tamphilus.
But Sulpicius different from both, says, that P. Corn. Cethegus, and Marcus
Baebius Tamphilus were at that time Consuls. Tho this our Great Man was always
employed in the business of War, yet He bestowed some time in Learning. For he
wrote several Books in the Greek Tongue, amongst which, one is an account of
the Actions of Cn. Manlius Volsus in Asia, which he dedicated to the People of
Rhodes. Many there are who have given an account of the Wars of Hannibal, among
which were Philenius and Sosilus the Lacedemonian, who were his
Fellow Soldiers, and lived with Him as long as Fortune permitted. He made use
of Sosilus as his Master, to Instruct Him in the Greek Tongue.

But now it is time for me to make an end of this History, and proceed to the
giving an account of the Roman Generals, that comparing each others Virtues, we
may be able to make an Estimate, which were the Braver Men.

THE LIFE OF CATO.
Done into English by Mr. Edw. Robinson of Merton Coll. Oxon.
CATO was a Native of the Corporation of Tusculum; while Young, before he
engaged in Public Affairs, he Lived in the Country of the Sabines, because
there was his Estate left him by his Father; M. Perpenna Censorinus was used to
relate, that by the encouragement and advice of L. Valerius Flaccus, (who was
afterward his Partner both in the Offices of Consul and Censor) he removed to
Rome, and applied himself to the Law. When he was seventeen years old, he
listed himself a Soldier, which was under the Consulship of Q. Fabius Maximus,
and M. Claudius Marcellus. He was a Tribune in the Army of Sicily: when he
returned thence, he went a Volunteer into the Army under the Command of M.
Claudius Nero; where he did very good service in the Battle of Sena, in which
Hasdrubal, Hannibal's Brother, was stain. He was by lot chose Questor to P.
Cornelius Scipio Africanus the Consul, with whom he did not live in that
Friendship which the Duty of the place required; and no wonder, considering the
whole course and bent of his Life was so contrary to that of Scipio's. He was
made Aedile with C. Helvius. When he was Praetor, he had the Province of
Sardinia allotted him for his Government; From whence some time before (when he
was Questor) as he was returning out of Africa, he invited and brought along
with him Q. Ennius the Poet, which was a prize of no less value, then the
greatest Triumph Sardinia could afford. He was Consul with L. Valerius Flaccus;
He gained by lot the Government of Hispania Citerior; From whence he returned
laden with the Honors of a Triumph. He continued in this Province something
longer then was usual, upon which Scipio Africanus, (who was now again Consul,
and whose Questor Cato had been in his former Consulship) endeavored to remove
him, and succeed in it himself: Scipio was then the greatest Man in Rome, yet
was his interest not strong enough to gain this point of the Senate: Because at
that time affairs were not Governed by Power, or the sway of a Faction, but
according to the severe Rules of Justice. But this disappointment so disgusted
Scipio, that when that Session of the Senate was ended, he retired from Public
Employment, and lived privately in the City; Cato being Elected Censor with the
forementioned Flaccus, behaved himself in that Office with a great deal of
rigor: He censured several of the Nobility, published new Edicts to restrain
the growth of Luxury, which at that time began to show it self in its buds. He
spent about eighty years from his Youth to the last days of his Life, in the
service of the Commonwealth, in all which time, the sincere pursuit of the
interest of the Commonwealth continually raised him many Enemies, which he so
little valued, that the fear of no Man's displeasure could influence him so far
as to alter his measures. Very many there were, who framed accusations against
him, which were so far from injuring his Reputation, that his good Name grew as
fast upon him as his Age. He was a Man of great Conduct and Application in
Business; He was a skilful Husbandman, a good Statesman, a good Lawyer, a great
General, a persuasive Orator, and none more addicted to Learning. He did indeed
apply himself to Letters something late, yet was there scarcely any thing in
the Greek or Roman Literature, that he did not perfectly understand. From his
Youth he exercised himself in the composing of Orations. When he was old, he
entertained himself with writing History, of which he left seven Books: The
first contains the Actions of the Roman Kings: The second, gives an account of
the Founding and Beginning of each City in Italy, upon which reason possibly he
entitles his Books Origines. In the fourth, he gives a relation of the first
Punick War, and in the fifth of the second; and of all these things he has only
given us the Heads or matter of Fact, without engageing in the particular
circumstances of Affairs: After the same manner he wrote the rest of the Roman
Wars, even to the Praetorship of Ser. Galba, (who has the infamy of pillaging
of Lusitani fixed upon his name). In these his Chronicles of the Wars, he did
not mention any Commanders, but without any names at all, gave us the naked
Event of things. We have given a more particular account of his Life and
manners, in that History, which at the Request of Titus Pomponius Atticus, we
wrote on purpose concerning him, to which we remit the Lovers of Cato.

THE LIFE OF ATTICVS.
Done into English by Mr. Morgan of St. John's Coll. Oxon.
POMPONIUS Atticus was Descended of one of the most ancient Houses in Rome, and
the Dignity of a Knight was derived down to him from his Ancestors, being an
Honor Inherent in his Family. His Father was an industrious Man, and very
indulgent toward him; was of a Genius Accomodated to the times, and very
studious; As He was a Lover of Learning himself, so he infused those
inclinations into his Son; for he trained up his Youth in all those Sciences
which his tender Age was capable of: But the Lad, besides a great docility of
Wit, had an extraordinary sweetness of Aspect and Elocution; so that he not
only quickly apprehended what was taught him, but pronounced it too with a very
agreeable cadence. These Seize so early disclosing themselves, got him an
high Reputation, and dazzled his Cotemporaries; for he gave brighter hopes of
himself, then those other Young Gentlemen who were his School-Fellows could
look stedily upon; so that his forwardness of Example piqu'd them all with
generous incitements. Amongst whom were L. Torquatus, G. Marius, Caius his Son,
and M. Cicero, whom he so gained to him by the obliging air of his
Conversation, that no Person was always so dear to them as He himself. His
Father died in a little time, and he being very young, run a great hazard, by
reason of his being related to P. Sulpitius, who was killed when he was Tribune
of the People; For Anicia who was Cousin German to Pomponius, Married Servius
who was Brother to Sulpitius; therefore, after Sulpitius was slain, and he saw
the City Embarass'd with the Commotions of Cinna, so that he could not live
with that Port which became his Quality, for the Interests of the Citizens were
divided, some addicting themselves to the Faction of Cinna, and others to that
of Sylla, thinking it a fair opportunity to follow his Studies. He went to
Athens; But this did not hinder, but that he bestowed Money upon young Marius,
who was declared an Enemy to his Country, and supplied him when he was a
Fugitive; and that his withdrawing from Rome might not prejudice his Domestic
Affairs, He conveyed the greatest part of his Fortune along with him thither.
Here he lived after that manner, that he was peculiarly beloved by all the
Athenians; For, besides the Credit He had acquired, which was very great for a
Young Man, He releiv'd them in their Public Exigents; for when they were to
take up Money of the Bankers upon any great Payments, and could not obtain
equitable Conditions, He always so seasonably interposed, that, as he demanded
no interest for the sums he disburs'd, so he would not let them owe longer then
the time they promised to refund them; and this procured them a double
advantage, for he would neither suffer the Debt to grow upon them by his
forbearance, nor the Usury of it to be multiplied. He made an accession to this
Courtesy by another piece of Liberality, for he distributed Corn amongst them
all, and gave to each of them six bushels of Wheat, which sort of measure is
called Medimnus by the Athenians; Here his carriage was so adjusted, that as He
was familiar to those below him, so He was equal to those of the first Quality.
This had that grateful influence upon them, that they would have Conferred all
the Honors upon him they possibly could, and made him a Citizen; but this offer
he refused, because according to some Men's opinion; He that is made a Denizon
of another City, forfeits the Freedom of his own. Whilst he lived amongst them,
he always opposed their design of Erecting a Statue to him, but he could not
hinder it when he was gone; so that in his absence, they Celebrated the
Memories of him and Pilia his Wife, by this lasting sort of remembrance, even
in the most Consecrated places of the City; for in every Concern of the
Commonwealth, they always followed his Conduct and Advice; therefore it was a
partiality of Fortune to him, to be a Native of Rome, which was the Seat of the
Empire of the World, and that which was his Country was his Mistress too, to
whom he was Constant in his Observances; and it was a Glorious instance of his
Wisdom, that when He went to Athens, which claims the Preeminence above all
other Cities for Antiquity, Humanity, and Learning, they should make choice of
him amongst all Mankind to be their Darling. When Sylla came here out of Asia,
as long as he tarried, He had always Young Atticus in his Company, for he was
extremely charmed with his good Parts, and the sweetness of his humor; for He
spoke Greek so perfectly, that He seemed to be born in Athens, and had that
delicious fluency in the Latin Tongue, that it was very apparent, that the
smoothness of it was Natural to him and not Acquired; He would repeat Poems in
both these Languages, so that nothing could exceed him; this so endeared him to
Sylla, that he would scarce let him be out of his sight, and he had a great
desire to have brought him away along with him, but when he endeavored to
persuade him to it, Pomponius returned him this answer; Do not, Sir, carry me
to Fight against those, upon whose account I left Italy, that I might not bear
Arms against thy self; But Sylla praising the Young Man for the good Offices He
had done him, ordered when He went away, that the Presents which were given him
whilst he was at Athens should be carried to his House, as the tokens of his
thankfulness. Here He remained many years, and tho He bestowed as much
inspection upon the Affairs of his House, as became the diligence of one that
was Master of a Family, and spent the rest of his time either in Study or
managing the business of the Athenians, yet He continued his kindness to his
Fellow-Citizens; For He Canvass'd at all their Public Elections, and when any
thing of importance was Transacted, He was never wanting in his solicitations.
To Cicero He showed himself singularly faithful in his last extremities, for
when He was forced to abandon his Country, He gave him Two thousand eighty
three Pounds six shillings and eight pence, English Ste^ling.
two hundred and fifty thousand Sesterces; But when all these Turbulencies were
quieted, and the Tybur ran calmly, He returned home, and as I think when L.
Cotta and L. Torquatus were Consuls. The day of his departure, the whole City
of Athens so deplored, that by the tears of their sorrow they expressed the
greatness of the love they had for him; He had an Uncle whose name was Q.
Caecilius, a Roman Knight, an intimate friend of L. Lucullus's, and very Rich,
but he was otherwise of a morose Nature, and difficult to be pleased; but
Atticus so softued his temper, which was intolerable to every one else, that He
gained his good will, and retained it even to a decrepit Age; and then He
reaped the fruits of that Piety, with which He cultivated his sower humor, for
He adopted him and made him Heir to all that he had; which Inheritance amounted
to ten Eighty three thousand three hundred thirty three Pounds six shillings,
eight pence, Sterling.
millions of Sesterces. The Sister of Atticus was Married to Q. Tullius Cicero,
and Marcus his Brother was a great promoter of the match; Between whom and
Atticus there was a familiarity, even from their being School-Fellows together,
and a closer friendship maintained then with Quintius; that from hence we may
form a judgment, that in the Unions of that Society, the resemblance of a like
disposition prevails more then Affinity; Hortensius too was his bosome-friend,
who at that time had the chief vogue for Eloquence, so that it was a matter
utterly undecided, which loved him best, either him or Cicero; by this means he
solved an inconsistence in these two Orators, which was a thing not easy to be
attempted, for tho there was a strong Contrast betwixt them for Applause, yet
they never broke out into any revilings of one another, but both agreed in
esteeming him. He so Comported himself in the Commonwealth, that as He was
always of the best side, so He had the luck to be thought so. But He never was
a party in the Civil Wars, for it was his opinion, that those who embarque in
quarrels of that nature, have no more Ascendant over themselves when the Waves
of Sedition work high, then those who commit their Fortunes to a Tempest. He
never was ambitious of any Honor, tho the access was easy to his pretensions,
not only by reason of his Credit but his Quality; He saw that Men were not so
fair Candidates for it as their Forefathers, they being so profuse in their
Bribes to gain Votes, that the Offices of the Commonwealth could not be
undertaken, and the Laws kept inviolate, nor could they be discharged without
danger, there being such a general corruption of Manners, which Epidemically
run through all the City. He never was a purchaser of any goods that were sold
by outcry, and as He never farmed any of the Public Revenues, so He never was a
Surety for them who did. He never managed a Criminal Process against any one,
nor subscribed to another Accusation; for He never went to Law, nor had ever
any difinitive Sentence; When many Consuls and Pretors offered him Governments,
He would not follow any of them into their Provinces, but contenting himself
with the Honor of the Proposal, He rejected the profits of it; He denied to go
with Q. Cicero into Asia, tho he might have been his Lieutenant General; for He
did not think it decent to be in subordinate Authority to a Praetor, who had
refused the first Dignity it self; and by this means, He not only Consulted his
Honor, but his ease likewise, and avoided the least umbrages of a Crime, that
He might live unsuspected; the result of this Caution was, that the assistances
he paid his friends were the more acceptable, because they were sincere, when
they were the effects only of a readiness to oblige, and could not be imputed
to such servile motives as Hope and Fear. When He was about sixty years old,
the Civil War of Caesar burst out into a flame; but He enjoyed the privilege
his Age indulged him, and never stirred out of the City; But those of his
friends who went over to Pompey's side, He furnished their Expeditions out of
his own Store; but Pompey could not think He was disregarded, if he did not
actually join him Himself, for he had not received any advantages from him,
which might encourage him to it, as others had done, who by his countenancing
them were become Powerful and Rich; some of whom followed his Camp, but with
regret and very unwillingly, and others ungratefully tarried at home, which
very highly offended him. But the Neutrality of Atticus was so grateful to
Caesar, that when he was Conqueror, and dispatched Imperious Mandates to
private Persons to Command their Money from them, He not only not molested him,
but pardoned his Sister's Son which she had by Quintius, tho he was of Pompey's
party; thus by keeping firm to those first maxims of Conduct He laid down for
the regulation of his Life, He preserved himself safe from all new and emergent
dangers; consequent to this, when Caesar was slain, and the Commonwealth seemed
to be devolved into the hands of Cassius and Brutus, the Fortune of Rome like a
Machine turning about toward him; yet He so Caressed Brutus, that the Young Man
never delighted in any ones Company, tho He was of the same Age with himself,
with that pleasure as He did in that of the Venerable Atticus; for He not only
admitted him into his most intimate Councels, but enjoyed his Conversation at
all his Repastes. There was a project set on foot, that a fund of Treasure
should be Constituted by the Roman Kinghts for the Murderers of Caesar; they
thought the design very feesible, if the Chief of that Order, would Contribute
their shares toward it; whereupon C, Flavius who was a great friend to Brutus,
applied himself to Atticus, that He would be a principal mover in this
Business; but He, who did courtesies to those He respected, without engageing
in their Factions, and had always a Temper untainted from designs of that
Nature, made this answer, that if Brutus wanted any supplies, He would
Accommodate him out of his own Money to what value he pleased, but that he would
never discourse with any Man about the Business, nor accord with him in it; so
that the united sentiments of a whole party were ruined by his single dissent.
A little while after Anthony began to have the upper-hand, and Brutus and
Cassius (the Affairs of those Provinces which were given them by the Consuls,
only for form-sake, becoming desperate) were forced to fly for it. But Atticus
who never employed his Money to support the other party, when they were most
flourishing, sent an Eight hundred thirty three Pound six shillings eight
pence, Sterling.
hundred thousand Sesterces to Brutus when he left Italy, and was broken in his
Fortunes; and when He was at Epire, He ordered Two thousand five hundred Pounds
Sterling.
300 thousand more to be given him, himself being Absent; and as He never the
more flattered the Power of Anthony, so He never forsook those who were brought
to a Precipice. After this followed the War of Modena, in which if I should
only call him Prudent, I should detract from his Character, and speak less then
I ought to do. He was rather Divine, if a Constant Natural Goodness deserves
that Appellation, which is neither shaken nor lessened by outward accidents;
Anthony being declared a Public Enemy, was forced to leave Italy, and there was
no hopes of being Restored; for not only his Adversaries which were very many,
and in a great Power Combined against him, but his Friends joined themselves to
that number, and Revolted from him; they placed all their hopes of Advancement
upon his Depression; they persecuted his most intimate Friends, they endeavored
to spoil his Wife Fulvia of all her goods, and extirpate his Children. Atticus
as He was familiar with Cicero, so He was a great friend to Brutus; by this
means He not only restrained them from committing any outrage upon Anthony
himself, but He Protected as many of his Confederates which fled out of the
City, as much as He possibly could, and supplied them with all things they
stood in need of. He was so kind to P. Voluminous, that greater tenderness could
not be expected from a Father; and He was so diligent in his services to Fulvia
when she was harrass'd with Lawsuits, and vexed with melancholy apprehensions,
that she never entered into any Obligation without Atticus, for He was her
Stipulator in every thing; particularly when in her prosperous Condition she
had bought a parcel of Land, which was to be satisfied for to a day, and now
since this Calamity besell her, could not take up Cash enough upon her own
credit to discharge the purchase; Atticus came in opportunely to redress the
greivance, for He lent her Money without interest, or so much as prefixing a day
when it should be repayed; for He reckoned himself the greatest gainer by the
Reputation of a grateful and an obliging Man; and thereby make it appear, that
He did not Contract an acquaintance with Men's Fortunes but their Persons. And
tho these were his Actions, yet no one could imagine He did them out of any
temporising principle; for it could not rationally enter into any one's
opinion, that Anthony would ever recover that game of Empire He seemed so
utterly to have lost; but every now and then He received secret checks from
some of the Nobility, objecting to him, that his hatred was not intense enough
against such profligate Citizens. But He confiding in his own Judgment, had a
regard rather to what ought to be done, then what other Men would commend,
whether it was right or no. For the scene of Fortune swiftly changed, and when
Anthony returned into Italy, every one was in pain for Atticus; for they
thought He must be involved in great risques, by reason of the strict
Communication that was between him and Brutus, and Cicero; therefore when the
Triumvirate approached the City, He went out of it, for He feared Proscription,
and absconded in the House of P^ Voluminous, to whom He was so Eminently
Serviceable, as we have showed before. So Capricious was the turn of Affairs in
those times, that sometimes one party and sometimes another, would either be in
the height of Prosperity, or the Abyss of Misfortune. He was not alone in this
Retirement, but Q. Gellius Canius who was of the same Age, and resembled Him in
the Customs of his Life, was the Companion of his Obscurity; and this is
another instance of the good nature of Atticus, that He lived so lovingly with
him whom He knew from his Childhood, and was his Play-fellow, for their
friendship grew up with their years, and lasted even to an extreme old Age.
Anthony, tho He was so inveterately angry with Cicero, that He not only
declared open enmity against Him, but threatened all his Abettors, and was
resolved to Proscribe them; yet when many made Remonstrances to Him in the
behalf of Atticus, and He himself called to mind the Engagements He had
formerly laid upon him, He as suddenly Relented; so that He Writ to him with
his own hand to know where he was, bid him not be afraid, but that he should
immediately come to Him, for that He had struck him and Gellius Canius out of
the number of the Proscribed; Besides He sent him a Guard to assure him in the
darkness, and free him from the dangers of the Night; by this means his sears
were dispersed, and He not only secured himself, but was an instrument of
safety to the Man who was next dear to Him. For He never solicited to be out of
trouble alone, but in Conjunction with his friend, that by this it might
appear, that Men who love one another are not to be divided in their Fortunes.
If that Pilot therefore deserves applause who steers his Ship in a Winter Sea,
when the Season is as rough as the Ocean, why should not his Prudence merit a
particular Encomium, who arrived at safety through so many Civil broils and
such Storms in the State? When He had worked himself out of these distresses,
He was intent upon nothing else then how He might Assist as many as he could,
and in what things He was able. When the Triumverate set a price upon the heads
of the Proscribed, that the prospect of a reward might encourage the Rabble to
a search, there was not any one who fled into Epire who wanted for any thing;
and He gave them liberty to make it their perpetual Residence; besides, after
the Battle at Philippae, and the Slaughter of C. Cassus and M. Brutus, He was
resolved to shelter L. Julius Mocilla the Praetor, and his Son Aulus Torquatus,
and the rest who were beaten down with the same stroke of Fortune; and He
Commanded likewise supplies to be sent them when they Retired out of Epire into
Samothracia. It is very hard, and indeed not necessary, to run minutely through
all his Actions, this only I contend for, and which ought to be understood,
that his Liberality was not covered over with any Sinister design, nor was it
to humor the present current of Affairs; this may be concluded from the things
themselves, and the Complexion of those times; for He never sided with the
Prosperous, but always succored those who were in affliction; for He was as
Assiduous in his respects to Servilia the Mother of Bratus after the Death of
her Son, as when he was living and most happy. Being so Generous He could not
well provoke any one to be his Enemy, for He never offered an injury, and if
another was the Agressor upon Him, He chose rather to forget then Revenge the
Affront; If He received a Civility the impression of it was Immortal, never to
be effaced; but if He conferred one, it easily fell out of his mind, till He
that was obliged renewed the memory of it by his acknowledgments; doing after
this manner, He confirmed the truth of that saying, That every one owes his
lucky hits to the Conduct of himself; but the making his Fortune, was the last
thing in his Intention, He first formed his Manners as a previous
Qualification, and with such an exquisite niceness, that He might not justly be
charged with any thing that was culpable. By this means it came to pass, that
when M. Vipsanius Agrippa, who was the Favorite of young Octavius, might have
had his choice out of the Ladies of the best Condition in Rome, by reason of
his own Credit and the Power of Caesar, yet He was ambitious of being related
to Him, and desired rather to marry the Daughter of a Roman Knight, as the
nobler Alliance; The chief Menager of this Match (for it is not to be
concealed) was Anthony, who was one of the Triumvirate for settling the
Commonwealth. Being shined upon by his favor, He might have made large
Additions to his Estate, but He was so little infected with the love of Money,
that He never used it but in those occasions where his friend was to be freed
from danger, and eased of any thing that incommoded him. An illustrious
instance of this was in the time of the Proscription; for when the Triumvirate
had sold the Goods of L. Saufeius a Roman Knight, according to the custom which
then obtained, who was of the same Age with himself, had Resided many years at
Athens to Study Philosophy, and had noble Lordships in Italy; Atticus carried
Himself in this business, with so much Industry and Address, that the same
Messenger who brought him word that He had lost his Patrimony contradicted his
own news, by telling him, that He had recovered it again. He likewise cleared
off L. Julius Calidius, who I am bold to affirm, after the death of Lucretius
and Catullus, was the most Elegant Poet of his time; He was no less famous for
the integrity of his Morals, and his being Educated in all the best Arts; This
Man after the Knights were Proscribed, tho He was absent, yet He was brought
into the number by P. Voluminous, who was Overseer of the Workmen of Anthony;
and his great Possessions in Africa made him obnoxious to this punishment; So
that it made it a puzling question, whether there was more difficulty in the
undertaking, or Glory in the performance. But it was a Character of Atticus
generally known, that it was his care as much to relieve his absent Friends as
those that were present; and He was as good a Father of a Family as He was a
Citizen; for tho He was a great Monied-Man, yet no one was so moderate a
Purchaser, nor Built less then He did; not but that he lived very Commodiously,
and what things He served himself of, they were the best of their kind. His
House was Situate in the Quirinal Hill, which was an Inheritance left him by
his Uncle, whose pleasantness did not consist in the Curiosity of the
Structure, but in the Wood that encompassed it; for being a Pile raised after
the ancient manner, it had more of convenience in it then beauty; and He never
made any Alterations, but where the decays by the injury of time required to be
repaired; His Family, if we judge of them by their usefulness, was
extraordinary; but if we regard only the outward appearance, it was scarce
tolerable; for it was made up of Lads who were very good Scholars, could read
excellently well, and writ delicate hands for Transcribing, and there was
scarce any Footboy but could do either of them to admiration. All the
Artificers too, whose Art was necessary for the Adorning his Apartments, were
the choicest of their Profession. And there was not one of them but was born
and run through the Novitiate of their several Trades in his House; which was a
sign not only of his moderation but great industry; for not to be intemperate
in our desires after those things which others so eagerly covet, is a great
continency of temper; and to acquire that by diligence which others are at an
expense for, argues a more then ordinary Application. Atticus was rather Polite
then Magnificent; He did all things for his Honor, but without any excess of
cost; He was always clean and neat, but did not affect an Effeminate niceness.
As for his Movables and Furniture they were Competently Rich, and did not
abound; so that He avoided the two extremes of being stingy and profuse. I will
not omit one thing, tho to some it may seem a matter of light importance, that
tho He was one of the most Splendid of the Roman Knights, and received Men of
all conditions at his House with a Liberal Hospitality, yet He spent no more
then just Equivalent to ten pounds Sterling.
three thousand Asses a month, as appears by the register of his Disbursements;
and this I do not speak by hearsay, but as a thing I am certain of; for by
reason of the familiarity betwixt us, I was Conversant in the Family, and was
at the casting up of the Accounts. He had no other Consort at all his Feasts
but only a single Reader, which in my opinion was the most ravishing Music;
nor did he ever Sup without one of these Lectures; that whilst their Appetites
were Regaled the minds of the Guests might be entertained with something more
diverting; for He never invited any one to his Table but in whom he discerned a
disposition conformable to his own. Tho Riches flowed in upon him, yet He never
heightened his daily Provisions, nor deviated from the former measures of his
Life; for He was so moderate that when He was worth but Sixteen thousand six
hundred sixty six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence Sterling.
twenty hundred thousand Sesterces, He did not Live ingloriously, which was the
Estate left him by his Father, so when it amounted to The sum total is one
hundred thousand Pounds Sterling For these reductions of the Roman Coin to the
English Standard, I am obliged to the Learned Mr. Wat.
ten millions, He did not raise his Port to any greater Affluence then what He
first designed; for He kept inalterarably to the same pitch, in either fortune.
As for his other Recreations, He had no Gardens with Parterres, nor no
delightful place to take the air in the Suburbs; He had no Sumptuous Villa near
the Seashore, nor indeed in all Italy, except it were at Ardea and Nomentum,
which were only two Country-farms; And all the Revenues He had consisted in the
Lands He had at Epire, and some Possessions in the City; from whence it may be
known, that He did not make his estimate of Morry by the immense quantity, but
the rational use of it. As He was always a Man of strict veracity himself, so
He abhorred lying in another; therefore his courtesy was mixed with somewhat
that was Austere, and He was Affable but Grave; so that it was hard to say,
whether His Friends Loved or Reverenced him most; whatever was entreated of him
He would promise solemnly to do it, for it was his opinion that he was not a
generous but an inconstant Man, who would engage for that which He was not able
to perform. He was so industrious in bringing an affair to a result which he
had once espoused, that He seemed to Transact his own concern and not another,
which was deputed to his Management; and when he had once undertaken a
business, He was unwearied in his pursuits, for he thought his Reputation was
Interess'd in it, of which he was jealous even to a delicacy; By this means He
solicited the business of Marcus and Quintius Cicero, of Marius, Cato,
Hortensius, Aulus Torquatus, and many other Roman Knights; from whence we may
infer, that it was an effect of his judgment, and did not proceed from any
unactive temper, that he declined the public Functions of the Commonwealth. A
greater instance of the Complaisance of his humor cannot be given then this,
that when he was a Young Man He was very agreeable to Sylla who was in the
decline of his Age, and when himself was old M. Brutus extremely delighted in
Him who was in the bloom of his years; He lived so amicably with his
Cotemporaries Hortensius and Cicero, that it is hard to say to which Age his
Genius was most adapted; but Cicero Loved him the most fervently of the two,
for it was to the last degree of affection; so that his Brother Quintius was
not dearer or more familiar to Him; the real evidences of it, besides those
Books in which he makes mention of him, which are already published, are those
sixteen Volumes of Epistles which He sent to Atticus from the beginning of his
Consulship even to his latter days, which whosoever reads he will not desire a
more Connected History of those times; for in them the inclinations and designs
of Princes, the faults of Generals in their Conduct, and the Revolutions of the
Commonwealth, are so perspicuously traced out, that all the intrigues of State
are unravelled, and the springs of Policy seem to ly open; so that from hence
we may conclude, that Prudence is a sort of Divination; For Cicero not only
pointed out all the accidents of his own time, but with a brisker heat of
Prophesy foretold all the events which have happened since, and we sensibly
experience. What need I Commemorate any thing more of the Piety of Atticus?
When I heard Him Glorying thus justly of Himself, in the Funeral Oration He
made upon his Mother, whom He buried at ninety years of Age, Himself being
sixty-seven, that He never had any occasion to be reconciled to Her, and no
difference ever happened betwixt Him and his Sister, who was almost of the same
Age with Himself; which are manifest indications, either that no causes of
Dissatisfaction ever arose between them, and so there was no need of Cement
where nothing was broken; or that He was so kind to his Relations, that He
thought it even a piece of Irreligion to be angry with those whom He had all
the obligations upon Him to Love. And this He did not so much by the tender
instinct of Nature, whose suggestions we are all obsequious to, but it was the
effect of his Learning, and He acquired it by Study; for the Precepts of the
chief Philosophers were closely impressed upon him, and they did not serve for
Parade and ostentation, but He made them useful to him in the whole course of
his Life. He set the Manners of the ancient Romans before him as the patterns
of his imitation, and fairly copied out the great Originals; He was likewise a
Studious Lover of Antiquity; this knowledge he intimately conversed with, and
gave large demonstrations of it in the Volume He Wrote of Magistracy, which was
a Province He ingeniously adorned; for there was not a Law made, no Peace
concluded, nor no War undertaken, not an Action of Consequence done by the
Roman People, but He has related it with a strict Chronology, and adjusted
every occurrence to its proper time; and which seems an attempt of great
intricacy, He has interwoven in it the Pedigrees of some Families, with so
fine a texture, that by them we may know the beginnings of those Men who have
made any considerable Figure in Rome. He did the same thing separately in other
Books; as at the entreaty of M. Brutus, He derived the Junian Family from its
first Source, and showed all the Channels in which it has flowed down even to
our times; distinctly numbering each one's Predecestor in a true series of
Succession, and relating what Honors they attained to, and in what times they
enjoyed them; He did the like courtesy for Marcellus Claudius concerning the
Marcelli; and at the instances of Scipio Cornelius and Fabius Maximus, He gave
an account of the Cornelian, the Fabian, and the Emilian Families; and nothing
carries with it so endearing a relish as these Books to those who have the
least tincture of curiosity to be acquainted with the descents of Illustrious
Men; He had a smattering too in Poetry, which I believe was, that He might not
be ignorant what sweetness there was in it; for if any had arrived to a higher
pitch of Dignity beyond the ordinary Romans, or had signalized themselves by
any notable performances, He employed his Poetical Talent to Record their
Gallantry; for He described their Exploits, and what Charges they had in the
Government under each of their Pictures, and this in no more then four or five
Verses, which seems a thing almost incredible, that He could comprise
transactions of such high moment in so narrow a compass. He Writ a Book also in
Greek concerning the Consulship of Cicero. These things we have related of him
were whilst Atticus was alive; but now since the malignity of fate will have us
to outlive Him, we will run through the rest of his Actions and dispatch what
remains of this Great Man; that by real and bright examples, we may instruct
the Reader, and so confirm that axiom we have before laid down, That every one
allures Fortune to his side according as He manageth himself; for Atticus
contenting himself with the Paternal Dignity of a Knight which descended to
him, He at last came to be related to the Son of Julius, and the friendship
between them was heightened into Affinity; for He had before gained the
confidence of Augustus by the elegancy of his Living; and this was the
inducement by which He attracted others of the chiefest rank in the City to his
Conversation, who were of as Noble an Extraction as the Emperor, but their
condition was unequal, because not so prosperous; for Fortune seemed to fawn
upon Caesar, and so constant a success still followed him, that all the Honors
she ever decreed to any of her Favorites, she conferred upon Him, and with her
Auspicious gales conveyed Him to the utmost Honor which the ambition of a
Citizen could aspire to. Agrippa made Atticus a Grandfather, who married his
Daughter when she was a tender Virgin; this Female-Infant, tho she was scarce a
year old, Caesar betrothed to Tiberius Claudius Nero, which his Wife Drusilla
had by a former Husband, and was his Son-in-Law; this Alliance confirmed their
former Amity, and tied it on with an inviolable Sanction. Tho before these
Espousals, not only when He was absent from Rome, when he writ to any of his
Friends, He sent to Atticus even the minutes of his Life, as what he was then
doing, especially what Author he was reading, in what place He resided, and how
long he designed to tarry there; but likewise when He was in the City, and was
distracted by multiplicity of business, which gave him so great Avocations,
that He could not enjoy him so often as he would, yet the commerce of the Pen
was not interrupted, for no day passed in which He did not by Letter ask his
opinion in some matters relating to Antiquity, or propose some Poetical
question; sometimes He would be facetious only and rally him, that the answers
in which He Reparteed might be the more prolix which had this good effect, that
when the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius, which Romulus built in the Capitol,
through Age and Peoples being incurious of its repairs, began to threaten a
total ruin, Caesar by the persuasion of Atticus took care to support it. M.
Anthony had him in no less passionate esteem, and maintained an intercourse
with him of this nature; for when he was banished even to the extreme limits of
the Empire, yet He certified his Atticus to a nice punctilio of what he was
then upon, and what design He had in farther Projection; He only is qualified
to judge of the greatness of this Correspondence, who can make a true estimate
what a piece of Consummate Wisdom it is to retain the favor, and reconcile the
jealousies of two great Personages, who were Competitors in the same Ambition,
betwixt whom there was not only a bare Emulation, but a persect Antipathy,
which kindled into the mutual upbraiding one another; it was an Aversion as
strong as could possibly be between an Anthony and a Caesar, who would not
divide the Globe, but each one contended not only to be Master of Rome, but
Emperor of the World. Through all these Traverses of Life, He at last arrived
to the seventy-seventh year, and his Credit and Riches multiplied upon him even
to an extreme old Age; (for many left him all that they had, purely upon the
account of his wonderful Goodness.) But now after He had been of so strong a
Complexion that he had no need of a Physician for thirty years together, his
health was so entire, He at last contracted a Disease which Himself and his
Doctors at first despised as a very slight indisposition, for they thought it
to be a This is a fruitless endeavor of nature to ease her self, occasioned by
a defluxion of sharp humots, the which irrirate the Sphinctor of the Anus.
Tenesmus, therefore they administered quick and easy applications, to disperse
it in its first accesses. After He had languish'd three months, without any
more sensible uneasiness then what He received from the methods of his cure,
the whole weight of his distemper sunk at last into one of his guts, which
broke out afterward into a very putrid Fistula; But before this Crisis happened
to Him, when he found his pains to increase and his blood grow warm, He ordered
his Son-in-Law Agrippa to be sent for, with L. Cornelius Balbus and Sextus
Peducaeus; when He saw that they were come, leaning upon his Couch he spoke to
them after this manner; What care I have taken for the preservation of my
health, since you all can abundantly attest, a discourse of that nature will be
altogether superfluous; Hoping therefore that I have given you satisfaction,
and being Conscious to my self, that I have omitted nothing which carried the
least tendency in it toward a cure; it only remains now that I more nearly
consult my self, and this is the thing I would acquaint you with, that I am
resolved no longer to nourish my disease but starve it; for the sustenance I
have taken these last days has protracted my Life indeed, but it has
prolonged my afflictions with at, without any hopes of recovery. I therefore
beg it of you, that you would first approve of my expedient, and then use no
arguments to dissuade me from it, for it will be all in vain. He spoke this
with such a strong voice, and such an assured Countenance, as if He was not
leaving the World, but passing from one House into another. But Agrippa with
tears in his eyes kissing him, did not only entreat but earnestly Conjured him
not to Accelerate his fate himself, but let nature bring it leisurely upon him;
and since there were remains of health which would in Life keep some time
longer, that He would suffer himself to survive both for his own sake and that
of his Friends; but He rejected his importunitles with an obstinate silence.
Thus after two days rigid abstinence his Feavor went of without any Paroxysmes,
and all the Symptoms were manifestly abated: but He thinking it not worth the
while to live, would not recede from his first purpose, therefore the fifth day
after he had taken up this fatal resolution He departed this Life, which was
the day before the Kalends of April, L. Domitius and C. Sosius being Consuls.
His body was brought forth in a Litter, as He himself had ordered, without any
Funeral Pomp; but all the best Men of the City accompanied the Corpse with a
numerous Concourse of the Common People; He was buried five miles from Rome by
the Appian way, in the Monument of Q. Caecilius his Uncle.

FINIS.

