Imprimatur.

Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc.
Land. a sac. dom. Nov. 1. 1678.
Six Sermons, Preached (most of them) AT S. MARY'S IN CAMBRIDGE.

By ROBERT NEEDHAM, M. A. late Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXIX.

To his ever honored Friend Dr. WALTER NEEDHAM at the Charterhouse.
SIR,
NOw at length I return you some of those Papers which you was pleased so
kindly to commit to my trust: viz. Six Sermons of your Brothers, I say not the
best I could pick out, (for indeed all that he composed were singularly good
and useful) but such as either he chose to preach in the most public places,
or else were more particularly desired by some of his friends.

Had he himself designed or prepared these Discourses for the Press, they would
have appeared much more accurate and exact, than now perhaps some passages in
them may seem to be; nor durst I venture to make any considerable alterations.
However as they are, I doubt not but they will be highly acceptable to all
serious and devout Readers, and I am sure they are far above the contempt even
of the Critics, and Wits of the Age.

Of such great moment are the Subjects here treated of, so plain and familiar
is the Style, so weighty and sound the Arguments, that there needs no other
reason to be given of these Sermons being made public, than that they are so
excellently fitted to do good. Unless you, Sir, give me leave to mention this
one; that these Papers will be a lasting Evidence and testimony to your self
and others his dear Relations of the incomparable worth, sweet temper, and
undissembled Piety of your Brother; since you may by them to your no little
satisfaction easily perceive, what a very considerable man he was likely to
have proved, what good reason you had to love him as you did, and how amply
your great care of his Education was recompensed and fully answered by those
extraordinary improvements he made of himself in so short a time, though under
much indisposition of body, and of late Years laboring under a tedious
incurable Disease: I may well call it incurable, since it resisted even all
your skill and pains, and in spite of all you your self could do, at last
prevailed against him, whose life above others you so passionately wished and
desired.

But here I think my self bound to add, that he will be apt to do great wrong
to the memory of our Author, who shall make a judgment of his Learning and
Abilities only by what he may find in this little Book. Preaching, perhaps,
was his least Talent; a Work he but lately entered upon, and by the By only
performed. You know, Sir, he observed a just and prudent Method in his Studies,
and had laid in a great Stock of useful Knowledge of all kinds, designing all
along not so much to fit himself for these Pulpit Exercises, as to be a General
Scholar.

And indeed such he was, there being few parts of Learning in which he had not
made a considerable progress. On which account he became most eminently
serviceable to Queens College; his known merits and prudence drawing many
young Gentlemen and others under his care, to their own singular advantage, and
the credit of that Royal Foundation.

Nor was he only admired in, or useful to his own particular College, but so
remarkable was his Worth and Goodness, that his Friendship and Acquaintance was
desired by many others. His Learning gained him every where Authority and
Respect, and his good Nature and most obliging Carriage won him the love and
favor of the whole University; so that he was the Man, of whom I never heard
any one say an ill word.

It is difficult for me here to forbear; so pleasant is it to me to think of my
Old Friend Mr. NEEDHAM. And I know I shall be sufficiently blamed by his
Acquaintance for saying so little of such an excellent person. One will tell
me, that at least his wonderful modesty and perfect freedom from all manner of
pride and conceit; another, that the briskness of his fancy, and the
pleasantness of his humor and conversation, whilst he enjoyed any measure of
health; a third, that his admirable Patience, and Indifferency as to this
World; others, that his faithful and truly friendly temper; that these with
many other of his excellent Virtues ought to have been duly rehearsed and
commemorated. Every one that knew him will find fault, that something or other,
for which he was exemplary, is now omitted.

It was the saying of a great Roman, when he was asked why his Statue was not
erected in the Marketplace, as well as of many others of far less note and
desert; that he had much rather people should wonder and enquire why he had no
Statue, than that any should ask why he had one. I had much rather be censured
for falling infinitely short of what my Subject might justly challenge, than
that any one should upon this or any like occasion, accuse me of Flattery or
Complement.

After all I must confess, Sir, I have one private selfish design in this
Dedication; which is, to take this occasion most thankfully to acknowledge your
great undeserved favors and kindnesses to me, which I can put on no other
account, but your own goodness, and that your Brother would please to call me
his Friend.

I am Your most obliged and humble Servant, BEN. CALAMY.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. S. MAT. V. 44. But I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you and persecute you. SERMON II. I COR. iv. 5. Judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come. SERMON III. S. JOHN vij. 17. If any man
will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self. SERMON IV. HEB. xij. 1: Wherefore, seeing we also
are encompassed about with so great a cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside
every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us. SERMON V. HEB. xij. 2. Looking unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand
of the throne of God. SERMON VI. 2 COR. v. 10. For we must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad.
SERMON I.
S. MATT. v. v. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you and persecute you.


THe design of our Blessed Saviors coming into the World, as he himself
declares at the 17. verse of this Chapter, was not to destroy the Law and the
Prophets, but to fulfill them. This he performed, partly by doing, and suffering
all that the Prophets had foretold concerning him, and by accomplishing what
was fore-shewn by the Types and Shadows of the Law; partly by his divine
Discourses and Sermons giving new life and authority to those Rules of Good
Living they had been taught by Moses; adding to, and improving them where they
were defective, and restoring them to their primitive sense and purity, where
they were either obscurely delivered, or by the misinterpretation of their
Doctors were generally misunderstood: and this he did suitably to the different
nature of those Commands which they had received in Moses's Law; some whereof
consisted of Rites and Ceremonial Observances, which were a Shadow of things to
come, and were upon the accomplishment of those things presently to have an
end: Others contained the necessary Rules of Good Living, and were of an
absolute and unchangeable nature. Now so it came to pass, that the Jews, a
People infinitely prone to Superstition, were very nice and curious in the
observance of those outward Circumstances and Ceremonies of the Law, even to
the neglect of the greater duties of Righteousness, Judgment and Mercy, which
they ought chiefly to have done, though not to have left the other undone. The
blame of this practice is by our Savior frequently laid upon the Scribes and
Pharisees, who then were the great pretenders to the Righteousness of the Law,
yet in truth the greatest corrupters of it, by laying the chief stress upon the
outward and less material circumstances, and evacuating the moral parts of it
by too nice and narrow interpretations. Our Savior therefore having declared
that he came to fulfill the Law and the Prophets, in pursuance of that design at
the 20. v. he forewarns his Hearers of this practice and doctrine of the
Scribes and Pharisees; I say unto you, Except your Righteousness shall exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into
the kingdom of heaven. And that they might not be ignorant in what particulars
they ought to exceed what the Pharisees taught, in the continuance of his
Sermon he gives them several instances, wherein the Law of Moses, partly by its
own obscurity, partly by their misinterpretations was generally misunderstood.
Among other parts of the Moral Law which were not well understood by the Jews,
there was none to which they were greater strangers, than this in the Text of
Loving Enemies.

They had received Levit. xix. 18. this precept, Thou shall not avenge nor bear
any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Now the Jews understanding the word Neighbor only of
the children of their People, of men of their own Tribe and Country, of men
that kept mutual correspondence and agreement with them, they took it for
granted that as for other men who were strangers and aliens to them, they were
at full liberty to exercise what revenge they pleased, as appears by the Verse
before the Text, Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor and hate thine Enemy. But this latter clause, and hate thine Enemy,
was an additional interpretation, no where to be found in the Law; and was in
truth contrary to the true intent and meaning of the former precept of Loving
our Neighbor, as appears by our Saviors explication of it, Ye have heard that
it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy: but I
say unto you, love your Enemies, etc.

Having thus far shown the Connection of these words with the foregoing, and
with the design of the whole Chapter, I shall now consider them by themselves,
and shall endeavor to set before you,

1. The Nature and Extent of the Duty enjoined. 2. Our Obligation to the
practice of it.
I begin with the Nature and Extent of this Duty, Love your Enemies, etc.

The word Love is of a very large signification, and in the language of holy
Scripture is generally used to express the whole duty of man. Thus our Savior
uses it in the Summary of Religion which he taught the Lawyer, telling him
that the whole Law was comprised in these two things, the love of God and of
our Neighbor: Thou shall love the Lord thy Matthew. 22. 37.
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, this is
the first and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it, thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self: on these two Commandments hang all the Law and
the Prophets. By which use of the word it is plain, that the love of our
Neighbor includes all the Duties and Offices which one man can owe to another;
and so it is here to be understood when applied to Enemies, as appears by the
connection of these words with the former Verse, Ye have heard that it has been
said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor and hate thine Enemy; but I say unto you,
Love your Enemies. Where it is plain, our Savior altered not the comprehensive
signification of the word, only enlarged the object of it, viz. that whereas
they had been before taught to confine their Love, that is, the several offices
of Justice and Charity, only to their Neighbors, that is, as they understood
it, only to their Friends and Countrymen; they should now extend the same
offices to Enemies likewise as well as to them, not only to Strangers and
Aliens, but to those also that professed hatred to them, and did them injury.
This he prescribes first generally by the name of Love, I say unto you, Love
your Enemies; and then, left they should make too narrow an interpretation of
the word, he further explains it by the most obliging instances can be given of
it, and that in opposition to the contrary practice of their Enemies; Bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you and persecute you.

But not to insist upon this large signification of the word, I shall now only
take notice of those offices which are peculiarly due to our Enemies as such,
over and above what can be due to the rest of our Neighbors; and those are
referred usually to these three general Heads.

1. That we do not return those evils upon our Enemy which he has done us. 2.
That we forgive him from our hearts. 3. That we recompense good to him when he
stands in need of our assistance.
1. If we are commanded to love our Enemies, it is easy to understand that we
are hereby forbidden all practices toward him that are inconsistent with Love
and Charity, and therefore that we must forbear all acts of revenge and
hostility toward him, all recompensing evil for evil. This branch of our duty
our Savior particularly teaches at the 38, 39. verses of this Chapter, Ye have
heard that it has been said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: but I
say unto you, that ye resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also. Where by the way we may observe, that
our Savior does prevent the most plausible Argument men are wont to use to
justify their revenge. Veterem ferendo injuriam invitas novam, was always a
pretense for it: and many men who would otherwise be thought good Christians
are still apt to urge it as a sufficient reason to return evil upon their
adversaries, because otherwise they may by too much forbearance be encouraged
to go on in the same practice of doing injuries and offering affronts. Now the
case here mentioned by our Savior, is very plain in opposition to that
pretense, Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also. The meaning of which words is, that in matters of less moment, as the
instance there given is, the good Christian ought rather expose himself to
further injuries, than return the same usage to his adversary that he has
suffered from him, or be guilty of any revengeful act. So patient must the
Servant of the Lord be toward all men, not rendering evil for evil, nor railing
for railing. 1 Pet. 3.9.


This duty will, I know, seem very difficult to men of this generation, who are
usually so far from being satisfied with an equal return of evil upon their
adversaries, that their revenge seldom ends with less then the death or ruin
of their brethren, and that often upon very slight or no provocation. It is
indeed a sad thing to consider, that in a Christian Commonwealth Point of
Honor and Gallantry should be so often pleaded as a just pretense for
Bloodshed and Slaughter, that a rash word, or a contumelious expression should
be thought a sufficient provocation to engage life and soul too in pursuance of
our revenge, and that in contradiction to so plain a precept, which by the
profession of Christianity we stand obliged to. But how dangerous a choice
these men make, I shall have occasion to discourse by and by. In the mean time
we are to know that the forbearing Revenge is but the first and lowest degree
of that Charity, which the Gospel requires toward our Enemies, and is expressed
hereby the name of Love.

2. It is not sufficient that we abstain from outward acts of Hostility and
Revenge toward our Enemies, but we must lay aside all thoughts and desires of
it. We are not to wish the same evil to our Neighbor that he has done to us,
we are not to retain any angry or malicious thought, no grudge or animosity, no
secret hate or envious design against the person of any man, how much soever he
has been our Enemy. We may have other reasons that may oblige us to refrain
from outward acts of Revenge: sometimes we may be too weak to do it, and want
power or opportunity to execute our designs of evil: sometimes it may be
against some other interest of ours which we prefer before it; and to forbear
Revenge only in such circumstances is no part of our obedience to this precept
of our Savior, which extends it self to the inward motions and dispositions of
our soul, and requires that our forgiveness be from the heart. And indeed the
primary intention of all the divine Law, is to regulate the inward thoughts and
habitual inclinations of the Soul, and to bring them into subjection and
conformity to the will of God. Nor can we be said to obey any one precept of
the Gospel only by abstaining from the visible acts of sin, unless we do
likewise mortify and subdue the secret lusts, and inordinate desires of our
heart, which are the inward principles and seeds of our outward actions:
according to which the good or evil of them will be measured. To be sure the
word Love is of all other most properly to be understood of the inward
affections of the Soul, and therefore we are obliged by this precept to lay
aside, and restrain all those black passions which any ways prompt us to seek
revenge, or rejoice in the hurt that befalls our Neighbor. To this purpose is
S. Paul's direction Ephesians. iv. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice: and be ye
kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you. Nay, the Scripture is so positive in this case,
that though we should forbear to return evil upon our brother that has
offended us, though our hand be not upon him to kill him, or do him hurt; yet
if we nourish in our bosom any angry and malicious thought against him, if we
wish harm to him, or rejoice over those evils that befall him, this would be as
direct a breach of the Law of forgiveness, as though we our selves had been the
executioners of our Revenge upon him. So S. John tells us, 1 John iii. 15.
Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer.

3. There is yet a further degree of Charity toward our Enemies. We must not
only forbear the return of evil, we must not only forgive them heartily and
wish them no evil, but we are obliged also to exercise acts of mercy and
goodness to them, we must be ready to do them good whenever they may need it
from us. If thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst give him drink. But
possibly he needs no such assistance, possibly his malice is such that he would
scorn thy offer, yet still thou may do him good whether he will or no; thy
Prayers are in thy own power, he cannot refuse the assistance of them; he
cannot defeat the design of this Charity. Offer therefore thy prayers to God
for him, that the wickedness of his heart may be forgiven him, and that he may
be endued with the spirit of Peace and Charity. This last branch of duty is the
perfection of the other two, and is chiefly intended in this place. But I say
unto you, Love your Enemies, etc. And thus much may suffice briefly to explain
the nature of this duty.

I come now to consider the extent of it: For it may be demanded, How often, and
to what degree shall my Brother sin against me, and I be bound to forgive him
and love him? must I always yield to Injuries and Reproaches? Can no wound be
so deep as to remove my brother from my affection, and to justify my revenge?
Must there be no end of my forbearance and suffering? In answer to these
Queries, there are these two things to be considered.

1. As to the number and multitude of our Brothers injuries against us, we may
remember that S. Matthew. xviii. 21. it is recorded of S. Peter, that he came to
Jesus, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive
him? till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee until seven
times: but, until seventy times seven. Now by this manner of speech our
Savior plainly intended, not to set bounds or limits to our forgiveness, but
to declare rather that it ought to be unlimited, that no transgressions of our
Brother, how often soever they be repeated, ought to exclude him from our
forgiveness and charity.

2. As to the other part of the Question, touching the heinousness of our
Brothers offenses against us, it is plain likewise, that no degree of guilt in
him can put him out of the reach of our pardon, unless we also would be content
that God should exclude us from that forgiveness we pray for: for so our
Savior has taught us to pray, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. If we therefore forgive partially, if we except any
of our Brethrens trespasses from our pardon, because forsooth they are too
great to be forgiven, what can we expect but that God should deal with us
according to our prayers, and leave us under the weight of our most heinous
transgressions? and how unsupportable a burden this would be, judge ye. By what
has been said it is easy to conclude, that this precept does oblige us to an
universal Forgiveness and Charity toward our Enemies, how many and how great
soever their offenses have been.

There remains one case still to be considered, viz. the Civil Magistrate is
appointed by God a Revenger, to execute wrath upon them that do evil, not upon
those only who sin immediately against God, but upon those also who are
injurious to their Neighbors. Nor could Civil Society subsist without such a
standing power. It may therefore be reasonably demanded, that if God has
established such a power amongst men, for the relief of the injured, and
punishment of offenders, how can it be unlawful to make use of that remedy? and
then surely all return of evil upon our Adversaries is not forbidden by this
precept of loving Enemies. Nor would God have appointed his public Officers
for the punishment of Injustice and Wrong, if the persons injured might not
lawfully implead those who did the wrong, and seek that reparation which the
Laws of God and Man have provided. And indeed if our Savior did universally
oblige us tamely to yield to all kind of injuries, without making our just
defense, or seeking reparation from the Law, this would be the direct way to
disorder and confusion, and would justify that objection which is wont to be
made against this precept, that it exposed good men to ruin and poverty, and
gave security only to the violent and oppressors.

But to free our Saviors Doctrine from so undeserved a calumny, it is to be
considered,

1. That this Precept is primarily intended as a Rule for private persons, in
that capacity, that they should by no means make themselves judges in their own
cause, and assume to themselves the power of taking vengeance, and exacting
what satisfaction they thought fit for the injuries they received. Not but that
Injustice and Wrong ought to receive its due punishment even amongst men; but
because private persons are not to be trusted in their own concern, therefore
God has reserved this power to himself, and to Magistrates commissionated by
him, for the punishment of evildoers, and the praise of them that do well. And
to these all private persons ought to refer the judgment of their cause, and
reparation of their wrongs; and this I take to be the force of S. Paul's reason,
why we should not avenge our selves, Romans xii. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge not
your selves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is
mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Vengeance belongs to God, the Magistrate is
Gods Revenger, therefore private persons must not pretend to any such authority
over their adversaries.

2. It is to be considered further, that there is a wide difference to be made
between prosecuting an injurious man, and seeking revenge. The former of these
may be done without any breach of Charity, or diminution of our affection
toward him, nay possibly it may be the cruellest piece of revenge to let men
alone in their evil practices, or to suffer them to enjoy the fruits of
Injustice without calling them to account for it. The success of unrighteous
actions may by degrees harden them in sin, and bring down the severer judgments
of God upon them, should they escape humane Justice. So that to give a timely
check to our Neighbor when he deals unjustly by us, may possibly be a means of
gaining our Brother, when private admonitions may not prove effectual. So that
this is no ways inconsistent with an hearty forgiveness, and unfeigned charity
toward our Enemy. In short then, we may lawfully implead those who have done us
wrong, only we must observe great care and moderation in it; we must not go to
Law for every trifling and light occasion, we must be careful not to do it with
any malicious design against the person we contend with. For though our
adversary be justly punished, yet if we pursue him with intention to gratify
our own passion in his sufferings, we can in no wise be found guiltless of the
breach of this duty. But thus much may suffice for the first thing proposed,
the Nature and Extent of the Duty enjoined, Love your Enemies, etc.

I come now to show the great obligation that is laid upon us to the practice
of this duty; which I shall endeavor to enforce,

1. From the quality of the Lawgiver intimated in these words, I say unto you.
2. From the nature of the Precept. 3. Because our greatest interest does
indispensably depend upon the practice of it.
As for the quality of the Lawgiver expressed in those words, I say unto you,
etc.

1. If we look upon our Savior only as a Prophet come from God to declare his
will to Mankind, to make them understand more clearly what it is that the Lord
requires of them, yet this alone were sufficient to challenge our obedience to
this, and all his Commands. That God, whose Creatures we are, on whom we depend
daily for our subsistence and wel-being, from whom we have received life and
breath, and all things we enjoy, and from whom alone we can receive whatever we
hope for, this God, whose natural born Subjects we are, has by our Savior
given us the most clear and perfect revelation of his will, and does
accordingly by him require the most entire and universal obedience to it. Nor
is there any Doctrine he does more frequently insist on, or more earnestly
persuade us to obey, than this of the Text, of Loving Enemies. The Will of God,
whenever made known to us, is a sufficient reason of the obligation of any of
his Laws: and our blessed Savior brought with him such undeniable evidences
that he came from God, and delivered his Doctrine with so great demonstrations
of the truth, and divine authority of what he spoke, that he extorted from his
very adversaries this confession, Matt. 22. 15. Master we know that thou art
true, and teach the way of God in truth. This was that Prophet whom God
himself spoke of so long before to Moses, saying, Deuteronomy. xviii. 18. I will raise
them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my
words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them all that I command him; and it
shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he
shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. And what is meant by those
words, I will require it, S. Peter explains Acts iii. 23. where citing this
prophecy, he tells us, and it shall come to pass, that every soul that will not
hear that Prophet, shall be cut off from among the people. If therefore we look
upon our Savior only as that Prophet, yet this alone gives sufficient
authority and obligation to his Precepts, and he might justly pronounce pro
Imperio, I say unto you love your Enemies.

2. We are not to look upon our Savior only as a Prophet; it is true, he was
a Prophet mighty in deed and in word, but he was withal much more than a
Prophet: for God who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past
to the Heb. i. 1, 2.
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds. Now
if the dignity of the Ambassador add any weight or authority to the Message he
delivers, then surely by how much greater the Son of God is, than those other
Prophets and Ministers whom God in former Ages sent forth to declare his will
to the World, so much more inexcusable must those men be, who reject the
precepts of the Gospel, and refuse obedience to those Laws which are revealed
to them by the Son of God himself. This is the inference S. Paul makes Heb. ii.
1. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. For if the word spoken by
Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received its due
recompense of reward? how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, etc. Now if these
considerations may seem too remote as having equal influence upon all other
duties required in the Gospel, we may observe:

3. That our Saviors authority ought to have a more particular force to engage
us in the practice of this duty of Loving Enemies, because the whole course of
his life was a continued example of unbounded goodness and love to those who
were his enemies, and he gave us that example that we should follow his steps.
Our Savior in this precept requires nothing more of us, than what he practiced
toward our selves in a most eminent manner. And can we then be unwilling for
his sake to imitate his practice toward our Fellow Creatures? When all flesh
had corrupted their ways before God, and become enemies to him through wicked
works, and liable to most severe vengeance, then it pleased the Father out of
his most tender compassion and love to Mankind to send his Son out of his
bosom, to proclaim Pardon and Forgiveness to them who would repent, and turn
from the evil of their ways and would believe and obey that Doctrine which he
should teach. Then it pleased the Son of God to come down from Heaven, the
habitation of Glory, to take upon him our flesh, and to submit to all the
miseries and sorrows of humane life; and lastly, to suffer an accursed,
ignominious, and painful death, to redeem us from our iniquities, and to free
us from the insupportable vengeance which is the wages of them. And can we
think of so great condescension of the Son of God, so boundless a compassion
and mighty love, without being transported with the most fervent affections of
Soul to render to him all possible demonstrations of thankfulness and
obedience? Surely no obedience on our parts can be too great a testimony of our
thankfulness and love to him, by whose mercy and goodness we are so deeply
obliged.

Now the duty of Loving Enemies is not only recommended to our practice by our
Saviors authority and example, but is further enjoined as a particular mark
and character of his Disciples, and as the great instance of Charity, wherein
they should exceed other men. S. Luke vi. 32. If ye love them which love you,
what thank have you? for sinners also love those that love them. And if ye do
good to them, which do good for you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do
even the same: and if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank
have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners to receive as much again. But love ye
your enemies, and do good hoping for nothing again. So then by our Saviors
argument, when we do good to friends only, we do but as other men, and mind
only our interest; but if our charity extends to Enemies, this is pure
obedience to the Commands of our Savior. then are we properly called his
Disciples. To conclude therefore this Argument, if the Will of God sufficiently
made known to us have any force to oblige our practice, if the authority and
example of the Son of God can prevail with us, if the greatest instance of
goodness and love toward our selves can deserve any suitable return from us,
then our Savior may, and does upon all these accounts challenge your obedience
to this precept of Loving Enemies, as the peculiar instance of your duty to
him, as the best imitation of his charity, and truest testimony of your love
and gratitude. Thus if we consider the quality of the Lawgiver, he is one, who
by the justest authority, and greatest obligations claims obedience to this
precept. I say unto you, love your Enemies, etc.

2. Besides the authority of the Lawgiver, if we consider further the nature
of the Law it self, it will appear much more unreasonable we should disobey
him. For however uneasy this may seem at the first sight, if we take our
measures aright, there is no precept that does more conduce to the quiet
contentment of our own minds, the peace of the World, and the true dignity and
perfection of our Nature.

1. If we consult only our present ease and satisfaction, this only would in
a great measure oblige us to pass by many injuries, and to be kind and courteous
toward our Brethren, though they have been injurious to us. And this will best
appear if we consider, how burdensome and uneasy those passions are which
incline to revenge. Anger and Malice, and Envy and Jealousy, which are the
constant Attendants of the revengeful man, do raise such boisterous tempests,
such tumult and disorder in the soul as cannot consist with true peace and
serenity. So that to give way to them, and cherish them in their beginnings, is
as dangerous to our repose and happiness, as though we should nourish a Snake
in our bosom which would leave behind it an incurable sting and perpetual
anguish. Tell me, I pray, is any man happy that is easily provoked? Can he
enjoy the same content with other men, who leaves it in the power of any one
that dares affront him, to raise in him those tempestuous passions, and to rob
him of his repose and quiet? Certainly the angry and revengeful man, if he has
an enemy, gives him the greatest advantages over him that can be. For there is
no injury so effectual, as that which raises disturbance in the mind: so that a
malicious designer always does the intended mischief, when it is directed
against a man that indulgeth these passions. Whereas on the contrary, he that
inures himself to patience and forbearance, though his adversary seek to do him
mischief, yet by this temper of mind he frustrates the design of his malice,
and in spite of all injuries is perfect Master of his own happiness. In a word,
there is no condition of life so happy, no enjoyment so full of satisfaction
which can give us the least content, while the desire of Revenge prevails with
us. And of this the Hihory of Haman is abundant evidence, which we read Esther
v. 11. where Haman having called his friends and kindred together, and having
told them of the greatness of his riches, and the multitude of his children,
and all the things wherein the King had promoted him, and how he had advanced
him above the Princes and Servants of the King, yet says he, v. 13. All this
avails me nothing, so long as Morcai the Jew sits at the Kings gate. So
unhappy is the envious and revengeful man amidst the greatest prosperity which
this World can afford.

2. Next to the peace and quiet of our own minds, this duty of forgiving
injuries and loving Enemies does highly conduce to the peace of the World, and
to the preservation of unity and good will among Christians, as being the most
generous and likely way to reduce our enemies to peace and friendly agreement
with us. There is no man so averse from reconciliation, who will not in time be
wrought upon by kindness and charity. Enmity will of it self expire, if it be
not continued by repeated acts of unkindness, how much rather when men find all
their injuries repaid with courtesies, all their uncharitable dealings with
good deeds. This Argument is made use of by S. Paul, Romans xii. 20. If thine
enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him drink, for in so doing thou
shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Which is not to be understood, as
though by so doing we should design to increase his condemnation before God.
For though possibly that may be the event, if notwithstanding our kindness he
continue obstinate in his malice, yet to design that in relieving him would
indeed be the cruellest piece of revenge and malice. The Apostles meaning
therefore is, that by doing good to our enemy, and relieving him in his wants,
we shall kindle in him that fervor of affection and holy fire of Love to us,
that he may for the future become our friend, and repent, and be ashamed of his
wickedness. This I conceive to be the meaning of heaping coals of fire upon his
head; and this is confirmed by the following words of the same Apostle, Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Let no man's injuries or
malicious practices toward thee deface in thy Soul that divine temper of mind,
that inclines thee to do good; but endeavor rather by repeated acts of charity
toward thine enemy to overcome his enmity, and bring him to agreement and
peace with thee.

This consideration ought to have great force upon us, because there is nothing
more desirable in this World, than that brethren should live together in unity,
nor any thing more agreeable to the design of our most holy Religion. When our
Savior was born into the World Angels attended his birth with this song, Glory
be to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men. Our Savior is often
called the Prince of Peace, and when he left the World, the last Legacy he
bequeathed to his Disciples was Peace: My peace I leave with you, my peace I
give unto you. Nor ought any thing to be dearer to us, who pretend to be his
Disciples, than this peace; nor ought we to be unwilling to let go much of our
right, and to forbear many injuries, and to forego all desires of revenge, so
that we may obtain the blessed fruits of peace, and live in unity and godly
love.

3. From what has been already said, it is easy to conclude, that the
practice of this duty does highly conduce to the true dignity and perfection of
our Nature. Those good dispositions of mind that incline us to be merciful and
friendly to others, are the great perfections of reasonable beings, and we are
so much more perfect, by how much more enlarged and extensive they are, and
less capable of being removed or changed. And therefore he who is so settled in
the habit of doing good, as not to be withdrawn from it by the injuries and
provocations of his enemy has gained a victory over himself far beyond what he
could hope for in pursuance of his revenge, and has attained to as great a
degree of perfection as he is capable of. For proof of this we may have
recourse to the consideration of the divine nature: for the great perfection of
Man, was that he was created after the image of God, nor is there any thing
whereby we attain a nearer resemblance to the Divine Nature, than by this
universal and unrestrained charity, this desire to good to Enemies as well as
Friends. That which makes God the most adorable Being in the World, is chiefly
his infinite and unchangeable goodness. This reason is assigned by our Savior
to engage us to the duty of loving Enemies in the following Verse, That ye may
be the children of your Father, which is in heaven; for he makes his Sun to
rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust. And
at the last Verse concludes his discourse with this advice, Be ye therefore
perfect as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

3. The last Argument to persuade us to forgive and love our Enemies was this,
that our greatest interest does indispensably depend upon this our practice of
it. We have all sinned and come short of the glory of God, and do therefore all
of us stand in need of pardon and forgiveness at his hands. And can we pray to
God for pardon of our own sins, if we refuse for his sake to forgive our
Brethren? Surely this were a very vain thing to hope for. For what is there can
seem to render our Neighbor incapable of forgiveness, which does not aggravate
our sins against God infinitely beyond his transgressions against us? If our
Neighbors offenses against us are very many, yet ours against God are vastly
more numerous, if not rather without number. Who can tell how often he offends?
was holy David's question; and it plainly implies that no man can tell. For his
own part, though he was the man after Gods own heart, yet he fairly
acknowledges that his sins were more in number than the hairs of his head: and
what then must we think of our selves, who come far short of his piety and
integrity? Again, are our Neighbors sins against us very heinous and
provoking? Ours against God are infinitely more so. And that upon these two
accounts, the infinite distance between God and us, the mighty obligations we
have received from God. And these are such aggravations of our sins against
God, as our Neighbors offenses against our selves are not capable of. For as
for men they are all but fellow creatures, and though there is order and
superiority amongst them, yet the distance bears no proportion with the
infinite and incomprehensible Majesty, whereby God is exalted above the Sons of
men. If we also compare the Benefits we receive from God, with what we confer
upon one another, even those also bear no resemblance, and therefore cannot
aggravate our Neighbors trespasses against us in any proportion with our
offenses against God.

Let us then consider with our selves, that if our sins against God both for
the number and aggravation of them are infinitely greater than the greatest of
our Neighbors injuries can be; how unreasonably we demean our selves, if we
pray to God for pardon of our sins, while we deny forgiveness to our Brother
for the lesser offenses we have suffered at his hands. Do ye as ye would be
done by is the common rule of equity. Would you therefore that God should show
mercy to you, be ye also merciful to your fellow creatures. This is the
greatest equity and reason in the World, and God will certainly deal with us
according to that rule. So our Savior tells us, S. Matt. vi. 14, 15. If ye
forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you: but
if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly father
forgive your trespasses. And elsewhere we are assured that he shall have
judgment without mercy, who has showed no mercy. And now I would beseech James
11. 13.
the malicious and revengeful man (if he be capable of being calm) to consider
with himself, whether he be able to bear those everlasting pains which are
reserved for those to whom God refuses to show mercy; if he cannot, let him
consider further, whether it be not his greatest interest to agree with his
adversary quickly, while he is in the way with him; to seek reconciliation with
him, to forgive him, pray for him, and do him good, that he also may be capable
of that mercy from God which is not attainable by us, unless we from our hearts
forgive every man his Brother their trespasses.

I shall conclude all with the excellent sayings of the son of Syrach, Ecclus.
28. 1. He that revengeth shall find vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely
keep his sins in remembrance. Forgive thy Neighbor the hurt that he has done
thee, so shall thy sins also be forgiven thee when thou prayest. One man
bears hatred against another, and does he seek pardon from the Lord? he
shows no mercy to a man like himself, and does he ask forgiveness of his own
sins? If he that is but flesh nourish hatred, who shall entreat for pardon of
his sins?

SERMON. II.
1 Cor. iv. part of the 5. verse. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord
come.


THe belief of our Saviors second coming, as it has a general influence upon
all the parts of a Christian conversation, so more peculiarly does it serve to
dissuade us from that uncharitable temper so prevailing among men of Judging
and Censuring the rest of our Brethren, and is frequently insisted on by our
Savior and his Apostles, as a most effectual and cogent argument against it.

For the better enforcement therefore of this prohibition so frequent in the
Gospel, I shall enquire: 1. What that Judgment is, that is here so universally
forbidden. 2. The particular force of the Argument here used to dissuade us
from it, Because the Lord comes. 3. I shall show the great unreasonableness of
it.


For the first of these, it is easy to understand that the Judgment here
spoken of, is not meant of Judicial proceedings either in matters Civil or
Ecclesiastical; and this, if from no other Argument, may appear from the
necessity of a Judicial power to the well-being and support of humane society.
For that Civil Society cannot subsist in peace and tranquillity without
sufficient authority residing in some persons above others, to determine
controversies between man and man, and to execute punishment upon those that
offer violence to their neighbors is too plain to be insisted on.

For that bad men are vastly more numerous than good, and that such who have no
sense of virtue and goodness are no other way to be restrained from evil, but
by the severity of wholesome Laws, and the due execution of them; and that this
cannot be without judicial authority, every man's experience may convince him.

If therefore we consider that God is not the Author of Confusion, but of
Order; and that he designed man for society and mutual support of each other in
it, we cannot persuade our selves that any precept of the Gospel can tend to
the subversion of it, which the taking away Judicial proceedings would
certainly do. Nay, rather since Order and Government is so necessary to our
Well-being, we may well conclude that it is derived from God, and from him
alone. And agreeably to this the Civil Magistrate is styled by our Apostle the
Minister of God, a Revenger, to execute wrath Romans xiii. 4, 5.
upon him that does evil. And we are therefore required to yield obedience to
them, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Neither is the
necessity of a Judicial power less evident in matters Ecclesiastical than in
Civil: nor is the danger of Confusion and Disorder greater in the State than in
the Church. Therefore when our Savior sent forth his Disciples to gather to
him a Church, and make Disciples of all Nations, he entrusted them with the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, with the power of censuring and absolving, of
remitting and retaining sins, agreeable to the demerits of persons under their
jurisdiction; and in obedience to this Commission, the Scripture gives us
several instances of the use and exercise of this power. By this authority S.
Paul did deliver Hymenaeus and Alexander unto Satan, that they might learn to
blaspheme: as we read 1 Timothy i. 20. and in the 5. chapter of this Epistle,
verse 5. he gives directions to the Church of Corinth to use the same power
over such persons as were notorious, to deliver such unto Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. The Judgment therefore here and elsewhere so frequently forbidden,
cannot be meant of the Judgment of authority in matter either Civil or
Ecclesiastical.

2. Neither are we forbidden all kind of judgment of the persons of men from
their outward and visible practices; though we have no superiority over them,
we are still allowed the judgment of discretion, to distinguish between man and
man, to know whom to avoid and whom to associate our selves with, and it is a
great part of Christian prudence so to do. The actions of many men are so plain
and notorious, that they are not capable of a mild and easy interpretation;
and should we stay till public authority had set a mark upon such persons,
before we provide for our own innocence and security by forsaking their
acquaintance and conversation, we may in time grow partakers in their iniquity,
and be defiled by them. Bad Company and Example do insensibly prevail upon our
minds, and betray us into evil, and unless we were allowed to make a judgment
of some persons from the actions we see, we could have no reason to stand upon
our guard, or beware of them. Nay further, Christian Charity it self, which
obliges us against all rash and malicious censures of other men, does in many
cases not only allow, but exact of us to make a judgment of, and be jealous
over them, that we be able to afford to them seasonable reproof and admonition,
before they are confirmed in a habit of sin. And to this kind of Judgment, if
it be exercised with true charity and moderation, out of a zealous concern for
the soul of our offending Brother, there is a reward annexed, S. James v. 19.
Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him, let him
know that he that converteth a sinner from the evil of his way, shall save a
soul from death, and hide a multitude of sins. Now we should be excluded both
from this duty and blessing, if it were not Iawful to judge of men in some
measure by what we hear and see.

3. We are not forbidden to judge and pass censure upon our selves: For this is
elsewhere made our duty, and prescribed to us as a great means to escape the
Judgment of God. For this S. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. xi. 31. If we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged. And the reason is plain: For would men
find leisure seriously to examine their own lives and actions, and to judge
impartially of them, they would not then so freely indulge themselves in those
practices to which they know the judgment of God is due. They would think
themselves obliged in all times and places, to a more strict and circumspect
walking with God; and when they have through inadvertency and neglect yielded
to temptation, by a due examination and judging of themselves, they would be
convinced of the necessity of an hearty and sincere repentance, before they go
hence and be no more seen.

The power of Conscience was given us by God for that end, that we might be
enabled to judge of the good and evil of our actions, and be thereby more
vigorously engaged to continue in well-doing, and eschew evil, upon a prospect
of a future and more dreadful judgment that would otherwise ensue. When
therefore S. Paul tells us verse 3. that he judged not his own self. This is
not to be understood as though he made no judgment at all of his own life and
actions, and particularly of his discharge of his Apostolic Office mentioned
in the former Verses; but that he was not finally to rely upon his own
judgment, but that although he knew nothing of himself, as he declares Verse 4.
yet he was not thereby justified, in as much as he was afterward to be judged
by the supreme Judge of all the Earth, who knew better how he had behaved
himself, and would judge more impartially than he himself could; and then
immediately subjoins the prohibition of the Text, Therefore judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come.

These things therefore being excepted from the general prohibition, the sin
which is here forbidden, is the uncharitable practice of censuring and
condemning other men without any probable or just grounds, when men take
occasion from little circumstances and appearances to judge the person of their
Neighbor, and the inward thoughts and inclinations of his heart. When they
take up an ill opinion of him from every idle report, and stick not to spread
and divulge the same to his prejudice. When they take all occasions to lessen
and detract from the good he does, and aggravate the evil. This unchristian
practice is capable of many degrees and aggravations, which I shall not insist
on particularly. I shall only take notice in general, that whoever will
consider calmly with himself how he would have his Neighbor deal with him in
the like matter, with what candor and simplicity he would have him judge of
the outward circumstances of his life, how loath he would be to have the worst
interpretation made of all his words and actions, and how willing he would have
others be to admit his excuses, if not to take away, yet at least to lessen and
alleviate the guilt of any miscarriages; such a one cannot but understand what
those degrees of uncharitable judgment are, which are here forbidden. I proceed
therefore to the second thing propounded, to show the great unreasonableness of
this practice, and this will appear from these three considerations: 1. From
the baseness of its original. 2. From the greatness of the injury done to the
person we censure unjustly. 3. From the mischief which redounds to the Public
by uncharitable judgment of one another.


1. For the original of this practice of censuring and reviling one another, I
think it may ordinarily be resolved into one of these three Principles.

1. Secret pride and over-valuing our selves. Men, who are destitute of real
worth and yet have a mighty opinion of themselves, have no other means to buoy
up themselves in that conceit, but to pick faults in the life and actions of
other men. And this I doubt is the humor of too many pretenders to the
strictness of Religion; who, if they declare a great abhorrence of some
particular fault of their Neighbors, which is contrary to their own natural
inclination or present interest, are apt vainly to please themselves with the
opinion of their own righteousness, and to vaunt it in the language of the
Pharisee, Luke xviii. 10. God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican. Now the
unreasonable folly of this method of proceeding, no man can be ignorant of,
that considers the nature and genius of true Religion; that it does not consist
in the abstinence from some particular sins, which I may apprehend others to be
guilty of, but in an universal obedience to all the commands of God. And
therefore what advantageth it me to be able to declaim zealously against this
or that Vice of the Age I live in, or the persons with whom I converse, if I
cherish in my bosom other impieties, which, if not so open and notorious, may
yet be as inconsistent with my salvation as any other. If we will take our
Saviors judgment in the case, the poor Publican, though conscious of so many
faults and infirmities, and already judged and condemned by the Pharisee, was
yet in a much fairer way to be justified before God, than the other, who did
not seem to apprehend that he needed any repentance. Now were men truly humble
and conscious of their own manifold defects and miscarriages, they would find
infinite more reason to turn the edge of their censure upon themselves. There
is no man who will take pains to search into the secrets of his own soul, but
may find himself guilty of more faults than he can reasonably suspect or accuse
his Neighbor of. We see only the external gesture and behavior of other men,
and cannot easily determine from what principle their actions flow: we do not
know all the circumstances they are engaged in, which will much alter the
nature of the actions we judge them for. We cannot tell what we our selves
should do in the like case, and how far we may be able to resist the same
temptations. Whereas we may easily know the true grounds of our own
miscarriages, that the blame of them is due only to our selves. So that every
man has upon this account much greater reason to think and speak well of other
men, than of himself. But now if notwithstanding this evidence, men may have of
their own guiltiness above that of their Neighbors, they can give themselves
the liberty zealously to declaim against the supposed faults of other men, this
must needs argue an unreasonable degree of self-conceit, and proud overlooking
those imperfections and follies which may be found at home in their own bosom.

2. A further ground of this uncharitable practice, is Idleness, and a gross
neglect of our own necessary affairs. The business of our own salvation is of
so near and great concern to us, that unless we be very negligent of it, we
cannot find leisure to pry into, and condemn the miscarriages of others. Our
life here is short enough to fit and prepare us for that unalterable state
which we are hastening to; and can we think it reasonable to spend any of those
precious hours which are never to be recalled, in a business of so little
concern to us, as the faults and follies of other men: especially when they may
be employed to so great advantage in furthering our journey, and facilitating
our admission to that glorious Kingdom which we all pretend to seek after?
Surely did men seriously consider, that their title to an eternal and
never-fading inheritance did depend upon the wise management of a few days
here, that the very best of mankind, when they had done all they could, were
but unprofitable servants, and that our future condition would be determined,
not according to other men's actions, but our own, they would think it much more
reasonable to spend that leisure they had in the search and examination of
their own souls, while there is room left to repent and amend, lest while they
are impertinently busy in inquiring into, and censuring the actions of other
men, they themselves should be surprised by the evil day, and snatched away
unprepared to the great Tribunal. Every man's own business therefore being of so
great and weighty a concern, he that is really mindful of it, can have no
further leisure to observe the failings and miscarriages of other men, than to
take occasion from thence to exercise that great part of Christian charity,
which consists in friendly reproof and admonition where it may be given; and
when it may not, to take heed to himself, lest he also be tempted; and if any
man suffer himself to be transported beyond these bounds, to censure and
condemn other men, he justly deserves the reproof in the Comedy:

Tantumne ab re tua est otii tibi,
Aliena ut cures, eaque nihil quae ad te attinent?
3. A further occasion of uncharitable censures, is Interest and Design. When
men make the disreputation of other men the step to their own advancement in
the World; and of this the experience is too manifest: this being a disease
that widely spreads it self among all sorts and conditions of men. How seldom
do we see any matter of interest decided without many hard speeches, and unjust
censures of the persons we contend with? How apt are men to take advantage of
every little circumstance of another life that is capable of an ill
interpretation, when it may suit their interest to disparage him? There is a
sort of politic and designing men in the World, who can converse familiarly,
and speak friendly to their Neighbor, and be lavish in his praises, till a
competition of Interest happen between them; but then all his good deeds had
some sinister design blended with them: they can then discover many
circumstances which are apt to create suspicion, and those suspicions are soon
spread with so much aggravation, as though the suspected faults were real and
evident: and when they have said the utmost they can to lessen his esteem, they
can still express a great tenderness for the reputation of the man, and that
they are loath to say or think the worst of him.

Besides the greatness of the injury, and other bad effects of this way of
proceeding, which I shall have occasion to insist on more particularly, that
which I shall at present take notice of, to show the great unreasonableness of
it, is this, that none but bad men and a bad cause can stand in need of it. He
that pursues his own interest and advancement for no other ends but such as are
just and reasonable, viz. that he may be able with more freedom to discharge
his duty toward God and Man, and be in better capacity to do good in the World.
Such a one will consider, that there is no such great need of his advancement
in the World, but that another man in the same state and condition may
discharge the offices of that state as well as he. And in the mean time he may
satisfy himself, that the duties he performs in a lower sphere, are as
acceptable to God, and less distracting to himself, than if he were raised
higher: and then what temptation can such a man have to exalt himself with so
great an injury done to another man? And this leads me to the second thing
propounded, to show the unreasonableness of uncharitable judgment of our
brethren, from the greatness of the injury we do by it.

1. It is an injury against which there is no defense. He that assaults a man
by open violence, may be restrained by the use of our own power against his;
besides the public authority of Laws provide for our security, and men are
naturally inclined to assist and succor the weak against the violence of an
oppressor: but the tongue of the malicious and censorious wounds in secret,
and it is hard to know from whence our harm arises. A slanderous report
spreads widely and insensibly; nor can a man be able to trace out the
beginnings, or stop the progress of it. Nay many times the slander is improved
beyond the intentions of him that devised it. If but a bare suspicion be put in
the minds of the giddy and credulous multitude, how easily does it gain credit
as true? and then suddenly a thousand circumstances are added to aggravate the
guilt; so that it is not in the power of the greatest wisdom or virtue to
resist wholly, or stop the progress of a false accusation.

2. The greatness of this injury will appear yet more manifestly in that we
cannot make sufficient reparation for it. He that has been the Author of a
false report, though he should afterward repent and be sorry for it, though he
should ask forgiveness of the person injured, and take all occasions for the
future to wipe off all suspicions which himself had raised; yet after all is
done, much of the report will be believed whether he will or not. It may be
spread through many places, wherein after-confession cannot reach; and even
then men are apter to believe the bad report than the good. Men will not lay
aside a prejudice once entertained, without greater evidence to the contrary,
than what caused it at first; and such evidence it will be hard to give to all
persons who have believed a slander. A malicious censure may meet with many
persons who may think it their interest to continue the belief of it, though
the first inventor should repent. So that when once an uncharitable judgment is
made and divulged, I cannot see how it can be in the power of him that did it,
to stop the belief, or spreading of it, or to make reparation.

3. A further aggravation of this sin is, that no kind of injury does more
afflict the spirit of a man, or make a deeper impression than a false and
uncharitable judgment of him. Every man has naturally a great reverence for a
good name; and agreeably to his value of it, cannot but highly resent to be
deprived of it by a false and unjust accusation. And therefore Solomon compares
the words of a slanderer and back-biter to the piercing of a sword, Prove. xi.
18. And holy David tells us that swords are in their lips, Psalm. lix. 7.
Neither is it without good reason that men are thus tender of their reputation
and good name, in as much as it is one of the great instruments whereby men are
enabled to do good in the World; and to be disabled from that, is one of the
most just occasions of grief and dissatisfaction.

A man, who out of conscience toward God, makes it his sincere endeavor to do
what good he can in the place and station to which God has called him, cannot
but be deeply affected with such an injury, as makes his endeavors ineffectual
for that end; and though he may be so charitable as to forgive, yet it cannot
but cause a great unquietness of spirit in a good man, which cannot easily be
attoned for. But this is not a private injury only, but has very great and
malignant influence upon the society in which we live. Which brings me to the
third consideration proposed, to show the great unreasonableness of
uncharitable judging of one another; namely the bad effects which redound from
this practice to the Public.

1. The first of those bad effects, which I shall insist on, is that which I
just now mentioned, that it renders particular persons less able to do good in
their several places and callings, than otherwise they might be. And this must
needs be a great injury to the Public, proportiotionably to the several
abilities and degrees of the persons so dealt with. Now that slanderous reports
and false judgments spread concerning the persons of any men, do tend much to
hinder the good they might do otherwise, I shall endeavor to prove by
instancing in two sorts of men, whose ability to do good, does in great measure
depend upon the reverence and esteem of their persons, which must consequently
be much lessened by malicious and uncharitable censures of them, and even by
the undue mention of faults that are true and real, but yet are no man's
business to enquire into, or accuse them for.

The persons I mean, are public Ministers either in the Church or State. For
the latter of these it is a thing of common experience, that the great strength
and security of any Nation consists in the unity and good correspondence
between the several parts of it: when those that govern apply themselves
zealously for the good of the Community; and when Subjects on the other hand
are hearty and sincere in their obedience to those that rule over them. Now it
must needs be granted, that nothing more effectually engages the obedience and
affection of Subjects to their Sovereign and Ministers employed by him, than a
firm belief of their wisdom and integrity in the management of their respective
employments. Whoever therefore makes it their design, as many busybodies are
apt to do, to mis-represent all the proceedings of their Governors, that suit
not with their present humor and understanding, and to rip up and aggravate
those private faults of such persons which concern them not: such persons, I
say, cannot but be thought highly injurious to the Public, by abating the
reverence and esteem, which is justly due and of great use to superiors in the
execution of the great trust committed to them. But in the name of God, what do
men of this temper propose to themselves? Do they think their Governors are
not men of Passion and Infirmities as well as others? Do they not know that the
employments they are engaged in, are of more variety and difficulty, than can
be managed with so exact evenness, but there will be still some inconveniences
unavoidable? How is it that they do not observe, that even then when they
complain of, and censure the persons and actions of their Governors, they do
in a great measure contribute to, and increase the inconveniences they suffer.
For it is vain to imagine that inconveniences of any Government arise wholly or
chiefly from the faults and miscarriages of men in authority, but in great part
from the perverse and ungovernable tempers of some men, who study to be
unquiet, and for that reason stick not to declaim zealously against all the
actions of their superiors, which they think capable of blame.

2. The second sort of persons, whose abilities to do good, depend much upon
the reverence and esteem of their persons, are the Ministers of the Church. Now
the business of these men being of so great importance, as the salvation of the
immortal spirits of men; whoever hinders the success of their endeavors in
that affair, may justly be esteemed a common enemy to mankind. Now I do not
understand any way whereby men do more directly undermine the Authority of our
holy Faith, and hinder the enlargement of it, than by defaming the persons to
whom the delivery of the Sacred Oracles, and the Ministry of Reconciliation is
entrusted. For though it be a very unsafe and unreasonable way of arguing, for
any man to disbelieve the truth of Christian Religion, and to neglect the
practice of it, because this or that particular man in Holy Orders is
unfaithful to his own soul, and lives not up to the purity and perfection which
he preaches to others; yet certainly it is an argument which does extremely
prevail in the World, and is equally dangerous, whether it be grounded on the
real, or but supposed faults of men, whose Office it is to instruct or persuade
others to the practice of holiness. For to him who believes a false report of
his spiritual Guide, the occasion of Scandal is as effectual, as though the
report were true, and the censure just: and then who can persuade himself that
the man who raised the false accusation is not as injurious to the Church, as
the man whose life is really scandalous? What has been said of the ill effect
that redounds to the Public from the uncharitable censurings of men of this
public capacity, will in proportion hold concerning the rash judgments we make
of private persons, according to the several degrees wherein they may be useful
either in the Church or Commonwealth.

2. I proceed to a second instance of the ill effects which redound to the
public by our uncharitable judging one another; namely, that our rash and
censorious practice toward others, provokes the like usage from them toward
our selves; and thence arises those many feuds and animosities, mutual
revilings, and bitter envyings, so visible among men of all conditions; and a
feud thus begun, commonly spreads it self, and all our friends and
correspondents are soon made partners in the quarrel; and how hard it is to lay
aside or allay those animosities which have been thus begun, every man's
experience may convince him. Now I need not use any arguments to show that
divisions and animosities among men, are of very dangerous consequence to the
public Society where they live; it being a truth attested by the common
consent of Mankind, and by the experience of all Ages; so that we must needs
conclude, that whatever practices tend to the begetting and increase of strife
and contention, are very hurtful to the Public.

Nor do I know any practice that does more effectually tend that way, than this
of uncharitable judging and censuring other men. How much the greater the end
and design of any Society is, so much more dangerous and hurtful those
practices are to be esteemed which cause divisions in it. The Church of God
therefore being a Society, whose happiness is not terminated in the temporal
peace and tranquillity of this life, we must needs conclude that those
uncharitable censures which cause divisions among Christians, receive from
hence a mighty aggravation in that they do not only hinder their present peace
and tranquillity, but endanger their falling short of that eternal salvation,
which is promised to none that do not follow after peace and holiness. And from
this consideration that we are all members of the Church of Christ, I cannot
but add a third ill effect which this uncharitable practice of judging and
censuring one another brings to the Public.

3. Viz. That it brings reproach upon our Christian Profession, and upon that
Holy Name whereby we are called. For suppose a Jew or a Pagan should peruse the
writings of the holy Evangelists and Apostles, and should read there the many
precepts which require of us the greatest degree of meekness and humility in
our opinions and judgments of other men; should they read S. Paul's description
of Christian Charity, that it thinks no evil, that it believes all things,
and hops all things; did they consider the many arguments the Gospel uses to
enforce the duty, and great reward undispensably depending upon our practice;
and lastly the example of our Savior himself, who in his conversation among
men, was the greatest enemy to all uncharitable judgment of others, but did
himself exercise the greatest candor toward all men, scarce ever passing a
severe censure upon any, but that proud censorious Sect of the Pharisees, who
made themselves judges of all others: should they then descend to compare the
practice of Christians with that excellent rule they pretend to, and with the
example of their Lord and Savior, and see how vast the disproportion is
between our Practice and Profession, they would easily persuade themselves that
the generality of Christians did not seriously believe the Doctrine they vaunt
of, nor own the authority of their Savior in giving Laws for the Government of
their lives, nor expect the accomplishment of those things which he has
foretold. They will find it very hard to reconcile, how the belief of those
things can consist with many uncharitable practices, unjust reproaches, and
mutual enmities which the professed Disciples of the blessed Jesus are so easily
tempted to. Thus, besides the injury we do to particular persons, and to the
public Society whereof we should be feeling members, we cast a stumbling block
in the way of those who might be won over to our most holy Profession, did they
not see the Professors of it so manifestly contradict in their lives and
practices, what they plead for with so much zeal and affection.

I proceed to the third thing propounded, to show the particular force of the
argument here used to dissuade from uncharitable judging one another: Because
the Lord comes. And this will appear,

1. From the consideration of his infinite knowledge, if compared with our
great inability to judge aright. This branch of the argument is particularly
urged by our Apostle in the words following my Text; Judge nothing before the
time until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden works, and
will make manifest the counsels of the heart, and then shall every man have
praise of God.

The good and evil of what men do, cannot be determined barely from outward
appearances, which only are exposed to the knowledge of men. Many actions may
proceed from an heart truly pious and devout, which may be acceptable to God
that knows the heart, which yet as to men may be liable to suspicion and
mistake. On the other side the outward actions of hypocrites may appear to men
as instances of great piety and devotion, when to God they are an abomination.
Now should we use the utmost of our discretion in these cases, we could have no
sufficient ground to judge rightly of these men or their actions. So many are
the secret windings and private retirements of the heart of man; so various his
thoughts and intentions, and so numerous his pretenses to disguise his actions,
that it is not in the power of any mortal eye, though never so impartial, to
discern rightly of him or his actions. Besides, there are few men so impartial
in their judgment as to take in all circumstances even of outward appearance,
we too frequently pass censure according to our own preconceived opinions and
prejudices, and are often biassed by our zeal, interests or affections, which
do usually as much mis-represent persons and actions to our understanding, as
colored Mediums do objects to the eye. Thence arises the great difference
between the several judgments men make of the same things. Nay, so deceitful is
the heart of man, so hardly to be searched into, that we are not competent
Judges of our own actions. We have many arts to deceive our selves, many secret
evasions and false pretenses to beget an opinion of our own worth and
righteousness, and to hide our selves, if I may so say, from our own souls, and
then how can we hope to make a right judgment of other men? But now the Lord,
who is to come, is of infinite knowledge, and it is his Prerogative alone to
understand the thoughts of man, and the counsels of his heart.

This God testifies of himself, Jer. xvii. 9. The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? I the Lord search the heart, I
try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his doings. Again, Prove. xxiv. 12. If thou say, behold we knew
it not, does not he which pondereth the heart consider it, and he that keeps
thy soul, does not he know it? The all-seeing eye of God can discern those
inwards acts of piety which a good man is employed in, though they meet with
censure and reproach among men; and can as easily unmask all the false
pretenses of the Hypocrite, since all things are naked and open before him. Now
the consequences of these considerations to dissuade us from judging before the
time is easy and obvious. For what more reasonable motive to restrain our
curiosity in prying into, and censuring the actions of others, than that the
exact knowledge of those things is too wonderful for us, and that we cannot
attain to it; and withal that there is a judgment to come, when, if we make a
false and uncharitable judgment, we shall be plainly convinced of it before God
and all his holy Angels, and then who can persuade himself, that it will not be
a matter of great shame and confusion of face, to see those men, whom we had
unjustly censured and reviled, receive praise from the unerring judgment of
God, and for those very actions which we here condemned, made partakers of the
reward of Righteousness, the Crown of Glory and Immortality.

2. A further consideration to dissuade from all uncharitable judgment is, that
the Lord, who is to come, and he alone, has power and authority to judge. That
Lord, whose Creatures we are, and on whom we depend daily for our support and
well-being, has only absolute right and dominion over us: and except in those
cases where he has delegated his authority to Princes, Parents, and other
Governors to judge of, and determine those outward actions that concern
Society, he has reserved the power of giving Laws to mankind, and of judging
according to them to himself only. And therefore, besides the presumption
which while we judge others we are guilty of our selves, by boldly intruding
into those things which we know not, we do withal sacrilegiously invade the
royal Prerogative of God, to whom alone judgment belongs. This is St. James's
argument, James iv. 12. There is one Lawgiver able to save and to destroy, who
art thou that judge another? And S. Paul to the same purpose, Romans xiv. 4.
Who art thou that judge another servant? to his own Master he stands or
falls.

But to conclude. Thirdly and lastly, we ought not to judge before the time,
because the Lord comes, who will be the severe avenger of all uncharitable
judgment of our brethren. This he himself assures us, S. Matt. vii. 1, 2. Judge
not that you be not judged; for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. And
from this ground S. Paul argues, Romans ii. 1. Therefore thou inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art, that judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self; for thou that judge do the same things. Verse the
third. And think thou this, O man, that judge them that do such things,
and do the same, that thou should escape the judgment of God. Now I
conceive the Apostles Argument is equally cogent, whether he be understood here
to speak of the same sins in specie, or rather of other sins of equal guilt.
Since the unreasonableness of judging our Neighbor for some particular sins,
when we are guilty of others as heinous, is altogether as evident as though we
did the same things we condemn him for. And therefore S. Paul himself in the
latter part of that Chapter, when he pursues the same argument makes his
instances not only in sins of the same kind, but of equal degree, Verse 22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? And now let any man
consider how dreadful his condition must needs be at the judgment of the great
day, if the Lord who is to come should be extreme to mark what he has done
amiss, and should deal with him according to the utmost rigor of the Law, and
then he cannot want sufficient arguments to persuade him to a meek and candid
interpretation of the faults of others, especially if he call to mind that God
has declared, that he shall have judgment without mercy, which has showed no
mercy: which showing of mercy does not consist barely in the relieving the
wants of those that are in misery, but in an universal charity, as well in our
thoughts and judgments of others, and in an humble forbearance of their faults
and infirmities, as in other acts of bounty and liberality.

It remains now since we all believe, and are assured that our Lord will
certainly come to judge the World, that we behave our selves as men that wait
for his coming; as by all other Exercises of Holy Living, so more particularly
by Meekness and Charity toward others: that laying aside all rash and
uncharitable censures of other men, we may be in some measure capable of
receiving the promise of our Savior, Luke vi. 37. Judge not and ye shall not
be judged: condemn not and ye shall not be condemned.

SERMON. III.
JOHN vij. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.


HE that considers with himself the great variety of Opinions in matters of
Religion, which have prevailed in the Christian World, and the great zeal and
animosities wherewith men of different persuasions are wont to maintain the
distinguishing opinions of their Party, scarce allowing those that differ from
them any probable hopes of salvation. He that considers this, must necessarily
suppose one of these two things:

Either that the way of obtaining the knowledge of divine truth is not
sufficiently plain and certain, so that all that use a due diligence in the
search after it, may reasonably hope to obtain it.

Or secondly, that the generality of Christians that maintain so wide
differences about matters of Religion, do not seek for knowledge after a right
manner.

The former of these, viz. that the way of salvation is not sufficiently plain,
and that all, who use a due diligence in the search of it, may not reasonably
hope to find it; this cannot be granted without injury and affront to the
divine goodness and justice. For since the eternal welfare of all Christians
does depend upon their due performance of the condition of Christianity, and
this cannot be performed without a competent knowledge of those things that are
revealed in the Gospel; if these things were so dark and obscure, that even the
plainest Christian might not attain to as great a degree of knowledge as is
necessary for him, it would then follow, that God had not taken sufficient care
of his people, to make the way of salvation known to them: and withal that he
dealt very hardly and unmercifully with the greatest part of them, in excluding
them from the means of knowledge, when yet he has annexed so great a penalty
to the want of it, as their falling short of that eternal inheritance to which
they are called in the Gospel.

The true reason therefore why so many enquirers after knowledge do miscarry in
their design, and are led away into strange and dangerous opinions, is not
because the knowledge of the truth is so hard to be obtained, but because there
are but few that apply themselves to the search of it after a due manner. It
cannot therefore but seem necessary, that while we all pretend to seek after
knowledge, and to desire to be informed in those important truths revealed in
the Gospel, that we first of all endeavor to satisfy our selves concerning
the true way and method, by which the knowledge we seek after is to be
obtained: and this our Savior has directed us to in these words, If any man
will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self.

In the foregoing Verses of this Chapter we read that there was great
murmuring among the people concerning our Savior, who about that time begun to
show himself to Israel; and there was great variety of opinions concerning him.
Some said, he is a good man, others said, nay; but he deceives the people. Now
to decide this controversy concerning himself, and the doctrine he taught, he
gives them this plain direction, if any man will do his will; intimating
thereby, that they who thus disputed concerning him, had not that true frame of
mind that was fit for his reception: that they were not willing to obey God,
whatever they pretended, and therefore that it was in vain for them to be so
inquisitive about him. For to what purpose should they look for further
revelations and instructions from God, when they refused obedience to that
doctrine they had already received, and which they knew to be divine? For to
this purpose he upbraids them, v. 19. Did not Moses give you the Law, and yet
none of you keeps the Law? So then, had the Jews been obedient observers of
the Law, as they pretended great admiration of it, they could not have found so
many difficulties in their owning our Savior for the true Messiah, they would
then easily have understood that he came from God, and that the doctrine he
taught was truly divine and heavenly, and that he did not endeavor to destroy
the Law and the Prophets, as they were wont to object against him, but that he
did eminently and exactly fulfill them.

But not to insist on this strict connection of the words with the foregoing and
following Verses, I shall now consider them, not as having any peculiar respect
to the Jews, but as they are a general rule for all enquirers after divine
truth: If any man, whosoever he be, Jew or Gentile, will do his will, he shall
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

In handling of these words, I shall first endeavor to explain the nature of
the condition, which our Savior here requires in order to the search of divine
truth.

2. I shall show the certainty of success to all such as seek for knowledge
after this manner here required.

1. For the condition it self, If any man will do his will, he shall know of
the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. This
condition implies in it these four things:

1. A previous sense of the divine Sovereignty over us, and our obligation to
do whatsover God commands. This belief of the Supreme Authority of God, is
antecedently necessary to all enquiries after divine truth. For he that would
be satisfied concerning the truth of any particular kind of Religion, must in
the first place suppose that some religious worship is due from men to God; and
this is of so natural an evidence and obligation, that there neither is, nor
has been any Nation of the World, wherein they have not had a sense of the
Being of God, and of his supreme right to give Laws to Mankind; and that our
well-being and happiness does depend upon our doing those things which are
well-pleasing to him; and therefore we find, that how far soever the Nations of
the World had erred concerning the Nature of God, ofttimes attributing to him
those unworthy passions and practices which a wise man would be ashamed of; yet
still they thought it necessary to find out some way of expressing their homage
to him. And though the ways of Worship devised by the Heathens were commonly
very absurd and ridiculous, yet thus much is abundantly evident from their
practice, that they owned an obligation to a religious worship of God, and had
a sense of his sovereignty and right to govern them, and to dispose of them as
he pleases.

And this sense of his divine Sovereignty is necessarily supposed in this
condition, If any man will do his will. For no man can intend to do the will of
God, who is not before persuaded that he ought to do it, whenever it is made
known to him.

2. This condition, if any man will do his will, implies or presupposes a
serious desire to know the will of God in order to practice, and a diligent use
of those means of instruction which God has afforded us: as viz. a search of
the Scripture, a sober use of our Reason in the examination of it, a diligent
attendance on those spiritual Guides which God has set over us for our
instruction in the way of righteousness; and prayer to God for the guidance and
assistance of his good Spirit, to enable us to understand and do those things
which are necessary for us, and to lead us into all truth. For we are not to
understand this promise of our Savior, as though God would infuse the
knowledge of divine truth by a miracle; but that those that will do the will of
God, shall be blessed by him in the diligent use of those ordinary means which he
has appointed for their instruction. And therefore in the old Economy the
Jews were referred to Moses for their instruction, what they ought to do. And
under the Gospel, God has given some Apostles, some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; and to these
men and their successors we must have recourse in order to instruction, and
satisfaction in matters of Religion. To these themselves we may have recourse
in the Books of the New Testament, which they have left behind them as a
certain guide to us in all things necessary, if we be not wanting to our
selves. To their Successors we have recourse in our attendance upon the public
Ministry, who derive their commission by a continued succession from the
Apostles, who were empowered by Christ to ordain others, for the continuance of
their Office to the end of the World. And to these persons thus empowered all
private Christians ought to apply themselves with humility and diligence for
their instruction; and in the diligent use of those means of knowledge
abovementioned, he that will do the will of God, by virtue of this promise of
our Savior, shall know of the doctrine.

3. This condition, if any man will do his will, implies further, that in our
search after divine truth, and in our use of those means of knowledge which God
has afforded us, we must propose to our selves the doing the will of God, as
the ultimate end of our knowledge.

This is that which is more particularly expressed in the Text. Many there are,
who are very inquisitive after truth, but they have oft-times very different
and undue ends in their enquiry: sometimes they do it to gratify their
curiosity; sometimes that they may be able to maintain their Party they are
engaged in, with some plausible show of reason; sometimes they do it for
ostentation and vainglory, that they may appear wiser and more learned than
their neighbors; and sometimes they seek for knowledge, as other men do their
Merchandise, that they may make a gain of it, and provide for their subsistence
in the World. Now Now all these several sorts of Enquirers may possibly attain
the several ends they propose to themselves; they may grow learned and wise in
the ordinary account of men, they may grow rich, and gain esteem and applause
among men, and in this they have their reward; but still they may want the true
knowledge and satisfaction which our Savior here speaks of; which is not
attainable by any that do not intend and resolve to do the will of God
according to their knowledge; this alone makes them capable of a full and
sensible conviction of the divine authority and excellency of those revelations
which are contained in the Gospel. For it is not every one that can talk
superficially about religious matters, or that can give a tolerable account of
the rational grounds, upon which the truth of the Gospel is conveyed to us; not
every one that can dispute learnedly about points of Faith, and decide
Controverfies; not every one that is thus accomplished, is properly said to
know of the doctrine in our Saviors sense. No, he that is resolved to do the
will of God absolutely and entirely, such a one shall receive a more full and
ample satisfaction concerning those things that are necessary for him, than can
be gained by the strongest reasonings, and most convincing demonstrations. He
shall find in his soul a lively sense of the excellency of those truths which
the Gospel delivers, such as shall leave no room for doubtfulness or disputing.

4. We must not only intend and resolve to do the will of God, and propose to
our selves this, as the great end of our enquiry; but we must actually
endeavor to discharge those duties we already know, if we hope to attaim to a
sufficient satisfaction in our Religion: for he that neglects to do the will of
God, as far as he already knows, he cannot be presumed to have a sincere
resolution of submitting to those further instructions which he may find in the
Gospel. And indeed in this place our Savior may well be understood to exact
this qualification of those who came to hear him, that they should practice
those duties they already knew, if they would be satisfied concerning the truth
of his Religion; for otherwise it may seem an improper and preposterous way of
proceeding, to persuade men first to obey the Gospel, and then to promise them
satisfaction about the truth of it. Men are not willing to enter upon a way of
living so strict and severe as the Gospel enjoins, without being satisfied
before hand of the truth of it; that that is truly the will of God, which is
there required, and that it is their great duty and interest to obey it. Nay it
is manifest by sad experience, that many who are convinced of the truth of the
Gospel, are yet very backward to practice the precepts of it; but how much more
unwillingly would they undertake this practice, if they were not capable of
satisfaction about the truth of the Gospel, till they had obeyed it. So that it
is most reasonable to suppose, that the doing the will of God here spoken of,
must in part be understood of those previous instructions in the will of God,
which those who came to hear our Savior had before received.

The Jews, to whom our Savior here directs his discourse, had the instructions
of Moses and the Prophets; from whom they might have understood the principal
rules of good living; and their obedience to Moses and the Prophets would
doubtless have been a great preparation for their reception of the Gospel; and
then for those Enquirers after truth, who have been bred up in a Christian
Commonwealth, they cannot be supposed to be wholly ignorant of their duty. No
man can ordinarily grow up in a Christian Society to an age capable of such
enquiries, but must have been competently instructed in the general rules of
good living, in the substantial and necessary parts of Religion. Those three
great branches of Duty which S. Paul teaches us to be the sum of the Gospel,
the living righteously, soberly, and godly in the World, are in themselves of
so evident an obligation, that no man who has come to the use of Reason,
especially in a Christian Commonwealth, can be ignorant that it is his duty to
live so. Suppose we then a man competently instructed in the general rules of
good living, whether by the Law of Nature written in his mind or conscience, as
was the case of the better sort of Heathens, or by the Law of Moses, as the
Jews were in our Saviors time.

Or lastly, by the benefit of a Christian education, as the state of those
among our selves is, who come to examine the truth of the Gospel, and to
enquire more nearly into the sense of it. Suppose we a man already instructed
by any of these means in the fundamental rules of practice, desirous of further
knowledge and satisfaction in the doctrine of the Gospel, he must be careful to
live up to those principles he is already instructed in, resolving also to
submit obediently to whatsoever else, upon his further enquiry, he shall find
to be his duty. Such a man thus prepared by doing his duty, and thus resolved
to do the will of God, as far as it shall be made known to him, such a one is
the person to whom this promise of our Savior does belong. If any man will do
his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I
speak of my self.

I proceed to the second thing propounded, to show the certainty of success to
those that seek for knowledge with this preparation; and here it will not be
amiss to consider briefly in what sense this promise is to be understood,
before we undertake to prove the certainty of it. We are to observe therefore,
that this promise of our Savior is not to be understood so universally, as
though no man, who was sincerely resolved to obey God, shall fall into any kind
of errors in matters of Religion. For this is contradicted by the constant
experience of all Ages: for it would be very uncharitable to suppose, that
among most of the dissenting parties in Religion, who maintain great
controversies with one another, there should not be some persons truly devout
and sincere on both sides. We are not therefore to suppose that a man truly
religious shall not err at all; but that he shall not be led into such errors
as are dangerous to, or inconsistent with his salvation. And indeed the promise
in this place is not set down in so general terms, as that they should seem to
require any larger interpretation than this I am speaking of; If any man will
do his will, says our Savior, he shall know of the doctrine, I now beliver to
you, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Which cannot
reasonably be extended beyond these two things.

1. He shall receive satisfaction concerning the truth of Christian Religion in
general, that it is a doctrine truly divine and heavenly, and that the author
of it came from God, and delivered his mind and will.

2. He that will do the will of God shall be satisfied also, concerning those
particular truths, which are indispensably necessary for him to know, in order
to his salvation.

These two things will be the undoubted effects of a religious frame of mind,
of a sincere resolution to do the will of God, and will certainly be made good
to all, who seek for knowledge with that preparation; and this we have great
reason to be assured of, whether we consider:

1. The natural influence that a religious temper of mind has upon the
understanding, to make it fit for the reception of divine truth.

2. The peculiar blessing and assistance of Gods good spirit, which always
accompanies a truly religious man to guide him into all truth which is
necessary for him.

I will begin with the former, and shall endeavor to show, that the practice
of religious Duties has a natural efficacy upon the mind, to clear its
discerning faculties to make it capable of understanding, and giving a full
assent to the doctrine of the Gospel. And this I shall make appear by
instancing in some particular duties, which are of a natural obligation, which
no man can be ignorant of; each of which, singly considered, has a very
immediate influence upon the understanding, to make it capable of divine
knowledge. In consideration of which it will also appear, that the contrary
vices to these are the only causes of dangerous and damnable errors. The
Duties I shall particularly insist on, are these:

1. Simplicity of mind without prejudice. 2. Purity of heart and affections. 3.
Humility. 4. Calmness of Temper. 5. Prayer to God.
These are all Duties of a natural obligation, and therefore he that comes to
examine the truth of the Gospel cannot be presumed ignorant of, nor unwilling to
practice them if he seek for knowledge with that preparation I have been
speaking of.

1. He that examines the doctrine of the Gospel with this intention, to
satisfy his conscience concerning those things that are necessary for him to
believe and do, resolving by Gods grace, to do the will of God, as far as it
shall be made known to him; such a one will bring with him an honest simplicity
of mind, not biassed by prejudice or preconceived opinions; such a one will
consider with himself, that the truth of things does not depend upon his own
fancy, or petty reasonings; that a strong imagination cannot make those things
Articles of Faith, which God has not revealed; and therefore he will bring
with him no preconceived opinion, which he will not be ready to lay aside upon
sufficient evidence to the contrary; he will not endeavor to distort, and
wrest the plain words of Scripture to that sense of things which he formerly
had; but will readily yield up all his former notions to the authority of
divine revelation. That we are naturally obliged to this simplicity of judgment
in all enquiries after truth, is evident; because in all manner of disputes,
this is one of the first things we challenge from our Adversary, as our
undoubted right, that he would hear what we have to say, without prejudice; and
therefore we also ought to bring with us to a religious debate, the same free
and unprejudiced minds which we expect from others. And indeed this temper of
mind is highly necessary, and very advantageous to prepare us for the reception
of truth. For certainly the power of prejudice is very great, to darken men's
minds, and to mould them into such apprehensions as are most suitable to it.
And therefore it is easy to observe how men who are engaged in a Party, and
prepossessed with the distinguishing opinions of their Sect, easily find ways
to pervert the plainest places of Scripture to their own sense, to make it
agree with the Analogy of their Faith, that is, of their darling Notions. When
I speak of laying aside prejudice in the search after divine truth, I do not
understand that we must call in question all kind of preconceptions we have had
concerning religious matters. Some things there are in Religion of so great
certainty and evidence, that though an Angel from Heaven should teach us
otherwise, we ought not to receive him. Such are those preconceptions we have
concerning the Being and Attributes of God, that he is most wise, just,
powerful, faithful, and true, etc. Such also are the general notions of good
and evil which God has planted in every man's soul; which have so evident an
obligation, that no pretended demonstration in the World ought to shake our
belief of them. But there are other opinions which men take up upon lesser
evidence, which they are sometimes as tenacious of, as of those first
fundamental principles. And these sort of prejudices are commonly the great
hindrances of the propagation of truth, there being scarcely any Sect in
Religion which have not some peculiar tenets, which they take up upon weak and
incompetent grounds, in proportion to which, they judge of all other doctrines,
and make them the rule and measure, according to which all places of Scripture
must be interpreted. Now in regard we all confess our selves liable to
infirmity and mistake, it is certainly the most equitable and reasonable thing
in the World, that when we come to enquire after truth, we resolve with our
selves always to submit to clear evidence, though we have been otherwise
persuaded. Now that the want of this temper is a very great hindrance both to
the receiving the Gospel, and to our understanding it aright when we have
received it, I shall endeavor to prove by two notorious instances of the power
of prejudice in either of these cases.

The first instance shall be that of the Jews in our Saviors days. The great
opposition which our Savior met withal among the Jews, the great reason why
they would not receive him for their Messiah, was grounded upon this prejudice,
that they took it for granted that their long expected Messiah was to have been
a temporal Prince, and to have appeared with worldly pomp and splendour; and
that he should have delivered them from the Roman Yoke, and have reigned
gloriously in Jerusalem. And therefore when they saw him appear in so mean and
despicable a condition, not all the demonstrations of a divine authority
accompanying him in all his mighty work, not the greatest wisdom with which he
spoke, not the most divine and excellent precepts he gave, not all the
predictions of their Prophets fulfilled by him, not any of these things, though
they were in themselves as great evidence as they could have required, yet none
of them could prevail with them against that one prejudice, that his Power was
to be temporal, and that he should restore the kingdom to Israel in a literal
sense; which was inconsistent with that state of sufferings in which our
Savior appeared. Now that this Opinion of the Jews was taken up upon
insufficient grounds is evident from hence; because though there are glorious
things spoken of the Messiah, yet his sufferings also are foretold by the same
Prophets in as plain words as the other. Nay, it is expressly said by Isaiah,
that the glory that should be given to the Messiah, was to be consequent upon
his sufferings, as a reward of them. And the Jews themselves have been so far
sensible of the force of those predictions, to prove that the Messiah should
suffer, that to salve those prophecies they invented a Fable concerning a
twofold Messiah; one of which was to suffer for them, and the other to redeem
them, and to reign gloriously over them. Though the Prophet Isaiah chapter liij. v.
12. expressly attributes both to the same person, making the suffering of the
Messiah the reason of the glory which God would afterward confer on him.
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death, etc. But
the minds of the Jews were strongly affected with the love of this present
World, and the glory of it; and they hoped that in the days of the Messiah they
should plentifully enjoy all the blessings of this life; and therefore they
were resolved to believe no more of the Prophets than agreed with this opinion,
that was so suitable to their inclinations, and were incapable of being
convinced by the most powerful demonstration to the contrary, that could
possibly be given. Thus we see how great the power of this one prejudice was,
to hinder the Jews from receiving the Gospel at first.

Nor is the power of preconceived opinions and prejudices less dangerous to
hinder our understanding the Gospel, when we have received it. And of this I
might produce many instances in the several dissenting Parties in Christendom;
every Sect having some peculiar and darling Notion, which they hold tenaciously
against all opposition; and to comply with which, all other doctrines must be
bowed and wrested, as they can best contrive it. I shall give but one instance
of this kind, and that is the doctrine of Infallibility, as it is maintained in
the Church of Rome. This is the leading prejudice of that Party, which being
once firmly received, it becomes the Mother of the most absurd and
contradictious opinions in the World: and which is worst of all, makes those
who believe it, incapable of conviction by any argument, though never so clear
and cogent. For what argument can possibly prevail with those who resolve to
reject the testimony of their senses, though never so well qualified, rather
than call in question the infallible decision of their Church. And this the
Papists plainly do in the doctrine of Transubstantiation, which has so many
plain absurdities in it, and is so clearly contradicted by our several senses
that are capable of judging in that matter, that there can be no other reason
of their obstinate defending of it, but that they cannot renounce the doctrine
without quitting their claim to Infallibility. It is beside my present business
to consider upon what grounds they build that infallible power of their Church,
in determining matters of Faith; but yet methinks I cannot persuade my self
that they have any Argument for it so plain and cogent as the testimony of
their senses; and therefore it cannot but seem a strange way of arguing which
they use, to deny matter of fact evident to their several senses, to maintain a
doctrine for which they have infinitely less evidence than that they reject. We
see then how far preconceived opinions and prejudices may prevail, both to make
men incapable of receiving the Gospel, and of understanding it rightly, when
they have received it, and consequently how much this simplicity of mind does
contribute to our success in the enquiries we make after divine truth.

2. The second branch of duty, which does highly conduce to our receiving the
Gospel, and understanding it aright, is purity of heart; which consists chiefly
in the moderation of our sensual appetites and pleasures. He that intends to do
the will of God, must not retain in his bosom any lust or habitual inclination,
which he is not willing to forego, if he find it contradictory to his will,
whom he resolves to obey; and for that reason must have a constant watch over
his sensual desires, to keep them in their due bounds. Those natural appetites
which every man is endued with, which tend to the preservation of life, and the
propagation of mankind, are in themselves the work of God, and are designed by
him for good ends; and we may lawfully gratify them so far as is requisite for
the accomplishment of those ends. But this is one of the greatest trials of our
prudence and resolution in the government of our lives, to understand the true
bounds, how far we may lawfully indulge the lower faculties, and to restthere:
for if our Reason, which should prefide over them, once let go the reins, by
which she should govern and restrain them, they easily get the mastery, and are
not to be reduced to their just measures without great difficulty and
reluctance. Now the regulating these desires I conceive to be that which our
Savior recommends to us S. Matt. v. 8. as a means to attain to the beatifical
vision of God, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Which
blessing, though it principally be understood of the blissful sight or
knowledge of God in the Kingdom of Heaven; yet has it part of its
accomplishment in this life. The pure in heart being the best qualified to
judge of those divine and spiritual things which God has made known to us in
the Gospel. And this will easily appear, if we consider how much the contrary
Vices tend to the debauching the Understanding in these matters. The fumes of
Lust and Intemperance are very pernicious to our rational powers; they make men
dull and of no understanding even in the ordinary affairs of life: and then
surely, if they make men unfit for worldly business, they will render them
infinitely more incapable of religious enquiries. A man who is led captive by
his impure desires, will not easily be brought to spend so much time to enquire
seriously into the nature of Religion, as is necessary for his satisfaction; he
is afraid he should be convinced of something that would ruffle and discompose
his thoughts, awaken his conscience, and put a check to his Carreer of
pleasure; and therefore, while he can find pretenses to defer his enquiry, he
will. But then suppose a man of this temper should for once undertake to peruse
the Gospel, yet being prepossessed with the love of these sensual delights, he
would find out many Arguments to defend himself withal; many arts and evasions
to justify, or at least to palliate and excuse his practice; and then withal
it is certain, he would not have a due relish of the excellency of those
precepts which the Gospel gives, nor of the rewards it promises, they being of
a more refined and spiritual nature, and of a kind so vastly different from
what he is most delighted with. So S. Paul tells us 1 Cor. ij. 14. The natural
man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. To this
purity of heart I have been speaking of, may be reduced a generous contempt of
the World, a freedom from all covetous and ambitious desires; for he that has
his heart set upon riches, or upon the pomps and gallantries of the World, is
not in any capacity of receiving or understanding the Gospel. These two Vices,
Covetousness and Ambition, have even from the Apostles times been noted for the
great causes of Infidelity and Heresy. The love of Money was that, which made
the young man in our Saviors time go away sorrowful; because he could not be
admitted a Disciple of our Savior without relinquishing his large possessions.
This was the cause of Demus's Apostasy from the Religion he once embraced,
because he loved the present World. Diotrephes is noted by S. John for his
ambition; for he withstood the Apostle, loving to have the pre-eminence. S.
Paul also puts these two causes together, Pride and Covetousness, as the
principal reasons of Heresy and false doctrine, 1 Timothy vj. 3. If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine, which is according to godliness, he is proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words; supposing
that gain is godliness. And indeed it is easy to observe how hard it is to
convince any man of what is contrary to his interest or ambitious desires; and
therefore we cannot but understand, that this duty of purity of heart, which
consists in regulating our worldly and sensual affections, highly conduces to
the understanding and embracing the Gospel; because it takes away those
dangerous causes of Error and Apostasy.

3. A third branch of Duty, which I proposed to treat of, as being a necessary
qualification for all Enquirers after divine truth, is Humility, and the
efficacy of this duty to make us capable of divine impressions will appear, if
we consider these properties of an humble and modest man.

1. He that is truly humble, and sensible of his many defects and infirmities,
will readily acknowledge that he is not able to understand all Mysteries. He
knows the nature of God which is infinite, cannot be comprehended by his finite
and narrow faculties. He knows that no reasonings of ours can give us so true
an account of the Nature and Attributes of God, and of the various methods of
his providence toward men, as God himself can; and therefore he does with all
reverence submit his understanding to those revelations which God has made in
the Gospel; and provided they be there plainly delivered, he will not be
discouraged from his belief of them, by any of those imperfect reasonings,
wherewith men of corrupt minds may endeavor to shake his Faith.

2. A truly humble man will not be too curious and inquisitive in praying into
those things which are not clearly revealed; much less will he be positive and
dogmatical concerning them. This virtue of humility will lead him to consider,
that had the knowledge of such and such controverted doctrines been necessary
for him, they would have been delivered in Scripture with the same plainness as
other things of the greatest importance are; he will satisfy himself, that God
was able to have interpreted his mind to the World as far as he thought
convenient; and therefore where God has not used this plainess, he thinks it a
sufficient check to his curiosity, and that he ought not to pry into it.
According to that of Moses, Deuteronomy. xxix. 29. The secret things belong unto the
Lord our God, but those things which are revealed, belong unto us and to our
children for ever.

3. An humble man is naturally apt to learn; he is willing to be instructed, he
will easily believe that some other men may have better abilities to understand
and judge of truth than himself; especially he will have a great deference and
regard to his spiritual Guides, who are set over him for his instruction in the
way of righteousness; he will consider that these men are commissioned by God,
and have a peculiar promise of the divine Spirit, to enable them in the
discharge of their holy Office; and therefore that they ought to be attended to
with such reverence, as is due to the Ambassadors of God, to the interpreters
of his mind and will. Not that the truly humble man is bound to yield a blind
assent to whatever he hears delivered from a Pulpit, or that he is presently to
renounce his own reason and understanding, whenever it is contradicted by his
immediate Pastor. No, we do not claim this dominion over the reason and
consciences of our brethren. We do not require an absolute assent to all we
say: only thus much an humble man will, and ought to think his duty, not to
oppose every private scruple of his own, to the received doctrine of the Church
in which he lives; much less to separate from it without manifest and plain
grounds. He ought rather to distrust his own private judgment, when it stands
in competition with the public sense of the Church; and to use all possible
diligence for further information, before he be positive in his opinion. He
ought to apply himself with all humility to his Superiors, to desire
satisfaction from them, and he ought to attend to them with patience and
submission, and to be very cautious, lest any prejudice or self-interest should
be the ground of his persuasion; and then if after a due diligence he find
himself still unconvinced, yet still humility will oblige him not to judge
those who differ from him, nor to withdraw himself from the public service of
God, as long as there is nothing required of him as a condition of Communion,
which he is not fully convinced to be be unlawful. Now he that proceds with
this humility and deliberation in the examination of those doctrines of the
Church which seem doubtful to him. This humble temper will either lead him to
the means of satisfaction from the instruction of his Superiors, or at least
will secure him from the danger and malignity of his Error. For simple Error
is not dangerous in it self, unless it arise from a culpable cause; or unless
it lead to sin or disobedience. And this an humble man will hardly be tempted
to for the sake of any private Opinion.

4. An humble and modest man will be willing to yield to such Arguments as the
matter he enquires about is capable of; and will not require greater evidence
for revealed truths than the nature of the things will admit of.

And indeed the want of this temper of mind may justly be accounted the
fundamental Principle of Atheism and Irreligion. Many disputers there are in
the World, who think it an Argument of Wit and Parts, to be able to defend a
Paradox, and to stand their ground against all opposition. These men seek not
Truth, but Victory; and do not so much endeavor to satisfy themselves, as to
amuse others: and therefore as long as they are able to raise an Objection
which they think their Adversary cannot answer, they take it for granted that
it is unanswerable; and think that a sufficient reason to deny the force of all
positive Arguments whatsoever: Now this perverse and conceited way of
disputing, renders men very unfit to enquire after truth in any kind of
Science, but especially in Religion: for the doctrine of the Gospel is not
capable of such proofs, but that a perverse and unteachable Spirit may find
some kind of evasions, to abate the force of them; and may raise some kind of
groundless suspicion, that possibly things might have been otherwise than they
are there represented. The evidence of Christian Religion in these days does in
great measure depend upon the historical truth of those relations of matters of
fact, which were done by our Savior, and his Apostles in confirmation of the
doctrine they taught; and the truth of those things is attested by as credible
witnesses, as any matter of fact ever was; and matters of fact are not capable
of any other or better proof than the testimony of those who were eyewitnesses
of them. But yet still a man that were perverse and obstinate might say, that
the evidence of sense is more convincing than that of witnesses. That seeing is
believing; and if I could see some of those signs and wonders wrought now,
which are reported to have been done in our Saviors time, I would believe. But
as for these Historical narrations, if either the Authors of them were
themselves deceived, or did intend to deceive or delude posterity, neither of
which is absolutely impossible; if either of these things should have been,
those relations are no evidence at all. Now although it be the most absurd and
unreasonable thing in the world to suppose, that so many thousands of the
Primitive Christians should lay down their lives so cheerfully in testimony of
the truth of the Gospel, without being satisfied about it themselves, or with
intention to deceive others. Though this be the absurdest thing in the world,
yet if any man will be so perverse as to think so of the Apostles and first
Christians, what further Argument can be used to convince him? For what further
evidence can we expect of any man's sincerity in what he says, than that he
will lay down his life to attest it, as they did? And then for their knowledge
in these things, we may well appeal to the divine wisdom, wherewith they spoke
and wrote, that such men could not be deceived in the plainest matters. Yet
still the testimony of the Apostles and first Christians is not so great
evidence, as that of sense; though it be as great as the nature of the thing is
capable of. And therefore a man that is resolved to yield to nothing but
sensible demonstration, must expect to go away unsatisfied, as to the truth of
the Gospel, because it is not now capable of that kind of evidence. But now an
humble Enquirer after truth, that sought for knowledge in order to practice,
such a one would not be thus obstinate and refractory in his proceedings: He
would content himself with such evidence as the things he enquires about are
capable of, and will require no greater. And indeed it is reasonable to
suppose, that those perverse disputers, who are not content with that rational
evidence we have for the truth of the Gospel, would not be convinced, though
they saw a miracle. For our Savior has plainly told us in a like case, If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe though one
arise unto them from the dead. The Law of Moses was at first confirmed to the
Jews by miracles, but afterward they were to be content with the testimony of
their Fathers concerning it, and those who would not believe the doctrine of
Moses upon that evidence, according to our Saviors judgment, would not be
convinced by the greatest miracle, even the resurrection of one from the dead.
The case is now the same with us, as it was with the Jews in our Saviors time.
At the first promulgation of the Gospel, it was confirmed from Heaven by such
signs and wonders, and mighty works, which could not have been wrought but by
the almighty power of God, attesting the truth of what our Savior and his
Apostles taught. But the doctrine of the Gospel being once sufficiently
confirmed, God expects now that man should rest satisfied with that evidence
which he then gave; and is conveyed down to us by the testimony of those, who
were witnesses of those miracles and mighty works with which it was then
attested. Nor is it to be expected that God should now work miracles to
convince the obstinate, since the evidence he has already given is sufficient
for those who are humble and teachable, and will render the obstinate
inexcusable. Men may therefore, if they please, dispute themselves out of their
Religion upon I know not what vain surmises, and set up for Wits, and men of
more than ordinary reach, not to be imposed on by any Historical Narrations,
though never so well attested; but in the end they will find how far this
perverse and arrogant humor falls short of true wisdom: when for the sake of
that they reject the divine and heavenly doctrine, which if carefully attended
to and obeyed, is able to save their souls. By what has been said it is easy
to understand how necessary a qualification humility is, in order to our
enquiry after truth, and how effectual it is to make us fit for the reception
of it.

4. A fourth branch of duty very advantageous to us, to make us capable of
divine knowledge, is calmness of temper and moderation of passions. He that
comes to enquire after truth, must bring with him a quiet and sedate temper; he
must be willing to hear patiently what can be said on both sides, and by no
means engage his passion on either part, till he has first satisfied his
Reason about it. Our passions are then very useful and beneficial to us, when
they promote our vigor in the prosecution of things that are virtuous and
praiseworthy, and when they encourage us to make a bold resistance against all
things that are wicked and unworthy of us; but then, that we may be assured
that our passion is duly exercised, it is necessary that our reason should
have first thoroughly considered of the matter, and given in its impartial
sentence, before we suffer our passions to interpose in our examination of
truth. For when once our affections are engaged on any side, they do certainly
biass the judgment and make it admit of every small appearance or shadow of
truth, which seems to favor the opinion we have a fancy for, and to reject
with disdain the strongest reasonings, when they are opposed to what we desire
should be true. Men do not then sincerely seek for truth, but endeavor to
prove that true which they have a mind to; and though they happen to be
mistaken, they will not then endure to be better informed, and are impatient of
any contradiction. And this is accounted one great reason, why among so many
Writers of Controversy so few have ever changed the opinions they at first
maintained, or have yielded the cause, when they have been fairly and fully
answered: Alas! it is hard for them to renounce those beloved notions which had
been impressed on their minds in their younger years, and they had rather take
hold of any shift or evasion, then grant they had been in an error. But if
they find their own reason begin to waver, being in part convinced by the force
of contrary reasons, they fly for refuge to the Authority of others, and
fortify themselves with this consideration, that such and such men are men of
noted learning and piety, and yet they are all of this opinion; and yet
doubtless they understood the force of those arguments better than we do, and
would have yielded to them, had they thought them convincing. Thus when Reason
of it self would yield, yet their affection to the cause, and the men that
maintain it makes them hold out still; and though they have a glimpse of truth,
they dare not, they cannot receive it.

But the passion I intended principally to speak of, as being a great hindrance
to our receiving the Truth, is that of Anger; which is a boisterous, unruly
passion, and disorders all the powers of the reasonable soul, and makes them
wholly unfit for any impressions of truth. A man that is angry and impatient,
will not allow his Adversary leave to speak out half an argument, but presently
he is provoked, and then he is not able to make a reasonable defense though he
should have the truth on his side, he does not then consider what is most fit
and proper to be said, but casts out at random what his passion first suggests
to him: all his thoughts are then in commotion, and like the troubled waves,
will not receive any perfect image of things, and you may as well hope to
convince a mad man as him.

Now this heat of passion, as it makes men very unfit to be wrought upon by
others, so it commonly suggests to us very improper ways of arguing, when we
endeavor to convince them who differ from us. This temper of mind produces
those sharp and satirical Treatises, whereby some men endeavor, if not to
convince, yet to shame and silence their Adversaries, by exposing their
persons, and representing them to the World under odious Characters. Now
certainly what ever these men may hope, this method of railing and reviling,
though the persons they accuse may really deserve all that is said of them, yet
I say, this is not a fit method for the propagation of truth. For as the piety
of one man ought to be no defense or security for his error; so neither ought
it to be any argument against the truth, that it is defended by a bad man: and
therefore all the Arguments that are levelled against the person of our
Adversary, are wholly besides the purpose; they tend only to the breach of
Charity, not to the convincing any man's judgment that differs from us. And
certainly our blessed Savior, when he gave us so many precepts of meekness and
charity toward all men, when he so often requires us not to judge and condemn
our brethren, over whom we have no jurisdiction, when he represents to us the
danger of uncharitable speeches, S. Matt. v. 22. Whosoever shall say to his
brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; and whosoever shall say, Thou
Fool, shall be in danger of Hellfire. When our Savior so often inculcates
these and the like precepts, requiring so humble and charitable demeanor
toward our brethren both in thoughts and words; he cannot be supposed to give
the least permission to his Disciples to endeavor to propagate or defend any
part of his doctrine by reproachful and contumelious usage of the persons they
contend with. Sure I am, his own example was infinitely different from what men
practice in these days. Our Savior had certainly more clear right on his side,
than any man can now pretend to, but was entertained with the greatest
contradiction of sinners that can be imagined; and if any injury might justly
provoke our rage and passion, those offered to our Savior were of the most
heinous and provoking nature; but yet, when he was reviled, he reviled not
again; when he suffered, he threatened not; he rendered not evil for evil, nor
railing for railing; but committed himself to him that judges righteously. And
now can any man pretend to own the obligation of our Saviors precepts and
example, and yet contend for the truth of his doctrine with so much bitterness
and virulency of speech toward their dissenting brethren, as some of our
zealous Disputants do in these days. S. Jude tells us that Michael the
Archangel, when he contended with the Devil, he durst not bring against him a
railing accusation: and how then can we presume to do it in our Religious
debates with our Christian brethren, who for ought we know, notwithstanding our
misconceptions of them, may be in truth the children of God, though fallen into
error. In a word, to conclude this particular, he that would learn, must be
willing to be contradicted, and hear with patience what may be said, be it
never so opposite to his former notions, or to his present wishes. Otherwise he
will be hardly capable to judge aright. Again, he that would instruct and
convince others, must do it also with calmness of spirit, confuting error with
all the clearness and perspicuity he is able, but sparing the persons he
endeavors to reform. For if by reproach and contumely he provoke their
passion, whom he should instruct, he destroys the force of all his reasoning by
discomposing those faculties which should judge of it.

5. The fifth point of duty which I proposed to speak of, as having great
influence upon our understanding and receiving the Gospel, is Prayer to God.
This is a duty of natural obligation, as may appear by the many precepts of
ancient Philosophers concerning it. Pythagoras in particular advises to
undertake no work, to endeavor nothing without imploring the divine
assistance. (...). This he subjoins to many other precepts of Virtue, as the
complement and perfection of them. And surely if the imploring the divine
assistance is necessary in all our concerns, it is principally to be regarded
in our search of divine Truth. For to whom shoud we seek for knowledge but to
him who is the Fountain of Truth, the Father of Lights, from whom every good
and perfect gift comes. And the same Philosopher immediately after his precepts
of Virtue, and his direction to pray to God to bless and perfect our
endeavors, he adds this, as the first and principal benefit that would redound
to us thereby, that we should by so doing gain the knowledge both of the divine
and humane nature; which is not much different from what I have hitherto
endeavored to prove, viz. that the practice of Virtue has in it self a
natural efficacy to clear the understanding, and make it capable of divine
knowledge; and surely if Philosophers by the force of natural principles,
understood the necessity we had of the divine assistance in all our endeavors,
and that Prayer was the means by which it was to be sought, we who have
received better means of instruction than they had, cannot be ignorant of this
point of duty: especially the doctrine of the Gospel being so full of precepts
of this kind, requiring us to pray to God in all our exigencies, and assuring
us of success by so doing, if we be not wanting to our selves. Thus
particularly, Luke xi. 9. our Savior advises us, Ask and it shall be given
you. And then follows, v. 13. If ye being evil know how to give good gifts to
your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him? And S. James yet more nearly to our present purpose directs
us to make our humble addresses to God in order to the attainment of divine
knowledge. James 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that
gives to all men plenteously and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

I have thus far insisted on some particular duties, each of which singly
considered, has a very great efficacy to enable us to understand those truths
which are revealed in the Gospel; and to make us capable of satisfaction
concerning them. From whence the inference will be easy and obvious, that if
the practice of each of these be very useful, and beneficial to us in our
search after knowledge; then surely where these are all united, they cannot
ordinarily fail of their desired effect. But yet we are to consider further,
That the condition which our Savior here requires, is not completed in our
observance of those particular duties abovementioned; but in an universal and
impartial obedience to the Will of God, as far as it is already known to us,
and in a sincere resolution to obey him in all further revelations of his Will,
which upon perusal of the Gospel, we shall find to be our duty. And a man thus
qualified, besides the natural efficacy of Virtue to make him fit for receiving
the Gospel, has moreover a peculiar promise of the divine blessing and
assistance to enlighten his mind, and to guide him into all necessary truth.
And this is the second account upon which we may be assured of the truth of our
Saviors proposition, If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

God, who would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth, will not be wanting to any, who seek for truth with a sincere resolution
to submit to it: especially to those who have already exercised themselves in
doing his will according to their knowledge, he will not fail to afford such
further means of instruction as is necessary for them, according to what our
Savior says in the parable of the Talents, Mat. xxv. 29. Unto every man that
has, that is, who makes a due use of what he has, to him shall be given, and
he shall have abundance. Every one who sincerely endeavors to live up to that
measure of knowledge he has, God will give to him such further degrees of
knowledge, as shall be suitable and necessary for him; and of this we have a
great signal example in Cornelius the good Centurion, Acts 10. whose Prayers
and Alms, while he was a stranger to Christ's Religion, were so far accepted by
God, that he was pleased miraculously to direct him to Peter for further
instruction what he ought to do.

Now although we are not to expect that all sincere Enquirers after Truth shall
be thus miraculously instructed, as Cornelius was; yet God has given us
abundant assurance, that no such person shall miscarry for want of necessary
knowledge. For to this end God has given his Holy Spirit, to continue with his
Church to the end of the World, to guide it into all necessary truth, and to
assist and govern every lively member of Christ's body in the knowledge and
practice of all that is indispensably required of him. God himself has a
singular delight and pleasure in good men, as the holy Psalmist tells us, Psalm.
cxlvij. II. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, and in them that
hope in his mercy: and our Savior assures us, that God will condescend to
dwell and inhabit with such persons; which I conceive cannot be understood in
any other sense, than that there is a very near intercourse between God and
good men, that God is always ready to assist and succor them in whatsoever
they call upon him for. John xiv. 23. If a man love me, he will keep my words,
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. And then surely being blessed with the presence of such a Guest, they cannot
want any measure of knowledge in the ways of God, that is necessary for them.

To conclude then, what remains now, but if we desire knowledge and
satisfaction in the Religion we profess, that we apply our selves to seek it in
this way which our Savior has prescribed, viz. with sincere resolutions and
endeavors to do the will of God according to our knowledge. This is the only
way whereby true knowledge is to be obtained, he that seeks in this way shall
not miscarry. For if any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

SERMON. IV.
HEB. xij. 1. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us.


IN the former Chapter of this Epistle the Apostle given us a large account of
the afflictions and sufferings of those Patriarchs and Prophets, and other holy
men, who lived before the coming of our Savior; and the words I have now read
are an inference from their example, that we also having before our eyes the
glorious things which they did and suffered, and calling to mind the mighty
power and efficacy of their Faith in overcoming the World and enduring
afflictions, may from thence be excited to a like vigor and constancy in our
Christian profession. So that the words contain these two things worthy our
consideration: An Exhortation, and the reason of it.

The Exhortation in these words;

Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and
let us run with patience the race which is set before us. The reason of the
Exhortation in these words:

Seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses. I shall
begin with the Exhortation.

There is nothing more usual in holy Scripture, than to represent the duty of a
Christian under the similitude of such other employments, as carry with them
the greatest difficulties, and require the most exact care and vigilance in
those who undertake them. Sometimes we are compared to Soldiers, who must be
always upon the Guard: sometimes to Travelers and Pilgrims, who have a long
and hazardous journey to make: sometimes to those who strive for Masteries in
public Games. Now these several sorts of employments do all presuppose these
two things.

1. That those who undertake them do propose to themselves some great and
considerable end, some reward of their labors.

2. That there are great difficulties to be passed through, great industry, and
care, and watchfulness to be used for the attainment of it.

The case is not unlike in our Christian Profession. We have a glorious prize
of our high Calling set before us; we have an exceeding great reward, a Crown
of Glory laid up for us, which God the righteous Judge and just Rewarder of
those that diligently seek him, will not fail to bestow on such as overcome.
But then we must not expect this Reward and Crown upon any other condition,
than that we approve our selves as men who have fought the good fight of Faith
manfully and courageously; who have strove lawfully and endured to the end. The
similitude used in the Text is taken from those Trials of Skill, those public
Exercises which were used in the Olympic Games. Now for those who run in a
Race, there are three things necessary to be done, if they hope to gain the
victory: in proportion to which the whole duty of a Christian is expressed in
this Exhortation.

1. They must free themselves from all unnecessary burdens, from all their
loose garments which may clog or entangle them in their way; they must lay away
every weight.

2. They must be active and vigorous in the course; they must run the race set
before them.

3. They must continue their vigor and courage to the end of the race. This I
conceive to be meant by running with patience, that is, with perseverance and
continuance in well-doing. Now it is easy to apply these several circumstances
to our Christian duty, and I shall consider each of them.

1. It is easy to understand, that what is here metaphorically expressed, by
laying aside every weight, is the same with what S. Paul elsewhere teaches us
in plain terms, and calls the denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
what our Savior means by denying our selves. The riches, honors, and
pleasures of the World, and the love of them, which S. John calls the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, are not unfitly compared
to so many clogs and weights that press down the soul, and are apt to make it
dull and unactive, and divert it from the ways of holiness: and the laying
aside these encumbrances, the freeing our minds from these affections and
desires, and from the love of all things else whatsoever; nay, of our life it
self when it stands in competition with our duty, is so necessary a preparation
for our running the race set before us, that without so doing we are not
capable of being Christ's Disciples, Mat. xvj. 24. Jesus said unto his
Disciples, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me. S. Mat. x. 38. He that takes not his cross, and
follows after me, is not worthy of me. Now that the renouncing and forsaking
our carnal lusts and desires is most generally to be understood by taking up
the cross, and denying our selves, I conceive evident from hence; because it is
made a necessary qualification of all that will be Christ's Disciples, not only
those who suffer persecutions, but all that will be Christians must in their
proportion deny themselves, and take up the Cross. These and the like
expressions are universal, not limited to any time or place, or other
circumstances, but equally belong to all Christians, Luke xiv. 26. If any man
come to me, and hate not his father; and mother, and wife, and children, and
brethren, and sister, yea and his own life also, cannot be my Disciple: and
whosoever does not bear his cross, and follow me, cannot be my Disciple. Now
the hating these things in the literal sense can then only be our duty, when
the love of them is inconsistent with our profession of Christianity; for
otherwise they ought to be most dear to us: but this is a case which very
seldom happens. The taking up the Cross therefore, and denying our selves which
is required of all Christians, must be interpreted of laying aside our
irregular lusts and desires: which is agreeable to this interpretation, called
crucifying the flesh with its affections and lusts; and is expressed in the
Text, by laying aside every weight: nay possibly if it were not beside my
present design, it would be no difficult task to make it appear, that denying
our selves, and taking up the Cross, in this sense I am speaking, the
mortifying and subduing our fleshly appetites, the freeing our minds from evil
habits and inclinations, and from the darling sins we have delighted in, may be
a greater trial of our obedience and love to God, and our desire to please him,
than even the laying down our lives for the testimony of the truth of the
Gospel. Many men can be prodigal of life, and die with great bravery and
resolution, when they would think it a very hard and laborious employment to
endure the severities of mortification; and to wean themselves from some long
accustomed pleasure and temptation. But to return to the business in hand, Let
us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us.

I shall not pretend to give a Catalogue of those particular lusts and desires,
which by the force of this Exhortation we are to forsake and lay aside. The
variety of them is infinite, according to the several ways of living men are
engaged in, according to the difference of their temper and constitution, and
other outward circumstances. I shall only take notice of two general rules in
this matter, which the Text suggests to us.

1. That our care in this affair be universal and impartial: that according to
our knowledge and ability we lay aside every weight. It is not sufficient that
we abstain from this or that particular habit of sin, if at the same time we
wilfully indulge our selves in others. Though a man be able to say with the
Pharisee, and to say truly, that he is not an extortioner, unjust, adulterer,
nor as this and that particular man, whom he may observe in his neighborhood
that is worse than himself; yet all this while he may cherish in his bosom
other darling lusts, and habitual practices, which may exclude him from the
kingdom of Heaven, notwithstanding his caution and abstinence in other things.
For alas! a man may abstain from many kinds of temptation which others are
betrayed by, and yet be guilty of no great virtue in so doing. For not only
Virtue and Vice, but even several Vices themselves are at enmity with, and
mutually destroy one another; and therefore it is no virtue in a covetous man,
that he abstains from profuseness and luxury; nor is it praiseworthy in the
prodigal, that his heart is not set upon riches. If the Hypocrite give alms to
be seen of men, if the ambitious man be courteous and affable, though these
things be the proper matter of Virtue, yet inasmuch as they proceed not from
from any principle of obedience, or love to God, they are no part of that duty
and allegiance we owe him, nor will they be accepted by him; nay certainly he
that abstains from some kinds of Vice only to indulge himself in the contrary
extreme, is so far from laying aside those weights which hinder him in his
Christian course, that he rather loads himself the heavier, and is still more
unfit for so great an undertaking; and indeed so necessary it is, that we
should be impartial in this affair, that we should lay aside every weight, that
unless our diligence extend thus far, any single habit of evil that we indulge
our selves in, is sufficient to defeat us of our victory, and to bereave us of
our Crown and Triumph: because in Gods account he who wilfully harbors in his
bosom any one habitual lust, which he is not willing to forego for Gods sake,
is as guilty as though he broke all his laws. So S. James tells us Chap. 2. v.
10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. And he adds the reason of it in the next verse, because the same
authority of God is equally concerned in all his laws, and is therefore equal
contemned in the wilful breach of one, as of all or any. For he that said, do
not commit adultery, said also, do not kill; and certainly he who picks and
chooses the sins he will forbear, and what not, is determined in his choice not
by any respect he bears to the will of God, but by his own temper and
inclination. For if he abstained from any one sin out of pure obedience to the
Will of God, because God did forbid it, this reason would equally hold against
all kind of transgression, because they are all abominable in the sight of God:
nor could we have a reason to forbear one more than others. Again further,
unless our care in this business be universal and impartial, to lay aside every
weight, to free our minds from all affections and desires that may hinder us in
our duty, we are not entirely at our own dispose, and are not therefore in a
fit capacity to render to God that obedience which is due to him, and which he
expects from us. He who gave us our being and endued our souls with so many
excellent perfections and abilities, may justly expect and require of us that
they be entirely devoted to his service, and he has accordingly declared that
he will accept no less. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. But
this cannot be done, while we cherish in our bosom any inordinate desire, any
lust, or passion which claims an interest in our affections, a share in our
service, Mat. vj. 24. No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the
one; and love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the
other: we cannot serve God and Mammon. What is there particularly said of the
love of riches, is as true of any other habitual inclination to evil which we
indulge our selves in. If we cannot serve God and Mammon, neither can we serve
God and our Lusts, we cannot serve God and our Ambition, we cannot serve God
and the Devil.

2. Besides this universal care expressed here, by laying aside every weight, we
have here in the Text another rule of direction suggested to us, which may
render us yet more fit and expedite for the race set before us, viz. that we be
more particularly careful to arm our selves against those temptations, to lay
aside those lusts, to which we perceive our selves by nature, or custom most
inclined.

This I conceive is meant here by the sin which does so easily beset us. Every
man who gives himself the leisure to examine his own heart impartially, will
find that some temptations have a great deal more easy access to him than
others: and our great adversary the Devil is very diligent and watchful to set
before us such objects, and lay such snares in our way, which are most likely
to prevail upon us. The sins we are naturally inclined to ofttimes creep upon
us insensibly, and get possession of our hearts before we are well aware of
them. Sometimes they disguise themselves under the pretense of Piety and
seeming holiness, and a great zeal against the contrary extreme. Sometimes they
plead Nature and Custom for their continuance, that these cannot be overcome:
sometimes we have ways to extenuate them, and make them seem small and venial;
and if men take time to deliberate about parting with them, there is great
hazard but they will keep possession. So apt are we to be vanquished, when we
have a mind to it; when our Adversaries from without have their correspondents
in our own bosom; when we have so many treacherous Guests, so many deceitful
Lusts within us, which are ready to betray us, and to yield up our hearts to a
subtle and powerful enemy. Here then is our greatest danger; here we must exert
our greatest care and vigilance; here we must show our courage and resolution,
in throwing off these darling and beloved Lusts, the sins that do so easily
beset us. This is that which our Savior elsewhere requires of us, when he bids
us cut off our right hands, and pluck out our right eyes, when they make us to
offend. And thus much for the first part of the Exhortation.

Having according to our power laid aside every weight, having freed our selves
from our evil habits, and customs, and from our most secret and beloved Lusts,
we are not to rest here. Thus much is required as a preparation to be Christ's
Disciples; but when we are admitted into the number, we must then set our
selves upon an active obedience to his Laws. A negative holiness will not serve
our turn. We must not only eschew evil, but we must do what good we can in the
several places and stations to which God has called us. They who run in a
Race, when they have stripped themselves, and laid aside all unnecessary weights
and encumbrances, have yet the whole Race before them which they must run
through, if they expect their Crown and Prize: and therefore in proportion to
what is required of them, we also are exhorted, in the

2. Second place, to run the Race set before us. Now the positive duties
required of all Christians, answer to that part of the similitude, and to
discharge them faithfully, is meant by running the race set before us. And this
is elsewhere expressed in plainer Exhortations. Work out your salvation with
fear and trembling, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and
to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness charity. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any praise, or if
there be any virtue, think on and do these things. Now these and the like
Exhortations and Precepts often repeated in holy Scripture being all in general
terms, the particular instances of duty required by them, must be left to each
man's private consideration; and they are various according to men's several
abilities and opportunities, according to their several relations in which God
has placed them. God the supreme (...), has by his wise and good providence
allotted every man his course. It is not of our choosing, but it is a race set
before us. He has likewise distributed among men various gifts and abilities,
whereby they are severally fitted to do good; and according to these every man
must judge of his duty in particular, what it is that the Lord requires of him;
and no man who does not want will and resolution to do the will of God, can
ordinarily be ignorant what he ought to do; and therefore I shall not descend
to any particular instances of duty; only from the similitude here used, I
shall crave leave to suggest these two things.

1. That our obedience to God ought to be vigorous and cheerful. 2. That it
ought to be constant and uninterrupted.
1. The similitude of Running imports great vigor and alacrity in the
discharge of our duty. They who run with hopes of Victory must not be
faint-hearted and languish, but must be cheerful, and courageous, full of hope
and eager expectation of the desired triumph. Thus must a Christian behave
himself in the race set before him. He must go about his duty with cheerfulness
and freedom, as one that does it with a willing mind, and hopes for success by
so doing. He must always have in his eye the great recompense of reward, the
joy set before him, the Crown of Glory laid up for him; and in prospect of that
he must cheerfully undertake whatever difficulties he meets with in his way.
And indeed if we have once obeyed the former part of the Exhortation, if we
have once freed our minds from the low and sordid cares and encumbrances of
this life present, there can then remain nothing to hinder or retard our
motion, or to abate our courage in running the Race set before us. And this
holy David seems to express; saying, I will run the way of thy commandments,
when thou have set my heart at liberty. When we are once at liberty from the
World, and have weaned our affections from things below, and placed them on a
better and more enduring substance, then though we meet with dangers and
inconveniences, we shall joyfully go on, and every days progress in our course
of piety will render our task more easy and delightful. We shall apprehend our
selves every day more and more, approaching to the end of our hopes, and to the
Crown of our labors, and out of prospect of so sure a reward, so nigh at hand;
and out of a fore-taste of that happiness shall be able to say of Religion from
our own experience, that her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
Peace.

2. Another thing represented by this similitude of Running is, that our course
of Piety, our religious conversation ought to be constant and uninterrupted. He
that runs in a Race cannot find leisure to stop and divert himself, or salute
his friends by the way. A little needless ceremony at such a time, may hazard
the loss of the whole prize. His adversary perhaps, who was of less ability and
courage, may by such an advantage easily get the start of him, and defeat him
of the Crown, and he become the derision and scorn of the beholders. The case
is not unlike in our Christian Race. It is not sufficient that we be Religious
and Devout by fits and starts, at some set time, or upon some solemn occasion;
but it ought to be our constant behavior, the continued employment of our
lives. The doing the will of God is much more our business than any other
employment whatsoever; and ought to be as constantly and vigorously pursued.
For if at any time we give our selves leisure to be idle, and make any least
delay or stop in our Christian Race, alas we do not consider how easily we may
fall short of our desired end. For how fast soever we go on in our way, our
former lusts and desires we had cast off, will be sure to follow us close, to
tread in our steps, and will watch every opportunity to desire Parley with us,
and entreat our stay. And if we once make the least intermission to treat with
them, it is easy to foresee how soon our vigor and heat with which we began
the Race, will abate and cool: our joints will then grow stiff and unactive,
and then presently a thousand difficulties arise, and we are as far from our
Journies end as when we first set out. So dangerous a thing it is, when we have
begun well, and gone on for a while, then to stay and look back, and deliberate
whether we shall go farther or not. Nay in these cases of a moral nature to
stay, is to go backward. For such is the nature of man, he cannot be altogether
idle; if he be not engaged in things that are good and virtuous, he will
certainly be employed in somewhat else that is bad and sinful. And then it is
very plain, that a good habit is much more weakened by a little intermission,
than it can be strengthened or improved by many instances of Virtue. So that
from these considerations it may abundantly appear, how necessary it is that
our progress in this Race before us should be constant and uninterrupted.

3. The third and last part of this Exhortation is, that our vigor and
diligence in this affair must be continued to the end of our lives: We must run
with patience. How diligent and active soever we may have been in the practice
of our duty, how far soever we have proceeded in our Christian Race, let no man
yet flatter himself that he has done his whole duty, or that he has attained
to the utmost degree of perfection he is capable of; or that he is already
secure of his Reward and Crown. For this is a very dangerous mistake, and many
who did run once well, may upon this presumption foolishly miscarry,
notwithstanding all their pains and labor they have heretofore endured. All
the promises of a future reward are limited to such as persevere in well-doing;
and this very similitude is a clear evidence of it. For who ever pretended to
have won the prize, without running to the end of the Race? Now there is
nothing more plain than that our life here is the time of our trial, wherein we
must work out our salvation, and run the Race set before us; and that the life
to come is the time of reward or retribution. As long therefore as we live
here, we must keep up our diligence in our Christian calling, laboring every
day to go on from strength to strength, to grow in grace, and to improve in the
practice of all virtue and godliness of living. And as for those who imagine to
themselves I know not what security of their condition, they would do well to
remember, that God has assured us that he has made no such irrevocable decree
for any particular man's salvation, but that he is in a possibility of falling
short of it, if he fall from his uprightness and integrity. Ez. 33. 13. When I
shall say to the righteous that he shall surely live, if he trust to his own
righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be
remembered. For his iniquity that he has committed, he shall die for it. Out of
a sense of the possibility and danger of this, S. Paul exhorts us, 1 Cor. x.
12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Where
the Apostle plainly intimates, that they who think themselves perfect and
secure of their condition, are in greater danger of falling than others;
because that very security is apt in its own natural tendency to make men
supine and negligent, and unwilling to proceed further in the Race set before
them. The truth is, as long as we are in the body, though we have made it our
endeavor to throw off every weight, though we have used great diligence in our
Christian Race, yet still we have something more to do; we have still many
adversaries to contend with, many temptations to resist; the seed of those
desires which we had before, do still remain in us, which will always afford
new matter for our vigilance and care. Nor can we ever be secure that we have
earned our prize till we have finished our course with patience, and God calls
us hence to receive our reward. Sure I am, if any man might be secure before
hand that he had done his whole duty, and was now ascertained of his reward, S.
Paul might pretend as reasonably to that privilege as any other; but yet he
describes his own condition as still imperfect, and still depending upon his
future diligence: Phil. iij. 12. Not as though I had already attained, either
were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for
which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self to
have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward
the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Thus if we
would follow S. Paul's example, and the Exhortation in the Text, we must still
continue pressing forward, and run with patience to the end of our race.

Having thus far considered the Exhortation in the Text, and the extent of it,
I might now endeavor to enforce it by representing to your thoughts the
exceeding great reward, the glorious prize we are to run for in the Race set
before us. Which is so great a degree of blessedness, that neither eye has
seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man sufficiently to
conceive of it. I might also here recall to your remembrance the faithfulness,
and truth, and goodness of God, who has promised this reward, and will bestow
it on those who have endured to the end and run with patience. I might farther
add the consideration of the assistances of Gods good Spirit, the great
comfort, support and joy which it affords us in this spiritual Race, which
infinitely over-ballances all the false pleasures we forsake, and all the
difficulties we undergo in undertaking this enterprise. And lastly, I might put
you in mind of the great danger, reproach, and confusion of face, which will
certainly attend us, if by our negligence and indifference we fall short of
this glorious prize; all which arguments ought to have a mighty influence upon
us, to awake and excite our utmost industry and vigor, to promote our
vigilance, and to confirm, strengthen and maintain our courage, constancy and
resolution to go on steadfastly in the ways of holiness, and to run with
patience the Race set before us. But the prosecution of these and the like
arguments would be too large a scope for the time allotted to this exercise,
and the words of the Text confine my thoughts to a more particular
consideration of the example of the Saints, Martyrs, and holy Confessors, who
have gone before us in this glorious Race, and have already finished their
course with patience. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so
great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, etc. The word Martyr
or Witness in an Ecclesiastical sense is usually restrained to such only, who
have laid down their lives in testimony of the truth of the Gospel; but in the
language of holy Scripture, I find no such limitation of it. Any of these who
were either great examples of obedience and faith in God, any who bare witness
to divine truth, though they were not called to suffer death for that
testimony, being indifferently styled by that name. The Fathers mentioned in
the former Chapter cannot all be accounted Martyrs in the stricter sense,
however they all help to make up the number, which by reason of the multitude
of them, is here called a Cloud of Witnesses. Now the force of their witness
and example to engage us in a like diligence and constancy in running the Race
set before us, I shall endeavor to represent in these following particulars.

1. They were witnesses of the truth, and faithfulness, and goodness of God, in
whom we believe; that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those that diligently
seek him; and therefore that our labor and industry in our Christian Race
shall not be in vain, I mention this truth more particularly, because it seems
to be the only Creed, which all the Saints recited in the former Chapter,
agreed in. Some of them, it is true, had a great prospect and hope of a Messiah
to come. Abraham rejoiced to see his day. Jacobs prophecy of him is very
punctual and particular. The other Prophets give witness to him. But yet it
appears not, that all there mentioned had any knowledge at all, either that he
was to come, or what he should do or suffer for the World. And therefore the
Apostle in the beginning of the Chapter, lays down that, viz. That God is the
rewarder of them that diligently seek him, as the fundamental Article of their
Belief, in confidence of which they willingly underwent so many Trials and
Temptations with such bravery and undaunted resolution. If therefore we look
upon these men only as giving testimony to this truth, yet this alone is
sufficient reason for our imitation of them, and does justify the wisdom of
our choice in being religious, and serving the same God on whom they believed,
and forsaking all in obedience to him, as they did before us. Since we have the
same convictions of Reason that they had, that our God whom we serve, is a
Rewarder of those that put their trust in him, and are further confirmed in our
belief of this, by their patience and constancy in the same Profession, and by
their cheerful suffering Persecution for it. By their suffering we have this
satisfaction at least, that we are not singular in this our persuasion
concerning God, and that he has not been without his Witnesses in all Ages,
who have laid down their lives in this Faith and Assurance: and therefore we
ought to be steadfast in it without wavering. Now if any should object, that the
numbers of those who have died in this Faith, though they are here called a
Cloud of Witnesses, are yet but a very few in comparison of those who have
lived without God in the World, and have despised and rejected all hopes of a
future reward. To this it is easy to reply, that the credit of any testimony
does not depend on the number and noise of those that affirm any thing; but
from the manner of the evidence they give. Now a few men who give sufficient
proof that they understand perfectly what they say and do, and would not
deceive others, are more to be valued as Witnesses, than ten thousand of the
ruder multitude, who take up reports upon trust, and if you come to examine
them they shrink into nothing. They said something, they know not what; but
know not whence they had it, nor why they said it. The case is the same in
matters of religion; those that have been truly pious and religious, have in
all Ages been men of the clearest and best understandings, that have always
been able to give a reason of their Hope that was in them; and to satisfy the
World that they did not pretend this for any temporal advantage; they did
deliberately and cheerfully expose themselves to the most severe Trials and
Persecutions for their testimony of it, not accepting deliverance, as the
Apostle speaks, that they might obtain a better resurrection. This was the
case of those Heroic Spirits recited in the foregoing Chapter. They were men
of found mind, as appears by the glorious things they did and suffered, many of
which are at large recorded in sacred Story. They knew the value of life as
well as others; they were sensible of disgrace, and pain, and want, and could
have no reason to expose themselves to these things without a mighty evidence
and conviction of the truth of what they believed concerning God, of the
greatness of his Power, that he was able to reward them after this life; of the
greatness of his Wisdom, that he knew when and how to do it better than they
could choose; of the Justice of his Providence, that he would certainly do it.
But then on the contrary, for those that have rejected this belief, or at least
have not lived answerably to it, it is plain that much the greatest part of
them are only a rash inconsiderate multitude, of no understanding in these
matters, who never took time to think whether Religion had any real foundation
in Nature or Reason, or not; and therefore these are not competent Judges in
the case, and not to be regarded as Witnesses. For those others, who have lived
wickedly, and have yet had some reason to consider of the grounds and
obligations of a religious course of life; it is plain that these are most of
them self-condemned, and act against the conviction of their conscience, being
as it were bribed in their testimony by the love they bear to the pleasures,
and profits, and honors of this World. Now if we lay aside these two sorts of
men, those that act by no principle of Reason at all, and those who are
manifestly corrupted by their lusts, and smother and contradict their own
Reason; neither of which can be esteemed fit men to be relied upon as Judges of
Truth, the remainder of the World, if there be any not reducible to one of
these two sorts, is infinitely a less number than those who have been constant
Witnesses to, and Assertors of the Divine Providence, and that with the loss of
all other things that are most dear to them, and of life it self. And therefore
I think it reasonable to infer, that though the Fathers in the former Chapter
be considered only as Witnesses of this Truth in general, that God is a
rewarder of those that diligently seek him; yet their examples added to the
convictions of our own Reason are sufficient to justify the wisdom of our
choice in being religious, though we had no further motives to it than this:
inasmuch as they who renounce Religion, do it either without or against their
Reason, and there can be no competent evidence on their side, who do so; but
the force of their examples before mentioned will be yet more considerable to
engage us to imitate their patience, if we consider,

2. The great difference between their state and ours, and the far greater
advantages we enjoy above them. How far their knowledge extended beyond the the
principle before mentioned, it is not easy, nor necessary to determine. But
thus much is plain, that their condition was much more imperfect than ours
under the Gospel. The knowledge they had of a future state was dark and
obscure, the promises they received were mysterious and unevident; but now
under the Gospel the case is much otherwise. The types, and shadows, and
ceremonies of the Law, under which the promised Messiah was obscurely
represented of old, are now exchanged for the substance it self. Now life and
immortality is brought to light by the Gospel. We have now greater
demonstration of the goodness and mercy of God toward us than they had, in
that he spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all. We have a better
prospect of the promised reward. We have now clearer promises of the divine
Spirit to assist and support us in all our Trials, and to enable us to run our
Race with patience. These and many other advantages of knowledge we enjoy.
These encouragements to practice we have received, beyond what the Fathers were
acquainted with. And this the Apostle refers to in the conclusion of the former
Chapter, These all having obtained a good report through says, received not
the promises; God having provided some better things for us, that they without
us should not be made perfect. Now the inference from this consideration is
very plain and obvious. For if the Fathers before the coming of our Savior,
who received not those exceeding great and precious promises which are revealed
in the Gospel, did yet exercise so great degrees of Faith, so mighty a
confidence and trust in God, as to endure such bitter things in obedience to
him as we read they did; how strongly should this excite and provoke our zeal
and fervor to follow after them in this glorious enterprise, and to run with
patience the Race set before us; how should we be ashamed and blush to read the
History of their sufferings, and the glory of their virtues, if we who enjoy so
many advantages above them, do yet come short of their bravery and resolution,
and constant obedience to the will of God.

3. The examples of those who have gone before us in the ways of Virtue, ought
to have this further influence to engage us in the like cheerful discharge of
our duty, inasmuch as they are witnesses of the possibility of those things
that are required of us, in order to the attainment of that reward, the Crown
we seek for. The hardest duties required of us have been long since
accomplished by them; and accomplished with such full assurance of hope, such
ravishing apprehensions of the joy set before them, as perfectly over-balanced
all the difficulties they met with, and made them joyful and courageous amidst
the most severe tortures. Let no man then pretend, that the commands of God are
impossible to be kept; that his Laws are hard or grievous to be done, since we
have seen them fulfilled in so high a manner, and that under a more imperfect
dispensation than that of the Gospel, as the state of those manifestly was; nor
is it a bare possibility of our task which we are taught by their example, but
they are Witnesses of the loveliness of Virtue, that it is very excellent and
desirable, worthy our choice and constant embraces, though it be attended with
greatest dangers and persecution. For if it were not so, it were not possible
that all the Saints and Martyrs who have gone before us, should have expressed
so constant a joy and satisfaction in what they suffered for its sake. It was a
fansiful supposition of Tully, that if Virtue could be seen by bodily eyes, it
would appear so comely and amiable, so beautiful and lovely, that men would
need no other arguments to invite them to embrace it. I will not say this
supposition is altogether extravagant, because it may fairly be understood of
those great examples of Virtue, some of which have appeared in all Ages, to
vindicate its practice from all the disadvantages under which the folly and
slothfulness of men is wont to represent it. In brave and Heroic examples
Virtue appears as it were clothed with flesh and blood, visible to the eyes of
the most stupid and insensible; since there are none so barbarous and savage,
who will not follow a truly virtuous man with reverence and applause, though
they see him oft-times clouded by affliction, and oppressed by the malicious
and unjust. The truth is, no kind of Arguments has greater advantages of
persuasion, and leave us more without Excuse than good and virtuous Examples.
Others may speak great things in commendation of Virtue, and the Reward
prepared for it; but if notwithstanding they live not as they teach, there is
an easy answer to be made to such Exhortations, and we may be apt to reply,
Surely these men do not really believe what they endeavor to persuade us; for
if they did, it would be their interest to practice Virtue as well as ours; and
why do they neglect it? But when men teach us by Example as well as Doctrine,
then they may urge their precepts with good assurance, and we have no excuse or
pretense left, why we should not follow and imitate them.

The Saints therefore and Martyrs, who have left behind them such glorious
Memorials of their obedience and faith in God, and patient sufferings for
conscience sake, do herein give us the most powerful motives to a like
stedfastness in our Holy Calling; inasmuch as they bear witness by their
Examples, that there are no difficulties so great in the ways of Holiness, no
afflictions so grievous, but that by the power of a lively and active faith,
and by a prospect of the Joy set before us, and by the assistance of Gods grace
in the discharge of our duty, they may be endured with patience and comfort,
nay further, with joy and satisfaction. Let us now cast our eyes back on those
great Examples of Faith and Patience recorded in the foregoing Chapter; let us
behold the mighty power and efficacy of their Faith, and the bravery of their
Virtues in its most afflicted state: let us call to mind the cheerfulness and
joy with which they trampled on, and despised the sufferings of this life
present, that they might obtain a better inheritance. Let us add to these the
glorious company of Apostles and Evangelists, the noble Army of Martyrs and
Confessors, and innumerable companies of just men made perfect, who have
departed this life in the Faith of Christ, being Witnesses to us of better
promises than the Fathers had. And lastly, let us look unto Jesus the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy set before him endured the Cross,
despised the Shame, and is now set down upon the right hand of the Throne of
God; and then surely, if the Apostles Argument was a reasonable motive in his
days, it will now be much more so, since the Cloud of Witness is so much
increased by the Saints and Martyrs of the Christian Church. Wherefore seeing
we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay
aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us; and let us run
with patience the race that is set before us.

SERMON. V.
HEB. xij. 2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for
the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is
set down at the right hand of the Throne of God.


THere is no kind of Argument more naturally fitted to prevail upon men's minds,
and to engage their industry and diligence in any enterprise whatsoever, than
the example of others who have gone before them; whose wisdom and virtue they
have in reverence; who have performed the like undertaking with honor and
success. The opinion we have of their wisdom and virtue, makes us think it not
unreasonable for us to follow their steps, and imitate their practice; and the
success of their endeavors takes away all those faint excuses which Sloth and
Idleness are apt to suggest to us. We cannot then pretend that it is an
impossible task we are persuaded to, when we see before our eyes the examples
of others of like frame with our selves, who have already performed it with
cheerfulness and joy.

The Apostle therefore well knowing that the Profession of Christianity was to
be attended with many difficulties and dangers, and that our Savior had made
it a necessary qualification of all that would be his Disciples, to take up the
Cross and follow him; to prepare the minds of his new converted Hebrews against
all discouragements whatsoever, that might withdraw them from their
stedfastness in the Faith they had embraced, in the foregoing Chapter of the
Epistle, he largely represents to them the many examples of the Patriarchs of
old, whose Seed they were; of the holy Prophets, whose Writings they had
received; of all the Worthies recorded in Sacred Story, whose Praises they had
been instructed in; that all these, in confidence that God would reward their
Obedience and Faith in another life, though he suffered them to be evil
entreated here, had patiently undergone the most barbarous cruelties, which the
wit or malice of men could exercise upon them. Some of them were stoned and
sawn in sunder; some of them wandered about, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented; but yet these, and many other kinds of calamities they cheerfully
submitted to, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. And then applying their examples to the state of those first
Christians, he gives them to understand, that if the Fathers before recited by
the power of their Faith were enabled to endure such things as these, then
surely they who had received far better promises ought not to fall short of
their patience, and resolution, and constant perseverance in their holy
Profession, though they should be exposed to many Trials and Persecutions for
it.

This application he makes in the words before the Text; Wherefore, seeing we
also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside
every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us. But because the duty of Patience under
Sufferings is that which of all others we are naturally most averse to, that
there might be nothing wanting to confirm their resolution to go on cheerfully
in the Race set before them, he proceeds in the Text to raise their thoughts to
the contemplation of a far more eminent and illustrious example, whom they
ought always to have in their eye, as the best pattern of their Obedience, and
affording the strongest motives and encouragement to it: Looking unto Jesus the
author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God.

Considering the words with this dependence, they are a prevailing argument and
motive to engage us to imitate our Savior, as in all other parts of a holy
conversation; so more particularly in the patient suffering of those
afflictions and calamities which befall us in this life. Which duty, though it
have a more peculiar reference to the state of the Primitive Christians, who
were continually exposed to the most unsupportable calamities for their
profession of Christianity; yet we are not to persuade our selves that we in
these days are wholly exempt from our share in it. Though open Persecutions are
not now felt among us, yet all that will live godly, have many Trials and
Temptations to oppose themselves against, many difficulties and dangers to
struggle with, many enemies to withstand through the whole course of their
pilgrimage, who are always active and busy to hinder our progress in our
Christian Race, and to defeat us of our Reward and Crown. Though we are not now
brought before Kings and Rulers for the sake of Christ, though we cannot now be
tempted to a total Apostasy from our Christian Profession, to an open denial
of the Lord that bought us, yet still we are exposed to many temptations which
are apt to draw us from our uprightness, and to betray us into those evil
habits and customs which are inconsistent with the Faith which we outwardly
prosess, and with the Salvation we hope for. We have therefore need of great
watchfulness and care, and constant resolution, if we would preserve our
innocence and integrity amidst so many and dangerous temptations. We have need
of patience, if we would deny our selves all those irregular gratifications, to
which the Devil, the World, and our own hearts Lust are apt to entice and
invite us; and therefore the consideration of our Saviors example of Patience
under Sufferings may still be very useful to us, though we be not called to
suffer Persecution for his names sake. And then for Persecution it self, though
it be a case very seldom happens, yet such is the condition of Christianity,
that every one that undertakes the profession of it, must at least, in
preparation of soul, be ready to lay down his life, rather than renounce it.
Now in order to confirm our constancy and resolution in our Holy Calling,
notwithstanding any temptations we meet with in the World, notwithstanding any
afflictions or calamities that may befall us, the Apostle recommends this as a
most effectual means, to look unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith,
who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.

In which words the blessed JESUS is represented unto us under a twofold
Character, each of which affords very proper and suitable Arguments to engage
us in imitation of him.

1. We are to look unto him, as the Author of our Faith. This is in Greek
(...), which is a Military term, signifying a Captain and Leader, one who has
gone before us with bravery and resolution, and has commanded us to follow his
steps. This is further explained in the following part of the Verse, who, for
the joy set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame. If we look unto
Jesus under this Character, the Apostles Argument is very piain and convincing;
that since the Author and Captain of our Salvation did not refuse himself to
undergo the most unsupportable calamities of this life, and to suffer a painful
and most ignominious death, in prospect of that exceeding great reward which he
saw prepared for him; neither ought we, who pretend to be his Disciples and
Soldiers refuse to follow him in the same track, that we may partake with him
in the same joy. Especially if we consider,

2. That he is not only the Captain of our Faith, but the finisher and
perfecter of it. This is in Greek (...), that is, the Rewarder of our Faith.
This is further expressed in the latter clause of the Verse, where the Apostle
declaring the issue and event of our Saviors sufferings, tells us, he is set
down on the right hand of the throne of God. Which words express these two
things:

1. That our Savior has himself received the full Reward of his humiliation
and sufferings, being set down at the right hand of God.

2. And which is consequent from that, that he is now endued with sufficient
authority and power abundantly to reward those who suffer with him, and after
his example.

I shall begin with the first of these Characters, and shall consider our
Savior as Author and Captain of our Faith, the great Pattern and Example of
Patience, who, for the joy set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
shame. And to show the force of the Apostles Argument,

1. I shall first consider the sufferings themselves which our Savior
underwent, expressed here by two comprehensive words, the CROSS and the SHAME.

2. The manner of his enduring them.

3. I shall endeavor to show the influence of his Example to engage us to
follow and imitate him.

To begin with his Sufferings themselves.

Though the Cross and the Shame here spoken of, do principally refer to the
great and unparalled instance of our Saviors Sufferings, which was the
consummation of all the rest, even his painful and ignominious Death; yet I
conceive they may not unfitly be extended to the whole History of them, from
his Birth unto that very time. If therefore we take a short view of our
Saviors whole life and actions, we shall easily discern that the prophecy was
thoroughly fulfilled, wherein he is represented as a man of sorrow, and
acquainted with grief. Not to mention the meanness of his Birth, the poverty of
his condition, the early Persecution raised against him by Herod, nor those
other accidents that befell him in his younger years. Not to mention these
things, I shall confine my discourse to those instances of Suffering which
befell him after he began to show himself to Israel, and by signs and wonders to
declare himself to be the Son of God, the true Messiah, that according to the
Prophets was to come into the World. And I shall represent them under these two
heads answerable to those in the Text, the great ignominy and reproach which
was cast upon his person through the whole course of his Ministry; and then the
bitter and painful circumstances that went before, and accompanied his Death
and Passion.

And first, if we consider the quality of our Saviors person, that he was the
true Messiah, so long foretold by the Prophets, and at that very time expected
by the Jews; if we consider the great and undeniable proof that he gave of
these things, viz. the fulfilling all the prophecies that spoke of him so
punctually and so particularly; his delivering such a doctrine to them that
carried with it all the evidence of a divine authority; his doing such mighty
works among them, which by their own confession no man could do, unless God
were with him, his healing the sick, and curing diseases and casting out
Devils, giving eyes to the blind, restoring the lame, raising the dead, all
which could be the effect of no lesser cause, than the Almighty power of God,
attesting the truth of what he spoke, and the authority of his mission. He that
considers these things might reasonably expect, that so divine a person at his
first appearance should have been entertained with the greatest demonstration
of joy and triumph; and doubtless had the Jews themselves been demanded
beforehand, what honor was fit to be given to their long looked for Messiah
when he came, they could not have contrived any ways of respect suitable to
their great apprehensions of him; they would have thought no kind of homage too
great to be paid to the person whom God had sent to them so immediately, and
upon so advantageous a message. But behold on the contrary, when this Prince
and Savior did at length appear in the fullness of time, though there was no
testimony wanting to confirm him to be the very CHRIST, yet because he came not
with outward pomp and splendour, had none of the gilded Pageantries of the World
to attend him in his appearance, this prejudice alone was sufficient with them
to overbalance the strongest demonstration that could possibly be given. Is
not this the Carpenters Son? they thought sufficient confutation of all the
mighty things he spoke and did. So that in stead of those joyful acclamations
with which he ought to have been entertained, in stead of that honor and
respect that was due to his high Character, he met with nothing but Scorn and
Derision, Ignominy and Reproach; and that in those very cases, wherein they
ought to have paid him the most profound homage and adoration. For instance in
the execution of his prophetic Office. Though the doctrine he taught was the
most divine and heavenly that ever was made known to the Sons of men: though by
their own confession he spoke among them as never man spoke before; though he
so often confuted the great Doctors out of the Law and the Prophets, which they
thought themselves the best Interpreters of; yet so far were they from yielding
to the conviction, or owning his Commission, that they took occasion rather
from thence to contrive his ruin, and to represent him under the odious
character of one that endeavored to overthrow the Law and the Prophets, which
he came most eminently to fulfill. Again, when he went about his Fathers
business, to seek and to save that which was lost, and for that end vouchsafed
to converse with Publicans and Sinners, that he might reduce them from their
evil ways; though this was really an instance of the greatest goodness and
compassion toward them; yet for this they revile him, making it an occasion of
the foulest calumny, crying out of him as a Glutton and a Wine-bibber, a friend
of Publicans and Sinners. Lastly, to name no more, when he went about doing
good, curing diseases, healing all that were oppressed of the Devil, who could
expect but that such mighty instances of his power and goodness should have
extorted from them the most grateful acknowledgments? But in stead of this,
some of them desire him to depart out of their Coasts; others revile him as
though he did all these mighty and inimitable works by the help of the Devil,
casting out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of them. Thus the unspotted innocence
of his life, the purity of his doctrine, the mighty power which he showed in
confirmation of it, and the many good deeds done among them to all that stood
in need and craved his assistance; all which were in their own nature admirably
fitted to excite their love and veneration of him; all these were made use of
by the Jews to the quite contrary purpose, and became the occasions of the
greatest calumny and malice toward him. But I hasten to the great instance of
our Saviors Sufferings, even the bitter and most painful circumstances that
went before and accompanied his Death and Passion.

When the appointed time was come that the Messiah was to be cut off, our
Savior well knowing the approach of it, sought no means to escape the danger,
because he knew it was his heavenly Fathers pleasure that he should suffer such
things, and that otherwise the Scriptures would not be fulfilled. He therefore
prepared his Disciples for it, giving them warning that one of them should
betray him, and that the hour was now come. Having therefore eaten the Passover
with his Disciples, and put an end to that Ceremony which was figurative of
himself, and having instituted his last Supper to be kept for ever in
remembrance of him, he goes out to the Mount of Olives, there to be in
readiness to meet those that sought him, to take away his life. There it was
that our blessed Savior, out of deep apprehensions of that great weight of
afflictions that was now to be laid upon him, that he was to bear our grief,
and carry our sorrows, began to be exceeding sorrowful even unto death, and
fell into that bitter agony, wherein he sweat drops of blood. And here what
words can express, what thoughts can sufficiently conceive the greatness of
those pains that befell our Savior, when the very apprehensions of their
approach made so deep an impression upon the Son of God himself, and put him in
so strange an agony, and extorted from him the earnest petition which he made
Mat. xxvj. 39. O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Sure it is that never was such
height of malice expressed against one innocent person as was against our
Savior, nor was affliction ever aggravated with such grievous circumstances as
his was. He was betrayed by one of his own Disciples, betrayed by one who had
been all along a witness of his mighty Works, a hearer of his doctrine, a
constant partaker of those benefits which he so freely bestowed on all;
betrayed by him who had so often eat at his Table; betrayed by that very action
whereby he was wont to express his homage to him. Being thus betrayed into the
hands of Sinners, they deal with him as the vilest Malefactor, they hurry him
to the high Priests house, where the Scribes and the Elders condemn him of
Blasphemy, for no other reason, but for affirming the truth to them, that he
was the Son of God, which they could not disprove. Then they go on to the most
insolent expressions of scorn and contempt of him; they spit in his face, and
buffeted him; others smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophecy
unto us, who is it that smote thee? After this infamous manner was the Son of
God treated by these unreasonable and wicked men, to whom he came to do the
greatest good, had they been capable of receiving it. Their malice did not rest
here. Though they had offered him all the vilest indignities, yet this was not
sufficient to satisfy their rage. Nothing would do that, but the shedding his
most precious and innocent blood. And because it was not in their own power to
pass the sentence of death upon him, they being now under the Roman yoke,
therefore they hasten the next morning to bring him before Pilate the Roman
Governor, to demand sentence of death from him. And here, that they might give
some plausible reason of their malice, they invent a new accusation against
him, charging him with a new kind of crime, that he was guilty of Treason,
making himself a King. When Pilate was unsatisfied with their proof of this,
they supply their want of proof with the loudness of their clamours, crying
out, Crucify him, crucify him. And because Pilate was still unwilling to
imbrue his hands with this innocent blood, demanding still a further reason of
their proceedings against him, saying, Why, what evil has he done? he gained
no other answer but importunate clamours, and they cried out the more, Let him
be crucified. And doubtless the injustice of these clamours was very evident to
Pilate; though none of the justest Judges, he was yet desirous to clear himself
of this guilt; insomuch that he washed his hands before the multitude,
protesting his innocence as to the blood of that just man, and charged them
with it. And here we may behold the strange precipitancy of these men's malice,
that rather than not obtain one single design of mischief upon the most
innocent person in the World, they wilfully devote themselves and their
posterity to ruin, crying out, His blood be upon us and our children.

O most horrid and dreadful imprecation! For who can conceive the infinite
horror of their guilt, and the terrible vengeance they called for upon
themselves, when he considers how precious and inestimable the value of that
blood was, which they was so hasty to spill? What remains now, but that having
extorted from Pilate the most unjust sentence, they should now proceed to the
execution of it? But lest his death too should want any circumstance which
might aggravate his grief and their malice, they contrived all imaginable ways
to heap more indignities upon him. Then they stripped him, and scourged him,
and mocked and put on him a Crown of Thorns, a Scarlet Robe, and a Reed in his
hand. What should I mention the further mockeries they used toward him? the
prodigious cruelty of the torments they put him to; nailing his tender hands
and feet to the Infamous Tree, and leaving the whole weight of his Body to be
supported even by those wounds. In these sad circumstances of disgrace and pain
did the HOLY JESUS suffer, which though they were the most sharp and bitter
which the wit or malice of men could invent, had yet a further aggravation,
which infinitely exceeds all that we can speak or think: for besides the
extreme violence of his bodily pains, besides the most barbarous indignities
and affronts offered to him, there was yet a far greater weight of sorrow hung
upon his soul, than his enemies could bring upon him: the burden of our sins
then lay heavy upon him, and the weight of our iniquity pressed his soul down;
and this we may easily conceive was the true cause of that bitter agony and
bloody sweat which he was in before apprehension. This was that which, while he
hung upon the Cross, made him cry out in the bitterness of his Spirit, My God,
my God, why have thou for saken me? And now let us look unto JESUS under these
doleful circumstances, and consider if ever sorrow was like unto his sorrow.
That we may therefore more effectually be moved to an imitation of our Savior,

Proceed we now to the second thing proposed, to consider after what manner the
HOLY JESUS demeaned himself under these Agonies; For the joy set before him, he
endured the Cross, despising the shame. In which words is expressed the
deportment of our Savior, thus much at least, that his undergoing these
calamities was free and voluntary, that he did it out of choice, for the joy
set before him. But what is wanting in the Text may easily be supplied out of
other places in holy Scripture: Isaiah liij. 7. The Prophet describing the
manner of his sufferings tells us, He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet
he opened not his mouth. He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a
Sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. Which
prediction was so exactly and punctually fulfilled by him, as nothing could be
more. For notwithstanding all the heavy pressures that lay on him, who ever
heard one murmuring or discontented word, one least complaint against the
method of Gods dealing with him? But in the most bitter circumstances of all,
though he prayed for a deliverance from the evils he felt, and from those he
foresaw were ready to ensue; yet this was done with the most perfect
resignation of himself to his Fathers will, Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. Our Savior
was not of that sort of men, who pretend to be unmoved by any pain or trouble.
His patience was no stupid insensibility of the things he felt; no, he was of
as tender sense as other men, and the pains he felt were such as would have
disturbed the evenness of the stoutest Stoic, awakened the most resolute. But
in this the eminency of our Saviors patience appeared, that notwithstanding
the Agonies he felt were so full of anguish and sorrow, he could yet in the
midst of these tortures entirely submit himself to his heavenly Fathers will,
saying, Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy
will be done. Nor are the instances of our Saviors patience less remarkable,
which he showed in his behavior toward men. For notwithstanding those many
affronts and indignities which were offered to him from that ungrateful people
the Jews, notwithstanding all the malice and violence they pursued him with, he
never uttered one angry or revengeful word against them. When he was reviled,
he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously. Nay, so far was he from making any least
return to those many injuries he received from them, that even in the midst of
his affliction, in that unconceivable anguish which he felt hanging upon the
Cross, he omitted not to pray for forgiveness for them, saying, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do. After this manner did the HOLY JESUS
suffer, bearing all reproaches and indignities from men with the greatest
meekness, answering not a word to all their calumnies; bearing the most
piercing and violent pains with the greatest patience and submission to his
Fathers Will; and this he did as S. Peter tells us, Leaving us an Example, that
we should follow his steps. Which leads me to the third thing to be considered,
the Influence of our Saviors Example to engage us in imitation of him; and
this will appear many ways.

1. If we consider the greatness of those sufferings which our Savior
underwent; they were such as infinitely exceed all that we can possibly be
exposed to, as may appear by what has been already said. If therefore God was
pleased to lay so great a burden upon his beloved Son, in whom he was
well-pleased, and if the Son of God were willing cheerfully to endure such
bitter things, because he knew it was his heavenly Fathers will, and that
otherwise the Scriptures could not be fulfilled; how unreasonable must it needs
be for us to murmur and repine at those lesser afflictions, which God may call
us to; and yet, alas, how apt are we to complain and murmur at every little
accident and disappointment that befalls us here? How forward are we to
complain of the unequal distribution of humane affairs, and to think ourselves
hardly dealt with? and though possibly we do not make complaint directly
against Heaven, nor call in question the justice of Gods providence toward us,
yet the instruments of his providence, the men he suffers to afflict us, seldom
escape our severest censure.

But now to qualify our minds in these cases, and to restrain our too
passionate resentments of the injuries we meet with, let us take the Apostles
advice, and look unto Jesus; what he suffered and after what manner. Are any of
those affronts and indignities that have been offered us, in the least degree
answerable to those contumelious usages which the HOLY JESUS was exposed to?
Are any of our calamities comparable to those bitter pains which he endured
upon the Cross? Or is there any sorrow can so deeply affect our soul, as that
unconceivable anguish of his did, which made him cry out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? but yet notwithstanding the infinite weight of his
afflictions, the piercing violence of his pain, we find not the least syllable
of complaint proceed from him against this proceeding of his Father toward
him; no word of reproach or resentment against his most barbarous and
implacable Enemies. Let us therefore look unto JESUS under these circumstances,
and then we cannot but be sensible how ill it becomes us who pretend to be his
Disciples, and call our selves by his name, to be so angry and impatient under
those light afflictions we are called to.

2. Our Saviors Sufferings have this farther influence to engage us in
imitation of his Patience, because the perfect innocence of his life had
merited none of those things. He knew no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth. He was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners: And
therefore might justly have claimed exemption from those miseries he
under-went, and have withdrawn his shoulders from bearing the heavy burden
which it pleased his Father to lay on him. If he therefore when he might have
avoided those calamities that befell him, when he could have called for more
than twelve Legions of Angels to rescue him from his danger, chose rather to
submit to all those indignities he foresaw would be heaped upon him in
obedience to his heavenly Father; how much rather ought we without repining
quietly to sit down under the afflicting hand of God? we, who can suffer
nothing in this World so grievous which we have not deserved; we, whose sins do
every day provoke Gods indignation against us. What rational Plea can we have,
why God should not use the most severe chastisements upon us? And certainly, if
God spared not his own Son, but gave him up to those calamities he had not
deserved; we have all the reason in the World to submit to him, notwithstanding
any trouble he brings upon us; and to take up the confession of the penitent
Thief upon the Cross, We indeed suffer justly, for we receive the due reward of
our deeds, but the HOLY JESUS had done nothing amiss.

3. A further Argument which the consideration of our Saviors Sufferings
suggests to us, to engage us to a like patient submission to the will of God,
may be taken from the end and design of his Sufferings, which was the greatest
design of goodness and love to us, that could be undertaken: and therefore
ought to engage us to a suitable return of obedience and love to him, though it
were to die for his sake as he did for ours, and to suffer the most severe
Trials that it shall please him to appoint us to undergo. When all mankind,
like Sheep, had gone astray, when they had all sinned, and come short of the
glory of God; and made themselves liable to the utmost severity of his anger
and justice; when we were dead in trespasses and sins, and were in no capacity
to help our selves, or contrive our own recovery; then it pleased the Son of
God out of his tender compassion and inimitable love to mankind, to come down
from heaven the habitation of Glory, to take upon him our flesh, to submit to
all the miseries and sorrows of humane life; and lastly to suffer the most
painful and ignominious death of the Cross, to redeem us from the bondage and
dominion of sin, and from the dreadful effects of it, and to make us capable of
life and salvation. Blessed Lord! what was man, that thou should be so
mindful of him? what is the Son of man that thou should so regard him, as to
debase thy self in such a manner, and to submit to all the vilest indignities,
and most unsupportable pains, to rescue him from that misery which by his own
wilful and unreasonable choice he had brought upon himself.

O the inestimable riches of love which the HOLY JESUS expressed toward us in
these his sufferings! and now what shall we render for all his goodness! is
there any thing which we can be unwilling to do for the sake of him, who has
done and suffered so much for us? We see then that the obligation of our
Saviors example to engage us to follow him in the patient suffering those
calamities that befall us, is very plain and evident, because his Sufferings
were undertaken for our sake and benefit, and he requires this testimony of our
love and gratitude for so unspeakable mercy toward us, that we also should
take up our Cross cheerfully, and follow him wheresoever we are called to it.

4. The consideration of our Saviors Sufferings and Death, are a further
Argument to a like Patience under and submission to the will of God, because
they are a strong evidence of that future reward that is prepared for those who
continue faithful to the end, and run with patience the Christian Race set
before them. Our Savior while he was yet alive promised many Blessings and
Rewards to his Disciples and Followers, most of which were to have their
accomplishment in another life: in the mean time he foretold them, that in this
World they should have tribulation, and that they must be always ready to
forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, yea and
their own lives also, if they would be his Disciples. However, that there was a
certain reward laid up for them in Heaven, which they should not fail to
partake of, if they continued steadfast in this Faith, and finished their course
with patience. Now our Savior could give no greater evidence of the truth of
those promises he made to them, and of the sincerity of his intentions in
pressing this duty of Patience under Sufferings, than that he himself was
willing to go before them in this so painful and laborious an enterprise, and
to endure the worst of those evils which he foretold should befall them in
prospect of the joy set before him, which he promised they should partake of.
Had he not undoubted assurance of the truth of those things he spoke to his
Disciples, he would not doubtless have exposed himself to so many hazards for
affirming them; but the assurance he had was strong and convincing, such as he
knew he could not be mistaken in. And therefore in John xvij. 2. he speaks of
his own power, which he was to receive upon account of his sufferings, with the
same assurance, as though it had been already accomplished. Thou have given him
power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have
given him. This our Savior spoke before his Passion, which argued a mighty
confidence he had that he should receive this reward of his humiliation and
Sufferings, that he should give eternal life to as many as his Father had given
him; and this was that joy set before him, expressed in the latter clause of
the Verse by his sitting down at the right hand of the throne of God, in
prospect of which he endured the Cross, despising the shame. And we have all
the reason in the World to believe that he who could endure so much ignominy,
shame and pain, for the obtaining this Reward, was both sufficiently certain of
the reality of it, that it would be made good to him upon the accomplishment of
his Sufferings; and likewise that this joy set before him was of inestimable
value, and far exceeding those tribulations and sorrows he undertook in order
to it. And lastly, that he could not deceive his Followers with the promise of
an imaginary Joy, since he did himself endure such real and unexpressible pains
to obtain it for, and confirm it to them.

The sum of this Argument is briefly this: Our blessed Savior endured the
Cross, despising the shame in full assurance of the certainty of the Joy set
before him, and of the inestimable value of it above the proportion of his
Sufferings; and therefore that we also ought to imitate his Patience, being
well assured by his Example, that the light afflictions of this life, which
endure but a moment, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall
be revealed; and that if we suffer with the HOLY JESUS we shall be also
glorified together.

Thus far have I endeavored to represent the force of the Apostles Argument
from the Sufferings of our Savior to engage us to imitate his Patience, and to
suffer with him when Gods calls us to it; but we must not confine the influence
of our Saviors Sufferings to this single duty.

The Race set before us, mentioned in the former Verse, may fairly be
understood of the whole Course of a Christian Conversation; and our Saviors
Sufferings and Death have doubtless a very great efficacy to oblige us not
only to the patient enduring Afflictions and Calamities, but to an universal
and impartial obedience to the will of God. For with what face can we look up
unto JESUS, and consider the intolerable weight of sorrow which he endured for
the sins of men, and not be ashamed and blush again to be guilty of any of
those sins, which put the Son of God to such shame and pain? Or how can we call
to mind his boundless compassion and love to us in enduring such things for our
sake, without being effectually moved to render to him all possible
demonstration of our thankfulness and love for all his benefits? Which we
cannot better express, than by a sincere and constant obedience to the precepts
of the Gospel, and by walking before him in all holiness and godliness of
living. Which that we may all do, God of his infinite mercy grant, for the sake
and merits of our blessed Savior; to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
be all honor, and praise, and glory, henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON. VI.
1 COR. v. 10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.


ONe great privilege and perfection of Mankind, whereby they are distinguished
from, and far excel the Beasts that perish is this; that whereas other
Creatures are either wholly determined in their actions, by outward and
necessary causes, or at least are led on by those objects only which are
present, and work immediately upon their senses, without any prospect of, or
regard to future and remote events; Men only by comparing causes and effects
are able to make an estimate and value of future good and evil, and accordingly
to determine their present actions and choice, in proportion to those ends
which they propose to themselves; and therefore though all men naturally seek
after good, and are averse to those things which are painful and unpleasant;
yet if they are well assured that what is now pleasing and delightful to them,
will be the certain cause of future and more lasting evils than can be
recompensed by any present and transitory pleasure. This consideration to those
that use their reason is sufficient to put a check to, and divert them from any
present enjoyments, which will in the event be dangerous and hurtful. On the
contrary, by the same principle men may be encouraged to undergo many
difficulties and hardships, if they can be convinced that their present
sufferings shall be recompensed with a suitable reward and satisfaction for the
time to come. And therefore no kind of Arguments are more naturally fitted to
persuade men to the practice of Virtue and Goodness, and to discourage them
from the contrary ways of Sin and Wickedness, than a due consideration of those
several ends which they lead to, and of those Rewards and Punishments which
will be the unavoidable events of them. And accordingly no kind of persuasions
are more frequent in the Gospel, than those which are taken from an expectation
of a judgment to come, and from those incomparable rewards which will then be
the portion of the Righteous, and the unspeakable miseries which will be the
lot of the Wicked and Disobedient. And this is that which the Apostle
particularly insists on in this place, as the ground of his persuasions, We
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive
the things done in his body, according to that which is done, whether it be
good or bad. Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. In
these words there are many circumstances of great weight and moment, worthy of
our most serious consideration; which I shall briefly represent to you.

1. Here is the certainty of a Judgment to come, declared in these words, We
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

2. Here is the person before whom we must appear, it is the Judgment Seat of
Christ. He, who was before our Mediator and Advocate, who came to redeem us
from our iniquities, and to make us capable of being happy in another life,
will then be our Judge, and will actually dispense those rewards he promised to
those, for whom they are prepared, and will also be the severe avenger of those
who would not be reclaimed.

3. Here are expressed the persons that must appear. We, we the same men that
are now alive in the body, though our earthly tabernacles be dissolved, though
our bodies die and see corruption, yet we our selves must again appear. The
same Almighty power, which at first framed us in our Mothers Wombs, and
curiously fashioned all the parts of our body, though they be dissolved into
dust and variously scattered over the earth, will again restore them to life,
and we shall again appear, the same men that we were before: For we must appear
and no other.

4. Here is expressed the universality of the appearance, We must all appear;
all men that ever lived or shall live upon the Earth, high or low, rich or
poor, no order or degree of men excepted, we must all then make our appearance.

5. There is something considerable in the appearance it self. Doctor Hammond
interprets the Phrase, We must appear, only with analogy to Tribunals of
Justice among men; that as Prisoners at the Bar are wont to be set in a
conspicuous place in order to their Trial; so we also must give our appearance
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. But the word (...) has a more important
signification, and must be understood not only of our being actually present
at Gods Tribunal, but we must appear or be made manifest, as the same word is
interpreted in the following Verse; and then the Apostle means thus much, that
all our hidden actions and secret designs, which are now undiscovered by men,
shall then at the Judgment Seat of Christ be made manifest and laid open to us
before God and all his holy Angels. We have now many ways to hide our selves,
and to disguise our actions from the knowledge of men; we can now put on the
Mask and Garb of a Righteous man, and appear as such to the World, when our
hearts are full of wickedness and deceit: but at the Judgment of the Great Day
all these arts will avail us nothing; our false pretenses will then be
discovered, our disguise pulled off, our hypocrisy made visible and manifest,
inasmuch as all things are naked and open before him, with whom we have to do:
and we must all appear.

6. Here is the method that will be used at the Judgment Seat of Christ, Every
one shall receive the things done in the body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad.

7. Here is the use S. Paul makes of all these considerations, Knowing
therefore these terrors of the Lord: and being assured how dreadful this
appearance and the event of it will be, we persuade men that they would now
behave themselves as men that must then appear; but to insist particularly on
all these circumstances, would be too large an Exercise of your Patience. I
shall therefore confine my Discourse to these three things.

1. I shall endeavor to remind you of those grounds and reasons by which we
may be assured of a Judgment to come; that we must appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ.

2. I shall consider the method of proceeding at the Day of Judgment, Every man
shall receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad.

3. I shall draw some inferences that may be of use to us in the government of
our lives. First of the truth and certainty of a Judgment to come. And this
will appear upon these following accounts.

1. From the dictates and testimony of our own Conscience. 2. From the Nature
of God and his Attributes. 3. From the concurrent testimony and belief of all
Nations. 4. From the particular revelation of this truth in holy Scripture.
1. If we look into the secrets of our own souls, and examine the natural
powers we are endued with, they will afford us great evidence that there is a
Judgment to come, when we shall be called to account for our actions here, and
be rewarded or punished according to them. The knowledge of good and evil, and
the obligation to do one and eschew the other, is naturally written in the Soul
of Man; nor can any man be wicked without violence to his own reason and best
faculties. Every man bears about with him a secret Monitor in his bosom, which
upon the temptations to evil does faithfully forewarn him of it; and upon the
commission of evil does afflict his soul with a sense of guilt, and with a
fearful expectation of punishment due upon it. On the contrary, there is a
secret joy and satisfaction naturally springs up in the soul of a good man,
which is an exceeding support and comfort to him in the discharge of his duty;
which enables him to bear many difficulties and oppositions which oft-times
attend him in the practice of Virtue; his conscience breeding in him a strong
confidence and assurance of some future recompense for his good deeds. Now that
conscience is thus active and busy to forewarn men of the evil which they are
about to do, and to set before them in order the evils they have done, and to
support them in doing good, every man, that gives himself the leisure to attend
to the motions of his own mind, may be convinced by his own experience. Or if
we would rather learn from the experience of others, it were easy to produce a
crowd of Witnesses, which give us large descriptions of the unsupportable
burden a troubled spirit, and the great comfort and security of a conscience
void of offense. And now would we know the true ground and foundation of those
hopes and fears, which the conscience naturally suggests to us according to our
actions whether good or bad, there is no sufficient reason of them can be
assigned but this, that they are the voice of God and Nature forewarning us of
another state after this; when all men shall be recompensed according to that
they have done here. For that the fears and disquiets of a guilty conscience
are indeed the effects of Nature, and are not grounded upon the apprehension of
temporal punishment, or of the Laws of men, as some vainly suppose, is
sufficiently evident in that those persons, who have been beyond the reach and
above the fears of any earthly Tribunal, have yet been the greatest examples of
this force of conscience. The Story of Caligula is in every bodies mouth, and
is indeed a signal instance of this truth. He, who was possessed with so
unlimited a Sovereignty over a great part of the Known World, and exercised his
power with so extravagant a cruelty, was yet upon every flash of Lightning and
clap of Thunder awakened to a sense and fearful apprehension of the power and
justice of that God, whom at other times he was wont to defy. But not to dwell
upon a single instance, a further evidence that these Fears are the effects of
Nature, may be gathered from hence, that the sting of conscience is most
remarkable in those actions, which are done in secret and far removed from the
knowledge of men. For though we seek the darkest retirements, where no mortal
eye can trace our steps, or behold our doings, yet there our conscience is as a
thousand Witnesses, continually upbraiding us with what we have done, and
afflicting us with terrors, which can proceed from nothing else but from a
secret conviction of soul that there is a God, whose power and knowledge
reaches to all places, even to our most secret retirements, and who will one
day bring upon us punishments proportionable to our deservings. I will not
insist longer upon this Argument, than to take notice that S. Paul himself
seems to urge it to this very purpose, Romans ij. 14. when speaking of the
Gentiles to whom God had made no particular revelation of his will as he had to
the Jews, yet notwithstanding he tells us, that they also should be judged as
others were; inasmuch as they had the law of conscience written in their
hearts, and had from thence sufficient reason to expect that God would call
them to account for the violation of it, and reward those who did obey it. The
Gentiles, which have not the law, are a law unto them- selves, and show the
work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness,
and their thoughts the mean time accusing, or else excusing one another, in the
day when God shall judge the secrets of all men.

2. Besides the dictates and testimony of our own mind, if we consider the
Nature of God and his Attributes, together with our necessary dependence on
him, this will give us further assurance that there is a further judgment to be
expected. God, who gave us our being, and does continually preserve and support
us in it, who has endued us with so many excellent perfections above other
Creatures, has certainly the justest right to our obedience and service. And
accordingly he has given Laws to Mankind for the government of our lives, Laws
agreeable to his own nature, Laws that are holy, and just, and good; and that
none should plead ignorance of these Laws, he has as was observed, written
them in their souls, and stamped upon them sufficient evidence of their divine
authority and obligation. And can we think the All-wise Creator has done all
this in vain? Can we persuade our selves that these divine impressions upon our
soul, these notices of the will of God were implanted in our nature to no
purpose at all? No surely, the natural promulgation of the divine Laws is alone
sufficient evidence that he expects and requires obedience to them; and that
according to our observance or neglect of them, he will one day either reward
or punish us. One of the first and most natural notions of God is, that he is a
rewarder of the good and virtuous. And this belief S. Paul requires as
antecedent to all religious worship of him. He that comes to God must believe,
that he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him. And if we must believe
him a rewarder of the good, we must upon the same ground of Reason believe,
that he is also a punisher of the bad. Now if we look abroad into the World, it
is easy to observe, that the distribution of humane affairs in this life, has
very little appearance of that universal and impartial Justice, which we have
reason to believe God will exercise toward the Sons of men. It is very plain,
that many men suffer in this World for their virtue and integrity; and that
others to the contrary, raise themselves to a great degree of prosperity by
wickedness and oppression. When therefore we see some men prosper in their
Villainy, others afflicted for their Piety, what can we conclude, but that the
Judge of all the Earth has appointed another time and place wherein he will
judge the World in Righteousness, and recompense all men according to their
deserving? It is true indeed, God does many times in this life exert his power
in the punishment of some notorious Villainies. There are many remarkable
revolutions which happen in the World, which carry with them very signal
evidence of a divine Providence and Power presiding over humane affairs. But
the instances of this kind, are very few in comparison with the great
wickedness of Mankind: and therefore we are not to look upon the judgments that
befall men in this life, as the complete execution of the divine Vengeance;
only that they are so many remembrancers to awaken men into a sense of that
justice, which will one day equally appear to all. God is pleased many times to
make his power known in the exemplary punishment of some men in this life,
sometimes for their own amendment that they may escape the Wrath to come;
sometimes for examples to others, that they may see it and fear, and remember
that the MOST HIGH rules among the children of men; but still the full
execution of his justice is reserved to another life: and there we must expect
that he will bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good or bad.

3. A further evidence of a Judgment to come may be taken from the concurrent
testimony and belief of all Nations. The many Religions of the Heathen, though
disagreeing infinitely in other things, yet do all consent in this belief, that
there is another state after this, when all men shall be rewarded or punished
as they have done in this. Hence arose the many Fables of their Poets
concerning the punishment men underwent in Hell, and their descriptions of
Elyzium, which they supposed to be the seat of happy souls, who had lived here
holy and innocent. Hence it was that those good Heathens, who were conscious to
themselves of having lived up to the light they had, were so undaunted and
courageous at the approach of death, being firmly persuaded that their souls
should overlive their bodies, and that they should enjoy the presence of God,
and the society of good and virtuous men that had gone before them. Thus
Pythagoras taught his Scholars, that if they lived virtuously here, when they
came to leave the body they should go to Heaven, and become like God, and
should be no more liable to death. Thus Socrates said of himself when he was
going to die, that he should go to a just God, and to men better than any
living; and that after death it was much better with good men than with the
bad. Many expressions to this purpose may be gathered from the Writings of the
ancient Heathens, which are sufficient intimation of this belief, that there
were rewards and punishments to be expected in another life, according to our
actions whether good or bad. Now that this belief and expectation of a future
state should be thus firmly received by all the several Parties in Religion, by
men of all Nations and Sects, though they disagreed infinitely in other things,
must be grounded upon some certain Principles of Reason which are common to all
men, or else must be the effect of some early revelation made by God in the
beginning, before the several Nations were dispersed over the Earth. Which of
these may be the true account of this universal consent in this matter, it is
not easy to determine; but whichsoever it be, the inference will be certain,
that there is a Judgment to come, because all Nations have agreed in the
expectation of it. For if they agreed in this Persuasion from the force of
natural Principles, there can be no greater evidence of the truth of any
rational deduction, than that all men that use their reason should argue alike,
and agree in the same conclusion; and could such an Argumentation deceive, we
could have little encouragement to believe any thing upon the testimony of our
Faculties.

Again, If this were the effect of some early revelation made to men when they
were yet few in number, and retained in the dispersion of Nations, and still
preserved, notwithstanding the gross ignorance they fell into, as to other
matters. This must be a great evidence of the clearness and evidence of that
revelation at first, and must consequently much confirm us in the belief of it.
And indeed it is not improbable that the rational Evidences of this Truth of a
Judgment to come, might have been confirmed to the first Ages of the World by
some divine revelations, which were communicated to all, and thence derived and
propagated through all the several Religions and Superstitions which afterward
were entertained by the Heathen World.

It is not to be doubted but that Noah understood this Truth, and would not
fail to instruct his Family, which were all humane souls that were left alive,
in so necessary a matter which might have so great influence upon them to keep
them in obedience to God, who had so lately delivered them from so universal a
destruction. Nay, there is still extant the remainder of a Prophecy concerning
a Judgment to come much ancienter than the Flood. This we find cited by Saint
Jude 14. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied, saying, Behold the
Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all, and
to convince all that are ungodly, of all their ungodly deeds which they have
ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him.

And this leads me to the last and most undeniable evidence of this truth,

4. The particular revelation of it in holy Scripture; but the testimonies of
this Truth, that there is a Judgment to come, are so frequent in the Writings
of the Evangelists and Apostles, that it were altogether needless to recite
them to you. Every one that has heard of the Gospel, must understand that is
one chief Article of our Christian Profession. Nothing more plainly revealed,
nothing more frequently inculcated, than that we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ.

I proceed therefore to the second thing proposed, The Method of proceeding at
that day, Every one shall receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad.

That the good or evil of men's actions in this life, is the rule and measure
according to which they shall be judged at the great day; that they who have
done good, shall receive the good they have done; and they who have done evil,
shall receive according to that likewise; is a Truth so fully and plainly
taught in holy Scripture, that one would think men could not easily mistake or
deceive themselves in this matter. For

1. It is very plain, that no other way of proceeding can be agreeable to the
Purity and Justice of the Divine Nature. The righteous God loves
righteousness, and his countenance will behold the the thing that is just; and
he is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. The righteous therefore, and they
only can be capable of reward from him, when he comes to judge the Earth: and
the wicked and unrighteous, and they only must be the objects of his wrath and
vengeance. To do otherwise than so, and to invert this method, would be a
contradiction to all the divine Attributes, and to all the Methods whereby God
has made himself known to the Sons of men. And therefore the Author of the
Book of Wisdom says thus to the Almighty, Wisd. xij. 15. For as much as thou
art righteous thy self, thou orderest all things righteously, thinking it not
agreeable to thy power to condemn him who has not deserved to be punished. To
which we may also add, That it is not agreeable to his Purity and Justice, to
reward the unrighteous and disobedient.

And therefore we may observe, That in all the methods of Gods dealings with
the Sons of men, he has all along declared the greatest abhorrence of sin and
wickedness, and the greatest severity against those that continued in the
commission of it. It was Sin only that brought Misery and Death into the
World. For by one man's disobedience sin entered into the World, and death by
sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. And when God
was pleased out of his infinite mercy and compassion to contrive the way of our
recovery, and to send his Son into the World for our Redemption, he would not
admit us to terms of Peace and Reconciliation without the greatest
demonstration of his justice and severity against sin; and that in the
Sufferings of his only begotten Son. For he was made sin for us, who know no
sin; he bore our griefs and carried our sorrows; he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, by his stripes we are
healed. Now we are not to persuade our selves that our Saviors sufferings in
our stead can be available to us, or free us from the punishment of our sins,
while we continue in them. For he bare our sins in his own body on the tree,
for no other end, but that we being dead to sin might live unto righteousness;
that so being saved from our sins here, we might be saved from the Wages of
them hereafter. And therefore Saint Paul tells us, that the grace of God has
appeared to all men to bring salvation, no otherwise than by teaching us to
deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly, and
godly in this present World. Thus if we consider the nature of God, and his
dealings with Mankind, we cannot but expect, that when he comes to judge the
World, he will judge according to righteousness: They who have done good shall
be rewarded by him, and they who have done evil shall receive a due recompense
of their evil deeds.

2. This is further evident from the several promises and threatenings in
Scripture, which are all along made use of as Arguments to persuade us to the
practice of righteousness and true holiness, and to discourage and dissuade us
from sin and wickedness; which it were in vain to do, if the promises of the
Gospel can be due to any but upon condition of their obedience; or if the Wrath
to come could be avoided any otherwise than by forsaking those sins to which it
is threatened. Thus Saint Paul argues from the promises of the Gospel, 2 Cor.
vij. 1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear
of God. Thus again S. Peter i. 4. tells, That by the Gospel there are given
unto us great and precious promises, that by these ye may be partakers of the
Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through Lust,
and besides this, giving all diligence, add to your Faith, Virtue; and to
Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience;
and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; and to
Brotherly Kindness, Charity. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you
effectually into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Now these and the like Exhortations would be of no force at all to persuade us,
if these promises could be attained without the performance of these conditions.

In a word, in all the descriptions of a Judgment to come, there is nothing
plainer than this that I now plead for; that God will reward every one
according to what he has done. I shall mention but two places more. Romans ij.
6. God will render to every man according to his deeds; to them, who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every
soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentiles: For
there is no respect of persons with God. The other place is Mat. xxv. where our
Savior having given us a large description of those good Works which shall
then be rewarded, and having there represented the vanity of those men's excuses
who had not wrought them, he concludes with this sentence, these shall go away
into everlasting punishment, and the righteous into life eternal.

There remains only to draw some inferences from what has been said, that may
be of use to us for the government of our lives.

1. If there be a Judgment to come, wherein men shall receive rewards and
punishments according to their actions, whether good or bad; it is easy then
to understand how much those men deceive themselves, who hope to be saved by
virtue of any absolute and inconditionate decree. For if God have from eternity
foreordained such and such particular persons to eternal life, and others to
eternal damnation, without any consideration of their actions, whether good or
bad, then certainly God cannot proceed in judgment according to the method
before described, nor could the promises and threatenings of the Gospel have any
force of persuasion to engage men in the practice of Virtue, or to discourage
them from Sin and Wickedness. In vain would the Apostle here make use of the
terrors of the Lord to persuade men, if God have before determined, that such
a certain number of them shall not escape the wrath to come, whatsoever
diligence they use on their parts. On the contrary, the promises of the Gospel
cannot have any reasonable force to engage men to obedience, if once they knew
and believed that their future state was from everlasting unalterably fixed, so
that they could not fall short of it by any neglect. Nay, upon this supposition
all the various methods of persuasion, which God uses in Scripture to bring men
to repentance and a better life, prove nothing else but illusion and
hypocrisy. For that God should so often by his holy Prophets and Apostles
invite and exhort and beseech all men, that they would turn from their evil
ways and live, when in the mean time he has excluded many myriads of men from
any possibility of salvation by an absolute and irresistible decree, which no
endeavor of theirs can revoke or cancel; this way of proceeding cannot by any
means consist with that truth and sincerity, and goodness, which is inseparable
from the divine nature. We must therefore conclude, that if there be a Judgment
to come, when all men shall receive rewards and punishments according to what
they have done, then certainly no man shall ever be excluded from those rewards
but by his own fault; nor yet any man obtain the same, but by a due diligence
in working out his salvation, and performing those conditions upon which they
are promised.

2. From what has been said concerning the method of Gods proceeding at the
Judgment of the last Day, we may also observe that those men do extremely
mistake the conditions of salvation, who talk of being saved by Faith, as it is
distinguished from good works and obedience; who take so much pains to cry down
the value of our good works, as though they had little or no influence in the
justification or salvation of a Christian. For surely if we shall be judged
according to what we have done, Faith alone cannot be the whole condition
required on our parts in order to our salvation. It is true indeed, glorious
things are spoken of Faith in holy Scripture, but these things must not be
understood of a bare assent to the truth of the Gospel, which is the proper
importance of that word Faith; but of such a Faith as is a principle of life
and action, such a Faith as has influence upon the whole course of our lives,
and is not contradicted by our practice and conversation; a Faith that works
by love and is fruitful of good works and obedience. Thus it is not to be
considered as a single Virtue and separate from the rest, but as being the
fruitful parent of all other Christian Virtues, and including them in it. For
if we understand Faith in a more strict sense, as distinct from an holy
conversation, it is no more than the Devils themselves may pretend to; and yet
this is so far from being any relief to them, that it is the great aggravation
of their misery. To know and be assured of the glorious things revealed in the
Gospel, and to know withal that they themselves are finally excluded from the
benefit of them; this doubtless is a mighty aggravation of their horror, and
we may well conclude as S. James does, that they believe and tremble, nay that
this belief does make them tremble.

3. If we shall be judged according to what we have done in the body, it then
follows, that all that is to be done by us in the great work of our Salvation,
must be performed in our life time, whilst we are in the body. Now must we
give all diligence to make our calling and election sure, and not leave any
thing to be done after our death, either by our selves or others. This I
observe in opposition to that Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which supposes
that some sins are expiated after death, and purged away by the fire of
Purgatory, and by the Prayers and Sacrifices of those that are left alive. But
this is not only a vain and groundless opinion, but certainly does much tend
to the hindrance of Piety, and lessening men's care of their future state. As
the Tree falls so it lies. As a man goes out of this World, such will be
his future state; and he will be judged according to what he was when he left
the body, according to what he had done in the body.

4. If it be thus certain that we must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, this certainly
ought to awaken our diligence in the business of our Salvation; that to day,
while it is called to day, we break off our sins by a sincere and hearty
repentance; that knowing the terrors of the Lord, we pass the time of our so
journing here in fear. For surely did men seriously consider that there is a
day coming, when all the hidden works of darkness shall be made manifest, when
the secrets of all men's hearts shall be revealed, when all the close impieties
which had passed here undiscerned, should be laid open before God and all the
World; they would not now so fondly flatter themselves with hopes of secrecy
or impunity. Did men seriously reflect upon the terribleness of that great day.
when God shall appear with ten thousand of his Saints to take vengeance on them
that have not feared his name, did they often think upon that dreadful sentence
which will then be pronounced against all impenitent sinners, Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; this
certainly, if any thing, would put a check to the bold impiety of this Age. Men
would not then dare so openly to defy Heaven, and blaspheme the Majesty of the
great God, who will at that day appear so terrible, nor would they continue by
their hardness and impenitent hearts, to treasure up to themselves wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God.

On the contrary, as the terrors of that day ought to make us sensible of our
danger, if we continue in disobedience, so the glorious reward which shall at
that day be given to those that have lived obediently to the will of God, ought
to be a most effectual motive to persuade us thereunto. For what greater
encouragement to our duty, than the consideration of those great and glorious
things which God has prepared for them that love him? Who would not willingly
forsake all the flattering joys and transitory pleasures of this life, that he
may secure to himself such an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades
not away, which God the righteous Judge shall give him at that day? Or who
would not despise all the sufferings of this life, which may possibly attend
him in the practice of his duty, when he remembers that these light
afflictions, which endure but for a moment, work out for him a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory?

Now the great God grant us all his grace, that we may have the judgment of the
last day always present to our minds, that denying all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world,
looking for that blessed hope and glorious appearance of the great God and our
Savior Jesus Christ: that when we come to stand before that great Tribunal, we
may be presented pure and unblamable in his sight; and that not for any merits
of our own, but through the mediation of our blessed Savior: To whom, with the
Father, and Eternal Spirit be ascribed, as is most due, all power, praise,
thanksgiving, and obedience, for evermore.

FINIS.

