A DISCOURSE Concerning SCHOOLS And Schoolmasters Offered to public
Consideration.

By M. N.

LONDON, Printed for H. H. Anno Dom. 1663.

A Discourse concerning Schools, and Schoolmasters, Offered to public
Consideration.
THat the Education of Youth is one of the greatest concernments of the Nation,
is a Truth so obvious to every ordinary understanding, that I shall not need to
insist upon the proof of it. Since it is plain, that the Scholastic State lays
the groundwork and foundation of the other three States, viz. Oeconomical,
Ecclesiastical, and Political; wherein the Societies take their measures of
goodness and felicity, from the nature of those Methods which were used and
that success which has bin obtained in Schools; all persons generally behaving
themselves in their several stations, (which providence fixes them in)
according to those Principles their childhood was first seasoned with, and that
improvement of parts and manners they brought from thence. What is it that
furnishes Families with dutiful children, industrious servants, discreet
Masters? that supplies the Church with able Teachers, devout Hearers? that
keeps Subjects in obedience to their Prince, in a quiet and just demeanor
toward one another; but the powerful impressions of an early Institution,
which being once well settled grow into habits, and become cor-natural to the
temper and very constitution of the mind, not to be removed without great
violence, and the continued efforts of ill company and constant debauches or
diabolical infusions. Again, it is no less observable, that it is every man's care
and main design, to provide well for his children after him, and to transmit
happiness to his posterity: and this care is visible enough in their leaving
honors and estates many times purchased with their own disquiet and sin to
boot. Now let me ask, what those Legacies of the Parents love will avail, what
the laws themselves, which by bounding property are to secure those estates to
them, will signify; if our Children that are to succeed us, are not rightly
principled in Piety and Obedience and the rules of honesty, and so prepared to
a due observance of those Laws; which if not kept by them as well as us, all
our care and provision for them will come to naught, and the next age that
treads upon our heels, if let loose to licentious or factious practices and
opinions, cannot but ruin all the benefits of our Peace, and the interests of
our Religion; with this advantage, that their Predecessors must bear the blame
of those miscarriages which proceeded from a neglected education of their
children. Nay, I shall appeal to the Story of our late villainous changes,
whether a few phanatick ill-principled spirits may not get partly power to
destroy, partly credit to corrupt the rest of their fellow subjects from known
rules of duty; as frequently those currs, which spend upon a wrong scent, are
apt to mislead the whole pack.

This being, as it is amongst all men, who guide themselves by reason, agreed
on; It may justly provoke the admiration of any considering person, that all
sorts of people should be so remiss in this point, that amongst other
provisions they seem to look upon education as the least necessary, and think
that charge lost which is spent in breeding their children; which their extreme
lavishness on other occasions and their sordid thrift in this does abundantly
testify.

Res nulla minoris
Constabit Patri, quam Filius.
Nothing shall stand the thrifty Dad
In less then the breeding of his Lad.
Not to mention those of quality, and take notice only of the rabble we meet
with in the streets; it must needs pity any Christian heart to see the little
dirty Infantry, which swarms up and down in Alleys and Lanes, with curses and
ribaldry in their mouths, and other ill rude behavior, as if they were intended
to put off their humanity, and to degenerate into brutes. What hopes may we
entertein of posterity, when the better sort are sent over to foreign Schools
of vice, to learn fashions, to court mistresses, dance a la mode and swear with
a grace; and the worser sort are sent no whither, but learn to imitate and
outdo those sorry examples they have at home.

Nor is this neglect to be charged only upon particular persons in their
private sphere; but the public also may be thought to partake in the same
guilt: when we consider it is the only way to ascertain to our posterity the
fruits of our late blessed and wonderful Restoration, and that so little has
bin done toward it, and that that little too has bin so little looked after
and observed. Indeed it must be confessed, that the Public Counsels have in
the main bin very worthy and just and industrious in ordering the great
concerns of our peace, and in re-estab^ishing the Church in its ancient Revenue
and Reverence. And something by the by has bin touched at for the Catechizing of
Youth, for the Masters abjuration of Covenant and subscription to Church
Orders. But that either so imperfectly worded, as to afford an easy evation;
or so poorly put in execution through negligence or corruption of Officers,
that the law had as good never bin made. I do not speak this with any
imputation to the Henourable Assembly of Parliament; but with some resentment
of this inadvertency bewail the fate of Schools, (which either have no patrons
or their patrons no will to assist and promote their co^cernments) and pity the
condition of posterity, which is no nearer looked to, no better provided for. It
must be acknowledged, our worthy Patriots have business enough before them, to
fill their hands and hearts, to take up their thoughts, and to employ their
discourses. But when I find grievances of a meaner alloy considered and
redressed; I could not but conclude, that they would in their wisdom have
judged (had there stood up any one to represent) School-grievances and fraud
and cozenage in that Mystery of as great and ill a Consequence to the public,
and as worthy their debate and a speedy remedy as many of those which are come
into Acts. Whereupon in the silence of all others, I thought my self obliged to
take notice of this subject, and rather to extimulate some other, who being
better acquainted with these things may make out further discoveries, then out
of any confidence of an ability in my self to speak much to purpose in a thing
of such moment, I have adventured to tender to public consideration my
unpolished thoughts concerning the ordering of Schools to the benefit and
improvement of Youth, and the advancement of Learning and Religion.

And first, to speak of Stipend: reward being the very life of action, and the
main encouragement of diligence.

Quis enim vir^utem amplectitur ipsam, praemia si tollas?
For who embraces virtue's self, If you take away the pelf?
It Is the Salary which makes Schools and Learning flourish. Chi ben paga ben
impara, says the Italian. The conscience of doing public service, and
satisfaction of discharging ones duty, is not a sufficient recompense for the
toil of teaching. In Courts of Law and equity no under-Clerk or inferior
Officers place, but may vie, for the profits of it, with the fairest pension of
any public School. Ministers themselves, who instruct us to expect future
rewards, yet without a fair present maintenance would fall into the contempt of
the vulgar, and their labors prove ineffectual. And this is the case of
Schools: no employment more publicly useful, none more toylsome and painful;
yet no one more slighted even to reproach; no one less rewarded or regarded.
It Is a great scandal to the Nation, and certainly as great a grievance (if
rightly considered) that no one sort of men are greater sufferers in this kind,
then Schoolmasters. Yet this must be said in commendation of our Ancestors,
that their provision was very competent, and that the indowment of Schools was
in proportion to the estates of those times very fair and honorable. When
workmen wrought for a penny a day; when that Land which is now worth 40. or 50.
s. an Acre, was then thought a dear bargain at ten groats; when every thing was
cheap but money; forty pound per Annum was a fair livelihood, and better then,
then 200. l. now perhaps. But what do we add to our forefathers stock? The
Trustees and Governors in the several Corporations share the Improvements
amongst themselves, take all above the Salary for lawful prize, and leave the
Master to the bare old allowance, notwithstanding the vast increase of the old
Rents. So that by this means Schools are become Impropriations, and lay men
(ignorant fellows) run away with the encouragements of Learning, and receive
the rewards of the Masters industry. This abuse would deserve the Parliaments
notice, and a severe account to be taken of the Revenues of Schools; which
might be done by requiring all Masters and Governors to give in a perfect
Inventory of School-Lands, Houses, etc. with their yearly value, and settling
accordingly an honorable Salary upon the Master, with reasonable abatement for
Repairs and the Charges of the Overseers. This course would invite men of
eminent parts and abilities into School-work; whereas now it is made the
Sanctuary of many idle insufficient persons, who have no hopes elsewhere; or by
those, which have any merit, designed a step to some Church-preferment. It
cannot then be expected, as things are, that the Schools of this Nation
(excepting some few, which are Illustrious, and of Royal Foundation) should be
in any tolerable condition.

Having taken notice of the mean support and slender maintenance, let us next
take a view of the Methods of teaching used in Schools; and see what disorders
may be met with in them. I shall not pretend to be able to judge and give
definitive Sentence, what is the best method; though we ought to have that
regard to Antiquity and the custom of former times, that we are to be very
tender, how we prefer our own novell conceits to their tried and approved
usages; and that we do constantly adhere to that method and way which their
practice, backed with public authority, has chalked out to us, till authority
do recommend another. They do almost in all Countries entertain the same
Grammar, and go by a certain rule of teaching; Despauter obtains in France,
Alvarez in Spain; and all England over heretofore, Lilly and Camden were in the
hands of Youth. And indeed there is the same reason for Uniformity in School,
as in Church: the variety of Methods (supposing they were all severally in
themselves very good) doing very much mischief, by not only distracting young
heads, and discouraging them, and putting them back upon their removes to new
Masters; but also making a fundamental difference in their course as they
proceed to other studies. I have heard that a Bishop, at an examination in a
public School, receiving an answer out of the common road, from a child, which
had come lately from a private School, made this Reply, What, says he,
Puritanism in Schools too? And so it is with us now, since these licentious
times have overthrown all order, and broken us into so many sects and factions;
the Schools have been infected with that Fanatic Itch, and like Independent
Congregations have bin variously administered by new Lights, according to the
fancy of the several Teachers, that I dare say there are as many Grammars
taught as there are Grammarians to teach, if not more. It would be well if
these loos brooms were gathered again, if not into the old, yet into some one
Model. It Is likely enough the old way may have some inconvenience, many defects
and redundancies; why may not the same course be taken by us, as by the States
of Holland, who upon such an occasion employed Vassius to revise and mend and
complete the old Grammars both Greek and Latin, which are now accordingly read
in the Low Country Schools; or, for better satisfaction, what if the
Convocation would please to order some of their number, taking to their
assistance some of the most able Masters, well experienced in teaching, either
to correct what is amiss in the old Institution, or to draw up a new body of
Rules and System of that Art, with the advantage of later inventions. It would
be a thing not unworthy the care of Churchmen, and that for which posterity
would pay thanks to their memory. Some eminent Divines in former ages have
descended to that care, Dr. Collet, Dean of Paul's, Erasmus, Card. Woolsey, etc.
In the mean time, I shall appeal to any man of sober Judgment, whether it be
consistent with the Nations good, to banish schism out of the Church, and
countenance it in Schools; and whether our English Youth, which is thus nursed
up in faction, is like to be well taught.

When the Stipends and Methods are thus established, I should further propose,
that there should be no allowance for any one whatsoever to keep a private
School upon his own account, unless it be the Clerk of the Parish, whose office
it should be (with an allowance for it) to teach all the Children of the Parish
at certain hours each day to write and read, and that by the direction and
under the inspection of the Minister; and on Saturdays to prepare the^ for
their public answering in the Church to the Catechise-question^: and that when
children are thus far instructed in their own Parish, they should be then sent
to some public School, unless the Parent were of an Estate to keep a Tutor (to
be approved by the Bishop) in his house, or were of so low a fortune, that he
could not be at the charge of breeding his Child a Scholar. For without
question many of those whiffling undertakers, that appear not in public
Stations, but venture out upon their own private bottom, besides that they
drain the public Schools, to their great hindrance and discouragement,
Citizens being easily pleased with any thing that is newfangled; may very well
be suspected to have no honest warrantable design, if they be well inquired
into. I shall readily crave pardon of any one which shall be injured in that
information which I have received; but must think my self oblig'd*in justice to
the public, to let it be understood, what ill offices may be done it (as I
have heard) in private. There are at this time about the City several Masters
of private Schools, which have bin and are still Covenanters, Presbyterians,
Non-Conformists; some of whom have been outed out of their other men's places
for Schism: who yet are encouraged by the confluence of youth from the City,
and (...) the favor of some Noble Families: One at Clapham. One at Totenham
High-Cross. One or two at Chelsey. One or two at Newington. One at least at
Hackney, etc. and so (as I am told) throughout the whole Kingdom those of that
party are designing the same course. Whether this be the fault of the
Underofficers, a sort of men that by ill execution of good Laws have always
brought an odium upon the Episcopal Authority, which imployes them, and the
sacred Order it self, upon which they depend: or whether it be the craft and
cunning of those Merchants of the Faction, who rather then sit out will play
any game, I am not able to discern; Authority may be satisfied, if it may be at
leisure but to make the inquiry. However, it has a very ill face, and portends
unluckily enough to the peace of the Nation, that there are suffered such
Seminaries of Faction, as if it were designed, that Posterity should retrive
the Good Old Cause, and the Children should carry on the Work of the Lord in
the following Generation, which has proved too hot in ours (Thanks be to God)
for the Father's fingers. Will not these suffering Brethren have a fair
Opportunity of being revenged on the Reverend Fathers of our Church, for their
severity in turning them out of unjust Livings, by training Youth to a contempt
of Church Authority and Order, and keeping on foot Nurseries (like Barksteads
Regiment) of those who may hereafter make up a Schismatical Army?

My Lords, You had much better have continued them in the Pulpit; they will do
ten times more mischief now amongst the Lambs, then they could have done
amongst the Sheep. What they did then, was like stealing of standing Corn out
of the Field, but rubbing the Ears; but what they do now, is stealing the Seed,
the next years Crop, which the Civil Law has determined to be a far greater
theft. They have sufficiently spoiled the present Age, must they now be turned
loose to spoil the next Age too? If those Spirits by their Religious canting
could carry away Men and Women from their Obedience to the Father of their
Country, and from the bosom of their Mother the Church, ah! My Lords, Are they
to be trusted with the Children? I am of Opinion, that if the Vicar General
would instead of School-Licences give them Licenses to practice Physic, he
might do the whole Nation (...) good Office: For by this means, those of their
own Tribe being the only persons that would probably make use of them, they
might in some reasonable time give a fair account of the whole Fraternity; as
we use to rid our houses of Rats, by teaching one to eat Rats flesh, and then
hanging a Bell about his neck he will never give over till he have ferreted all
the gang away. In good earnest, it would be more prudent to advise his Majesty
to allow all that have suffered in that kind, and are otherwise unprovided,
(which will not be many) a moderate Pension out of his Exchequer, then thus to
admit them to an employment, which may be of so dangerous a Consequence to the
public Peace. And whereas they pretend not to intersmeddle with the
Instruction but leave that to a little Officer, some puny Fellow they get from
the University, who may subscribe according to the Act, while themselves keep
their own Conscience free to the Godly Design: besides, that it is plain enough
what danger there is in their very Converse and Example, in their Hums and
Haws, in their Graces and Family-Exercises; it being so familiar with Men of
that Principle, to sow Sedition in their very Prayers, and to make Religion it
self a Stale to Faction: I say, besides this, it will be found upon inquiry
that they do too execute the Teaching Part, by spending considerable portions
of their time in examining and taking account how their Children profit; though
this must be said in their behalf, that for their teaching of Letters there is
not that fear of a Presbyterian's doing much mischief, seeing it may be
supposed they cannot be very comunicative of what most of them have not; but it
is believed, it was the intention of that Act to take from them the Opportunity
of spreading the Leaven of their Factious and Disloyal Opinions, which they can
more effectually do in the Duties of the Family: And it may be easily guessed
by the Relations, on what errand those Children are sent to such Masters or
Landlords, namely, that they may learn to fear God, and disobey the King and
the Church, (as their Fathers before them have done.) I am somewhat the more
earnest on this Subject, because it must be confessed, that those who were
censured unfit for Church-work, ought to be judged much less fit for the work
of the School: and if the Priests are denied to the Fathers, much more should
the Children be kept from them, unless we would verify that Proverb, that The
Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and now the Childrens teeth must be set on edge.

To come then to the last and chiefest Consideration; How Schoolmasters
themselves are to be qualified, that they may laudably perform the great Trust
and Duty which is charged upon them. What difficulties the Work has in it, to
encounter all kind of Tempers, and improve all sorts of Wits, to be ingeniorum
and morum artifices, to fashion Minds and Manners, to cultivate rude Soil, and
dispose Youth to Virtuous behavior against their Natural inclinations; what
cares and pains, what great abilities of Prudence and skill and all Virtue,
what a Cycle of Knowledge it requires to instruct others in the grounds of
Literature, to raise their Parts, to heighten their Fancy, to fix their
thoughts, and to crane their Genius to the pitch, and so prepare them for
public Service, is a thing more easily discoursed then considered, more talked
of then taken notice of. It is a great wonder of Providence, when we look on
the present Constitution of Schools, how much contempt, and how little
encouragement is shown to the Profession, that there are any able and worthy
men of that way; and sure whoever they are, it was at first not the spontaneous
Election of their own mind, but some outward necessity of Fortune, or some
other Fatality that condemned them to those Galleys, and tied them to that
Oar, seeing those that are engaged do most upon the stock of their own credit
work through the flint: So true is that,

Quem Jupiter odit, Paedagogum facit.
To whom a spite* Jove takes,
Him Paedagogue he makes.
Were Parents obliged but for some time to the trouble of instructing their
Children, (they think it trouble enough to have them in the same house;) they
would quickly be convinced, what respects were fit to be paid to him, who
undertakes such a charge, and what pardon he would deserve at their hands for
small failings, when themselves cannot secure them from great ones. But were
the forementioned course taken, of proportioning the Salaries to the
improvement of Rents, there is no question to be made, but Schools might be
well provided with gallant and able men, who might discharge that National
trust with brave success, and yet with great Splendor and much ease. Were that
done, young Scholars at the University would prepare themselves for School, as
for a handsome Preferment; whereas now nothing but pure necessity can put them
upon that way: They would practice to talk Latin fluently, that they might
readily entertain any stranger, (which now many that have the Reputation of
good Scholars are but clumsy in) and pour forth Verses and Declamations
extempore; they would study the Classical Authors thoroughly and digest them,
acquaint themselves with all the Critical parts of Philology, and the
Elegancies of the Language, and the Customs of Antiquity: How many Erasmusses,
and Melancthons, and Scaligers, and Puteans, and Vossiusses, should we have
amongst us in a short time, if Literature were but thus encouraged? whereas now
generally the Pulpit is made their ultimate Design; and when they set once a
preaching, they lay their studies of Humanity aside.

Before I part with this, I must not forget one thing, which I take to be a
main Cause of the Masters toil, and the Scholars non-proficience; that as
Schools now are, the Master takes too much upon him, and more then he can
possibly with any credit discharge: For you shall see in most Schools but a
Master and an Usher, and sometimes but one set over a Company of Boys, whose
Capacities and Ingenies may be sorted perhaps into seven or eight Classes. It
is not possible one or two men, (let them work their hearts out) should suffice
to this Duty: Wherefore, if it were so ordered that every great School might
have for each Form a Master, who might be as the Intelligence of that Sphere,
and wheel it about with him through the whole Encyclopedy of School-Learning,
(with a Rector or President over them all) the work would go on with great
facility and cheerfulness, and no less success.

This is the course which the Jesuits take, and which makes them looked on as
the greatest Masters of breeding up Youth: And this would be very feasible, to
have in every great Town almost such a School, at least one or two in a County.
To instance. What were it for Kings-Colledge to supply Eaten-School,
New-Colledge to supply Winchester-School with half a dozen young Masters, who
might, as they ripened each his Company, return back to his College, and
there, if his Superiors shall judge fit, go on with those that are taken for
the University, through the course of Philosophy: And so out of Christ-Church
in Oxford, and Trinity in Cambridge, seven or eight, or half a score young men
would not be mist; who if they were employed in Westminster-School, which
furnishes both thos^ Colleges, might by dealing the work amongst so many hands
make it very light and prosperous; and so of other Free-Schools, especially
those that send Scholars to certain Colleges.

And this would be a pretty Introduction of young Masters of Arts and
Batchelours into the World, and prepare them for a serious Scene of Action; and
keep them from growing musty in the University, where Colledge-Commons, and
the Walks, (if not good fellowship) indispose many for the Duties of an Active
life; and to say Truth, what have they those Fellowships and Allowances for,
but to serve the public, which they cannot do better at first setting out then
in this way. And for places of lesser note, Servitors, when they are arrived at
Degrees, may be sent to Officiate for a time appointed, and not have Orders
presently given them, and to be put to their shifts (as heretofore) in the
Ministry, when their necessities recommended them to Presbyterian Families or
poor populous Corporations, where for a livelihood they studied placentia,
preached down the Church and preached up the Kirk: for it has been observed,
that your factious little Chaplains, and the Lecturers of your great Towns
proved the Boutefeus of our late Troubles. There being one or two such Schools
in each County, how easily will the Gentry fall in, how readily the other sort
of people, especially if such Schools have some Colleges in either University
allotted for their preferment upon solemn Probations; which may be easily
contrived without breach of any Statute. Nay, many Colleges we see are already
so allotted, as those I mentioned before: so Saint John's* for Merchant Tailors:
Jesus College for the Welsh: Exceter for Devonshire men, etc. and why may not
the rest be so ordered? And then for places of lesser Note, as little
Market Towns, etc. where there is great number of Children, and some that their
Parents would wish should do more then barely write and read, which we suppose
is the Clerks work to teach them: there as was said before, may be one or two
meaner persons with a less Salary, who may be stinted too in their work; so as
to teach only Latin according to Grammar-Rule: for those who would design
further, should be obliged to attend the great Schools; and no other School
should have Privilege to fit Scholars for the University, by which means
there would be a great concourse thither; and if the Gentry were numerous,
there might be provided Masters of other Faculties to take up their leisure
hours and intervals of study; viz. A Catechist, an Arithmetician, a Writing
Master, a Master of Fence, a Dancing Master, Music Masters, a Rider of the
great Horse; some old Soldier to teach them their Postures, and to handle
their Arms, etc. And besides this (which is the other advantage of your
boarding Schools) the benefit of Air might be procured, in the Summer quarter
at least, by removing two or three miles out of the Town to some convenient
seat, which might with those Improvements easily be purchased; as also other
requisites provided for the ease and Reputation of the Masters, and the benefit
and advantage not of the Scholars alone, but of those Towns also where the
Schools are kept. Nor would this Academical way tend at all to the diminution
of the Universities, but much advantage them in their Repute, by certain
constant Homages from all the Schools in the Nation, holding from them in
Capite, governed by their Missionaries, and by their Rules; and at last
according to their demerit upon Trial, expecting Preferment from them; to which
Repute the mutual Emulation of the Masters in their several Provinces being
always in Fluxu, and not Stationary; and the account that they must make to
the College which sent them, would very much conduce. Now those Provinces or
Classes might be ordered according to the several Stages, Scholars go in their
School-learning, after some such Draught as this:

The first Class, Grounds of Grammar, declining Nouns and Verbs. The second,
Congruitie of Latin. The third, Propriety and Phrase. The fourth, Oratory and
Rhetoric. The fifth, Poetry and Verse. The sixth, Greek grounds. The seventh,
Dialect. The eighth, Antiquity and Philology.
But this Course may be left either to the Arbitrary discretion of the present
Master, or else Regulated by the Head and Seniors of the College, to which
that School shall appertain according to occasion.

To make short, this last Paragraph is offered as a Scheme only upon sudden
thought, on purpose to suggest to some more ingenious and better experienced
Head, to find out an expedient for preventing the Masters toil, and yet
assuring the success: Nor has the whole Discourse any other Design, then
barely to represent some inconveniences in the managing of Schools, which are
very visible to any one, but have not been taken public notice of by any; not
that the Writer of this is at all an Opiniator of himself, or has the
confidence of obtruding his crude and undigested Sense upon the great Council
of the Nation, or has indeed any concernment in the Grievance, further then
his own Children, whom he shall provide for, whether this have any effect or
no; or can entertain any great hope to have this Paper considered or looked on
by any of those who may be concerned in the Redress; much less was it in his
aim to level Satyr at any one, any otherwise then honestly to discharge his
own burdened thoughts, in resentment of that which his mind told him deserved
to be the Object of a public care, with the same Freedom as he thought them.
And if any one find himself aggrieved at the Writer, he must not blame him for
having a greater tenderness for the public good, then for any private person;
and withal let him take this Character of him, that he is one bears that love
to his Country, that Faith to his Prince, that Reverence to the Church, and
that Honor for all true Worth and Desert, that he shall not be grieved himself
to see his own Interest, his Reputation and dearest Concerns lie bleeding for
their sakes; and will readily allow his forgiveness for any unkindness any one
shall do him upon such a score.

Much more might be said concerning the Exercises, especially such as are to be
performed publicly; and concerning the Discipline of Schools by reward and
punishment: wherein I should particularly advise that whipping might be, if not
totally laid aside, at least very sparingly used, and that upon Moral
transgressions; as Swearing, Thieving, etc. and then too by the hand of some
Servant, the Bedle or Lictor of the School; as an Office in it self servile,
not at all beseeming either Gentleman or Divine to execute; or indeed becoming
any thing of Ingenuity, either to act or suffer. Indeed the great indiscretion
and intemperance of Masters in that, has brought a very great contempt and
hatred upon the Profession it self: and not to speak of the ill use some have
made of it to lewdness (of which Instances are not wanting, but that they are
odious) it being a kind of uncovering nakedness: it does generally more hurt
then good, by making those that are dull more dull, and dispiriting the
ingenious; and truly, wicked Boys (to whom it properly belongs) are by the
frequency and commonness of it hardened; and being grown after a while
shameless, and senseless of the Rod, having past the last remedy (as this is
accounted) do become incurable: whereas such are to be kept in a course of
Discipline, as not to be mended with the most severe inflictions of present
smart, which is quickly worn off.

To these Heads, and other Expedients, I do not want store of Observations
taken up both abroad from other Countries, and at Home, in our own: but think
it best to reserve them till some other time, if occasion shall be offered.
Again, I consider, this is but a needless work peradventure: for when Salaries
are improved, the Grounding Methods settled, and Masters well qualified, as to
their Abilities and Affections, these Masters will in their several Companies
for Superstructure and Discipline, and other Prudential ways, better possibly
consult for themselves, then any by-stander can. Let me add, that in that
Method by me laid down, there is not any prejudice in the least intended to
those Masters, who are at present in Possession of public Schools; but on the
contrary great advantage of Ease, of Honor, and of Profit. For supposing the
number of Schools should be reduced to that paucity there mentioned, out of
those Masters might be chosen the Scholarcha or Rector of each School, and his
Colleagues too, pro hac vice, whose single Forms would bring them in better
returns, then their whole huddle of Scholars does now. Those of the lesser note
might be planted in the lesser Towns, and nothing to their loss. After these
old standers were worn off the Stage, then University men might take their Qu.

I shall Conclude with an humble Address to those in place and Power: (it being
not impossible that some such may chance to let fall their Eye upon this
Paper.) That the Honorable Court of Parliament would, as they tender the Peace
of three Kingdoms, and the preservation of their own good Laws, lay to heart,
and take into serious Consideration the necessity of wholesome Institution for
our Children; that they would give public Schools a public Countenance, and
remove those Grievances, which they labor under, by settling handsome
Salaries, and establishing some kind of Uniformity; That they would not suffer
those seeds to be scattered in the minds of Youth, which have in these late
years produced such a Harvest of mischiefs and confusions; (upon this ground,
that Royal Clemency is to be limited to Persons, not to be extended to
Principles:) That they would take up that Noble Design of perpetua^^^
themselves in a well bred Posterity: and Lastly, That they would not be slow in
a Business of so great and quick Concernment; the hopes of the next Age lying
at stake, Children growing up into Men apace; and what is taken in now being
hardly cured hereafter, the Elder sort affording very few examples of
Conversion. That especially, the Right Reverend the Bishops, would not only
provide for the Sheep, but take care that the Lambs may be fed, as the great
Shepherd and Bishop gives them Order: That they would in their Dioceses Visit
Schools, as well as Churches, and encourage Youth in Virtue: That they would
please to use their Power for detecting the Frauds of Trustees, and for
restoring to Schools they Rights: And in fine, That they would enjoin their
Ordinaries to be very strict and careful what Masters they admit how they are
qualified, and affected to present Governmen^ both of Church and State: For he
that is an Enemy of on^ can be no Friend to the other: And to call, especially
all private Teachers, and Schoolmasters (what ever their pretenc^ may be) to a
public Account; it being found a task almost impossible by all Methods the
Church of England cause to recover those persons to a sound Orthodox Sense
whose Childhood has been poisoned, and prepossessed with Schism.

FINIS.

