Bill read 24 Jan 1700. N. N.

A LETTER to a LORD concerning a Bill to incorporate the Old East India Company.
My Lord,
I Have read something, and heard a great deal, concerning Commonwealths, but
remain still of Opinion, that there never was any Constitution better contrived
than our own, for the Conservation of Public or Common Good. Nothing can pass
into a Law in England, 'till it has undergone the different and distinct
Examinations of the King, the House of Lords, and the Representatives of the
Commons of England. And, my Lord, I am so far from agreeing with the
extravagancy of the late Times, in thinking your Lordships useless, that I am
very confident you are, in many respects, a very happy as well as an essential
checque in our Constitution. Your Lordships have no Professions to biass your
Debates. Lawyers have been observed to make our Statutes intricate, and for
their own purpose. A very sensible People would never suffer Merchants or
trading Men (how honest soever) to have any thing to do with the Legislature,
'till they had for many Years laid aside all Trade, lest their Interests or
Affections should be too hard for their Inclinations to do good.

But it is not only your Lordships being exempt from Callings, but your being
exempt from the necessity of courting Factions for your share in making Laws,
that adds Impartiality and weight to whatever passes your House. Perhaps there
is too often Occasions for your Lordships to exercise your Aristocratical
Power. I could wish you exerted it as often as there was occasion. I am not
sure whether a Bill now before you does not justly and loudly call for the
Power to which you were born. It is your Station. You are brought up to
consider Public Treaties with Foreign Princes. You know the Decency that is
due to the chief Administrators of Affairs. You know how much the Honor of
Kings, and the Welfare of Nations are concerned in keeping punctually to every
thing that is stipulated by those who negotiate for the respective States. All
this is little more than Preface, and from a design not to fall too abruptly
upon a matter that is now laid before your Lordships.

You are now possessed of a Bill to incorporate the Old East India Company. I
will not insist upon the several Addresses of the House of Commons to dissolve
that Company. And less will I repeat the Reasons that occasioned those
Addresses. I will begin no higher than 19 Jan. 1693. at which time the House of
Commons of England declared it the Right of every English Subject to trade to
the East Indies, unless prohibited by Act of Parliament; and withal I beg leave
to remind your Lordship, that it was upon the Encouragement of this Vote that
the Free-Traders began to launch boldly into the Traffic of those Parts, but
were far from invidiously endeavoring to shut out others from that Trade. But
the old East India Company behaved themselves quite otherwise; and soon
perceiving that others, as well as themselves could, without having either
Forts or Garrisons, trade profitably to those Places, they were presently, as
they had been constantly, bent to make that Trade a Monopoly, and so offered, 4
May, School. to lend the Government 700000 Pounds, provided they might have the
sole Trade thither settled upon them for 31 Years by Act of Parliament.

I will not trouble your Lordship, with recounting how delatory and trifling
nevertheless they were, nor upon what fallacious Proviso's and Conditions they
would, after all, have lent their Money.

It is sufficient to my present Purpose, to set down, that it was by reason of
this Offer from the Old East India Company, that the House of Commons first
empowered the Committee of Ways and Means to receive Proposals to settle the
Trade to the East Indies; and that the Gentlemen, who are now the New Company,
if I may so say, out-bid them, and proposed to lend two Millions, upon
Condition that the said Trade should be secured solely to those that furnished
that Sum.

To this Proposal the Parliament agreed, and this was the plain Bargain made
between the Subscribers and the Legislature. This is what the New Company
expected, what they lent their Money upon. They did not doubt but that their
Security would be well drawn. They did not apprehend that any want of Grammar,
or the mistake of a Clerk, if any such should be, would raise any Constructions
to their disadvantage. And the Old Company had, when the Act was made, the very
same thoughts, believed theirs would be dissolved, that there could be but one
Company trading with a Joint Stock to the East Indies.

Their own Applications by themselves and Council to your Lordships, were (as I
know your Lordship, who observes every thing, can very easily recollect) I say,
all the Applications of the Old Company were upon this Foundation.

His Majesty's Dissolution of them was but according to the Power he had
reserved in their Charter; was reserved, and, as I may say, directed by the Act
of Parliament; was according to what the Old, the New Company, and all Men took
for the Sense of the Act.

And the Subscribers to the New Company were as careful to secure their
Bargain. They exacted the performance of all the necessary Forms for the
Determination of the Old, and would not subscribe 'till the Old Company's
Dissolution was actually signed. And it was not 'till after that the Old
Company had actually received notice of their Dissolution, that Mr. John Dubois
subscribed, and so, as all Men thought, came in under the Terms of that Act,
which, by the way, the Old Company, when it was first offered to them, refused.

Your Lordship will hear from another Hand how destructive to the Trade two
Companies will be, and how groundless are their Suggestions for their being
continued a Corporation, how unnecessary it is to continue them so, for the
very Ends that they pretend. I know your Lordship will steal time even from
your Meals and Sleep, rather than not be thoroughly informed in a matter of this
Moment. I know you will read all that is written upon the Subject, and
therefore I will not repeat what I know will be purposely handled in another
Paper.

But I cannot help saying, that it seems strange, since all that I have said is
Fact, that the Old Company should nevertheless last Year Petition the House of
Commons, not only to be continued a Corporation, but to have the Five per Cent.
taken off. Indeed that Petition was then rejected. But is it not yet stranger,
that they should this Sessions be able to get a Bill pass through that House to
continue them a Corporation, and have so powerful an Interest, as that all
Clauses to explain and confirm the Five per Cent. and to determine their being
subject to the Rules and Restrictions of the general Society should be rejected?

The New Company know very well what they reckoned their Bargain, and they are
glad the Judges sit in your Lordships House to give their Opinions, if asked,
upon the Law. If the Law is not so strictly penned as it should be, since all
England knows what it was intended to be, it should, with submission, be
construed as it was designed. Your Lordships (who are the last resort of Equity
as well as Law) will doubtless in this matter, of so great Importance, bestir
your selves to do the utmost Justice.

Public Credit (without which Communities can scarce subsist) is concerned to
have this Bargain made good entirely.

If Men cannot lend Money upon Acts of Parliament, the Government must deal
hereafter with none but Pawn-brokers, and take it up upon Plate and Jewels, as
the King of Poland was forced lately to do in the business of Elbing.

I have said enough to your Lordship about Public Credit, when you have
allowed me the Honor to be admitted into your most retired Conversations, and
I have found your Lordship so satisfied, that it is to be maintained with
utmost nicety, that I need say no more to you upon that Head, but for the sake
of others I must be a little more express.

Unless a Nation is sure it shall never more make War, the Public Faith ought
to be kept free from all Suspicion. Machiavei observed so long ago as his Time,
that Money was the Sinews of War. It is evidently more and more so since;
because the World is better acquainted with Encamping, and a Battle or two does
not now decide the Controversies between Princes. A wise and a cautious General
in our Days can preserve a Country from those rough Decisions, and we seldom
now hear of Armies so routed that they can never rally again. Taking good
Ground, and furnishing Provisions for an Army, are become a great part of the
present Art of War. The last Article of Military skill depends not on good
Troops but lasting Purses. When Public credit is preserved chaste and
unspotted, Men think, in a Public Calamity, that the Exchequer of the
Commonwealth is the safest Repository of their Treasure; nay, if your own
Country cannot furnish you with Coin enough, Foreigners will with their Wealth
as well as Men enable you to maintain the War. So that you do not only depend
upon your self, but have all the Neutral World ready to supply you with Men or
Money. This Act supposed we might be assisted with Foreign Money, and the Danes
(who were not concerned either on the Confederates or French side) lent us
Troops. It was the opinion that men had of our Public Credit, that enabled us
more than any thing else to humble France. But had it been plain, that an Act
of Parliament was not a Security to be depended upon, whatever difficulties and
dangers had beset the Government, all men would have endeavored to hide their
Plate and Money, and made their particular Property the last stake to be played
off.

But, my Lord, I must not be too tedious on this, or any other Head. I will
only tell your Lordship that I suspect, that this Bill is not the only attack
that the Old East India Company design to make upon our Public Credit.
Methinks there are two plain Reasons for this surmise. One Reason is what I
have already mentioned, viz. That as they last Year Petitioned against the Five
per Cent. they now, whilst this Bill was passing, opposed that, and all other
Explanations of the late Act. My other Reason is; because mere Incorporation
will little redound to their Benefit, unless vying with the New Company, and so
making Goods dearer in the Indies, and, by that means, confounding the Trade,
till our Neighbors swallow it up, are reckoned by them Advantages.

My Lord, East India Company to show so much as one Precedent in any Country
whatsoever, of two Companies trading with two distinct Joynt-stocks to the same
place.

My Lord, dernier Arbitrators of this Realm, and, with submission, I humbly
conceive, that it will be a nobler employment of your Lordships time, to take
the quarrel that is between the two Companies into your own hands, than to pass
an Act in favor of one. They on both sides pretend they have been fair and
treatable, but I see nothing that comes of their treating with one another.
There may be avaritious and artful men in both Companies, who may find their
account in keeping up the difference, but such designing men will find it a
hard task to impose upon your Lordships. There are in your House Noble Minds,
who have not thought it below their Dignity, in an Island supported by Traffic
and Navigation, to understand Accounts and Trade, and sure it will be as well
for the Nation to have their respective Claims at first determined by your
Lordships, as when they have walked through the Courts of Westminster Hall into
your House.

My Lord,

My Lord, England it self, that you should enter upon this matter; for it is
impossible for us to know what Treaties his Majesty's Ambassador may have begun
with the Great Mogul; and should we send thither Instructions, Acts of
Parliament, and Reports that contradict one another, we should at least be
infallibly reckoned an inconstant and faithless People.

I will make no Apology to your Lordship, for speaking my thoughts thus boldly;
for you ever give me that Liberty: But if any thing I have said offend others,
let them believe heartily of my Intention, and correct my Errors by an Answer.
I am, as becomes my obligations,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Devoted, and most Humble Servant, N. N.


