SEVERAL PAPERS OF CONFESSIONS, PRAYER, and PRAISE; By James Naylor: Concerning
His Fall and Restoration.

A Just Man falls seven times, and rises up again; but the Wicked shall fall
into Mischief, Prove. xxiv. 16. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

To those who were in AUTHORITY, whom the LORD is now Judging, that they may
Repent and find Mercy from God.
By James Naylor.
With His Letter to King CHARLES II.
OH! Men of England, whose Day is over, and whose Time is passed away from you,
and you are now left as Men in Desolation and Darkness: You had a large Day and
Time to have done good, and to have answered God's Requirings of you, and your
Engagements to him, and so to have laid up Treasure with God against the Evil
Day, which is come from far upon you; and you had a large time, and a great
Power in your Day, to have made you Friends of the Unrighteous Mammon, by doing
Justly, and showing Mercy therein; that so you might have had a Habitation in
the Day of Adversity: And in your Day the Heavens were fair, and the Son gave
you his Light; shining upon you through many Clouds that seemed to arise, over
which he sent you Light; that in his Light you might have walked and seen
Light; and his Visitations and Risings toward you was often, and his
Appearance was lovely toward you; even as a calm Sunshine after a stormy
Tempest, and as warm Clearness after Rain, to the softning of the Earth, and to
make it Fruitful, that he might have received of his Tillage, a good Savor
from the Fruit of his Labors, and have blessed you: But Oh People! You would
not hear nor regard in that Day, when his Work was good toward you every
Morning, and his Mercies upon you all the Day long; but you grew high and lofty
in your selves, and Proud in your Minds, and Self-conceited, and Self-ended,
and hardened your Hearts against his tender Witness in your Conscience, and
walked Rebelliously against his good Spirit in your own Hearts, and he could
not cause you to hear; but you grew past feeling of any thing that is called
God in you.

Then you daily waxed Fat, and Fullness increased, and Pride gendred into your
Hearts, and you grew wanton, and kicked against him that bore you, and made
light of his Bricks in your Consciences: Thus was your Ear stopped toward God,
and you wholly lost from all that he might speak unto you in Spirit, or
Counsel, or Fear; and from the Way of his Teaching and Reproof you was utterly
gone, and had removed your Hearts far away from hearing his Voice; for you had
filled them with Pride and vain Glory, and your unjust Gain had made many of
them even as the nether Millstone, so you became unmovable in your Way.

Then did the Lord raise him up Servants that would hear, and gave them his
Light, to see what you were doing against the Lord your God, who had redeemed
you out of all Adversity, and had raised you up out of a low Estate, and had
done for you exceedingly; even to win you as a People to himself: And also what
God was a-doing against you, because of this your contrary walking toward him;
and that he would certainly bring you down before your Enemies, if you did not
return and humble your selves before him: And these he sent amongst you with
his Word, rising early, and sending them to speak his Mind expressly what he
minded to do; and it could no longer slumber: But you would not hear, neither
would you believe; but the same which had stopped your Ear, and hardened your
Hearts in your own selves from feeling, that had wrought too such Hardness,
Dullness and Unbelief, till God's Word could have no Entrance into you; nor his
Servants Liberty to walk among you to publish it: But you begun to Question in
your unbelief, whether it was the Word, and in your Pride to scorn it: And in
the Hardness of your Hearts, then you begun to persecute the Messengers of the
Lord, which he sent with it to you for your Good, and many Hundreds suffered in
all Parts of the Nation upon this Account, till there was no hope of your
hearing, or obeying the Voice of your Return.

Then did the Lord raise up Signs and Wonders among you, if by any means he
might appear as one to be feared or observed by you: And he stripped his Children
naked and sent them among you; and some he clothed in Sack Cloth, as mouring
over you: And some with Ashes upon their heads he sent into your Assemblies of
Worships, and your Assemblies in your Feasts, and of your Fasts, which was all
Abominable to him, while you walked in your own Ways, and would not hear his
Voice; but these you used worse than formerly, and your Rage increased in
Stocking, Beating, Whipping, and Imprisoning, until the Cry of Oppression was
so great, that there was no Remedy; and then the Lord arose and shaked you in
Pieces, as a Mighty One in his Anger, and broke you with such a Breach so as
you could not be healed, nor be a Power any longer; and so has brought the
Wheel over you, and from far, without help, has he caused the Rod to Blossom.

And the Just Lord is now seen in the midst of you, and which of you is able to
stand before Him in Judgment, or to Condemn Him in the thing he has done; and
Captivity is taken Captive before Him; and you that did Imprison, are
imprisoned; and you that sought to make your selves dreadful by Oppression, now
knows not where to hide your selves from the mighty Day that is coming upon you
from the God of the whole Earth.

And now this is the Word of the Lord to you, all you Sturdy Oaks, and Tall
Fruitless Trees, whom the Wind of the Fierce Wrath of the Almighty has thus
shaken: Hear the Rod, and who has appointed it; and how before the Terrible
Judge of all flesh, and seek not to save your selves with your former
Consultations, with that Spirit in which you have always Rebelled against God
till this Day, and in whose Counsel you have wrought this great Evil to provoke
the Lord, and in which you have ever rejected his Word in your selves and
others; neither trust to your Friends to make Flesh your Arm, yet farther to
provoke the Lord to your utter Confusion; neither trust in your Prayers or
Performances, or ought you can do, while you are in that Rebellious Spirit of
Disobedience to God's Witness in your own Consciences; for verily God will not
hear you, while you are unwilling to hear him. And now for this he is come near
you at last to Judgment, and he has brought near his Righteousness, that you
might see it, and lay hold on it, and make Peace therewith now at last for your
Souls, that you may be saved, and your Return must be first to that Spirit
against whom you have Sinned, there to make Peace.

And now spend not your time in vain Talks, and vain Practices, and so still
serve that Evil Spirit that has all along betrayed you of your Obedience to
God; but wait to feel that Spirit which calls you to mourn a part, every one
for the Evils of his own Heart against his God, and let that be minded which
leads to Repentance toward God first; that if by any means you may find a
place for Repentance, which will be hard for many of you to do, you have so
long Dissembled with God, and betrayed his Witness in you through Deceit; for
this is the Truth to you all, If you find that from the Lord in Spirit, that
will let you see the Evils of Provocation, and give you Power to put it off,
whatever it be, you will find favor with God therein for your Souls; but if
you find not that Spirit, you will find small Peace with God, and then that
which Men can do for you will be little available; for it is for want of
Hearing and Obedience toward God, that all this Evil is come upon you; which
must be turned to, ever it can be taken Everlastingly off; for if you had
harkned to his Light in your Consciences, and his Word had had a Place in your
Hearts to Obedience, when you was yet tender, then would it have kept you in
his Fear; so that you durst not have coveted that Cursed thing, with which you
hid and covered that Just Principle in you, and blinded your Eyes with the
Riches and Spoil of your Enemies; nor durst you have set up what you had cast
down, and got into their Estates, and so into their Pride by unrighteous Gain,
whom God had cast out: Then had you not provoked God by these things to your
utter Ruining: Or if after this was entered upon you, you had hearkened to his
Reproof, and put this off your selves with his Spirit, then had he not brought
this Terrible Besom to sweep it away from off you, and from within you, who
has left you no Place to hide your Glory, or your Riches, where his Hand shall
not reach, and his Eye find them out.

And there is now no hope for Agreement with God in y^^r selves, nor that he
will cease his Anger against you, till you return to that from which you
departed, that the same Spirit may be confessed, and Glory given thereto, by
putting off in his Counsel and Motion, that which was put on in your Counsels
against that Spirit, and his Light in your own Consciences; and also in many
others, whose Souls were troubled and grieved for you in that Day; and this the
Lord God looks for, that Glory be given to the just in his sight, and in the
sight of all before whom his name has been Blasphemed.

And this is now the Work of this your Day, while you have a little time, and
for this he waits and forbears, that he may be Gracious to your Souls for his
Names's sake: And it is not a time for you to sleep and sit at ease, nor spend
your time in Vanity, nor seek to hide that which God is resolved to declare
openly, nor with fleshly Counsel seek to save that which God will destroy. It Is
time now at last to see what that selfish Spirit, and its Counsel has done for
you, and Repent of it; by following whereof all this Evil is come upon you, for
your Authority has vomited you out, your Glory has left you naked, and your
Riches cannot profit you in this Day of Wrath from the Almighty. This was I
moved of the Lord to write to you.

J. N.
Oh! KING,
GOD has in these Nations a People gathered by himself into his Light, who are
known to himself better than to Men, and therefore have we suffered by Men
under all the Powers that have risen in this Nation, ever since God called us
toward himself by his Eternal Light and Spirit; and though we receive not our
Laws from Man; yet are we not without Law as to our God, but have one
Lawgiver, even Christ Jesus our Lord, our Life, and our Head, blessed over
all: And from his Laws we may not depart; and by his Law in our Conscience, and
the Power of his Spirit in our Hearts, are we ordered and guided to walk Holily
toward our God, and Harmlessly toward Men, as the Saints of Old witnessed in
Scripture, however they be minded toward us; and by the Virtue of the Lamb,
and not of Flesh and Blood, are we made to give our Goods to the Spoil, and our
Bodies to the Tortures of Cruel Men, rather than defile our Consciences, or Sin
against any one of the least of the Commands of our Lord and Lawgiver Christ
Jesus; who by the Light of his Eternal Spirit, does daily lead us out of the
Evils and Vanity of this present World, and having begotten us into his own
Guiding, he does not suffer us to subject our selves to any thing whatsoever is
not set up by himself; nor to Worship the god of this World; nor obey him in
Commands or Customs; but the Exercise of our Consciences he has redeemed
wholly to himself, and by his Precious Blood has sprinkled them, and made them
tender and pure; so that we may not Worship false gods, nor the true God in a
false manner; nor may we Worship Men, nor the true God in a false manner; nor
may we Worship Men, nor follow the Customs of Nations, Kindreds, or People, or
Languages; but the Spirit of Truth it self we must follow: Nor may we break
Christ's Commands in Swearing, when Men Command us; but must obey him who
faith, Swear not at all: Nor may we join to, or uphold any Worship whatsoever,
but what the Spirit of Truth it self leads us into; though many have sought to
force us thereto: Nor may we leave the Ministry of Christ, and that Maintenance
which the Gospel allows of, to Maintain a Priesthood with Tithes, and so go
back from Christ to the Law, that the Apostle says is disannulled, Heb. 7.

And for such things as these, concerning a tender Conscience, and the Law of
our God, have we suffered Grievous Persecution, and not for any Unrighteousness
done by us against any Man's Person or Estate, nor have we suffered by any just
Law of the Nation, but by the Wills of Cruel Men, and as a Prey to every Man's
Lust has been our Liberties, Lives, and Estates, and the Rulers that have been
to this Day, have not sought our Deliverance, but have dealt Treacherously with
us, and the Lord whom we serve has seen it, and reproved it, and yet we are
not set free; but at this Day we live in the Account of the rude and envious
People, as a People appointed to Death and Desolation, and the whole Body of
Ungodliness, and Rage of Wickedness is upon us daily, and with Cruelty falls
upon us in our Persons and Estates, and our Peaceable Meetings to Worship the
living God. And as to all these things, we are laid as the Mire in the Street,
for every rude Boy to run over, and we have not found help from Man, as to all
the Powers that have been till this Day since we were a People; nor do we speak
this because we look for help from Man; nor indeed can we expect that from Men,
until Men own the same Principle of God to Rule in them to which we are
subject; which is the Son of Righteousness, and leads all into Righteousness,
Truth, and Peace, that his Light does follow, who is known to us to be King of
Kings, and Judge of the Judges, though Flesh and Blood sees not his Kingdom.

And now, O King, as we have been moved of the Lord in Bowels of Love, and with
much Plainness of Speech (after the Spirit of Truth, and not with vain
Complements) to lay these things before all the several Powers that have risen
hitherto, with several other Evils which our God has sent us to testify
against, (both in Rulers, Teachers, and People) so we have done, and for that
we have suffered also for a Witness against them, as it is at this Day: So the
same God has now after a while put into our Hearts to lay these things before
thee (O King) that thou may not be Ignorant to what we are called, and for
what we suffer: And in this we rejoice, That we feel love to thy Soul even
while we are thus doing; and if many should be moved hereto of God, take heed
of being wearied therewith, nor count it Clamor, or Trouble, as they that was
before thee did, and so let up Prejudice and Evil Thoughts in their own Hearts
against the Innocent; for this we say unto thee, and affirm in the Name of our
God, that the more any are (truly) moved by the Eternal Spirit to warn thee of
these Things, (or any other Evils that may any way grieve his Holy Spirit) so
much does the Lord (of thy Life, and true and Everlasting Peace) double his
Love unto thee, and show his Willingness to stay thee from that which has
removed Kings, and broken Kingdoms: And this we know to be in God, and by him
in us toward thy Soul and Eternal Welfare. And though we cannot Swear, and
Unswear; Covenant, and Uncovenant with every Change that comes, as Men do that
know not the Everlasting Covenant and Decree of God; yet this has God fealed
in our Hearts, To seek the Good of all Men, Plot against none; but study to
live quietly, and Exercise our Conscience faithfully toward whatever
Government our God shall set up; desiring that all Men in their Day may so use
their Power, as they may give Account to God with Joy, and not leave their
Names for a Curse and Reproach among Men; for this we know, That God is now at
Hand, to give a speedy Reward to every Man, as shall be the Work of his Day.

Wherefore, O King, seek the Fear of the Lord, and not Pleasure, do Justice and
Judgment in this thy Day, Relieve the Helpless Oppressed, and break the Yoke of
Bondage that lies upon the Poor, and bring Judgment into the Gates, and let not
Justice be sold, least the Meek of the Earth Cry to God against thee: Verily
God is nearer this Nation to avenge than many can believe, though the has done
Wonders in this Generation that many Generations have not seen, and he is
trying all Sorts of People with the Testimony of his Appearance; Blessed are
they whose Eye is open to discern the Signs of the Times, for a Work is God
working in the Earth, and he will cut it short in Righteousness for his Elect
sake, which Daily has waited upon Him that is Blessed for ever.

O King, spend not thy time in Fleshly Pleasures, neither strive after that
Glory which will fade away; but apply thy Heart to God, and wait to feel his
Spirit in thee, giving thee Light and Understanding to guide thy ways before
him; for only Blessed is he who Rules by his power, and who is taught of God,
shall be Established in Righteousness, and be far from Oppression; and only
such shall be called the Blessed of God to all Generations; read, and remember
the Righteous and the Wicked.

From one of those whom the World calls Quakers, JAMES NAYLOR.
Written the 3d Day of the 4th Month, 1660.


FINIS. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.
To all the Dearly Beloved PEOPLE of GOD, Mercy and Peace.
THere is nothing dear and percious to me in this World, but God's Truth, and
his Life of Righteousness; for which I have forsaken all the World, and
whatever was dear to me therein, I have hated and counted it as an Enemy, that
I might obtain Christ, the Fountain and Spring of that Eternal Life of Truth,
the Beauty whereof I cannot express, as I see it and feel it: The Loveliness
thereof to my Soul has so dearly united my Spirit to all that bear the Image
and Life of it, that there can be no Separation, but my Life suffers thereby;
and I can truly say, that there is no other thing whatsoever that can unite me,
as one with any Creature living, but this Image and Life, where I see it born
up, or breathing to Life; but in whomsoever it be (without respect of Persons)
that I see the least appearance of this Seed of Life is, I can (by that Power
of Love the Father has begotten in me) lay down my Life to serve for the
Seed's sake. And wherein I have come short of this formerly, and have respected
the High, more than stood only in this Seed, I have been judged of the Lord,
and my evil Thoughts therein condemned; yea, and I do condemn them before all
the World, to be of that which favors Self, and not the Things of Christ: And
the lower God does bring me, and the nearer to himself, the more does this Love
and Tenderness spring and spread toward the poor, simple, and despifed ones,
who are poor in Spirit, meek and lowly Suffering Lambs; and with those I choose
to suffer, and do suffer, wherever they are found; and I bear my Testimony
against that Spirit by which they suffer, wherever it is found; and this lies
upon me from the Lord: Hearing and feeling a Spirit of Enmity having got head,
by what the Lord has done with me, and now does exercise its Power against the
Peaceable Meetings of the Lord's People, the Burden whereof lies heavy upon
me, and I suffer under it, and have long waited with Prayers, and Tears of
Sorrow, Night and Day, to receive Counsel from the Lord what to do in it, in
that Condition I am now in at present: God knows, I Lie not; for there is
nothing of all my Hardships that has lain and does lie upon me like this, that
any of the Flock of God should be offended, or suffer through me; therefore I
have not ceased to warn (as God has opened to me) such as I could speak to, to
live in Peace and Love; to suffer, but not to act Strife and Violence; and have
denied that Spirit, not to be of the Lamb, but an Enemy to him, though the
Creature may not know it, but may think it is doing God service; it being got
above the suffering Seed in themselves, would scatter and devour it in others:
And this Spirit the Lord has showed me, and its end, and has redeemed me from
it by the Spirit of the Lamb; and I shall never join, as Head or Tail,
therewith; but shall earnestly pray to the Father, that a deep Search of Truth
may seriously pass through the Hearts and Reins of all Contenders, that all
that are guilty herein may speedily come to Repentance, left they be hardened
therein, and there come a time when they would give whatever is dear to them
for one Hour's Society with the People of God, and cannot obtain it; then with
lamentable Woe shall the Wrath of that be known, that is now trampled on,
without the true Fear of God, or Life of his Love: And having at length
received this Favor of the Lord, I have taken this time, in the tender Bowels
of Love, (as one wounded therewith) to warn you hereof: Beseeching you all, for
the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that you all search low for the Bowels of him who
loved you, and suffered for you, when you were his Enemies, and put them on
toward all Men, but especially toward one another, who have been called by
one Spirit into one Truth; that so the holy Spirit be no more grieved, nor
Satan get any more advantage; whose Work is to sow Dissension, even among
Brethren.

And the Lord God of Love give us all to see, that whatever our Gifts or Powers
be, yet if we have not the Life and Power of Love, it avails not with God,
though Men may esteem of us never so high: For only he that dwells in Love,
knows God, and lives in him; the rest knows not what Spirit they are of. And
this I feelingly declare, from that dear Love of God in me; begotten to all his
People; whereby I am so far from taking delight in troubling the People of God,
that their growth in Peace and Truth, upon the Foundation laid already, was
never so much desired; and my Love to them is daily increased, beyond what I
can here express, yet the Lord knows it, and whence it is, whether it be
received by Men or no; yet the Seed snall feel it (in God's time) to which it
is, and in whose Peace only I have Peace; and I hope, in the Power of that
Love, God will so strengthen me, that nothing of Shame, Loss, or Reproach,
shall ever be too hard to take up for the advancement thereof, as God shall
show and lead me therein, without whom I dare do nothing, lest I deny his Work,
or confound it with my own.

And concerning you, the tender Plants of my Father, who have suffered through
me, or with me, in what the Lord has done with me, in this time of great Trial
and Temptation; the Almighty God of Love, who has numbered every Sigh, and put
every Tear in his Bottle, Reward it a Thousand-fold into your Bosoms, in the
Day of your need, when you shall come to be tried and tempted; and in the mean
time fulfill your Joy with his Love, which you seek after. The Lord knows, it
was never in my Heart to cause you to mourn, whose Sufferings is my greatest
Sorrow, that ever yet came upon me, for you are innocent herein: But the
Envious One has taken his advantage, which the Lord will turn to his
disadvantage, and utter ruin in many Souls; and in this believing, is all my
rest, in my great trouble of heart, concerning you or my self; and in Patience
I wait to see it, when the Man of Sin has had his time, to be revealed. For I
have seen the good Hand of God all along working in it; whose End is good to
all that love him, else had I been destroyed e're this, such has been the
Violence of the Enemy of my Soul: But he has numbered my Hairs, and not left me
in the Fire or Water; when none else was with me, thou were my Comforter. O
that I may never hide thy Praise, by covering my Sin or Shame! God forbid.

By a way unexpected did the Lord open a way to declare these Words, all other
means of writing being taken from me. Blessed be He, on whom I wait further to
see his Will, that I may do or suffer it.

The Presence and Peace of the Almighty comfort his People, whom I salute in
the Bowels of Love. James Naylor.
I beseech you (all that can) to receive it, even as you would be received of
the Lord; and for the rest, the Lord give me Patience to suffer, till the Lord
make up the Breach.



A Testimony to Christ Jesus, delivered to the Parliament, who Persecuted him
as a Blasphemer; written in the time of his Imprisonment in Bridewell.
CHrist Jesus, the Immanuel, (of whose Sufferings the Scriptures declare) him
alone I confess before Men; for whose sake I have denied whatever was dear to
me in this World, that I might win him, and be found in him, and not in my
self, whose Life and Virtue I find daily manifest in my mortal Body, (which is
my Eternal Joy and Hope of Glory) whom alone I seek to serve in Spirit, Soul
and Body, Night and Day, (according to the measure of Grace working in me) that
in me he may be glorified, whether by Life or Death; and for his sake I suffer
all things, that he alone may have the Glory of my Change, whose Work alone it
is in me: Even to that Eternal Spirit be Glory, and to the Lamb for ever.

But to ascribe this Name, Power and Virtue to James Naylor, (or to that which
had a beginning, and must return to Dust) or for that to be exalted or
worshipped, to me is great Idolatry, and with the Spirit of Christ Jesus in me
it is condemned; which Spirit leads to Lowliness, Meekness, and Long-suffering.

So having an opportunity given, (with readiness) I am willing in the Fear of
God the Father, (in Honor to Christ Jesus, and to take off all Offenses from
every simple Heart) this to declare to all the World, as the Truth of Christ is
in me, without Guile or Deceit, daily finding it to be my Work to seek Peace in
Truth with all Men in that Spirit.

James Naylor.

J. N's ANSWER to the FANATIC HISTORY, In Relation to himself.
AS for thy Charge against J. N. through the Everlasting Mercy of my God, I
have yet a Being amongst the Living, and breathe to answer for my self, though
against the Intents of many Bloody Cruel Spirits, who pursued my Soul unto
Death (as much as in them lay) in that Day of my Calamity, when my Adversary
was above; and wherein I was made as a Sign to a Backsliding Generation, who
then would not see nor hear what now is coming upon them, but rejoiced against
this piece of Dust, and had little pity toward him that was fallen into their
Hands; wherein God was just, in giving me up for my Disobedience for a little
moment, as a Father to correct; yet should not they have sought to aggravate
things against me, as thou do: For it was a Day of deep Distress, and lay
sore upon my Soul; and the pitiful God saw it, who, though he was a little
displeased, yet his Thoughts was not to cast off for ever, [but extend Mercy]
as it is at this Day: Glory be to his Name from my delivered Soul eternally.

And in that Day there was many Spirits flocked about me; and some whom, while
my Candle shone upon my Head, I ever judged, and kept out from me; who then got
up, and acted and spoke several things, not in the Light and Truth of God; by
which they who sought occasion against me, then was strengthened to afflict this
Body; and he that watches for Evil in thee, and some others, makes use of
still, against God's Truth and Innocent People; whose Mouths the God of my
Mercy stop, and so finish the Trouble of my Heart, as to that thing. For my
Soul has long dwelt among Lions, even among them that are set on Fire, whose
Teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongues a sharp Sword, speaking
mischievous things to shed Blood.

But O Man, or Men, whatever you be, whose Work it is to gather together the
Failings of God's People in Time of Temptation, or Night of their Trial, and
aggravate them, and add there to the Wickedness and mischievous Lies of your
own Hearts, as thou have done in thy Book, and then come out with those against
God's Everlasting Holy Truth, it to Reproach! I say, you are set to work by an
Evil Spirit; and you do but show your selves to be Enemies to God and his
Children: And it is our Sorrow that any of us should give such Spirits occasion
to blaspheme; and it has been Trouble of Soul to all the People of God, that
have ever loved Righteousness, when they have thus occasioned the Joy of the
Wicked, or to feed that Man that watches for Iniquity, and feeds on Mischief.
Yet know this, you that are of that Brood, God will not cast off his People,
though he be sometimes provoked to correct them, even before their Adversaries,
(which is a Sign to them;) yet is his Anger but for a moment, and his Favor
shall return as Streams of Life. Then shall the Food be taken out of the Mouth
of the Viper, and the Prey from between the Teeth of the Devourers; and God
shall feed them with their own Vomit; and the Poison, that has long lain under
their Tongues, shall be bitter in their own Bowels. Thus will God certainly
plead with Zion's Enemies, as he bends her Sons for himself, and God will make
up her Breaches. And this has my Soul seen, Jacob's Captivity restored, and
the Diggers of the Pit are fallen therein: Neither has he smitten him, as he
smote them that smote him; or is he slain, according to the Slaughter of them
that are slain by him; but this is all his Fruit, to purge away his Sin.

So he that had long waited for my failing, then got advantage against me; yet
had I then Power to bear his utmost Envy, through Christ Jesus, whom I then
confessed before Men, who then was my support in all, and under all, and who is
over all, blessed for ever, of all who have proved him in the depth.

But that which was and is the Sorrow of my Heart, is the advantage the Enemy
then took against the Name of Christ, his Truth, and his despised People, in
that time of Temptation, which is that which thou art now pursuing, with Hatred
and Lies; as that I had a Woman in Bed with me the Night before I suffered at
Bristol: When there was Six or Seven Persons in the Room that Night, and a Man
(to wit, Robert Rich) in Bed with me. But this, and several other false things
thou have written in thy Book, of which I am clear before the Lord, so they
touch me not at all; nor shall I here mention them against thee in particular:
But to God alone I look, in his time, to be cleared from all Offenses in his
sight, who only knows my Heart in this thing; in whose Presence I can say, that
nothing is more odious and burdensome to my Soul, than that any of that Glory
or Worship, which belongs to God or to Christ, should be given to Flesh and
Blood, in my self or others: And how it was with me at that Day, many talk of,
but few knows; so the Judgment of such I bear: Desiring, that none in Judging
me, might have Condemned themselves in God's sight, whose Counsels are a great
Deep, and the End of his Works past finding out, till he himself reveal them;
but in the End he will be justified of all, and in all he does, that all Flesh
may be silent before him.

And however my self, or any others, may be left to themselves, to be tried in
the Night; yea, should any utterly fall, or whatever may be acted by any Man or
Woman, that is not justifiable in God's sight; yet in vain do thou, or you,
gather up Sin, or watch for Iniquity, to cast upon the Light, which Condemns it
in every Enlightened Conscience, and there will clear himself to be no Author
nor Actor therein: And I know by the Spirit of Jesus, which I have received,
and which works in me, that this is not his Work, nor his Seed, nor in him
that loves thy Enemies, thou art not, but the old Accuser of the Brethren it is
that works strongly in thee; and in the Light which thou Reproaches, art thou
seen to be the Man that makes Lies, and carries Tales to shed Blood, Ezekiel. 22.
9, 12.

Another Paper added.
THere is a Spirit which I feel, that delights to do no Evil, nor to revenge
any Wrong, but delights to endure all things, in hope to enjoy its own in the
End: Its hope is to outlive all Wrath and Contention, and to weary out all
Exaltation and Cruelty, or whatever is of Nature contrary to its self. It sees
to the End of all Temptations: As it bears no Evil in it self, so it conceives
none in Thoughts to any other: If it be betrayed, it bears it; for its Ground
and Spring is the Mercies and Forgiveness of God. Its Crown is Meekness, its
Life is Everlasting Love unfeigned, and takes its Kingdom with Entreaty, and
not with Contention, and keeps it by Lowliness of Mind. In God alone it can
rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its Life. It Is conceived in
Sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it; nor does it murmur at Grief
and Oppression. It never rejoices, but through Sufferings; for with the
World's Joy it is murdered. I found it alone, being forsaken; I have
Fellowship therein, with them who lived in Dens, and desolate Places in the
Earth, who through Death obtained this Resurrection and Eternal Holy Life.

J. N.

London, Printed in the Year 1660.
TO ALL THE People of the LORD EVERY WHERE, Gathered or Scattered.
IN the Fear of God, and Love to his Truth, and People do I declare, in the
Spirit of Meekness, what has long oppressed my Soul, concerning those Unclean
Spirits gone out from the Unity of the Truth and Light, by which we have been
called, and gathered into one in Christ Jesus, the Head over all his Blessed
for ever, whose Name has been greatly dishonored through many wild Actings,
and his Innocent Spirit grieved, and many simple Souls deceived; many opressed,
and many offended against the Truth; because of those Spirits gone out from the
Truth, and now secretly, under a pretense, seeks daily to make it odious to
all. (For which Work my Soul has been much troubled:) Who to this Day raven
about from Place to Place amongst the People of God, seeking to enter where
they can; and so to strengthen themselves into Parties, to trouble such as they
cannot enter, seeking to spoil the peaceable Pasture of the Lambs, that they
should not Feed in Peace: And for that end, hunt after the Meetings of the
People of God. All which Practices and Pretenses, I deny in my Soul, and that
Spirit that acts therein.

And the more it lies upon me from the Lord, to warn the simple innocent ones
of his thereof openly, in that through me these Spirits have got much Head and
Entrance into the Minds of some who were simple toward God's Truth: And this
the Envious One has done, in the Night of my Trial, and Hour of Darkness and
Temptation, taking Advantage at my Sufferings, in the Day when my Judgment was
taken away, and I led Captive under the Power of Darkness, which all along has
sought my Life, had not the Father hid it, and with his Hand upon me, staved me
in those great Temptations; to whom alone I give the Glory of my Deliverance
from that great Destruction, as his Promise was to me before I came into that
Trial; who has now brought me up again, and has given me to see those Evil
Spirits, and that the Work of the Murderer and Devourer is therein, against
the Life of God in his Temple: Which, though they seek Entrance under pretense
of Humility, promising some great things, and more Holiness in that way, to
steal into simple Minds; but being got in, exalts themselves above the Seed of
God, and Tramples the Meek Spirit under Foot, and so darkens the Vessels, and
being exalted in the Openings of the Imaginations, leads the Creature, (as God)
above that of God, and so against that of God; he wars in others, where God is
above.

And this Mystery of deep Iniquity has the Lord God in the Spirit of the Lamb
revealed unto me, whose powerful working I have found, working in me above the
pure Measure and Unspotted Life of God. And though in the Simplicity of Christ
Jesus, I had given up my Body all along, a Free Offering to the Will of God in
Life, or in Death, for the Seeds sake; yet ungathered in the World; (as God
knows I lie not) yet could I often feel that exalted One above, secretly
tempting to Envy against the People of God already gathered, pretending a
greater thing to come another Way; but this, with the Life of God was ever
Judged. Though often I was buffeted therewith, sometimes so strongly, as to
force Words from me, above the meek and lowly Principle: All which Words were
soon judged, with the sufferer which lay under, and with his Life be they
Condemned for ever.

And this lies upon me to declare openly, which God has revealed to me, for
the sake of the simple Ones, who may be deceived therewith, but would not, did
they know his Subtilty; And by this shall you all perceive that Spirit,
whatever it pretends, it will secretly withdraw your entire Love from the Flock
of God, already gathered, and cool your Affections and Zeal toward their
present Meetings, and if you judge it not there, it will grow on with an Evil
Eye, to spy out their Failings, and delight to hear of them, and talk of them,
with an hidden Joy, whispering them to others, and adding thereunto, with a
desire to see them broken, and their Nakedness laid open, if any thing be
amiss: And thus it has wrought in a Mystery of Wickedness in some Unjudged,
until it be seated in the Throne of open Enmity and Strife against the Lambs of
Christ; preferring the Society of the Profane before them, and taking Part
therewith against them, joining with any who seek to scatter them. And what
ever pretense this Spirit seeks to cover it self with, this I declare of it,
(having been kept by the good Hand of God, to see it revealed in its Ground and
End) that it is the Old Spirit of the Ranters, which now in a new Way makes
Head against the Light of Christ, and Life of his Cross; which is the only
thing that stands in its Way, by condemning its Filthiness in every Conscience:
And so they, in whom this is Entered, being exalted above the Living Witness in
themselves, would devour it in others.

And this in the Presence and Fear of God I declare, without the least
Prejudice against the Person of any Man or Woman; but in Obedience to God, and
for the Seeds sake, lest any more of the simple should be deceived, and that
such as are deceived already, might recover themselves out of Satan's Snares;
no selfish End have I in it, God knows. And long time has my Soul been in
travail, ever I could obtain Power herein, so strongly has he that lets
withstood my Way.

Therefore in the Bowels of tender Love, I warn you all, to take heed how you
ever come under that Spirit under any pretense whatsoever; but let the Fear of
God, and sound Judgment in the Spirit of Meekness, you all preserve above it;
for wheresoever it enters by consent, it is hardly got out again: And if it be,
it is not without much Sorrow: And this I have found in the Depth, which for
your sakes I declare in Plainness and Truth, as I have learned of the Lord,
laboring with him without ceasing, that the rest of the People of God every
where may be saved from this Devourer, who goes daily about to deceive, and
whosoever he takes, he casts into the Earth, or into the Sea; for Wickedness is
with him wheresoever he goes.

Even the Lord God Almighty arm you all against his Wiles, being warned thereof
in his Love, and the Eternal Power of Holiness you all preserve clean to
Himself, who are dearer unto me than ever, and that in no other thing, but in
that Innocent Principle in which you are kept free from all the Pollutions of
the World, and Fleshly Liberty, and stand Witnesses for God against it, before
all Men, and in no other thing have I fellowship with any, which is that I seek
to set up above all.

And this was I moved to give forth, to go every where, as a Witness against
that unclean Spirit wherever it goes, felling its Work is to run to and fro
to deceive; that all may be warned by what I have learned in Sufferings, and
they that will not may be left without excuse.

JAMES NAYLOR.
Written in Bridewell, about the Beginning of 1658.
FINIS. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.
TRUTH Cleared from Scandals: Being James Naylor's Answer, and Declaration,
Touching some things Charged upon him, in the Lancashire PETITION.
HAVING heard of diverse Untruths cast upon me by some of the Priests in their
High Places, though I stand only to the Lord in respect of my self; yet least
any that love the Truth, should be led to speak Evil of the things they know
not, I shall lay open the Truth, as it is in me Revealed; touching those things
Jude 10. Re. 19. 13 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1. 25. John 1. 14. Ephesians. 5.
30. and 1. 21, 22. Joh. 8. 12. 2 These. 2. 8 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
whereof I have been Falsely Accused.

1. Concerning Jesus Christ, who is the Eternal Word of God, by whom all things
were made and are upholden, which was before all Time, but manifested in Time,
for the Recovery of Lost Man; which Word became Flesh, and dwelt amongst the
Saints, who is the same Yesterday, and to Day, and for Ever; who did, and does
dwell in the Saints; who Suffered and Rose again, and Ascended into Heaven, and
is set at the Right Hand of God, to whom all Power is given, in Heaven and in
Earth; who fills all Places; is the Light of the World, but known to none,
but those who Receive and Follow him, and those he leads up to God, out of all
the Ways, Works and Worships of the World, by his pure Light in them, whereby
he Reveals the Man of Sin, and by his Power casts him out, and so prepares the
Bodies of the Saints a fir Temple for the pure God to dwell in, with whom
dwells no Unclean thing; and thus he Reconciles God and Man, and the Image of
God, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
which in Purity and Holiness is renewed; and the Image of Satan, which is all
Sin and Uncleanness, is defaced; and none Col. 3. 10.
can Witness Redemption, further than Christ is thus Revealed in them, to set
them Free from Sin: Which Christ, I Witness John 8. 34, 36.
to be Revealed in me in Measure. Gal. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Col. 1. 27.

2. Concerning the Scriptures, That they are a true Declaration 1 John 1. 3, 5.
2 Pet. 1. 21, 22. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Rev. 22. 18. Tim. 3. 16, 17.
of that Word which was in them, that gave or spoke them forth, and are of no
Private Interpretation; but were given forth to be Read and Fulfilled in the
Saints, as they were given forth by the Holy Ghost, without adding or
diminishing, and was not given forth for Men to make a Trade upon, to get Money
by; but as they are, they are Profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
Perfect; thoroughly furnished unto every good Work: But they who tread in the
Letter, and are Ignorant of the Mystery, deny all Perfection, and none can
rightly 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. Joh. 3. 11. Acts 1. 5. 1 Cor. 12. 13. 1 Pet. 3. 2.
Col. 2. 12. Gal. 3. 27. Romans 6. 3. Mat. 26. 26, 28. John 6. 51, 53, 54, 55, 56.
1 Cor. 10. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. Col. 2. 10. Acts 4. 32. 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28,
29, Joh. 5. 20.
understand the Scriptures, but they who Read them with the same Spirit that
gave them forth, For the Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God; for they are Spiritually discerned.

3. Concerning Baptism, the true Baptism is that of the Spirit, with the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire, Baptized by one Spirit into one Body, not the washing
away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: without which, no other Baptism can
Save us, they being but Figures or Shadows, but this Baptism of Christ is the
Substance, whereby we are Baptized into his Death; and those who are Baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ.

4. Concerning the Lord's Supper, the true Supper of the Lord, is the Spiritual
Eating and Drinking of the Flesh and Blood of Christ Spiritually, which the
Spiritual Man only Eats, and is thereby nourished up unto Eternal Life;
without which Eating, there can be no Life in the Creature, profess what you
will; and all who Eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup, have real Communion
with Christ the Head, and also one with another, as Members, and are all of one
Heart, and one Mind, a Complete Body in Christ. Now the World who take only the
Outward Signs, and are not brought into a discerning of the Lords Body, Eat and
Drink Damnation to themselves, and so become guilty of the Body and Blood of
Christ; and calls this a Communion, but Lives in Envy, Strife and Debate,
Fighting, and going to Law one with another, for Earthly things.

5. Concerning the Resurrection. That all shall arise to give 1 Cor. 15. 38.
an Account, and receive at the Last Day according to their Works done in the
Flesh, whether Good or Evil; these Bodies that are Dust, shall turn to Dust,
but God shall give a Body as pleases him; that which is sown in Corruption
shall be raised 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44, 46, 50, 51.
in Incorruption; it is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body; and
as we have born the Image of the Earthly, so we shall bear the Image of the
Heavenly. But Flesh and Blood Rev. 20. 6. Phil. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 20.
cannot Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; neither does Corruption Inherit
Incorruption, for we shall all be changed. But they who cannot witness the
first Resurrection, within themselves, know nothing of the second, but by
hearsay: And therefore say 1 Cor. 15. 47. Col. 1. 15.
some of your Teachers, that Christ is in Heaven with a Carnal Body; now that
Christ, who is the first Fruits, should be there with a Carnal Body, and the
Saints with a Spiritual Body, is not proportionable.

6. Concerning Magistracy. That it is an Ordinance of God, Ordained for the
Punishment of Evil doers, and an Encouragement Romans 13. 3.
to them that do Well. Where Justice and Righteousness is the Head, and Rules,
without Partiality, that Land is kept in Peace; and those who Judge for the
Lord, I Honor as my Jude 16.
own Life; not with a Flattering Honor of putting off the Hat, and bowing of
the Knee, which is the Honor of the World, having Men's Persons in Admiration,
because of Advantage, for Self Ends; but from my Heart, for Conscience sake,
Romans 13. 5.
as to the Power which is of God, and not to Men's Persons: For the Scripture
says, He that Respects Persons commits Sin, and is Convinced of the Law as are
Transgressors. And the Apostle James James 2. 5. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4.
Commands the Saints, not to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of Glory with Respect of Persons: And says, such are Partial in themselves,
and become Judges of Evil Thoughts. And Romans 13. 1, 5.
says Paul, Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers: For says he,
there is no Power but of God. The Powers that be, are ordained of God, not of
Man; and that whosoever Resists the Power, Resists the Ordinance of God:
And says, We must needs be Subject for Conscience sake. And therefore, though
the Prophets and Saints were often sent by the Lord, to Pronounce Judgment
against Unjust Men, who had the Power committed to them, and did not Judge for
God, but for Self Ends; yet they never attempted to raise any Violence against
them, but used all means to Persuade them to do Justly, Love Mercy, and Mic. 6.
8
walk humbly with God, that they might be Established, and the Wrath of God
turned away from them: For those that be of God, cannot Rejoice in the
Destruction of any, but would 1 Pet. 1. 12. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
have all to turn to God and find Mercy.

7. Concerning the Ministry. The true Ministers of Jesus Christ have always
been, and are still such as came not by the Will of Man, but by the Will of
God; neither are they fitted for that Work by any thing of Man, but by God
alone; for the true Ministry is the Gift of Jesus Christ, given for the
Perfecting of the Saints, and needs no addition of Humane Helps and 1 Cor. 12.
7.
Learning, but as the work is Spiritual, and of the Lord, so they are
Spiritually fitted only by the Lord. And therefore he chose Pet. 4. 10. 11.
Gal. 11. 11, 12, 16.
Herds-Men, Fishermen, and Plough-Men, and suchlike; and as he gave them an
Immediate Call, without the Leave of Man; so he fitted them Immediately without
the Help of Man: And as they received the Gift Freely, so they were to give
Freely: And when ever they found any of the false Ministers, who Taught for
Hire, they Cried out against them, and Pronounced Woes against them, and showed
them that they lay in Iniquity, because they thought that the Gift of God could
be Bought and Sold for Money. And Christ calls them Hirelings, Mat. 10. 8. Acts
8. 20. John 10. 13. Micah 3. 10. Jer. 5. 30. and 6. 13. Isai. 56. 10, 11. 2
Pet. 2. 14, 15. 2 Cor. 11. 15. Jude 11.
and says, they care not for the Sheep. And Micah cries out against the
Priests that Taught for Hire, and says, They Build up Sion with Blood, and
Jerusalem with Iniquity. And Jeremiah, cried out against the Priests in his
Days, that bare Rule by their means and calls it an Horrible thing, and says.
That from the least of them to the greatest, they are all given to
Covetousness. And Isaiah cried out of such in his Days, and calls them Greedy
Dogs, that can never have enough; and says he, they all look for their Gain
from their Quarter. And Peter says of such in his Days as should come, that
they through Covetousness should make Merchandise of the People, and says,
They have Hearts exercised with Covetous Practices, who have forsaken the right
Way, and have followed the Way of Balaam, who loved the Wages of
Unrighteousness. And Jude cries, Woe unto them, for they go on in the Way of
Cain, and run greedily after the Error of Balaam for Rewards. But those that
were sent out by Christ, counted it their Reward, to make the Gospel without
Charge; neither ever had they any set 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 4. 11. Gal.
4. 19.
means, but went about, having no certain Dwelling Place; neither were Masters,
but Servants to all for Christ's sake: Nor ever went to Law for Tithes, or any
other Earthly thing, but Suffered Persecution; and as always he that was after
the Flesh Persecuted him that was after the Spirit; even so it is now. Now all
People, Try your Priests by the Scriptures, whether they are of God or of the
World; and never think to hear the Word of the Lord from their Mouths, who walk
contrary to the Scriptures; for such were never sent of God; for had they been
sent of God, they would abide in his Doctrine. And John 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Joh. 9. 10. 2 John 9. 10, 11.
says, such has not God, but he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has
both the Father and the Son. And if there come any to you, and bring not this
Doctrine, you are forbidden to receive them into your Houses, or bid them God
Speed, for if you do, you are partakers of their Evil Deeds. And unto the
Wicked, says God, What have thou to do to Declare my Statutes, or that thou
should Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
take my Covenant into thy Mouth, seeing thou hate Instruction, and castest
my Words behind thy Back, and art a partaker with the Thief, the Adulterer,
Evil-Speaking, Slandering and Deceit, and such as Psalm. 50. 21.
do these things, think God to be like themselves. But I will Reprove thee, and
set them in order before thine Eyes.

J. N.
1653.
The Condition and Portion of the People of England, who have long Flattered
themselves with the Church-Ministry, and Ordinances; but upon Trial, are found
to be the Synagogues of Satan, Persecutors of the Truth, and Enemies of the
Gospel of Christ.
The Lion has Roared, Tremble all you Beasts of the Field. The Trumpet has
sounded, let the Beast prepare himself to Battle, for the great Day of Sions
Recompense is at hand, and Woe to all her Enemies.

I Have heard a Voice of Woe and Terror, to come upon all the Inhabitants of
the Earth: Repent all you Inhabitants of the Earth, the Sword of the Lord is
Furbished against you, to make a grievous Slaughter; Howl, Woe and Misery, all
sorts of People, who have preferred your own Wills, Lust, and Pleasures, before
the pure Law of God: Howl you Sodomites, and Belly-Gods of the Earth, who have
given up your selves to Fullness of Gluttony, and all Excess of Riot, Feeding
without the Fear of God, Sporting in the Day Time; Living like fed Horses,
spending the Creatures upon your Lusts, which were never made for that end: Woe
unto you, you Fat Swine, the Sins of Sodom are found among you, and the Plagues
of Sodom are nigh at hand. Woe unto you, for now is the Lord come to Require
his Corn and his Wine which he gave to Feed the Poor and Hungry, which your
Lusts have Devoured; the Wants of all Poor in the Nation cry out against you,
you have exceeded all that ever went before you, and you shall exceed in
Misery. Woe unto you Proud, Lustful and Lofty ones, that are lifted up in your
own Eyes, and have set your selves above the Fear of God, which Teaches
Humility, you plainly appear to be Children of the Devil, who is the Father of
all Pride and Self-exaltation; you bear the Image of the Serpent, you speckled
ones, who have Painted your selves in the various Colors, to make your selves
seem Glorious in the Eyes of others, that they may Bow to and Worship you. Woe
unto thou, that have set thy self in the Seat of God, thou art Weighed and
found Wanting, thy Pride is for the Fire, and thy Honor for the Dust, for now
isthe Lord coming to Enquire after his Wool and Flax, which he gave to Cloth
the Naked of all sorts, with which thou have Decked the Serpent, and spent it
upon thy Lusts, thereby to set thy self in the Seat of the Almighty. Woe, Woe,
Woe unto thee, thou that art exalted as high as Heaven, yea, as into God's
Throne, but thou shall be cast down to Hell, the Lamb is Risen to Rule the
Nations. Woe unto the Covetous Cruel Oppressors, who Live upon Dust, you Grind
the Face of the Poor, and Oppress them that are Fallen, your Measures you have
filled, and you have heaped up abundance against this Day of Wrath. The Fire of
the Almighty is kindled, and it shall never be Quenched till it has Devoured
and Burnt up you and your Heaps, and made you a Curse to the Generations that
shall come after. Woe unto the Evious Serpents that seek to Devour the
Innocent, that make a Prey upon them that depart from Iniquity, you are the.
Head of the Serpent, that must fulfill what is spoken of you, and you now show
the Enmity that God has put between the two Seeds, now thy Rage is come, the
Seed is come whose Heel thou art Bruising, who shall Bruise thy Head, thy Time
is as short as thy Rage is great. Rejoice all you that Suffer it, that the
Scriptures may be fulfilled. Woe unto you Scorners, you Sons of Hagar, you Sons
of Bondage to the Works of the Devil, Scorning, Backsliding, False Accusing,
Slandering and Evil Speaking; you are brought forth by the Egyptian Woman, and
are in Egyptian Darkness, and you cannot see that you are in the Works of the
Devil, and by him you are put on to Act against Christ, in his Saints. But now
is the Son of the FreeWoman brought forth, to whom the Heritage belongs, and
you shall be cast out among the Heathen, and Ungodly, and Judgment is coming
upon you, in which you shall not be able to Stand. Woe unto you Swearers and
Liars, under whose Tongues lies the Poison of Apses, which you vent out as you
are moved by your Father the Devil, against the Holy and Dreadful Name of the
Almighty, the Land is filled with this Generation, and has long Mourned
because of you: Who can pass in Streets or Markets, that Fear the Lord, and
their Hearts not be Broken to hear it? Do not all places abound with Vain
Oaths, and Lying Idle Words? Never was Nation like to this in these things, so
that any who will not use these Idle Words and Oaths, is known in the Streets
as they pass, and not esteemed worthy to Live in the Nation; and thus not only
with all the Common sort, but also with many that are in place of Authority to
Punish such things; and yet those are not afraid to call themselves Christians:
Shall not the Lord be Avenged on such a People as this? Woe unto you that Live
upon Deceit in your Weights and Measures, by your Slighty Words arising from
the Serpents Wisdom, which makes a Prey on the Simple; and when you have got
great Estates, you say, God has given you them; you are set up above them who
are made Poor by you; now is the Lord come to search you out, and you shall
Restore for your Theft Fourfold. Woe unto you that have had Power in your
Hands to restrain these things, but instead of using the Sword to scatter the
Works of Iniquity, have turned the Edge of it against such as the Lord has
called out of these things, and sent them to call others out, least they
partake of the Plagues that are to come upon those who are found in them. Woe,
Woe unto you Blind Guides, who have called your selves Christ's Seeds-men, and
now that the Lord of the Harvest is come to look for Fruits, here is no better
Fruit to Reap but such as these; and that among such as you call Saints, and
the Churches of Christ: And now that the Heir is Appearing, you are stirring up
the Powers of the Earth how to Destroy him, lest you be called to Account for
your great Care to feed your own Bodies, and heap up Carnal things, and the
little Care for the Souls of Christ's Flock: Now shall you not Escape, your Day
is near at hand. Who could have Believed that England would have brought forth
no better Fruits than these, now after such Deliverance, as no Nation else can
Witness? Oh! tell it not among the Heathen, least you strengthen the Hands of
the Enemy, and occasion the Wicked to Blaspheme the Name of the God of Hosts,
who is reported to be amongst us, and Subdued all our Enemies, and has
Delivered us thus far. Awake, Awake, all sorts of People, can you say you have
not had Power in your Hands against these Abominations? But now that you have
not proved Faithful in your Promises to the Lord, in the Day of your Fears;
therefore is the Lord coming to call to Account all sorts of Dissemblers and
Oppressors, and by his own Right Hand to get himself the Victory. And now Woe
unto you that have known to do Well, and had it in your Power, but have not
done it. Woe unto you that have taken Counsel at your own Wisdom, and
Multitudes, and not at the Spirit of the Lord, and have Strengthened your selves
by your Riches. Woe unto you Fruitless Trees, you have long been Dug and
Pruned, but no Fruits brought forth, you have long cumbred the Ground. Woe unto
you that are at ease in Sion, Howl, Woe and Misery; Tremble ye Women that are
at Ease, Strip you, make you Bare, put off your Pride, and put on Ashes, turn
your Music into Wailing, your Feasts into Fasting, and Bitter Lamentation, and
meet the Lord, if there may be Hope for your Souls, in the Day of his Fierce
Wrath that is coming upon the Earth. While you have time, improve it.

J. N.

THE END. Printed in the Year, 1654.
TWO EPISTLES OF JAMES NAYLOR's.
An Epistle to several Friends about Wakefield.
JAMES a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, unto all that love the Appearance of our
Lord Jesus Christ every where, Grace and Peace be multiplied from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ; My dear Hearts, you whom the Lord has
manifested so much Love unto, as to call you out of Sin and Death, and the
World, all the Delights and Pleasures of the World, which Fades away, up to
himself, where is Joy unspeakable, Pleasures and Riches that endure for
Evermore. Dear Friends, Watch and be Sober, that you may hear the voice of your
Beloved when he calls, and let not the precious profers of the Love of God be
tendered in vain; while you have an Ear open to the World, you cannot hear the
Voice of God, so that you have been made to groan under it: How long have you
been deceived by it, all your time promising Peace, Fullness, and Satisfaction;
but have been brought to cry out of Oppression and Deceit, and your Cries are
come before the Lord of Sabbaths, who is your Rest, and he is now appeared to
Deliver you, and set you free from Bondage, that you may serve him alone. And
now take heed of consulting with your Old Master; has the Lord been so
Merciful unto you, as that he has set your Faces out of Sodom and Egypt,
toward the promised Land, Oh take heed of looking back, lest you be taken
Captive, and led back again, and so you come short of Redemption, and your
Faith fail you, and so you come short of the Promise, for Unbelief cannot enter
into the Rest; but you, Dear Friends, put on Resolution, put on Strength, be
Valiant for your Freedom, cast off every Weight, follow your Captain the Lord
Jesus Christ, who for the joy set before him, endured the Cross, despised the
Shame, and so entered into Rest and Glory. Take heed of halting between God and
the World; what agreement can there be, or what Peace, while you are Married to
the World? Your thoughts turn in thither, and you are Adulterated from God, who
gives you all good things, as so many tokens of his Love; hereby is the broken
Language brought forth, and you cannot speak the pure Language of the Land of
Rest. And while you give way to that in you, which leads you to look back to
what is behind you; you keep your selves in the Wilderness and Darkness, and
lose your way, and know not where you are; Grieving the Holy Spirit of the Lord
which has appeared unto you, to Guide you: But (Oh Friends!) mind your Guide,
and follow him; Arise, Shine, your Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is
risen upon you, the Night is far spent, the Day is at hand, even the Day of
Sion's Deliverance; Arise, come away all you that love her, come off from the
World and Worldly things, come into the Life, lie no longer in Death and Dead
things. Awake thou that Sleep, and stand up from the Dead, that Christ may
give thee Light: Come forth, come forth of all Created things, witness your
Redemption from the World, that you are Redeemed from the Earth up to God, out
of all Kindreds, Tongues, People and Nations, to Reign as Kings and Priests for
Ever, above the World, Sin, and Death; Triumphing and Treading upon all that
would take you Captive. This is the Day of your Deliverance, own it with the
Loss of all Fading Pleasures, make it appear to all the World, this is the Day
you waited for, even the Day of your Joy, but of the Worlds Sorrow: A Day of
Blackness and Gloominess, a Day of Fear and Trouble to them that Oppress you; a
Day wherein the Kingdom of Jesus Christ shall be Exalted, and all the Kingdoms
and Powers of the Earth Shaken; a Day wherein the Lord will Avenge the Power of
him that is too strong for you: Rejoice, Rejoice ye Meek of the Earth, Shout
for Joy ye poor Despised ones, whom your Brethren have trodden upon, and have
cast you out, and you have been made their Mocking-stock for the Truths sake,
Sing and Rejoice, the Voice of a King is amongst you, and he will Marry you to
himself in Righteousness, Purity and Holiness, and will Rejoice over you, as a
Bridegroom over the Bride, and you shall be for a Crown of Glory in the hand of
the Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of your God. O my dear Hearts, my
desire to God for you all, is, that you might come to see what unspeakable
Riches is laid up for you in Jesus Christ, which is hid from all Flesh, neither
can they see it who live after the Flesh; and while they continue their Love to
the World and Worldly things, they keep out the Manifestation of the Father's
Love, for their Hearts cannot receive both: Now show your selves Wise Men,
choose that which is Eternal, here is Light and Life tendered you in Jesus
Christ, freely out of the Father's Love, freely receive Life and Love, and show
forth Life and Love to God again, by giving up to him all you have, and all you
are for Christ's sake, that so you may come to receive all again with Christ,
who is the fullness of the Father's Love, and in him are all good things needful
for this Life, and that which is to come, even the earnest of your Inheritance,
which none can take from you; which being received, you shall never hunger
more, having a Wellspring within, even the Witness of Eternal Life and Love;
and as Christ Appears, who is our Life and Love, so shall Life and Love Appear,
Spring, Blossom, and bring forth Fruit toward God and Man; that so being
raised with him from Death and Dead Works, you may henceforth Live unto God,
and being brought into Oneness with him, and Purity, and Holiness, you may be
one amongst your selves, of one Heart and one Mind, speaking one and the self
same thing, and having the same care one for another, as for your selves. And
take heed that there be not in any of you, a Principle of Self-love, which will
lead to Separation and Division, casting a stumbling block in the way of the
Simple; and so they that are Weak may be Defiled and turned back into the
World. And I beseech you Brethren, that you mark them that once set their Faces
toward Sion, but not being willing to deny the World, and take up the Cross,
have consulted with Flesh and Blood, and turned back into Egypt again; of such
take heed, knowing that the same Spirit that has wrought in them Deceitfully,
will not cease to work by them to Deceive others to maintain its own Kingdom;
but you standing fast in the pure Light of Christ, shall see whither those
Return, and the cause of their Returnings, and that the end of such is worse
than the beginning; but there will be such, that they who are approved may be
made manifest. But you my Brethren, be ye so far from following such, that
their falling away, may cause you to watch and search by what Power you stand,
and so a pure fear may be preserved in you, by which you may be kept in the way
that leads to the Crown which is Immortal: For it is he that overcomes that
must wear the Crown, wherefore faint not, nor think any thing hard the Lord
calls you unto, nothing must Suffer but that which is to Die, that your Souls
may Live: Oh your light Affliction works for you a far more exceeding weight
of Glory, while you keep your Eye to that which is Invisible! wherefore give up
your selves to his will in all things: Stand in the will of God in your present
Condition, you are my joy in the Lord; let my bowels be refreshed to hear of
your Stedfastness and Growth in the Truth: Take heed of propounding ends to
your selves in any thing, for that leads out of the way of God, and gives way
to your own Wisdom; and so you seek to preserve that Alive which is appointed
for Death, and so you maintain War against God, and know it not; and in this
condition you can have no Peace, while the Enemies are in Arms against your
Peace. Oh! dear Friends, you are in my Heart, my Prayer to God for you is, that
you may be kept blameless to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, blessed for
Ever. My fellow Prisoner, and dear Companion in the Lord Salutes you F. H.
all: Cease not to Pray for us, that we may be kept to his Praise, who has
counted us worthy to Suffer for his Name, we are well and in great Peace, kept
in our Father's Love above all; we are often brought to stand and wonder how we
are kept in the midst of the Fire, and not Consumed; and the more that the
Enemy Rages, the more are we kept in Peace within: Here are strange Devices
used to ensnare us, to get ought against us (true or false) but all is ordered
by a power the World knows not, God is our Strength; Rejoice with us all, dear
Friends, and Praise his Name for Evermore, for he is worthy, for his Mercy
endures for Ever.

JAMES NAYLOR.
A Prisoner at Appleby in Westmoreland for the Truths sake, 1653.
To all Dear BRETHREN and FRIENDS in Holderness, and in the East Parts of
Yorkshire.
DEAR Friends, I Rejoice in you, as you are entered into the Love of the Truth,
and have owned the Voice that calls out of the Darkness that is over all the
Earth, to set your Faces toward Sion the City of Everlasting Light: And now
mind your Way, and the Light that is given to Guide you in the Way, to keep
your Eye to the Light, that it may lead you through all the Visible things of
the World, and as you pass through you may stand single in the Mind unto God,
not turning to the right or left Hand, where lies the Temptation, nor looking
back, which lays you open to be Assaulted afresh by those Evils you had once
escaped from; but keeping the Eye toward the Mark, pass on, leaving and
forgetting what is behind, and Treading and Trampling under your Feet, what the
Enemy shall lay as stumbling blocks in your way, which your Carnal Eyes, or
Ears, or Hearts would be closing with, for the Temptation lies in the Carnal
things, and there is the Bondage of the Creature to things that are Corrupt,
from which Bondage, from Sin and Corruption, the Lord is now Appeared, that in
the Light he may Redeem and lead out of it, all that will own and follow him;
and this Light and Redemption is in his Son, whom he is about to Exalt, in
which Exaltation a strange and mighty Work is to be brought to pass, whereat
all that stand not in his Counsel and Fear, and to whom he shall not Reveal his
Secrets, shall be offended, for all that is exalted shall be laid low and
debased, the Wisdom of the Wise shall come to naught, and the Understanding of
the Prudent ones shall be hid, Riches and Honors shall fall to Dust, from
whence they came, and the Worship of the World shall become Filthiness, the
Gods of the Heathens shall be Famished with looking for Worship, but shall get
none, and the strongest of them shall not be able to deliver himself; for the
Lord will bring down all Heights and Mountains into the Valleys, for in the
Valley of Jehosaphat he will plead with all Flesh, which has scattered the
Seed of the Covenant: And now dear Friends, here is your Peace and Blessedness,
that you Silence all Flesh, and cease from your own Wisdom, and give over your
Imaginations about the things of God; come out of the Love of the World, and
arise out of all Visible things, and prepare to meet the Lord; cast off all
your Idols that have had your Hearts, and put off the stumbling blocks of your
Iniquities from before your Faces, and give up all that will not that he should
Reign over them, that his Enemies may be your Enemies, for in Judgment and
Righteousness is he come out, to be Avenged upon the Unrighteous Seed, and now
stand in the Light, that a separation may be made in you, the Precious from the
Vile, that a true savor may arise, that you may know your Calling and
Election, what is called, and what you are to come out of, lest you stay in any
of that to which the Plagues is, for this is the cause of your Suffering, not
discerning in the pure Wisdom, what that Antichrist or exalted Spirit is, that
is got into the Seat of God, and shows himself to be as God, whose Kingdom
stands in the Wisdom, Glory and Riches of the World, whereat all that knows not
the true God in Spirit ask Counsel; therefore, dear Friends, look not out into
the Visible things, for there he is ready to present to you false Voices, and
Visions, Lying-wonders, to lead out the vain Mind into the Liberty and Boasting
of high things, in Words without Power; but while such speak of Liberty, they
are in Bondage, in Mind, to Corrupt and Fading things, and while these are Head
in the Creature, there is not Redemption: For the Bonds of Iniquity are
unloosed, and the pure seed is oppressed, and the Plagues must pass upon that
Nature, therefore sink down into the Sufferings and Death, that you may find
the Door whereat to Enter, for there is a Vale of Tears to pass through, you
shall find your Well-springs in him, where you shall drink of the Water of
Life, and find Refreshment, and grow from Strength to Strength, till you come
up to Sion: Stand fast, take heed of Words without Life, spoken from the
Comprehensions; for that Feeds not the pure Seed, but Feeds the Wisdom which is
above, and the Itching Ears, and so the pure is covered with Earth, and the
Fowls of the Air is fed, and no Fruit is brought forth to Perfection, and take
heed of that Nature that would know more than God is willing to Reveal; for you
shall find that unwilling to obey what it knows, and take heed of that which
desires to appear before Men to be commended, for that seldom deserves Praise
of God; and let a Godly Conversation declare what is within, and know one
another in Spirit, and not in Word, and meet often together, and wait upon God
(for his Teaching alone) in a Cross to your own Wills, for therein is the
Secrets of God Revealed: Let Love abound in you one toward another, without
being Partial; and I beseech you by the Love of God, that you halt not between
God and the World; but as you Profess that you are not of the World, so let
your Conversation be out of its Fashions, Customs, and Traditions, and Covetous
Practices, that it may appear you are marked out for the Lord's, and that you
are not ashamed to own that which differs, and so walk, as not to cast an
offense on the Gospel, that you become not a scorn to Fools, but let Wisdom be
justified of her Children, and take heed of that which would be exalted above
others, Teaching and Talking of things without Life; and you that would be
counted somebody, let such first learn to wash the Feet of them they would be
above, and he that would be Greatest, let him be Servant to all, for it is the
Humble, and not the High Spirits that are Taught of God, and such so walk, as
their Lives and Practices Teach and Judge, all Vain, Light, and Heighty
Spirits; and mind how you grow out of the Earth, and out of that which is in
the Enmity; and until you be brought out of the Love of all Visible things, and
wholly infolded into the Love of God, you cannot witness Redemption, nor
receive the true Joy that arises in the Manifestation of the Love, for it is
only he that is brought up out of the Death to Reign over it, whose Heart is
come out of the Unrighteous Mammon, who is entered into the Kingdom of
Righteousness, Joy and Peace; and as you arise out of the Earthly Bondage, you
shall witness the glorious Liberty, and so come to know your own Measures,
every one in particular to improve it, and not to boast above it in another
Man's Line; and so you will come to see by what Power you stand in your
Warfare, how far you are Conquerors, and who is your Enemy at present, and so
be able to give an Account in your selves of your Faith, and how you grow from
Faith to Faith: And dear Friends, watch over one another, Ex^ort, Reprieve,
Admonish in pure Love and Meekness of Spirit, least you also be Tempted, and
all know, that you are set as a City on a Hill, as Signs to this Generation;
therefore lift up your Light to all the World, that all Mouths may be Stopped,
and Hearts Convinced; so that all that see you, may see you to be Children of
Light, and being Judged by you, may be ashamed of their deeds of Darkness, for
great is the work of the Lord, and Blessed are they that are found Faithful in
it, in what is committed to them. Farewell, dear Hearts, and the Lord God
Almighty Bless, Prosper, and Preserve you Pure and Clear unto his Kingdom,
Amen. My Love in the Lord Salutes you all, and if my Father please, I shall be
glad to see your Faces in the Flesh; but his Will is my Peace, who is Blessed
for Evermore.

Written from Nuby the last Day of the Seventh Month, 1653. A Lover of your
Souls, JAMES NAYLOR.
The Work of the Lord is great in those Parts, and he carries it on with a High
Hand, having got himself the Victory.

Praise the Lord with us, all that know him, who is worthy, even him alone for
Ever.



FINIS Printed in the YEAR, 1654.

