THE Pacquet-Boat Advice: OR A DISCOURSE Concerning the WAR WITH FRANCE,
Between some English Gentlemen and a Frenchman, betwixt Calis and Dover.

Omnis fabula fundatur in veritate.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1678.

THE PACQUET-BOAT ADVICE, etc.
HAVING received Advice from some of my Friends in England, that there was a
little cloud of discontent arising by reason of the Jealousies of the growing
greatness of the French, their many great and unexpected Conquests, which they
seemed not only obstinately resolved to keep themselves possessed of, but by
the progress of their Arms to enlarge and extend; ran guessing that in all
probability these storms would not be allayed without some showers of Blood, I
began to unfix my self from my residence at Mompellier, whether my Curiosity
and the Course of my Studies had carried me; and my intentions were to have
spent some time, and then to have passed over the Alps to see Italy, the Garden
of the World.

But receiving Letters of fresh date, giving an account of his Highness the
Prince of Orange's Marriage with the Lady Mary, and His Majesty's calling of
the Parliament, sooner than the General expectation.

I began then to think that there was something at the bottom of the flying
Rumors: being not willing to run the hazard of being ill treated in France,
where I had not so perfectly made my self Master of the Language as to pass for
a Native, and considering, that I had no way to support my self but by Bills of
Exchange or begging, if there should be a War between the two Nations, I began
to reflect how difficult it would be for me to secure my self of constant
supplies, and that if I had them, possibly I might run the risque of being
suspected and seized for an Intelligencer; and not daring to trust to the
Charity of a People who are so impoverished, as generally rather to expect it
from Strangers than to afford it them; and where my very being an Englishman
would deprive me of the Charity of such as were able, since they would look
upon me as an Enemy; and in truth fancying that I should make a very ill
Beggar, it being a Trade I had no acquaintance with, upon these considerations
I thought it more advisable to take my Leave of France, and to retire into my
Native Country: upon which resolution I departed with the first convenience
that offered, for Paris, where when I arrived, the Rumor was hot amongst the
English, that there would be a War, and that very speedily, though the French
were very mute and hush about it.

These considerations, made me think of staying less time then I intended at
Paris, and therefore I made immediately for Callis in order to my coming over
in the Pacquet-Boat for Dover.

We went aboard with the morning tide, the day proving exceeding fair, and the
wind which we had scarce enough, and not directly for us; it made our passage
something more tedious; but however the Company were so Civil to themselves and
one to another, as to endeavor to shorten the passage, by stealing some hours
in entertaining themselves with variety of discourses upon sundry subjects.

Amongst the rest there was one Gentleman who started the discourse, concerning
the present Rumor of the War, and desired the opinion of the Company about it,
whether they did believe it would prove so in good earnest, or whether it was
not only an overture and appearance. His concern and inquisitiveness made me
guilty of the same humor, and rather because amongst a great variety of
Entertainment, all the Company had discovered themselves, as to their designs
and professions, and some of them without any reserve, even to their very
Names, and the places of their habitation, yet I found this person not so
innocent and simply liberal, only he told us he was a Merchant in Paris, who
had some Correspondents in England, and that the News of the War had persuaded
him to cross over the Seas, and so for London, to endeavor to secure his
effects there, in case there should be a Rupture in good earnest, and that he
had considerable Bills of Exchange upon the account of several of the greatest
French Merchants in England, I gave him the patience of hearing, but I confess
no great credit to his words; for me thought his Mine, his Equipage, and his
Discourse betrayed something more in him, than mere Merchant; and I perceived
he had been abroad upon other affairs than those of Traffic, for he gave us a
punctual account of the most considerable Actions of the present War in
Flanders and Germany: but that which gave me the greatest suspicion, was his
frequent mention of something more than a bare knowledge of most of the great
Persons of the Court of France, and particularly of Mounsieur Lovois and
Mounsieur Colbert, whom he called the great Patron of Merchants, trade and
industry, extolling him to heaven, and protesting that if his designs took
effect, France would certainly be the only Emporium or Market of the World.
This Jealousy, that he did Trade with these great persons only for Diamonds,
having once infected my imagination, I had a curiosity to drive it as far as I
could, with all the studied Ignorance and simplicity I was capable of, and
pretending great kindness to this Nation a folly too common and usually true
with the English, who are wont with a kind of Witchcraft to dote upon the
French. So that we fell smartly upon the Subject of the War, and in regard I
appeared most forward in my Civility, and ready to entertain his discourse, he
thought he had met with a right English Spaniel; and therefore making his
application particularly to me Mounsieur (says he) you are an Englishman, and
though you have spent some time in France, yet I doubt not but by your
appearance, which seems to discover you to be no common person, you have good
intelligence from persons of condition, you will infinitely oblige the Company
and my self in a most particular manner, if you will honor us with your
opinion, whether or no you do believe, that we shall fall from those good terms
of Friendship and Alliance, which his Majesty of Great Britain has hitherto
conserved for his most Christian Majesty.

Sir, replied I, you set too obliging a value upon the opinion of a Stranger,
but it is the usual effect of your generosity, which I shall in some measure
endeavor to merit by my obedience to your commands: for I was willing to pay
him with his own Coin. But Sir, added I, your question is of too great
consideration, to find a resolution from my private opinion. Affairs of that
high nature are only transacted in the Cabinets of our great Masters, and it
may be it is no less a point of presumption than folly, for us to concern our
selves about them. Mounsieur (said he briskly) what we say is only to divert
our passage, and borrow an hour or two from these slow Sails and the Wind,
which uses not at this time of the Year to be so sluggish. But in my opinion
there are several reasons which may be alleged to persuade the World, that
this will not come to blows.

Sir, said a good blunt Gentleman with a Scar of honor in his face, who lay
all along in the Boat, and had not spoken till then; it may be you are not so
well acquainted with the English as I am; for my part I am not much concerned
cern'd in affairs of State, nor am I acquainted with the Counsels of Princes,
but let me assure you by what I have heard and know, that if it were put to the
Vote of the People, whether a War or no War with FRANCE, I believe not one in a
thousand, but would be for a War.

Mounsieur, said the Frenchmam a little fired at his discourse, no wonder at
that, the people are like the Element which now carries us, full of floods and
ebbs, and it may be they will to morrow be as forward for a Peace as to day
they are for a War; you English love to talk of Wars, but you hate to part with
your money to desray the charge of it.

Sir, said the Gentleman, raising himself a little, I know not whether we can
part with our money, but we will part with our blood freely, it is said indeed
you part with yours, and shoot golden Bullets, and make use of Keys of the same
metal, which will open a breach or a Gate into the strongest Fortifications;
but Sir we have been used to do it with Steel and Iron, and yet give me leave
to tell you, I hope we shall be so wise, rather to part with our money, than to
keep it till the French comes with armed Troops to collect it, as they do in
their own Country, and I hope, yet before I die to help to open some of the
Gates of Paris with that hard metal, and to hear the drums beat the heavy
English march through the Streets again, which once spoiled a Jest of one of
your Kings.

Mounsieur, said the French Merchant, as he called himself, biting the nails of
his thumb, by which I knew he was angry, Jerne Diabile, you will find something
to do before you come there; the King of FRANCE has two hundred thousand gens
d'arms who will bid all Europe stand, and 100 Sale of Ships, who will speak
Thunder and Lightening, and make bold to stop your passage.

Messires (interposed I, not willing to have these heats spoil our
conversation) be so obliging not to transport your selves into a heat about an
affair, which was only started, for our divertisement, there is no War yet, and
I hope none there will be. Sir, answered the English Gentleman fiercely, there
is not, but I hope there will be, and that quickly too. This Gentleman as I
understood after our Landing, was an English Captain, a Soldier of fortune,
who was taken Prisoner going wounded from Maestritcht, and not having wherewith
to ransom himself, according to the rate set upon him, had been a long time
very ill used amongst the French, but having made friends to procure a small
ransom, which they were willing to take rather than none at all, having got
his Liberty; was coming over to look for some employ wherewith he might at once
satisfy both his necessity and revenge: I gave him a little sign which he
understood, and being unwilling to hinder the prosecution of the discourse he
laid himself down again, upon which I took up the former argument of my French
Merchant, and desired him to favor us with the reasons that moved him to
believe there would be no War.

Mounsieur (said he) can the English Nation possibly live more happily than at
present they do, whilst enjoying peace they have the Commerce and Traffic of
the whole World, without paying any Gabels, Taxes, I think, you call them; and
would it not be a strange thing for them to put their finger into their
Neighbors fire when there is no necessity; when they have all the assurances
of his most Christian Majesty, that he has all the Honor and Esteem for them
imaginable, and that he would be ready to do them all the good Offices, as his
Majesty did in the late War with Holland in 1665. when the Count D'Estrees was
sent with a Squadron of gallant Ships to your assistance against the Dutch.

Mounsieur said I, people speak variously of that assistance, and I have heard
some persons affirm that Mounsieur D'Estrees did the English more prejudice,
than kindness; and I remember I saw a Letter, which affirmed that the not
coming in of the French Squadron ravished an assured victory from the English.

Upon which the Steersman of the Vessel would put in his oar into the Boat,
marry said he, I was then aboard the London under Sir John Harman; and I saw
never a Ship of the French strike a stroke, but how do you call him, Mounsieur
Martin he fought like a gallant man board and board with the Dutch, but they
say, when he came home he was clapped up in the Tower of Paris for his pains.

Friend, said I, to him, you mean Mounsieur Martel, and that he was made a
prisoner in the Bastile, but it was not for fighting, but for disobeying the
order of his Admiral. Mounsieur added the French Merchant, it was for some
Language, which he gave the Count D'Estrees, which did not become him to give,
nor the other to receive, but what signifies one idle talking Captain, who was
justly punished for his insolence, but Mounsieur said he, turning himself to
me, if it were not the advantage of Trade, which you do and may enjoy upon
keeping up a good understanding with the French, yet the Puissence of his Arms,
which is so glorious beyond all that ever were before him, attended with a
thousand victories, a thousand successes, might persuade you not to be so hasty
to enter into a war with a Nation, so great, so Potent, so Fortunate, and who
is not without hopes still of greater assistances and alliances; and possibly
e're long you may hear that some other Princes have declared in favor of
FRANCE.

Sir said I to him, the Argument which you use to persuade to peace is that
which generally I suppose in England is accounted the greatest motive of the
War; the wealth and puissance, the Victories and Conquests of the French, is
that which makes them looked upon as too great and dangerous a Neighbor both
in Peace and War; in peace because they will certainly, they affirm, diminish
their trade and treasure as they find by experience; and in War, there is no
doubt, but their greatness must needs make them sensible of their danger, and
they esteem it therefore a point of prudence to endeavor (if possible) to
arrest the course of their designs, before they break all the banks, and
ancient limits, which were the boundaries of their Ancestors, and overflowing
these parts of the World with a dominion, the name of which is odious to the
English.

Mounsieur reparted the French Gent. you do well to put it only by way of
supposition (if possible) for I assure you, had you but seen the French Armies
such brave men, such gallant Captains --

Upon which the English Captain, who I thought had been at his repose starts
up; what men do you mean, pray Sir? Are you not obliged to our Countrymen for
your brave achievements you talk of; pray who was it that took Maestritcht?
Are you not obliged to the Duke of Monmouth and the English for that Town? Who
was it that saved Marshall Turene oftener than once in Alsace? and who was it
that brought off his Army after that he was knocked of the head? when these men
are drawn off from you, and when they come to fight against you, we shall hear
of another Story.

Sir said I to him all the World must allow, that the French are brave men,
well disciplined, and that their Commanders are the most vigilent and expert
Captains of the Age.

Pray Sir, said he short upon me, are you an Englishman Frenchified, or a
Frenchman in the disguise of English? But be an Englishman or a Frenchman, or
what you will I would tell you a Story of one of the gallant French Commanders,
which will be reason enough to persuade all Englishmen to love them less than
they do (if it be possible) and to fight with them, and beat them too, which is
very possible; for let them give you never so good words at present if ever you
come within their clutches, they will use you like Dogs and worse, for they
will give you a knock but the Devil a bit with it. I was a Captain at Woerden
when the French lay in Vtrecht, and if you will give me leave I will tell you
of a brave speech which the Duke Luxemburgh, now the Marshall Montmorency made
to his Soldiers;

Mounsieur said the French Merchant, interrupting him, pray spare the Duke of
Luxemburgh, I presume you do not know him; for he is certainly the most
obliging gallant Gentleman of the world.

Sir, replied the Captain, he may be what he will; I have seen him, and if he
were here I would say what I have said; and hope as gallant as he is, if I can
come near him for his life Guard to change a Pistol with him laden with a
brace of slugs of good English Lead, and though mine will not shoot so far as
your French Pistols (which they say are better for Battery then heavy Cannon)
yet they will kill the gallantest Frenchman in the Army, if they have but the
luck to hit him three inches underneath his feather. And for the Duke
Luxemburgh, I will justify. --

Hold, hold; Noble Captain, said I, you are a man of war, we are all peaceable,
and I beg the favor of you, that you will allow us the freedom of discourse,
it is only to pass away our time till we come to Dover, it will not now be long,
and therefore applying my self to my Merchant, Sir; said I, there is no doubt
but the French are a most potent Nation, and if some other Princes of the
Empire should join with him, it would be a considerable addition to his power;
but still give me leave to speak in favor of my Countrymen the English, they
are a people not to be despised; and if it be true, which is said, that there
is a strict confederation between them and the Hollanders, they will out do you
far at Sea; and if they cut of your Navy, they cut off an Arm from FRANCE,
which one may say as the Turk comparing the loss of the Battle of Lepanto to
that of Cyprus, it is worse cutting off the head than cutting off the hair,
because the one will grow again, but the other never; and besides the stopping
of your Trade, and keeping your Wines and other Commodities upon your hands,
will make your Money run upon the Lees, and is cutting the Nerves of War as
money is always esteemed. And as this Power at Sea may well Balance all that
you can say of your Masters, so the Armies that ENGLAND may add to those of
the Confederates at Land, will more than Balance the assistance you promise
your self, and yet some persons are of opinion, that the Princes will still
maintain their Neutrality till they see which way the dye of War will fall; you
know it is safe joining with the victor, and in the mean time, they keep their
Country free from winter quarters and plunder: but besides all this, his
Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh will now be at great liberty to assist the
Confederates with those brave men who made themselves Masters of the obstinate
Town of Stetin.

Mounsieur said the French Merchant you speak a great measure of reason, but we
can difficultly persuade our selves that you are in good earnest, though some
things have past of late that begin to stagger a great many people: yes says
the Captain, who could hold out no longer, I believe it does stagger a great
many people, and the French especially. But that, said the Captain, for all
your pretentions of being a Merchant, I believe you are one of his Agents, who
with the Bills of Exchange you told us of* are going into England to hold
intelligence, and sow jealousies; that is a sort of Merchandise which you have
of late Traded with very much in all parts of the World: but it may be e're
long we shall hear, that you are broke by the discovery of your Correspondence.
And I hope those English people, those dull English, who you think you can
cheat and out-wit at your pleasure, will be so wise as to see your tricks and
Arts, and to understand that the gold you are so liberal of to some of them, is
only to guild the chains you intend to put upon them all. I am satisfied, if
they knew you, but half so well as I do, or had but seen your kindness to the
Province of Vtrecht after it had been wheedled into a surrender, they would
have little reason to trust to your kindness. Mounsieur said the Frenchman
what is all this to the English.

Sir, said the Captain, I think it is a fair warning to the English to stand
upon their Guard, and to endeavor to put themselves out of the danger of
falling under the kindness of the French.

Pray Mounsieur said the French Merchant (being a little cooled with the rough
humor of the Captain) what are those usages which the Province of Vtrecht
complain of.

Look you here said the Captain, with that he pulled a little book out of his
Pocket, written in French entitled Advis fidele aux veritables Hollondois, all
this is true and more then this I know to be true, when your gallant Duke of
Luxemburgh and the surintendant Robert had broken their Backs with Quarter, and
Plunder, and Payments, and Confiscations, and the Devil and all, the Marquess
de Lovois sends them a Letter of Consolation, a cup of Comfort, an Egg broken
into a pale of Water, which you shall hear if you have patience.

Messieurs, I'ay receu vostre Lettre 23 du mois pass, etc. but because, Sir,
said he, you understand and speak English so well as to make you pass for any
thing, if you can but leave your Shrug and your Jernies and Bongres, I will not
trouble the Company with a Language I do Love as little as it may be they
understand, and therefore I will endeavor to teach the Marquess to speak
English, for he is a Civil obliging complaisant person.

Messieurs, I have reciev'd your Letter of the 23 d. of the last past, by which
I have seen all the reasons which you represent, to make me understand, that
the City and Province of Vtrecht are not in a condition to satisfy the
Demands, which Mounsieur Robert has made. I do easily Judge that you cannot do
it without great trouble, but since necessity has no Law, and that the Armies
of the King must be maintained, you ought to accommodate your selves to the
said Sieur Robert, so as to furnish what he demands, otherwise it is
impossible, but you must fall into a most grand desolation, and to mend the
matter, the honest Sieur Robert tells them in short, that since they made such
an impossibility to raise the money demanded, he would cause fire to be set to
the four quarters of the City, and he would light it in the middle himself, (a
fin de reduire en Cendre une ville, qui u' estoit qui a charge and inutile au
Roy men Maistre) to the end I may reduce a City into ashes which is
unprofitable, and a charge to the King my Master. Is this true or not Sir.

Mounsieur, said the Frenchman, but what is all this to the English?

Sir, answered the Captain, I think it is a fair warning to the English to
stand upon their guard, and to endeavor to put themselves out of the danger of
coming under the power of the French, and if possible, to put the French out of
the power of putting them in danger.

Why Sir, replied the other, the French have no designs upon you, but only as
your own fears and apprehensions persuade you.

What cried the Captain, the French without designs? you shall as soon find a
Monkey without tricks: From the Onyon Porridge-man to the Marshall you are all
Politicians and designers. You have, you say, an hundred Sail of Ships, and two
hundred thousand Men, and you have no designs nor ever had I warrant you to
make yourselves Masters of Flanders, Germany, Holland, and England at last. But
by your favor Sir, you must pass through fire as well as water before it comes
to that.

Well Mounsieur, said the Frenchman, I hope for all this that there will be a
Peace, and it may be I have some reason for my conjecture, I assure you we
Merchants are in hopes, that you will not enter upon a War which must be so
great a hazard and charge to the Nation. Sir, said the Captain, you offer fair,
but I cannot imagine why you should be so troubled for the charge of the War,
(tho, I hope it will come to your share at last to defray it) unless you are
afraid we should so impoverish our selves by a War, that when you come to visit
us we should not be worth the Plundring, and London would be good for nothing,
but a second Fire as Robert said of Vtrecht: and for my own particular, and I
hope all true English hearts are of the same tough old metal, you shall first
try how you can digest our Steel and Iron before you taste of our gold and
silver.

I found my two Gentlemen were running into a heat, and therefore I thought it
better to make a tack (as the Boat then did) to some other discourse, which we
presently did, and so past the time till we came to Dover Peer.

As we parted the Mounsieur bid us adieu, and with the grace of a shrug
particular to his Nation, he told me he should be obliged infinitely, if he had
the good fortune and honor to meet me upon the Exchange. Farewell said the
Captain, and have a care I do not meet you scattering your Bills of Exchange in
the wrong place, and taking up News to send into France, in lieu of which you
will return us suspicious of your own making, to set us together by the ears at
home, that so you may be secured from us broad.

The Frenchman gave him a look full of indignation, and away he went to take
post immediately for London, I was extremely pleased with the rugged honest
conversation of this Captain; and therefore desired, if his affairs would
permit, that we might be Companions for that night at Dover, where I had some
little affair, he willingly consented to my proposition, and so together we
went to an Inn, where we had no sooner taken a Room, but in come two Gentlemen
of my Relations, who had promised to meet me there, I was very much pleased at
their arrival, and after mutual civilities passed, and that we had like English
men made some provision for Supper, without ever asking what we should pay for
it, and got a bottle of good Canary (for my Captain would drink no French Wine)
we presently fell to chat.

The first question you may be sure was, What News? and the Captain was in
great haste, what shall we have a War with France. Sir, answered one of my
Friends, Men's opinions are various as their Interests, but here is his
Majesty's Speech, which it may be is news to you; and if you please to read it
you may make your conjecture. Cousin said I, you mistake, if you think it news,
or if in less than a weeks time we do not see in Paris every thing of moment
that passes at London: The French trade in Aleppo Pigeons; nay if we will
believe them, they would persuade us, that they can tell beforehand what will
be done.

That is an excellent way of intelligence said the other Gentleman; but for my
part I look upon it as a French artifice, and I am confident that that trick of
pretending to know every thing amongst us has done them considerable service,
for certainly it has given occasion for those jealousies, which now break out
amongst us, as if there were a secret intreague betwixt the French and us, in
order to some strange design, and nothing will beat it out of some Peoples
heads, but that this War is only for a color. Sir said the Captain here came
over with us one of their Whisperers, Pistol-droppers, News-Makers, and away he
is posted for London to fill some peoples heads with Proclamations of Peace,
Popery, Arbitrary Government, etc. and others pockets with French money to
swear it is true, they have Letters from France that confirm it.

Cousin said I, if the French can accomplish this either way they have done
their business. I assure you there is nothing they dread like a War with
England. I saw it upon several posts in Paris a severe Prohibition so much as
to mention such a War, but if they can drive it off with these reports, by
disuniting the King and his Subjects, they are lucky people and safe enough,
and if they can make a Peace under hand, tho they give as much money for it as
would almost maintain the War, yet they have their aim.

Well said the Captain I doubt nothing, I am assured from a good hand, that
before I get to London some resolution will be taken. I told you some Stories
of the French, but I have more of their pranks to acquaint the people with.
Honest Captain and fellow Traveller, said I, God send you good luck, I dare say
you will bestow your Skill upon the French with a good will, but Cousin said I,
pray what is the matter. Sir, replied he they were wise that could tell you; and
for my part I have little curiosity, and less acquaintance with State affairs,
but some people I find are displeased: But prithee what is that to us, let us
drink and be merry, and let the world go which way it will: By your favor Sir,
said the Captain, there are some people that are displeased because they
resolved before hand to be so with every thing, but I presume, that you and
every Englishman are so far concerned, that if you do not look about you, the
French will e're long spoil both your Mirth and Drinking, what mean you
(answered the other) I hope they will not spoil our Drinking, by Cutting our
Throats, as they say the Danes did, which brought in the Custom of Pledging,
or being Pledge when one drunk. Sir, said the Captain, you may Live and Drink,
and be Merry in that Hope, but for my part. I do not intend to trust them. I
had rather Cut some of theirs fairly, for I hate to have my Weason slit, unless
it be in the Field.

Well, honest brave Captain, said I, your ill usage, makes you in a rage
against the French, and you think the Quarrel moves too slow, but, Sir, you
must consider, this is an Affair of great weight, and it is not good to make
more haste then speed. Sir, said he, the greater weight should make the motion
more quick; you do not seem to understand the worth of time, nor the brisk
humor of the French, and therefore I have nothing to say to you, but I hope
other People do and will consider it. Come, come, says my Cousin, what have we
to do with these matters, it was never well since there were so many little
Statesmen, and polit Politicians.

I believe most people are satisfied of the necessity of a War, to reduce the
World to the Old Balance, and FRANCE amongst the rest, that so she may be
easy to her Neighbors, and they safe from her, and what would any body desire
more? It Is true there have been some Jealousies, which have clogged the Wheels
of this great Affair, but I can assure you, when I came out of Town, it was
generally hoped that a little time would bring all people to a good
understanding, Councils to Unity, and the Affair to a happy Period.

Sir, said the Captain, this is a word of Comfort, for I dare assure you, that
the great hopes of FRANCE are grounded upon our Divisions, which they are not
so ill Husbands, but they know how to improve, I heard one of them the other
day say, that he thought that of the great Turk Solomon, might be applied to
the English, who will be of one mind (as he said, the Christian Princes would)
when all the fingers of his Hand were United into one.

Come Captain, said I, Unity, Secrecy, and Expedition added to our Courage, and
Power, may do much, and I doubt not, but the necessity which seems to be upon
us will make them all meet; the Cause is good for it is not for Soveraignity,
but for Safety, not for Glory but Security, and to preserve the Protestant
Religion, our Lives, Liberties, and Estates, from the Rapine and Ambition of
the French, and he is no true Englishman who will not heartily venture his Life
and Fortune, in such a lawful War.

Upon which, Supper came in, and we having talked our selves into a good
opinion of eating, we gratified our Pallates as well as the place would afford,
and not long after every one retired to his Appartment, where I believe the
Captain dreamed of Drums, and Trumpets, and Cannons, and Granado's Storms, and
Battles, for he made a horrible noise in his sleep lying in the next Room to
me, for my part, like a person not much concerned I slept, as heartily as the
Soldier would permit me, who gave me several Alarms; and I can no more tell,
what I dreamed, then I can tell certainly what all men long so much to know,
that we shall have a War with FRANCE, or such a Peace as shall be Safe and
Honorable for ENGLAND and all Christendom.

FINIS.

