LICENSED,

Sept. 2. 1664.
MEDELA MEDICINAE.

A PLEA For the Free Profession, and a Renovation of the Art of PHYSIC, Out of
the Noblest and most Authentic Writers.

Showing The Public Advantage of its Liberty. The Disadvantage that comes to
the Public by any sort of Physicians, imposing upon the Studies and Practice
of others. The Alteration of Diseases from their old State and Condition. The
Causes of that Alteration. The Insufficiency and Uselesness of mere Scholastic
Methods and Medicines, with a necessity of new.


Tending to the Rescue of Mankind from the Tyranny of Diseases; and of
Physicians themselves, from the Pedantism of old Authors and present Dictators.

The Author, M. N. Med. Londinens.

Medice, Cura Teipsum.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lownds at the White-Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard,
near the Little North-door. 1665.

To the Right Noble Lord MY LORD Marquis of Dorchester.
My Lord,
YOUR Lordship being looked on as a Prince among Philosophers and Physicians,
therefore it is, that though the Author of this Treatise has no Interest in
you, he conceives himself to have Relation enough to you by his Profession, to
venture a fixing of his eye upon you, and to present himself in this Book
before you, as a most proper Judge to determine whether he ought to be
protected, or no, in this bold Attempt, to open the eyes of our little World
touching the State of Physic. It is not my Opinion only, That there is a
necessity of settling it upon better Doctrines, Methods, and Medicines; nor have
I ventured to write any thing to that purpose, merely upon account of my own
Reason (for, should an Angel from Heaven speak to some People upon his own
word, he would hardly be believed); but others have in their Writings dropped,
here and there many passages to the purpose; and the Reasons which I have
offered, I suppose your Lordship will find here to be sufficiently seconded by
the most Learned men in the World, I having said little but what is expressed
in their Language, which cost me a great deal of pains to collect; And I was
the more willing so to manage the Discourse, because I had a mind to get
countenance to my Design, from the Opinions and Determinations of others more
able than my self. Which being said, truly (my Lord) I am somewhat confident I
have done the business that I aimed at; and there wants nothing to complete
this Confidence, but the passing of your Lordships Judgment; which living
Testimony if I obtain, after the many other, both dead and living ones, which I
have cited in this Book, I shall take the greater pleasure in the Achievement:
However, I shall have content, in regard I have a Thousand Testimonies, a
Conscience well discharged in the Work, and a Courage for that Cause able to
bear the brunt of ten Thousand Calumnies and Reproaches, if they come, instead
of Reason, from such Physicians as are contrary-minded. But, in recompense of
such a Reward from some, I know I shall have grateful Acknowledgments from
others of true Learning and Ingenuity, when they come hereafter to know my
Name, which at present I forbear to prefix at length; not that I am ashamed of
the Treatise, but to the end that when it is exposed to public Censure, men
may pass the clearer Judgment, without passion or partiality; seeing when
Authors are known, some out of respect to the Persons, others out of envy, are
apt to approve, or to condemn.

Your Lordship will therefore, I hope, excuse this Anonymous Address; and if
you meet with any acute Reflections upon the Galenick way, I presume they are
no other than necessary for the awakning of such as silently rest in an Opinion
of its sufficiency; for certainly, after a subduing of it by strength of
Reason, and so many good Authorities, it is but just to act a little triumph
over such Persons, who continually calumniate men that are not of their way,
and are so confident, as to attempt an Autarchie in Physic, and long for an
opportunity to oppress and trample upon the nobler sort of Philosophers and
Physicians, and, if it were in their power, utterly to extinguish them; when as
(to use a vulgar Anglicism) they are not worthy to be named the same day with
them, for true knowledge in the Art.

I shall (my Lord) say little more from my self, but end with the words of a
worthy Member of the College of Physicians (by name Dr Bennet) not long since
deceased, in his Epistle to the Reader before his Theatri Tabidorum Vestibulum;
Let none spurn at me because what I offer is of a new Production; for, I have
by certitude of Observations, faithfully and succinctly laid open the fallacy
of some Opinions anciently received, and not taken Precepts upon trust, only
from Authors, for understanding the Constitution of Nature. Moreover, I have
not learned to go according to Vulgar Institution, but have made bold to step
aside out of the Common Road, being inclined to contemplate and reverence
Nature, rather than her Apes. And his Book concludes, as I do this Epistle to
your Lordship, thus: I would to God that Physicians would think of refining,
correcting, and altering the Method of Physic, that it might be more
accurately and efficaciously fitted to the scopes of Curation; in order
whereunto, a liberty of thinking and speaking freely being first obtained,
notwithstanding the obstinacy of crabbed and morose old Fellows, I shall
undertake, relying upon Experience, and being instructed by her, to publish and
positively assert diverse things, somewhat copiously and boldly, according to the
nature of my Design.

But I should not have been so bold here to talk at this rate before you, had
not the words been put into my mouth by one whose Writing speaks him to have
been one of the freest and most ingenuous of the Doctors. And as to what
concerns me, seeing I am at present concealed from your Lordship, let me give
you this brief account of my self; That the Treatise is presented to you by one
that from his Youth has been conversant in the Studies of Physic, and came
young to the practice of it in this great City, above twenty years ago; and
after some years of forbearance, though nev^r from the Study, returned again to
Practice; and how he has since spent his time, in end^avouring to meliorate
Medicine, will best appear by what follows; which I humbly submit to your
Lordship, as to one that is raised aloft by your own Noble Conceptions,
Observations, and Knowledge in Experimental Philosophy, above the Pedantry of
this Profession; and being an able Judge, you will (I dare say) be just in
passing Sentence, without affection to the one or the other Party.

London, November. 26. 1664.
THE CONTENTS OF THE TREATISE.
CHAP. I. THat it is for the good of Mankind there should be a Liberty allowed
in the Practice of Physic. page 1.
That Hippocrates, and Galen, and the Ancients successively, used a liberty in
Judgment and Censure toward other Physicians, p. 2, 3. Old Authors not to be
upheld against liberty of Judgment, p. 4, 5, 6, 7. The Persecution against
Chemical Physicians, when they first began to flourish, p. 8, 9. Lord Bacon's
Judgment, and others, p. 8, 9, 10, 11. Persecution against the Improvers of
Science, p. 12, 13. Regius his opinion for the Reforming of Physic, p. 14.
Helmont's Character by Zwelfer, p. 16. Fernelius his opinion of Anatomy, p. 17.
The ill usage and malice of the College of Paris, with their Sentences of
Condemnation against the famous Quercetan, and Sir Theodore de Mayern, p. 20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. The Inference thereupon, p. 27, 28.

CHAP. II. That there is a great Alteration in the Diseases of this present
Time, from what they were in the former. page 29
Agues much altered, p. 29, 30, 31. Worms eating through the Bowels. Fevers in
new forms, p. 32. Women's Diseases grown more severe, p. 33. French Pox much
altered from time to time, p. 34, 35, 36. Its influence in the alteration of
other Diseases, p. 37. The like of the Scurvy, p. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. The
alteration of diverse Diseases manifested from the weekly and yearly Bills of
Mortality; as the Scurvy, p. 43. the Rickets, p. 44, 45, 46. Consumption, p.
46, 47. Stopping of the Stomach, p. 48. Rising of the Lights, both vulgar
names, p. 48, 49. Mother, p. 49, 50, 51. Convulsion, p. 51, 52. Small Pox and
Measles, p. 52, 53. The Running Gout, and Rheumatism, p. 54, 55, etc.

CHAP. III. An Inquiry into the Causes of the Alteration of Diseases from their
ancient State and Condition. page 56.
The French Pox and the Scurvy main Causes of the Alteration, p. 56, to 61. The
spreading of the Venereous and Scorbutic Ferments occasioned five several
ways, p. 62. The Causes why Persons not seeming to themselves infected, do yet
infect others, p. 65. and why it is so various in Persons, as to lurk in some,
and rage in others, p. 66, 67, 68, 69, 70. No Caution will serve to preserve
the libidinous, p. 71, 72, 73. The like notions touching the Scurvy, p. 74, 75.
Ill courses of curing the Pox noted, p. 76, 77, 78, 79. The ill Consequents of
bad Cures, p. 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84. Blood-letting bad in Scorbutic cases, p.
85, 86, 87. Some other proceedings in the like Cases noted; as common
Diet-drinks, ordinary Purgers, mistake of the Pox and Scurvy, because of the
likeness of their Symptoms, etc. p. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95. Contagion
described, p. 97, 98, 99. The Pox, Scurvy, and all contagious Diseases, able to
infect Persons at a distance, p. 100, 101, 102. Reasons why they may lurk many
years, p. 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112. What care
ought to be used in making second Marriages, p. 108, 109. The manner how the
Venereous and Scorbutic Contagion spreads insensibly; attested by Sennertus,
Dr. Willis, Kircherus, Sinibaldi, Zacchias, Sir Kenelm Digby, Vallesius, Dr.
Flud, Greg. Horstius, Fernelius, and Aurelius Minadous, from p. 110. to p. 132.
The grosser ways of Contagion noted, p. 132, 133, 134, 135, 136. How those
Contagious Ferments are propagated by Inheritance, p. 136. to p. 143. How by
Suckling Children, p. 144, 145. Caution about Nurses, from p. 145. to p. 153.

CHAP. IV.
A further Proof of this great Alteration, by inquiring into the manner of the
complication of the Pox and Scurvy, with other Diseases. page 153.

The Opinion of Fracastorius and others That the French Lues is communicable at
distance, p. 154, 155. The Opinions of Helmont and Grembs, p. 156, 157, 158,
159. All Diseases complicable with the French, 160, 161. The Complication of
Malignant Fevers therewith, p. 162, 163, 164. And of the Hectic, p. 165. Its
Complication with Wounds and Ulcers, p. 166, 167. and with other Maladies, p.
168. The like Complications of the Scurvy, p. 169, 170, 171. of the Tinctures
and Ferments of the Pox and Scurvy, p. 172, 173. hard to be cured, p. 174.

CHAP. V. An Inquiry into the Alteration of the nature of Diseases, in
reference to Vermination, or breeding of Worms. p. 175. Worms a great cause of
Fevers, p. 176.
Wormatick matter dangerous, though not animated, p. 177. Kircherus his Opinion
about Worms, p. 178, 179. The flight of contagious Attoms, p. 180, 181. That
they are sometimes animated, p. 182, 183, 184. Those animated Atoms made
visible by the Microscope, p. 185. The cause of Animals out of Putrefaction, p.
186, 187, 188, 189, 190. Experiments showing the Rise of them, from p. 191. to
p. 197. Invisible Worms in the Blood, Humors, and Vessels of the Body, p. 198,
199, 200. Examination of the Blood by the Microscope, and further discourse of
this, from p. 200. to the end of the Chapter.

CHAP. VI. The Insufficiency and Vselesness of the old way of Physic, in
respect of Method and Medicines, with a necessity of new. page 203.
Men to be encouraged in the new Improvements of Physic, p. 204. The Precepts
of Physic not perpetual, p. 205, 206, 207. Old Methods, why useless, p. 208,
209. Practitioners not to be despised, though no Scholars, p. 211, 212. The old
Philosophy prejudicial to Physic, p. 212, 213, 214. Little progress made in
the Art till of late, p. 215, 216. Pride of Physicians one cause of it, p. 217,
218, 219. The Physic of Brutes not different from that of Men, p. 220, 221.
Those Physicians that are in scorn termed Empericks, not to be despised, p.
225, 226, 227, 228, 229. New Remedies to be invented, p. 230, 231. The vanity
of a Set-method, p. 232.

CHAP. VII. A particular Inquiry into the main Philosophical Principles of the
Profession of Physic. page 233.
The four Elements cashiered by Heurnius, p. 234. Sensible Experiment the best
guide to Philosophy and Physic, p. 235. The Examples of Des Carts, p. 235,
236. Physic ought to have a new foundation, and be rebuilt from the very
ground, p. 237, 238. The excellency of Helmont, p. 239. Galen the great
corrupter; his Character, p. 240, 241, 242. The four Principles called Elements
rejected, and five other substituted, p. 243, 244. The Doctrine of Qualities
examined and rejected, p. 245, 246, 247, 248. Pyrotechnie necessary to make a
Physician, p. 250. The Galenists, without it, but Physicians in name, p. 251,
252. The common Book-knowledg of little use to Physic, p. 253. The taking
Degrees in Physic to be rectified, p. 254. M. Boyle's opinion of the Galenick
Principles, p. 256. The cashiering of the Doctrine of Temperaments, and of the
Four Humors, p. 257. to 265. The Five Principles owned by Chemical Physicians,
p. 265. to p. 269. more coducible to Physic than the old Principles, p. 269.
to 275. The nature and use of the five Chemical Principles, p. 270. to 274. The
Galenick Rule of Contraries pernicious, p. 276* to the end.

CHAP. VIII. An Offer of diverse other Particulars co^side^^ble, in order to the
Practice of P^y^^ck. p. 279.
Why Physicians so often fail, p. 280, 281. The (...) stated betwixt the
Gale^^^^ (...) and others, p. 282, 283. The six Digestions, p. 284, 285, 286.
Of the Ferments of the Parts, p. 287. to 293. The mistake of the Schools about
Diseases in general, p. 294, 295. Of that vital Spirit called the Archeus, p.
297. to 302. Somewhat of malignancy in all the Diseases of this Age, p. 304, 305.

CHAP. IX. An Examination of diverse old Doctrines, which more immediately
relate to the Practice of Physic. page 306.
The childish Doctrine of Critical days, p. 306. to 311. The mischief that
comes by waiting for a Crisis, p. 312. The little Agreement that is touching
the Causes of Critical days, p. 313. to 318. They are rejected by Celsus, p.
319, 320. Reason for rejecting them, p. 321, 322, 323. The Opinion of Regius,
p. 324. and of Helmont, p. 325, 326. The Doctrine of Pulses examined, p. 327.
reduced to Ten Primary Differences, p. 328. the rest rejected as fantastic,
p. 329, 330, 331. A rectifying of the Doctrines concerning Urines, p. 331, 332.
Dr Willis his way most rational, in examining them, according to the 5 Chemical
Principles, p. 333, 334, 335, 336. A Censure of Hippocrates, from p. 337. to
366. Of his Aphorisms, p. 339. to 353 Of his Prognostics, p. 352. to 362. Mr
Boyl's Opinion of them, p. 362, 363, 364. They puzzle rather than direct a
Physician, 364, 365. A Censure of Galen, p. 366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372.
The examination of Phlebotomy, or Blooding; proving it of little use in these
North parts of the world, p. 373. Five Preliminary Points insisted on, in order
to the discussion of the main Point, p. 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381,
382. The main Point argued, from p. 383. to p. 429 The Judgment of Zacutus Lus.
of the different State of the Blood betwixt Northern and Southern people, p.
384, 385. Bleeding ill for Scorbutic Bodies, p. 385, 386, 387, 388. Why
Bleeding is used rather than Purgation, in the finer Climates, p. 389, 390,
391, 392. Why our Fevers and Agues prove worse upon Bleeding, p. 393, 394, 395,
396, 397, 398, 399, 400. What persons receive most damage by Bleeding, p. 402,
403, 404, 405, 406. Of Coagulations and Congelations of Blood in Malign Fevers,
Small Pox, Measels, and the danger of Bleeding argued thereupon, p. 408, 409,
410, 411, 412. Evacuation of Blood in Malign Fevers reaches not the Seat, or
Matter of the Disease, p. 415, 416, 417, 418, 419. The reason of the different
Effects of Bleeding in the Northern, and in the finer Climates, p. 422, 423,
425. Ignorance of proper Remedies first occasioned the practice of Blooding, p.
427, 428. An examination of the State of Medicin, in reference to the old
Compositions, from p. 429. to the End. Why to be laid aside, p. 429. A Plea
for the Interest of Apothecaries, in a rectification of their manner of
Pharmacie, p. 430, 431, 432, 433, 434. Advice to them from Mr Le Febure, his
Majesty's Apothecary, 435, 436. No way for the Apothecaries to preserve their
Trade, but by accommodating themselves to the Chemical Physicians, p. 437, 438,
439. Diseases being New and Occult, require new and extraord. Remedies, p. 440,
441, 442, 443, 444. The different garb of Chymick and Galenick Physicians, 446,
447. Galenick Medicaments not rationally grounded, p. 448, 449, 450, 451, 452.
Ill contrived in the Composition, p. 452, 453, 454, 455, 456, 457, 458. Diverse
Countries ought to have different Medicaments, p. 459, 460, 461, 462, 463, 464.
An Answer to the Calumnies of the Galenists against Chemical Medicaments, p.
466. to 471. Why Galenists prosper not with using Chymick Remedies, p. 472,
473. Why Galenists are not safe in difficult Cases, p. 473, 474, 475. They and
the meaner sort of Practisers compared, p. 476. to 479. A Censure of the old
Method, p. 480 to 485. The Chemical Preparations in the common dispensatories
very imperfect, p. 487, 488. Foul Play of the Galenists, p. 490. to 496.
Chymick Remedies not so insisted on, as to exclude the use of Simples, and
Single Specificks, p. 496, 497, 498. Other Chymick Remedies to be invented, as
well as the more elaborate Preparations, p. 500, 501. Vegetables used by
Chemists are as much as Minerals, p. 502. Chemical operations usesul to
illustrate the Doctrine of Diseases, p. 503. to 514.

The Reader is entreated to amend this Fault of the Press, and excuse the rest.
Page 298. read (...)

Medela Medicinae; OR, A Plea for the whole Profession and Professors OF
PHYSIC.
CHAP. I. That it is for the good of Mankind there should be a Liberty allowed
in the Profession of Physic.
THat the Diseases of this present Age are of another nature than they were in
former times, is (I suppose) a matter out of question; but lest any should
question, I will prove it; and if that be once proved, then it cannot be
denied, that we must proceed by other definitions of their Nature, and
indagations of their Causes, and invent other Remedies, and Reasons and Rules
of Curation, than what have been delivered by the Ancients; and not confine our
selves to their Conceptions, Aphorisms, and Inventions, more than they did
themselves to the Dictates of those Physicians that were elder than they. It
was a liberty which Hippocrates himself took, by strength of Reason, to judge
and condemn the Opinions and Practices of such as went before him, and frame a
Body of Physic of his own: He may be called the Father of the Four Elements,
and of the Four Phantsies called Humors, which our Hippocrates (as some call
him) Dr Harvey De genesis Anim. exercit. 52.
aproves not, and allows but one. The like freedom was used by his great
Commentator Galen, who made it his business not only to trample and triumph
over all other Sects at Rome (having the Emperor Antoninus, and his Son
Commodus to Friend) but took a liberty to censure also the Oracle Hippocrates,
and the succeeding Physicians, and, when he pleased, to cashire them. In the 6.
De Morb. vulg. Comm. 2. he says, All things are to be examined by Reason and
Experience, and calls those Physicians Slaves which are sworn to Authors. And
in his second Book De Meth. Medendi, he calls their Learning tyrannical, which
is imposed by Masters and Dictators. And in that Book of his, which he wrote on
purpose to leave us a Catalogue of his own quarrelsom Works, he reprehends such
Physicians as pin themselves on the sleeve of any one or more Doctors, saying,
I am of Praxagoras; or, I am of Hippocrates: but being of a free temper, he
explained, amended, altered, and added many things, and spoiled most, sparing
neither Hippocrates, nor Plato, nor Chrysippus, nor Aristotle, nor any that
were before him: Wherefore it was but reason, that the learned Sanctorius,
after he had shown how foul this man fell upon Hippocrates's Aphorisms, should
take the same license to set down his Errors, (as Avicenna, Averroes, and many
others, have done likewise in a plentiful manner): And now, that after so many
Errors of him and Hippocrates have been detected, and that it has been made
appear by Vesalius, and others, that they erred, not only in their
Administrations and Descriptions of the Fabric of humane Bodies, but in the
very principles of that Philosophy, which they settled, and others most
pedantically have insisted on ever since, and do insist on, as the foundation
of Physic, and of whole Colleges of the profession in Europe; I cannot but
with a kind of indignation break out into the language of Langius, present
Public Professor in the University of Lipsick, who in his Preface before the
Book of that learned Jesuit Kircherus, lately published, De Peste, declares,
How exceedingly it has troubled him to see his Brethren of the Faculty dwell
only upon Commentaries (so most of them have spent their time since the days of
Galen) and through a proneness to subscribe to the dictates of the Ancients,
have been so sluggish as to acquiesce in them, and according to their rude
dogmatical Positions, to make enquiry after the Causes and Essences of Things
Natural, and of Diseases, and Medicines, and deliver them over as sacred to
their Disciples. What is this (says he) but to strangle Truth, and extinguish
the vigor of men's Wits with mere Authorities; which should rather be fitted
for great Things, and led on to more eminent searches into the Secrets of
Nature? Let me tell them, as long as they are carried with this vain opinion of
Authority, and so earnestly yield up themselves and their Followers Vassals to
Authors, doubtless they do a great injury even to the Ancients themselves,
seeing it never entered into the minds of Hippocrates, Galen, Aristotle, or the
other old Sages of Natural Science, to consecrate their Works to Posterity,
with such an intent as to count it necessary that men should presently be
content with them only, and rest wholly therein; but rather, that they should
remember to employ their Endeavors to search and proceed further, and produce
somewhat of their own: For, as our Ancestors did abundantly labor to add to
their own Inventions, with as great exactness as might be, to the Inventions of
such as went before them, and performed their utmost, by learned Observations,
to illustrate such things as to them seemed difficult and obscure; so it is our
duty so to reverence the fair Monuments and Inventions of good Authors, and so
apply our selves to the Inventors, as an Inheritance belonging to many; and
acquit our selves in such a manner as good Fathers of Families use to do, who
study how to enlarge and increase what they have received, and transmit that
Inheritance from themselves to their Posterity, much augmented, that so, I say,
we may look on those who are gone before us with so many illustrious examples
of their Industry, not as our Lords and Masters, but Leaders, reckoning with
Seneca, That there yet remains much work to be done; and that very much is like
to remain always; and that after a thousand Ages more, men will not want
occasion to make new Discoveries and Additions.

Men's not being persuaded of this, is the great occasion of the little progress
that has been made in all other Sciences, as well as that of Physic; and the
incomparable Lord Bacon, among the several Causes of the non-advancement of all
manner of Sciences, reckons this for one, An extreme Affection to Antiquity.
Advance of Learn. li. 1. cap. 5.
Truly (as he says) Antiquity deserves that men should make a stay a while,
and stand thereupon, and look about to discover which is the best way; but when
the discovery is well taken, then not to rest there, but cheerfully to make
progression. Indeed, to speak truly, Antiquitas Seculi, Juventus Mundi;
Antiquity of Time is the Youth of the World. Certainly, our Times are the
ancient Times, when the World is now ancient; and not those which we count
ancient, ordine retrogrado, by a computation backward from our own Times; and
yet so much credit (as he says) has been given to old Authors, as to invest
them with the power of Dictators, that their words should stand, rather than
admit them as Consuls to give Advice. And this kept Physic, till of late
years, as well as other Sciences, low, at a stay, and very heartless, without
any notable Growth or Advancement; and upon this account (as the same Lord
says) the Liberal Sciences have fared far worse than the Arts Mechanical,
which always have been, and are continually much improved; whereas in this of
Physic and Philosophy, men have formerly thought it wisdom not to budg an inch
from the footing of the first Masters; insomuch that when Chemistry first came
in play, the Professors and Operators were thought to be Madmen; but
afterward (when they gained some ground and entertainment in the World) the
Aristotelians and Galenists, seeing that reproach and contempt would not do the
work, began to raise a fierce persecution, by stirring up Princes and
Magistrates against them, as a pack of Magicians, Mountebanks, Rogues, Cheats,
Vagabonds, and I know not what; and procured Laws and Statutes to be made
against them as such, till the excellency of the Art it self, and its grand
Achievements, opened the eyes of Governors, and stopped the mouths of
gainsayers; and even the common people came to see, that it was the Interest of
the Collegiate Corporations of Physicians, who lived in ease and splendour,
practicing with old Maxims and Medicines, not to permit a new laborious Sect of
Philosophers, working Knowledge out of the Fire, by their Industry and
Successes, to bring a reproach upon them for their Idleness, and superstitious
devotion to their old heathenish Authors; of whom the same most excellent Lord
and Philosopher says thus in his Preface, I dare confidently avouch, that the
Wisdom we have extracted chiefly from the Grecians, seems to be a Childhood of
Knowledge, and to participate that which is proper to Children, namely, That it
is apt for Talk, but impotent and immature for Propagation; for, it is of
Controversies rank and fertile, but of Works barren and fruitless; the truth of
which never so signally appears, as when two or three of the dogmatical
Admirers of that Learning, and of the usual Medicines, come at any time to meet
in a Consultation; after which, if no good be done by them, it frequently comes
to pass, when all is desperate, that some noble Medicine (lying without the
Road of their Method, and a Pharmacopeia) which they may please to call
Emperical, through the goodness of God performs a Cure; and yet he that
administered it, be he otherwise never so Learned and Rational, if he be not a
Drone of the old Methodical Hive, is sure to be calumniated, and marked with a
black Coal, though themselves only have deserved it.

Now this were a thing to be admired at, but that we find it has always fared
thus with the Beaux Esprits, those brave Spirits in all Ages, who have advanced
Learning beyond the brains of Titular Doctors and Philosophers, and above those
antiquated Notions which are the Idols of such as are too proud and idle to go
to School again to learn new; though I must tell them, It Is no shame for any to
be a Learner in the School of Nature, whose Mysteries are sublime, her
Treasures inexhaustible; and he who will study, could he live (as Seneca says)
a thousand Ages, would even then find matter and occasion for new Enquiry and
Discovery: But the misery is, that other ways have been taken by too many,
though of late years they have been shamed out of it by the Industry of their
Juniors.

I remember Dr Hackwel, in the Preface to his Apology, gives an account at
large, what ill entertainment new Inventors and Inventions have always found
amongst the present Masters of several Professions. Should I tell how ill
Paracelsus was received, some would say, 'Twas but what he deserved, because he
has an ill Name among those that either do not or will not take pains to
understand him, and have not good nature enough to pass by his Extravagances;
yet one that was Physician to the Emperor, and other Princes of Germany,
styles him, Vere celsus Paracelsus, Most sublime Paracelsus. And the truth is,
he had the honor to open the eyes of mankind in the most excellent part of
Physic; and (setting aside some whimseys) it may be truly said, He did much,
and gave such hints of more, that all the World has been beholden to him ever
since; And others in aftertimes, taking example by him, have not only brought
rare Medicines to light, but shown the vanity of that Logic and Philosophy
which has been delivered to us by Heathens, and which it is a shame the Schools
of Christendom should yet retain, as if they contained Principles conducible to
the Attainment of Physic, when as that great Chancellor of the Commonwealth L.
Bacon.
of Learning (as a learned Frenchman calls him) and the profound Helmont, and
the most ingenious Des Carts, have abundantly made manifest the insufficiency
of both; and they are fallen now so low, that the most excellent Sr Kenelm
Digby, and that noble Philosopher Mr Boil, and others not so tall as they, do
not only look over but far beyond them; for, to say no more at present, the
Lord In his Nov. Org.
Bacon has shown of how little use that Logic is, and that the Physics were
corrupted by their being accommodated thereto; which makes that searching Wit
and learned Head Dr Henry More of Tantundem scivisse Cartesium statuere
oportet, in investigandis Naturae Causis quantum ignoravit Aristoteles.
Cambridge, the Ornament of that University, in a Latin Epistolary Discourse
of his very newly published, concerning the Cartesian Philosophy, vouchsafe
Aristotle no greater title than this, Argutus ille Graeculus, in comparison of
the Philosophers of latter Times; yet he rode a long while upon the shoulders
of the blind World, while others have walked a foot (and well they could do so
too) or have been laid by the heels, or been glad to be take themselves to
their heels from the places where they resided; Persecution having been
practiced in all Times on the account of Philosophy and Physic.

The Noble Descent of Tycho Brahe might be a protection to him when he first
broached that Position, which pulled the Spears out of Heaven, and reduced
their supposed solid Bodies to be fluid as Air; but Galilaeus fared worse,
being sent to Gaol for seeing more than others could, by the help of his Optic
Tube, losing (as Dr More says) his own Liberty in a Prison, for giving the
Earth liberty to fetch a Round about the Sun. And as for Des Carts, Peter
Boreel, one of the King of France's Physicians, at the end of his Centuries of
Observations, gives this Account, That when that sublime Philosopher lived at
Vtrecht in Holland, the Aristotelian Professors of that University became so
inflamed with envy at him, that their Scholars raised the Rabble of the City,
at the sound of a Bell, to drive him out of Town, who was and ever will be
thought worthy the admiration of the greatest Princes and Scholars. But to see
the fate of things, it has been this man's luck to triumph even in that
University where so much contempt was poured upon him; for, Henricus Regius,
who now lives there with the honor (which he highly deserves) of being Public
Professor of Physic, in a short time after did him right, by publishing a Book
of Natural Philosophy, agreeable to the Principles and Design of Des Carts;
and not only so, but in pursuance thereof he has declared, That if a new
Philosophy be introduced, more suitable to the Phoenomena and Operations of
Nature, there ought also to be laid new Foundations of Physic, free from the
intanglement of those Disputes and mere Opinions, which serve only to perplex
and amaze men, rather than afford any solid Instruction: This had been
attempted by many men before him, men of excellent good parts; but by their
leave (says he) In his Epistle Dedicatory to the Magistrates of Vtrecht.
they were able to effect little, because of their reasoning in the old obscure
way of Philosophy; but now that it has pleased God to illuminate the World
with a greater light of Philosophy, in this happy Age of ours, by clear and
easy Principles, every where obvious to the Understanding, and more accurately
fitted for use, I have reduced the whole Art of Physic to these two Points,
viz. the Knowledge and the Curation of Diseases, which are the only duties of a
Physician; and This Helmont did also before him.
cashiered the common Doctrine of Elements, Temperaments, Parts, Spirits,
Humors, Faculties, and Function, which have no Being but in the brains of the
vulgar, that so I might render all the Mysteries of our Profession, even the
most abstruse and difficult, plain and easy. Thus far he of himself; and this
he has (to say truth) well performed, by improving the Cartesian Principles,
in such a manner as has put to silence that peevish Spirit of Contradiction
which was so high before.

I might tell you what hard Quarter was given likewise to Van Helmont at his
first appearance, being reviled as an Enthusiast and a Madman, though I must
tell you, the Hypotheses by him set down to find out the essences of Diseases,
and proper means to cure them, show him to be one of great reason and insight
into things natural; and I, who have taken pains (as pains must be taken) to
understand him, though his Medicines cannot be understood, can say (by
experience) his Doctrine is such as by frequent recourse to it will enable a
man to design aright the Cure of Diseases, more than all that has been said in
the World to that purpose before; and therefore being lately turned all into
English, it had been better if Dr Charlton, who translated some parts of him,
had taken pains about the whole, that others might have be taken themselves to
the study of an Author, which some, that would be no little men of Learning,
are frighted from reading, because of his novelty and difficulty; when as
others of high State, and who have given the Age high proof of their Learning,
do admire him; witness the character given him by Zwelfer, Physician to the
present Emperor, in his most learned elaborate Notes on the Page 409.
Pharmacopeia Augustana, where he entitles him Acutissimum illum Philosophum
Helmontium; That most acute Philosopher Helmont. And Oswald Grembs, a very
learned Physician belonging to the Duke of Saxony, who has endeavored to give
us an Abridgment of the large Works of that Author, and joins together both the
Galenick and Helmontian way of curing Diseases, does notwithstanding in fine
give his vote for Helmont, telling us in plain terms, Lib. 2. c. 1. sect. 4. De
Morbis Lienls.
His main intent is no other than to persuade Physicians, that the Foundations
laid by Galen do not correspond with the practice of Physic, but that it may
be better accommodated by the Foundations of Helmont. Yet this was the man
cried out on by many wise men in the beginning, and now by none but such as are
Otherwise.

The same fate befell also our incomparable Dr Harvey, when he first laid open
the Bloods Circulation; and he himself, in that Treatise De motu Cordis, makes
sad complaint what ill usage he had, because in that business he departed from
the sense of all Anatomists that went before him: but what would those men have
said, had they lived to see what later Anatomists have done? not only departing
from the Ancients, but jangling and jarring with each other, touching the use
of every part and particle of Man's Body, as may be seen by the Writings of
Bartholinus, Walaeus, the new Schenkius, Rolfinckius, Hornius, Sylvius de le
Boe, and diverse others, too many to reckon up, besides others of our own
Nation; the latter of which, have taken pains to reckon up the differing
Opinions, the consideration whereof has, through their endless variety, given
me, and some other touchy Heads like mine, occasion to pry into one point
beyond them, viz. Whether in the practice of Physic there need be the
hundredth part of this ado about Anatomy; especially seeing that when the Body
is out of order by Diseases, the Blood and Humors have other vagaries than in
the usual Channels; and Plantius in the life of Fernelius, tells his mind more
at large.
Fernelius himself spoke but lightly of Anatomy, and was of opinion, our
Brethren might better spend their time in making Observations on the Sick; to
which give me leave to add an exhortation to labor with their own hands in
amending, refining, inventing, and compounding of Medicines, that we may be
delivered from the bondage and terror of those many fulsom Compositions,
borrowed from the Greeks and Arabians, who were Persons in their Time to be
applauded, and of such ingenuity, that were they now living to see what
improvement the Art has received of late in a few years, would doubtless
admire the dotage of those men who live lazing upon the little Knowledge that
comes by Tradition, and the Name they have acquired by Time, and timely
courting of Women and Nurses; and be the first in throwing most of their own
old Medicines out of the Dispensatory and the Shops.

I could enlarge on this subject by innumerable Instances, to show how here,
and in other Nations, those worthy Persons who have made it their business to
advance the Profession of Physic by new Inventions, and Principles, have from
time to time been unhandsomly treated, till Time and Experience taught others
to approve and admire them. But you will say, To what end is all this Discourse
about these things? It Is only to plead for a freedom for such as labor in the
secrets of Nature, and that no discouragement be given to such laborious and
ingenious Inquirers, who have too long suffered under the imperious Censures of
such as partly by their Rules, partly by their course of Practice, would tie
men to the old heavy Compounds, and by virtue of Seniority impose upon others,
and dictate in all Meetings called Consultations about the Sick; and, like the
Chinese, keep all others at a distance that are not of their own number or
extraction; and sometimes, like the Ottoman Emperors, strangle all their
Brethren, or those that are too active to live under their Empire and
Jurisdiction. The truth whereof, and the great Inconveniences thence likely to
ensue, will the better appear, if I set before you two (omitting many other)
very remarkable Instances, which I shall here give, because the persons
concerned in the Relation were men beyond all exception, and renowned for
Physic in the Kingdoms of England and France, and (like Augustus) did not only
conquer all their Opposites, but outlive them, and all their slanders: The
Persons were, Sir Theodore de Mayern; and his Friend, the famous Quercetan:
this latter known now by his Learned Works to all the World, and followed; the
other not so known in print, because his numerous Writings, Memorials, and
Consultations (which have been sufficiently talked of by such as saw them) have
not yet been published; but he was otherwise known to purpose in both Nations,
for his many performances of Cure among the greatest Princes and Persons; yet
these two Men, when they first began to show themselves at Paris, and went out
of the ordinary Dog-road of Physic, felt a grievous storm fall upon them from
the then mere Galenick Dons of the College of Paris, they having employed one
of their own number to write a Book in Latin, the Title whereof in English is,
Printed at Paris, An. 1603.
An Apology for the Physic of Hippocrates and Galen, against Quercetan, etc.
in whose defense Mayern writing also an Apology, they to this Book subjoined an
Answer to the Libellous Apology (as they termed it) of Turquetus, (so they
thought fit to term him, instead of Mayern); for though he never was ashamed of
his name Turquet, yet because (in French) it signifies a little dog, the witty
Champion of the College chose rather to mention him by that Name, as a subject
that would better serve (as he thought) for matter of quibble and reflection,
though his Father was known to be a Gentleman of good Descent and Scholarship,
and the Title de Mayern denoted a Lordship within the Territory of Geneva,
which gave name to the Family. That Book was set forth by the College, Anno
1603. but they rested not here, but went a step further to no end, summoning
all the Peers of the Faculty to a Solemn Assembly, where their Doctorships (in
perpetuum rei scandalum) passed Sentence of Damnation upon them both, within
the space of four Months, as may be seen by the Censures themselves, which I
have here set down, and translated them word for word as they printed them.

Scholae Parisiensis Judicium, de Alchymia Quercetani.
COllegium Medicorum in Academia Parisiensi legitime congregatum, audita
renunciatione Censorum, quibus demandata erat provincia examinandi librum
Josephi Quercetani, de materia, and praestantia veteris Medicinae; non tantum
Quercetani libros spagyricos damnat unanimi consensu, sed etiam Artem ipsam
spagyricam: Omnesque Medicos qui ubique gentium and locorum Medicinam exercent
hortatur, ut ex Hippocratis and Galeni doctrina faciant Medicinam. Quinetiam
prohibet, nequis ex hoc Medicorum Parisiensium ordine, cum Quercetano, aliisve
spagyrieis, aut a facultate non probatis consilia Medica ineat: qui secus
fecerit, Scholae emolumentis, and Academiae privilegiis privabitur, and ex
Medicorum regentium albo expungetur. Datum Lutetiae, in Scholis superioribus,
die 9. Septembris, Anno Salutis, 1603.

G. Heron, Decanus.

THe College of Physicians in the University of Paris being lawfully
congregated, having heard the Report made by the Censors, to whom the business
of examining the Book of Joseph Quercetan, De Materia and praestantia veteris
Medicinae, was committed, do with unanimous consent condemn, not only the
Chemical Books of Quercetan, but also the Art of Chemistry itself; and do
exhort all Physicians which profess Physic in any Nations or Places
whatsoever, that they will continue to practice Physic according to the
Doctrine of Hippocrates and Galen. Moreover, they forbid all men that are of
this Society of the Physicians of Paris, that they do not admit of a
Consultation with Quercetan, or any other Chemists, or any Persons not approved
by License. Whosoever shall presume to do contrary, shall be deprived of all
Advantages of the College, and Privileges of the University, and be blotted
out of the Register of Regent Physicians. Given at Paris, in the Upper Schools,
the ninth day of September, Anno Salutis, 1603.

G. Heron, Dean of the College.

Concerning Mayern.
COllegium Medicorum in Academia Parisiensi legitime congregatum, audita
renuntiatione Censorum, quibus demandata erat provincia examinandi Apologiam,
sub nomine Mayernii Turqueti editam, ipsam unanimi consensu damnat, tanquam
famosum libellum, mendacibus convitiis and impudentibus calumniis refertum,
quae non nisi ab homine imperito, impudente, temulento, and furioso profieisci
potuerunt. Ipsum Turquetum indignum judicat qui usquam Medicinam faciat,
propter temeritatem, impudentiam, and verae Medicinae ignorationem. Omnes vero
Medicos, qui ubique gentium and locorum Medicinam exercent hortatur, ut ipsum
Turquetum, similiaque hominum and opinionum portenta, a se suisque finibus
arceant, and in Hippocratis and Galeni doctrina constanter permaneant. Sed and
prohibet ne quis ex hoc Medicorum Parisiensium ordine cum Turqueto ejusque
similibus Medica consilia ineat. Qui secus fecerit, Scholae ornamentis,
honoribus, emolumentis, and Academiae privilegiis privabitur, and de Medicorum
Regentium numero expungetur. Datum Lutetiae, in Scholis Superioribus, die
quinta December. Anno Salutis, 1603.

G. Heron, Decanus.

THe College of Physicians in the University of Paris being lawfully
congregated, having heard the Report made by the Censors, to whom the business
of examining the Apology, published under the name of Turquet de Mayern, was
committed; do with unanimous consent condemn the same, as an infamous Libel,
stuffed with lying Reproaches, and impudent Calumnies, which could not have
proceeded from any but an unlearned, impudent, drunken, mad Fellow: And do judge
the said Turquet unworthy to practice Physic in any place, because of his
rashness, impudence, and ignorance of true Physic: But do exhort all
Physicians, which practice Physic in any Nations or places whatsoever, That
they will drive the said Turquet, and such like Monsters of Men and Opinions,
out of their company, and Coasts; and that they will constantly continue in the
Doctrine of Hippocrates and Galen. Moreover they forbid all men that are of the
Society of the Physicians of Paris, That they do not admit a Consultation with
Turquet, or such like persons. Whoever shall presume to act contrary, shall be
degraded and deprived of all honors, emoluments, and privileges of the
University, and be expunged out of the Register of Regent Physicians. Given at
Paris: in the Upper Schools, the fifth day of December, Anno Salutis, 1603.

G. Heron, Dean of the College.

It would be to little purpose for me to animadvert upon these dreadful Bulls,
thundered out against two persons of so great worth; let it serve for their
justification, That, for all this, the former became famous in France, the
Kings Physician, and lived to see the College repent of their folly, and their
Successors become Admirers of those Chemical Books and Remedies which had been
so rashly damned. The other became Physician to two Kings of France, and two of
England, and left a Name of great honor and wealth behind him. Only this is
published, that it may serve for a warning to great persons, and others, that
they dote not in any Nation too much upon the Names Doctor and College, when
Public Good is at stake, seeing they may be deceived, and be apt to deceive
others, if the like idle Spirit of Pride, Interest, and Envy, should at any
time possess them, to cry down Persons and Things, which once in seven years
themselves may think fit to follow underhand, and by stealth practice; but not
be seen to do it, for fear of losing their Credit. It may serve likewise to
evince, That seeing men of greatest Learning and Abilities in the Profession,
have judged the old Philosophy and Physic insufficient, and thereupon receded
from it. And whereas in this prying, laborious Age, wherein new discoveries of
Medicine are every day wrought out of the Fire, and other ways, and more like
to be discovered, for the benefit of mankind, afflicted more than ever with
monstrous Diseases (such as the ordinary Remedies of the Shops will not reach);
and seeing, if any Society of men be armed with power to regulate, censure, or
suppress whom and what they please, the most ingenious Laborers must be left
to the mercy of others less laborious, and be discouraged, or condemned, as
others have been before them, if it please the Infallible Masters: Therefore
doubtless any rational man will be of opinion, That it is the concernment of
Nations to admit a greater latitude in the Profession and Practice of
Philosophy and Physic, than the Interest (and many times the ignorance) of
some men of the same Profession would be willing to allow: Which was the thing
I had a mind to show.

Now let me, in the next place, proceed to manifest how great a difference
there is betwixt the old state of Diseases, and the new; and this as briefly as
I can.

CHAP. II. That there is a great alteration in the Diseases of this present
Time, from what they were in the former.
BEcause I cannot stand to run over every particular Disease, let it suffice to
instance only in some, and leave you to observe and reason out the rest in
others.

First, it is observable, That Agues, which of all other Diseases give the
greatest baffle to Physicians, are exceedingly altered. Look upon the
definitions and descriptions of the Ancients concerning the Quotidian, Tertian,
Quartan, etc. and see how little they suit with the Types and Formalities of
Agues appearing in this Age, being distempers of quite another nature; insomuch
that the old Rules and Remedies of curing them are quite out of doors, seldom
doing any good, but generally hurt; as for instance, Blood-letting, which
should we in these days administer in all putrid Fevers (as 11 Meth. 15.
Galen directs, and too many follow) we should make mad work with our Patients;
especially, if we should admit that to be Gospel which another Prince of the
Profession, by name Lib. 4. Fen. 1. Tr. 2. cap. 39.
Avicen, gives order for, viz. That if the Patient's Urine be thick and red,
then be sure to draw Blood; whereas I have observed generally in former years,
(and particularly this Spring), That Bodies either ill-habited, or
Scorbutically inclined, being phlebotomised for Agues, have grown very much
worse upon it, and either totally lost the habit of Body, or been precipitated
into another sort of Ague, of a worse nature and condition; as for instance,
from an Ague-Tertian to a Quotidian, or to a tedious Quartan; and yet such
Bodies generally have their Urines intensely thick and red. The truth is, where
one Ague falls out now upon the old simple account, at least forty to one do
start abroad, which must be put upon a new: Pract. li. 3. part. 5. sect. 2.
Sennertus is plain in the point, Plurimae febres quae hic aegros infestant,
omnes not as Febrium a Graecis and Arabibus descriptas non obtinent; Most Agues
which infest men in this Age, do not agree with the descriptions of Agues made
by the Greeks and Arabians: Nay, a man may truly say, They are mightily altered
in the course of these thirty years last past; for I remember when I was first
a Student in this Faculty, they were generally more slight, and easily curable
by old common Remedies; whereas now the most of them appear with different and
more dangerous Symptoms, which every where confute and defy the whole Herd of
vulgar Methodists, and their Medicines; yea, more than this, it is to be
observed, That sometimes a current of three or four years, sometimes every
year, produces a new sort of Ague, in the fashion of a Tertian, Quotidian, or
a Quartan, the like whereof was never seen before; and Continual Fevers also,
wholly new in all their Symptoms and Circumstances: In the year 1662. a new
sort of Quartan reigned about London, and other parts, which had in it all the
tokens of Malignity; and from most that I my self had in cure, I brought away
abundance of Worms, and then they presently mended. The like course I took with
that Continual Fever, which raged in the Country, 1661. and procured plentiful
excretions of Worms out of the Bodies of young and old, from Children to
persons of seventy years of Age; yea, and what I could hardly believe, when I
first read the Observations of Schenkius, and others, I that year found very
true in a young man and old woman, that Worms will make their own way into the
World, through the Bowels and Sides of the persons that breed them, and this
without damage, nothing being used but a little fresh Butter to the Orifice,
to make all whole again. He is but a dull Practiser that does not yearly see
Agues and Fevers appearing in new forms; and you may particularly remember what
the state of those Diseases was in the Autumnal Quarter of the year 1657. and
both the Spring and Fall of the year 1658. and how wonderfully the Agues and
Fevers varied in that short revolution of time; the ground of which mavelous
change in the World, both in respect of Agues, and other Diseases, I may give
you a full account of before the conclusion of this Treatise, and thereupon let
you see cause to apprehend the usefulness of what I now publish to the World,
to discover those two secret Enemies which now run in a blood (more or less)
through all the generations of Mankind, and have transformed the whole Scene of
Diseases.

I might next insist on several Diseases of the Female Sex, grown more severe
than they were in the days of their great Grandames, who, could they now rise
out of their Graves again, would wonder to see the miserable state of poor
Women, and the tyranny of those distempers which were in their time less
frequent, and more calm and curable, (for, the same Remedies now will do little
good toward a Cure); but I forbear particulars, seeing, for Modesties sake,
they are not to be exposed to every Reader.

That the Disease called the French Pox is extraordinarily varied, appears by
the account given of it at its first appearance in the World, compared with
what we see at this day. If you consult Fracastorius and Benivenius, you will
find, It, in the beginning brake forth in odious Pustles of several kinds upon
the Privities, the Head, the Face, the Neck, the Breast, the Arms, and generally
the whole Body. Some also it disfigured after the rate of a Leprosy; others
had a kind of scurf, which scaling off, discovered the skin underneath to be
black or blew: Upon some, filthy ichorous sores were continually running. And
besides all this, they had in the inward parts great tormenting Exulcerations,
as in the Mouth, the Throat, the Nostrils, the urinary and spermatick Passages,
which did eat off the Yard, the Palate, the Lips, the Nose, in despite of all
Medicines; so that men being affected with the Disease, their Friends were
frighted from looking upon them, and shunned them as if they had been visited
with the Pestilence: These things being considered, with the horrid pains that
racked them, it was rightly termed by a certain Author, Miserabile Scortatorum
Flagellum; The miserable Scourge of Whore-masters. But though it was thus with
the Disease then, yet Fernelius, who was born almost twenty years before it was
discovered in Europe, and lived to seventy two years of Age, saw it very much
changed in the space of thirty or forty years, insomuch that he tells us, in
his time it was much altered, De Lue Ven. cap. 2.
not defacing the Bodies of men with Pustles, Scurffs, and virulent Ulcers, but
tormenting them more with intolerable pains; which though they might be
increased by the ignorant and preposterous ways of curing then used, yet the
Disease it self also changed continually, and seemed to decline and grow old;
Adeo ut Lues quae nunc grassatur, vix illius generis esse putetur; Insomuch
(says he) that the Pox which now reigns, hardly seems to be of the same kind
with the former: And certainly this was but a short tract of time wherein it
received so great an alteration; but yet Fracastorius tells us, it was altered
much within twenty years, a lesser time; and that after this, another mutation
was made within six years time, the Disease not raging, as before, in the
external parts; from whence he also was in hope, that it would in time wear it
self out of the World, as many other new and monstrous Diseases have done,
after they had reigned for a season; but he is mightily deceived; for it yet
continues, not in that open hostility it exercised before, but more
treacherously and slily insinuates it self into the internal and fundamental
parts of the Body, sporting it self under several disguises to afflict the Sons
of Men.

Another change likewise has been made of this Disease, in that where one
person gets this Disease by the beastliness of Venery, many hundreds have it by
Traduction: For, it is most true which Sennertus says, The French Disease is
nom become Hereditary, being derived from Parents Pract. li. 6. part. 4. cap. 5.
to their Posterity by Generation, and communicated from infected persons to
others by kissing, by sucking, by clothes, and the like. Now all the venereal
distempers either of these ways contracted, do extremely differ from that which
is usually gotten by unlawful Contact; for, they usually appear in the form of
other Maladies; as is evident not only by report of all the best Authors, but I
find it in my daily Practice; forasmuch as abundance of people grow sickly, and
languish under the appearance (it may be) of a Consumption, a Gout, a Dropsy,
and Ague, a slow Fever, and sometimes an acute one, Sore-eyes, Greensickness,
and indeed of all manner of Diseases, which (when the other ordinary means have
been long used in vain) have at length been relieved by an orderly use of such
Anti-venereous Remedies as I have on purpose invented, the nature whereof is,
to fight against Humors both great and small, in old or young, which have been
any way touched with the Venereal Tincture, either through their own default,
or by sigillation of those seminal Principles, which contribute toward the
Being of Mankind in the Act of Generation; which whosoever takes not into
consideration, in curing the Diseases of this Age (now that the Families of
Mankind are tinctured all, more or less) will miss of his aim; and it is the
main reason why so few are thoroughly cured, because few Physicians proceed upon
an improvement of this Notion, or the inventing of such Remedies as are of a
large reach, and properly conducing thereunto. But of this Subject I shall have
occasion to discourse more copiously ere long.

In the mean while, let me have leave to insist upon another sore Evil under
the Sun, called the Scurvy, which, like the former, is very much altered also
from what it was in former days, and become every jot as Universal. I find it
is a Disease of no very long standing, much about the Age of its Cousin-german
the Pox; for I have read, that when Dr Martin Dorp, a Divine of Lovain, (one
much esteemed by Erasmus, and Sir Thomas More) was afflicted with it, the
Physicians of that University were amazed at it, as a new and unknown Disease;
and not knowing what to do toward a Cure, he died under their hands: So that
whatever others talk, and would fain reduce it to the old Stomacace and
Sceletyrbe, i. e. the Sore Mouth and Sore Legs of Pliny, yet questionless it is
but of a late standing in the World; and of late years it is grown so much
another thing, that it is in a manner wholly new. The Authors which write of it
give this account, That at its first appearance it brake forth in Sores and
stinking Ulcers in the Mouth and Legs, looseness and falling out of Teeth,
rotting of the Gums, debility of Legs and all the Limbs, Spots of all Colors
upon the Skin, acting very much of the same kind of Tyranny with Scabs,
Scurffs, and Ulcers of a malignant nature, as the French Pox did, which were
not to be cured by old usual Remedies, but only by Specificks of a new
invention. And as the Pox is said to have been discovered at first among the
French (which yet Rondeletius Rondeletius, De Morbo Italico.
and other French Writers deny, and would cast the original upon the Italians)
so this is fathered upon the Nations which lie Northerly, upon the Seacoast of
Denmark, Norway, Holland, and other parts of the Low Countries, where it fell
foul upon Seafaring people, who carried it thence, together with Commodities of
Trade, to other places, till it crept up into the Continent, especially among
such as lived upon ill Diet, like that of Seamen, as salt Meats, salt Fish,
etc. and in places watery and fenny and of a foggy Air. In this form it raged
at first, in such places, and varied but little till it got more ground in the
World. It was long ere it got into the warmer Climats of France, Spain, and
Italy, in which Countries it is See River. ^. Cent. Obs. 85.
rare to be seen at this day, as may be observed in Forestus, Fonseca, Piso,
Riverius, and others; yet among them it is increasing, though it is never like
to arrive at such a height there, as it is with us, the Germans, the Flemings,
and others nearer the Pole, because their Blood is not so abounding with that
Serosa Colluvies, which contributes so much toward the production of this
Disease among us, and other Northerly people; but that which is most observable
in every Country is, That now it but rarely discovers it self in its first garb
of Symptoms external, but having gotten dominion inwardly, plays most of its
pranks in the more noble parts of the Body; the reason whereof is doubtless
this, because now it arises not only from ill Diet, bad Air, contagion by
Contact, and the like Causes of corruption, as it did at first, but walks pari
passu as the Pox did, stealing upon Mankind by way of seminal traduction from
Father to Son, and is become hereditary; so that being as it were individually
radicated in the very Principles of men's Bodies, it has conspired with the
Seminalities of the Pox, and both have joined their Malignant Forces, to bring
a strange Metamorphosis upon the whole Frame of Nature in Mankind, and all the
diseases thereto belonging: But of this I shall say more anon; In the interim,
let it suffice to know, that it rambles about also in the habit of other
distempers; so that if an odd-humor'd disease happen, it concerns the
Physician, if he will be dextrous in curing, to exercise his skill first in
discovering, whether such a disease have in it a Tincture of the Pox, or the
Scurvy, or both; and then secondly, to invent such Remedies to have in
readiness, as may hit either of these; but certainly such Remedies are best as
have a power to strike at both, because (as Eugalenus in his Epistle to the
Prince of Orange well observes) the Symptoms Cum morbo Gallico paribus Passibus
certare videtur, and Symptomaetum vdrictate and similitudine.
of both have so near a resemblance, that few Physicians are able to
distinguish betwixt them. And as touching the great alteration of this Disease
from its first Nature and Condition, because I would not be tedious, I shall
give you only one Testimony, and but one Instance, the matter being obvious
enough of it self. Hochstetterus, an Eminent Physician of Ausburgh in Germany,
in an Epistle of his to the Famous Horstius, shows how the Scurvy altered, as
it got footing and time; for, it was so much another thing in High Germany from
what it had been in the Lower, and other Parts more North, that in his days it
was hardly so much as a Vix umbram bahere nostrum Scorbutum cum
Septentrionalium, intelligo.
shadow of what it had been among those Northern Men, according to the
Description of Eugalenus, Wierus, Ronseus, Forestus; yea, and of Platerus, who
did but transcribe out of them what he writes of this Particular, though he
deliver it as his own. The Instance is but short, and it is taken out of the
Bills of Mortality, which show both the increase of the Scurvy, and the
Malignity of it; for, if you look back on former days about 30 years ago, the
number reckoned to dye of that Disease was but small, and year after year ever
since it has increased gradually. In the year 1630. the number was but 5. In
1631. 7. -- 1632. 9. -- 1636. 25. -- Afterward, in the year 1647. the Account
came up to 32. -- In the year 1652. to 43. -- In 1655. to 44. -- In 1656. to
103. -- And in the years ever since, they are numbered sometimes above 70,
sometimes above 80, sometimes above 90, which signifies, that the Disease is
very much altered, being grown to a higher pitch of Malignity and Mortality
than in former time. But you are to conceive withal, that the numbers so set
down were only of such as dyed with manifest Tokens of the Scurvy, whereas
many hundreds have dyed, and do die every year of Maladies, which radically and
in the main are Scorbutic; yet because they are not discernible by vulgar
Physicians, and others, have their lot to be registered under the Names of other
Diseases; as will be further made evident before I end this Chapter.

My next Observation shall be of the Rickets, which is a Disease of a very late
Original; for, Mr John Grant, an ingenious Citizen of London, who lately wrote
an excellent short Treatise of Observations upon the Weekly Bills of Mortality,
has observed, that we find in them no Mention of Rickets till the year 1634:
which agrees much with the time of its Original, set down by the Learned De
Rachitide.
Dr Glisson, who says, it was discovered first in the West-parts of England,
viz. in the Counties of Dorset, and Somerset, about 30 years ago, from whence
it soon found the way to London, from whence it is now spread through all parts
of England. About 20 or 25 years ago, though it were a grievous disease, yet
not what it is now; It manifested it self by an over-growing of the Liver and
Spleen, with a crookedness of the Legs, a bending in of the Hams, knotting of
the Joints, overgrowth of the Head, a sinking of the Backbone, a narrowness of
the Chest, and a general failing of the strength of all the Limbs: but in these
days the Case is altered; sometimes some of these Symptoms appear, but not so
frequent as formerly, and these cannot be reputed the only Pathognomical Signs
of the disease, because it also, as well as the Pox and Scurvy, marches under
the Colors of most other diseases; as the Hydrocephalus intra Cranium, i. e.
the Water in the Head, difficulty of Teething; the Asthma, or difficulty of
Breathing; the Convulsion, Falling Sickness, Consumption, Hectic Fever,
Malignant Fever, Slow Fever, Ague, Dropsy, Kings Evil, and many more at
present, and more like to be hereafter, when it shall by Tract of time arrive
to be hereditary, (as it begins to be already) and join force with those
Enemies which are the Seminal Products of Venereous and Scorbutic Agents.
However, the Disease is even so much changed both in Symptoms and the effects
of them, that it does more and more mischief, by making greater destruction of
Infants one year after an other: For, Mr Grant has shown out of the yearly
Bills, that the Rickets were never more numerous than now, and they are like to
increase; for, in the year 1630. there dyed but 12 of it. In the year 1649.
there dyed 190, the next year 260, next after that 329, and so forwards, with
some little starting backward in some years, until the year 1660, which
produced the greatest number of all, viz. 521. which is a great Advance in so
few years from Number 12. But it is not to be attributed only to this, that
the Disease is more spread abroad, but that it is also very much altered in its
own Nature, to a more destructive condition: And being entered into a
complication already with the Pox and the Scurvy, (as Do Rachitide, cap. 20.
Dr Glisson acknowledges) it is in vain to attempt the curing of it with such
Remedies and Rules as were used thirty or twenty years ago; because by
experience we find they will not reach the Disease now, which points out to us,
that men's brains ought to be working out new Notions and Medicines, as the
only means (with Gods blessing) to lessen the number of those little Innocents
which are yearly snatched away by an untimely death.

Next, let us note the Consumption: which in the Bills of Mortality appears to
be exceedingly increased, far beyond the proportion of the numbers of
Inhabitants which have been added to this great City, the truth whereof will be
clear to any that will take pains to compare the Bills since the year 1629. So
that the extraordinary increase of this Malady must be attribured also to some
other Cause than the increase of People; and what can that be, but the change
of the Disease it self to be of another nature than heretofore? For it (for the
most part) contemns all those large Pectoral Swils, long Syrups, and
Electuaries, which were supposed to work wonders heretofore; the Phthisis is
another kind of Phthisis; the Atrophie another kind of Atrophie; and the
Hectic another manner of Hectic, than was in former days; and these three
Species of a Consumption spring generally in this Age from one Root, which is
in plain Terms no other but the Pox and Scurvy, either Hereditary or
Adventitious; and those wastings of the Body to a Sceleton, are uually the
Effects and Monuments of their Treachery and Tyranny; so that he who will now a
days cure a Consumption must strike at the Root, as well as regard the
Circumstances, wherein little good is to be done likewise by the ordinary
Anti-venereal Means and Courses, forasmuch as the usual Decoctions, Sweatings,
etc. do rather exasperate the Disease than militate against it.

From the same Root likewise most commonly springs that Disease, which the
Vulgar calls a Stopping of the Stomach, and it advances to a height in the
same manner, both as to the severity wherewith it handles men and women, and
the number which it kills: for, whereas it seems to be somewhat that is new,
because we hear no News of it in our Bills till the year 1636. (as Mr Grant
reckons) and then but of 6. for that year, it in the year 1655. came to be
145.; and Anno 1657. it was raised to 277. In 1660. to 314. Which Proportions
(says he) exceed the difference of proportion generally arising from the
increase of Inhabitants, and from the resort of Advenae to the City.

There is another Disease which the people term the Rising of the Lights, and I
am of his Opinion, that it is the same with that they call Hysterica Passio or
the Mother, because it seizes upon women (though men too sometimes have
somewhat like it;) and it is evident enough, since De Hysterica passion^.
Dr Highmore (a very industrious Learned Man) has sufficiently shown, that the
Lungs are the Part principally affected with that which hitherto has been
called a Fit of the Mother. But (says Grant) be these Risings what they will,
they have much increased beyond the general proportion; for in the year 1629.
there died but 44. and in the year, 1660, 249. viz. almost six times as many;
and whereas the Rickets, the Stoppings, and Rising (so called) have all
increased together, and in some kind of correspondent Proportions, it seems to
me (says he) that they depend upon one another. And I say, any man in reason
will conclude as much; and that they are all three but Pullulations of the
Scurvy, and its most Scurvy Companion, if we consider that all Authors de
Scorbuto reckon a difficulty of breathing and straitning of the breast, to be
one of its most constant Symptoms: And me thinks, what Sennertus has Pract. l.
3. part. 5. Sect. 2. c. 4.
written does very much illustrate this; for vicious and malignant vapors being
raised in the lower Belly, especially about the Spleen, in the Stomach, and
about the Midriff, and in the Cavity of the Omentum, must needs, while they
continue there, hinder that free motion of the Midriff which is necessary for
Respiration: In like manner also, vicious humors distending the Spleen and the
Parts adjoining, may compress the Midriff, just as persons hydropick, and women
with child, or others that are from any cause tun-bellied, are brought to a
straitness and a difficulty of breathing, while in the mean time the Patients
complain not at all of the Breast, but point out the place affected under the
Midriff about the region of the Stomach, as is evident by the Report of
Eugalenus, and by every days experience; which is enough to evince, from whence
that Malady which they term a stopping of the Stomach, has its original viz.
either from the Scorbutic humors, or vapors. -- But Sennertus goes on, and
gives us some light to derive the other, called a Rising of the Lights, from
the like playing of Scorbutic malignant vapors up through the Veins and
Arteries to the Lungs, and by communication thence to the Heart, and this upon
the least commotion or unusual motion of the mind or body: which being the
cause also of that Distemper which has been hitherto supposed to be seated in
the Mother, it is evident enough, that the increase of the Scurvy has made a
change also of these Distempers, as it has done by diverse other, and
consequently that the old Remedies respecting the Lungs, the Stomach, and the
Mother, will do little good in these Cases; and that is the reason why so many
Physicians are mistaken in what they prescribe, and so their Patients lose both
their Cost and their Labor.

The Convulsion also is a Disease now of another nature than formerly; In
former years, it slew its half hundreds of children, now its many Hundreds in a
year; for the Bills tell you that Anno 1629. there died but 52. which in 1636.
grew to 709. keeping about that stay till 1659. though sometimes rising to
about 1000, as the Estimate is made by the same ingenious Observator: to which
I may add, that in the year 1662. they rose to 1053. and in the year 1663. they
fell back, and were only 1011. which great increases cannot be attributed to
the increase of children (who are the parties most afflicted with it) because
the numbers of New Comers into the world are not advanced in any considerable
proportion to answer so great an Increase of the Mortality; but it must be
ascribed rather to the great Alteration of the Disease it self, which requires
other Notions to proceed by, and other things than old Methods and Means to
cure this so general a Destroyer.

The Small Pox and Measels must not be judged by the Bills, as the rest are,
because in some years they become epidemical, and then the slaughter they make
falls out (more or less) according to the malignity of the particular seasons:
but the observation to be made of them is when they are sporadical, here and
there sprinkled up and down among the people, in those years which have not any
such general Malignity above other years; and then consider, that as they seize
but upon a few people, so of those few there die many more, and those of them
that escape do much more hardly escape, than in former times, both those
Diseases being attended with more dreadful and more dangerous Symptoms: which
being obvious to every Nurse, it is needless to insist further thereupon than
to let you know, that most of those which miscarry, die partly for want of some
more generous Remedies than the Shops yield; and partly through the
inadvertency of Physicians, who do not calculate their Prescriptions to meet
with that Serosa Colluvies of Saline, and acid humors, with which the blood of
Mankind (especially in these North-parts of the world) is both by propagation
and by intemperance of Diet and Luxury exceedingly tainted: the extraordinary
active Fermentation and Ebullition whereof, when corrupted, is the Cause why
Agues, Fevers, Smallpox, Measels, and all that has any thing of Fever in it,
proves so difficult, or so deadly. In the days of Hippocrates and Galen, the
Smallpox and Measels were either altogether unknown, or else so light and
easy, that they were never reckoned as particular diseases among the Grecians,
but looked on as Accidents only, and Critical Eruptions supervening putrid and
Malignant Fevers: And in after-time we hear no such News of them, till the
Arabians began to describe the Small Pox as a Disease distinct from others; but
then they were very gentle, and thus continued till about 40. years ago, and
less. Just so, Riverius tells us, it was in the West Indies till the Spaniards
arrived there, and then it happened that a Black Slave sickning of the Small Pox
with Pestilential Symptoms, the malign and venomous quality thereof being
communicated by contagion to others, the Distemper began to rage at such a
height, that a great part of the Indians were destroyed by it, though so mild
before, that it was not reputed worth the Trouble of Physic or Physicians.

I might swell a Discourse up to a Volume, should I insist upon every Disease;
as the Arthritis Vaga Scorbutica, which being sprung up of late years, a
Consequent of the Scurvy, is called by the people the Running Gout, and grows
^^orse and worse continually: I might touch upon its elder Brother the Gout,
which though not so frequently knotty a formerly, has made an exchange (...)
other Symptoms, and seizes a greater part of Men than heretofore, not sparing
young Men more than old: Also the Rheumatism, which is a quite different thing
from that which is described by Galen; so likewise are most of our Palsies; to
say nothing of our common Coughs, Catarrhs, Toothache, and many other Diseases,
which are very much altered to the worse, so that the vulgar Remedies avail
little against them. But I am willing to make an end of this Subject here, that
which I had a mind to prove being manifest enough, viz. That all manner of
Diseases are altered from their old State, and become almost wholly new;
forasmuch as I shall in the next Chapter convey more light into the Truth of
this Position.

CHAP. III. An Inquiry into the Causes of the Alteration of Diseases from their
ancient State and Condition.
THis Subject not having been handled to purpose by any that I know of, and
there being but a short hint given in the former Chapter, that the French Pox
and the Scurvy, by their Invasions made upon the Universality of Mankind, have
been the two Main Causes of the Alteration; it will be worth the while to make
a Scrutiny into the certainty of the thing. It is a matter that I suppose may,
at first, sound harsh in the Ears of some people, because of the good opinion
they have of Themselves, their Families and Progenitors; and therefore they
will be loath to admit it probable, that any Tincture of such a nature should be
gotten into their Blood; but, by that time I have done this Chapter, I believe
I shall give them ground to apprehend all this may come about, and yet with a
Salvo to their honesty. The only person before me in Print that touched this
double Cause of the Alteration of Diseases, was one The Title of the Treatise,
is, Lues Venerea, published. Anno 1659.
Doctor John Wynel, whose design in writing was not so much to particularise
the manner how so great an Alteration is come about, but he aims only at the
description of the Pox, a new way of Cure for it, and lastly how many secret
ways it may be communicated or spread abroad; which last part of his Discourse
tends to illustrate the truth of what I purpose to make out, viz. the new
Specification or change of nature, which it has bestowed upon all other
Diseases: Only in his Preface he has a few Hints concerning this, but very
short, the Body of his Discourse bending to another End; but he says withal,
that the consideration of this general mischief wrought by the Pox, was one
reason which induced him to write of the nature of it, etc. I shall here
transcribe the words of his Preface, because they make much to my purpose. One
occasion of my Writing (says he) was my observing the stupendous growth and
spreading of two depopulating Diseases, the Venereous and the Scurvy; and
enquiring thereupon into their effects, in the yearly Bills of Mortality, I
found them so benign, that it gave me occasion to admire the mystery of
concealment: I observed the Consumption to have slain its Thousands, and the
Venereous Disease scarce its Hundreds: I concluded thereupon, that Dolus latet
in generalibus, Consumption's Back is broad enough to bear such Mocks: I
perceived also, that the Scurvy had scarce a constant name in the killing
Catalogue, though it destroy more than any Ten of its Fellows; but the Dropsy,
Fevers of many kinds, etc. have great numbers dead at their Feet. I concluded
thence, Filiae devorarunt Matrem. I observed also the Mortality and pining of
Families, their Generations gasping, and soon run out, one treading on the
heels of another, which made me to enquire what should be the occasion; I
accused their pampering diet, effeminate education, premature marriage, and
indiscreet covetousness in taking a weak, crooked, or rickety Woman (for her
Portion) to be Mater-familias. But my thoughts reasoning against the
sufficiency of this enumeration, as not of sufficient consideration, they
carried me with greatest reason to contemplate their Diseases; and finding the
Venereous Disease amongst them, I was strong in my conjecture, that this
Malady, traduced in the Seed of Parents, and Milk of Nurses, hindering Nature
from accomplishing her intent of perfection, has brought this calamity upon
Families, Haeret Semini lethalis Arundo.

I observed further, that hereby one principal end of Marriage, to propagate a
strong, healthy, and numerous posterity, sit to traduce the being, name, and
memory of Parents, to such an eternity as their mortal condition is capable of,
was much made void: For, in this wanton, painting, patching, perfuming, Issuing
Age, a man knows not whom or what he takes to himself or his Son in Marriage, a
Blessing, or a Curse, whereby not only our own Bodies are endangered and
damnified, but Posterity primarily, fundamentally corrupted, extirpated, hearts
of yoak-fellows alienated, Jealousy let in, and indeed an uncomfortable life
together, because they cannot get a-sunder, like two Dogs in a Chain ever
snarling, and all because the abuseful deceit in Marriage manet alta mente
repostum.

I observed also, that all Pretenders to Physic gave out a more than ordinary
Skill in the Venereous Cure; yet scarce one Patient of Ten went off from them
sound, as by relapses it too ordinarily appears. I was therefore led to
believe, that either the ignorance of the Disease, or shamefacedness to
discover it, made them carry it about them too long; or else the ignorance of
such as they applied themselves to, or the impatience of the Patients to bear a
Cure, gave the Disease this advantage: For, though by Palliation the dolorous
Symptoms were baffled, yet the virulent Cause was left behind in the dark, deep
in their Spirits and Bones, to make future work for the Physician. Hereby their
Patients are deceived, who not being able to judge, think better of their
Discovery than is meet and safe, and find by sad experience, that (the next
evoking Season) the Disease having gotten strength by lying in Trenches, breaks
forth more dangerous than it was at its first Onset. My Scope therefore in
publishing this Treatise, is, to present a good office to the world, by entering
the Lists with this Champion. And since this Enemy plays small Game also, and
is come down so low as the Spinster, I have therefore made him speak plain
English, (not without due respect to Modesty and better Understandings) that
ordinary Capacities may be able to judge of their own Condition by their own
light, and in season look out for relief, before captivity, and the further
Enervation of their own Bodies. For, though people of both Sexes may be privy
to their own personal integrity, yet what lurks in their humors from Parents
Seed, or Nurses Milk, they are ignorant of: And, however no present Symptoms
thereof discover it to themselves, much less to others; yet the Fomes of it often
and long lying obscure, does traduce a present defilement in Generation to
Posterity.

I have read many Authors on this Subject, and found satisfaction in none. I
perceive, that on this, as on other Subjects, they too much tread in the steps
of their Ancestors, and rest in their Dictates without further Inquiry,
swelling their Volumes with Transcriptions into their own Methods, which serve
to fill men's Libraries with much paper, and but few Books. Thus far He
concerning the Pox; whereby it appears, I am not single in my conceptions
touching the Alteration that it has made in other Diseases. He there tells us
also, that he had the same thoughts touching the Scurvy, and promised to write
the like Treatise concerning It, which I perceive he has not yet performed,
though doubtless very much might have been said to purpose by so learned and
ingenious a Pen. It shall be my part therefore to enlarge upon that Hint which
he gave in his Preface, touching the Influence which the Seminalities of the
Pox have by intermixture with other Maladies; and likewise to supply what he
has yet forborne to write, touching the like ^nfluence of the Scurvy. In order
whereunto, I shall reduce my Discourse to several Heads, and show, that both
the Venereal and Scorbutic Miasma have gained ground in the world five several
Ways, viz. 1. By Carnal Contact, 2. By ill Cures, 3. By accidental Contagion,
4. by Hereditary Propagation, 5. By Lactation.

1. By Carnal Contact. This being a matter evident by every days observation,
that the Mutual Attrition of Bodies in that Bestial Act, is the ready common
Road of communicating the Pox from one to another, I suppose it were time lost
to insist upon it, and it may with more purpose be spent to manifest a Truth of
much importance to be laid open for the security of Mankind, which it concerns
all men to take notice of; and it is this: That after the committing of that
Folly with an unwholsom Person, though there appear no Sign nor Symptom of a
Disease for the present, yet it may be latent and lurkking within the Body,
many years, before it make any discovery of it self either in its own nature,
or in the disguise of other Diseases. This may be proved many ways; for, it is
frequently observed, that Common Women who have long lived in that wicked
course of Prostitution, have many years continued without any manifest effect
of the Malignity of that Disease upon their own Bodies, and yet the Disease
lurking within has enabled them to infect (it may be) some Hundreds of others.
And the like has been observed of men infecting women, yet those men not privy
to the sense or knowledge of any Infection actually resident within themselves,
though otherwise they know they have sufficiently deserved it: which one would
think should be sad News to all the Strikers of both Sexes, to hear that even
in this world there can be no security from the punishment of this Sin; it is
commonly but Touch and Take; and if any offend, though but once, they may be
surprised by the venom; and if they should perhaps escape free from the Taint,
yet it is rare; and here lies the misery, they are not sure that they are so.
But that you may not wonder how this can come about, that some are made sad
examples of the Infection, and others not; and that some that practice
wickedness most of their days seem sound even to old Age, while upon others,
after but one Coition, the Disease breaks out with violence; or why some
Sinners seeming sound o themselves, are yet infectious to their Copes-mates; I
tell you in the language of Dr Wynel, it may be ascribed to many Causes.

1. To the various Dispositions of Bodies; for, some are more prone to this, or
that Disease, and therefore take it sooner, because Nature makes less
resistance: which also is the reason that they who have any part of their
bodies weaker than other, do receive a Disease sooner in that part: For
example, let a man that has the Gout be venereously infected, and he shall
find it more to prevail and afflict him in his Feet. So on him that has weak
eyes, if this Pocky Disease supervene, his eyes are sooner and more afflicted
than other parts: And the Truth is, the more infirm any person is in the
Spermatick Vessels and Members of Generation, the more easily the Infection
makes its way to the Blood, Humors, Spirits, and Parts of the Body, and the
whole Body suffers under its Tyranny; but if the Body be strong, then the Venom
is kept under in a lurking state, till the vigor of nature decaying either by
intemperance, or either by Time, or by the invasion of some other Diseases, it
takes thereupon an opportunity to break loose, and show it self in its own
Colors, or the disguise of some other Malady that joins Issue with it.

2. Carelessness, Sordidness in neglecting their own Bodies, is another Cause;
For Modesties sake these passages are put in Latin
Qui enim post Coitum, ab Inquinamentis and Sordibus, rationabiliter and more
debito seipsos mundificant, vel sciunt hoc rite peragere, rarius hoc morbo
capiuntur; quum alii, se negligentes, vel modum hujus operis ignorantes, dum
Illuviem adhaerere permitttunt, citius and immanius correpti poenas luunt:
Indeed, though an internal Taint (more or less) be scarce ever avoided by any,
yet cleanliness ex post facto is a great means to prevent the virulent
eruptions of a Gonorrhaea, Exulcerations, and other sad effects in and about
the Genitals.

3. In congressu carnali di^ ac multum immorari, ad virulentam Infectionem and
violentam plurimum conducit; qui enim impuris corporibus immersi detinentur,
and post S^tietatem, proprer libidinis E^stasin multum instammantur, unica
saliem Coitionis vice peract^ contagium suscipiunt; qui vero statim abscedunt,
minus inflammati, haud ita facile coinquinantur.

4. Quo flagrantius libidine exardescunt, and, equorum instar, igneo Spermate
stimulati remferocius affectant, eo citius homines labem contrahunt, and
crudelitas morbi per Signa manifestior evadit; atque inde est, quod tot e
Juniorum censu tam subito infecti redeant; quoniam ob victum nimis liberalem
and Spermaticum turgentiores facti, juventutis Ardoribus ac Libidinis una
coeuntibus, magna flamma accenditur, adeo ut de majori and magis Vrente parum
solliciti, minime timeant. Atque idem dictum sit de ijs etiam, qui Veneris
palaestra minus exercitati fuerint, qui siquando rem obtineant, impetu
vehementiore properantes celerius inquinantur, eo quod Spiritibus fervidioribus
ad genitalia copiose confluentibus, ardore eorum ac violentia Ductus Spermatici
plurim^m dilatentur, ut patentior fiat via veneno.

5. In a word; This Disease takes and breaks forth with some more than others,
either because it finds weak Bodies full of corrupt humors, bodies passively
disposed, and hereby it has opportunity to domineer most; or else the Disease
is a Relapse, and finds Nature yielding, and renewed and ingeminated Diseases
ever appear worst: Or sometimes other Diseases fallen in are joined with it,
one Disease drawing on another congenerous; and Diseases the more complicate,
so much the worse they are. Besides, the new Disease falls in when Nature is
weak, low, and languishing, so that its expulsive Faculty cannot keep out, nor
drive off the Diseases new or old. This Disease falls sometimes but gently on
the Hair, sometimes on the Nerves, and causes all manner of Palsies, Cramps,
Convulsions, Toothache, Pains in the Limbs, Gouts of all sorts, Lamenesses,
general Debility, etc. Sometimes on the Bones, sometimes on the fleshy parts,
whence come Leprosies, Scurfs, Scabs, Ulcers, knotty Swellings, and the like:
Sometimes on the Brain, whence come Sore Eyes, Rheumes, Catarrhs, Epilepsies,
etc. Sometimes on the Lungs, whence come Asthmaes, Coughs, Phthisical
Consumptions, etc. and so, many other Diseases, too long to describe; And all
this variety, because the several Parts respectively are more disposed and
propense to receive the impression of the Disease, or because they do less
repel it. -- Thus that which Physicians say of the Fever, that sometimes it
falls on the Humors, sometimes on the Spirits, and sometimes on the Solid
Parts, as they are more disposed to Inflammation, or do less resist that Flame,
may as truly be said of this Disease.

6. You may observe, that Men of Drier, Harder, and Colder Bodies, are less
subject to this Disease, as laboring men, poor men, and old men. I have read
it observed, that the Venom does not often discover it self upon the Turks; and
the reason suggested is, for that their Bodies are more Hard and Dry, and
consequently their Genitals.

7. There is Cause arising likewise from particular Constitutions, why this
Disease is so various; and (to speak in the Galenick phrase, because that
passes best to common Capacities) I observe the Choleric are soonest touched;
the Melancholic most afflicted; the Sanguine make best resistance to
Infection, and are best cured; and the Phlegmatic have it lurking longest in
their humors: which suits exactly with the Saying of De Lue Ven. l. 32. Obs. 3.
Forestus, who tells us, The Disease is one thing when it is in a Sanguine
person; another, when it is in a Choleric; another thing when it is in a
Melancholic; and so men are more speedily or more rarely made Examples of its
cruelty: which is no more than what was said also by De Morb Contag. l. 2. c.
14.
Fernelius before him, as you may read at large. And as this is true in
reference to Constitutions in general, so it is observed, that people who are
near of a Constitution, infect one another the more quickly and dangerously.
This also Fernelius shows in the same Chapter, Veluti si Biliosus cum Biliosa
concubuerit: And as Pract. l. 6. part. 3. cap. 3.
Sennertus is large upon this Point, so he gives a Reason of it; for, says he,
You are to consider the Body infecting and infected, and there is required in
all Contagion, a likeness betwixt the Contagious Body and that which receives
the Contagion; and he intimates, that where such a likeness is not, there the
Body that is in hazard operates Antipathetically by its natural vigor against
the other that would infect it; but in what thing either this Antipathy, or
this Likeness does consist, no man (says he) can declare in a satisfactory
manner; because those occult qualities of Bodies, and the essential Forms from
which they flow, are not discoverable by ^^ in this dark state of Mankind, nor
any way to be discerned but by their effects. Now that the Effect is really so
betwixt Sinners of a Complexion, will easily be observed by those Many that
have opportunity to observe things, in their loose way of Conversation and
Licentious Living. Zacutus Lusitanus, that Learned Jew, has said as much as
any to the same purpose; but goes further than others, and undertakes to show
ways whereby Infection may be prevented. [ Z^cut. Prax. Hist. l. 2. c. 1. p.
6^.
Sed si hoc negotium attentius expendatur, inveniemus p^^res Cautiones, and
Auxilia; quorum benesicio quispiam post concubitum, a Gallico veneno immunis
evadat. Primo ergo, oportet ut post Venerem, in qua non multum immoretur,
abluat totum pudendum aqua calida, denudato praeputio, and hoc per octavam
horae partem saciendum, idque mane and sero, bidui spatio. Hoc praesidio
superstites a tanta labe persaepe e^adunt Mulieres, panniculos ex gosrypio in
calida aqua abunde madidos immittentes. Quod si haec praesto non sint, protinus
genitalia urina lavabis. Balneum toti corpori adhibitum summopere prodest,
maxim si cum infecto vel necessitate coactus, vel inscius quis cubaverit.
Vinum etiam calidum in hunc usum mirifice confert. Verum Aqua aliis liquoribus
est praestantior; resolvit enim, ardorem temperat, mitigat dolorem, and non
exsiccat.] The English of which is to be locked up from the eyes of common
Readers, partly for modesties sake, and partly because such Cautions may prove
an encouragement to wickedness; though I believe them (for the most part)
ineffectual; and he himself does as good as acknowledge it in the same Page:
for Veluti Impossible est, posse inveniri remedium quod Contagii vim ex toto
resringat, etc.
(says he), In the Venereal Congress, the heat being excited by Motion, a
great ebullition of Spirits and Humors following thereupon, and the Passages of
the Body being made more open, it is in a manner impossible, that any means
should be found out, that may totally break and repress the force of the
Contagion, so as to hinder its being communicated to the neighboring vessels,
or its passing on to the other Parts: So that if his Directions and Cautions
should at any time prevail, to prevent present Inconveniences usually befalling
the Genitals, and the Spermatick and Urinary Vessels, yet the Venom may steal
on insensibly, and seat it self in the most hidden and substantial parts, to
act its part, by way of Sally and Surprise, in the form of some other Diseases
in the future. And the same Author hardly grants any possibility of
Women-strikers escaping, because they are the Receivers of Impurity; and though
their Menstrual Purgations may carry off part of the peccant Humors, and so
relieve them in part, yet their Bodies being more feeble, and liable to more
Diseases than Men, miserable Consequents are frequently seen to afflict them;
and that is the reason why those other Diseases that are peculiar to the Sex,
which were commonly curable heretofore, do now defy all the old Courses and
Remedies of Physic, so that the non-consideration of the Causes of this great
Change, and the not fitting of Medicines agreeable thereto, is the main Cause
why they are become the Shame of our Profession. I might be much more copious;
but this is enough to show, how slily this Infection many times steals into the
Body, and how silently it may lodge there, without any manifestation of its
Venom in the person, and yet that person may by Carnal Coition impart it to
another, who may be otherwise affected, and have visible Symptoms breaking out;
and to say truth, these are more happy, because they are alarmed to look out
for a Cure, while the other through security neglect it, and so the Disease
becomes naturalized in them, working it self into the whole habit of the Body;
and then what Diseases soever the Body is most inclinable to, in the form of
those Diseases it usually appears: And so, since the time that the universality
of Men have been infected, Diseases generally are altered, and are rarely cured
without Remedies that will meet with them in the Point of their Origination,
and reach the root of the Matter.

Now, as it fares thus with Mankind by the Pox, so in every respect also by the
Scurvy, which is a Disease every jot as much propagated by carnal Contact, as
the other, though it be a matter less taken notice of: For, all Horstius,
Sennertus. Re^j^erus, Forestus, and the rest.
Authors that write of it, reckon it in the number of Infectious Diseases: They
all agree likewise, that it may be, and is, transmitted hereditarily from
Fathers to Children, or by clothes, or by kissing, or other ordinary ways of
Conversation; and if it may pass by such slight means, then the Argument holds
a fortiori, that its Infection may pass much sooner and more fully by Venereal
Intermixture. in the clearing of which Assertion, I shall be more punctual by
and by. In the mean while, it is evident enough, that this Disease passes by
the mutual Act of Male and Female, even from this one Observation, that
wherever either of the Mates is scorbutically tainted, the other never
scapes, but catches the Taint more or less, and so, like the Pox, discovers it
self more or less according to the variety of the Tempers and Distempers of the
Bodies on which it seizes; or else not at all, till through decay of nature,
or by some other Accident, it has opportunity to show it self in its own
Colors, or in the garb of other Diseases. If any think he has reason to
gainsay this, let him first observe the Course of things, before he oppose it.

II. The Venereous and Scorbutic Taint has gotten much ground in the world,
through ill management of Cures, or insufficient ways of Curation: As for the
Pox, the Custom has been to run to any Pretender for a Cure of it; and those
Physicians that do meddle with it, do (most of them) handle it as ill as the
rest, because they make use of the common Scope and Remedies in curing, so that
they both mistake the way, and have not means wherewith to carry the Patient
safe to his Journies end, forasmuch as the pretended Cure very often proves
worse than the Disease, destroys the Constitution, and creates or exasperates
some other Disease, either which was not in being there before, or which was
but beginning, if it had a being.

Some of the common ways are mentioned by the foresaid Dr to be these:

1. The cheap-poor-whore-Cure, by Fontanels or Issues, taken up from the
practice of the poorer Spaniards, amongst whom it is in common use, whereby
nature finds some ease, disburthening part of the purulent matter, but the
Fomes is left within, to render their condition the more deplorable; And here
one thing is to be observed, that Issues prevailed not much in the practice of
Physic, until this Disease brake into Europe.

2. By Mercurial Unguent, which may serve for Carriers, and Porters, and other
robustious Bodies; and yet, even in them the Consequents render it perilous, if
not pernicious. I know, some are so ignorant and audacious, that they make it
their ordinary Champion, setting upon every Venereous Patient with this
dreadful Remedy, as if no cure could be dispatched without it; the effects of
whose boldness many have mournfully carried to their graves. What this Unguent
is, I need not express; its Composition is better known than trusted to, or
delighted in, by Artists: for, this Unguent rubbed on the Palms of the Hands
and the Plants of the Feet, etc. is speedily carried to the Head, as appears by
the Floods of Salivation, with other dreadful Symptoms, that follow the use of
it.

3. By Mercurial Cinabar-Fume, which is yet more formidable, and to such as
have pectoral Diseases, short Breath, ill-affected Lungs, Distillations, weak
Bowels, Colic Pains, and Dysenteries, it is pernicious; for, use what care you
c^n, the Mercurial Air will get into the Chest. And though great Pretenders may
promise security in its use, yet it is no wisdom to adventure your person, upon
every one's bold rash and ignorant confidence: Fierce Accidents will fall in;
bold Undertakers will promise much, and perform little, and adventure upon what
they cannot govern, therefore must needs abuse themselves and their Patients. I
say not this to decry the right use of Mercury; for, take away Mercury,
Antimony, and Vitriol, and you leave the Armory of Physic reproachfully weak.

4. By Salivation procured by Medicines inwardly taken, which, though it be the
best of all the ordinary ways, yet as it is managed by most Chirurgians, and
others, generally it is attended with Symptoms almost as ill as any of the
other; and all for want of such Medicines as will do the work of Salivation,
without those tedious and intolerable afflictions of swollen Head, loose Teeth,
sore and swollen Mouth, Tongue, and Throat, etc. and the Malign Impressions
thereby left when the work is over, which very few claw off all their Days
after.

The committing of persons to be cured of this Disease by common and ignorant
persons, is that which Dr De Vulgi Erroribus, l. 1. cap. 16.
Primrose cries out upon, among the Vulgar Errors, Credit being given to any
that will brag, and promise to make a Cure within 10. or 12. days, and yet
allow men their liberty; which draws men in, especially such as have Business
to follow; and when all is done, instead of a through-Cure, they gain no more
but a Palliation of their Pains and other ill Symptoms, for a season, when as
the Minera of the Disease remains still within, the more deeply rooted, and in
time brings forth the bitter Fruits of sorrow, repentance, the old Disease, and
new Ones to attend it. Therefore that the common sort of Receipt-mongers should
undertake the Management of this Cure, and that the wealthier sort of men
should so readily venture their Bodies into their Hands, shows the blind
Boldness of the one, and the mavelous Indiscretion of the other. I will
grant, it is possible an ordinary man may, by Tradition from his Master or a
Friend, be acquainted with a Method very good and sufficient in geral against
this Disease, and he may do some Cures with it, as we see is done sometimes in
Hospitals, where they have one Customary way of Cure for all Comers (which it
concerns the Overseers of those places to rectify) but that such a man should
think himself fit, with such a Traditional Method, and the Credit of having
cured some by it, to undertake the Cure in all Cases, is terrible to consider,
since every rational Practiser knows, there is so great a variety in the Pox it
self, respecting the nature of the Venom, and other Qualifications of the Body
in which it is seated, that in a Thousand Bodies infected you shall not find two
that are alike Circumstantiated, or that yield Concurrents so alike, as that
there will arise thence the like Indication for Cure in the one, as in the
other; or that the same Method and Medicines may be used to one as to another,
without prejudice and damage; which frequently happens to be so great, that
instead of curing the Pox, they exasperate it, and often precipitate Men's
Bodies in this delicate Age, into other destoying Diseases, be it pocky
Consumption, or what other name you please to give unto a lingering wasting
Malady; the truth of which is evident by every days observation upon nice and
weakly Bodies, when they come under these Traditional Curers and Cures; whereas
the ill Consequence of a Cure not rightly Calculated to the particular
condition of a Patient, is not so often manifested, where the Patient is of a
robust Body and strong Constitution; for such a one cannot easily be undone by
an Error, but makes a shift to run all hazards through the hard Chapter of any
ordinary means, and carry away somewhat like a Cure. I might be copious in
Instances to confirm this from my own Observation; but that not being fit to be
done, you may s^e enough in the Observations of Horstius, Zacutus, Riverius,
and others, in whom you will find (as we say in our English Proverb) What is
one Man's Meat, may be another Man's Poison what cured one of the Pox was
destructive to another; those w^^ Men ever varying the way and means of curing,
according to the nature of the Person and Disease that they were to deal with:
The want of which Knowledge and Prudence is a Cause why the Pox, instead of
being cured, has been only palliated, and under disguise gained such footing
in the world, that it paseth every where with the name of other Diseases.

Nor do that Common Sort of Undertakers err only in their pretended way of
curing the Pox, when it is inveterate and confirmed, but they stumble and do as
much mischief in the very beginning, when it is but a Clap (as they call it) a
virulent running of the Reins, etc. For, at first taking, the Disease lodges
in the out-parts, viz. the Urinary and Spermatick Vessels, and doubtless ought
to be sent back the same way that it came in, as is evident by the immediate
cure that some, as soon as they have been clap't, have procured to Themselves,
by repeated Coitions with sound Women; and some I have known to glory in this
Vilany of debauching that Sex in order to a Cure; and therefore doubtless such
Medicines are most proper as work in Analogy hereto, clensing the Ureters and
Vessels destined to Generation, rather than those iterated Purgations which
emptying the more internal parts, make room for the Venom, and so relieve the
ways of Urine and Sperm, by drawing it thence up into the Body, to take its
walk through the Blood and Bowels; and this being the common way of proceeding,
then when Men reckon they are relieved from the Clap, the Disease is but
translated to other Places, where it in time improves the possession it so
gets, and at length seizes the most abstruse and solid parts, vitiating the
whole habit of the Body, and putting on the Visor of such other Diseases as the
person is most inclinable to; yea, and very mysteriously running in a Blood
afterward from Generation to Generation: So that it appears, the Common
Undertakers do more mischief in their pretended curing of Claps, than they can
do in attempting the Disease when it is become inveterate, and deserves the name
of Pox. Let me conclude this therefore with the Sense of Vbi supra.
Dr Primrose, who observes the Error of the People, to think, that Physicians
are not so proper Artists for the Cure of this Disease, and upon supposal of
this, they commit themselves to the ignorance and odd Medicines of common men,
that will promise them cure in a few days without hindrance of business or
pleasure, as if this Subtle Enemy were a Disease so slight, that it might be
cured without observation of rule in Eating, Drinking, Exercise, or Recreation;
whereas there are no Remedies in Nature that will worm out this Disease without
regular abstinence and observance; for otherwise, the force of Medicines will
be broken. Moreover, we are here, as in other Ails, to have a respect to the
variety of Men's Bodies, and of the Age and Nature of the Venom, in proportion
whereto a choice ought to be made of Remedies, or else it is no wonder, if so
many Patients are undone instead of being cured; this Serpentine Evil in the
mean time insinuating it self into the Blood, Liquors, Spirits, Ferments, and
most abstruse parts of the Body, where it becomes quasi Altera Natura, as it
were Another Nature, altering All, and bestowing a kind of new Specification
upon every thing within the little world of Man; so that it is no wonder, if
Diseases and all things else become new. I might be larger in showing how much
the ill Cures that are in use have contributed toward the Universal spreading
of the Pox in its various Seminalities and Disguises; but a word to the wise is
enough.

I have a word also touching the ill Cures of the Scurvy in common use.

1. Against Phlebotomie. This Disease also walks abroad in so concealed a
manner, that it is not discernable by any but a judicious eye, and letting of
Blood is grown so common, that too many by this French Mode of Blooding make it
like the Prologue to the Tragedy, the necessary Praeludium of Cure in most
Cases that come under their Hands; and so, seeing there are but few Cases
wherein there is not somewhat of Scorbuticism mixed, I could willingly write a
Trea^ise touching the mischiefs done by bleeding in most Diseases, in these
North-parts of the world, as well as Agues and Fevers; in the mean time, I say,
the frequent opening of Veins is the Bane of our own Nation, and that it ought
not to be admitted, unless it be in some few Cases of Urgency, but not in every
Case of Turgencie; which is too frequently done, and is too wide a Subject here
to enlarge upon, otherwise you should have Reasons enough for my Assertion. At
present, take this hint only, that if it be true, (since the Liver is turned
out of the office of Sanguification) that Sanguis Sanguificat, Blood makes
Blood of the Chyle, and does it* ad modum Tincturae, then if the Blood be so
degenerous, flat and weak, as it is in some Scorbutic Bodies, or extreme Acid,
or Salty, as it is in other Scorbuticks, that it cannot give a true generous
impregnating Tincture to the Chyle, so as to render it good Blood, it follows
then that every addition of new Chyle, receives a vicious Tincture, and does,
instead of Blood, furnish the Veins with Humors, either Vapid, Acid, or Saline;
and so if by opening a Vein, that Crimson liquor, which gives the sanguifying
qualification and Tincture, be diminished, the consequence must needs be most
pernicious in such Bodies as the aforesaid, because in them the Crimson liquor
is but little, and the other exotic humors are abundant, and though much of
these may be let out by Blood-letting, yet that will not compensate the loss of
a very little of the other, because the other is that which has in it self the
vital power of sanguifying the Chyle, as it passes along the Vessels, and
seeing upon it the work depends, it must needs be, that when any part of the
little is drawn forth, that which remains behind is more apt to be diluted with
the peccant Humors which accompany it, than able to transmute the Chyle, which
through want of being made good Blood, degenerates, and so every day adds more
to the heap of those Scorbutic Humors, because they being most abundant and
prevalent, turn all into their own acid, vapid, or salty Nature; even as a
Vessel of Vinegar makes Vinegar of the best Wine, or a Vessel of dead Wine
makes bad the best Wine that can be added to it; and thus the whole Habit of
the Body comes to be mortified, rather than nourished and invigorated, which is
so much the more to be lamented, since the inconvenience and damage done by
Blooding such Persons seems irrepairable, and yet nothing more commonly
practiced than Bleeding, by virtue of the old Doctrins and Directions; which
are almost quite out of doors in this new State of Mankind.

2. Nor does the Scorbutic Adversary gain ground only by Bleeding but as much
also by improper means of Purgation, among which may be reckoned the Pills,
Electuaries, Powders, and Infusions, reputed Classical and Authentic, which
work by offensive irritation of Nature, rather than an amicable Close with her,
as may be seen by Aristotle's Description of the manner of Purgative Operation;
for, as in his days, they had no other Purgers, so the great Masters of the
Faculty which have been ever since, have very little mended the Matter as may
be seen by the several Pharmacopeia's Authorized in the world, out of all which
I do profess I cannot pick one Composition proper to purge Scorbutical Humors
in so gentle and effectual a manner as they ought to be, but instead of being
evacuated, they are the more exasperated thereby, and contract the greater
acrimony --. Nor is it thus only with the Shop-purgers, but even by the
ordinary Diet-Drinks used in Families Spring and Fall, much mischief is done,
because people rest upon them, and instead of clearing the body of Scorbutic
Humors, they drain the best Juices down through the common Sink-hole, not being
of power enough to enter into the secret Closets of the remote and solid Parts,
thence to solicit away the offending Fomes of the Malady by Stool, and give
part of it (which ought to be done at the same time also) a transpiration or
Breathing through the Skin; but it is not any of the common Medicines that will
act both these Intentions --.The like error also is committed by men's running
to the Wells: not that I condemn the use of the Wells absolutely in Scorbutic
Cases, especially such as have a Mine of Iron to feed them, whose water (as
that of Tunbridge) has in such Cases done much good; but I blame the customary
recourse to the other which have not so good a Mine, which in many
Constitutions I have known exceedingly to fret and exasperate the salty and
acid parts of the blood and humors of men so constituted, and so they return
thence with more work for a Physician, whose advice they had better have taken
before they went to those places. The truth is, though Purgation be necessary
to be used in this Cure, yet it must be gentle, and performed by Specificks,
which are but few good Ones in use; and the main of the Cure must be managed by
such Alteratives as will dulcifie the Blood; and they must respect likewise the
Seminals of the Pox as well as the Scurvy, else little good will be done, these
two being inseparably combined in their Principles, as has been signified
already in the foregoing part of this Book.

3. The Scurvy many times appears so exceeding like the Pox in all its
Symptoms, that they are hard to be distinguished: Hereupon, the common sort of
Physicians and others, presuming it is so, and Patients being perhaps guilty
enough to deserve it, make confession, and both by comparing Notes agree upon a
Cure; which is usually managed by Diet-Drinks, ill p^epared Pills, and other
Ceremonies of the Rack due to Sinners; which are wont to mount the Scorbutic
Dominion to such a height, that for the future there is no escaping the
Tyranny, it being confirmed by this means in the Body, and entailed upon them
and their Heirs for ever: which one confideration might be enough to deterr
men, from adventuring their Carcases into the hand of any Tormenter, that may
mistake the one for the other. For, there must be one way to cure the Scurvy
when it is simple and single; and another to cure it, when it is in complication
with a Pocky Ferment; and that which cures it, when it proceeds from a vicious
Habit of Body, will not cure it in a Body that has been vitiated by Contagion
through Inheritance, or any other way of adventitious Communication from
another.

4. Much mischief is often done by the use of such Medicines as in the Common
Opinion have a Pasport every where to be employed against the Scurvy, as
Scurvigrass, Water-Cress, and the like; which, where the Disease is lodged in a
Blood and Humors full of Acidity or Acrimony, and abounding with a vicious
volatile Salt, are eminently destructive, and render the salient Particles of
all sorts, the more capering, turgid, and unruly within the Veins, and send
them a gadding thence about the habit of the Body; by which means a Foundation
is laid for Agues of all sorts, Fevers, Vertigoes, running Pains, Stitches,
Headaches, Cramps, Convulsions, Gripings of the Guts, Short Breathings,
straitness of the Chest, Whites, Fluxes of all sorts, Gouts of all sorts,
Hypochondriack, and Hysterical Passsions, Inflammations, Pleurisies, and all
the Diseases of the Lungs. Some one or other of these mischiefs usually follows
the common Scurvy-Diet-Drinks and Barrels made Spring and Fall, unless the
Persons using them have healthy Bodies (for they will bear out any thing) but
the weaker and sickly do assuredly suffer, unless their Bodies be so
constituted, that such kind of Drinks do by chance fit them, and hit the
Distemper; but that is only by chance, and who then will adventure without good
Advice? for, I say again, that in Bodies which abound with Acidity, Acrimony,
or a vicious volatile Salt (which in this Age is very frequent) or which have a
Blood and Humors apt to ferment and frisk, there Scurvy Grass, Water-Cress,
Common Wormwood, Water-mint, Hors-radish, and the rest of that sort, do a world
of mischief, whereas they are very proper in Bodies whose Maladies lie in a
fixed Salt that needs a Resolvent volatilising power to remove it; or that
abound with dull, insipid, flat, dead Humors, like decayed depauperated wines,
which will never be restored to any tolerable State, unless you seek to cure
them by adding such Ingredients as will make them ferment anew within the
vessel. To such persons as these they may be of advantage, provided always
there be no other Circumstance to contra-indicate the use of them: which must
be left to the Judgment of some Physician, that is so indeed rather than Title.

5. The Scorbutic Ferment makes its way in the world with less control, in
regard Physicians do not distinguish, or will not understand a difference,
betwixt that Scurvy which comes by ones own default, through ill Diet, Courses,
etc. and that which comes by inheritance from Parents, or by Contagion from
others, and so proportion not their Cures accordingly. The Scurvy of the first
kind requires a Cure peculiar to it Self; so does the Scorbutic Tang or
Tincture of the Blood by Contagion; which is the less curable, because it
stealing insensibly into the Body, is usually confirmed, before people either
take notice of it, or look abroad for a Cure: But that which comes by
Generation is incurable, because inseparable from the Principles of the Body,
being ingrained in the very Blood, coessentiated with all that is within us,
and connatural to us, so that it mingles it self with all that is ours, yea,
with our very Diseases, and under their names it passes, and so necessitates a
laying aside the old Notions and Maxims, and the introducing of new Hypotheses
and Speculations, and a laying of new Foundations (other than that of a narrow
College, and old Piles of Books) whereon to raise a Body of Physic fit for
our Age and Climate; and yet it is a shame to consider how little has been done
that is new by any Man but our worthy Dr Willis, and some others that have
lighted their Tapers at the Torch of Helmont. Now here give me leave to note
what I forgot before in proper place, That as the Scurvy passes these 3.
ways, so also the Pox, and the not making distinction proportionably in cure
of it, is one of the Causes why it also has gone on to make so great Triumph
over Humane Nature: And though the Hereditary Species of both these Diseases be
not to be extinguished, yet the Evils thence arising may be qualified, and the
Diseases with which they are clothed be the better dealt with, if Physicians
will take pains, to form right Notions and Conceptions there-anent, for
rectifying and regulating the way of practice, and invent such Medicines as
have a reach and power agreeable thereunto: For, in a word, the World is grown
to such a pass, there is scarce a Malady which is not mystically complicated
with one or both those Master-Maladies; which, like Original Corruption, run
universally through the loins of the Sons and Daughters of Adam, and are as it
were Elements in the mixed Frame or Composition of other Distempers.

III. The Venereous and Scorbutic Taint has made great progress by Accidental
Contagion; which being the most curious and mysterious way of communication, is
not so readily assented to by common Readers; but the thing is no new Doctrine,
both these Diseases having been always reckoned among the Contagious. Nor let
people be so fond as to think themselves free, because they know themselves and
their Parents honest; that will not secure them from Contagion, which is a
thing of a Spirituous Nature, carried through the Air to make impression upon
such Bodies as come in its way. Fracastorius, a grave Author, makes a
threefold Contagion; 1. By Contact; 2. The Second, by that which he calls
Fomes Morbi; 3. The Third, at distance, which by Pract. l. 6. Part. 3. c. 3.
Sennertus is abridged to two sorts, viz. Contagion Mediate, or Immediate:
Contagion Immediate is that which is communicated by the gross Contact of a
Diseased Body, as when one lies with a Leprous, a Scabby, or a Venereous
Person; this every one grants may be done: Contagion Mediate, is, when one is
infected by the mediation of some certain Body, though he touch not the Body of
any Infectious Person; which mediating Body most commonly is the Air, it being
the vehicle that conveyes those Effluviums, Corpuscles, or Invisible Atoms, as
it were small shot, to do Execution upon persons at a distance. This fine way
of Communication suits not with the Conceit of a Brain, that measures every
thing by the gross Philosophy which Aristotle ties men to in the Schools:
Wherefore it is a wonder to me, why so Learned a Man as Fernelius, Sennertus,
and others, who in express Terms allow the Pestilence to seize Men thus at a
distance, by the mediation of contagious Effluxes or Atoms; and do grant this a
Truth, not only in the case of that most dreadful Disease, but also in lesser
Diseases as the Chine-Coughs, Common-Coughs, Catarrhs, Fluxes, the Phthisis or
Consumption, the Lippitudo or sore Eyes, Measles, and other Distempers, which
do many times run through whole Families, yea, Towns and Villages, as the
Consequents of mere Conversation, or co-habitation within the same Air and
House. But Fracastorius is clear of opinion, that it ranges abroad from Person
to Person, after the rate of other contagious Diseases, without any Contact or
Commerce corporal (such as Men commonly count Corporal:) The Truth is, the
ordinary gross Conceit of the world concerning Corporiety, tying it up for the
main to visible and tractable substances, is that which renders Doctrine of
this kind very difficult to apprehend; but he who reads the finer Philosophy of
this wiser Age, and does not take measure of it by the Beards of our Ancestors,
but has digested the delicates of the Magnetic or Sympathetick Doctrine of
our Noble Digby, and others treating of that Subject (too large for me here to
dilate upon) of the Truth of which daily experiments are a sufficient
Testimony, will soon agree upon the probability (yea the certainty) of people
being seizable at a distance, by virtue of the continual Effluxes of Atomical
Corpuscles, (which one may call Bodikins instead of Bodies) whereby the grosser
Substances, usually termed Bodies, are tangible by each other, and hold
communication with each other at remote distances, and so do operate upon each
other by Infection or Qualification, as well as if they did touch after the
gross manner of Tangibility, as when visible Bodies do touch one another in
such sort that we behold it with our Eyes. Agreeably to this, the same De Morbo
Gal. l. 7.
Fracastorius and Nicolaus Leonicenus, two learned Italians, do both contend,
that the French Pox rambles after the manner of contagious Diseases, which are
Epidemical, seizing folk that never had any carnal mixture with unclean
persons; only, here is the difference betwixt it and the Disease caught by
carnal Commerce, that this is usually more visible in its dire effects upon the
Body, by Gonorrhaea's, Buboes, Ulcers, etc. the other which comes by Contagion
at distance, is of a finer Nature, and dives not so deep presently into the
Blood and Humors, as it insinuates into the Spirits and Ferments of the Body,
and acts by time and by strategem, lying still till it has an Opportunity: Not
but that the other many times lurks some years also; but this more curious way
of Contagion (for the most part) after it has made entry, proceeds leisurely
and gradually to debauch the whole Habit of the Body, and seldom plays the
Tyrant till it has made a full and final Usurpation, which it seldom
accomplisheth without a Revolution of many years; and then perhaps it appears
not like it self, but it may be in the shape of some other one, or more
Diseases. Now here, because it is very necessary, this Point should be a little
cleared, give me leave to enlarge: This Contagion (says De Lue Ven. cap. 4.
Sennertus) when it is received into the Body, does not stand still, but after
the manner of other Venoms, creeps into the inmost and most hidden parts of the
Body, and sometimes it quickly shows it self; at other times it lurks long. And
Fernelius writes positively, De Abdit. rer. Cause. l. 2. Cap. 14.
That it will lurk thirty years together before it discovers it self; and thus,
many (both Men and Women) that think themselves free from all Infection, and
never had Sense of the evil upon their own Bodies, counting themselves
absolutely sound, do nevertheless infect others that lie with them, and beget
Children infected with that Disease. And this holds true, whether it be taken
by fleshly Coition, or by Contagion, only it more frequently discovers it self
after Coition. Our Wynel, Pathologic. Exercit. p. 177.
Charlton, Helmont, do report, after Fernelius, Forestus, Horstius, Sennertus,
and others, all in the Sense of Hippocrates, that Venom may lurk in the Body,
without showing it self, and it is instanced particularly in the Venom
proceeding from the Bite of a Mad Dog; yet neither Hippocrates, nor these, nor
any other of his Followers to this day, can give any reason why it should lurk
some months or years without any sign discovering it: So this Disease the Pox
may lurk, but the manner how, with the reason why, we can only guess at, and
that is when it comes by Coition. Then (says Wynel) the Proluvies of it being
viscous, tenaciously adheres to the Bowels, and is mingled with the Humors and
Spirits; but because evidence of its presence cannot clearly, and by manifest
effects be showed but on solid Bodies; therefore while this venereous Illuvies
does find Bowels so strongly Spirited, as they make great resistance and refuse
it, and obtrude it into the By-Cavities of the Body, (where it lies fermenting)
the Disease resideth especially in this Venereous Illuvies, and is not
communicated to the outward Parts: So that when, how, and where this Disease
begins, acts, and creeps on, is not perceived. There are Workings, and
Alterations, and Morbifick Sensations in the Body, which are not at all in
strong Constitutions perceived by their proper Causes, and are oftentimes
attributed to other than their own; so that if you put together the time
wherein the Bowels resist the Venereous Poison, and the time wherein it works
insensibly, together with the time of the Bodies State Neutral, it may amount
to many years before the Effects, Symptoms, and Evidences, do discover the
Disease undoubtedly present; and yet that it is privately settled in the Body,
often appears by such a person's infecting another: Thus you have in Avicen a
Story of a young woman nourished up by degrees with a poisonous Diet, who was
never poisoned her Self, yet poisoned all that had carnal use of her. I
remember also, De Morbo Gal. cap. 22.
Fallopius has a Story of twelve Scholars that had to do with one woman, yet
only three appeared to be infected, the rest seeming sound; which is to be
looked on only as a Reprieve from present Execution. Indeed, I the less wonder
at the cessation of this Venereal Poison in the Body, when I hear it avowed by
such as have Commerce with the East Indies, that they have such kind of Poisons
there as do neither kill, nor so much as operate presently: but after the time
of a week, a month, a half-year, or a year or two, as it pleases the Artist to
order the Matter; and thus diverse of our English have there unawares received
Poison at departure, which never wrought with them till their return into
Europe: But we need not go so far as the Indies for Instances of that Nature;
the Artists of Spain, and the Virtuosi of Italy, are dextrous enough in
contriving the like Doses, whose Malignant Force shall lurk in the body, and at
length, though slowly, yet surely do the Business. It is written by Piso (as Mr
Boil cites him, Experimen. Philos. page 267.) who learned of the Brasilians
diverse of their detestable Secrets, That some of them are so skilful in the
cursed Art of tempering and allaying their Poisons, that they will often hinder
them from disclosing their deleterious Nature for so long a time, that the
subtle Murderers do, as unexpectedly, as fatally, execute their malice and
revenge. Nor can it be at all difficult to any man to apprehend the possibility
of a Pocky or Scorbutic Ferments lurking long in the body, seeing the same
thing is granted touching the Measels and the Small Pox, whose seminal
Principles and Causes are said to be brought along with us out of our Mother's
Wombs into the world, and yet so to lurk within us as not to discover their
venomous and contagious effects till after years; in some sooner, in some
later, after 20. 30. 40. years, etc. no man does so much as scruple at, nor
that the Seminalities of other Diseases, as the Gout, the Stone, the
Consumption, etc. should associate with us from the very loins of our Parents,
and not appear till 20. 30. 40. or 60. years are past. We see also, that for
many years, diverse Diseases break out in men Spring and Fall, which in the
Intervals are quiet; yet all the while their Seminals are in being, never
showing themselves in Act but at those various Turns of the year. I would fain
therefore see some reason alleged, why it is not as possible for the Seminals
of the Pocky Lues to be lurking, as well as the Taints and Ferments of other
Diseases. l. 4. de Morbis insimi Ventris, Obs. 43.
Gregorius Horstius, as grave a Writer as any, had a Case propounded to him
concerning one of the Emperor's Counselors that had an Ulcer in the Reins,
which had baffled all the Physicians for many Months together, who dreamed not
of that which was indeed the Cause, because the Patient being a grave
Statesman, was past the suspicion of wenching, and so they proceeded to cure it
as a Malady arising ab acri and adusta Materia from sharp and adust Matter: But
Horstius advised them to look further, telling them in plain Terms, That the
stubbornness of the Disease did presuppose some Malignant Relics of the Pocky
Lues, deeply impressed without Sense or Pain at first upon the whole Mass of
Blood, where it lay invisible for many years; and that they might apply what
Medicines they pleased, all would be to no purpose, till the Patient be
prescribed a Course of such Remedies as are proper for the said Pocky Lues, to
correct the whole habit of the Body; which being neglected, it is no wonder, if
that Malignant Disease, having by its noxious qualities tainted the Blood, did
after many years lurking, take its opportunity to seize upon so weak, a part as
the Reins and Bladder, and send ill Humors that way, and elude all those
Medicaments applied for the Cure; therefore he advised them rather to go to
work with Sweating Decoctions, Bezoard. Min., Liquor Mercurii, and such like as
are used in Cure of the Pox: For, says he, I had the like Case about six years
ago in an old man, a Citizen of this Commonwealth, who had an ill-condition'd
Ulcer in the whole Leg of long continuance, it having afflicted him many years,
and grew the worse for all the Applications that had been made to it. As soon
as I came to him, I suspected it an effect of some Touch gotten in his Youth,
which had been then but superficially cured; Wherefore after inquiry made into
many Circumstances of his younger days, I found cause to deal with him with
Minerals proper for that Lues, and well prepared; which being done, that Ulcer
which had hitherto resisted all Remedies, and was looked on as desperate, did
consolidate of its self, after which the old man married a Wife, and never
complained more: Quod autem in hoc, and in sexcentis aliis observatur: And this
(he says) is no more than what has been observed in six hundred other
Patients, viz. That the lurking Lues breaks out, etc. And he referrs you to
many Histories more of his own, showing the Pranks of the Pockie Ferment, in
Internal as well as External Maladies; for, it will appear in the shape of the
one as well as the other. And in the same place, this Author says as much also
for the Scurvy, which will lurk as long, and show it self in various sorts of
Ulcers, etc. In the Cure of which he always found the common Remedies to be
vain, unless the Scurvy were first plucked up by the roots by other Medicines,
and the Scorbutic Ferment driven out of the Body.

And in his 7th Book de Morbis Contag. Observe. 9. He tells a Story of a Smith
by him cured, that had the Lues lurking in him diverse years, and at length it
put on the Disguise of a Headache, in which Form it continued, till at last
plain Symptoms of the Pocky Lues appeared, and then he turned him into the
public Hospital to be cured. And because this Disease may lurk in this manner,
Zacutus Lusitanus Prax. Hist. l. 2. cap. 1.
gives ground for exceeding Caution to be used by people about their Marriages,
especially with such as are in the state of Widowhood: He bids men take heed of
such Widows as have the Disease called Fluor Albus, it being many times part of
the Dowry left them by their former Husbands; and though they appear never so
sound, yet there is no security, if their Husbands formerly were Cocks of the
Game; toward the resolution of which doubtful Point, he says the Counsel of a
Physician is very requisite. The like Caution (say I) ought Women to use in
marrying such men as have themselves been Gamesters, or that have had Gamesters
to their former Wives: For, this Author fully demonstrates the strange lurking
nature of this Pocky Contagion; for, if it so happen (says he) that there be
no visible Token of it in the Body yet the venom is not idle, nor does it rest,
but works by little and little, till it change the solid parts of the Body, and
overthrow their Natural Temper. Thus when the constitution of any part is
altered thoroughly, then Nature being irritated drives the venom thence to some
more noble part; and so, grievous Symptoms begin to arise. But herein no
certain time can be fixed; for, some persons fall sooner, some later, and some
very late, into this Distemper, who before seemed to be sound and to have no
Taint within them; the cause of which, as he supposes, does depend upon the
stronger or weaker Faculty of the Agent, and the Disposition of the Patient,
without which Aristotle says, nothing can act under the cope of heaven. All
which, Zacutus says, is consentaneous to the Doctrins of Hippocrates, and
Galen, as appears by his Comments upon Hippocrates, viz. 3. Epid. Sect. 3. Com.
75. Prorhet. l. 1. Sect. 2. Com. 17. and 1. de Diff. Feb. cap. 6. Now
therefore, after so many other Evidences, let me close this matter with the
words of Fernelius; De Abd. rer. Cause. cap. 14.
The Force and Efficacy of this venom lurks for a time, and in time discovers
its self by manifest Signs and Tokens, even as the Poison which comes by the
Bite of a mad Dog, or the sting of a Scorpion, lurks a while, and creeps by
little and little through the Body; which when it has seized, then it
tyranniseth after the manner of other Contagious Diseases.

And yet it would not sink into the head of this Author, that it has power of
seizing by Contagion at a Distance; which seems strange to me, that men should
allow it to be Contagious, and all other Privileges belonging to Contagious
Diseases, and deny it this one, of infecting at Rovers. But that this Point,
being of so great Concern to be proved, may not pass without due evidence; if I
make it appear, that this Lues is armed with all those Arrows which are said to
be in the Quiver of other Contagious Maladies, then I doubt not but it will be
past Dispute, that this can shoot, strike, and seize men at a distance, as well
as the rest of its Fellows. For the better understanding of my Design, know
that all the notional Discourses about Contagion may be reduced to these two
Heads; either that which arises from the mutual Contact of two or more gross
bodies, or that which comes by the efflux of finer or more subtle Bodies,
striking or darting themselves into grosser Bodies by assistance of the
Intermedial Air; and thus all Bodies in the world are liable to an intercourse
with each other, and Diseased living Bodies especially to operate upon sound
Bodies ad modum Fermentationis i. e. after the manner of Fermentation; for the
mor subtle Effluviums, Particles, or fine little invisible Bodikins (call them
what you please) carrying somewhat of the nature of the corrupted gross Bodies
from whence they flow, and so insinuating themselves into the Pores and other
imperceptible passages of such other gross Bodies as they meet with in their
way, do there fasten and settle somewhat of their own Nature, Tincture, or
Leven, which leveneth these Bodies, and induces such an alteration in them, as
by degrees disposes them to be unsound or qualified with the same corruptive
qualities which were in those diseased Bodies, from whence at first they came;
which that it holds true betwixt contagiously diseased of the same Species or
Kind, I suppose none will deny, that sees Pestilential Diseases also among
Men, and Murrens among Cattle, and other Diseases also among both, to fly at a
distance from one to another, within the compass of their respective kinds: and
all by the efflux of those little Fermentative Particles which make the
impression. But that I may not seem to speak without Authority, this is no more
than what is said by the grave Author De Febr. l. 4: cap. 2.
Sennertus, who declared all Contagion at a distance flowing from diseased
Bodies to sound ones, to be wrought by a kind of Fermentation: For, that the
virtue of a Ferment or Leven is very great, appears by the little that
fermenteth or leveneth a great loaf of Bread, and a little yest that causes
the working of Beer; and it is remarkable, in how short a space of time, a very
small portion of these Ferments does change the Fermentescible Bodies into a
Nature like their own: And that he ties not this Transmutative effect of
Fermentation only to the actual mixture and contact of gross Bodies with each
other, is apparent by what he says presently after, when he tells us, that the
Habet se Contagium antea dictum Fermenti instar, etc.
foresaid Contagion acts after the manner of a Ferment, which being received in
a Body of the same Nature, induces to it the like Disposition. It, being a
small portion or particle of Contagious Matter sent forth of a diseased Body,
lights upon a sound Body, where being received, it acts upon it by a certain
hidden power, and a tota substantia as they call it. And in page 689: he says,
that in these sickly Effluviums or flying Particles which are communicated thus
to sound Bodies, the Contagious Cause is so powerful, that it needs not a
mutual contact of Bodies, but sends forth from it self somewhat of a Subtle
Spiritale aliq^id de se emittit.
Subtle and Spiritual Nature, by which the Bodies that entertain it are
infected, and contract the like Labes or Tincture.

And the same Author more largely explains these things in his Pract. l. 6.
Part. 3. c. 3.
Practice. He shows, that according to the common Rule, Accidens non migrare de
Subjecto in Subjectum, if that which the common Logicians call an Accident
cannot shift from Subject to Subject, then that which passes from a diseased
Person to another person by way of Contagion, cannot be an Accident, but it
must be a Substance; now Substance is divided into Spirit and Body: A Spiritual
Substance it cannot be, according to the sense of common Philosophers;
therefore it is a Body, of a fine invisible Nature, flowing out from the
diseased Person, after the manner of * Atoms; which Atoms (says he) a Modern
Writer Proculdubio Atomorum more, e corpore infecto effluens.
calls Corpuscula little Bodies, and Contagion is multiplied by these little
Bodies, which like Seed, comprehend within themselves the whole Essence of the
Disease. From which Discourse of this most learned Author, it is evident, that
though the gross Bodies of Venereous Persons do not touch another, yet the
finer little Bodies which fly like Atoms from this or that Person may touch and
seize another, and so much the sooner make a Seizure by that invisible Touch,
by how much the more fine and subtle the said Atoms or Bodikins are, and
consequently more apt to make an entrance; and then when they are lodged,
though they be but as it were little Nothings in respect of quantity, yet in
quality they have a mighty force, and as a little Ferment alters and leveneth
the whole Lump, so these being a kind of Ferment, (or as the Greeks call it, a
Miasma, and the Latins Seminium, Inquinamentum, Seminarium) the said Ferment
being received into the Body, changes it wholly, and alters it by
qualification like to it self. And no wonder, seeing (as our learned Dr De
Febr. cap. 12.
Willis says) the force of a venomous Miasma is so great, and the
contaminating particles of it so agile and expeditious in motion, that they
will very quickly make way through the Mass of any Body, like beams of light
through glass, or any Diaphanous Body. And lest any should think this
improbable, because many persons who converse with the venereously infected,
feel no Inconvenience, give me leave to apply what he says there of Malign
Fevers, to these venomous Maladies, the French Pox and Scurvy; for, says he,
as often as the Blood receives a Taint from any thing that is venomous, whose
venom is slow and of little activity, it does not discover it self presently,
nor break forth into direful Symptoms, until it be ripened by long time, and a
Fermentation, that the whole Mass of blood be tainted throughout, as is to be
seen in some Venoms which are communicated at a distance, yet have not their
effect till after some months, or years. And as to the manner of Contagious
Operation, his Description is much the same with that of Sennertus, it is
managed by those Effluviums which are sent out continually from an infected
Body, which being entertained by other Bodies, do presently, like Venom,
ferment with the Blood, and work upon whatsoever they find Homogeneous, or
easily convertible into their own nature, till they dispose it into the Idea of
the same Disease; and the Miasma is communicated not only by Contact, but at a
distance. Thus He: But that I may not want Evidence of all sorts, let me
introduce also the Learned Jesuit Kircherus, to confirm this Doctrine of
Contagious Operation at distance by means of those little Particles floating in
the Air, which Philosophers call Atoms, Effluviums, Corpuscles, i. e. Bodikins,
etc. In his seventh Chapter De Peste, he says thus, Every Natural Mixed Body
sends forth certain Effluviums or Effluxes of its own Power, which are not to
be taken for mere qualities, or Accidents propagated from a Subject through a
Medium, but they are truly and properly very little Bodies, not to be discerned
by the power of Sight, but Sunt aut^m hujusmodi Corpuscula nil aliud nisi
Spirabiles quaedam mixti Portiunculae, ejusdem cum Toto Proprietatis and
Naturae, Ibid.
are the vehicles of Accidents and Properties proceeding from a Subject, of the
same Nature with the whole Subject from whence they flow; and so those which
flow out of a Virulent Body, being of a foul and depraved Disposition, do by a
kind of contrariety to nature, overthrow the inward Oeconomie or Constitution
of the Body. I value the words of this Jesuit the more, because his Book is so
highly commended by two of the most Eminent Physicians of Italy now living in
Rome, known to all the world, viz. Sinibaldus, Author of that Learned Piece,
Entitled, Geneanthropia, and Paulus Zacchias, whose Quaestiones Medico-Legales
are a Monument of his profound and various Learning. And this Communication of
Contagion at distance, Kircherus says is wrought after a Magnetic manner,
even as the Lodestone works at a distance; which leads me to our Famous
Countryman Sir Kenelm Digby, who in his Discourse at Montpelier, has
sufficiently set forth the Doctrine of Operations at a distance, which who-ever
denies, must first deny his own Senses; and they are performed, he says, by
those small Bodies called Atoms, Page 34, 35.
and that which we call our Air, is no other than a mixture or confusion of
such Atoms, wherein the Aerial parts do predominate; which he Learnedly proves
by several sensible Instances; one is very familiar, and it is this; Page 50.
I would entertain you (says he) with the strange subtilty of little Bodies
which issue forth from living Bodies, by means whereof our Dogs in England,
will pursue the scent of a Man's steps, or of a Beast, many miles. To this I
may add what I have seen, that Dog called a Blood-hound, will in a Forest lead
a Keeper to find out a Deer-stealer, without laying his Nose to the ground to
scent the steps, but only by holding up his Nose in the Air, snuffing up and
taking in those Effluviums which flow from the person that is under pursuit.
But leaving that which is obvious to every Hunts-man and Falconer, Sir Kenelm
goes on, and says, That when any Hot Body (much more a living Body, Page 6^.
say ^) attracts the Air, and that which ^^ within the Air, if it happens that
within that Air there be found some dispersed Ato^^ of the same nature with the
Body which draws them, the attraction of such Atoms is made more powerfully
than if they were Bodies of a different nature, and these Atoms do stay, stick,
and mingle with more willingness, with the Body which draws them: the reason
hereof is the resemblance and Sympathy which they have with each other. Within
a living Body, such as is Man's, the interne Spirits do contribute much
facility to the Spirits that are without. And page 116. he says, The Source of
those Spirits, or of the Bodies which attract them, draw likewise after them
that which accompanies them, as also that which is united unto them. Seeing
then, that Humane Bodies have this power of communicating to and fro each
other, because of their likeness, let no Man be so sottish as to deny the
communication of Diseases contagious at a distance. We allow it in those
Diseases, the Consumption, sore Eyes, Coughs, Catarrhs, Fluxes, Pleurisies, and
many other which have little of Venom in them, and yet we are shie of granting
it in the Pox and Scurvy, whose Miasmata, Seminaries, and Ferments, include a
far greater Venenosity. We see what is done at a distance by the Sympathetick
Powder, and the Weapon-Salve by sounds upon the Ear, by Odours upon the Nose
many miles, by Onions upon the Eyes, by the Lodestone upon Iron, by Amber upon
Straw, by a Torpedo upon the Touch, by a Remora upon a Ship, by Thunder upon
Ale, by the Alteration of Air and Seasons of the years upon diverse Fermentative
Liquors, the wondrous penetration of Quicksilver, the mighty force of
Gunpowder, the Cures by Sympathy, the destructions by Antipathy, and all at a
distance; sometimes by forced darting of these Corpuscula or Atoms from one
Body to another, and sometimes by one Bodies attracting them from another, as
things may happen to fall out; and if Men did not perceive these effects by
their Senses, they would be as hard to believe them possible, because it is hard
to show the manner how they are done, as some may be to allow of the Assertion
which I endeavor to make good, and which the Experience of future Ages and Men
shall make good, let the present say what they please, out of prejudice or
humor. There is in Diseases that which Hippocrates calls (...), quid divinum,
which I translate somewhat of a more occult nature, of a more sublime,
Spirituous, subtle, finer consideration, than what comes from Discourse upon
Tempers and distempers arising from First and Second Qualities, and from Men's
grosser Conceits touching the Affects and Communications of Humane Bodies; the
Evidence whereof is to be sought by Observation of Experience, in the Sympathy
and Antipathy of things, rather than by Reason. Methinks the Learned Vallesius
speaks very pertinently to our purpose, Controvers. Med. and Philosoph. lib. 5.
cap. 6.
There are many Sympathies, besides those which Galen taught, which seem not to
be effected by the transmission or privation of any thing, but rather by some
occult Cause or Property, or whatever else you please to call it. And a little
after he says, We are to reckon, that there are in things some occult powers,
and certain Incorporeal Qualities, that penetrate through Bodies, which because
we are ignorant of, we are apt to err in resolving difficult Points and
Problems, and every Man dotes about every thing. We must pardon this Gentleman
for not speaking out, because he lived in an Age that doted upon Aristotelian
Philosophy; wherein though he saw more than his Fellows, yet he wanted apt
Terms whereby to express himself, and so calls those things, Incorporeal
Qualities, which our later Philosophers more fitly term Effluvia, Corpuscula,
Atoms, or little indivisible invisible particles of Bodies, which flow from
place to place, after an inexpressible quick and secret manner.

But much more is said to the purpose by our Learned Countryman Dr Robert Flud
in his Mosaic Philosophy, a Man of a notable Brain; and though he had many
Phantsies, yet you have with them mingled many most excellent Notions, of which
this is one: Mos. Phil. l. 3. sec. 2. cap. 3.
As it is certain (says he) that like does naturally affect his like, (for,
Nature does rejoice at the presence of its Nature, and Nature does correct and
corroborate its Nature, if it be sound, and full of vivifying wholesome Spirits)
so also Nature, if it be infected by a Poisonous and Venomous Nature, will, by
uniting it self unto a sound and wholesome Nature, quickly inquinate and corrupt
it, and so by such a kind of abortive and depraved union, Antipathie is placed
instead of Sympathy. Now how this is possible in Nature, I will in few words
relate to you. As Nature does magnetically affect and allure unto her self her
like; so if that like, which it sucketh unto it self, be inquinated or tainted
with Corruption, the said attracting Spirit, be it never so sound, will quickly
taste of the Bitter with the Sweet, namely, of the Venom, and so will also be
corrupt, equally with that Spirit which is Homogeneous, or of kin to it, in
which the Infection dwells, being forced to entertain Strife, Dissension, and
Antipathie into his Tabernacle unawares; even as we see a sound Spirit in the
Animal, which thirsting after his like Spiritual celestial Food, which hovereth
occultly in the Air, to be refreshed by it, does unawares draw in an Enemy with
it, namely, a pestilent and corrupt Fume, whereby it is oppressed and inflamed
with a Putredinous Fire; so that it was not the appetite or desire of the sound
Spirit to draw in that Poison unto it, but the Spirit like it self that was
poisoned. And again, each Spirit which is encumbered with any unnatural and
Antipathetical Accident, desires to shake off contentious Antipathie, and to
reassume that peaceful Sympathy which it enjoyed before, but finding it self
unable, it is apt to cleave and adhere unto good and sound Spirits for its
relief, and if more sound Spirits of his like were joined unto it, then might
it the more easily conquer and expel his Antipathetical Adversary; so also we
see, that one Bleareyed person, by darting his infectious Beams for relief at a
reasonable distance, becomes a Flame, which sets on fire the sound Spirit
unto which it applies; for, spiritual Poisons are like secret Flames of
Malignant Fire. Wherefore as Spirits are by union joined together and
multiplied, like Oil added to Oil, so does the infectious Flame increase, and
feed equally upon them both: For, as the sound Spirit desires the society of
his like to comfort it, and the corrupted Spirit so desired, does also covet
the sound Spirit to assist it against his Enemy; so Corruption is sucked in by
them both, and Antipathy is forced to roost amongst them, and forsakes them
not, till it has penetrated and gnawed even into their bowels, and poisoned
their very Entrails. And thus you see, those Sympathetick and Antipathetick
Operations at a distance, which Vallesius says are transacted by Incorporeal
Qualities, and our late Writers, by the Efflux of little Particles of Bodies,
Dr Flud assigns to the Action and re-Action of Contagious Spirits, or
Infectious Beams radiating from one Body to another, yet they all mean but one
and the same thing; viz. that there are wonderful, secret, subtle
Communications from Contagious Bodies, which imprint their own Nature upon
sound Bodies, and render them like themselves, by an invisible Contact, through
the mediation of finer Bodies flowing from the grosser, as effectually as if
those grosser Bodies were united by visible and immediate Contact.

Nay Instit. Med. Disp. Quaest. 15.
Horstius seems to be plain enough to this sense concerning the French Disease;
It cannot be denied, (says he) that sometimes the Venereous Lues is
communicated by venomous vapor, as well as by impure Contact; and that it and
the Leprosy, and the like distempers, are contagious by venomous expirations;
and, he concludes the Question with declaring this difference in Contagions
betwixt the French Pest and the grand one, only that the Venom of this does not
send abroad its infection at so great a distance as the grand Pestilence does.

And Fernelius, though his wit, in many other things divine, fly so low a
pitch concerning the Contagiousness of this Disease, as to place it only in
humor and dull Contact, yet in one De Morb. Contag. cap. 14.
place he speaks out to our Sense, and says, Truly very many Men are deceived
by a captious and vain way of reasoning about this and the other Venomous
Diseases, because while they see all the Symptoms of it to insult with a
corruption of some Humor, do think of nothing but Humor, conceive no greater
matter in their Mind, and make no further enquiry with the acuter part of their
Understanding; whether any other thing prevail in the Humor, wherein the chief
Cause of the Distemper does consist; which doubtless, if we discern not by
Sense, we ought certainly to comprehend by Reason and Intelligence, or else to
be wrapped in an ignorance of the greatest Concerns. Therefore that power of the
Venom, being very fine, and almost incorporeal, and beyond the reach of our
Senses, is inherent either in a Humor, or in some other Body, which Subject is
as it were the Vehiculum only of that malignant venomous faculty which affects
us. For, how is it possible, that a mere incorporeal power should execute force
upon our Bodies? So that this acute man (you see) was puzzled by adhering to the
gross Conceits of old Philosophy; yet fain would he shake them off, and come up
to our sense concerning the Nature of Venereous Contagion, and does in effect
say, that it, as well as other Contagions is conveyable to sound persons, by
the efflux of those delicate little Particles or invisible Corpuscles, which
pass from other persons that are diseased, and are as it were vehicles of the
Infection.

De Virulentia Venerea.
Aurelius Minadous likewise says the Venereous Lues ought not to be defined by
Quality, but by name of a Bodily Substance, and that it so passes from Body to
Body by Contact, Tangere enim, and tangi, nisi Corpus, nulla potestres; but
what kind of Contact he means, is evident by what he says afterward in his
30th Chapter, as he is cited by Pract. l. 6. Part. 4. Cap. 3. de Lue Ven.
Sennertus, where the Bodily Substance wherein this Disease is contained, is by
him called a fine Vapor or Spirit, or Spirituous Substance, endued with an
occult pernicious quality and power, able to infect and corrupt all the parts
of the Body, and turn them to its own l^keness, which may be done by a slight
kiss, or putting on another man's garment: But he needed not have instanced the
Passage of a Kiss, for, though it be but a slight Contact, yet it is a gross one
of two gross Bodies, and what need of so much as that toward an Infection? when
as the same Author says, the Vehicle of the Venereous Lues may be a Spirit or
Spirituous Substance, a thing of so subtle and penetrating a nature, that it
can make its own way upon and through Bodies, without the help of immediate
Contact: And this, Sennertus, in the same Chapter justifies him in, saying,
that it may be resolved into Vapors and smallest Corpuscles containing the
whole Essence of the Disease with power of diffusing it to others, destructive
to the Natural Spirits by the impression of its Venom, which is of an
inexpressible occult nature and condition. And yet after all this, Sennertus,
in other places of his Book, is so gross as to deny its being communicable at a
distance, as other Contagions are, by the efflux of those virulent particles
which flow from diseased Bodies, but ties up the Infection to immediate
Contact, either by Coition, Clothes, Sweating, Kissing, or the like; which is
readily granted, but all I contend for is, that the men of his opinion, who
grant that fine way of Intercourse betwixt Bodies which I have been thus long
delineating, and the notable Operations and Effects thence ensuing, would
produce some tolerable reason why they deny it in reference to the Pockie
Contagion. All the reason I ever yet met with in him and other Authors is,
because the Disease (they say) is lodged in a slow, dull, viscous matter, which
though in most Cases it be false (for, I have known many infected with so
active a Venom, as has set them all in a Flame, and almost blown them up in
three days) yet admit it were always lodged in so dull a matter, nevertheless
he and they all agree, that from the dullest and grossest Bodies there arise
fine vapors and spirituous Substances, which in other places of their works are
better termed Particles, Bodikins, Atoms, Ferments, and I know what little
invisible Matters, containing Virulencies and Infections, which have power to
alter into their own likeness, what Bodies soever they meet with that are
capable of the impression: which having been confessed also in other parts of
their Works, and being consentaneous to the sense of our best Modern
Philosophers, it matters not what their private Phantsie be in one place
touching a particular Disease, when in so many other Places, they concur with
the public sense of other the best Authors concerning the general nature of
Contagion, and the spiritual delicate manner of its conveyance from one Body to
another: For, thus they touch one another; though not visibly, after the manner
of common Contact, yet every jot as effectually, by the intercourse of those
Corpuscles which pass to and fro betwixt rhem. And thus, I suppose, it is clear
enough how the Pockie Lues may be propagated by accidental Contagion, even to
innocent persons: But you will say, if this be so, who then can be safe? I
answer, there is no Assurance for any one; only I determine, according to the
sense of all Authors, that some persons being naturally of more weak Entrals,
Constitution, and Spirits, and more luxurious or loose in Conversation than
others, because less able to resist the influence of Contagious Corpuscles and
Ferments, which are continually floating up and down in the Ambient Air, ready
to assail all persons that come in their way.

Now all that has been manifested in the past Discourse in reference to the
Pox, is, by the same force of Reason, applicable also to the Scurvy, which is
reckoned by all Writers among Contagious Diseases, and so must needs have its
Rambles and Rencounters at the same rate, and may take up its residence at
pleasure, and become Joint-Tenant with the other in any Earthly Tabernacle.
Therefore taking it for a grantable Point, I will not be tedious to confirm it;
let it suffice that De Scorb. c. 3.
Sennertus is very positive, and says, the Scurvy may be contracted not only
by ill Diet, bad Air, by Contact, by Conversation, by drinking in the same Cup,
by breathings of the infected, by sweating, by kissing, by lying with a
Scorbutic Woman, or with one that has the Disease called Fluor Albus. But how
to make out the reason of the communicability of this Disease by Contagion, he
cannot tell; only he says, there seems to be the Videtur eadem esse ratio quae
in Lue Venerea.
same reason in this as in the French Pox: For, as that Contagion may be
admitted by diverse Parts of the body, and being once admitted, does by little
and little penetrate into the whole, and not only taints the spirits and
humors, but imprints the like Disposition upon the solid Parts; so also the
Scorbutic Contagion, which way soever it be admitted into the Body, infects
and taints the Blood, and imprints the like Disposition upon the Bowels
ordained to Nutrition, and weakens them so, that they are not able in the
future to generate good blood, but that which is vicious and Scorbutic. The
learned Horstius likewise declares it a Contagious Disease, De Morb. Contag. P.
373.
and that the Contagion may be propagated by infecting the Spirits, which are
the Authors of all Action.

Thus having shown in part, that both the Pox and Scurvy are unavoidably
propagated from one to others by the finer and more mysterious way of
Contagion, it is to be conceived, that if this be so, then it holds a fortiori,
to oblige our belief, that these infectious Diseases may be propagated by the
more visible and gross ways of Contagion. Horstius, in the place before-cited,
inveighs so against the common Complement of kissing among us Northern people,
that it is no wonder if the wiser Nations have excluded it. In Holland (he
says) it is no marvel that the Scurvy gets ground so among them, where they
have as many kisses as salutations of Women, which not only the younger sort
expect, but those that are old and wrinkled, if they be not complemented with a
kiss, do take it as a Contempt and Injury done them. He shows also, how in
Saxony it is increased by tippling in the same Cup. In the Centuries of Cent. 2.
Obs.
Fabricius Hildanus I read of one infected with the French Disease only by the
garment of another. Molenbroccius, a late German Writer, in his Book de
Arthrit. Scorbutica, p. 15. says the Scurvy is contagious as well as the
French Lues, which is the reason that diverse who never used an ill Diet that
might incline them to the Scurvy, yet being infected by a Scorbutic person,
they suffer the same Symptoms. The reason of this we may pick out of our
renowned Exercit. de Motu Cordis, p. 61.
Dr Harvey, who says, that Contagion being impressed upon any particle, is
carried along with the Blood as it returns to the heart, and thereupon it
afterward taints either the whole Body, or corrupts some particular parts which
are most liable to receive the Venom.

Zacutus Lusitanus in his l. 2. Obs. 134.
Praxis Admiranda, says thus; after I had published my First Book de Med.
Princ. Hist. where, in the 73. History I have proved, that the French Pox is
contagious at a distance; by chance I met with a very rare example of a Disease
in the eyes called Opthalmia Gallica, that is to say, Inflammation and Soreness
of the eyes proceeding from a Venereous Cause: The Servant which attended the
Patient, and only brought him Clothes to wipe himself after Sweating, and
victuals to eat, was taken with the very same Disease, and could not be cured
by any other means than Mercury; let none doubt therefore (says he) but the
Contagion of the French Pox will work at a distance. He that doubts, let him
read Minadous de Lue Ven. cap. 5. This example of his some perhaps may believe,
but what is this to those that never come near the Chambers and beds of
infected persons? I answer, this Infection is not limited to such a
Circumstance only, though he instance it, but walks abroad in the open Air
also, which is likewise the sense of Zacutus in his 73. Hist. beforementioned;
where, having proved against Mercurialis, this Disease to be contagious at a
distance, he concludes the Natural Spirits may carry Contagion through the Air
from one to another. He says it is so even in Cutaneous Diseases, and 3. 4.
Tract. 3. cap. 1.
Avicen acknowledges it in leprous Cases, for that people were kept from
coming near the Air where such persons were. Therefore Paulus, l. 4. c. 1.
advises to send them far remote from Towns and Cities, to the very utmost
bounds of the Country, lest they infect others. Thus among Zacutus his
Countrymen the Jews, they were shut up without the Camp from the rest of the
Congregation: whereupon he determines, that if in Cutaneous Cases of
Leprosies, Scabs, Scurfs, Itches, etc. and if in other Distempers, as sore
Eyes, Catarrhs, etc. Contagion do fly at a distance through the Air, it must
needs be so likewise in Pocky Communications, seeing (says he) they have all
the Conditions requisite unto Contagion, as l. 1. De Contag. ult.
Fracastorius shows out of Aristotle, 7. Problem. 7. And for this cause he
advises people to be very wary what persons they converse with. What need I
then, if this be so, insist further upon the grosser ways of Infection? which,
after all this evidence, will doubtless the more easily be allowed. I might run
over the whole Bead-row of Stories told by Authors, as how De Lue Ven. Scholia
in Obs. 2.
Forestus tells of a young Girl that was pockily infected by one that gave her
only a kiss as she was dancing. And Horstius tells of another De Morb. Contag.
Observe. 3.
Girl that was infected by being Bedfellow to the Concubine of a certain
Gentleman; but they generally agree it may be done by Kissing, by the same Bed,
the same Close-stool, by Meats and Drinks, by Sweat, by Breathing, by the same
Hot-house, by Linen, by Clothes, by the same Cup, by putting on another Glove
or Stockin, and indeed by all the ways of Conversation. And what in these
respects is said of the Pox, is observed likewise, and avowed of the Scurvy.

IV. The fourth way of Contagion is that which runs by Hereditary Propagation,
and by this Course also both these Diseases gain footing in the world.
Hereditary Diseases (says Dissert. De Anatom. Vit. and Mort.
Horstius) do pass as it were by Transplantation, because the Seeds of them are
propagated from Parents to Children, from whence it follows that they have
Tinctures very strong and constant. Hence it appears what kind of Diseases
especially are Hereditary, to wit, Tartareous Diseases, which have roots deeply
fixed, and hard to be eradicated, as are the Stone, the Gout, the Leprosy, (to
which let me add the French Pox and Scurvy) whereas on the contrary, other
Diseases, which they call Sulphurous and Mercurial, to wit, Fevers,
Inflammations, Catarrhs, and the like, are not easily propagated to Children,
because the roots of them are more moveable, fluxile, and sooner tend to a
Resolution. Therefore seeing Experience shows, that there are no Affects more
rootedly fixed than the Pox and its Comrade, when they have once seized
themselves of the Body; it is no marvel, if they so constantly run in a
Generation. De Lue Ven. cap. 4.
Sennertus tells the manner how the Pox becomes an Hereditary Disease, and
says, it is done by being transferred with the Seed and Menstrual Blood from
Parents into the young one: For, when the Blood, out of which the Seed is
generated, is infected and vicious, then the Seed becomes like it, and
diseased; also the Mothers Blood being impure, with which the Child in her womb
is nourished, infects it, which Infection, after Children are born, breaks
forth upon them sooner or later, according to the greater or lesser force of
Virulency: Which Discourse of his is the general Sense of all Men, and
confirmed by frequent Experience in the practice of Physic, as may be seen by
the Histories of such as have left their Observations upon Record; and truly,
that Physician has known little in this great City, who has not seen what
miserable Spectacles are frequently brought forth into the world upon this
Account, many of which have passed out of the world again as if they had been
afflicted with other Diseases; and others that lived have languished miserably
as incurable, till some wiser than some, have had recourse to Antivenereal
Remedies. Prax Hist. Cap. 1. De Morb. Gal. p. 268.
Zacutus treating of the Hereditariness of this Disease, says, That there is a
depraved and diseased excretion in the Seed, or a certain occult quality
infecting the Seed and inherent in it, which impresseth the like Tincture upon
the Offspring; For, the diseased defects of Parents are derived by force of
the Seed of Generation, yea, and many secret Marks and Characters; yea, and
Children for the most part resemble their behavior, their gate, and
countenance. The truth hereof is evident, because that Children, not only after
they are born, become Heirs of the French Pox, but likewise bring it along with
them out of the womb.

Mercatus, the Learned Spaniard, has among his Works, a little Treatise of
Hereditary Diseases, wherein he signifies the same thing to the full; but
because some are apt to object, that if it pass thus Hereditarily, then it
would always be so; whereas others by Experience have found, that some
Children of the same Generation are infected, and some not, and sometimes all a
Man's Children escape free, yet it falls foul upon his Grandchildren. This
latter is avowed by Mercatus, and Ubi supra.
Zacutus has formed it into a Question, and resolved it, Vtrum Morbus
Gallicus, illaesis filiis, transeat in Nepotes? that is to say, Whether the
French Pox may, without touching a Man's Children, seize upon his
Grandchildren, and so passing from the Grandfather, as it were skip a
Generation? It seems hard (says he) to conceive in this Case, how the Children
should seem free themselves, yet beget others infected; for, a corrupted Seed
derived from a corrupted Body, seems to import a necessity of corrupting the
young one begotten, and that this Corruption ought to be propagated to the
Second and Third Generation, seeing these Generations draw their Original from
one Beginning only. The Cause of this Event (says he), is because the vis
Formatrix, the Formative Power, though it has the Idea's of all belonging to
the Father, yet it is not equally excited by them all unto operation, but by
some more, by others less, or not at all. From which it comes to pass, that
sometimes it is not excited to form a Member diseased, and by consequence the
Son will become sound in that part; but sometimes it may beget a distemper of
the Father in the like Member of the Son, and produce a Son diseased, and like
to the Father; which the Formative Power may effect in the Grandchildren in a
contrary manner. But methinks yet, there is more may be said to the Business,
and what is to be said of this Disease relates also to the Scurvy; for, in the
foregoing part of this Treatise I have made it appear, that Venomous and
Contagious Diseases are of a strange lurking Nature, and though the
Grandfather be infected, yet his Son may seem free, yet not really be so,
because the infection may be as it were in some By-Cavity or Dormitory in the
Body, taking a nap, by the influence which through some Accidental Advantages
befalling his Body, the vigorous Constitution thereof may have over it, so as
to quell and command it, and make it lie still and quiet, that it give no
disturbance to him; Nevertheless the Seminality or Ferment of the Disease,
being lodged in the Seed, and con-naturalized therewith, may insensibly pass
from him with entire force, to do execution upon the Grandchildren, because
perhaps, they may be of Spirits less strong, of life less temperate, and of
Constitution of Body less able to resist the Power of the Venom, and keep it
under, after it is transferred unto them. Besides, it is observable, that there
is a great difference which may arise from the Constitution of Mothers; for,
the Grand-Father's Wife may be of so excellent a Constitution, as that what she
contributes in mixture, may serve sometimes to correct the ill Ferment gotten
into his Seed; but the contrary may fall out in the Son's Wife, and so the ill
Ferment in the Son's Seed comes to prevail over the Grandchildren; which
mystery is thus described by the Learned Horstius in his Medical Institutions,
De Causis Morborum Internis, Quaest. 1. And in his Dissertation, De Anatomia
Vitali and Mortua, he says, the Stone will thus run from Grand-Sire to
Grandchild, and skip the Son, the reason whereof he assigns to the different
Constitution of the wombs of the Mothers, which (says he) I have more fully
handled in my Tract concerning the Scurvy, and other places. And in his 12th
Paragraph of the first Section of that Tract touching the Scurvy, among other
Causes which hinder the appearance of an Hereditary Disease, he reckons this,
That sometimes by the power of the Natural Balsam of the womb, the strange
Rudiments or Ferments of Diseases are subdued and overcome. And in the Second
Section and first Paragraph, he speaks more fully, That sometimes the
Grand-Sire infected with the Scurvy, propagates this Disease, not upon his Son,
but upon the Grandchild, the Son in the mean while being free; because it may
so fall out, that he may have a Sigillation or Character impressed upon him
from the Grandfather, the active power whereof is obliterated by the
excellency of the Mothers Seed and Blood; which nevertheless breaks forth again
in the Grandchild, in case he has a Mother of Constitution weaker than was
the Grand-Moiher. The illustration of which Truth, he says, is more amply set
forth in Mercatus. By the like proportion of Reason it may come to pass also,
that Brothers and Sisters of the same Father and Mother, may happen to have
some more some less Tokens of these Contagious Diseases upon them, and some
none at all, because the Bodies of their Parents may at sometimes, be in better
temper, their Seeds more vigorous and flourishing, and consequently, have less
of the Contagious Ferment impressed on them, than at other times, according as
their Bodies come to be more or less altered by the accidental Emergencies and
Extravagancies of Life. -- But enough of this; let it suffice, that the great
Increase of the Pox and Scurvy, and of other Diseases also not so Contagious,
by Hereditary Propagation, is a Matter that the world is very well convinced
of, therefore I shorten this Discourse.

V. The last way of Propagation to be insisted on, is that of Lactation, or by
suckling of Infants. It would make ones heart bleed, to see what a world of
these Innocents die every year in this great City; some under the form of the
Rickets, Teeth, Consumption, Convulsion, Griping of the Guts, and others of
other nameless wasting Diseases, and not one Physician of a hundred that
considers the Seminals and Ferments of the French Disease, and the Scurvy,
which so many bring into the world with them that are begotten by the honestest
of Parents, and others contract them afterward by sucking their Nurses, perhaps
as honest as the Parents; and if they chance to consider aright the root of the
Disease, it is a thousand to one, whether they have a fine little Remedy fit to
strike at it in so tender Bodies, and which are so touchy and peevish, or weak,
that they will hardly take any thing; for, the Medicines, used in the common
Trade-way of practice, will not reach it.

Cap. 3. De Scorb.
Sennertus says of the Scurvy, a nutrice cum lacte instillari, that it is
instilled into Infants with the Milk from their Nurses. The like of the French
Disease, That it is De Lue Ven. cap.
communicated to Infants with their nourishment and Milk from corrupt Nurses:
which (says he) is the most powerful manner of Infection, seeing that when the
Milk they suck is changed into Blood, and this Blood becomes the Nutriment of
the whole Body, the Venom is by this means dispersed throughout the whole, and
most deeply insinuates it self thereinto, and therefore those that are this way
infected, are rarely and very difficultly cured.

De Lue Ven. Schol. in Obs. 2.
Forestus also says, That Children by the Milk which they suck, contract the
Venereous Contagion with their Mouths; and that Nurses themselves also by
giving suck to Infected Children, contract this Disease from them by their
Nipples, the first Sign whereof is when they have Ulcers breaking forth upon
their breasts; which is a thing (says he) that I have often seen. But in the
same Second Observation, he gives us also the Story in particulars, saying; A
certain Man in the Hague married a fair young Woman, whom he infected, yet she
conceiving by him, brought forth a Child, which Child being infected from the
womb, and put out to an honest poor Woman to Nurse, the Nurse also became
infected; and the Contagion was so active, that it seized two more of the poor
Nurse's little ones, and a girl of hers also that was six years of Age. These
were all under his Hand together for Cure. The like Case almost is related by
Amatus in his Centuries, Cent. 1. Curat. 49. And that Nurses may thus suffer
from Children, Sennertus affirms in his forecited Chapter, and gives this
Reason of it, because by the Infants sucking, the Nipples are heated, and so
the Pores of them are the more opened, whereupon they the more easily take in
the virulency. The like is affirmed likewise by Prax. Hist. l. 2. cap. 1. De
Morbo Gall.
Zacutus, that when the Children take it of the Nurses, it discovers it self
usually about the Mouth or Headfirst: But if the Nurses take the virulency from
the Children, then their Breasts and Nipples are affected; and the virulent
humor creeping thence more deeply into the Body, the whole is afterward
contaminated by the Contagion. These things hold true alike, both of the foul
Disease and the Scurvy, as you may see in De Arthrit. Vaga Scorbutica, p. 29. 3
1 See Oswald Grembs, l. 1. cap. 8. de usu part, Sect. 3. p. 77.
Molenbroccius, who likewise declares, That the Infection may come from the
Milk of the Mother, or of the Nurse. But in so plain a Case as this, the Reason
whereof is so obvious, the Experience so common, and which (I think) no Body
will deny, I list not to be tedious; I shall turn my Discourse therefore into
Advice, that such Mothers as are to be suspected of either of these
Infirmities, be persuaded to transplant their Children into the Arms and care
of other Women sounder than themselves, and that they have a special regard to
the finding out of such, and not to take for a Nurse the Wife of any Man, (be
she never so honest, or seem she outwardly never so sound) that is either an
idle Husband, or Luxurious Company-keeper; for, they seldom bring any good
home; and though they perhaps do not stray in Venery, yet they converse too
often with such as do; Besides, their intemperate drinking, and extravagancies
fill them with such ill Humors as serve sufficiently to give ill Tinctures to
their own Bodies, and consequently to their Wives, by that close Communion of
Bodies, and thereby a grand intercourse and communication of Spirits, which
they have with each other; so that a mavelous Alteration is wrought in the
Milk, by the least ill Ferment injected into the Womb of the Nurses; which is
easily apprehended by such as understand the quick Intercourses and Sympathies
that pass betwixt the Womb and the Papps, by the mediation of particular
Vessels, and otherwise. Have a special care therefore, what Woman you choose for
a Nurse; for, I have seen many a Child undone in its Constitution, by putting
it abroad to Nurse; for though the Woman may be careful, yet all may not be
right with her; and on the other side, where Prudence has been used, I have
seen many a weakly Child, wholly altered for the better in its Constition; and
the Seminal ill Impressions derived from the Parent have been so far subdued
and altered, that the Child has gained as it were a new Nature, and put on the
good Constitution of its Nurse.

The most acute noble Helmont (whose Doctrine, so much of it, as I have labored
to understand, I cannot but admire) in his brief Discourse de Nutritione
Infantum of the Nursing of Infants, penetrates into the bottom of the business,
and stretches the Advice yet further; and is for nursing of children up by
Hand, rather than by Suckling; for, after he has told how many ways the Milk
comes to do mischief, as first upon the soul of the Child, the Seeds of ill
Morals and Natures (which (...).
Plutarch also shows) streaming along with the Milk, do implant within it all
the Vices, Imperfections, and lewd or ungenerous Dispositions of the Nurse: so
also upon the Body; for, the best Milk too often causes cruel Distempers, by
souring and curdling in the Stomach, through a vicious Ferment there lodged
which corrupts it, and from thence come so many Vomitings, Worms, Gripings,
Fevers, Fluxes, Epileptick and Convulsive Fits, with many other unthought of
occasions of death. Sometimes likewise the Milk is of a Cadaverous Nature, as
when the Nurse either proves with child again, or grows Feverish, or is under
grief; or some occult Disease, or cause, lurks within, whereby various
Impressions are fixed upon the Milk. But this is not all; he shows, there are
strange defaults by Milk transplanted into children, after the manner of
hereditary Diseases, as the Leprosy, and other Pests of that Nature, Hectic
Fevers, the French Pox, and other Contagious Maladies, which by that way as
effectually seize them in the Cradle, as by Seminal Tincture in the Mother's
Womb.

But you will say then, what would you have us do to bring up our Children? Is
not Milk the Food ordained for them by God in the Course of Nature? and can any
thing be more proper than what is most natural? I answer, that nothing is more
natural and proper, provided that the Milk do not stream from a Corrupt
Fountain; but since that in this Venereous and Scorbutic Age, the Frame of
Nature for the most part appears corrupted, and that even in Country-Cottages,
which lie remote from the Contagion and Converse of the greater Towns and
Cities, and partake not of the excesses of Lust and Diet, it it is a hard
matter to find out a Woman in puris naturalibus a Nurse untainted, and requires
a curious head and eye to discern her: and seeing when all is done, there can
be no certainty, because either her Husband may be some way Tainted, or her
Parents that begat her; and the Seminals of that Taint traduced from them or
one of them, to her by generation, may be latent in the blood, and she sound
only in sense as to herself, and but in outward appearance to others; therefore
She that uses good judgment in choosing a Nurse for her Child does well, and
may continue it there two or three Months for necessities sake, till the Child
come to some strength; but She does better that removes it from the breast as
soon a She can, and be takes her self wholly to the breeding of it up by hand;
for so, a harmless Sustenance may be prepared, not so easily corruptible in the
Stomach as Milk is, and secure from those ill Impressions and Tinctures which
may come along with the Milk from the Nurse, notwithstanding all the care and
discretion that has been used in choosing her. I am the more large in
discoursing this, because it is grievous to see how many thousands of healthy
children do suffer by Nursing with Woman's Milk; when as very few who are bred
up by hand do miscarry, or suffer such strange distempers and afflictions as
everywhere befall the other; Nay, in the same Family, it has been often
observed, that when the children nursed by such Milk have two or three in number
successively been miserable sickly; the rest born afterward being bred up by
hand, have merely by this alteration of the manner of Nursing, proved sound and
lively. If it were needful to instance in a matter, that, by observing, you may
see with your own eyes, I might enlarge; only I tell you, Helmont has a Story
of an Earl, whose Fourth Son he so ordered in breeding up by hand, that he
became more sound, strong, tall, ingenious, and valiant, than the rest of his
Brothers.

And thus, having run through those Five ways, whereby the Contagious Seminals
of the French Pox and the Scurvy have been propagated in the world, I suppose
there are no persons breathing, but have cause enough to suspect the
possibility of their own being tainted one way or other, and to believe, that
this Taint, like Original Sin, has overspred the whole Face of Mankind, and by
tract of time, one way or other, introduced an universal Alteration and
Depravation of Nature, and consequently an Alteration of the Nature of all
Diseases from their ancient State and Condition, it being now quasi Altera
Natura, become as it were another Nature unto us.

CHAP. IV. A further Proof of this great Alteration, by inquiring into the
manner of the complication of the Pox and Scurvy with other Diseases.
COncerning the French Lues, Forestus says, sensim in universum orbem est
disseminaat, it spread it self by little and little over the wholeworld:
Eustachius Rudius, as Sennertus cites him, says, Maxima pars mortalium eo
infecta, the greatest part of men were infected with it; which in the very same
words is affirmed by De Morb. Gal. c. 7.
Fracastorius, and that it was become general throughout Spain, Italy, France,
Germany, and almost all Seythia. Wherefore, if so many years ago as the days of
those Authors, this Disease was become so universal, what a footing then may we
imagine it has gotten, in the revolutiof so many more years as have passed
since their time? It is now from the first beginning of it in Europe about 170.
years, as all Authors agree, it not being known here till the year of Christ
1493. so that it has had a fair time to take possession of the little world of
man; And though Si unus esset Mundi Princeps, etc. lib. 5. de Morb. occult. c.
11.
Rudius, in his time was of of opinion it might have been utterly extirpated by
help of Physic, had some one Prince had the government of the great world that
would have used his Authority to regulate men, and had there been an unanimous
Consent of many to conspire against this Disease; yet (by the leave of so grave
an Author) I look upon this Conceit of his as but a mere Phantsie, and utterly
impractible, not only in respect of the impossibility of getting men to be of a
mind about it, but even in regard of the Nature of the thing it self, it being
a Disease rooted in Contagion, and by all the ways of Contagion, secretly and
unavoidably growing upon Mankind; and that it did so, appears by this, that
both l. 2. de Contag.
Fracastorius, and Leonicenus, and Minadous, perceiving how exceedingly it had
spread in a short time, and so many suffering by it that were honest people, and
that it was impossible it should spread at that vast rate by one only way of
Coition or Lechery, though all the people in the world had turned Whores and
Whore-masters, concluded, That it was a Disease, not only Endemial among the
Indians, but really Epidemical in the Nations of Europe, and did make its own
way among them, flying from place to place, after the mysterious manner of the
Pestilence and other Epidemical Contagious Diseases: For, as it is noted by
Fracastorius, it brake forth upon many of it self, without the concurrence of
common corporal Infection, which is recorded also by the laborious De Med.
Pri^. l. ^. Hist ^*
Zacutus; and it serves to confirm (what I have sufficiently proved in the
former Chapter) not only that it ever was contagious at a distance, but that by
the continued Succession, Multiplication, and Concentration of so many Millions
of Contagious Ferments, as have since been floating and flying up and down, it
must needs be co-essentially tinctured and combined with the very Blood,
Humors, Spirits, and, by consequence, universally complicated, more or less, in
all men, with all manner of Diseases. And what is said of this, relates also to
its Compeer the Scurvy.

Most pat and pertinent to our purpose are those Passages of the profound
Helmont, which I shall here insert, to manifest how much Diseases are altered
by the said Complication. They are grown more mystical and spiritual, than in
former Ages, consisting less in matter, and more in Ferment, which Ferment is
as it were the finer, the more subtle, sublimated, and exalted part of
Morbifick Matter, of a volatile, penetrative, communicative, and diffusive
Nature, stealing abroad insensibly, by flight from one to another, and so lays
hold on and seats it self in any Bodies, whose Natural Spirits and Faculties
are weak, and therefore unable to make good their station against it. Lib. 2.
cap. 1 de Morbis in genere. page 162.
Oswald Grembs, that learned Helmontian, says, this Ferment is the very same
with Hippocrates his (...), quid divinum, somewhat of a spiritual Nature in
Diseases, and passes inconceivably after the manner of a Spirit. Therefore,
Helmont himself, in one of his little Ign^tus Hospes Morbus, p. 405.
Tracts, affirms, That Diseases lead out their Armies against us, and act their
Forces upon us per ignorata seminaria, and initia invisibilia, by unknown
Seminaries, and invisible Beginnings. And in the next page, he says, we have
of later times had new Diseases started up in the world, and the old ones do
little suit with the names and descriptions given them by the Ancients, because
they have put on other strange Symptoms and Properties, Quihus larvati incedunt.
with which they walk disguised, and deceive such Physicians as think to cure
Diseases by following the Directions and Precepts of the Ancients. Their Age is
rather to be envied than imitated; the happiness was so great in their days,
that as Diseases were but few, so they were more simple, calm and gentle, were
more easily tractable and curable, having none of those odd Mixtures,
Complications, and Disguises, which latter Ages have seen, and yet we are so
sottish and pedaneous, as to tread only in their steps, and confine our selves
to such Definitions, Notions, and Medicines, as they have left us. Tumulus
Pestis, p. 844, 845.
In those days (says he) the natures of men were more strong to resist
Diseases; but now I find the Seeds (or Ferments) of Diseases gather strength
every day, fall on more fierce, and become more hot and active, and that our
Nature, the farther it goes, and the more disordered it grows, the less it is
obedient to remedies. Our Plagues increase daily, because our Impieties are
multiplied. Indeed, Diseases are changed, disguised, increased, and do
degenerate, by reason of somewhat that is complicated with them; I am of
opinion, that the French Pox having changed other diseases, and brought them
under its own Command, will have an Influence likewise upon the Pestilence;
yea, it is Tinctued by it already; Nor do old Diseases answer any more to the
Desciptions of old Authors, nor yield obedience to their Remedies. And page
847. he says, It has infected every Corner of the world, and by its effect
plainly shows, that it is creeping to a further scope, as yet unknown to the
vulgar. It is not a Disease consisting of Matter, but is only a Venomous
Ferment, affixed, like a subtle Scent or Odor, either to the solid, or liquid
parts of our Bodies, and so (in a way peculiar to it self) it incorporates not
only with the Substantial Parts, but with the Excrements also, or Matters of
other Diseases, which it touches, because it affects them, and is mingled with
them. Hence it comes to pass, that what persons soever are either manifestly
weak, or occultly inclined to Diseases, they are easily seized by this Disease,
and so it by Association transforms it self into the various shapes of those
Diseases. Wherefore Diseases being thus degenerated since the time that the
French Pox brake forth in the world, they do for the most part appear to have
in them somewhat of a Venomous Nature; and no Man has as yet sufficiently
investigated the Causes of them, (as now constituted) so that by this means
most Diseases are become Contagious, more cruel, more frequent, and more slowly
and difficultly to be expelled, than in former times. Thus plainly He: I wish
his Language had been as plain in all other Particulars

Moreover, Zacutus putting the Question, Prax. Histor. c. 1. De Morbo Gal. p.
^66.
Whether the French Disease may be complicated with all other Diseases?
resolves it in the Affirmative: For (says he) if it be an Universal Evil, we
cannot deny, but it may be joined with All, and it may happen many ways; for,
Distempers do unite with this Lues, either through likeness of the Matter, or
in some other particular, as the Gout called Arthritis, pains of the limbs and
outward parts, moist and cold Livers, Distempers of the Stomach and Spleen,
from whence come Pains, Obstructions, and very grievous Diseases, as the
Dropsy, Falling Sickness, Stupor, Palsies, and others as tedious. Oftentimes
also, this dreadful Lues is complicated with Acute Diseases, as Fevers,
Internal Inflammations, and the like. -- To the same sense he speaks also in
his other Med. Princ. Hist. lib. 1. Quaest. 35. p. 126.
Volume, That diverse other Diseases may be complicated with the French, is,
besides daily and long experience, affirmed by John de Vigo in his Treatise of
it, and after him by that Learned Spaniard Ludovicus Mercatus, l. 2. De Morb.
Gall. who have both of them very elegantly taught, that all sorts of Diseases,
as well Acute as Chronical, may be complicated with the French, of which some
have dyed quickly, others, in a lingering manner, according to the Nature of
this cruel Disease. Many also have exchanged Life for Death, by violent Fevers,
and Internal Inflammations, contracted only upon this Account, and other very
Acute Distempers, springing from this Root, as from their first Original. To
which give me leave to add, what I by Experience know, that as this is the
condition of most of the Fevers in this Age, by the Intermixture of the Pockie
Ferment, or the Scurvy, or both united; so if a Physician has not in his Head
a right Notion of the knack of the Distemper in its complication, and admit he
should have a Judgment or right understanding of it, yet if he be not provided
of neat Remedies fit for such a Case, or knows not how to invent, there is an
End of the Patient; for, the Fever shall not budge one foot, for all the Juleps
and Cordials, till you hit him in the Root upon which he grows. So that I
think, in our Discourse concerning the variety of Complications, it may may do
well if we lead the Van with Testimonies touching Fevers. De Lue Ven. cap. 7.
Sennertus says, that if a Fever be complicate therewith, the Cure becomes
difficult. Also, Helmont, in the place before cited, speaks home to this Point,
showing how the French Ferment is complicated with that grand Fever the
Pestilence, and attributes the frequency of the Pestilence to the frequency of
the other. Without doubt (says he) the Pestilence is now more frequent than in
former Ages; it seizes us upon the least occasion, cruelly persueth, and more
easily spreads it self, because of its being associated with this new Venom or
Poison.

Yea, he referrs to this the Original of the many strange Malignant Fevers of
this latter Age, so different from those that were of old, which have arisen
not only in Towns, but Field-Armies, and Sieges. For, of old great Armies were
led up and down in Europe, Asia, and Africa, without any notable Contagion, and
their Musters were commonly not much diminished; but now, no sooner is a Siege
begun, but immediately the Besieged die within, and the Besiegers also without,
by some strange popular Pest; and when the Siege is over, hardly a Company, or
Troop, marches forth, but there follow Wagons laden with sick men. Not long
since, a Camp-Fever brake forth in an Army of ours, of a profound Contagion,
killing men without Thirst or Heat, which some would have attributed to the
Impurities and Nastinesses of Camps, Marish grounds, Houses, together with the
necessities of the Soldiers, as the Causes of such unusual sicknesses; and so
upon this supposal, Physicians manage the whole business of Curing; as if Camps
had been more cleanlily kept of old, when such strange Pests and unusual Fevers
were not seen among them. But I know, that as often as any Fever of the old
stock does befall a Body, that is actually under infection of the French
Disease, or that formerly has had it, but was ill cured; immediately the Fever
associates it self with the Venomous Relics (or lurking Ferments) of that
French Lues, and from it borrows Poisons, which produce that Fever called the
Malignant and Camp-Fever; after which, the Contagion propagates it self, even
upon such persons as are free from the said French Lues; and having the Fever
as it were for its Father, and the Lues for its Mother, the newborn Monster
being a Mongrel begotten of two distinct Diseases, starts up a Third Thing
different from both its Parents. Hence it comes to pass, that as well Fevers as
Pestilences, march disguised and unknown; for, the Lues being locked within the
feverish Chaos, goes on to spread it self along with it, and becomes
Epidemical, to wit, this unluckie Monster of the Lues, being unlike both its
Parents, and a treacherous Venom, becomes like a Pest, and renders the
Pestilence it self, by adding a new putredinous Ferment, more cruel than it was
wont to be.

Certainly, never was more substantial Truth delivered by an Author in so few
words; for, though this Nation (through Gods blessing) has not been of late
years punished with the Pestilence, as formerly; yet the Armies that have been
marching throughout the late Wars, have sufficiently felt the Fury of Malignant
Fevers, of so different a Nature, that Fevers arising in some years have
always varied in Symptoms from those that fell out in other years: Nor was it
thus of late only in our Armies, but in our Towns, Cities, and Villages, and
has been ever since; yea, these 3. years last past, though no great numbers,
compared with former years have been cast down by Fevers, yet those that have
been (both Fevers and Small Pox) have been odd kind of Distempers, not
reducible to any old Class of Fevers, and have always puzzled Physicians to
deal with them. But this is no more than what agrees with the Account that is
given of them by De Lue Ven. cap. 7.
Sennertus, who says, They especially do perish, who are seized by those
Malignant Fevers, called Febres Gallicae, French Fevers, so termed, because
they are complicated with the French Pox; for, the Venereous Virulency
corrupting the Humors, puts upon them a malignant quality, renders the Fever
the more grievous, and debilitates also the Natural Heat, so that neither the
Fever, nor that Malign Disease, can be overcome by Nature.

Nor is it with these dreadful Fevers alone that it is complicated, but with
Hectic Fevers also. So says that Author in the same place; For, the Venereous
Virulency it self, and the Pains, want of Sleep, and other Symptoms, debilitate
the Natural Heat, and hurt the Instruments of Nutrition, so that a Consumption
of the whole Body follows, conjoined with a slow putrid Fever caused by vicious
corrupted Humors. And upon this File you may hang most of those that are
reckoned (as Mr Grant says) to die of a Consumption, in the Weekly Bills of
Mortality. And I remember, that Septalius, in his Animadversions for the Cure
of such persons, prescribes a Broth made of Veal and Sarsaparilla: a reasonable
Remedy, because founded upon a right Notion, but alas too too short of power
to reach the Business now. I could (if I list) be copious in Allegations out of
Authors touching this French Hectic, but I am willing to shorten.

This French Sprite, called Lues Venerea, haunts not only the Inward Parts of
Men, but the Outward also, appearing in the form of Ulcers, (as Helmont shows)
P. 845. 847.
Pustles, hard Bumps in the Flesh, Inflamed Tumors, purulent Apostems; as also
renders wounds hard to be cured, insomuch that the best Chirurgians do
complain, with admiration, that of late even the sleighter wounds will hardly
yield to the usual Remedies, so that there is need of a new Foundation for
Surgery as well as Physic. It Is too true of wounds, but especially of Ulcers
in the main Body, yea and trivial red pimples in the Face, (as I have
frequently observed) that the old Medicines will do no good on them, by reason
of either the Venereous, or the Scorbutic Ferment, or both, latent in them. At
this Instant, while I am writing, I have a Patient with an Ulcer, that was
before handled by one in the old way, to no purpose, nor do I reckon I shall do
any good with it but by Anti-scorbutick Remedies. In the year 1661. I my self
had a hot fiery Impetigo, which ran through my Beard round like a red Half Moon
from one Ear to the other; and, after all manner of Unguents, Waters, Lotions,
etc. used for 12. months in vain, I devised a Scorbutic Liquor, and infused in
it a certain Mercurial Powder; which, only by wetting the part therewith
slightly with the top of my Finger, twice a day, took it instantly away; and I
use that Infusion with the like success to other People ever since, who cannot
be cured by any other means but such a one as this, which opposes and
strangleth those ill Ferments in the Cutaneous Parts, wherever it finds them.
The like may be made for Washes, to recover the flourishing color of the Face,
and restore Hair on the Head in the room of that which is fallen; a Blemish to
which both Men and Women are too subject in this Venereous Scorbutic Age. To
such Outward Maladies, Helmont adds also Inward, and says, This French P. has
brought forth also new Palsies, P. 847.
new Gouts, Jaundies, Dropsies, and many more. And this deceived Paracelsus,
who thought the French P. was of it self no Disease, because in his days he
found it united with other Diseases.

De Lue Ven. cap. 7.
Sennertus likewise reckons up a great many of Diseases that it passes under;
as besides the External, the Internal, viz. when it puts on a form of those
Diseases which befall the Heart; then it quickly kills people; in those of the
Brain, it is slower; in those of other Parts, it is slowest; and the Venom will
lurk there (he says) and, though it seem extinct, will show it self after
thirty years time. It will act all the Diseases of Stomach, Liver, and Spleen.
It will appear in a Headache, Vertigo, Falling Sickness, Catarrhs and
Distillations of all sorts, strange Arthritical pains, the Diseases of the
Lungs, and of the Womb, and all manner of Fluxes. So far He. And his Testimony
is Instar omnium, because he is a Collector of the Sense of most other Authors
of Note, to which he has added his own Knowledge and Experience.

Nor does it fare thus with Diseases in regard of the Pox only, but the like
pranks are played also by the Scurvy. Helmont P. 84^.
tells us, that this Disease has had a stroke likewise in Production of the
strange Fevers both in Camps and Cities; and that such a Contagious Malady
brake forth in the Low Countries, the very same year that the Scurvy first
appeared in the world. His Abbreviator, Lib. 2. cap. 2. De Febr. Natura.
Oswald Grembs, says likewise of the Hectic Fever, that it is united with the
Scurvy, it arising frequently from Scorbutic Matter, and so requires another
manner of Cure, than the Consumptive Hectic of the Ancients, And quite
contrary thereto; that is to say, not with Moistning Remedies, but rather such
as will cut and attenuate the Offending Matter, and consume the putrid
Exhalations. This I see confirmed by daily Experience.

Cap. 4.
Sennertus in his Tract de Scorbuto concerning the Scurvy, shows how it is
gotten into all manner of Fevers, and Agues, from the Camp to the Cottage; so
that, he says, he who will cure them in this Age, must not have recourse to
the Doctrins and Symptoms set down by old Authors, nor make a Judgment of them
from the number of Days and Fits, but by the propriety of their Signs: For both
in respect of Heat, Cold, Duration, and the rare Evils and Symptoms attending
them, which are not to be heard of among the Ancients, there is a vast
difference betwixt these and the old Fevers and Agues. He is very large in
this; but I must make haste, and only tell you that l. 7. de Morb. Contag. p.
374.
Horstius says the like, also Forestus, and Eugalenus; this last man first
opened the eyes of the world about this matter, and all agree, that new ways
of Cure must be found out for most Diseases, because of the Scorbutic
Complication, as well as the Venereous. Yea Ibid. p. 387.
Horstius says thus, Eugalenus Scorbutum omnium Morborum quasi Materiam Primam
esse contendit, i. e. Eugalenus affirms the Scurvy to be as it were the Materia
Prima of all Diseases; and the same (says Horstius) is by Hercules Saxonia, in
his Lectures and Consultations, avowed concerning the French Pox; so that the
world since the days of those Authors, (some of which lived near 100. years
ago) must needs be brought by this time to a fine Pass. Those Two prodigious
Maladies combining together to complicate themselves with all other Diseases,
have now, in process of time, by reason of their contagious quality, so
insinuated themselves, that they are become universal, a part of our Humane
Nature, and consequently inseparable from us, as well as from our Diseases. Yea
more than this, they have so ordered the matter, that they have quite lost
themselves within us; these two are become other things than they were when
they first started up, in the appearance of Simple Pox and Simple Scurvy; but
since that time, by being Compounded with each other, they lose their own
primitive simplicity, and a Third Monster is started out of them, which we know
not what to call; but, like the old Serpent, it has twined it self with our
corrupted Nature, and winding and turning it self in various Forms, it stings
many to death invisibly, and poisons the rest of the world with new Ferments,
working up one after another, and producing strange unheard of Infirmities,
year after year: so that the Pox and Scurvy thus propagated, are not wont to
appear in their own Colors, nor with the common Symptoms, which follow the one
when it is contracted by Coition, and the other when it is gotten by ill Diet,
ill Drinks, ill Airs, etc. Allege not, that you have nothing of the Pox, none
of the Pockie Ferment within you, because you never had the usual Signs, as a
Gonorrhaea, Bubo's, Ulcers, and the like, which are the usual Formalities of
the Pox; nor be you over-confident, that you have nothing of the Scurvy, none
of the Scorbutic Ferment, because you have no loose Teeth, nor rotten Gums,
etc. which are the common reputed Signs; Alas, these two Ferments, whether they
go jointly or separately, do put on other Formalities, and disguise themselves
in the habit of other Diseases, according to the inclinations of such weakly
Bodies as they light upon. Guil. Romanus, a German Doctor, in an Epistle of his
recorded by l. 7. de Morb. Contag. p. 394.
Horstius, reproves another Doctor, that advised with him about the Case of a
certain Patient, because he would not allow the Case to be Scorbutic, willing
him not to be misled by the low Notions of common Practisers, who alleging
that the Patient had no sore Mouth, no looseness of Teeth, no rotting of Gums,
nor Spots in the Body, nor loss of lively ruddy Countenance, therefore
concluded the Disease was not the Scurvy; this suits Nugae sunt, and ineptiae
vulgarium.
(says he) with the vain Conceits of vulgar Physicians; and he there shows,
the Case may be Scorbutic, and yet not one of the common Symptoms of the
Scurvy appear in the Business --.In a word, for the right understanding of my
Drift in this Disourse, consider, that I distinguish betwixt the Tinctures or
Ferments of those two grand Diseases, and the Diseases themselves: The Diseases
sometimes appear like themselves, when they are gotten in the common way; but
when the Ferments propagate themselves, either by Lactation, or Hereditary
Propagation, or by Contagion, they seldom or never appear like branches of such
a Stock; but being Tinctured in the Blood and Humors of Bodies do pass into the
Forms of such Diseases, as those Bodies which receive them are most inclinable
to; and such Diseases, whatever they in common sense and outward appearance
seem to be, are never cured by the Medicines usually applied against them, but
by such Remedies only, as either totally alter or extirpate the Ferments, which
are complicated with, or Tinctured in them. And therefore, it is well noted by
Cap. 7.
Sennertus in his Adviso's about the Pox, that when it is gotten in the usual
way of Coition, it is the more easily cured; but very hardly when it is gotten
by Suckling, or by Hereditary Propagation; for then, it is not so much the Pox,
as a Pockie Ferment, and (as he says) is hardest of all to be cured. The like
holds also concerning the Scurvy and the Scorbutic Ferment. And thus I have
been as plain in my style and language as I could be, in describing so
mysterious and abstruse a Matter.

I might enlarge by naming particular Diseases, to manifest the vast extent of
the Scurvy's Complication with all other Maladies, and make Inferences
thereupon of the necessity of new Notions and new Medicines; but that being done
to my hand by the long Catalogues of Scorbutic Diseases, recorded by
Sennertus, and before him by Horstius, and before him by Eugalenus; I think fit
to referr you to the Authors themselves, this Treatise being already mounted to
a greater Size than I intended. The commonness of such a Complication will
hardly be denied by any man that is a Physician; therefore I think it is enough
that I have touched upon the manner of it, and made it (I conceive) a little
more easy to be understood and believed, than has been done by any one before
me.

CHAP. V. An Inquiry into the Alteration of the Nature of Diseases, in
reference to Vermination or Breeding of Worms.
THat Worms are, and may be generated of some bigness, and of several shapes,
not only in the Bowels, but in every other part of the Body, is a matter so
obvious in every Author of Note, and by continual Observation, that I suppose,
none will deny it: and that they are in these days more frequently appearing in
all manner of Fevers, and other Diseases, than in former time, is by experience
seen, and there is reason for it, because by the intermixture of Pockie and
Scorbutic Ferments, humors are more vitiated, and a more poisonous putredinous
Disposition or Corruption is introduced into men's Bodies, than was wont to be
in elder time. In the years 1660. and 1661. (as I have hinted in my second
Chapter) there raged in the Country a Malign Fever, and I my self found worms
coming from all people of all Ages from two years old to 70. of both Sexes; for
I so ordered Juleps and other means, that I still mingled such Remedies with
them, as might kill Worms, or alter the Wormatick matter which abounded within
the sick every where; This I then began to do, and have done it ever since; not
only in Fevers, but I mingle such Remedies constantly in all other Cases, and
do find Worms frequently brought away from People in years, as well as the
younger Fry: Therefore this Scope I continually propound to my self, and
commend to others that they strike at Worms, and be continually devising
Remedies which may suit with the main Disease, (let it be what it will); and
withal alter the Wormatick Matter, if there should be no Worms to kill; for,
this I find, that though the matter do not sometimes breed the Animals, yet as
long as the Wormatick Cadaverous Humor and Matter remains in being, within the
Body, so long the Body languisheth, and sometimes will have all the Symptoms
that attend Worms actually existent; and no cure of the Main Disease, with
which it is complicated, will go forward, till that Verminous Humor or Matter be
extinguished or removed: which being done, and the Cure wrought by mingling
Anti-verminous Medicines with the other, I thereupon conclude, a matter near of
kin to the Worms was A Con-cause (if not the only Cause many times) of the
Disease, though I see no Worms actually come away.

This is a Course that had its rise first from my own private Speculation; for,
though others have written of a Complication of Worms with other Maladies, yet
none ever took notice of it as so general a Business. And if others will take
to the putting of it in practice, by providing themselves with various Remedies
of that Nature, fit to be mingled with other, in Diseases either Acute or
Chronical, they will find the success exceed their expectation.

But since the time that I first entertained this Conception, I have met with a
Book, which, though it cannot confirm me more in Judgment, than I am confirmed
already by my own Practice; yet it pleases me to see a Notion concerning Worms
more finely improved, than ever I thought of before: The Author of it is De
Peste
Kircherus, the Famous Jesuit, now living at Rome, and it is highly commended
by the two greatest Physicians of Italy, (as I intimated in one of the
foregoing Chapters) by Name Sinibaldi, present Public Professor of Physic in
the University at Rome, and Paul Zacchias, now chief Physician to the Pope and
his Court, with whom the Learned Jesuit communicated his Papers before he put
them in Print, and they revised them; so that what is said in that Book, is the
Sense of three Men, known by their Learned Works throughout Europe. I find by
the Date of the Epistle Dedicatory to the Pope, that it was written in the year
1658. and was since Printed at Leipsick, an University in the Elector of
Saxonie's Country, with a Preface to it prefixed by Christianus Langius,
Public Professor of Physic in that University, whose Name I have once before
had occasion to mention; but the Book came not to my Hand till last year. He
exhorts the Physicians of Leipsick to follow the example of Kircherus, by
aspiring after Notions more sublime, than what are to be found in the common
Doctrines of Philosophy and Physic, and says, Thereupon they will acknowledge
that Man born to open the Eyes of Philosophers and Physicians, who err and go
astray.

The Design of this Book is, to treat of the Pestilence, its Original, Causes,
Signs, and Cure; The occasion of his writing was the strange Nature of the
Pestilence which raged at Naples and Genoa, Anno 1656. and from thence flew to
Rome; the Symptoms whereof were such as agreed not with the old Descriptions,
and baffled all the old Antidotes and Cordials, and puzzled the Physicians in
all their Consultations about the Causes and Cure of it: Which Kircherus
considering, and pondering various Causes, at length he pitched upon those
Effluviums, Atoms, Corpuscles, or Ferments, which (in the same sense that I
have described them in the Third Chapter) do continually flow forth of all
gross Bodies through the Air, whereby even the said gross Bodies do touch and
take with one another, according as they are capable to receive Impressions
from each other, through the working and counter-working of these Intermedial
flitting Atoms or Bodikins, which when they issue from Contagious Bodies,
impart somewhat of their own Natural Venom, and improve it, wheresoever they
fix; and He thereupon concluded, that some such little invisible contagious
bodies as these, carried through the Air, and insinuating themselves into the
Bodies of Men, did, by their pernicious Ferment, induce a putredinous pestilent
disposition in the Humors, and consequently, the Pestilence it self, where
Nature had not strength enough to oppose and hinder the operation of its
Fermental Force and Power.

This is no other Doctrine than what I have asserted before, in maintaining the
like manner of propagation of the Pockie and Scorbutic Ferment; and there is a
parity of reason for the like propagating of these Contagions, as for the
Pestilential, because the Ferments of Diseases are by Helmont, Horstius,
Sennertus, and others, rightly termed, Seminia, Seminalia, Seminaria,
Seminaries and Seminals, in regard they carry along with them the Seeds of the
Infection of those Infected Bodies from whence they flow; and, wheresoever they
lodge, they are like seeds sown, which has in it a hidden power to produce its
own like, and so they beget a Disease of the same kind with that which was
their own Original, be it either Pestilential, Pockie, or Scorbutic. -- But
that which most remarkably touches the Point in hand, is, that he introduces a
new Paradox, (as himself calls it) into the world, viz. That the Contagion of
the Pestilence was at that time conveyed abroad, not only by the volatility of
such Effluviums, Atoms, and Corpuscles, as are Inanimate, but by such also as
were Animated, living Creatures, and were a sort of Invisible Worms or
Vermicles. This might seem strange at the first Report, and not to be
belielieved, unless that which is not to be perceived commonly by Sight, may by
help of Art be prsented to the Eye, and then there is no disputing against
Sense. This that Author undertakes to do, (of which more by and by) and says,
P. 81.
That these Animated Effluviums are constituted of indiscernable Animated
Corpuscles, it does appear by the multitude of Worms which are wont to issue
out of one and the same Body; of which some are so big that they are presently
seen, the rest remain in an undiscernable state of Magnitude, yet multiplied in
so great a number, as the numberless Corpuscles or Particles are, of which the
Effluvium does consist; and being exceeding subtle, thin, and light, they plie
to and fro, no otherwise than Atoms do, with the least puff or motion of the
Air: And he says, These Worms are so fine, that they insinuate themselves, not
only into Clothes, Ropes, and Linen, but into other Bodies less Porous, as
Cork, Wood, Bones; yea, into those which are least Porous and most compact, as
metals, money, etc. Of this he in Page 250.
another place tells us, they had daily Experience in the Plague-time, at
Naples and Rome, where no money was received in Payment, but what was first
well soaked and washed in Vinegar, if it came from any Infected Place; and he
believed, nothing could resist the penetration but Diamonds only, because of
their polished Superficies, and unconquerable hardness. By such Animated
Effluviums Lib. D^ Venen.
as these, Cardan says, the great Plague that fell out in his time at Milan
was raised, which unpeopled that great City, not only the Air being filled with
them, P. 85.
but the very dust of the Earth animated into such kind of Vermicles.

Georgius Agricola tells, that in his time, a Plague came by eating of Fruits,
Pears, Prunes, etc. so that the eaters dyed in few days after; which Fruits
swarmed with multitudes of indiscernable Worms: which were no other than the
Animated Corpuscles or Particles flowing from Contagious Carcases, and fastening
upon Trees and Plants, being carried thither through the Air. In the late Pest
likewise at Naples, many were infected and dyed presently after eating of
Fruits: The use whereof must needs be hazardous in Infectious Seasons,
especially such Fruits as are corruptible of their own accord.

He is much more copious in Discourse about this, but I will contract him, as
well as I can. Some will object, that if this were so, then by these Animated
Effluviums or Vermicles, being blown by winds from one place to another, the
whole world would soon be ruined by Contagion. I answer; that this is not wont
to be, by reason of the diverse and disproportionate Situations of Countries,
with their various Natures, Tempers, and Properties, and the diverse
Constitution of winds and Airs prevailing within them.

Thus we see, in the same City or Country, the Pest usually declines with the
Season of the year, because of the Alteration of the Air, etc. In cooler Airs,
these Animated Effluviums or Vermicles, can neither swarm nor live. But if you
would know, how these Vermicles come to be made visible, which are of so minute
a Magnitude, and so subtle a Substance; the same Author tells us, the visibiliy
is attained by the Instrument called a i. e. An Instrument so made, and fitted
with glasses at each end, as that the smallest thing will be represented by it
in so considerable a bigness; that the frame and composure of its Parts may be
discerned.
Microscope. These things (says he) may perhaps seem Paradoxes to the Reader,
but when he shall, as I have done, by Experiments made the space of many years,
by the help of most exquisite Microscopes, thoroughly see with his own Eyes,
then I suppose, he will not only believe these things to be so, but instructed
by Experience, be ready to attest the Truth of what I have said.

Now, as the certainty of these things is by him alleged, in reference to the
propagation of that grand Evil the Pestilence, there can no Reason be given why
we should not have an Eye upon a Verminous Disposition in all manner of
Diseases whatsoever: If invisible Corpuscles, Atoms, or Particles, may be
vivified on this manner, and be conveyed at a distance from place to place, and
from a sick person to a sound, or from putrid Carcases to living and lusty, so
as to beget a Verminous Disposition within them, I suppose it is more easy to
conceive, that within the same Body, wherein (be it through intemperance, or by
any sort of Contagion) a putredinons Matter (Blood or Humor) is prepared, not
only the grosser part of the Matter may be enlivened into the greater sort of
Worms, but also the Salient Corpuscles, frisking Atoms, or active Particles
therein contained, may be very often (if not continually) quickened into such
Invisible Animals or Vermicles; and, as such, lurk in the Blood and Humors of
the Body, and become the occasion of many strange Diseases both Acute and
Chronical, which we are wont to attribute unto some other Cause.

The learned Author gives so much Light to this as has convinced me, by
manifold Experiments, which because they are the best kind of Arguments; and
the clearing of this being of very great importance to the practice of Physic,
I will set down all, but make them as short as I can. Before he comes to
Experiments, he lays down this for a Position; Omne Putridum, exse and sua
Natura generare Vermes: i. e. That every thing which is Putrid, does of it
self, and by its own Nature, generate Worms: whereupon he thus reasons.
Whereas all generation consssts in what is hot and moist, according to the
Philosopher's determination, a twofold Corruption may here be considered; the
one Natural, the other specially adventitious or beside Nature, which properly
is wont to be called Putrefaction. I say therefore, that there is no living
thing which is not liable to Putrefaction, even as the * Philosopher himself
Arist. 2. de Hist. Anim.
affirms. For the understanding whereof, it is to be noted, that no living
thing can be generated out of what is formally Putrid. But whenas that which is
putrefied, being a mixed Body, is, by separation of impure parts from the pure,
resolved into its own Elements, and whereas the pure Parts natural to the mixed
Body being mingled with the putrid, are agitated by heat; and forasmuch as
Nature always intends the best, hence it comes to pass, that the external heat
works the prepared matter, not into any thing that is of an Excrementitious
Nature, but thrusts forth the purer Parts of the Mixed Body into somewhat that
is animated; and this is the only Cause of the Original of Animals out of
Putrefaction. Moreover, whereas Philosophers are wont commonly to say, that
some Animals are generated out of mere Putrefaction alone, that is true, if we
conceive the whole putrefaction of a mixed Body to be performed under one
Action, but because no mixed Body is so corrupted, but that some of the purer
Parts natural to it do remain; therefore when these purer Parts become
Tinctured with in an ill fuliginous quality through the putrefying of the
Excrementitious Parts, hence it falls out, that the said purer Parts being
agitated by external heat, do thrust forth an Offspring of Animals, of the
same Nature with the Excrementitious Parts which gave the Tincture. So much for
his Philosophy of the Business: Now for the Experiments.

We see, that the Earth, out of I know not what Putredinous Matter in its own
Bowels, does produce not only Insects of all sorts, but also various Monsters
of Venomous Creatures, as Serpents, Toads, Dragons, in Dens and Caves of
Mountains, which have their original from moisture and a various mixture of
virulent Dregs and Slime; and the like are produced out of Ponds, Lakes, and
Marshes, by the heat of the ambient Air working upon a Conflux of Terrestrial
Parts. Yea, Water it self kept in a close Vessel, and exposed to the Sun, is
quickly animated into Worms, as is seen by daily Experience, both in Voyages at
Sea, and within the walls of our own private Houses. Who knows not, that Worms
arise from putrefaction out of corrupted Nutriment within the bowels of Men's
Bodies? And the like from corrupt humors creeping betwixt the skin, so that the
whole Body becomes animated by little and little, as in the Lousie Disease
called Phthiriasis?

Again, there is no kind of Plant which does not out of slime or mucous Matter,
generate a certain Worm peculiar to it self; which secret is in these last
Times discovered by the Microscope, and will be more experimented. Yea,
Vinegar, Milk, the Blood of men in Fevers, are perceived to be full of Worms,
although not to be discerned by an eye that is not armed with that Instrument.

In the Carcases of Men and Brutes, that wonderful Efficacy of Putrefaction in
generating Worms does very much appear: which being taught abundantly by
Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Pliny, Arist. 4. de genesis c. 26. Theophr. l. ^ l 4.
c. 27. Plin. l. 11. c. 34.
and known to the Vulgar, I shall not insist upon.

Moreover, Water elevated by Vapor, Air, Hail, and Snow, are full of Worms.
Pliny says so of Snow, in his Book de Divinis Not. Charact. And Cornelius
Gemma of Hail in lib. de Art Metallica. As much is said of Air by Georgius
Agricola; and the sudden generation of Worms, Frogs, and Insects (which have
come down with rain upon the earth) does confirm it. There is also scarce a
Stick, or Fruit, or any other mixed Body, which does not produce some Animal
which disposes that to Destruction which begat it, according to that of
Lucretius, -- obnoxia cuncta putrori Corpora, putrores Insecta animata
sequuntur. All Bodies are subject to Putrefaction, and out of Putrefaction
spring Animals. And that Worms of bigness visible arise out of putrid Bodies,
is a matter known to All; but that all putrid Bodies should abound with an
innumerable Swarm of Worms not to be perceived by the eye of it self, is a
matter that was never known till the admired Invention of the Microscope: which
I my self could never have believed, unless I had found it true by many years
experience. Therefore, that the Reader may more fully behold the admirable
power of Nature, what has been hitherto said, may be manifested by
irrefragable Experiments, as follows.

Experiment I.
Take a Piece of Flesh, and expose it by night to the moisture of the Moon till
early the next morning, then view it diligently with a Microscope, and you
shall find, that all the Putrefaction contracted by the Moon is degenerated
into innumerable Vermicles differing in bigness, but when you remove the
Microscope, you cannot discern any by the quickest of your eyes, unless perhaps
some few be among them that are grown to a sensible magnitude. You may try the
same in Cheese, Milk, Vinegar, and the like Bodies abounding with Putrefaction.
Yet think not it is to be done by every slight Microscope, but one made by a
diligent and skilful hand; such a one as I have, which represents Objects a
thousand times bigger than they are in themselves.

Experiment II.
If you take a Serpent cut into small pieces, and putting it into rainwater,
expose it for some days to the Sun, then bury it in the Earth for the space of
a day and night, and afterward taking out the parts grown flaccid with
putrefaction, shall examine them with a Microscope, you will sind all that is
putrefied swarming with so great a Multitude of little springing Serpents, that
no man, though he have the eyes of Lynceus, can number them: which Experiments
may be performed with all kinds of Serpents; and sometimes in dead putrefied
Serpents you will find some of them discernible by the Eye alone.

Experiment III.
Matthiolus, Fuchsius, and many other Herbarists, declare, that Sage unwash't
is very hurtful to such as eat it; yea, Mizaldus says, that some by eating it
have immediately fallen down dead: The Cause they impute to I know not what
Toads poisoning the roots with their breath. But as for me, I have discovered
another Cause of this Matter; for, while I examined more curiously the
constitution of this Plant, by the help of my Microscope, at length I observed
in those leaves which were more rough than the rest, that their whole
Superficies was covered with somewhat like a Spider's Web, within which
appeared Animals exceeding small, and which were perpetually at work therein,
and certain round Things as it were Eggs were spread upon the Superficies, which
as it is doubtless a certain Breed or Spawn of that sort of petit Animals, so
by their virulent humor they may do a man a deal of mischief: But wipe a leaf
with your finger, or wash it with water, and they allpresently disappear; from
whence I collect the true cause of the pernicious quality of Sage that is not
washed --. Moreover, if you make Experiment in other Herbs, you will to your
very great admiration find, there is no Herb, out of whose moisture or putrid
Mucor some Inf^ct does not spring, which shows it self at first in the form of
a very little worm, a little after it acquires wings, and is transformed into a
Butterfly, or some other flying Infect, according to the condltion of the Herb
or Plant; all which I having found true by frequent Experiment, others also may
be satisfied that will make trial of the matter.

Experiment IV.
If with the Microscope you examine the powder of any rotten wood whatsoever,
you will find a prodigious number of Vermicles, some armed with Horns, some set
out as it were with Wings, and others not unlike those Worms that have many
Feet; their Eyes also you will discern like black Points, and that they have a
long Snout; so that it may appear, Almighty God has manifested his own
wonderful Power, not only in the greatest Bodies of the World, but in the
smallest, even in those Animals that are not to be discerned by the sharpest
sight, having furnished every one of them with such Members, as without which
they could neither move themselves, nor exercise any vital Actions. What a
little Liver, little Stomach, little Heart, little Nerves, and Gristles, must
there go to the making of such invisible Corpuscles! The least Creature that we
can see without the the help of Art, is a Mite, it resembling a little white
Punctum or Point, but view it with a Microscope, and it appears to us a rough
hairy Creature, like a Bear.

Experiment V.
Take a Glass-Vial half-filled with Water, into which sprinkle some dust of the
Earth, which will presently sink to the bottom; and so exposing the Vial to the
Sun in the Summer time for some days, let it rest without shaking, until the
Water begin to putrify; and when the Water does begin to putrify, observe the
bottom of the Vial, there will arise out of the settling of the water or
injected dust, certain little round bubbles, every one of which in the
following days will be animated into very little Worms or Vermicles, which
will strangely frisk and sport up and down in the midst of the Water; and being
come to Maturity, at length they be take themselves to the top of the Water,
and there being in great numbers transformed into winged Gnats, they commit
themselves to the Air, and become as troublesome to Men and Beasts in the
Summer, especially by night, as others use to be.

Experiment VI
Every Living Creature out of its own putrefaction educeth some kind of Animal,
agreeable to its own Nature, and different from all others, which as I have by
Experiment found true in several sorts of Herbs, and may be seen by Corn
animated into winged Animals; so it holds most certain in Animals, as well
perfect as imperfect. The Carcass of an Ox becomes animated into Bees; Horses,
both living and dead, generate Wasps and Scarabees. Men do breed Nits, Lice,
Fleas; the like do some Brutes also. Man's rotten Carcass becomes a Seminary of
Worms. Infects putrefied generate Animals of Nature like unto themselves.
Nature is so sollicitous about promoting the Generations of Things, that
wheresoever She finds a Disposition, that is, heat with a due proportion of
moisture, there She immediately thrusts forth an Animal. I could here produce
innumerable Instances from all sorts of Living Things, but because these are
enough for the proof of what I intend, I shall no longer insist on them. Only
this one thing I avow, that all Putrefaction has certain Seminals or Seeds
within it self for the Generation of Animals, which being excited by external
and convenient Heat, do break forth into the aforesaid Colluvies of Worms, so
much the more pernicious as the putrefaction is more virulent.

The Inference.
From this new Doctrine, established by Demonstration of irrefragable
Experiments, it clearly appears, that most of the odd Diseases of a Malignant
Nature, and which Physicans know not what to make of, do for the most part
depend upon a certain virulent and strange putrefaction, which being animated
by time, as it degenerates into a certain verminous and indiscernable
Generation of Worms, so also they occasion a strange Catastasis of unusual
Exotic Symptoms, the Causes whereof Physicians cannot assign: For, as there is
no sort of Meat which is not subject to such a wormatick production; so in the
Body of Man there is no Vessel belonging to Vital Operation, which is not
sometimes affected therewith. Hollerius tells us of a Scorpion bred in the
Brain; also of a Man whom he dissected after Death, and found a world of Worms
in his Liver, which were the Cause of his unknown Disease. Turn over the
Volumes which give us the Historical Part of Physic, and you will find
Examples of Worms, not only in the principal Parts of Man's Body, as the Heart,
Liver, Brain, Lungs, Reins, Spleen, Bladder, Stomach, etc. but in those Channels
of the Blood, the Veins, and Arteries. For, whereas, by the unanimous Consent
of Physicians, the Cause of all Diseases is said to be a certain putrefaction
secretly lurking among the hidden recesses of the Humors; and whereas all
putrefaction upon the next opportunity produces Worms not to be discerned by
the Senses; and seeing that according to the various distemper of Humors,
Putrefaction acquireth Venoms of diverse Natures, and diverse powers in working,
according to the various manner of combination of Malignant Humors, even such a
variety of Powers also the Animals from thence springing must needs acquire,
and become so much the more pernicious, by how much a Poison or Venom that is
Animated is more violent than that which is Inanimate: And so it falls out,
that this Animated or Wormatick Venom being disseminated by little and little,
first infects the Mass of Humors, then creeping on gnaws the Bowels, and
dispersing its Poison through the inmost Fibers of the Body, does, with most
horrible Fits and Symptoms, dispose a man by degrees toward his long Home.
Hence it is, that Physicians perceiving such effects fall out beside the Course
of Nature, as are little less than prodigious, in the exotic constitution of
some Diseases, they admire what the Matter is, and try all Experiments; and so
the Apothecarie's Shops are well nigh emptied of Medicines, and yet no hope of
procuring health, whereas if they did rightly apprehend the nature of the
lurking Enemy, perhaps they might by appropriate Remedies restore the Patient:
But few do imagine, that we carry about with us an Off-sping of Animals
begotten out of our own Blood and Bowels, of so great a contumacy, that if you
overthrow their Auxiliary Forces in one place, you will find them immediately
recruited in another.

Moreover, that there may be a more full evidence of this Truth, so necessary
to be known, the aforesaid Author says, Page 240.
he has with his Microscope examined the blood of men sick of Fevers, which
has satisfied him over and over of the business; for, viewing the blood an
hour or two after the opening of veins, I have (says he) found it so full of
Worms, that it made me almost astonished, and I have ever since been convinced,
that man, as well living as dead, may abound with innumerable vermicles though
undiscernible by the eye; so that well may we take up the saying of Job, I said
to Corruption, Thou art my father, and to the Worm, Thou art my mother, and my
sister. These Things perhaps may seem Paradoxes to some Physicians, but let
such know, Page 241.
that many things lie hid in the nature of things which were unknown to the
Ancients, and to such also as have lived of late years, which the extraordinary
Sagacity of the present times has discovered by the benefit of the Microscope,
and laid before our eyes.

The Result of all I have brought here is this: That the Bodies of men are
liable to be wrought on by each other at a distance, by the efflux and
intervention of certain Atoms, Corpuscles, or Particles; and that these
Particles sometimes are Inanimate, and sometimes Animated into little invisible
Worms (as in the Case of Pestilential Infection;) but howsoever, be they the
one or the other, it is certain (...) they carry along with them a power able
to corrupt Bodies which receive them, and turn them into the same nature and
bad condition with Themselves. So much therefore to show, that such
indiscernible Vermicles may be generated within us by secret corruptive Causes
coming from without us, because those Corpuscles carry along with them
Ferments, which have a power Alterative lodged in them, able to work upon
Bodies of the same kind in especial manner, and by Fermentation convert both
blood and humors into their own ill Nature, even as a very little leven
leveneth a whole Tub of Meal. But admit this could not be, yet the Case
concerning our new Hypothesis touching Worms (great or small, visible or
invisible) to be considered in the constitution of all or most Diseases,
because somewhat of Putrefaction attends all humane Bodies, is plain enough from
Corruptive Causes lurking within us.

But it may be objected, Men in all times have had Putrefaction, and so
doubtless Vermicles latent in them, in Ages past as well now, though they had
no Microscope to discover them, and yet they had not such strange prodigious
Distempers attending their Diseases as you talk of, by reason of such Worms or
Vermicles; why then do you insist so much upon Worms now, as a main Cause of
the unusual Symptoms and Alterations in almost all Diseases, more than in
former times? I answer, it is true, such Worms (no doubt) in respect of
magnitude (or rather littleness) have lurked in the parts, blood, and humors of
men in all Ages, because of Putrefaction, and have been Causes of so much
mischief as the force of their nature could extend to; but consider, 1. That in
old time, even the great Worms were not so frequently attendant upon other
Diseases, as now we find them; for in reading of Hippocrates and Galen, and
their followers, little is said of Worms in any other Disease but Fevers; but
now a days we find them much more frequently in Fevers, yea and in Diseases of
the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Heart, Brain, Reins, Bladder, and in the Colic, and
Pains of the sides; and of the back, etc. which have all vanished upon the
avoidance of Worms, effected by mixing Anti-verminous Medicines with other:
which being a matter rare to be heard of till this latter Age, is an evidence,
that now Bodies of men have usually more Putrefaction in them, for which many
common Causes drawn from the latitude of Luxury in latter times, may be
assigned, but I wave them as needless: only let me observe here, that in those
greater, as well as the lesser Worms, the Symptoms are more strange and violent
than heretofore. I had a gentlewoman not long since afflicted with a Pain in
the region of the Liver; after other remedies used in vain, I gave her a gentle
Purgative mixed with somewhat against Worms: It brought a great one from her,
and after once or twice more using the same remedy, the Pain went away.
Another, a gentlewoman of quality, now in Southwark, who the last year had a
great pain in her stomach, a Cough, a great Inflation or Tumefaction in the
region of the Liver; She ran all the Round of Physicians and Remedies, and her
Body was wasted to the lowest ebb of a Consumptive state; but by Advice of a
great Lord, who supposed wind to be a Cause, She chawed Tobacco, by which means
vomiting (a little too violently for so weak a Body) She threw up 7. or 8.
Worms; whereupon the pain went immediately away, all other terrible Symptoms
were at an end, and She soon recovered to a perfect state, without any other
means. This week, wherein I now write, an Elderly woman, long afflicted with
all the imaginable Symptoms which are wont to attend Hypochondriack Melancholy,
and which nothing else would ease, by giving her Pills which are wont to work
out Worms, many strange ones came from her, day after day. I could run out at
large in Instances of this nature; but that were more fit for a particular
Treatise about it. If the great Worms do mischief thus, what may we expect from
the little ones, that are in the more abstruse and solid parts, and in the very
blood and humors?

2. Consider, that as Putrefaction is more frequent, so it is more virulent,
having in it a greater degree of Venom than in olden time: For, you may
remember what is noted before, That according to the various distemper of
humors, Putrefaction acquires venoms or virulencies of various Natures, and
diverse powers in working, according to the various manner of combination of
Malignant Humors; and so if the invisible Animals or Vermicles thence
generated, arise now from a combination of humors, of condition more virulent
and malignant than was known heretofore, it is no wonder, if Diseases be more
often caused by them, and become more dreadful in their effects and Symptoms.
Now, if you enquire, how the humors of men's Bodies, which are the Subject of
Putrefaction, come to be more malignant and Poisonous than formerly, I, to
avoid a tedious repetition of things, referr you to the foregoing Chapters of
this Discourse, which sufficiently point out the new Parents of Putrefaction
and Malignancy, viz. the Pox and the Scurvy, by which I have manifested what a
marvelous Change has been wrought in the whole Frame of the little world of
man; so that the exotic Ferments being propagated and sublimated to a great
height of venom, in their combination with our Blood and Humors, the venomous
Product of putrefaction thence arising must needs induce a Malignancie in every
malady, and consequently in Worms; not only in the visible ones of all sorts,
but (which is of more sad and serious consideration) even in those petty
Vermicles, which (whether they come into us from abroad, or breed within us) do
the most frequent and greatest mischiefs, because the Parts and Liquors of our
Bodies are rarely free from them, yet few or no Physicians take notice of them,
or have remedies that will reach them; and so these invisible Vermin being
neglected, as well as the greater, render most Cases incurable, because being
of a nature more poisonous and penetrative than in former Ages, they are now,
by an active exerting and diffusing their virulency within the Body, become
more able to Taint it, and more apt than ever to rage, and do prodigious
executions.

But because many are swayed in their Judgments, more by the concurrence of
Testimonies, than any other Evidence, give me leave therefore to conclude this
Chapter with the opinion of Langius, present public Professor in the
University of Leipsick (whom I have occasion to mention once or twice before;)
He, in his Preface before Kircherus declares himself abundantly satisfied about
these things, and names one Dr. Hauptman, another German Physician, who affirms
the same in a Book entitled De viva Mortis imagine. I shall not (says he)
insist upon those many most faithful Experiments made by Kircherus, and others
both Physicians and Chirurgians, who have abundantly proved with the
Microscope, that upon the opening of Buboes and Tumors, they have been found
full of innumerable Vermicles undiscernible by the eye. The like may be said of
Wounds and Ulcers which so frequently puzzle such as endevor the Cure of them.
But he goes on, and discourses of that terrible Disease the Purples, which so
frequently befalls women within the month after child-delivery, for, it having
baffled the greatest Physicians and their most precious Cordials, thereupon he
and Hauptman laid their heads together, and concluded the Principal and
Immediate Cause of that roughness of the Skin in that Disease, must be from
some extraordinary Putrefaction within; and so examining the matter with the
Microscope, they found those petty Vermicles, spread upon the whole Superficies
in the rough parts of the Skin; by which means you have here an Infallible
experiment, touching the Original of that most Malignant disease the Purples;
which is further confirmed by this, that after the using of all the
Bezoardicks, Diaphoreticks, and Cordials commonly so called, without any
success, he be took himself to the use of such remedies as have a power to kill
and mortify the putrid seminaries of worms, by mingling them with such other
remedies as were proper in the Case.

From hence he bids us, with the like prudence to collect the causes and cures
of distempers in the Measels, Small Pox, and Spotted Fevers, etc. and if you
follow his example close, he says, you will not err from the succesful way of
curing: And he knows no reason why he should not, in all and singular diseases
which have any thing in them of a notable putrefaction or Fermentation of
vicious humors, resolutely assert, that they spring from such a vevminous
seminary of Animals, seeing he has seldom failed of a prosperous success by
such a course of Cure: For, as I affirm (says he) that Inveterate Headaches,
Pleurisies, accompanied with intolerable pain, Pains and Gnawings of the
Stomach, Torments, Gripes, or Wringings of the Bowels, Epileptick Convulsions,
Arthritical Tortures, and other the like distempers, do arise from Effluviums
and Exhalations quickened into Animals, which, as being exceeding slimy, very
easily adhering to the Nervous and Membranous parts, do, by twitching and
lancing, affect them with very cruel pricking and shooting pains perpetually;
So also by administering such remedies as are specifically destructive to Worms,
and which have a strong power to precipitate them, all pains have been removed
out of the body. Thus he; and in pursuance of this Doctrine, he promises ere
long to publish a Treatise with the Title of Pathologia Animata.

Now lest any should object it a matter impossible, that there should be so
quick and ready a transmission of those little Animals along with the Liquors
of the Body from one part to another; let me have leave to add one Testimony to
illustrate this; and it is that of the ingenious Author de Ratione Motus
Musculorum lately printed, who, page 9. after he has shown that all the
Membranes of the body, as well as the Muscles, are filled with a subtle
spirituous Liquor, which perpetually passes through all their Fibers, and
keeps them in a due Tone, says, No man can think this too much to be granted,
who considers those very very little Animals which are furnished with all their
appertinences, and yet are less than the smallest of those Fibers. And truly if
this be so, it is no hard matter to conceive, but they may pass along through the
Fibers, with celerity, as well as the said Liquor. But enough of this for the
present, seeing it may serve to give some light, how much Diseases are altered
from their old state, in reference to Vermination; and to stir up the wits and
spirits of ingenious men, to make further inquiry into this, and many other
Particulars, touching which we have no relief from the antiquated Doctrines and
Medicines of former Physicians.

CHAP. VI. The Insufficiency and Uselesness of the old way of Physic, in
respect of Method and Medicines, arguing a necessity of a new.
IF my Premises be true, certainly the Conclusion will naturally follow: If all
manner of Diseases are grown more rebellious, or more mortal than formerly; if
they are all altered from their ancient State and Condition; if the Causes of
this Alteration were never known to the old Founders of Physic, nor taken
notice of by any that succeeded them, nor by any in this last Age so fully, as
the matter requires; If also through the mavelous alteration by them wrought,
there be introduced as it were another Nature both in men and Diseases; then it
clearly follows, that the former Rules and Doctrines calculated for Curation
from a consideration of other Causes, or from Causes less important, are
almost, if not quite out of doors; and that the old Medicines, the invention of
which was grounded upon such Doctrinal Hypotheses or Suppositions, as in these
days of ours are least considerable, must needs be in difficult cases useless,
and in most cases insufficient; and that all manner of Encouragement ought to
be given to such men as labor to establish new Doctrines, new Methods, and
Rules of Curation agreeable to the new frame of humane nature, and to the new
Phenomenon of Diseases; and that my Brethren ought to apply themselves with all
industry thereto, and instead of dwelling upon old Notions and Remedies, be
take themselves to the Invention of new, more rational, and less lothsom, and
which may more effectually meet with Diseases in their very Root and Original.

This is a hard Chapter to be read by men that have taken up their rest, would
lie a bed, because their names are up, and mean no more to go to School: but
let such know it is no shame to learn; Ars longa, vita brev is; the Age of
Methuselah is too short a time to run a round to any purpose in the Field of
Nature; could I live 1000 years, I might always find work in a Laboratory and a
Study, for the advancement of Physic both in Theory and Practice. The Maxims
of our Profession are not like those of the Spanish Monarchy, which, Monsieur
de Balzac says, are eternal; and he gives this Character of the great Dons of
Spain, that they and their Kings have them annexed to their Birthrights, being
bequeathed to them by their Fathers, and conveyed down to them by Inheritance;
and it is said, they are so precise in the observation of those Maxims, that they
will hardly recede a moment from them, though it were to save the Monarchy.
Perhaps there may be somewhat of Hyperbole in this: but however, it will become
Physicians not to take up so pertinacious a stately Humor, either when a Life
lies at stake, or in their ordinary Course of practice, as to tie themselves to
old Methods and Aphorisms, remembering what prudent Celsus (the great Plagiary
of Hippocrates) says, Vix ulla perpetua praecepta Ars Medicinalis recipit,
Scarce any of the Precepts of the Art of Physic are perpetual; and truly, by
stiff adherence to them, many a person has been lost, but the Thing may be
justified, because he died by Rule and Sccundum Artem.

This is pretty tartly touched by that noble and industrious person Mr. Boil,
in his Put. ^. Essay. 5.
Experimental Philosophy. There was a while since (says he) a witty Doctor,
who being asked by an Acquaintance of mine of the same Profession, why he would
not give such a Patient more generous remedies, seeing he grew so much worse
under the use of common languid ones, to which he had been confined, alleging,
that at last he must needs die with them in his mouth: He briskly answered, Let
him die, if he will, so he die Secundum Artem. I hope there are but few of this
man's T^mper; but it were to be wished there were fewer men that think that a
Physician has done enough, when he has learnedly discoursed of the Seat and
Nature of the Disease, and methodically employed a company of safe, but languid
remedies, as unable to cure the Patient, as unlikely to kill him: For, by such
an unprofitable way of proceeding, to which some lazy, or opinionated
Practisers of Physic, have, under pretense of its being safe, consined
themselves, they have rendered their whole Profession obnoxious to the Cavils
of Empericks. So Monsieur de Balzac (in his witty French Discourse of the
Court) has a story of a Physician of Milan, that he knew at Padna, who being
content with a possession of his Science, and (as he termed it) the Enjoyment
of the Truth, did not only not particularly inquire into the Cure of Diseases,
but boasted that he had killed a man with the fairest Method in the world.

It were to he wished they would rightly apprehend the nature of Diseases in
this Age, and their Causes, before they lay so much stress upon old Methods and
Means, and tie up men to their Forms: For (as it is well observed by the same
Chapter 1^.
learned man of honor) they cannot agree yet about the Nature and Causes, and
therefore no marvel they that would be thought the exactest Methodists, do miss
so often of a right Method. It Is not (says he) that I am an enemy to Method, or
an undervaluer of it, but I fear the generality of Physicians have as yet but
an imperfect Method, and have, by the narrow Principles they were taught in the
Schools, been persuaded to frame their Method, rather to the barren Notions of
the P^ripatetick School, than to the full amplitude of Nature. Nor do I find,
that Physicians have yet done so fit a thing, as seriously (and with such
attention as the importance of the thing deserves) on the one side, to
enumerate and distinguish the several Causes, which may any whit probably be
assigned, how the Phenomenon of that disordered state of man's Body, which we
call a Disease, or its Symptoms, may be produced; and on the other side, by how
many, and how differing ways the Phenomenon may be removed, or the Diseases
they belong to may be destroyed. And if this were Analytically and carefully
done I little doubt but that men's knowledge of the Nature and Causes of
Diseases, and the ways of Curing them, would be less circumscribed, and more
effectual than it was wont to be. And I am apt to think, that even Methodists
themselves would find, that there are diverse probable, if not promising Methods
(proper to diverse Cases) which ways they yet overlook: And though in a right
sense it be true, that the Physician is but Nature's Minister, and is to comply
with her, who aims always at the best; yet if we take them in the Sense
wherein those Expressions are vulgarly used, I may elsewhere acquaint you with
my Exceptions at them. In the mean time, I confess to you, that I know not
whether they have not done harm, and hindered the Advancement of Physic,
fascinating the minds of men, and keeping them from those effectual Courses,
whereby they might potently alter the Engine of the Body, and prevent or cure
diverse stubborn Diseases, more happily than the vulgar Methodists are wont to
do. And indeed, it is scarce to be expected, that till men have a righter
knowledge of the Principles of Natural Philosophy, without which it is hard to
arive at a more compr^hensive Theorie of the various possible Causes of
Diseases, and of the Contrivance and Uses of the Parts of the Body, the Method
which supposes this knowledge, should be other than in many things defective,
and in some erroneous, as I am apt to think the v^lgar Method may be shown to
be as to some particular Diseases. To be short, how much esteem so ever we have
for Method, yet since that it self, and the Theories whereon men ground it,
are, as to diverse Diseases, so hotly disputed of, even among eminent
Physicians, that in many Cases a man may discern more probability in the
success of the remedy, than of the truth of the received Notion of the Disease.
In such abstruse Cases, methinks it were not amiss to reflect upon that
reasoning of the ancient Empericks (though upon a somewhat differing occasion)
which is thus somewhere expressed by Celsus, I have read it in the Preface of
Celsus.
Neque se dicere consilio medicum non egere, and irrationabile Animal hanc
Artem posse praestare, sed has latentium rerum Conjecturas ad rem non
pertinere; quia non intersit quid Morbum faciat, sed quid tollat. And as the
controverted Method in the abovementioned Diseases, is not yet established or
agreed on in the Schools themselves, so diverse persons that are wholly strangers
to the Schools, do yet by the help of Experience and good Specificks, and the
Method which their Motherwit, according to Emergencies, does prompt them to
take, perform considerable Cures.

This Testimony of so worthy a person I have set down at large, that I might
deliver my own Sense, in the language of one well-known to the world for
Sufficiency, by reason of the great expense of time that he has made in
Medicinal Inquiries, continual Converse with Physicians of all sorts, and
observations of Practice both Rational and Emperical. But lest you should
think, that I like this Distinction in the common use of it, let me tell you,
that I, who for many years have conversed with such Professors of Physic, as
some in scorn term Empericks, and observed their various ways, and thought it
no shame to make Collections from them, and from all the Old women I could meet
with, which pretended to any thing of Physic, could seldom find any of them so
irrational, as not to give some tolerable reason, and so much as satisfied me,
that for the most part they had reason for what they did; and though perhaps
their Discourse came not from them, clothed with such delicate Terms of Art,
as pass current among the Schools, yet giving them some grains of Allowance, I
concluded they spoke reason, and that their Method was right, because it was
fitted to the Medicines they used, and both Method and Medicines so well agreed
as to make Cures in many desperate Cases, left as incurable by others: And I
must profess, that by observing the Practices of these, I have had
opportunities to see more of Nature in her naked appearances and operations (as
to the condition wherein she now stands in this present Age) than ever I could
discover in all the Volumes that I have read. Therefore call men Empericks, or
what you will, because they are neither graduated nor incorporated, I shall
ever esteem such to be most Rational, as make Art to follow Nature, rather then
strain Nature and her Anomalies to general Rules of Art, and who seeing Nature
degenerated into Extravagancies never known heretofore, do endev^r to find out
new ways and Remedies to deal with her: which he that adheres to that old
Philosophy, which is usually made the entrance into Physic, will never be able
to do; for (as it is well noted by the same Gentleman Part. 2. Page 237.
) indeed the Physiology wherewith Physicians, as well as others, are wont to be
imbued in the Schools, has done them no small disservice, by accustoming them
to gross apprehensions of Natures ways of working. And I find, that those
Apprehensions commonly arise from Preconceptions grounded upon some general
Aphorisms and Conclusions delivered by Authors, who (as my Lord Bacon notes)
never took the right way toward an attainment of Science in things Natural,
which ought not to be founded upon what we conceive in our Brains, but rather
upon sensible Objects and Experiments, and so, through an enumeration of
particular Experiments, we may by way of Induction rise up to a power of
establishing general Conclusions; but for want of this, men have made too much
haste in setting down Principles of Sciences. Bacon, Advance of Learn. l. 4. p.
189. 190.
For, they use commonly to take a Prospect of Nature, as from some high Turret,
and to view her afarr off; and are too much taken up with Generalities, whereas
if they would vouchsafe to descend, and approach nearer to Particulars, and
more exactly and considerately look into things Themselves, there might be made
a more true and profitable discovery and comprehension. Now the remedy of this
Error, is not alone this, to quicken or strengthen the Organ, but withal to go
nearer to the Object: And therefore there is no doubt but if Physicians,
letting Generalities go for a while, and suspending their Assent thereto, would
make their approaches to Nature, they might become Masters of that Art, whereof
the Poet speaks, Orid, Remed Am. ^. 2.
Et quoniam variant Morbi, variabimus Arts;
Mill Mali Species, mill Salutis ^runt.
Because Diseases vary, therefore we Will vary Arts of Cure; and though there
be
A Thousand sorts of strange Distempers steal
On us, we will have a Thousand ways to heal.
Which (as the same noble Philosopher and Lord tells us) they ought the rather
to endeavor, because the Philosophies themselves, upon which Physicians,
whether they be Methodists or Chemists, do rely, are indeed very slight and
superficial. Wherefore, if too wide Generalities, though true, have this
defect, that they do not well bring men home to Action, certainly there is
greater danger in those Generals which are in themselves false, and instead of
directing to Truth, mislead the mind into the Bypath of Error. Medicine
therefore (as we have seen) has been such hitherto, as has been more
professed than labored, and yet more labored than advanced, seeing the pains
hestowed thereon has been, rather in Circle than in Progression: For, I find
much Iteration, but small Addition in Writers of that Faculty. Thus He. And the
Truth is, he might well say there had been but little Advancement made in the
Profession of Physic, for, I may safely say, that there has been more of
importance done to that End, since the time of his writing that Book, than ever
was done in the world before; for, in former time, men contented themselves
with the little Science that was left them by others, and made no Progress, but
ran the Round of Comments upon the Greeks and Arabians, as the Oracles of
Physic; and usually one Commentator steals out of another, so that you have
but the same Dish of Crambe new cook't; and if you have one of the most
voluminous, you have in a manner All: look but fifty or sixty years back, and
see what a poor Case Physic was in to what it is now; nay, look but twenty
years back, and you will say, never had any other Science or Art in the world
such an Advance and Alteration in so short a time; insomuch that our Dogmatical
Methodists can now vouchsafe to use commonly such Medicaments, as were startled
at before, and with some patience hear of such Doctrins, Methods, and other
things, as they were wont, at the very first mention, to rant against
heretofore. To speak truth, we are all of us too apt to prize what we have in
possession, and to believe it so perfect, that nothing can be added to it; or
else we would have others believe so, and when we grow lazy and stately, it is
our Interest to have it so, and to persuade all men of any Interest that it
should be so.

But truly, it is much more honorable to acknowledge, that the greatest part of
what we do know, is the least part of what we do not know, and thereupon to
give all manner of encouragement to searching heads to make further inquiry,
and not straiten the hands of any whose industry and experiments may contribute
toward the completing of our Art; the Harvest is great, and the Laborers but
few; what vast crops are appearing in the spacious Field of Nature, to find
work for Ages to fetch them forth! therefore it were well, if all men were
invited to the Profession and Practice of Physic and Medicinal Researches, in
all Countries of the world; especially the Nobility and Gentry, who by reason
of their Estates and Interests, would be more able, and attain greater
opportunities than other men, to enquire, and invent, and spend their time in
Practice, especially among the Poor: which in former time (as we read) has
been the employment of the greatest Princes. I (for my part) cannot but think
highly of so brave a Latitude, and so meanly of my self, as to set my self to
learn of the meanest persons (though my education has not been inferior to
others) rather than scorn or oppress them; but if I would trample on any, it
should be upon the self-conceited, and the proud, and that I would do to
purpose, calcare superbiam majore cum superbia, and afterward descend to
confer with the lowest of this profession, to gain an understanding of his
Notions about Nature, his way of practice, and the Reasons of it, and his
Observations; and what I have already gained by collections thus made, perhaps
you may have an account of in public hereafter.

In the mean time know, Hippocrates himself gives it in command in his Book
entitled Praeceptiones, that you count it no disparagement to learn of the
most Contemptible persons, Ne cuncteris, etiam ab Idiotis inquirere and
discere, si quid ad medendi occasionem facere videatur; Be not slack (says he)
to inquire and learn even from Idiots, if they have any thing that seems to
promote a Cure upon occasion. Of this generous teachable temper Mr. Boil
himself is a noble example, who (I hear) disdains not to learn and collect from
any person: And in one place Part. 2. ^. 301.
he notes it was the custom also of Henricus ab Here a great observator at the
Spaw, who in his Book entitled Observationes oppido rarae, shows that he
thought it not beneath his dignity to record diverse receipts that he had from
Mountebanks, yea, and from Gypsies. I remember also, that the late great
Collector Riverius tells, in his Book of Observations, of his learning of a
Beggar-woman to cure the Haemorrhoids with Millefoil infused in fair water, and
drunk for a month together, which usually took effect with all that used it;
and a Chirurgians wife and another woman are named, that were so cured. And the
learned Gentleman above named thinks it no shame, to learn from the experiments
and practice of p. 234, 235.
Farriers, Grasiers, and Shepherds, who deal with Brutes, how to make Additions
to the Art of curing the Diseases of men; many such things (says he) may
serve, either to enrich or illustrate the way of curing humane Bodies: Their
ignorance, and their Credulousness, together with the liberty and meanness of
those Creatures which they Physic, gives them leave to vent ure on any thing,
it having made them try upon Horses and Cattle, many such things as Physicians
dare not try upon Men and Women. And among those many extraordinary things,
some, as it often happens, have succeeded so prosperously, as to deserve to be
considered by the skilfullest Physicians, some of whom might, without
disparagement to their Profession, do an useful Piece of service, if they
would be pleased to collect and digest all the approved experiments and
Practices of the Farriers, Grasiers, Butchers, and the like; which the Ancients
did not despise, but honored with the Titles of Hippiatrica and Veterinaria;
and among which, if I had leisure, I might take notice of diverse things, that
may serve to illustrate the Method of Curing.

Lib. 1. chap. 18.
Dr. Primrose also, in that very ingenious piece of his, Entitled of Vulgar
Errors, maintaining that our faculty or Physic being an Art Mechanical, and
that it is ill done to separate the Physic of Men from the Physic of Brutes,
says, The wound of a Horse differs not in specie from the wound of a Man; they
have the same Causes, the same Indications of Cure; the Physician is the
Minister, be it of a Horse, an Ox, or a Man. A Fever Continual, and
Intermittent, is a disease common to Horses, Dogs, Kine, and Men; the Remedies
also are common, as Bleeding, Clysters, Purgations, made of Medicaments Simple
or Compound. The Physic of men has nothing proper to it, which the Physic of
Brutes may not challenge to it self; that they who have written of the Physic
of Brutes, among the English (for whose sakes this Book is written) of which
Markham is one, and another an Italian (whose name I have forgotten) as also
those Ancients who have written of that sort of Physic, do use the same
Remedies, and that with very great reason; for, Medicaments do not work upon
man as he is a Rational Creature or a Man, but as he is a mixed Body. This is
not only Lib? 4. chap. 2.
his Opinion, but Aristotle's also, in his Metaphysics; and in his second
Chapter of Rhetoric to his Scholar Alexander: yea Zabarel, and Piccolamini,
reprove such Physicians as make man's Body alone to be the Subject of Medicine;
seeing this Art extends it self further. Nor was it in ancient time thought any
discredit for Physicians to observe the ways of curing Brutes, which have been
taken notice of, and recorded by Columella, Cato, Varro, Pellagonius and
Vegetius, all of them most noble Authors. Yea, Alphonsus King of Arragon
retained in Pension two Doctors of Physic, with a large Fee of Allowance to
cure his Horses and Dogs; and enjoined them to inquire and try, what Remedies,
and what manner of Cure did best agree with every Disease of Beasts; which
having done, they set forth a very profitable Book about these things. The same
Cap. 87.
Cornelius Agricola tells us, was done, in his time by Joannes Ruellius at
Paris, a man of great learning, and a principal Physician, who wrote a Book to
the same purpose, with Collections concerning Diseases and Remedies of Brutes,
out of Apsirchus, Hierocles, Theomnestus, Pellagonius, Anatolius, Tiberius,
Eumelus, Archidamus, Hippocrates, Hemerius, Africanus, and out of Aemilius
Hispanus, and Litorius of Benevento; which turned to the great Advantage of the
Public, and the Advancement of the Commonwealth of Physic; in the compiling
of which Books, these noble Authors thought it no matter of scorn, to consult
all manner of Grooms, Herds-men, and other keepers of Cattle, and Farriers;
from whose ruder Speculations and Practice, I my self many times have had
occasion to excogitate ways and Remedies for cure of Men, with notable success
in the application; and would men lay aside the stately humor, and inquire
among all sorts of Practisers, both upon Man and Beast, and improve inquiries
of this nature, a far greater Amplitude would thereby accrue to the Body of
Physic, than ever can be expected from the most diligent Readers, or the most
lofty Speculators; all that has been done in Physic hitherto, being of but
little value to what may be.

Enter into such an humble course of Inquiry and Observation, and the more
knowing you become, the more you will know, that there is abundant cause we
should despise no body. As Mr. Boil says of such as cure Beasts, much may be
learnt among them, because they venture with any thing upon those creatures; so
I find much may be learnt among such as some are pleased to call Mountebanks,
Quacks, and Empericks, especially in Chronick difficult Cases; for, usually
they are the poorer sort of people that have recourse to them, upon whom having
most liberty to try notable Medicines, and having often tried them with
success, they go on, and are not (I perceive) so void of reason, but they know
how to improve them in their practice, and can from a Parity of Reason (which
the Schools call Analogismus) invent new ones of the like powerful Nature, and
which may give you, or me, or any other Physician, (by converse with them)
occasion to endeavor to invent such, or better: now, the like opportunities
are not to be had among Physicians of higher port, who attending the better
sort of Patients, content themselves for the most part with the use of such
Remedies, as their Bills upon the File, and the Apothecary will witness to be
Authorized Medicines, and Safe; though I must tell them, other Medicines are now
by time and experience seen to be every jot as Safe, but much more Effectual,
which were damned by Bookmen when they were first invented, and do now pass
with as much credit and Authority, as if they had never been cried down or
contradicted; and doubtless, he is a very Wicked Practiser that will administer
any Medicin, which he knows not whether it be safe or no; and a very Ignorant
one, that is not able to judge certainly, if he do invent a new Medicin,
whether it be fit or no, or who dares not venture it first upon his own Body,
yet shall presume to give it to another: He that can analy se natural Bodies,
and resolve them into their Principles, is Scholar enough to understand a
Medicin. This is not spoken therefore to countenance any person so audaciously
Emperical, as will at adventure be trying of Practices, though they have
neither Reason nor Experience to guide them; but rather to encourage good wits
(both great and small) seeing Diseases are altered, and do still alter, and
many of them prove incurable by old methods and means, that they will not be so
precise as to judge of men's Insufficiency in curing, by their skill in old
learning, but rather by their knowledge of the Principles or parts of mixed
Bodies, and the ordering of them for Medicin, their acquaintance with the
present Phenomenon of man's nature and of Diseases, and by their Industry in
making Experiments and Remedies proportionate thereunto. How many in this great
City have I seen excellent at this, who never saw an University! Therefore hear
again what Mr. Boil says, * and very excellently to the purpose, Page 286, 287.
that as Physic has owed its beginning to Experiment, so those that practice
it must enlarge and rectify their Principles, according to the new Discoveries
which are made from time to time, of the Operations and power of the
Productions, whether of Nature or Art. Celsus in his excellent Preface,
speaking in the sense of the old Empericks, of the original of Physic, says,
that Remedies being first found out, Men began to discourse of the Reasons of
them; and that Medicin was not invented after Reason, but Reason was inquired
into after the Invention of Medicin. And lest the mistaken name of Emperick
should make you undervalue so useful a consideration, which not the nature of
their Sect, but that of the thing, suggested to them, I shall add in favor of
experienced, though otherwise unlikely Remedies, that it is a Sentence ascribed
to Aristotle (and in my opinion one of the best that is ascribed to him) Ubi
res constat, si opinio adversetur rei, quaerendam rationem, non rem ignorandam;
Where a thing is manifest, if Opinion be against the thing, then the reason of
it is to be inquired after, but the Thing it self ought not to be disowned. And
certainly, though there be scarce any sort of men, whose credulity may do the
world more mischief than that of Physicians; yet perhaps neither Nature nor
mankind is much beholden to those, that too rigidly or narrowly circumscribe,
or confine the operations of Nature, and will not so much as allow themselves,
or others, to try whether it be possible for Nature, excited and menaged by
Art, to perform diverse things which they never yet saw done, by diverse ways,
differing from any, which by the common Principles that are yet taught in the
Schools, they are able to give a satisfactory Account of. Thus he.

And truly, the reason why I drive this Nail so home, is not, that I think that
noble person a Friend to unlearned Empericks; nor that he, who has so great a
portion of Learning, would be reckoned an enemy to Learning and Learned men;
only, I perceive he is of my mind in another part of his Book, where he
implies, there is no such need of Learning (commonly so reputed) to make a
good Physician; for, Page 395.
he by conversation with eminent Physicians having found, that the learned of
them disagree so much about the Nature and Causes of Diseases, admits, that a
man may prosperously practice. Physic, that is either ignorant of, or dissents
from the received Doctrines of the Schools concerning the Causes of Diseases,
and some other Pathological Particulars, provided he has a Mediocrity or
competent measure of knowledge in Anatomy, and the Nature of Diseases and
their Symptoms, etc. Nor do I cite this, as if I my self were of the Spirit of
Hercules Bovio, (the noted Italian Emperick, contemporary with Fracastorius and
Fumanellus) who wrote a Book Entitled Il Flagello di Medici Rationali, the
Scourge of Rational Physicians (which I have read translated, though not
printed in English;) but I believe an old way of Profession of any Art to be
very irrational, when the Subject matter of it is altered and become new (as I
suppose I have proved that of Physic to be,) and I am He was Physician to
three Emperors. Consil. 322.
of Crato's mind, who allows a man that has expert Medicines, to practice them,
if he be so rational as with reason to administer them, For (says he) though a
Physician should consider the Cause, and the Part affected, and think that
ought more to be insisted on than extraordinary Receipts of Medicines, yet I
question not but an expert Medicin administered with reason, may avail more than
that which is sometimes suddenly devised with great reason by a most learned
Physician: And upon this account (says he) I agree with Hippocrates, that even
the Rational Physicians ought to give place to the Empericks. It Is not vast
reading and learning of other men's speculations that makes a Physician, but a
near Approach unto Nature (as my Lord Bacon calls it;) a strict and constant
observing of her Motions and manner of Operations, is that which gives a man
light how to trace her in the darkness of obscure Causes, when she is out of
order, and to reduce her into order; and an observing of the various effects,
or non-effects, and operations of all sorts of Medicaments, both old and new,
together with a man's own manual operation in making them, will inlighten him
and conduct him so far, as to perceive Causes more evidently, and take off a
great patt of that Scandal hitherto imputed unto our Profession, that it is but
Ars Conjecturalis, a mere Conjectural Art, and the best part of the Professors
but good ghessers, and of little use, seeing that men have been too apt to
argue like the Empericks in Celsus; that as long as the Causes of Diseases and
of Natural Actions, were obscure, it was to no purpose to inquire into them,
because their Nature was incomprehensible, and thereupon they have been as apt
also to conclude, Ergo No need of a Physician. Neque enim credunt posse eum
scire, quomodo morbos curare conveniat, qui unde hi sint, ignoret; They will
not believe he can know how to cure Diseases, who knows not from whence they
proceed. And (says the same Author) oftentimes new kinds of Diseases fall out
in which Experience never yet gave any light: It is necessary therefore to
consider how they began, without which no mortal man can understand, why he
should use one thing more than another: And therefore the Empericks had reason
to plead, that they ought to have as much liberty to practice, as others, while
Causes remained obscure, because all Parties were in the dark alike in respect
of Causes: And if I by this present Treatise have (as I believe I have)
discovered more plainly the most important Causes, latent in most Diseases of
this latter Age, than has been done by any one man before me, and made the
matter easy to be understood by the meanest Capacity, certainly all being
alike instructed, other men as well as Scholars, little reason is to be given
why all Professors should not have liberty alike to practice, as well those
they term Empericks as others, so rational and new a Foundation being here laid
to deal with our Diseases, which are proved to be in a manner wholly new; and
truly there is great reason these they call Empericks should be pleaded for,
because by prying into their Experiments and Practices, I was confirmed in my
Apprehensions about this matter when I first entertained them in my mind, and
have since been quickened by continual observation, to adventure upon this
Undertaking, for the public Good of Physicians and their Patients.

Wherefore from this plain Discourse of mine, it being certain, that Diseases
are become new, and it being evident withal, what the Causes are, why their
present state and qualification is (for the most part) different from the old;
and seeing a more certain way of Practice does thence now arise, if Remedies be
found out to oppose and conquer them in their new Qualifications; What remains
then, but that all Professors do set their Wits on Work about the inventing of
proper Remedies? in the mean while, till that be done, it is of public concern
that they be encouraged, and persuaded so to order some of the Medicaments
which are already in use, that they may be fitted for the purpose. It Is
incredible how much a good wit may do this way, by fitting some ordinary
Medicines to strike at those Causes, which I have labored to explain in the
foregoing Chapters. What then might be done by more generous remedies?
Therefore I hope men will be excited to set themselves on work, and in working
proceed upon the Principles here mentioned, toward the inventing of higher and
more noble Medicines, which may be of so large an extent and reach, as to pursue
and overtake those causes wheresoever they be, and of so comprehensive a nature
as to cope and contest with them, be they either complicated (as for the most
part they are) or single; for, these being now known to be the main
Constituents in most diseases (especially such as formerly seemed to be most
occult and difficult) then, if it be true, that when the causes are known,
Cures are half done, I suppose every Practisers Mother-wit may instruct him,
being a man of good parts, how to form up a Method for his own use, by fitting
it not only to the Nature and complication of those general causes, which are
(more or less) concerned and prevalent in the strange and stubborn maladies of
this Age, but also to the nature of such Medicaments as he is master of: For, a
particular Method may be useful and effectual, being joined with the use of
some Medicines, which will do little or no good in the use of other Medicines; as
I have frequently seen.

Vain therefore is that Learning which ties men up to a general set Method in
curing, and inables them to excuse themselves for any thing they do, if they
can but produce an od Aphorism, or Text of Hippocrates or Galen, for a
justification, and thereby prove (as Balzac's Italian Doctor did at Padua) that
the Patient died with the fairest Method in the world; whereas that ancient
Prince of the Faculty, and Galen the Usurper, being no Prophets, and little
able to divine what Alterations of things would fall out in our days, could
never foresee how to frame Precepts and Rules to guide Us in our Concernments.
There are many things admitted and enjoined by them in the Methodus Medendi,
which may by no means be allowed in ours, as the Case now stands: It will not
be amiss therefore if I give you here an Essay (as brief as I can) in making
inquiry what things for the future ought to be excluded out of the Profession
of Physic as unnecessary or false, and what to be admitted; what old
Foundations and Buildings are to be demolished, and what new ones established.

To do this fully, by excurring into all Particulars, would require the
compiling of vast volume; but I shall content my self with some of the most
considerable.

CHAP. VII. A particular inquiry into the main Philosophical Principles of the
Profession of Physic.
SYlvius de le Boe, present Professor of Physic in the University of Leyden,
begins one of his disputations thus: Disput. Med. These. 1.
I cannot but wonder (says he) that some Physicians, who are eminent for
learning, should be so absurd, as not to be ashamed even now openly to profess,
that all things which may make for the perfection of Physic, were known to any
one or more of the Ancients, although they are discovered to be false by every
days experience. Yea, some are so fond as to urge, that in the institutions of
Physic, we ought still to tread close in the steps of the Ancients, in the
training of Students to the Profession. But it is too late now to insist upon
blind obedience about things Natural: especially seeing many of the Galenists
have been so ingenious, as to declare their Judgment, that many things
received as previous to Physic are unnecessary. My Lord Bacon in the 31.
Aphorism of his Novum Organon, says, it is in vain to expect any Advancement in
Science, by super-inducing or grafting new things upon old; but an Instauration
is to be made from the very lowest Foundations. Give me leave therefore to
strike at the very Foundation of our faculty: and here I have one leading me
the way, who (I suppose) of a pure Galenist, is the quaintest person that has
written, next after the most delicate Fernelius; I mean Heurnius the Hollander,
who was Physician to old William Prince of Orange. In his Comment upon the Book
of Hippocrates de Natura hominis; he in order to the study of Physic, cashiers
the common Doctrine of the four Elements, and says, To what purpose is it, in
order to Physic, to search into the Nature of Elements? truly it is sufficient
if we inquire into the powers and operations of Nature, so far as she has an
influence in the mutation of Bodies. In another place he says, we ought to
trust our senses rather than the opinions of Philosophers; for, it was one good
saying of Aristotle, Nihil est in Intellectu quod non prius fuit in sensu; and
my Lord Bacon Presace to the advancement of Lear^ing.
makes Sense the surest guide for our Understanding in discovering the secrets
of Nature, and proves at large, that if we will have any sound knowledge of
Nature, there is a necessity of deriving Philosophy from Sensible Experiments;
we must use our own Industry, and trust our own eyes, and observations, because
these produce to us somewhat that is certain; whereas a Philosophy and Physic
formed up of Intellectual Conceptions, digested into Conclusions and Aphorisms,
(since the Intellect of man is naturally full of Idols and Fantasies, and
various in every man) must needs be but the evaporation of Phantsie; and it
tends to the introducing of Opinions without end, instead of establishing
Truth, which always is but One and the Same. Therefore the noble des Carts
took a more commendable course; for, as Boreel tells us in his Life, percieving
that a knowledge of the Truth was not to be found among men, or Books, he laid
them all aside, and betook himself wholly to a contemplation of the Book of the
world; and that he might be at liberty to sound the depths of Nature, he
quitted the Conversation of men, and retired to a little Village near Egmont in
Holland, where leading a solitary life for 25. years together, without a
Library, he spent his time wholly in Experiments, whereby he discovered many
things worthy admiration, for the benefit of mankind, and formed unto himself a
new Philosophy to lead men to Physic; such a one as has drawn many persons of
high parts to follow him, and lay new foundations of Medicin, more
consentaneous to the operations of Nature, than the Book-learning that was in
fashion before it. But none has made a business of it so exactly as Regius the
Professor of Utrecht, who (as I told you in the first Chapter) has turned off
all the Doctrine of the Elements, Humors, Temperaments, etc. and such other old
Notions, as he reckons to be but mere Chimeraes; and I think it is no shame to
follow so worthy a Leader.

But as it has been my design, all along this Treatise, to say little but what
is in the language of the best Writers of this latter Age, or agreeable to
their Sense; give me leave now to make use of one who is (I may well say) the
Ornament of our Nation next to immortal Harvey, by name Dr. Willis, Professor
of Natural Philosophy in the University of Oxon; one that has made himself a
Physician indeed and Philosopher by Fire, and given a good account why he
departs from the Doctrine of the Ancients touching Fevers as well as other
things. In the Preface he says, That if he do recede from the common
Judgment, he is not the first that has swimm'd against the stream of a
received Opinion: That in matters belonging to Physic, those things that
pleased men formerly, will not pass now, because the Ancients, resting upon a
false Supposition about the Motion of the Blood, did very foully and dangerously
err. That the Art of Physic ought to be wholly renewed, and the old Props
failing, Posterity is concerned to take care that the Fabric be rebuilt from
the very ground. That seeing we have now gotten new lights, and a knowledge of
the Causes of things formerly unknown, it becomes not prudent men, and such as
profess Philosophy, to hold their eyes shut still. That though the Doctrines of
the Ancients be yet openly maintained in Universities, yet he cannot believe,
but that most Physicians of a deeper In-sight, do from their own Reasonings
form unto themselves new Hypotheses to proceed by. That Physic was at first
Emperical, and Remedies were invented by frequent trial of particulars, and not
by general Precepts or Analogy; and if, after the example of Hippocrates, his
Successors had be taken themselves to Observations only, and Experiments,
without doubt the Art of Physic had been advanced to a greater perfection and
fineness, and with much more advantage to the sick. But that which presently
shut out the light which had been at first set up, and dimmed the eyes of
posterity, was the preposterous endeavor of those men, who hastily, and in a
manner after their own Fantasy, framed the Art of Physic into a general
Method, after the fashion of some Speculative Science; and so by this means, a
copious form of Doctrine, specious enough, but fallacious and instable, was
built, before firm foundations were laid. Thus much you have from one of our
University-Professors; and it were well if the Universities would wholly follow
his example, and cleanse the Schools thoroughly from the Cobwebs of old
Heathenish Philosophy and Physic.

Much pains has been already taken by the most acute and profound Helmont, the
reading of whom I can never sufficiently commend to our Countrymen, now that he
is printed in English; but know, it is not a flight reading will serve the turn:
Ten times over is too little, though a man should have the help of a Tutor to
direct him. Were I worthy to undertake such a work, I could never do the world
the like service any other way, as I might in this, by Methodizing the several
pieces of him into some better order, rendering his most subtle Conceptions
more familiar and easy. And truly, the more regard is to be had to what he
writes, because, as he was a noble Philosopher by Fire, so before he be took
himself wholly to this new course of Study, he had been an indefatigable
Student in the old; having read over the tedious Works of Galen twice,
Hippocrates once, (getting his Aphorisms without-book) and all Avicen he read,
and all the Greeks as well as Arabians, with many modern Authors, no less than
six hundred, and collected Notes out of them all; but after all (he says)
counting what cost he had been at, he found he had gained Nothing, but repented
of his Pains, and the spending of so many years to little purpose. Vide
Promissa Helmontii, Page 8.
The blame of all he lays upon Galen, the great Corrupter of so much as was
tolerable in Hippocrates, and of the Schools, with Phantsies: This Galen
arrogating to himself the glory of such as went before him, enlarged the Art of
Physic, which before was contained in a few Rules, unto vast Volumes. He was
pleased forsooth to determine, according to Hippocrates, that all Bodies were
made up of four Elements; and parallel to these he establ^shed four Qualities,
and so many simple Complexions, and then as many Couples of complex Qualities,
and thence he confirmed also four Humors to make up our Constitutions; which
were devices that others had dreamt of before him: And then, out of the strife
and disagreement of these, as well simple, as complicate with fictitious
humors, he would needs derive almost all Diseases, with the Scopes and
Indications of Cure; as on the other side he concluded Health to arise from
their Agreement and Proportion with each other. Moreover, every Disease he
declared to be but a mere Disposition in quality; and that Contraries were to
be cured by Contraries. His knowledge in Herbs was so little, that the virtues
of Simples he transcribed out of Dioscorides, with the Elementary degrees of
them as to Heat, Cold, etc. altogether neglecting the Seminal and Specific
powers of them, because he was ignorant of them. By which easy road of Art
propounded to the world, he procured to himself the Sovereignty of Physic, and
Posterity being drawn in by so compendious a Course, a deep Lethargy crept in
upon the Schools, through the Doors of Sloth and Idleness; and so it has
continued till this last Age of Industry and Inqu^^y. This Prince of the
faculty (as some would make him) made it his business to rail at others that
were before him, as Herostratus, Asclepiades, Protagoras, E^^sistratus,
Herophilus, and many more; yea, he spared not his own Master Quintius* who was
of the Sect Emperical. Lacuna an Italian, who has taken pains to Epitomize
him, intimates, that his scolding ^umor came to him by kind, his Mother having
been such another perpetual Clack to his Father, as X^ntippe was to Socrates;
n^r did he himself De co^^o^cend^^ (...), ^ff^ct (...).
spare his own Mother, but gives the like Account of her in one of his Books:
No wonder then, that he swells up his volumes with so many impertinent
digressions to abuse others, which being taken away by his Epitomizer, all his
Doctrine is reduced but to one volume, not very big, though it is said the number
of what he wrote was 400. volumes; and the same person says, he collected out
of them whatever he found of Substance. He was so quarrelsom at Rome at his
first coming, that the City was too little to hold him and the other
Physicians; which made him retire out of it for a season; but having gained the
opinion of the Emperor Antoninus, and cured his two Sons Commodus and Sextus,
of sl^hgt Fevers, the Empress Faustina cried him up to the sky, being taken
with the saccess; thereupon he began to grow insolent, and made a shift to
infinuate so at Court, as to establish himself a Faction, which enabled him to
triumph over all other Physicians, and by the countenance of Imperial Majesty
give Laws to all the world in Point of Physic; wherein the Students of this
faculty have most supinely acquiesced till this latter Age.

It Is high time therefore now for us, to shake off that yoke of Phantsies,
under which men have so long been held in a pedantick Compliance; in order
whereunto, give me leave to set down what Principles and Particulars hitherto
received, ought to be exploded out of the Doctrine and Practice of Physic.

I. Away with the frigid Notion of four That ought to be excluded out of the
Faculty of Physic^.
Elements, which he, out of Aristotle, makes to be the Principles of all mixed
Bodies, and frames Conceptions about this, agreeable to the Sense of
Hippocrates in that very vain Book Entitled De Principiis. There is a very
short, but sufficient Character given of this opinion by Dr. Willis in the
first Chapter De Fermentatione. As touching the Four Elements, and the First
Qualities thence to be deduced, I must confess (says he) that this opinion
does in some sort conduce toward an explaining of the Phaeaomen of Nature, but
in so gross a manner does it solve the Appearances of things, and without any
peculiar respect to the more secret Recesses of Nature, that it is almost the
same thing to say a House does consist of Wood and Stones, as a Body of four
Elements. Instead of these the Doctor introduces Five Principles of mixed
Bodies, viz. Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water, and Earth, affirming, that according
to their diverse motion and proportion in Bodies, the reasons and varieties of
the Generation and Corruption of things, especially of Fermentation, are to be
considered. These Principles he does not set down as most simple Beings
altogether uncompounded, but as such Substances only, into which Things
Natural and sensible are finally resolved as into Parts. By the combination and
intestine Motion of these, Bodies are generated and do augment; by the mutual
separation of them from one another, and dissolution, they are altered and
perish. In the mean while, those Particles which are added to the Subjects, or
that come from them, appear under the Form of Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, or one of
the other two: And that these Particulars, being real, are much more subserving
than the other, to gratify man's Intellect with a right Apprehension touching
the nature of mix't Bodies, is evident to the eye of ev^ry one that takes pains
to Analyze them by fire, and resolve them into their Principles. This suits
exactly with my Lord Bacon's design, of raising a Philosophy from sensible
experiments, if we would have it certain, and really conducible to an
understanding of the Nature of man and of Diseases. Concerning the various
Affections and Combinations of these Principles in Bodies, the said Doctor in
his D^ Fermentatione.
second Chapter, gives a very notable and Demonstrative Account: to which
Scholars are referred. But that the English Reader may clearly understand what
is meant by these five Principles, I referr him to Monsieur ie Febure the Kings
Chemist, in the first part of his Book, entitled A Complete Body of Chemistry,
newly Printed for Octavian Pulleyn Junior; which will easily inform the
Ignorant, satisfy the Doubting, and convince others.

II. After the four Elements, away also with the four Qualities which are
attributed thereto; I remember, the noble Lord and Philosopher Novum O^ganon,
Aphorism. 15.
beforementioned, will not so much as allow the Term Quality to be a tolerable
Notion, in order to the understanding of the Concernments and Operations of
Nature, and he totally excludes the Notions of Humidum and Siccum, Moist and
Dry. And Helmont, In the Latin Copy.
Page 316. shows what mischief the admitting of these causes in the cure of
Diseases: In Page 136. he says, Moisture and Drieness are not to be understood
to be Qualities in Abstracto, but they are rather Bodies qualified; and
therefore (by the leave of the Schools) they are not acquired by Parts and
Degrees, after the manner of Qualities. Water never dries, though it seem so to
the eyes by vanishing: And Dry sounds nothing else properly but to be without
moisture, and so conteins nothing but a Negation of Moist. It is a wondrous
piece of Folly then, to dream, that Moisture comes on by degrees, and a
remission also of Moisture and Drieness in Elements; and so it is a monstrous
whimsie to have introduced such kind of stupid Dreams into the Nature of
Diseases, and Rules of Curing, and thereupon to have laid the whole Foundation
of Physic, by making diverse marriages of Moist Dry, Hot and Cold, with each
other; and all this, to uphold the vain doctrine of Temperaments; not
considering that in Nature there is no penetration of Moist with Dry, no
radical union or commixtion or Temper possible betwixt them. Then as for the
other Qualities (so called) Hot and Cold, Helmont P^^ura.
cites the saying of * Hippocrates to cashire them; That neither Hot, nor Cold,
nor Moist, nor page 320
Dry, are to be reputed Causes of Diseases; but rather that which is Acid, or
Bitter, or Sharp, or Saltish. To this purpose also Hippocrates, in his Book De
Veteri Medicina, speaking of a Fever, menrious the nature of it much otherwise
then Galen; saying, that men in a Fever have it not absolutely from Heat (as
the other is pleased to define it) but you are to consider Bitter, Acid, and
Saltish, joined with the H^at, and innumerable the like; and so in like manner,
not to consider Cold of it self, but as it is consociated with those Faculties.
He lays not the stress of the nature of Diseases upon Qualities, but upon the
other Particulars, though Galen be so bold as herein to leave his Leader; but
Heurnius, upon the foregoing Text, a more sober Commentator, is very plain,
and says, Calidum and Frigidum principatum non obtinent inter Morbificas
Causas, nec Medicam manum valde implorant, Hot and Cold have no pre-eminence
among Causes of Diseases, Nec M^dicimanum v^lde implorant.
nor do they much require the hand of a Physician: And if these be so little to
be regarded, what will become then of most of Galen's Doctrine, and his
Medicines, and the Doctrine and Medicines of his successors, and of the Shops at
this day, which are all proportioned (for the most part) according to the
Notions and Degrees of Heat and Cold? In another Text of the same Book also,
Hippocrates was so prudent, as to advise us to have a regard to that in man
which is Bitter, and Saltish, and Sweet, and Acid, and Austere or sour, and
Insp^d, and Infinite other things having all manner of Faculties, power, and
strength: which is one of the best Sayings to be found in that Author. And two
or three Texts before that, he says, Non enim Calidum est quod eximiam per se
vim habet; Inter cunctas autem facultates, languidissimam esse existimo
Frigiditatem and Caliditatem; that is to say, Heat has not of it self any
considerable force, but among all the Faculties, I think Cold and Heat to be
the most languid; and yet the Frame of Galenick Physic seems (for the most
part) to be built upon Hot and Cold, and a^ attemperation of these with Motst
and Dry, therefore both the Method and Medicines devised in proportion to those
Conceits, must needs be erroneous and insufficient, while the Schools do (as
P^g ^39.
Helmont says) perversely traduce the Seminal and Specific powers of Things
into Elementary Qualities, from whence they raise their Doctrine of
Temperaments, and to these they unadvisedly referr and ascribe the Vital and
Seminal Faculties of Things. By such narrow poor Conceptions as these, Galen
corrupted the Art of Physic, and the Arabians imitated him; so that (as I
said) a Method of Curing, and of Composition of Med^cins, has been founded
upon a mere mingling, confounding, and jumbling of pretended Contraries, to
bring them to agreement and concord, as it were by Mathematical Rule of
proportion: That is to say, the whole Fabric of Natural Science has hither to
stood upon mere opinions obtruded on us by gross Heathens, upon whom it is a
shame to hear what high Elogies are bestowed by some of their Christian
Commentators, calling them Divine, Divine Hippocrates, Divine Galen, and I know
not how many more Titles more fit for God than men; whereas these Masters
extended their knowledge and their searches after it, no farther than the
external shadows of things, seldom looking intra Corticem, to the Ferments, the
Digestions, Seminals, and other Particulars of high moment, but placed all the
energy of Nature in Fictions about the Disagreements, the Oppositions, the
Velitations, the Contrarieties of Heat and Cold, Moist and Dry. By this means
the idle sort of Gownmen that have imitated them ever since, lazing in their
Studies over the P^gan Books of Institutions, seeing the Road open and easy
before them, and that they might this way quickly get to their Journeys end of
Scarlet, and Worship, and Profit, without so much as wetting, or smutching, or
burning a Finger, have made very little Advance of the Art they profess, but
studied their own ease, never diving farther into the Depths of Nature, the
Differences, the Causes, and the Proprieties of Bodies, which it is impossible
to attain without an Insight into Pyrotechnie, that is, working a knowledge of
things Natural out of the Fire.

This is it which (Mr. Boil Experiment. Philos. part. 1. 35. 36.
well says) may, as the Handmaid to Physiology, not a little contribute to
clear up the nature of Digestions, and the Deficiencies or Aberrations in them,
which produce a great part of Diseases. Indeed, since the Liquors contained in
the Body abound, diverse of them, with Saline or Sulphurous Parts, he that
has by Chemistry been taught the nature of the several Salts and Sulphurs, and
both beheld and considered their various Actions one upon another, and upon
other bodies, seems to have a considerable help to discourse groundedly of the
Changes and operations of the Humors or Juices contained in man's body; which
he has not that never had Vulcan for his Instructor. And Page 30. 31. he
says, the Explications of a skilful Naturalist may add much to what he has
hitherto been commonly taught, concerning the nature and origin of Qualities in
Physicians Schools; and that a little comparing of the vulgar Doctrine, with
those various Phenomenon to be met with among Natural things, will easily
manifest it to you. Much more likely explications, than those which were
applauded some Ages since, of diverse things that happen as well within as
without the Body, have been given by later Naturalists both Philosophers and
Physicians. The Theory concerning that disease the Stone, and of many other
diseases which has been given us by those many Physicians, that would needs
deduce all the Phenomenon of diseases from Heat, Cold, and other Elementary
Qualities, is inferior to the account given us of them by those ingenious
Moderns that have applied themselves to diverse Inquiries, together with some of
the more known Chemical Experiments.

But that ingenious person, Monsieur le Febure, Royal Professor in Chemistry to
his Majesty, and Apothecary in ordinary to his Household, having (as I hinted
before) lately published a Book Entitled A Complete Body of Chemistry,
dedicated to the King, is somewhat more plain, and notes Page 108.
such Galenists to be only Physicians in name, who after they have perused some
University Writings, do persuade men, that Physic is nothing else but an Art
of discerning Heat and Cold, and immediately take upon themselves the Practice,
and fill their discourses with nothing else but Notions of Heat and Cold; and
all their skill tends to speak more or less of these Qualities. But the learned
Fernelius, who was the Ornament of his Age, does confess and evidence, after
having acknowledged this Error, that besides these first Qualities, there are
many other powers hidden in mixed Bodies, which he plainly signifies toward the
latter end of his second Book de Abditis rerum Causis, where he plainly
teaches how the Seminal Virtue contained in Compounds, and which really is the
Seat of all their activity, must be extracted. Moreover, in his Preliminary
discourse before that Book, he says, it is a very difficult matter for any to
attain the exact knowledge of Natural Things, without the previous guidance of
Chemistry, and a being acquainted with all its Parts; neither can any be
reckoned a perfect Physician without the help of Hermetick Philosophy, since it
is the truest Ground of Physic, without which no Practitioner can deserve any
other Title than that of Emperick: For, it is not a Gown, or Degrees taken in
Universities, which constitute the Physician, but a solid Knowledge of Nature,
grounded upon sound Reason and mature Judgment, improved by Practice and
Experience. The rare Prescriptions of Chemistry have their Remedies grounded,
not upon the actings of first and second Qualities, but upon the Specifical and
Internal virtues of their Principles. Doubtless there may under a Gown, and in
an University, be as great a Knowledge of things Natural, as there is in a
Royal City; and this the excellent Dr. Willis has sufficiently shown, as some
others his Compeers have also done, by their own personal worth and Industry;
but then, the means to attain it, is not in the old lazy way, and by the old
dull Principles; for, here lies the Bane of our Profession, that because a
Book-knowledge of Hippocrates, Galen, and the rest that are counted Classick,
is admitted in the Universities as a sufficient Test, to try a man's fitness to
become a Doctor of Physic, therefore the less ingenious spirits content
themselves with that sort of Learning, and seldom seek after the other; or if
they do, they rest in a superficial Acquaintance with the use of some common
Chymick Remedies which are to be had at the Apothecaries; whereas the case
would be otherwise, and much more for the Advantage of mankind, and of the Art
of Physic it Self, if the world were divided betwixt Galen and Helmont; that
is, that they who take degrees in the faculty, should by public Constitution
be Obliged, to give a Proof of their Sufficiency, in the Doctrine of the One as
well as the other; and in the Analytick Operations of Chemistry, as well as in
the Peripatetick Speculations and Maxims of Galenism; for, though these cannot
render one the better Physician to cure, yet they make him the more
accomplished, because he is acquainted with the ways both old and new: which
very well agrees with that saying of the prudent Celsus, who tells us, it is
true, that as to In Praesat.
the Art of Curing nothing avails more than Experiment; and although there be
many things not properly appertaining to an Art it self, yet it may by those
things be advanced in quickening the wit of the Artist. Therefore also, that
contemplation of the Nature of things, although it make not a man a more apt
Physician, yet it renders him the more complete for the Profession: That is to
say, in plain English, a Doctor bred up in the Contemplative Philosophy of the
Schools, may be a Scholar and a very fine Gentleman; but what is that to the
Curing of a Disease, or the rousing of a Heart-sick Man from his bed of
Languishment? This is to be expected rather from one that is qualified for the
work by acquaintance with Mechanic and Experimental Philosophy. Therefore very
much to the purpose is that other saying of the same Author, who, though he
appear to favor the Sect of the old Empericks, yet has, for his gravity and
great Sufficiency, gained this Acknowledgment from many Admirers of the old
Learning, that he is to be ranked next to Hippocrates: his words are to this
Sense: Celsus in Pre.
It is not so much matter, what moves the Arteries, as what all kinds of Motion
do signify: but those things are to be known by Experiments; and in all kind
of Speculations men may dispute Pro and Con; and so a good wit and quaint
Discourse may overcome; but know that Diseases are not cured with Eloquence,
but by Remedies: Which if any man that is an Experimental Practiser come to
know, though he be slow of Tongue, he will become a much greater Physician,
than he that without such an Experimental Course, shall seek to adorn himself
with an eloquent Tongue. And truly, this is the most considerable qualification
that a man may arrive to by Galenick Philosophy; i. e. to manage a discourse
about fruitless Notions with Elegancy. With this weapon the Tongue, it is likely
Galen himself prevailed over all the other Physicians in the Court of the
Emperor Antoninus; for, he that writes his life describes him to be a very
eloquent person, and that is a grand advantage to any man in the Courts of
Princes. And yet for all his height of Eloquence, we see his Principles to be
but straight and shallow; particularly, these concerning Elements and
Qualities, which Hippocrates spoke but faintly for, and Celsus does not
vouchsafe once to mention. And Mr. Boil says, well, that Experim. Philos. p.
281. part 2.
he sees not how from those narrow and barren Principles of the four Elements,
and the four first Qualities, the four Humors (and the like) any ordinary
effects can satisfactorily be deduced: And if so, then certainly the
Scholastic Method and Medicines erected upon such Scholastic Foundations,
cannot in reason stand any longer, but ought to be turned up as Insufficient,
and of little use, in an Age wherein better things are known. So much for
Qualities: And yet let me have one fling more at them, which is this: That the
admitting two of them, viz. the Notions of Heat and Cold, into the Doctrine
touching Fevers, is a Cause why at least a third part of the Sick do run a
strange hazard every year of losing their lives; or else miserably languish and
lose the habit of their Bodies, by the ill handling of them and Agues.

III. The common Figment of Qualities being cashired, the Galenick Doctrine also
concerning Temperaments falls to the ground of Course, because it depends
thereupon; and so I slightly pass it, as not only useless, but dangerous,
because it casts many a Mist before the eyes of men, about the regulation of
Diet, as well as the Curation of Diseases.

IV. After Elements, Qualities, and Temperaments, the next Considerable is the
old Notion of four humors, which they reckon to be Ingredients in the
Constitution of the Bodies of Animals: This Conceit, as vain as the rest,
passes yet among the vulgar, both Physicians and others, who conclude that the
humors floating in the Mass, ought to be acknowledged by the Names of Blood,
Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; and from these they derive four Complexions,
viz. The Sanguine, the Choleric, the Phlegmatic, and the Melancholic; and
out of these they fain also as many Complicated Complexions, according to the
predominancy of one humor over another; which are too frivolous to be named.
Therefore I pass them by; and the rather, because De Gener. Animal. Exercit. 52.
Dr. Harvey, whose Excellency lay most in Physiological discourses, puts a slur
upon this Principle of four Humors, saying, If these things be so, then there
is a necessity that the maintainers of this opinion must set down two kinds of
Blood, viz. the whole Mass together in the Veins, composed of those four
Humors, and a fourth part of it more pure, more florid, and more spirituous,
which in the stricter sense they name Blood, and which some affirm is contained
apart in the Arteries, and therefore separated from the rest for other uses:
the ridiculousness of which conceit concerning two kinds of Blood, is plain
enough from the received doctrine of the Bloods Circulation, seeing it is one
and the same Mass of Blood, which fetches its Round, flowing out from the
Ventricles of the heart, by the Arteries, unto all parts of the Body, and from
thence back again through the Veins to the Ventricles of the Heart; which
reciprocal Motion being continual, it is not to be imagined, that any one part
of Blood distinct from the other, can be contained in the Arteries, but that it
is the entire Mass which flows in that Circulatory Motion; and as it passes
along, it purges it self of its Feculencies by the common Emunctories of the
Body, which Feculencies being diversified in color and Consistence, according
to the variety of their nature and condition, have gotten the Appellation of
four distinct humors, as if they were so many parts, and sometimes, as if they
were so many Excrements of the Mass of Blood; And so according to these gross
Conceptions, the Galenists have formed all their Notions about Pharmacy, aiming
at an evacuation, or else a contemperation of supposed Humors, and Excrements;
but there being no such matters as they Phantsie to be Ingredient in the nature
of Diseases, it is no Marvel if they miss the Curing of any Disease, which is not
curable by Strength of Nature, and Length of Time.

As for Melancholy (as they call it) the Receptacle which they bestowed upon it
was the Spleen, pretending that its office is to separate the Drossie part of
the Blood, which cannot be elaborated by the Liver, which Vessel they
destinated to the purer part of Sanguification; but both these Opinions have of
late been sufficiently disproved by the ingeny and industry of some searching
heads, who determine the Liver not to be the office or Storehouse of
Sanguification; and the Spleen to a nobler use than to receive drossie Blood,
it appearing rather to be an Elaborator and Fermentator of the noblest Juice,
viz. the Arterial Blood, by reason of that grand Intertexture of Arteries, by
which it holds a near Communication with the vital Parts of the Body.
Concerning which read Bartholinus, Walaeus, and our most ingenious Dr.
Highmore, and others, who have well improved the hints that are given by
Helmont.

As for Choler or Bile, they have hitherto reckoned it also to be an Humor; and
nothing has been more talked of than Bilious or Choleric Complexions and
Diseases, till Helmont opened the eyes of the world, and showed, that Bile,
which the Galeuists make the parent of almost all active Diseases, is not an
Excrement, but rather a Condiment, and Balsamic Preservative of the blood in
its due vigor and activity; and that the fetid Cadaverous yellow excrement,
which we find frequently avoided in Evacuations upward, or downward, is
sometimes a good Juice or humor, vitiated, and tinctured yellow, and drawn out
of the Body, by common ill natured Purgers; and sometimes a part of the Chyle
corrupted, which comes forth either yellow or Seagreen, being Tinctured so,
more or less, according to the Degree of that Corruption which has seized it.

Agreeable to this Doctrine of Helmont, the Learned L^b. 1. ca. 8.
Grembs has determined the nature of Bile, and of that corrupted Juice which
resembles it; and of late, Sylvius de le Boe, in his Disputations at Leyden in
Holland, shows that the Liquor or Bile contained in the Gall is not what
Physicians commonly have defined it, but that it is Dispu^. Med. 6.
a part of that noblest Liquor, the Arterial Blood, conveyed by the Cystick
Arteries into that little thin receptacle the Gall; and that for the main, it
consists of a Lixivious Salt, mingled with a mean quantity of Sulphur or Oil,
and a volatile Spirit, by which it is endued with a notable power of
penetration, so that it effects wonderful operations within the Body, and
keeps it from corruption; having in it self the nature of a Ferment, by virtue
whereof the blood is maintained in an active state of Circulation, the work of
the several Digestions is promoted, and the respective Ferments of every part
and Vessel of the Body invigorated and quickened. Vain therefore are the old
Speculations touching those many Diseases which have hitherto been owned, as
proceeding from a redundance of Bile; and all the Remedies founded upon this
Figment of a Bilious Humor, are either pernicious, or else useless to the end
for which they are administered. The truth is, the Fabricators of the Four
Humors may as well make them up seven or eight, by adding the Liquor Nervosus,
the Serum, the Urin, and the limpid liquor of the Lymphaeducts; and I see no
reason but they may as well add Spittle, Snivel, and Tears (for they are all of
a different appearance;) however they may do well to add Tears of repentance,
rather than fool the world any longer with such Phantsies, the admitting
whereof runs the Precious lives and healths of men into many a hazard.

To be brief therefore upon this subject, I will say little more, as from my
self; but seeing Doctor De Febr. Cap. 1.
Willis has very excellently trussed up all that is considerable in a narrow
compass, I will render it as plain as I can to the English Reader. Though this
opinion of the Four Humors has ever since the days of Galen prevailed in the
Schools of Physic, yet in our Age men begin to suspect it; nor is it so
commonly made use of to solve the Phenomenon of Diseases; because such kind of
Humors do not constitute Blood, but those that are called so are (excepting the
Blood) only excrements of the cruentous gore, which ought to be separated from
it: For, the blood is in truth one only humor, nor is it one thing about the
Bowels, and another in the habit of the Body; nor is Phlegm moved at one time,
and Bile at another, or Melancholy (as the vulgar talk) but the Liquor boiling
within the vessels is only Blood, and whither soever it is carried through the
several parts of the body, it is still the same, and like it self. But because
in some persons, by reason of the abundance of Natural heat, and through want
of the same in others, the concoction of Aliment is sometimes more effectually,
sometimes more remisly, performed both in the Bowels and in the Vessels,
therefore there follows a diverse Temperature of the Blood, although it be
one and the same liquor, and according to its constitution, it may be said that
men are either Choleric, Melancholic, or of some other Temper. Moreover,
because while the Blood circulates within the vessels, some parts of it
continually grow old and stale, and others are supplied a new, hence it is,
that from crudity, or too much coction, somewhat excrementitious must needs be
heaped together: which nevertheless is by effervescencie separated from its
Mass, even as it happens in the efflorescence or depuration of Wines; and so
the Blood being after the same manner depurated, ought to be of it self without
that which they call Bile, Phlegm, and Melancholy. And whereas those humors
vulgarly so called do consist of other Principles, viz. that which they term
Bile or Choler, of Salt and Sulphur, with an admixtion of Spirit and Water; and
that which they term Melancholy, of the same, with an Addition of Earth; and
seeing that of such Principles as these the Blood does immediately consist, and
is wont to be sensibly resolved into the same, I judge it better to lay aside
the vulgar acceptance of Humors, and to take into use these celebrated
Principles of the Chemists, for explaining the nature of the Blood and of its
Distempers. There are therefore in the Blood, as in all other Liquors which are
apt to Ferment, very much of Water and Spirit, a Mediocrity of Salt and
Sulphur, and some little of Earth: and when the Blood is resolved by
putrefaction, it yields the same Principles separate, and Distinct.

And because it is necessary, the Reader should have a little prospect into the
nature and meaning of these Five Principles, he says, that Spirit is a subtle
and most volatile portion of the Blood. By the offervescencie Spirit.
of this it is, that the Blood is kept in a continual Ebullition and Motion,
and purified from whatsoever happens to be mingled with it which is
Heterogeneous or unapt for mixture, or else the Spirit being thereby disturbed
in its Motion, there follow^ an exagitation of the Blood, and a Distemper,
which never cease, till the Heterogeneous matter be either subdued and
reduced, or else evacuated. This Spirit, in destilling the Blood of Animals,
becomes visible, ascending of a clear limpid color, like Aqua Vitae, and by
the adhesion of Salt it becomes very sharp and pricking.

That Sulphur also abounds in the Blood, Sulphur.
appears, in regard we feed chiefly upon fat Aliments and such as have Sulphur
in them; yea the Nutriment accruing to the solid parts from the Blood, turns
into Sulphur and Fat; and it is probable, that from the dissolution of this it
receives its red Tincture: Hence it is, that the blood being impregnated with
Sulphur, as well as Spirit, the whole Mass is very apt to Ferment; and it
passing through the Heart, receives there a greater effervescencie or
accession, to maintain vital heat in the whole Body. And when this Sulphurous
part is exalted, and becomes luxuriant in the Blood, it perverts the Temper
thereof from its due state, rendering it bilious or Choleric (as we call it) or
corrupt, so that it cannot concoct the Nutritive Juice; or inslaming the Blood,
it puts it into Heats and Burnings, as in Continual Fevers; and hence it is,
that the more of Sulphur any one has in the blood, the more apt he is to fall
into Fevers,

That a Salt also is in the Blood is evident by Taste: That which is the Fixed
Salt comes Salt.
by feeding upon Vegetables; and the less volatile Salt from other kinds of
Food, which by a good Digestion of Nature, and by circulation, attains to be
Volatile. Now if it so hapPen in the Blood, that by reason of ill Digestion,
the Salty or Saline particles thereof are not rightly exalted, but remain
crude, and for the most part Fixed, thereupon the blood becomes thick, and unfit
for Circulation; from whence come Obstructions in the Bowels and solid Parts,
and an increase of serous Crudities; But if by a Depression, or through defect
of Spirit, the Salt becomes too much exalted, and fluid, the state of the blood
become acid and austere, as is observed in the Scurvy and Quartan Agues, yea
and various Coagulations of Salt happening upon this account, thence arise all
manner of Arthritick Diseases, the Scrophula, Nephritick Distempers, Leprous
Dispositions, and almost all Chronick Diseases: But when the Salt, after
concoction well performed in the bowels and and vessels, is duly exalted, and
by association with the Spirit made volatile, then, by reason of its mixture,
the Liquor of the blood ferments the more equally, and is vindicated also from
Puirefaction, and from Stagnation, (that is to say, defect of motion) and from
Coagulation: For, the Saline particles do restrain the exorbitances of the
Spirits, and especially of Sulphur: wherefore they who have a blood well
saturated with volatile Salt, are the less subject to Fevers: and from hence is
is, that they who frequently let blood, are the more inclinable to Fevers.

That Earth or terrestrial Particles abound Earth.
in the blood, appears by the grosness of its humor, and thickness of its
Consistence. This serves to keep the blood from becoming too volatile, and from
being too soon inflamed; even as in the ordering and making of Gunpowder,
Coals are many times added in greater proportion, that its parts may not all at
once and too soon take fire. And that there is such an Earth, appears also in
the Distillation of Blood, after which you will find good store of that the
Chemists call Caput Mortuum, a light Earthy substance apt to crumble.

Lastly, that there is a Water or Watery part of the Blood, is seen by its
Fluid nature; Water.
for, by this it is kept from being Stagnant or without Motion, and is
circulated in the Vessels without thickning, and withheld from too much
Conflagration and Adustion, and the Heat is preserved in good Temper. This also
is made manifest in the Distillation of Blood, whereby there is educed a Water
limpid and insipid, of at least a double proportion in respect of the rest.
From hence the matter of Urine, Sweat, and of any of the other moist
Excrements, does for the most part proceed.

Now this being so, what remains, but that the ingenious Reader should lay
these two Doctrins together to compare them, and thereupon judge which is most
likely to direct men in understanding the nature of man's Blood, and of
Diseases arising from its Distemper; whether that old Fiction of Four Humors,
which I have shown to be frivolous; or whether this new Notion of the noblest
Sect of Philosophers and Physicians, setting forth Five Principles in the
Blood, which are demonstrable to the eye, therefore most apt to inform a
Physician how to apprehend the Causes of every Distemper, as they arise from
true and genuine Fundamentals of humane Bodies, and consequently how to invent
Remedies to quell those Causes, and remove them.

And as to the invention of Remedies also, it is not to be imagined which way
men can go rightly to work, without a like consideration of the same Five
Principles, which are as demonstrable also to Sense, in resolving mixed Bodies,
whether Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral, into their ultimate Ingredients or
Parts, by Pyrotechnie and help of the Fire. For, as Monsieur le Febure (the
Royal Professor of Chemistry) well says, After that the Artist has performed
the Chemical resolution of Bodies, he does find at last Five Substances, which
Chemistry admits for the Principles or Elements of Natural Bodies, whereupon
are founded the Grounds of its Doctrine, because in either of th^se nothing
Heterogeneous can be found; and they are, 1. The watery part, which they term
Phlegm. 2. The Spirit, termed also Mercury. 3. Sulphur, or Oil. 4. The Salt.
5. The Earth. Some give them other Names, and it is free for every body to put
what name they please, provided they agree in the Things or Substances. Three
of these substances offer themselves to our sight in a Liquid Form, viz. the
The Nature and use of the five Principles.
Water, the Spirit, and the Oil: the two other, in the form of a solid Body,
viz. Salt, and Earth. The use of the substance called Water is, to be as a curb
and bridle to the Spirit, to dull and take off its acuteness; and to dissolve
the Salt and weaken its corrosive acrimonie; also to hinder the Inflammation of
Sulphur, and unite the Earth with the Salt; for these two last substances,
being brittle and dry, would give but little firmness and consistencie to a
mixed body, without the help of the Water.

The next considerable thing drawn by fire out of the Composition of Mixed
Bodies being the Spirit, observe that the nature of it is very penetrating, and
the use of it is, to cut, open, and attenuate the most solid and fixed
substances; it excites heat in Fermentation, untieth the Bonds of Salt and
Sulphur, and makes them seperable, resists Corruption and Putrefaction, yet by
accident may be the cause of it; devoureth the Salt, and seizes so greedily on
it, that it can scarce be parted from it, but by extreme violence of the Fire:
It is possessed of its own heat and cold (so appearing accidentally by its
effects) for it does not act by the common Elementary, but by its own proper
Specific Qualities. This same Spirit communicates several noble Qualities to
the Water, preserves it from corruption, makes it penetrative, and endoweth it
with almost all its own activity: And in requital, the Water does soften and
bridle the fury of the Spirit, and makes it so tractable, that it may become
useful a thousand ways: It is very serviceable while it remains in a due
Harmony, hindering the growth of excrementitious matter in mixed Bodies,
multiplying the substance, and strengthening the Faculties and Powers both in
Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals. But if it exceed the condition of the mixed
wherein it is, it alters the whole Frame of it, and becomes a Principle of
destruction.

The third thing visible in the artificial resolution of Mixed Bodies is
Sulphur, appearing in the form of Oil; and because it is an Oleaginous
substance, it easily takes Fire: It swims above the Water and the Spirit,
because it is lighter and more Etherael: It resists Cold, and never congeles,
being the Principle of Heat: It never suffers Corruption, but preserves from it
such things as are immersed in it, preventing the penetration of Air: It
sweetens the Acrimonie of the Salt, by whose help it is fixed and coagulated:
It powerfully blunts the sharpness of Spirits: Its office is, to bind and
temper the Earth with the Salt in the frame of M^xt Bodies: It causes also a
strict union of the other Principles, moderating the too great dryness of Salt,
and the Fluidity of Spirit; and finally, by its means the other Principles do
cement each other, and enter into a renacious compacted substance.

The Fourth Principle educed by Pyrotechnie is the Salt. Without this and the
Earth, the three foregoing Principles being volatile (as appears in Chemical
operation by their flying the Fire) would be unable to indue the M^xt Body with
a solidity requisite for its duration. The Salt being separated from the rest,
offers it self to our Senses in a dry crumbling brittle Body, easily
reducible to Powder, a sign of its external Drieness; but it is endued also
with an internal Moisture, as is witnessed by its Fusibility. It is fixed, and
incombustible, resisting the Fire, wherein it grows purer, suffers no
putrefaction, and is as it were eternal, being able to preserve it self without
alteration. It is easily dissolvible in Moisture, and being dissolved bears up
the Sulphur, and joins it to it self by the assistance of the Spirit. The use
of it is, to hinder Fire from consuming hastily the Oil: but if it exceed, or
grow exorbitant, it corrodes and destroys with its acrimonie whatsoever the
other Principles or substances can produce, or would preserve.

The last of Principles is the Earth, a naked substance, divested of all
manifest qualities, except Dryness and Astringencie. It Is usefulness in Mixed
Bodies is, by union with the Salt to cause Corporiety, and compactedness,
taking in to it is assistance so much of the liquid Principles as is necessary
for the Composition. By this Description of these Five Principles, you may
perceive, that you are not to understand common Water, nor Spirit, nor Sulphur,
nor Salt, nor Earth, in the ordinary acceptance, as if the Sulphur and Salt,
etc. were the same that are every day in Domestic use; but only in an
Analagous Sense, in regard of the likeness and correspondency which they have
with those common substances from which they are denominated; for, upon this
account only those names are taken up.

Upon the whole matter therefore, it is evident, that the Blood and Body of
man, and of other Animals, and the Bodies of those Vegetables and Minerals,
etc. of which Remedies are made, have one and the same substantial Principles
whereof they are constituted, and into which they are to be resolved only by
the Art of Chemistry, and the knowledge of them cannot be sensibly manifested
by any other means; therefore seeing the new Doctrinal Principles of the
Helmontians or Chemists, are exactly consenting with those substantial
Principles of Bodies, which by Artare made obvious to our Senses, and
manifestly one and the same, it is left to any indifferent man to judge, which
of the two sorts of Principles are most conducible to the Practice of Physic;
whether the old ones, founded upon Four humors, which are no Parts of us: or
the new Ones here enumerated, which our Senses, by the help of Chemistry,
Demonstrate to us, to be Parts really ingredient in the Composition of our
Bodies.

And as touching the Invention of Medicines proper for the Case of every
Patient, certainly he who is able, by acquaintance with the operations of
Nature, to comprehend the Phenomenon which usually follow the Excesses and
Defects, the Exaltations and Depressions, Fixations and Volatilisings,
Digestions, Fermentations, Meteorisms, and other Motions (exorbitant, or
regular) of any of the Principles here laid down, must not only best understand
the Constitutional state of a man's Body, and his Disease in the Causes of it,
but likewise the Constitution and power of every Drug, Mineral, Herb, or Root,
etc. that is to be made use of for remedy; and so by seperating those of the
Five Principles which are unfit to be continued in the preparation of any
Plants, or Minerals, etc. or by altering and meliorating them in the Process, a
Medicin and Method of using it, may be properly accommodated and suited,
according to the exorbitancie, or Malignan^ie of all or any of the said Five
Principles, which contribute to the causation and continuance of the Disease.
For want of this looking to the Internal Principles and Proprieties, both of
Diseases and Medicines, it is, that so many have been long in Physicians Hands
as incurable; for, the old Dronish Stationary Method of Authors leads them to
look after supposed Humors, and Hot, or Cold Cookeries of the Shops for
Draining them, and a Qualifying or attempering of Qualities, by the damnable
Rule of Contraries, which is destructive in innumerable Cases, and ineffectual
in the rest that are of any difficulty; And as for the more facile Cases, which
arise either from accidental Discrasies and Disorders, or from the intestine
Motions of Particles in the Mass of Blood, at or about the Equinoctial and
Solstitial Returns of the year, or through variations of Weather (wherein most
of the Galenists desire most to deal) that saying of Hippocrates may very well
be applied to them, Naturae sunt Morborum Medicatrices, strength of Nature, a
good Nurse, and Kitchin-Physick, after an Evacuation or two, and a little
patience, sets the Distemper packing out of good-habited Bodies, but in others
the Chronick Disease only retires till another Season; and so, the Incomes of a
double Harvest (Spring and Fall) upon this Account, out of most great Fam^lies,
are very much for the advantage of their learned Worships. In the mean while,
they have little leisure, or lust, to enter upon a course for examining old
Principles, a rectifying, or cashiering old Methods, and an accommodating the
Profession with new, and new and better Medicaments, by Analyzing the Bodies of
Minerals, and making another kind of Scrutinie into the Natures of Plants and
other Vegetables, than by considering outside Qualities, as Hot, Cold. etc.
For, it is a shame to see how little is known of the Inward Essences and
Proprieties of Herbs, or has been done about discovering the Faculties of the
other Medicaments, for these two thousand years past: yet the Learned (so
called) have been content, to let matters go as they are; and were it not, that
God has given an Industrious Spirit of Inquiry to others, whom they upon all
occasions brand, and seek to suppress, little Advancement would be made of the
Art of Physic in the future; and we should be to seek of Noble Remedies, which
are now every day in a Course of Improvement, and the perfecting of them is
exceedingly wanted, for the quelling of those Exotic Venomous Ferments, which
get ground apace, and are the Parents of those Monstrous rebellious Diseases,
which start up in new Disguises almost every year. So much then for Demolishing
the old, and receiving new Fundamentals in the Profession of Physic.

CHAP. VIII. An Offer of diverse other Particulars Considerable, in order to the
Practice of Physic.
NOw lest any should yet object; this discourse against old things does not
sufficiently establish things new in their place; If we give over the Notions
about Elements, Qualities, Temperaments, Humors, and Complexions, in the Bodies
of men, and in Diseases and Remedies, we would have somewhat else that is solid
whereon to ground a proceeding in Cure, let me (besides the five Principles
already mentioned,) offer unto you such other Particulars as will very much
subserve also to the purpose: In the description whereof I shall be but brief,
though a great Volume would be little enough to lay them out, in a due
proportion to the worth and weight of the matters.

1. There is to be considered in every Thing (Diseases as well as other things)
a Seminal, and Specific Power, whereby it has a subsistence, and peculiar
Properties and Operations, which distinguish it from others, and qualify it,
either for a producing its Like, or for exerting its vigor and activity in or
upon others; This is the Root, and those that the Schools call Qualities are
the Flourishes, and indeed but accidental Effects and Products of its force,
not manifestations of its nature; for, an effect which we call Hot or Cold, is
many times wrought by a thing which is not properly either, but rather as to
outward appearance seems to be of a nature contrary thereto, as might be made
evident by numerous Instances: To this it is which Physicians ought to have
respect in the inventing of every Remedy, and the Calculating of every Case of
Curation that comes before them; and the not knowing, or else the not applying
themselves to this, is the reason, why relying upon other Notions, they so
often miss the mark, spending their Inventions in the Culin^ry Conceits of
Heating and Cooling, etc. while in the mean time they dig not to the root of
the matter, but neglect the Essential Q^^ddities both of Remedies and Diseases;
And hence it is, that so few Diseases are cured, besides those which Nature
Naturae sunt Morborum Med^catrices. Hippoc.
her self is able to cure, with the help of a little Customary Evacuation, and
a few Doctoral Visits, and Chips in Pottage, and Time; which in the common
Cases (as I have told you) will do All with the help of such stuff as is
usually dispensed in the Shops, because abundance of Diseases there are latent
in the Body as to their Seminal Causes, which break out, some of course at
certain Seasons of the year, others upon certain Occasional Accidental Causes,
as Alteration of Weather, Diet, Drinking, and some one or other disorder of
Living: and such Diseases do for the most part, with a little patience, and
help of Nurses, without that wicked way of Bleeding, and other
excarnifications, retire of their own Accord, and of their own Accord return
again at the like Seasons, or upon accidental Motion of the like Occasional
Causes, because Physicians seldom design, or if they would, seldom know how to
prescribe Remedies of a Fundamental Nature, such as are able to penetrate and
pursue a Disease into its darkest Center of retirement, and there extinguish
his Seminal Power, that he may grow no more upon the Body: And hence it is,
that the Scholastic Road of Practice is in tough Chronick Diseases but mere
Practice, and a running of the Round, to the great dishonor of so noble an
Art: And were it not that other men who are too often in contempt termed
Empericks, have had notable successes in Curing innumerable Cases, which others
had turned off as incurable, the Credit of our Profession had long since fallen
to the ground. -- The difference betwixt the Scholastic men and Us, is shortly
this; Their Doctrine is founded upon Elements, Qualities, Contrarieties,
Mixtures, Humors, and old Medicines; We insist upon the Internal Seminal
Principles of Diseases, the manner of their Production, their Causes of
Adaptation, their Affinities, Consents, Diversifications, and proprieties, with
a perpetual Improvement of Medicinal Inventions, by the Preparations,
Exaltations, and Appropriations of the Sublimer and more refined sort of
Remedies; because they may be administered, and do their work, without respect
to Qualities and Contrarieties, aiming at the very Quiddities of Diseases, as
they flow from their immediate Essential Causes. It were endless to reckon up
the Non Successes of the common Methods and Medicines which are proportioned to
the Conceit of first and second Qualities and Temperaments; Witness their Fumes
and driers for Catarrhs; their Issues, their Heaters in Epilepsies,
Convulsions, and Vertigoes; their Humectators and Coolers in Hecticks; their
Analepticks, Nutritive Messes, Lick-pots, and Pectorals, destructive in most
Consumptions; their Drainers in Dropsies; their Bleeding in Agues, Gouts, and
in many other Cases; their Binders in Fluxes; not to name any more, by which
the greatest part of Patients are very little relieved, or else made much
worse. And if it were convenient, a large Catalogue of Persons might here be
inserted to confirm it: but the weekly miscarriages upon this Account call
aloud for other Methods and Medicines, and another kind of Philosophy or
knowledge in things Natural, than the Scholastic ones which have been received
of old, to reach the new diseases of this Age in the very Center of their
Proprieties and Essentials, and to discern them through all their strange
Phenomenon or Appearances.

2. Consider also, that whereas the Of Digestions.
Schools assign but three sorts of Concoction, or Digestion of Aliment; the
First in the Stomach; the Second in the Liver; the Third in each part and
particle of the Body; they are neither copious enough in the number, nor
distinct in the Description; for, we cannot but (with Helmont) enlarge the
Digestions as to Number, and specify them in other Terms. The First Digestion
therefore we say is in the Stomach; the second in the First Gut called
Duodenum, where the Felleous liquor of the Gall mingling with the Chyle,
changes the acidity which was bestowed on it by the Ferment of the Stomach,
into another Substance full of Volatile Salt, whereby it is fitted for a
further Process. The next Digestion or Concoction, the old Stagers will needs
have to be in the Veins of the Mesenterie as preparatory to Blood, and in the
Liver as the Finisher of it; and to this, Helmont agrees, but the latter
Experiments of Anatomists show, that the Liver has no share in that work; and
there is cause to believe, that the third Concoction is elaborated in the
common Receptacle invented by Pecquet, which is seated at the Root of the
Mesenterie near the Loins; after which it is conveyed by the Ductus Chyliferi,
near the Backbone, through the Chest, up to the Subclavian Branches of the
Vena Cava, where it mixeth with the Blood, and with its stream passes to the
Heart; and there being impregnated with the noble Ferment of that Vessel, it
becomes Blood, and puts on the Principles of Vital Power, which I may call the
Fourth Concoction. The Fifth Concoction is in the Arteries, where its
Spiritualisation and vitality is perfected. Then in course, according to
Helmont, follows the sixth Digestion or Concoction, performed in all the
Members, which the Galenists made to be the Third; but neither of these
opinions may pass for current, because before the Blood is distributed to each
Part or particle, it passes under more operations and Elaborations, as it
circulates through other Vessels, which I look upon as so many additional
Digestions and Fermentations. The Anatomists pretty well agree upon this
general Circulation; and it is but reason; but in what order, it circulateth, it
matters not to our Purpose; it suffices me to observe, that first or last it
visits every Vessel, as the Lungs, the Brain, the Liver, the Spleen, the Reins,
and the Testicles, as well as the other aforenamed; and in every one of these
it is impregnated with some one power or other, which none of the other could
bestow; and so out of all these Digestions in the several Vessels, there
results as it were a conspiration of Powers, which become all united in one
Point of Vitality within the Mass of Blood, for the maintenance of a vigorous
state of health within the Body. Now that which occasioneth a great Defect in
the Practice of Physic is, that Physicians are too narrow and short in their
thoughts about Digestions, and do not consider the nature of Diseases, as they
spring out of the Enormities, or the Defects, which are incident to every
Digestion respectively; which is a subject too large to be insisted on in this
Place, but might be very well worth the Discussing, by any that would engage
his Pen, for Digesting a new Body of Physic in a just Volume; than which
there is not a more necessary Work under Heaven.

3. Great regard likewise is to be had to those Energetical powers which God
has Of Ferments.
implanted in every Vessel, whereby the work of Digestion in each of them is
accomplished; and these Powers or Faculties we call Ferments or Levens, because
though a Ferment be but (as it were) indivisibile Quid, a very small Thing, of
a Spirituous and almost incorporeous Nature, yet it is able to leven, that is,
alter and qualify with a peculiar Tincture whatever is brought to it for that
purpose, by the appointment of Nature. Thus the Ferment or Leven of the
Stomach, mysteririously seated in that part, has a peculiar Power of
Chylification, and may be called the Master Ferment, because it prepares All
for the other; and the supreme Moderator of the other Ferments, because it has
an Influence for Good or Ill upon them All; for, if this be infirm, the rest
are immediately languishing throughout the Body; which made Helmont assign the
Stomach to be the principal seat of the Soul; and we see, that in sicknesses,
it is the first that is out of order, and the last that is recovered. If it
sends away the Chyle imperfectly digested, the next offices that receive it one
after another, cannot make their Successive Digestions so complete as they
otherwise might (for, the latter Digestions amend not the errors of the Former)
and thereby Crudities or Excrements are still heaped up, to the weakening even
of the Ferments themselves, so long, till being tired out with labor in vain,
they can do no more service to the Body; and then by degrees it draws on to
death: And thus many times the sicknesses which are felt in remote Parts, the
Stomach is primarily in fault of; and the Ferment of it being rectified, the
other Ferments also under its command share in the good of its recovery, and
make a shift (if not too far evigorated) to recover of themselves. In like
manner, on the other hand, if the subserving Ferments be at any time faulty,
they recoyl upon the Stomach: Thus, if in the second Digestion, the Duodenum
fail in his Duty, through want of the Felleous liquor to assist it, or through
any other Cause, many times it regurgitates, and putting the Pylorus into a
Fury, it crucifies the Stomach, causing Nauseousness, Eructations, Pains,
Vomitings, etc. The like may be said from the other, till you come to the
Heart, where the observation of its Ferment, when debilitated, evidenceth its
power of reflection upon the Stomach; for, be it debilitated or disordered,
either by excess of Joy, or Fear, or Sorrow, or Venery, or any thing that
causes a dulling, or dissipation of its Native Ferment, you see it enjoys not
it self, but loses its Appetite. Nor do they hurt the Stomach only, but
prejudice likewise one another, there being a marvelous Consent betwixt them
All, as there is betwixt the Wheels of a Watch or a Clock, because they set one
another a going, and if any one be out of order, the rest are at a stand, and
rather hinder than advance the Motion of their fellows. These are they, which
abounding with an exalted Salt, Sulphur, and Spirit, are exceeding active, and
continually busied in Fermental Action, for carrying on the Works of
Sanguification, Nutrition, and Vegetation, for a conservation of the Archeus in
its Vital Function in every Part and Particle: And thus those Noble Operations,
which Aristotle, Galen, Avicen, and their Followers attrib^^e to Heats
implanted in the several Parts and Vessels, are the effects of these Spirituous
active substances called Ferments, which never cease from their activity, but
bestow their Energie upon the Alimentary Juice, as it passes through all the
Shops or Offices of Digestion, by making it of a Volatile Nature, fit for the
eliciting and generation of Spirits, and of that generous Liquor with which the
Nervous and Musculous parts are irrigated and enlivened: To this agrees that of
a learned and ingenious Author of our own, in his Anonymous Treatise lately
published De Ratione Motus Musculorum; who in his sixth page, treating of those
Spirituous Liquors, with which every part and particle of the Body does abound,
says they are elaborated out of the Alimentary Juice as it passes through the
several Offices, and so become endued with various and distinct Natures, pro
varid cujusque partis Temperie, ac Fermenti in ipsd peculiaris ratione, that is
to say, according to the various Temper of every Part, and the nature of the
Ferment which is peculiar thereto. From whence it necessarily follows, that if
any of the Ferments be out of Order, the Body grows Spiritless, dull, tiresome,
or unapt for Motion; Or if they be defunct, that they cannot at all perform the
Duty of their respective Digestions, then all runs to ruin by an ill Habit or
Consumptive Atrophy, because the nature of the Archeus and of those Ferments
which attend it, in the solid parts, is such, that if the Alimentary Juice has
not been elaborated as it ought to be in every shop, as it passes from one to
another, it comes to the last Digestion so imperfect, that instead of being
assimilated to the Solid Parts, Nature rejects it as useless, and so it turns
to vicious Excrement; whereupon the Ferments implanted also in the solid parts,
wanting fit Matter to work upon for a good purpose, and not knowing how to be
idle, begin to take ill Courses, and by reason of their restless activity, do
prey upon the several Parts wherein they dwell, and so by degrees consume the
whole Body to a Sceleton; which too often falls out now a days, because of the
Universality of Scorbutic and Venereous Ferments among the Sons of men, than
which nothing is to be imagined more destructive of the Native Ferments and
Digestions of the Body.

In such Cases as these, when the respective Ferments are languid, and cannot
digest the Alimentary Juice as they ought, the more Nutritive the Food is which
men eat, the more mischief they run into, because it affords more Nourishable
Matter than the Ferments are able to impregnate or make Volatile, to be
assimilated unto the Solid Parts; and so the more men lade the Body with the
best meats, the more of Excrementious matters are stored up in every Part, and
so much the more pernicious, because the Corruption of the best is the worst;
by which means nature is rather oppressed, or suffocated, than comforted. Hence
it is, that so many persons, in Consumptions especially, are even killed by the
Kindness (or rather Folly) of their Physicians and Friends, who never think
they do well, longer than they are prescribing and giving them high Nourishing
D^stillations, Broths, Jellys, and I know not what Messes, besides the Pectoral
Syrups, Electuaries, and the like, which advance the Disease, and Patients
toward a final Destruction, under pretense of Restauratives; whereas they ought
in that and many other Diseases, to lay aside these things, and their Notion of
Cure g^ounded upon Contrarieties, that Inanition indicates Repletion, an
Emaciated body a rich Feeding; and to mind rather in the first place a reviving
of decayed Ferments and Digestions; which being effected by proper Remedies,
and by subtracting so much Aliment, as would otherwise clog them, and cloy the
Shops of Digestion, then Feeding falls in properly, forasmuch as Nature having
recovered her Fermental Force, knows how to make use of the Alimentary juice
again, and improve it; which she will do of course, if she be prudently (i. e.
gradually) supplied, and will immediately repair the loss of Flesh, and of the
rorid Succulencies, in the Body. Thus much of Ferments in general: For, to
treat of them in particular, with their several Seats, and the mutual
Dependencies and Consents which they have with each other, and what Doctrins
may thence arise, for Direction in the practice of Physic, is a Design too
copious for this Time and place: only, let me observe, what Mr. Boil says,
Experim. ph^^os. pa^^. ^. p. 44.
That he who thoroughly understands the nature of Ferments and Fermentations,
stall probably be much better able than he that ignores them, to give a fair
Account of diverse Phenomenon of several Diseases (as well Fevers, as others)
which will perhaps never be thoroughly understood, without an Insight in the
Doctrine about Ferments. The truth is, scarce any Disease is to be understood
without it; and therefore the Doctrine of the Schools having been unacqu^inted
with it, must needs be insufficient also in respect of this; and their Remedies
useless, because they reach not beyond Humors and Qualities, and are not able
to penetrate so deep, as to relieve Nature in such profound and mysterious
Desiciencies, as we here speak of: Nor did any of the old Authors, in their
Discourses about the Method of Curing, aim at any thing like it.

4. I might assert also that Doctrine never Of Diseases in general.
Dreamed of by the Schools in former days, touching the Notion of Diseases in
general; for, they make a Disease to be no more but a mere Distemper in excess
of Quality; whereas Helmont, and Grembs, make it appear to be a real
substantial thing, inherent in that which they call the Archeus or Vital
Spirit, where it first has its beginning, and by this means the first
beginnings of Diseases are undiscernible, because they are actuated in and from
so fine and subtle a Principle as that which we call Spirit; and that is the
reason why Physicians so seldom Cure any Disease, which Nature with a little
time cures not of her self, because they look not to the Spirituous original,
be it either Hereditary, or Adventitious, but ground their Indications of Cure
upon the mere Products and Effects of the Disease, rather than the Disease it
self, or at the highest only upon Occasional Causes, which have no affinity to
the essence of a Disease. Upon this Account, I have seen them Purge a Patient,
and Bleed him (I know not how many times) over and over, supposing forsooth,
that by this means they drain away much of the inward Cause, which such
Remedies can never reach in its intimate recess; and suppose they could, yet
they would rather exasperate than pacify the Archeus or Vital Spirit, wherein
all Chronick Diseases are radically seated. And truly, in this matter,
Hippocrates was wiser than his Successors, in aiming at the essence of
Diseases, while he ascribes so much to that which he calls Spiritus Impetum
Faciens, or the Active forcible Spirit, as including the essentials of a
Disease; for, in that Vital Spirit (which we call the Archeus) implanted in any
part of the Body, lurk the difficult sort of Diseases; and till that Spirit be
pacified, or rectified, by a proper Remedy, or by some extraordinary benignity
of Nature, it is, in such Cases impossible to attain a recovery; -- And the
truth is, a Cure of this kind is not to be effected by any Remedy, which is not
invented and wrought by Rules, out of the best and most powerful Materials,
which are wont to be made use of for producing the Noblest Arcana; that is to
say, Medicines of as comprehensive and universal a Nature, as may by the help of
humane Art and Industry be devised.

And yet it is not to be denied, that there are many Diseases happen to be
difficult and dangerous, which having been at first irritated by Occasional
Causes, are removed upon altering or removing those Causes, by which the
irritation or offense was first given to the Vital Spirit. Thus those things
which Hippocrates calls Acre, Amarum, Ponticum, Acidum, Salsum, i. e.
Acrimonius, Bitter, Austere, Acid, or Saltish, becoming the Occasional Causes
of Diseases, it is the Physicians part to inquire into these, and to provide
suitable remedies; which though they be not of the Upper Form of A^canaes to
reach the Archeus, yet may allay his fury at a distance, when these Occasions
of offense are taken out of the way. And certainly, such considerations
touching Diseases in general, are in order to the Invention of Medicines, more
necessary to be entertained in this Age, wherein most mysterious Maladies are
naturalised within our Vitals, than the poor Notions so much doted on, which
lead not men beyond the thought of Qualities, Temperaments, and Humors: for,
these serve only against such distempers as are apt to wear off of themselves:
And thus (as Grembs says) Lib 2. ca. 1. De Morbis in genere.
Diseases sometimes are cured by Accident (that is, as we in English say, more
by good hap than cunning) if they be inclinable to be consumed and resolved of
their own Accord; but those which have fixed roots do elude and scorn Galenick
Remedies, whereupon through want of Remedy they become incurable Diseases; for,
a Remedy ought to respect that Instrument of the Soul called the Archeus, or
vital Spirit, which Ortus Imag. Morbos. p. 44.
Helmont says nothing can do but the more Mysterious Medicines, which are of
such a comprehensive Latitude as is little less than Universal: Or which may be
so deemed, at least in a Comparative Sense, by comparing them with the dull
Recipes of an inferior virtue.

5. I may spend time also in explaining the Qualifications and Effects of that
Of the Arch. us.
Vital Spirit called the Archeus, and prove, that there is such a thing
diffused through every Part and Particle of the Body, as director general of
all the works of Generation, yea and Corruption also; the great Exciter of all
Motions, being (as one describes it) a Thing very delicate to be conceived, but
is Grembs de Ortu Rerum, l. 1. cap. 7.
Medium quid inter Vitam and Corpus, and veluti Aura Nitens splendensque a kind
of Middle thing betwixt Spirituous and Corporeous, as it were a Luminous Air:
But for the more accurate description thereof, I refer you to Helmont himself.
Yet because it is the Reformation of the Galenists which I aim at, I shall not
omit to show, it was a thing apprehended by one of their own Authors, and
indeed the wisest of their number, I mean the quaint Fernelius. De Ahd^t. rer.
Cause. l. 2. cap. 7.
He begins thus, The proper signification of Spirit is Wind, in all Languages;
and whereas Wind is very powerful, and effects wonderful things, and is not
to be seen by our eyes, it has so fallen out through a kind of affinity and
similitude, that the name of Spirit is transferred unto every thing which falls
not under our sight, whether it be corporeal, or Incorporeal. Hence it is, that
the substance which is in Us, very like to subtle Air, undergoes the
Appellation of Spirit. But it is somewhat of a nature differing from Body and
Humors, which Hippocrates called (...), or Incitans, somewhat of an impetuous
force, not from the tenuity of its substance, but because it has a great power
of incursion, like Wind. So far therefore as it excites those impetuous
Motions, it is understood to have some affinity with the Nature of a Body; but
in as much as it cannot be seen, it draws near to an Incorporeal Substance;
whereby it comes to pass, that it is of a middle nature betwixt them, and
partakes of both. This Spirit is the Vehicle and proper seat of the Soul and
all its faculties, which perhaps you may properly call their Body: for so the
Platonists of old said, that a certain Body of an excellent nature, Perlucid
and Ethereal, is subserving to the Soul and its faculties, to the end that they
may be United with the Earthy and gross Body. Yea, and as if he meant to paint
our Archeus to the Life, he a little beneath says, Nature which is in that
Spirit, has obtained a condition more excellent and more divine than that of
Spirit. And presently after he adds, it must needs be a Thing different from
the Temperament of the body, and be constituted above the nature of a
Temperament, seeing it is the Author of life and all the Functions. The heat
which is in this Spirit is not of the common sort, (he says) but plainly
Divine and Heavenly, like the light or heat of the Sun. By this you see, his
description of the Archeus or Vital Spirit, exactly agrees with that which is
set down by Helmont and his followers.

Add to this also the sense of Heurnius in the beginning of his Lib. 3. cap. 1.
Institutions, whom (of all the Galenists) I reckon the man that saw most, next
to Fernelius, who defines this Spirit to be a kind of Ethereal Body,
elaborated out of the purest part of the blood, and changed into the Substance
of a very subtle Air, and it is the prime Instrument of the Soul, for
performance of all its Functions. To which I may add also, that it is the
Creator of the greatest distempers: for, the same Lib 7 cap. 7. Eu^q. Spiritum
Causam Continentem dixere.
Author says, that before Galen, that which we now call the Causa Continens of
a Disease was ascribed to this Spirit by Herophilus and his followers; because
when this Spirit in any part is extravagant, then a Disease arises, but when it
returns to good order, then the Disease is at an end. And the same Author, cap.
5. cites the Authority of Plato in Charmide, Ubi eleganter demonstrat omnes
morbos ex animo nasci, where he elegantly demonstrates, that all Diseases have
their original in this Animus, this Wind, this subtle Ethereal Air, this
Impetum Faciens of Hippocrates, this Spirit, or call it what you please; it
matters not what the Name be, if we agree about the Thing; Either the
occasional irritation, or the spontaneous exorbitancy of this, which we call
the Archeus, is the prime Cause of every distemper. And in his sixth Book, cap.
1. he says, that Argenterius, a learned writer of the same Tribe, endeavors
his utmost to prove, that a Disease first hurts the Faculty, afterward the
Action or Function. Now consider, that the Faculty is one and the same with the
Archeus or Vital Spirit, and to be separated by the conception of the mind
only; Facultatem nihil aliud esse intelligimus, quam substantiam partium
animatarum, By a Faculty (says he) we understand nothing else but the
substance of the parts which are animated; that is, in truth (say I) the
Archeus or Vital Spirit implanted in every part, which Fernelius before calls a
very subtle Aerous Substance, endued with faculty to put in execution this or
that Function for the service of the Body; but when it is infested, or enraged,
then to raise Tumults, Discrasies, and Disorders, to the detriment of the Body:
which exactly suits with the Notion of Helmont: And the use of it is very
great; viz. in all our Scopes about Curation of Diseases, especially difficult
ones, that we should raise our thoughts above the common Notions of Qualities,
Temperaments, Humors, and the like, and bend our Brains to a course of
Medicaments that are of a reach beyond those low conceits, and which will
extend their power to a rectification, and pacification of the Archeus, in any
of the Parts affected. Fernel. de Abd. rer. Cause. lib 2. Cap. 8.
Vix tu sane possis numerando percensere functionum genera quae supra
elementorum vires sunt, and quae nequaquam ad illorum temperaturam pertinent.
It is (says Fernelius) a hard matter to number up the sorts of Functions (or
Operations) which are beyond the powers of Elements, and which do in no wise
belong unto their Temperaments.

The consequence whereof therefore must be this, that we ought to look after
Causes more high, concealed hitherto from vulgar understandings, which the lazy
Doctors of the Schools heretofore never inquired into, but with ease referred
all that was beyond the common Doctrinals, to that grand Refuge of Ignorance
termed Occult Qualities, Proprieties, and Occult Diseases, for which no reason
(as they said) was to be given, because they had none to give of their own, nor
could find any in their out-worn Authors, and therefore thought they had no
reason to beat their Brains about the Business, as long as they could do their
own business without it. But enough of this, seeing it has pleased God so to
illuminate this Age, by the Industry of some few, after whose example some
others are perpetually engaging themselves in discovery of things, as to their
Essences and Causes, which heretofore had been locked up and kept occult, in the
dark Chaos of Pride, Ignorance, and Idleness; yet with a pretense of Learning.

6. I might insist also upon the Doctrine of Ideaes, how far they contribute
toward the Causation of Diseases, by their Influence upon the Archeus; as also
how Diseases are causable and curable by the force of Imagination; and what
effects are produceable by Sympathy and Antipathy; and make reflections
likewise upon the whole Doctrine of Magnetism; all which carry us above the
usual gross Speculations belonging to our Profession; but lest I should in such
discourses appear too Platonic, or Fanatic, in the opinion of such as
consider not, that all the Effects and Operations in this visible world have a
dependence upon the invisible, I forbear an Enlargement upon these particulars;
though I must tell them, they are of excellent use, and without any
Superstition, in the curing of Maladies, and do only conduct us out of the
common Road into the Inner Closets of Philosophy and Physic: For, that
Diseases are caused, and may be cured as well as caught, per radios
invisibiles, by invisible radiations or Influences, or by intermediation of
Corpuscles, Atoms, Effluviums, or flying particles, after an undiscernable
manner, is a matter now so far out of question, that he who will deny it must
first renounce his own knowledge of visible effects, and run cross to the
Observations of the wiser part of the world, and against the more Sublime
Conceptions of this Inquisitive Age.

The last Thing that I might insist upon in order to the practice of Physic,
is that which I had first in my Intention when I fell upon the penning of this
Book; and it is this Position, That there is in this Age somewhat of a venomous
disposition, or Malignancy (more or less) in all manner of Diseases, not known
to former Ages, which touching the work in general of Curing, is of a
consideration paramount to the old Notions, about which there has been so
great a scuffle in the Schools: So that there was never so much cause as now,
for men to consider Hippocrates his (...), which De Ab^rer. Cause. lib 2. Cap.
10.
Fernelius translates not quid Divinum as properly so, but quid Admirabile,
somewhat that is admirable or extraordinary in Diseases, as proceeding from a
more hidden Cause, whith is (says he) above the condition of Elements; and
works not upon the Temperament, but upon the whole Habit of the Body. But what
this Extraordinary thing is, I forbear to repeat in this place, because it is
sufficiently described in several of the foregoing Chapters, which discourse of
the Marvelous Change that is wrought in all manner of Diseases, by the
intervention of Verminous, Venereous, and Scorbutic Ferments.

CHAP. IX. An Examination of diverse old Doctrins which more immediately relate
to the Practice of Physic.
HAving with good Authority examined, and upon good ground rejected the old
Scholastic Principles of Physic, and substituted better in their places, as
much more conducible to the Art of Curing, it is now time to proceed to an
examination of the other Particulars, which more immediately concern the
Methods and Practices of those that would be reputed the only Methodical
Physicians; and here we shall have occasion to throw out diverse other
Doctrinals which have been hitherto received, and Abuses which have crept into
the Profession.

1. Let us cashiere the Hypercritical Doctrine about Critical Days; as childish
a Conceit as ever was owned by any Long Beards called the Children of men; for,
truly it is like the Children's game called Ludere Par Impar, Even and odd, and
yet the Ancients all are very grave at it, reckoning much upon even days and
odd days, except only Celsus, of whose opinion you shall have an Account by
and by. In the mean while know, that a Crisis H^urnius in Hippoc. Progn. l. 3.
is a changing of the Disease to a contrary state, that is to say, either to
better or worse, to life or to death; and the days to which such Mutations are
ascribed are called Critical days. The establishment of them was by
Hippocrates in his Aphorisms and Prognostics; and from him, Galen, and all the
rest of the Commentators have borrowed the Phantsie. They are supposed to be of
most use in the Curing of Fevers, and other Acute Diseases; yet some are so
vain as to extend them to the Hundredth, and the Two hundredth day, when
Diseases from Acute become Chronical; yea and they would yet spin out the
Patience and Purse of a Patient further than this, in expectation of a Critical
solution of a Disease by the benefit of Nature; which Doctrine being admitted,
serves for two purposes very well; First, to cloak the Ignorance and
Insufficiency of such, who sticking to old Rules of practice, have Authority to
hold Patients so many days in hand without releef, and yet be reputed never
the worse Physicians; Secondly to hide the Insufficiency of the old Art it
self, and of those Medicines that belong to it, that Patients may be trained on
to take more, and lay the blame of all upon a supposed rebellion of the
Disease, rather than an impotence of the Course of Remedies; which if it cure
not, yet must it be thought necessary to be continued, in expectation of the
day of Judgment, otherwise called a Judicatory day of Crisis: In the mean time,
the Apothecaries and the Nurses are bound to say Amen to the Business, and
impute the delay to the great Caution and Care of the Physician, who is said to
watch Natures Motions, but oftentimes lies gaping for the Motion of Nature so
long, till for want of being roused by some noble Remedy, she fall asleep for
ever.

But to go on; let me give you the sum of Hippocrates in his Prognostics about
this matter: There are in Acute and Feverish Diseases, which are reckoned by
days, some days called Decretory or Critical, in which Nature of her own
accord, without help of Medicin, does upon an odd day make excretion of such
noxious Humors asare separated by Digestion: Other days there are, called
Indiciarie or Significative, which are supposed to signify, by some precedent
sign, the coming of the Crisis upon a Septenary; as for example, they say the
Fourth day signifies what will fall out on the Seventh, and so you are to
reckon by Fours and Septenaries, till you arive (if there be occasion) at an
Hundred. Thus, Hippocrates dividing the week into two Parts, has digested it
into Quaternaries or Fours, which in making the Account are always
Significative of the Septenaries. In short, some days are reckoned by an odd
number, others by an even number. In his fourth Book De Morbis, he says, it is
deadly to administer a Purgative upon an odd day (which by many Instances and
Observations I know to be most false, and that in all probability Patients must
have either Died, or been the more difficultly Cured, had they not been purged,
or vomited upon such a day;) but upon even days he gives leave of Purgation;
yet confesses, that the Physicians before him did not think fit to observe
these things: but concerning this, see more in Epist. (...) 2. cap. 60.
Joannes Langius his Epistles.

The Commentator upon Celsus, a Hot man for Hippocrates, having reckoned up
these for Critical days in Acute Diseases, viz. 4. 7. 11. 14. 17. 20. 24. and
27. stops not here, but goes on to 31. 34 37. and 40. But let them reckon as
they list, it is a shame to think, that the world in two thousand years time
should be no better improved, in some men's opinion, than to admit of such
Conceits as these; that they can keep a Patient in an ordinary Fever twenty one
days without releef, till Nature her self, by her own strength, or her great
Enemy Death, come to give a release; and yet it shall be thought a wise piece
of Art so to carry the matter, and the Physicians learned enough, though they
be not Masters of so much as one noble Remedy, to give a Turn to the Disease,
but the Patient shall be learnedly left to languish, and nothing be done, for
fear forsooth of anticipating, or impeding a Crisis; whereas if a right course
were taken with proper potent Remedies, the neck of a Fever might be broken
long before it be spun out to the 21. or the 40. day, yea the sting of the
Disease might be taken out in the very beginning. I must confess, that what
Lib. 2 ed* ^, de Febr, na^u^a.
Grembs says of Helmont is very much; that he undertook, without Blooding, and
with allowing the Patient Wine, to remove a Fever in F^ur days time, by the
help of Diaphoretick Preparations; and that he thought any man unworthy the
name of a Physician that cannot do the like. As for Blouding, I have seen
enough of the wickedness of that practice in Fevers, and the Folly of fearing
to relieve the Patient with a little Wine now and then, to support the Spirits;
but it is not for any man to be positive in the number of Four days, who is
not Master of such noble Medicaments as Helmont was, that can incide,
attenuate, resolve, and take away the Occasional Cause in what places soever it
may lurk; yet I know, that by the time that the Fever arives at the first
pretended Critical day, which in common computation is the seventh, there are
Medicines to be had, with which the height and Fury of that dreadful Disease
shall be either taken off, or else a Judgment shall be pronounced what the
Event of the Disease is like to be.

Which being considered, it cannot but Nauseate any ingenious man, to read the
Superstitious Fooleries of Authors, and to see how they puzzle one another with
petty quarrels about the Doctrinal part of this sort of Criticisms; and it is
like to be good, when they cannot agree about the Causes of them, or any thing
else that concerns them; and truly, the Consequent of it is miserable, because
that one single pretense of waiting for Critical solutions of Acute Diseases,
has in all times, been an occasion of slaying at least two parts of that part
of mankind that has died of Fevers; for 'its a Fundamental principle with
some, that you are to deal with such a Patient only with Languid remedies
(chips in pottage) and leave Nature to shift of her own Accord to cure him, if
she can: And yet these are called Safe Doctors, though they do just nothing,
and can hardly make a step beyond Gascoins Powder, Magisterie of Perle, Bezoar
(which is generally counterfeit) Treacle-water, the cool Water of Sax: a few
Syrups, and one or two more Shop-Magistrals, with a Clyster; which the Boys can
tell the road of Administering, as well as themselves; and therefore it is but
reason that the Master Apothecaries undertake to practice without us, and (to
save the Patients Purse) seldom send for us till needs must, and even then also
the Apothecary might proceed as well alone; for, he knows the Summa, Totalis at
the Tail of all (as well as vulgar Mr. Doctor) to be but Blistring, Cupping,
and Pigeons, and the like Cordials as before; and so there is an end of the
story; but it concerns him to palliate all that has been done, by late sending
for a Doctor, who when he comes, does just no more; and what more can be done
for the poor Patient after this, but to leave him to his own good Nature, and
Gods blessing, by some happy Crisis to rescue him from the power of the Grave?
whereas all this hazard might have been prevented at first, by other kind of
Medicines and Methods: with which, ere long, a Course will be taken to furnish
the Nation.

In the mean while, it will be very necessary, Of Critical days.
for the information of our Countrymen, to descend a little to a view of the
odd Conceits of the great even and odd gamsters about Critical days.
Hippocrates himself was wiser than his Followers, in this one thing, that he
would not venture to assign the Causes of such days; only he gives notice,
that he in his own experience had observed them to fall out so, and thereupon
concluded there was an innate propriety in these days to produce such effects
more than other days. And Avicen says, he did well in this business, to
content himself only with Experience; but it is as lawful to object Exprieence
against it, that in our Age all things fall out as well upon the other days,
as upon those that he calls Critical. Nevertheless, let us see his ground for
his opinion: its no other than this, that he supposes a kind of Charm in the
Number Seven, and in a Computation by Septenaries, saying, that a Hippocr. lib.
de Carnibus.
Septenary is as it were the Law of Nature, after the example whereof all
things are dispensed; which suits just as well with the Law of Nature, as the
Conceit of another Naturalist does with his, viz. Aristotle, who trips up
Hippocrates his opinion with a Trez or Trey (as we pronounce it) saying,
Aristor. lib. 1. de ^^lo, cap. 1.
that a Ternary is as it were the Law of Nature, whereby all natural things are
disposed. Nevertheless, Hippocrates carries it with his Successors, who in the
afore-cited Book says, man's life is dispensed by sevens. But it is to be
observed, that whereas in his Epistle to his Son Thessalus, he gives no reason
for this but the necessity of Nature; so in his Book de Aevo, having promised,
that he would in time give other Reason by particular explanation, he wholly
neglected the performance, and tamely resolves the whole evidence of the matter
into his own observation and experience.

Now though the grand Leader was so shie and timorous to venture upon giving a
Reason, yet the Followers have been more hardy: some have assigned one Cause,
some another, and so it is like to come to somewhat, when the prime Dictators
can agree upon Nothing. The Followers of Pythagoras referred the Cause of
Critical days to the mysterious power of the Number seven, which odd number
(they say) is more potent than an even number: For (they tell us) although
number be not a substance, yet it has a substantial effect upon things from a
cause unknown to us: that is, ignotum per ignotius decernere, to determine an
unknown thing by a thing more unknown; which Doctrine of theirs, touching
number, is repeated by Galen 3. d^ diebus Decretor^is cap. 8. and 11.
, and by him well enough refuted.

But he lapseth afterward himself as fondly as the Pythagoreans, and falls in
with the Astrologers, ascribing the Critical days to the Motion of the Stars,
especially of the Moon, as their principal Cause. To which I say no more but
this in short; If it were so, then the Squares and Weeks of the Moon would
always concur with the Quaternious and Weeks of the Disease; but this very
rarely falls out. Moreover Fracastorius, in a particular Treatise which he set
forth upon this Subject, says, If the Moon has any Power, it must be by
reason of her celestial Light and Heat; but her Light does not send forth Heat
on one day more than another, but only as it is more or less reflected upon the
earth; which happens in the Sun, when he is nearer, or his beams more direct;
in the Moon, when she receives more Light from the Sun, which falls out when
she is more remore from the Sun. If this be true, it follows then, that seeing
she is on the eighth day more remote than on the seventh, and consequently has
more Light and Heat, we ought to conceive the Eighth day more likely to be
Critical than the Seventh.

And yet Fracastorius, who in this argues sufficiently again Galen, committs
as gross an Error himself, while he assigns the Causes of Critical days to
the Motion of the Melancholic Humor, which (according to the old Phantsie) is
supposed to have its Motion every Fourth day by a peculiar propriety. Upon
this, as the Ancients vainly grounded the Circuits of Quartan Agues; so he
supposed it might serve his Turn to establish a reason thereupon, why the
Fourth day is said to be Critical. But suppose (as we have before proved) that
there is no such Humor in the Body of man as that which is termed Melancholy;
what then becomes of his Conceit about the Motion of it? And admit there were
such a Humor, it would be hard to prove the Motion, none of the old Grecian
Writers having ventured to give any account for it but their own Word and
Authority. Therefore he might have done better to assign no new Cause at all,
when he contradicted Galen, but to have been silent, and to have labored rather
to excuse Galen, as Med. Princ. hist. lib. 6. q. 11.
Zacutus (the great Galenick Jew) has endeavored; for, to save the credit of
Galen for falling in with the Astrologers about this matter, he says there are
so many things in that Book wherein Galen is supposed to deliver that opinion,
which are vain, false, and unworthy the wit of Galen, that he cannot but
conclude it to be none of his, but altogether Spurious and Illegitimate.

But the most ridiculous of all is that of Tract. de Dieb. Decret.
Amatus, and Cartagena, de sign. dier. Decret. c. 18. who both of them had
recourse to Musical Notions, the Concent, and proportions of numbers; and as
among those Numbers some are Dissonant, and others Consonant, so (say they) it
happens in days of sickness; therefore the days D^ssonant from the first day,
by reason of the cause of disagreement which they have therewith do stir up
Nature to a Contention; but the days Consonant to the First day, by reason of
the likeness which they have therewith, are disposed to quiet, and so do not
provoke Nature to a Contest, and by consequence do not stir up a Crisis. Which
is an odd kind of Riddle, to say no more. But this confirms what has ever been
observed, that one Absurdity begets a Thousand. That one Phantsie of
Hippocrates about Critical days has set all his Followers a madding to give
Reasons for them; and so they are all lost in a Fog.

Therefore Asclepiades warily considering the matter, said it was a vanity to
seek after a Cause of Critical days, supposing them a mere Figment; and he
derided Hippocrates, for making some days Indicatory, other days Judicatory or
Critical: For, in no day (says he) because it is even or odd, is there any
danger more or less. This Judgment of Asclepiades is seconded very much to
purpose by Celsus, whom Heurnius and other notable Galenists reckon not
inferrior to Hippocrates. The truth is, he has taken out of Hippocrates
whatever is of moment, and digested it in his own Book, but he leaves him to
himself in the business of Critical days and expectations. And though Med.
Pri. Hist. l. 6. Quaest 11. p. 979.
Zacutus would fain persuade us, that what Celsus declares against Critical
days, is not according to his own mind, but that he relates it only as the
Sense of Asclepiades, yet (by his Favor) it is no such matter; for, Celsus is
very plain and positive in the Case, as will appear to any Reader, and I shall
here translate the place Verbatim, Celsus, de Re (...). cap. 4.
where you shall see he approves Asclepiades his Judgment in casting off such
days, and says jure repudiavit, he did well in repudiating them. The words
are these: Hippocrates, if a Fever abated upon any day besides a Critical, was
wont to fear a Return or Relapse. But Asclepiades lived in the time of Pompey
the great.
Asclepiades did justly repudiate this as vain, and said, there is in no day,
because it is even or odd, any danger, more or less. For, sometimes the odd
days become the worser. Sometimes also in the Disease it self the Course of
days is changed, and that day becomes more grievous which was wont to be the
calmer: Moreover, the Fourteenth day it self is an even day, upon which the
Ancients did lay so great a stress. Who when they contended that the eighth day
has the same Nature with the First day, so that the Second Septenary or Number
Seven ought to begin from thence, did thereby contradict themselves, in not
reckoning the Eighth, nor the Tenth, nor the Twelfth day, as the more powerful;
for, they attributed more to the Ninth, and the Eleventh. Which when they had
done without any probable reason, they passed from the Eleventh, not to the
Thirteenth, but to the Fourteenth. We find also in Hippocrates, that the Fourth
day is reckoned most grievous when the Patient is like to have his Critical
Deliverance on the Seventh. So also he says, that upon an odd day, the Fever
may be both more grievous, and a certain sign of what is to come. And in
another place, he apprehends every Fourth day as most efficacious in both
respects, that is to say, the Fourth, the Seventh, the Eleventh, the
Fourteenth, and the Seventeenth, whereby he passes from odd to the account of
Even. And yet here he holds not firm to himself, forasmuch as the Eleventh day
computed from the Seventh, is not the Fourth day but the Fifth. So it appears,
that which way soever we count upon number, there is nothing of reason to be
found in that Author. And what (I pray you now) could be uttered by so grave an
Author as Celsus, with more Tartness against Hippocrates his Phantsies about
Critical days? So that I fear Zacutus his eyes were not his own when he read
this P^ssage; but Baldwin Ronsseus in his Comment, says plainly, that Celsus
is clearly of one and the same opinion with Asclepiades, about this Business.

I might to these add a large Account of the Quarrels among Authors, about the
time from whence the computation of days is to begin, but I wave it: sometimes
a Patient (as we often see) becomes Feverish for two or three days, and then
it abates for three or four days more; and a few days after, the Fever comes
on in good earnest: Now, in such a Case, it were well if any could assign a
right time from whence the Computation should begin. Besides, admit a right
time be pitched upon from whence to compute, yet to what purpose is it to
reckon onward in expectation of a Crisis, whenas every small circumstance will
alter the Motion of the Mass of Blood, and the Pepasmus or Concoction of the
Morbifick matter, upon which the Crisis is supposed to depend? so that it shall
not come to pass on the Set-day according to expectation, and perhaps not at
all: For, I have often observed, that sometimes a Purgation, sometimes want of
Sleep, sometimes a little Broth, sometimes a little Cold, sometimes a slender
Invasion of Ill News, Grief, or Fear, and diverse other Accidents, have wrought
a marvelous sudden alteration in a Patient, so that all things being out of
order, what orderly Crisis (if any such Thing be now in Nature) can in reason
be expected? The Truth is, there are so many probable Rubs in the way to hinder
the process of the Pepasmus, that it is a wonder, if in the North-parts of the
world, where our blood is not so fine and brisk, nor the Air so benign, as in
warmer Climates, if ever we see in twenty years practice so much as one
complete Critical Solution: For (as Doctor Willis De Febr. cap. 9.
well observes) if any thing fall out which is not clearly conducing thereto,
the Crisis (if any be) proves vain and treacherous, seldom putting an end to
the Disease. For, admit that the Moon or other Stars did by their Influence in
part regulate the Critical motion (as Galen would have it wholly) yet the same
Doctor well notes, the critical evacuations are determined only by a
turgescencie of the adust matter; and that he shows may, pro re nata, fall out
sooner or later, so that there can be no certain time: And many times, I have
observed a cruel Disease spend it self, without any the least sign of a Crisis;
especially when the Physician has furnished his Patient with some commanding
Remedies; for, these either immediately accelerate some Mutation that is like a
Crisis, or else they need not the assistance of any such violent excretions as
use to attend a Crisis, to put an end to the Disease; which they are wont to
dissolve after a more easy and less perceivable manner, little, being to be
observed besides gentle Sweating. And as touching the uncertainty of Critical
days, Vallesius Contravers. M^d. and Philosoph. l^b. 10. cap. 2.
also is very positive, and says, if the Moon and the Stars do not govern
them, they must needs vary, either by a change of the quantity of the Matter,
or through an increase or diminution of the Patients strength: For, if in a
Disease which ought to be determined on the seventh day, you draw away, or add
but a little matter, you may cause the Crisis to fall on the sixth or eigth
day: Wherefore seeing proportion may be altered in each Constitution, or in any
Disease, it is impossible to six the same Critical days for all Fevers, and
Natures, and Countries, and Ages, and Seasons. And if so, then the certainty of
such days, and all the Doctrine about them, falls quite to the ground. To the
very same Sense also speaks Lib. 1. Epist. 35.
Langius in his Epistles, where he brings in Galen himself, confessing that
Critical days are uncertain, because of the various Concerns of the Morbifick
matter, through Accidents, etc.

This being so, it is very well done of Regius present Professor at Utrecht, to
free our Profession from such a parcel of perplexing Notions to no purpose, as
were left us in old Authors, touching this Critical Doctrine; For in the new
Foundations of Physic by him laid, he takes but slight notice of it, and
presently concludes in these words: In these Countries, Crises do seldom fall
out, both because of the Coldness of our Air, and because our Physicians being
furnished with more benign Purgers, do happily drain away the matter of the
Disease per Epicrasin, i. e. by gradua^ gentle Purgation, and so they ca^ry off
the Cause of the Crisis.

But of all others, I find Helmont most positive and powerful in the discussing
of this Point, in his Treatise De Tempore, where, after some other Discourse
about it, he adds this: I have always observed (says he) with diligence, that
there is never any Crisis at all, where the Physician being Master of his Art,
knows how to take away the Disease before the usual time of the Crisis is come:
For, as nature enjoys ordinary Motions, and is accustomed to them, and is
readily governed by the unity of the Motive Faculty, so when the whole Business
of a Disease rests only upon her shoulders, she endeavors at some times to stir
up a Crisis, which otherwise the goodness, or the badness of a Medicin or
manner of curing does anticipate, retard, or destroy. By this means fo^sooth
sometimes the Crisi^ that was expected on the Fourteenth day is prolonged till
the Fortieth. It is the part therefore of a good and faithful Physician, not
to give any regard to Crises; and it were better for the Patient to have been
without a Physician, if he be cu^ed by a Crisis; and so much the more, if his
Crisis were slower. But to what purpose is so great a Catalogue of Critical
days? s^eing it behooves a Physician to be so armed, as to be able to ^ame a
dangerous Disease, and shorten a long one; that is, extirpate it betimes, that
it may not be delayed in expectation of a Crisis. And the same Author, in his
book concerning Fevers Cap. 11.
, adds more to the same purpose: A good Physician ought not to regard Crises,
but rather to prevent them. For, Nature never intends a Crisis, unless it be
when she is left to shift for her self, and to bear the whole burden alone.
Therefore a true Physician ought to overcome the Disease before the usual Time
of Crisis, and so he neither expects, nor desires it. The Consequence then is,
that it must needs be very pernicious to hold up the pretense of Critical days
in the Profession of Physic, because the Physician is thereby enabled to
justify himself, although he do leave Nature to her self to struggle with the
Disease, while he laz^ly looks on, and with his formal visits only keeps Count
of days, and orders the common feeble Medicines, which have little power to
effect any thing considerable toward a speedy extirpation of the Disease; so
that of course the Patient ought to lie languishing, till time, rather than the
Physician, brings on a delivery. But of this I have said enough before, as the
great occasion of ruin in Acute Diseases; and a Cloak to the Ignorance of old
Pedantick Practisers; besides that it strangulates all thoughts of devising
more potent Medicines, or of introducing other Methods more agreeable to them,
and much more rational, than those which depend upon the Superstitious Fictions
of old heathenish Authors.

II. The next thing to be considered is Of Pulses.
the Doctrine of Pulses; which ought in part to be cashiered also, and in part
to be retained. I remember, when I first studied Physic, I spent much time to
understand the tedious Descriptions and Schemes or Tables of different Pulses
enumerated by Galen; but they serving for no end but vexation of the Brain,
ostentation of pretended Science, and to impose upon the world, it is meet to
reduce the useful part to a narrow Compass, that Students may not be confounded
about it in the future. The First that attempted this (if I mistake not, for I
have not the Book at hand) was the grave Spaniard Per^da. Since him, Greg.
Horst. I^stit. Med. Disput. 13. Quaest 1. Conciliator D^ff^r 82.
Horstius, as grave an Author as he, has done the like, and he brings in also
one reputed the gravest of them All, viz. Petrus Aponensis the Conciliator, who
shows how endless a matter it is to spin out so many Notions as Galen has done
about Pulses; for, (says he) after the same rate of Magis and Minus, they may
be infinite; therefore he reduces them to Ten in number; and that this is
sufficient, they both of them demonstrate thus: In every motion are to be
considered, 1. The Space by which the Motion is made, 2. The Time which is
consumed in the passage of the Space, 3. The Quiet or Pause which follows
both the Motions, 4. The Efficient Cause of the Pulse, 5. The Instrument
whereby it is effected. From whence arise Ten simple Pulses.

1. In respect of Space, or distension and contraction in the Space, a Pulse is
great, or little.

2. In respect of Time, to which the quality does answer, it is Swift, or Slow.

3. In respect of the Quiet or Pause, it is Frequent, or Rare.

4. In respect of the Mover or Cause Efficient, it is Weak, or Vehement.

5. In respect of the Place or Instrument whereby it is effected, it is Soft,
or Hard. And so these make Ten Primary Differences of Pulses. But if you
consider (or rather Phantsie) diverse Particulars in any one Pulse, or compare
and mingle the Pulses with each other, then you may proceed in Infinitum; and
there he turns us off to Galen; and thither you may go, if you delight in
Quirks and Quillets, or have any time to throw away; where you shall find I
know not what delicacies of the Touch in distinguishing Pulses, so that you had
need have a Finger more delicate than ever was employed in the Touch of a Lute.
There you have that which is termed Pulsus Dicrotus, Caprisans, Interruptus,
Undosus, Vermiculans, Formicans, Vibrans, Convulsivus, Serrinus, Impar citatus,
Arythmus, Ecrythmus, Heterorythmus, and I know not how many hard words more;
which Modern Writers have been sick to think of; and Heurnius, in his
Institutions, having reckoned up some of them, counts it but time lost to
insist upon more; For (says he) reliquas Pulsuum Differentias prudens omitto,
I think it prudence to omit the rest. And Regius, in his new Fundamentals of
Physic thinks not Fundamenta Med. cap. 5.
the beforementioned worth the delivering, because (says he) they are in a
manner inobservable, and the nature of Pulses may be understood well enough
without them. The same prudence (no doubt) has guided his Brother Sylvius de
le Boe, Professor at Leyden, in his Disput. Med. 8.
Disputations lately published, to reduce the Doctrine of Pulses to a short
rational State, just after the same manner, as is done before by Horstius and
the Conciliator. And truly it was high time to reduce them, for the sakes of
young Students, seeing Galen and his Admirers (as Dr. De vulgi Erroribus, l. 1.
c. 15.
Primrose observes) had mounted them to above two Thousand differences. The
very Names of which alone (says he) if many should hear them, they would
immediately renounce the touching of Pulses; for, they would amaze and terrify
the ignorant, no less than if they were so many Magical Spells.

And when all is done, regulate the Doctrine of Pulses as well as you can, it is
fit I should tell the world, there is little certainty of Judgment to be made
by them of a Patients case, seeing every small Circumstance of Pulsus autem
ratione aetati^, s^xus, Temperamenti, deloris, and affectuum a nimi magnopere
variatur. So says Henricus Regius.
Hope, Fear, Grief, Diet, Drink, sudden Approach of the Physician, Friends, or
other Company, want of Sleep, and the like Accidents, will induce a notable
Alteration, so that I am resolved as little to credit my own Sense of the
Pulse, as a wise man would a Gypsy that crosses his hand to tell him his
Fortune; and I would build a Prognostic upon the one, almost as soon as I
would upon the other: which will be the less wondered at, when you shall find,
that even those Pulses which are reputed Mortal, may be felt many times when
the Patient, (though in the height of a Distemper) has been far enough from
Death. Therefore it makes me wonder, when I see how wondrous wise some would
make people believe they are, that will from a touch of the Wrist deliver
Oracles, and from thence pronounce Reasons to argue a Necessity of Bleeding,
and other Proceedings, when as nothing is more fallacious than the Pulse, next
to Urines; and yet neither of them are wholly to be neglected, but to be
reputed only Accessaries, not Principals, in the great work of Curation.
Whosoever conceives otherwise, and to put his Conceit in practice, ventures to
prescribe Remedies accordingly, shall always put the Patient to hazard, and
kill more than he cures.

3. Nothing needs a Rectification and Of Urines.
Improvement more than the Doctrine about Urines; for, besides the animadverting
upon ordinary Abuses of Inspection, and pronouncing Judgment thereupon, little
has been done heretofore to procure a Reformation, whereas it is the old
Doctrine it self that has need to be reformed, and no man ever yet attempted it
to purpose, except Dr. Willis, who finding that the Observations which concern
the practice of that Doctrine, were (as he says) In Epist. ante disser. de
Urinis.
either ill made, or not well digested into Method, that Method which is
delivered by most, seeming more Emperical than Rational, did therefore
undertake the Task, and has excellently well performed it. Of old, the
differences of Urines were recited barely, as they are wont to be variously
distinguished, according to their Color, Consistence, and Contents: Then, to
the several kinds of these they affix Pathological significations, collected
only out of more ra^^ Observations; while in the mean ti^e the causes of the
Phenomenon, or Preternatural Alterations in Urines, are not assigned a^ they
ought to have been; nor is the signification of Urines, applied to the Causes
of Diseases, but only to the Disease, or the Symptom, and therefore is
oftentimes fallaciou^ and uncertain; because the same Morbisick Cause, as also
the signification of the sam^ Urine, may at once mediately respect dive^^
Diseases and Symptoms. And therefore ^^ is necessary, that a Doctrine or Method
about Urines be instituted, above the vulgar Notions of Philosophy.

He chooses therefore another way to go to work, to give Us an Understanding of
Urines: he first thinks fit to anatomise them, by resolving them into the same
Chemical Principles, of which our senses tell us that other mixed Bodies do
consist.

1. Salt or Saltiness in Urines, which is percieved by Taste and Touch, and is
either Fixed or Volatile.

2. Sulphur, which is sufficiently testified by their Putrefaction and Stench.

3. Spirit; for according to the diverse plenty or prevalency of Spirits, Urines
do vary in their Hypostasis and Setlings, and do Putrefie sooner or later.

4. Water, or the watery part of the Urine; which though it abound more than
the other Principles (at least six to one) yet it cannot be so drawn away by
distillation, but that some particles of the Salt and Sulphur do ascend with
it and bestow on it an unpleasing Scent.

5. Earth and slimy dregs; as is sufficiently apparent either by Distillation
or Evaporation of Urine; For, when the other parts are exhaled, the Earth, like
a Caput Mortuum remains in the bottom.

These are the Principles which constitute the body of Urine, into which it is
by Chemical Analysis easily resolved: And it is out of the diverse combinations
and contemperation of these, that the Accidents of Urine do arise, viz. the
Quantity, the Color, the Consistence, and the Contents, which according to
Sense are the most remarkable things about it, and the principal objects of
Judgment by Urine. And besides these things there is nothing else considerable
in Urines.

After this he proceeds to show how the Colors of Urines are to be considered
and estimated, according to the different ingrediency of the said five Chemical
Principles; which being dispatched in a very delicate and particular manner, he
sums up the whole in general thus, in reference to Color; that the paler
Urines do all for the most part arise from too much crudity; and most of the
high colored Urines from Salt and Sulphur dissolved more plentifully, and
sometimes from adust recrements cocted in the Serum, or from the grosser
contents of the Urine. And yet the Colors notwithstanding may sometimes by
accident be altered, and appear otherwise than they ought to be expected from
the lesser or greater ingrediency of these Principles; but by these we are
directed to a much more probable way of Judgment than formerly, as from
Colors.

Then, in order to a right knowledge of the Contents of Urines, he that will be
a curious Inquirer, ought to resolve them into Parts, by which means he will
attain Medical directions of no little moment: For, in diverse Chronical
Diseases, it is of great concern to inquire into the distempers of the Blood
exactly, that the proportion of Salt and Sulphur therein contained, and the
temperature, may be rightly investigated. To this end, it is convenient
sometimes to evaporate Urines, or expose them to distillation; and sometimes to
Precipitate the Contents of them, or resolve them by Putrefaction. As
Evaporation and Distillation subserve much to the manifestation of the Salty
Principle; so Precipitation and Putrefaction do show the grosser Contents of
Urines, both as to weight and measure; only Putrefaction is wont to show the
several particles of every kind somewhat more distinct, and as separated from
one another; for, if you let the Urine stand still several days in an Urinal,
it will be very much altered both in the Color, Scent, and Consistence.

Thus much I thought necessary for giving the Reader a Taste of this new
Doctrine about Urines; which certainly is much more agreeable to Reason, than
any thing that ever was said before upon that Subject, and must needs be
abundantly more conducible to the practice of Physic, seeing it directs our
Judgment, not by mere outward Appearances, and bare Observations, as of old,
but by an accommodation of our Understanding to the real Principles which are
in Urines, the same as in Men's Bodies: from whence doubtless a more certain
way of Judgment must needs arise, than can be imagined by any other course
that may be taken, to judge by Urines concerning the State of the Blood and its
Diseases. I cannot therefore but commend that tract of Urines to ingenious
Practisers, as a more sure guide than any that they can meet with in former
Authors; and exhort them, by manifold Observations and Experiments in their way
of Practice, to follow the example given them, for the improvement of that
Doctrine, and the settling of a right Method in this part of Physical practice,
for time to come: And I hope it shall not be the less acceptable, as other new
things have been, because it requires more care and trouble, than the lazy
formal sort of Professors are willing to bestow; For, I have seen, that the
knowledge which comes by it will abundantly recompense the labor, by
discovering the Morbifick Causes in particular persons.

4. The reputed Oracles of our Profession, Hippocrates and Galen, are in the A
brief censure of Hippocrates and Galen.
next place to be inquired into; whom though we ought not to reject, but to
allow them the honor due to them, because they were men famous in their
generations, yet know they were but men, albeit, some have endeavored to make
Gods of them; and truly, but children in the Art, such as lived in the nonage
of true Philosophy and Physic, if they be compared with the learned of this
latter Age. I would not detract from them, because for some things we are
beholden to them, especially to Hippocrates; but it is necessary to be a little
brisk in expression, because the world is apt to dote upon old Authors,
especially when they hear of honors little less than Divine given to these
Erroneous Heathens: And some that speak lowest of them, say, they were
infallible in the Things which they have left us. I remember Jo. Langius, in
one of his Epistles, says as much of Hippocrates, that he was fallere ac falli
nescius, one that could not deceive nor be deceived; which saying he borrowed
out of Macrobius. But it is the humor of many men, upon the credit of other men
to fall a commending what perhaps they never saw, or did never understand, and
so the Commendation passes Customary and current from one to another, till the
generality even of the learned come to give up their belief to what others have
said; and so men happen to become famous Authors, as other men many times have
the good fortune to grow rich, though they never deserved it. And yet we cannot
but acknowledge these two were witty men, learned and able as the times went
then, and I do belive they were Masters of so much wit, that could they now
revive, and see what an Advance and alteration has been made in the state of
Physic, they would by common ingenuity be induced to quit their own
Principles, as very rude and insufficient, if compared with others: wherefore
we have reason with thankfulness to own what we find approvable in them, but
not to lie down sub magni nominis umbra, under the shadow of a great name, and
make an Idol of it; We should rather reject what runs to superstition, and not
pin the Faith of mankind upon the sleeve of Hippocrates, because others have
done so; And yet some there are who have been so bold, as to sift, and note,
and upon occasion reject him.

The most Oraculous parts of him are A Censure of the Aphorisms of Hippocr.
supposed to be his Aphorisms, and his Prognostics. As for the Aphorisms, we
find him tripping there at every three or four steps, when he comes to Points
of moment: the rest, which are true, do for the most part fall under the
observation of every Nurse, and so in such common things every She may be as
Divine as He. To clear this, it will be worth the while to take a brief view of
them. -- The First Book of Aphorisms contains only Rules which concern the
Physician himself, what Caution he ought to use in prescribing Diet, and
Purgation. The five first Aphorisms are of some moment, also, the tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth are good, which forbid feeding a Patient at the time of a
Paroxysm, and in the height of a Disease, which certainly neither the Patient
himself will do, nor any body else that has common reason permit, if he would,
or could feed, being in such a condition. The 22. is false in many Cases, and
destructive in others; for, it commands us to delay purging, till Crudities be
cocted; and the greatest part of them are incapable of Coction, especially in
the Diseases of this Age. The 24. which allows us but seldom to Purge in the
beginning of a Disease, and that with great Caution, is also very destructive;
for, if ever it be lawful to Purge boldly, then is the time, because the
Orgasmus or fury of redundant humors commenceth, and the Patient is then most
able to bear the Remedy. But the less regard is to be given to this Aphorism,
because it is directly contradictory to another in his second Book, viz. the
29. which is indeed more rational; where he injoyns us to Purge, if at all, in
the beginning of a Disease, because (as Heurnius well says upon the Text) it
gives a Revulsion to the raging Humors, and takes off their Fury: And this is
all that is considerable to be noted on the First Book.

In the second Book the First Aphorism of Note is the 10. which commands us,
before we Purge, to render the Passages passable. This concerns not us so much
in this Age, who have such noble remedies as will unlock the Passages, as well
as draw away the Humors, at one and the same time, and both these with much
kindness they will do: But it is very necessary to be observed by such as still
use the old Purgers, which are (more or less) of a violent and Malignant
nature; so that if the bad Humors cannot stir, the good Humors are forced, and
being more fine, run away like a Torrent, to the great impairing of the Body.
-- The 20. has nothing of certainty in it; which says, that young men whose
Bodies are laxative grow costive when they are in Age, and e contra. -- The 23.
which says that Acute Diseases come to a Crisis in fourteen days time; and
the twenty fourth, which pretends to describe a certainty of Critical Motions,
are fond and false, as I have already proved the whole Doctrine to be which
concerns Crises and Critical days. And truly, he before in his ninteenth
Aphorism confesses enough to overthrow all that Doctrine, saying, that the
Predictions of the Events of Acute Diseases are uncertain. -- The 36. says,
that Purgations in healthy Bodies, and in Bodies abounding with ill Juices, are
impairing of the strength and vigor: which is a kind of Riddle that none of the
Commentators can solve; for, if in both these Cases a Purge be pernicious, when
(I pray you) shall it be administered? But this may well enough suit with most
of the old Purgatives, which will sufficiently afflict bodies, be they Sound or
Sick; though God now has furnished us with such, as either in Sound or
Diseased bodies, will operate with facility and pleasure. -- The 37. agrees
with the former. The 41. says, they which are subject to Swoundings or
Faintings, die suddenly: which every days experience proves manifestly false;
for, no Affl^ctions are more ordinary and common than these, yet without any
such consequent at the Heels of them. -- The rest in that Book are most of them
agreeable to the common Dictates of every man's Mother-wit, that has seen any
common Accidents and Circumstances concerning the Sick.

In the third Book, the three first are little considerable; and from the Third
to the twenty fourth Aphorism, you have nothing but common Notions and
Prognostics about the effects of the various Turns of weather, and of the
several Seasons of the year, in causing Diseases; some of which Particulars are
false, others frivolous, the rest are and Lippis and Tonsoribus not a, obvious
to every one; and the whole is more fit for an Almanac than the great Monument
of Physic. The other which follow to the end of the Book, only tell us what
we all know, i. e. what Diseases are wont to befall Children and old People.

In the fourth Book, he begins with great-bellied Women, and says, if you
purge them, it may be done in the fourth month till the seventh; but not in the
First months, nor in the last. This might be an useful Caution in those days
when they had none but violent Purgers; but what is that to us now, on whom God
has bestowed more Delicate Means? Why is it, that Physicians permit women all
the time of their Childing, many times to labor and languish under a Load of
turgent Humors, and very few of them think it fit to venture a Purging? I do
here profess, that I have in the first months both Vomited and Purged them
frequently with Success, and so likewise Purged (but not Vomited) them after
the seventh to the very last of their Childbearing, and never did I find any
Inconvenience therein. And doubtless, others may do the same, if they please to
take pains in fitting remedies of their own for the purpose, and by this means
free women from those sorrows which (many of them) endure for want of such a
neat Assistance. But be sure to do it only with Remedies of your own
preparing, which a good Physician should always have ready at hand. -- The 4.
Aphorism says, Winter is for Purging, and that Vomiting ought to be prescribed
in the Summer. Till we have some good Reason for this saying, know that either
of them may be done either in Summer or Winter, with good Medicines. -- The 5.
bids us not Purge before, nor in the Dog-daies. -- The 6. and 7. relate to the
same Business: But know this, that delicate Vomitories and Purgatives may be
given at any Season of the year: yea more than this, I upon occasion
plentifully Purge my Patients in the Winter, though they keep Shop, or go
abroad about their Business: But this is not to be done by any one that is not
Master of the like Remedies. Far be it from me to mention this in ostentation;
but I cite every days experience, to show the frivolousness and uselesness of
old Maxims and Medicines. -- The 8. forbids Vomiting in a Consumption. But this
holds not; in some Consumptions, which are attended with a recourse of Serous
Matter to the Lungs, nothing is better than such a remedy. -- The 1^. says,
that to Vomit persons in the Winter that have the Flux called Lienteria, is
dangerous: And this perhaps might hold true still, if we had no other
Vomitories than what he had, such as white Hellebore, etc. but know this, that
in all Fluxes, nothing brings more advantage, both in regard of Revulsion and
other Reasons, than a good conditioned Vomit does in the beginning of Fluxes,
at any time of the year: but such violent Vomits as by Hellebore and the like
Medicaments, of which he speaks afterward in the 13. 14. 15. and 16. Aphorisms,
are not for the work. -- The 18. which says if the Patient's pain be above the
Midriff, he is to be Vomited; if beneath, then he ought to be Purged, is very
fallacious; and particularly, I avow it in the case of Pleurisies, in which
most Physicians do observe the Rule of this Aphorism. The 38. the 39. and the
41. deliver vain Things. One says, in what part soever most Sweat does appear,
there is the seat of the Disease. Another, that the part where cold or heat is
first perceived, is the seat of the Disease. Another, that if Cold and Heat by
Turns, frequently invade the body, it argues the Disease will be of long
continuance: than all which particulars, our constant experience tells us
nothing can be more fallacious. -- The rest of the Aphorisms to the 69. deliver
observations about Fevers, which suit with the Fevers of this Age, as ill as my
old Shoes would fit a Colossus; and some of them relate to Crises and Critical
days, which we have already thrown out of doors; and certainly with good
reason are these things to be slighted now, because the whole Scene of Fevers
(as has been already shown) is exceedingly altered; and therefore those
Aphorisms which were calculated for the Meridian of an Age so long since past,
may come in fashion again hereafter, when the Platonic year shall, in its
revolution, reduce all things to their ancient state. And yet some of these are
in part true; but they are those Aphorisms only which deliver the Signs and
Tokens of approaching Death, which will be one and the same, for the most part,
to the end of the world. -- From the 69. Aphorism to the end of this Book, they
give Judgment upon Urines; and so are very uncertain, as might be made
sufficiently to appear, could I insist upon every Particular. But this being
enough, to have run through the four first Books of Aphorisms, I suppose the
Reader is by this time sufficiently convinced of their uselesness, and informed
what to guess of the three other Books (for, they are seven in all;) therefore
I avoid them, that I may not be tedious, but do affirm them like the other.

Now lest men should turn tail at me, as a person singular and saucy, because I
presume with reason, to pass my Judgment upon that which has been accounted
the most creditable Piece of an Author so admired as Hippocrates; therefore to
show that I am not alone, and that others before me have taken the boldness to
censure him, I will bring in the learned Sanctorius, who has spent one Meth.
vitand. Error l. 1. cap 31.
Chapter to show, that the Aphorisms are not of such verity as men have cried
them up to be. He takes notice of the 41. Aphorism of the fifth Book, which
says, that if a woman take honey'd water, going to bed, and find wringing
pains thereupon in her Belly; it is an Argument that she has conceived with
Child: If no pains, then, that she is not with Child: which though Galen
endeavors to justify by giving reason for it, yet my Author proves his
pretense of reason to be of no value, and blames Avicen for pretending the
like. And besides Avicen, he tells of others that have labored hard to save the
credit of Hippocrates about this Aphorism; yet (says he) I have often tried
the Experiment, but could not observe any such Pains ensuing. He tells us also,
He denies that an odoriferous Fume received by the genitals of a woman, will,
if she be not with child, always penetrate up inwardly to the Nose; which is
avowed in one of the Aphorisms; because the passages of the Womb may be closed
not only by a Conception, but by a false Conception, by suppressed Menstruals,
by Fat, by Tumors, and by six hundred other Causes, as we know by Experience.
-- He reproacheth also that Aphorism which Lib. 5. Aph. 42.
says, if a woman with child has conceived a Male, She is lively colored in
the face, if a Female, then ill-coloured: For, who (says he) can defend this
Aphorism to be always true? How many women have we seen ill-coloured, being
great with a Male, and well-colour'd with a Female? In the 31. Aphorism
likewise of the sixth Book, if a woman with Child be taken with an acute
Disease, it is deadly; who can defend this to me, who have seen women sometimes
seized with acute, and very acute Diseases, and yet they have escaped?
Moreover, in the 79. Aph. of the fourth book, it is said, that sandy setlings
of urine be token the Stone in the bladder: No man of understanding would
maintain this, seeing such urines have been very often observed, without
suspicion of the Stone. In like manner in the 70. Aphorism of the fourth Book,
it is said, They whose urines appear troubled like the urines of Beasts, either
have pains in the head, or shall have; and yet we have seen many sick have such
urines, who never had a pain in the head throughout all the time of their
sickness. Ecce quam Hippocratis sententiae sunt aeternae veritatis! Lo (says
he) how the sentences of Hippocrates are of eternal verity! Galen therefore, to
save the credit of his Leader, would have it thus understood, that though they
be not all, yet they are for the most part true; and this excuse of his is
recorded in his Comment on the 58. Aphorism of the sixth Book, which says,
that if the Omentum the Kall slip out, it necessarily putrefies; where he
slubbers over the matter, saying, though it fall out otherwise, yet it is in a
great part true. But (says Sanctorius) consider the words of Galen well which
follow, who says, when this Aphorism and the rest of them are said to be of
eternal verily, it is to be understood in a Figurative form of speech that they
are so, though the very things do not come to pass: which is as much as to say,
that only in a Figurative Sense they are true, but in a real Sense they are not
so. And what is this (I pray you) but to give away the Cause, and the credit of
the Aphorisms in a fine way of speaking? Therefore I cannot but wonder how
Galen, who first cast this Figure in favor of Hippocrates, has been able ever
since to conjure all posterity quite out of their Senses into an admiration of
those Aphorisms, which may (many of them) like the Oracle of old, be taken in
both constructions, Pro or Con, (Aio te Aeacidem Romanos vincere posse) for,
men have been exceeding tender of touching them, and mighty careful to save the
reputation of them, because they were his, who had the luck to be cried up for
Prince of the Profession, and it has been the business of Commentators ever
since to hold him up; as if the credit of Physic must needs fall to the
ground, if that man were detected of Error, who in an ignorant Age, imposed
upon the world his own Dreams, as matters of Eternal Verily. I must profess I
would not willingly detract from the Ancients; Amicus Hippocrates, Amicus
Galenus, sed Magis Amica Veritas; we ought to have a greater value of Truth
than of Hippocrates, or Galen, especially when it is clear, that the holding up a
reverence to them is a Prejudice to Truth, and has been the main Remora to the
advancement of so noble an Art as that of Physic. Agitur de Corio Humano;
Men's precious lives are at stake in the business, and it is the general
interest of mankind that I have a regard to in this liberty that I take, which
ought to be preferred before the Interest of any particular Corporation, or
Sect of Physicians whatsoever. In my younger days, I came at first to the
reading of these Aphorisms with as reverend a regard as any of them, and since
that, made it my business to For ease to the memory, Ralph Winterton of
Cambridg pub^ished them in verse both Greek and Latin. An. 1633.
say them by heart; by which means being enabled to produce them, or ken them
to my self, upon any occasion, I have had the greater opportunity to observe
the uncertainty and fallaciousness of them: nor do I find less Frailty in those
other Works of his which are counted the most legitimate.

As for the three Books of Prognostics, so much as is true in them, is of no
higher a A Censure of the Prognostics of Hippocr.
nature, than what falls under the observation of the meanest persons that have
to do about the sick: which makes me wonder, that so wise a man as Heurnius,
should bestow these Flowers to adorn them; that they are most absolute, and
full of Divine Oracles, and never reprehended in the current of so many Ages;
And yet now for all this, they ought not to be used more kindly than they
deserve: For, perceiving in the course of Practice, that many of them, and of
the Coacae P^aenotiones, did fail me, I could not, at first, tell what to think
of the rest; but afterward, having the sum of them reduced into order under
certain Heads Alphabetically, after the manner of Common Places, ready to be
produced, I began to compare them upon occasion in observing the Sick, and by
this means I am the better able to advise others to be wary how they trust
them, because they have so often deceived me.

In the First Book, the First notes the Posture of the Face in Acute D^seases;
If Nose be sharp, Eyes hollow, Temples fallen, Ears cold and contracted, Skin
dried, Color Text, 3.
pale, black, or leaden, it is a dangerous state, and pray you who is ignorant
of this Truth? Not an old woman in all the Town but will seal to it. And yet
out of this state men daily recover, and are apt to fall into it upon every
light occasion, as by over-Watching, Fasting, and immoderate Fluxes; which he
himself in the very next Text admits; and to those might have added also
excess of Venery, Text, 4.
Traveling, Study, and the like; either of which will presently bring a man's
countenance to be the picture of this Facies Hippocratica; but of these he
takes no notice, but records only the other three to be considered by the
Physician upon his first access to the Patient. -- The fourth Text makes
Observations upon the Eyes, and pronounces them deadly; to which I say, though
the Eye be the Index of the Soul, and gives us, in many Cases, a notable guess
at the inward state, yet the Judgments grounded according to his descriptions
touching the Eye, are every jot as fallacious, as are the common Prognostics
upon Urines; yet upon these and the Eyelids he bestows two Texts more. -- From
thence to the 17. Text, he dwells upon the Postures of lying in Bed, and
gestures of the Hands; and the sum of all he says is, that those postures and
gestures are best which are most like the usual postures of men in health: Et e
contra. Such Oracles as these are obvious, and are delivered at the fireside
by every old woman that attends the Sick. And yet let me tell you, he that
ventures his credit in Prognosticating upon postures and gestures, shall
assuredly give cause ever and anon to be laughed at. -- The 17. and the 18.
tell us, that in acute Diseases a cold Breath is deadly; and that easy
breathing portends good, but short breathing, and great breathing, pain and
inflammation in the Breast, and a Delirium at hand; which sometimes may be so,
but more often it is not so, as we all well know; and I should be loath to be
guided by such Phenomenon as these in the ordering of a Patient, seeing they
fall out often, where there is neither Pain, nor Inflammation, nor a Delirium
subsequent: Especially in Scorbutic Fevers, as most of the Fevers now extant
are. The 18. and 19. are about Sweats, and tell us, those Sweats are best which
abate the Fever, and that cold Sweats, and partial or imperfect Sweats, are
bad: Thus you see all along, that what in these Prognostics is true is but
very ordinary stuff. -- From the 19. to the end of this First Book, he treats
of Abscesses or Tumors in the Hypochonders, in Fevers; which in acute ones are
seldom seen, but in other Fevers, and Agues, they sometimes happen, and but
sometimes; and then usually when the body's habit is vitiated by preposterous
ways of Curation.

In the second Book of Prognostics, after three Texts spent about Dropsies
(the second whereof is Oraculous, because a Riddle) He tells us in the fourth,
that if the Head, Hands, and Feet grow cold, while the middle parts burn, it is
ill, and that it is best, that the whole Body should be warm and soft. -- The
6. says, blue or livid Hands and Feet be token Death, and that it is not so
bad, if they be black, which two Texts every body will grant, and preach on as
well as the best Doctor; but the conclusion of the latter, which says, that if
the Patient happen to escape with life, yet the parts blackish will gangrene,
is most false. -- The 5. is common stuff, which says, it is good, if the Patient
can turn and rouse himself cheerfully; but dangerous, if he be sluggish. -- In
the 7. he is very common likewise in his Prognostications touching sleep. --
From thence to the 20. he treats of Stools, and out of the close-stool Pan he
delivers Oracles, which are some true, and none of them always true; yea the
best of them about Stools are not frequently true; but it may be so, and it may
more often not be so; for, it is very often to be seen, that the worser the
Stools are which pass from the Patient, the more relief he receives, and the
more speedily he recovers, Nature carrying off that way the Malignant matter of
the Disease. -- From thence to the 34. he plays the Pisse-Prophet, and
undertakes to prognosticate from the Urinal, quasi vitro magico In Epistolae
ante librum de Fermen.
divinare, to divine as it were by a Magical glass (it is Dr. Willis his
expression) and I hope those sentences shall not be admitted for Oracles. The
residue of this Book touches upon Vomitings, Spittings, Expectorations, and
Purulencies; of which it is certain, that to judge so positively of a Patients
condition by Colors and Consistencies of Vomits and Spittles, is a very idle
thing, seeing those which appear worst do (as we find) very often tend to the
best: And as for Purulent Persons, it was the Impotency of the old Physicians,
which in Diseases of the Chest, could not so manage a Cure of them (I instance
a Pleurisy for one) as to prevent a termination of them in Purulency.

In the third Book, the four first Texts discourse of Crises and Critical days;
of which I have already eased the Reader. -- The 5. and 6. determine upon what
Terms you are to expect an eruption of Blood by the Nose after the 20 day of a
Fever. But of what use is this now? when some of us are ashamed to see how long
people are held in Fevers under cure, not only till the 20. day, but long
after; whereas in fewer days a hopeful account may be given, if at all, except
error be committed by the Patient, or his Attendants. -- From thence to the 16.
treating of Exulcerations of the Mouth and Throat, and Quinsies, his Doctrine is
good. -- The 16. relates to Critical days, and so is not worth the noting. --
From thence to the 24. he treats of Abscesses or Tumors at the Tail of long
Fevers and Agues; which are very rare to be seen in our days, only in some few
they so fall out. -- From thence to the 30. he treats of Headache in Fevers,
and says, If the Disease begin with Headache, the Patient becomes more
afflicted the 4. day than on the 5. but is better again on the 7. Again, if the
Head begin to ache on the third day of the Fever, then the Patient will be most
afflicted on the 5. but will be freed from the Disease on the 9, or on the 11.
day. Again, if the Head begin to ache on the 5. day then expect a Crisis on the
14. all which, he says, holds good in Continual Fevers, and Exquisite
Tertians: But let the Reader observe these Fevers, and he shall generally find
all this to be fallacious and frivolous. And yet he concludes his Books of
Prognostics with this Magisterial Assertion; that they will be found to prove
true in Libya, that is to say in the hottest Country; and in Delos, i. e. in a
temperate Country; and in Scythia, i. e. the coldest Country; which is as much
as to say, they will hold certain in all Times and Places, having been so
Calculated for the Meridian of Greece, his native Country, that they will serve
indifferently for all Climates and Nations in the world: And this the
Commentators will not stick to swear on the behalf of their great Master;
though they cannot be ignorant, that things seldom fall out so: but the Trading
upon old Notions must be held up, and there is the Business; If we recede from
old Things, and suffer a reformation in any (said the Council of Trent) it will
take off all reverence to the rest: I shall not apply it to the Concernments of
Physic, but leave impartial men to judge, whether some Professors Interests,
and Ignorance also, may not lie in the way of so necessary a work, as reforming
and redeeming of so Noble a Profession; and what Credit is to be given to one
that contradicts himself, I mean this our great Master, who forgot that the 19.
Aphorism of his second Book consutes all that he delivers here as certain about
Acute Diseases; for there he says, that the Predictions concerning such
Diseases are uncertain. And whereas he has so imperiously said, that his
Prognostics will hold certain in all Countries, I note it clearly contradicts
the reason of his Lib. 1.
second Aphorism, which bids us in Evacuations of the Body, have respect to the
difference of Countries, in regard the same Effects cannot be expected in all
alike, because (as Heurnius, who has collected the sense of the best
Commentators upon the Text, says) according as a Country is hot, cold, moist,
dry, or windy, and according to the manner of feeding used therein, ita variis
succis circumfluent corpora, so men's bodies will abound with various Juices;
from whence I argue, that if the Blood of men's Bodies differ according to their
respective Countries, then by a parity of reason it follows, the Motions of it,
and Operations, and Effects thereupon depending, must needs be different; and
so it is impossible that the same Events in reference to spontaneous Evacuations
should fall out alike; in several Countries and it is much less to be expected
they should so in regard Nature does so particularly observe the Climate (as is
implied in that second Aphorism) that you cannot without prejudice force her by
Art, to any Evacuation, or excretion, which is not agreeable to her in the
particular Country where she is. What then (I pray you) can ye think of one
general Uniform Rule of Prognostication, touching the Phenomenon, and the
Events of Diseases, in all the Countries of the World? I am sorry I have grated
so hard upon this business, but it cannot be avoided: It is no more than what
some of the more ingenious sort of men have been aiming at before; only,
because in those days it was not convenient to discredit the old Learning, when
they had no better to substitute in the room of it, therefore they endeavored
to salve all sores, and touch them very tenderly; but I say, -- Immedicabile
vulnus Ense recidendum est. -- There is no redeeming of our Faculty, but (as my
Lord Bacon's expression is) by attempting an Instauration ab imis fundamentis,
Novum Organ. Aph. 31.
from the very foundations, and by taking off in the first place, that
superstitious reverence which has been so long paid to the antiquated Masters
of the Profession.

Thus much then for Hippocrates, touching whom I could spin out a volume by
insisting upon other Works of his; but let it suffice, that De vi^ndis error.
lib 15. cap. 11.
Sanctorius gives one Caution touching his Sentences, that sometimes they are
not true; and many of them have been detected by the industry of this latter
Age. Mr. Boil also is loath to speak out, because he has (he says) Exper.
Phil. part 1. page 6.
a great respect for Hippocrates; and were it not for that, he should venture
to say, that some of those rigid Laws of Draco (whose severity made men say
they were written in Blood) did perhaps cost fewer persons their lives, than
that one Aphorism of Hippocrates, which says, that if a Teeming woman be let
blood, She will miscarry; for, it has for diverse Ages prevailed with great
numbers of Physicians, to suffer multitudes of their Female Patients to die
under their hands, who might probably have been rescued by a discreet
Phlebotomy, which Experience has assured us (whatever the close of the
Hippocr. Aph. 31. lib. 5.
Aphorism says to the contrary) to have been sometimes not only safely, but
usefully employed, even when the Infant is grown pretty big. By neglect of
this, numbers of Teeming women have been sufler'd to perish, who might
probably, by a seasonable loss of some of their blood, have prevented that of
their Lives. And the same noble person having ventured to say thus much, goes
yet a little further, and shows the great inconvenience of resting upon
Prognostics, and what mischief it does in the practice of Physic, because
upon the credit of them many times a Patient is judged incurable, and so left,
when as it is no such matter: For (says he) Ibid p. 73.
That in Acute Diseases, Persons given over by Physicians may recover, the more
judicious even of those Galenists that are of a despondent temper will not
deny: For, not only Celsus gives us this sober admonition, Neq. ignorare
oporte^, in acutis morbis sallaces notas esse and Salutis and Mortis.
that Physicians ought not to be ignorant, that even in Acute Diseases the
Signs both of life and death are fallacious; but even Hippocrates himself, who
was so skilful in Prognostics confesses, that the Predictions in Acute
Diseases are not wholly certain as to life and death. And even in Chronical
Diseases, where Events are wont much better to answer Physcians Predictions,
there are sometimes such Cures performed, as may encourage humane industry, and
keep a sick man's Friends from forsaking the Cure of him. For, it has been
often seen, that diverse persons given over by some Physicians, have been cured
by others, perchance more lucky than more skilful, by the use of extraordinary,
powerful, and especially Chemical Physic. Which discourse falls in very pat
with what the same learned Gentleman says in another place, Ibid Essay, 3. p.
66.
viz. That the Prognostics hitherto current in Authors, and commonly made by
Physicians, do suppose the use of the Received Remedies, and of the Dogmatical
Method of Physic; but if there were discovered such generous commanding
Medicines, as by powerfully assisting Nature, or by nimbly proscribing the
Morbifick Matter, might enable Nature to hinder the Disease from continuing its
Course, and acting its Tragedies in the Body, then Physicians would not need in
Acute Diseases to wait so long for a Crisis to instruct their Prognostics.

Thus he: Which is indeed as much as I would say, and all that I intended when
I d^d set Pen to Paper against Hippocrates his Aphorisms and Prognostics, viz.
to show, that a precise regard to them does but puzzle a Physician in his work
of Curing, and dispose him to commit many errors, supposing such and such signs
will produce such effects, and have such events as those books of Prognostics
do tell him; and that therefore his main work is only to watch the motions of
Nature, and wait for Critical Solutions and Excretions, and do just nothing, or
what is as good as nothing, administer faint, languid remedies, which are of no
force either to forward Nature or to hinder her; whereas if he were Master of
more noble Remedies, there needed not this expectation to the 14. or the 20.
day in Acute Diseases, but the Course of them might be cut off betimes; and in
Chronick Diseases, they would not be so frequently led aside, to use this or
that Method and Remedy, which they suppose, upon the credit of old Aphorisms
and Prognostics, fit to be used, when as perhaps it is quite contrary to the
nature of the Disease, and pernicious to the Patient. In a word; the Maxims and
Predictions of this Author, and the Determinations of other old Authors, might
(so far as they have any thing of Truth in them) be of some use, if we had no
better Remedies than those of the Shops to rely on; or if Diseases themselves
were not so exceedingly altered from what they were when those Authors were
living. But the Case being altered, a new state of things requires new
Medicines, and new Methods, with other Aphorisms and Prognostics more agreeable
thereunto.

Thus, the greatest stress of reputation lying upon Hippocrates, I have
enlarged so much upon him, that I shall need to say the less of his Commentator
Galen, because he writes after him; but sometimes he 8 Meth. 2.
contradicts him; as when Hippocrates forbids the giving of Food to Patients
before Paroxysms or Fits, the other says it is not always good, for that
Choleric Persons, if they be not fed in the beginning of a Fit, are apt to
fall into a Marasmus. Lo then (says De vitan. err. l. 15. cap. 11.
Sanctorius) how those Medical precepts are often apt to deceive us, if they be
not discreetly heeded! As for Galen Himself, the same learned man has taken
good pains to wean us from our Superstitious devotion also toward him, having
reckoned up at least 31. of his Errors, spending upon him four or five Chapters
to that purpose: And whereas Galen seems most to triumph in his Book concerning
the Use of the parts of man's body, that Excellent Anatomist Vesalius shows
him to have been very ignorant of Anatomy, and that he never performed one
Anatomical Dissection, so that it is supposed he took things upon Trust, and
transcribed out of other men's works; for, he proves him to have erred in one
Hundred and Sixteen Particulars touching Parts.

Therefore, the more regard is to be given to what Sanctorius says, that
seeing Galen has erred, if he speak contrary to our Lib. 3. c. 15.
Senses, why should we not reject him? and forasmuch as he is neither an Allie,
nor Kinsman of mine, nor Uncle to any of my Ancestors, that I know of, nor
Canonised in the catalogue of Saints, as one that had been by Divine power
inspired, I see no reason (says he) why we may not all honorably relinquish
him. Wherefore, after he has reckoned up his Errors, he tells us, that yet
there are many men of no mean reputation, who had rather derogate from their
own Senses, than from Aristotle or Galen, and who mortally hate and rail
against such as would debate things mith freedom. And of this Temper (he says)
Jacobus Sylvius was against Vesalius, calling him, in allusion to his name,
Vesanus, that is to say, mad, or not right in his Wits, and his most excellent
Book of Anatomy he calls a filthy Sink, a rude indigested heap of stuff, and
thereupon exhorts the Readers to tear it, stamp it under foot, and throw it in
the fire. At length, after all the bitter Invectives that he could make, he
humbly besought the Emperor, to punish Vesalius, as a Monster of ignorance,
ingratitude, and arrogance; and this for no other cause, but that he relied
more upon his own Senses than the Authority of Galen. Indeed Sylvius was a very
learned man (as his numerous Writings do show) but a little too Hotheaded with
zeal for his Master; as most Galenists use to be, against any that would
Dethrone him from the Infallible Chair, and the Principality of Physic.

And yet I must needs desire a little more of their patience, to hear how he
who made it his business to contradict, and trample down all the Physicians of
his time, became guilty at last of contradicting himself; and thus it will
always be when men write with vain glorious pride and choler.

About the beginning of his Book De Tremore and P^lpitatione, he says,
Trembling is an involuntary Motion of the parts; yet a little after he adds,
that Tremblers have not Motion without the Command of the Will.

In his second Book De Febr. Diff. cap. 1. he says, a Semitertian is of the
number of Continual Fevers. The same in effect he says in Comm. 2. in lib. 6.
Epid. cap. 22. and yet in his Book De Typis he affirms, that a Semitertian is
not always Continual, but sometimes Intermitting.

In 13. Method. Med. and in many other places, he says, the Spleen is
nourished with the grossest blood, much more gross than that with which the
Liver is nourished: which he directly contradicts in lib. 4. De usu Part.
saying, that the body of the Spleen being finer than the Liver, and thicker
than the Lungs, it is deservedly nourished with the finer part of the blood.

In that little Tract of his, wherein he discusseth the Point of Purgation, he
says, that Serous and thin humors you are to purge in the beginning, but in
gross and viscous humors you are to expect concoction. But note that he says
also, that all thin humors Ex Comment. 1. in lib. 1. Epid. cap. ^4.
are crude; which Assertion he in many places opposes, saying, that all crude
humors ought to be concocted before they be evacuated; which he before limited
only to gross humors.

In his 2. Commentary upon the Prognostics, cap. 36. he says, Children
concoct all things very speedily, by reason of the strength of the Alterative
power, which is stronger in them than in young men. The like he declares Comm.
3. in lib. 6. Epid. cap. 15. and in his 3. Comment. in Prognost. cap. 34. But
all these places he contradicts in his Comment upon the 27. Aphorism, lib. 3.
where he says, that the Dispositions of Children are very quickly altered, as
well through the moistness of their Bodies, as by reason of the weakness of
their natural Power.

In his Comment 1. in lib. 6. Epid. cap. 1. he says, that the Nerves are not
Hollow: which he contradicts in lib. 1. de Symptom. Cause. Also in his book De
Dissectione Nervorum, and in the 8. 10. and 16. De usu Partium; and his fourth
book De Locis Affectis, cap. 1.

In his Comment on the 23. Aph. lib. 3. he says, no man can stop his own
breathing; which is as much as if he should say, the work of Respiration is not
voluntary but perpetual: which is plainly contrary to what he says in his
second Book De Motu Musculorum, where he asserts the work of Respiration to be
an Act voluntary, and at the arbitration of the soul: For proof of he produces
an Instance touching a Slave, who being vehemently stirred with anger, resolved
to die, and lying along on on the ground, held his Breath till he died, etc.

In his 1. Book De Simpl. Med. Fac. cap. 8. and 29. he says, that Water does
cool and extinguish thirst, because of its Cold and Moist Nature. But he
pronounces the quite contrary Comm. 5. in lib. De Rat. Vict. in Morb. acut.
cap. 40. where treating of Water, he says it does neither quench Thirst, nor
Moisten. And in his Comment, on Aph. 13. lib. 4. he affirms, that water is,
neither inwardly taken, nor outwardly applied, apt to moisten the solid Parts.

In his Comment 1. in lib. De Rat. Vict. in Morb. Acut. cap. 22. he says, that
Honey'd Water, and Wine, do moisten more than Water can: yet in lib. 1. De
Simpl, Med. Fac. cap. 30. he writes, that of all moist things Water does
moisten most, and that nothing is more moistning than Water.

In his third Comment on the same Book, cap. 40. he says, that Water turns to
Bile in such persons as have Bowels Tumesied, and that it is corrupted in a
Bilious Stomach. But in lib. 9. Meth. Med. he professes, that a true
Erysipelas settled in any Bowel, is not to be cured otherwise than by drinking
cold Water. Also, in his Book De Art Cur. ad Glauc. he advises, that in very
hot burning Fevers, such as arise from yellow Bile, that the Patient should
drink water boldly.

In several places, and especially at the end of his Book De Opt. Secta, he
says, a Phlegmon is a preternatural Tumor with pain, not apt to be compressed,
but hard, and hot. Quite contrary to which he writes in Comment. 1. in lib. 6.
Epid. cap. 29. Hard things grow hard by being dried through Cold; and that a
Phlegmon does not cause a hard Tumor, but that it yields to compression, after
the manner of skins or bladders filled with water or wind.

In lib. 6. de Locis Affect. cap. 2. And in Comment. in Aph. 10. lib. 7. and in
Comm. 2. lib. 3. Epid. cap. 6. And in Comment in Aph. 44. and lib. 6. And in
this third Book also concerning the Natural Faculties, he says, that persons
seized with that Disease called the Iliack Passion, do void their Ordure
upwards by vomit. Which directly thwarts what he says in his Comment on Aph.
12. lib. 4. where he declars, that nothing contained in the guts can be voided
by vomiting.

A man might proceed a great way further at this Rate, if it were worth the
while; but this is enough to tire the Reader, and (I think) to instruct any
man, that neither he nor Hippocrates are much to be relied on in the practice
of Physic. And if I ever have a more fit occasion hereafter, I shall be more
copious: But here now I intend brevity, and give only a Taste, to excite
ingenious men to a more strict enquiry, and a shaking off that yoke of bondage,
under which we have been detained in a superstitious adoration of poor
Heathens, for so many Ages. And yet not so, as to cast them off wholly; for
there is use of them in a degree, and of their Commentators, as there is of old
Posts and Stones, though it be but to show where the old Road was, and how we
may be take our selves to better ways, by comparing it with the new.

V. The next thing to be brought under examination is Phlebotomy or
Blood-letting: a thing very much practiced, but how agreeable the Course is in
these North-parts of the world, I shall Discuss by and by: In the mean while
know, I do not reject it where there is urgent Cause; but it is so seldom that
there is a tolerable cause for it in our Climate, that I cannot but admire at
the boldness of many Physicians, who make it (as I have often said) like the
Prologue to the Play, a matter of Course and Custom in most Cases that come
before them; though truly, in most Cases, nothing can be of worse consequence
to the Body.

In order to the more handsome Discussion of this so important a Point, give me
leave to set down certain Particulars, as Prolegomena, i. e. preliminary and
introductory to the Discourse.

1. We shall take for granted, because it has been abundantly proved, that the
Disease called the Scurvy or rather a Scorbutic state of Body is more or less
to be considered, as befalling men generally in these Northern Nations. If so,
then it is to be considered also, what kind of blood usually flows in the Veins
of persons Scorbutically disposed: And here, in this matter, let me use the
Authority of that grave Collector Sennertus, who in his Tract concerning the
Scurvy Cap. 3.
says, the Blood of persons touched with a Scorbutic Tincture becomes of the
nature of Vinegar, and such also is the Blood of all Melancholic persons, as
say Hippocr. De V^ct. Rat. in Morb. ac T. 38. Galen, 3. De Sympt. Cause. ca. 2.
Hippocrates and Galen, whereas in its right state in sound persons it is
compared to generous Wine; and he intimates, that the Scorbutic humor is
generated after the same manner as Vinegar out of Wine. And as there are many
other things by him described, which as Causes contribute to the turning of
Wine to Vinegar; so among the rest he tells us, it may be done by casting a
little Ferment, that is leven or leavened bread, into it, which by degrees
turns the Wine into its own acrimonious acid Nature. The same also is done,
when an ill Scorbutic Ferment comes any way into that generous liquor the
Blood, and turns it to an acid ichorous acrimonious state and condition: for a
vicious Ferment, as well as crude and sharp humors, will corrupt the Mass of
Blood. Moreover, if by any Accident, as Heat, or otherwise, Wine happen to lose
its Sulphur, that is, its Sulphurous or Balsamic part (it being apt to
evaporate) then it turns likewise to Vinegar: After the same manner also it
fares with the Blood when its Balsamy Part is evaporated by Fevers, immoderate
Heats, Sorrows, Studies, Watchings, Exercises, or Venery, the corrosive Salty
parts left behind predominate, and so pervert the Mass into such a sharp
condition, that it can be compared to nothing more fitly than to Vinegar.

As a further confirmation of this, take in also the Judgment of another grave
Author, Greg. Horstius, who shows likewise, what the state of the blood is in
Scorbutic persons; and first he speaks De Mo^b. Contag. lib. 7. Sect. 1. Sect.
10. and 11.
as a Galenist, and says, their blood is crude and Ichorous, apt to taint and
corrupt all the Alimentary Juice which is daily added to it, and turn it into
its own sour vicious Nature. After this again, he speaks much to the purpose
as a Chemist, and says, that the blood becomes thus Crude and Ichorous, and
Nature is not able in Scorbutic dispositions to restore it, to its Balsamic
state, because of an impure Tartar, endued with Vitriolate and Aluminous
qualities, diluted and united with the Mass of blood: which turns it into an
acid state.

This acid state of the blood, as to the manner of its generation, is very well
illustrated by our learned Countriman Doctor Willis, in several places of his
Book De Ferment. and Febr. And, which is as considerable to our purpose, he
sets forth also the manner of its degenerating into a vapid flat state, like
Wine or Vinegar that is corrupted and become flat or dead; which I shall take
in also by and by, because upon both these considerations I ground diverse of my
following Arguments. This man, in his Book concerning Fevers, Chap. 1. and 6.
agrees with Sennertus, that in Scorbutic persons the blood is acid, even as
it is in persons Hypochondriacal, or that are seized with a Quartan, wherein he
says that the liquor of the Blood in naturam Ponticam and acidiusculam
degenerat, degenerates into a sour austere acid nature. And a little before he
describes it thus, Sanguinis liquor a natu^a dulci, spirituosa, and balsamica,
in acidam and nonnihil austeram, instar vini acescentis, transit, i. e. the
liquor of the Blood passes from a sweet, Spirituous and balsamic Nature, into
an acid and somewhat austere, like Wine degenerating into Vinegar.

2. In the second place, I would have this agreed on also; that the main cause
of this acid state of the Blood is an abatement, or a decay of its Sulphur and
Spirit: This appears by Ubi supra.
Sennertus, who says, that generous liquor, Wine, is wont to become acid, when
that principle the Sulphur is for the most part gone from the Salt, either by
evaporation or otherwise, and so that principle the Salt which before was
Volatile, and friendly, becomes fixed, and acrimonious or acid: which is the
true cause of Vinegar: which appears plain enough by putting flame to Vinegar,
for, it will not burn, because the Sulphur is absent, and the Winy Spirit
extinct, or depressed. This is seconded by the aforementioned Doctor, Willis de
Febr. ca 6.
who says, that the evaporation of the Sulphur and Spirit out of men's blood,
occasioned through the heat of the Summer, is one reason why men in Autumn have
that acid state of blood, which renders them liable to Quartan Agues, and the
Scurvy; which is not to be restored by any other means, than by dulcifying it;
that is, by altering it with such Medicines and Meats, as may impregnate it anew
with an amicable Volatile Salt, and a Balsamic Sulphur and Spirit: Just so as
Wines, when they are growing acid, or flat and vapid, are not to be restored
any other way, than by feeding them with Flesh, and rich Syrups, and fresh
Lees, or other things that abound with a Sulphurous and Spirituous nature.

3. That as the Blood in Persons often contracts an acid state, so likewise in
Scorbutic and other ill-affected bodies, it at length, after the manner of
Wine, degenerates so far, as to grow vapid, flat and dead, being divested of
its Balsamic Sulphurous and Spirituous part, in a further degree. This is
illustrated also by the same industrious Doctor in his Book De Ferment. Cap. 7.
where he shows, that the more of the Spirits and Sulphur of Wine is lost, the
nearer it draws down and is impoverished to a vapid condition; which is more
deplorable than the former; for there, part of the Winy Spirits are remaining,
though depressed, but here they are almost, or else quite drawn off and fled
away, so that the Wine is with marvelous difficulty, or not at all, to be
recovered: And just so it fares with man's blood; it is, when it is once come
to that vapid pass, very rarely revived and Spirited again, but being crude and
watery, by degrees destroys the vital heat, and the Ferments of the parts, and
becomes unapt for motion or Circulation.

4. That the Blood many times may, after the manner of Milk, by some Cause or
other be coagulated; in which Case the Doctor says De Febr. cap. 2.
, the Mass is divided into parts, the more gross and terrestrial from the
thinner part; by which means the blood is not so well circulated in the
Vessels, but that its congeled parts (or portions of it like gelly) being apt
to settle in the extremities of the Limbs, or to become stagnant in the heart,
do interrupt its even Motion, or exceedingly hinder it; for the restoration
whereof, Ebullitions greater than ordinary are raised in the blood; as in the
Pleurisy, pestilent Fevers, small Pox, and all venomous Diseases: to which
Sense he speaks also in Cap. 1. de Febr. and ca. 3. and 7.
other places, and enumerates other Diseases caused thereby, as the Quinsie,
Inflammation of the Lungs, Dysenterie, as well as malign and pestilent
Diseases. And that this Coagulation or Congelation be falling the blood is no
new doctrine (though some have smiled at it) may be seen by Hippocrates his Book
De Morbis (I mean the First Book, for, the other three are accounted Spurious)
where you shall find the Notion in diverse Texts; as in the 112, 129. and 145,
etc.

5. That the work of Sanguisication or bloud-making is performed by the Blood;
that is to say, the Chyle being mingled in the Vena Cava with the stream of
blood, and passing along with it through the heart into the Arteries becomes
Blood, and as it passes afterward through all the Instruments or Parts, does
from the Ferment of every one receive somewhat that tends to its further
Elaboration and perfection. For the clearing of this, Oeconom. Anim. Exercit. 4.
Doctor Charlton has well collected the Sense of the later and best
Anatomists; which is, that the Chyle being imported into the Subclavian Veins,
and from them into the Vena Cava, and thence immediately disembogued into the
right Ventricle of the heart, is there converted into a liquor of a different
Nature, viz. Blood, by a kind of exaltation of its Nature, or an advance of
those natural Spirits which it contains, into vital or more sublimed and
active ones. By this, the Liver (he says) is deposed from the office of
Sanguification; and Dr. Dr Gener. Anim. Exercit. 51. sub finem.
Harvey concludes, that the Liver borrows its heat and color from the Blood;
but not the Blood from the Liver. And a little after, to set forth the manner
of the Chyle's being Tinctured by Blood into the same Nature and Crimson
color, he says, the Chyle makes but a short stay in the heart, but remains
constantly commixed with the Blood, until it be thereto perfectly assimilated.
The blood flowing in the heart, Arteries, and Veins, does in quantity at least
ten times exceed the Chyle of one Meal, and in strength or activity an hundred
(for, what is more potent than that Spirit which enliveneth the whole Body;
what more soft, gentle, and more easily superable than Chyle?) and therefore no
doubt but the Blood does easily obtain Victory over the Chyle, and overrun it
with his own nature.

To this agrees that of Doctor Willis Lib. De Febr. ca. 3.
, who says, that the Alimentary Juice (or Chyle) which is supplied out of our
daily Food, comes crude; but being commixed with the Blood, and circulated with
it, is assimilated thereto: Indeed, of late years, this Doctrine has prevailed
among the most learned, that the Liver is not the office of Sanguification, as
was supposed, but that the work is performed by other Means, and after another
manner. Of this number is Andreas Caesalpinus, Conringius, Thomas Bartholinus,
Vesalius, and Doctor Harvey, with others: and it is questionless the very Truth.

Now these five Particulars being confirmed as Preliminary, let me have leave
to argue thereupon.

I. That we ought to be very wary of drawing blood in our Climate, in regard of
the universal spreading of the Scorbutic Tincture: For, I am persuaded, more
than half of the Sick do suffer upon this Account, in these Northerly Nations;
as is cleared pretty well in the foregoing part of this Book, it being an
undoubted Truth, that the Scurvy is predominating in most of our Diseases, and
consequently that we have much more of a crude acid Serum floating in the Mass
of Blood, than is usual in the more delicate Climates, where that Disease is
but rarely found; and this, because, besides the consideration of Adventitious
Causes, our blood is in its own nature much more Dilute and Serous. This you
have well Discoursed by an eminent Professor of one of the Universities of
Germany, by name Augustinus Thonerus, one that I find to have been in great
esteem with Greg. Horstius, and with all the famous Physicians of that time;
who having declared his own Med. Obser. lib. 1. Obs. 33.
Judgment against bleeding in the Fevers of the Northern Climates, adds to his
own also the Testimony of Zacutus Lus. in these words: It cannot be amiss here
to recite what is said by Zacutus in his Observations touching the Blood of the
Spaniards, and of the Germans, which is most worthy to be known and noted, viz.
That in the bodies of Spaniards there abounds a blood thick, succulent, and
compact, so that if they be seized by a Continual Fever, they all die, unless
there intervene a large letting out of blood. On the contrary, the bodies of
the Germans are filled with blood crude, watery, and not very firm or compact.
If in Fevers the blood which is drawn from a Spaniard be fluid and watery, so
that it do not thicken with standing, it is an undoubted sign, known even to
Idiots, that they all die, because the Fibers of the blood are corrupt and
dissolved: But in Germany, not only in malignant Fevers, but even in the lesser
Diseases, and sickly persons, the blood, though fluid and watery, betokens no
danger. Hereupon it comes to pass, that the Germans do hardly bear
bloodletting, especially if it be large, because their blood is less
Spirituous; as is evident by experience, in regard, that if we in health be let
blood, merely for prevention of a Disease, we very often fall into grievous
Faintings, even while the blood is flowing: Much more then is it to be feared
in Continual Fevers. The nature of the Iralians differs not much from the
constitution of the Spaniards; and the complexion of the French is fiery, so
that they may have greater need of eventilation by bleeding. Wherefore, things
thus standing, it were (says he) a Physicians best course to use providence
and caution in this matter, and to accommodate his counsel according to the
diversity of Countries, Reason and Experience showing him the way.

If this be the state of the blood of the Germans, from whom we English are
extracted, and who live in a Northern Clime not much different from theirs,
certainly what is true in this case of them, must needs very much concern us:
The blood of us both is much alike, as to the Spirituous part, because most of
the Sick in both Countries have their souls even drowned in a Flood of Serous
and Scorbutic humors within the Veins, whose acidity and acrimony shows, after
the manner of Vinegar, that the Spirits therein contained are either very few,
or very much depressed. I would fain know then, whether in opening Veins that
contain so much of an acid Serum, and so little of the noble Crimson liquor, it
be not a great hazard to let out so great a part of the Crimson as appears in
every Phlebotomy, because in it the Vital Spirits abound, and it is as it were
the balsam of the blood, so that the subtracting of but a little must of
necessity leave the rest behind much more liable to dilution and corruption, by
reason of the superabundance of the Serous acid Humors, and therefore the less
able to give a Tincture and nature of blood to the new Chyle which succeeds;
whereupon, it not being duly assimilated and Sanguified, instead of being
converted into good blood, does degenerate, and add to the Flood of Crudities
and Acidities, to the further disabling of the body at present, and a
disposing it for the future to worse Diseases, and a languishing life, which is
worse than Death. How many every year are seen upon this Account, exceedingly
to suffer! when Physicians upon every slight Motion or Ebullition of Humors,
are immediately for opening a Vein, the consequence whereof is, for the most
part, a disposing of the Limbs to Numbedness, and Stiches, Aches, Prickings,
Arthritick and Nephritick pains, and Agues and Fevers, debility of Stomach, and
of all the Bowels, Gravel and wind-Colick, all manner of Hypochondriack
passions, and the hastening on of old Age, through the continual heaping up of
Crudities, because Nature, losing much of Vital power in every opening of a
Sluice (on which power the validity of all the Ferments of the Parts and Vessels
(which are the great Elaborators) the work of Concoction does solely depend) is
not able to give the Succeeding Chyle and Blood its due Digestion and Vitality.
It Is to be granted, that at the first, our Scorbutic Patients seem to come off
with relief, the diminution and eventilation of the liquor by Phlebotomy,
putting a stop to the high boiling, and so there follows a Pacification, and
hence it is that the Physician seems to deserve praise for it; but alas the
relief is but fraudulent and temporary, the body pays for it afterward, being
thereby exposed to greater exasperations and ebullitions, upon the access of
every extraneous Adventitious heat, and exotic irritating Spirit, when the
Natural Heat and Spirits are by loss of Blood made weak and low: the truth of
which is abundantly seen in the less Vegete, or the Valetudinary state of
Bodies, especially if they abound with those acid and acrimonious Juices. What
a horrid thing is it to see, how freely many times blood is drawn in the
beginning of Agues, Fevers, and Arthritick Distempers, etc. upon a pretense of
quelling the immoderate Fermentation of the Mass, whenas there are so many
other ways to the Wood? but admit there were not, yet certainly handsome
purgation by Specificks might be much more proper in such habited Bodies; for,
even this, if the Medicin be right, gives as present relief, and without the
like hazard; it drains the ill humors, without diminishing the Crimson Balsam
and Vital Spirit, which departs and vanishes (more or less) upon every Section
of the Veins and Eventation of the Blood (as some do call it.) Methinks, as of
all the Galenists I most admire Fernelius, so doubtless his determination is
excellent in this Case Metb. Med. l 3. cap. 1.
, Venae Sectio fortasse vitiosum humorem qui consistit in venis, at non
sincerum evacuat, sed Sanguine and utili humore permistum: Purgatio vero id
solum quod vitiosum est and qualitate peccat, utilirelicto, nisi forte
immoderatius efferatur. The opening of a Vein (says he) does perhaps empty
that vicious humor which is in the Veins, yet not sincere or mere, but mingled
with the blood and the profitable humor: But Purgation empties that only which
is vicious and offends in quality, leaving the profitable behind in the Veins,
unless perchance it work too immoderately. To which let me add also, unless the
Physician be destitute of such neat Purgers as are fit for the purpose. Now I
know, there are many Citations brought out of Hippocrates and Galen to the
contrary, preferring Phlebotomy as a more safe remedy than Purging. To which I
say, whatever Hippocrates might do in Greece, or Galen who practiced in Greece
and Rome, by way of bleeding, is no example for us, not only in regard of the
difference of Climates, but in respect also of the Alteration of Time and
Diseases themselves: And there is this likewise considerable in the Case, that
Hippocrates was acquainted with no evacuators but Hellebore and such like
violent stuff; and Galen knew only the like, and ill-corrected Scammoniates,
sharp and fiery, such as set Nature upon the rack; and therefore they had some
reason, practicing in so delicate Climates, in a less Tainted Age, to prefer
Bleeding as a more safe remedy than purging; but what is that to us in the
Northern world, at this time, where the states of men and Diseases, as well as
Climates, are quite other things, and on whom God has bestowed a better
Furniture of Remedies? Truly, besides these reasons, there is so much the less
Cause to heed what Galen says about this matter, because as in many other
things, so in this he has the luck to be self-contradictory, as all heady
quarelsom ambitious Writers are wont to be; for, in his Comment on 2. Aph. 19.
he extolls Blooding as a safe remedy before Purging; and on the contrary 2.
Acut. 11. He magnifies Purgation before Bleeding: Therefore, if in those
Countries and Times it was a measuring Cast, that he could not readily conclude
which to side with as best and safest, then the preference of Purgation is to
be admitted without question by us now, having so many new measures of Reason
to preponderate and invalidate the old. What a marvelous hazard then must we
needs run by longer relying upon Galenick Doctrine, and exotic practices
learned abroad, and brought home by some pretending Doctors? who return
perchance with little more than a Diploma and foreign Twattle, to try
Conclusions upon our Countrymen by strange Notions and Customs, not at all
agreeable to the Constitutions of our Bodies; especially by the bold way of
bleeding, which Thousands of Familes are bound to curse; and this Custom is the
more confidently owned by Travelers, because besides their Observations
Beyond Sea, their Phantsies are heightened with old Galenick Authorities;
especially in Fevers and all acute Diseases promiscuously; For, in Fevers, and
most Agues, blood is drawn of course, because 1. Aph. 23. 11. Method c 3 and
cap 14. 15.
Galen says, where any thing of Putredo is in Fevers, you are to draw blood,
even to Fainting; and the whole stream of Authors run a madding after him,
except only 7 Collig. cap. 8.
Averroes, the most judicious Author among the Arabians. But this manner of
Practice will appear so much the more intolerable, if we go to sensible
experiment; for, in bloodletting, suppose that Ten ounces be drawn, you will
have sometimes 4.5. or perhaps 7. ounces of Humors, the residue good blood; now
the loss of but a little good blood more concerns the Body as to damage, than
the evacuation of the concurrent humors by Phlebotomy can advantage it, because
the more Cacochymy or ill juice is contained in the Veins, so much the more
reason there is, not to part with any part of the Crimson liquor, though never
so small, because in it the Vital power is lodged to carry on the work of
future Sanguification; and the Diminution of any part of it is but a disabling
of what remains behind. Now in Purgation, the Case is much otherwise; for,
though Helmont say Purgatives do but corrupt the Blood and Humors into that
stinking state, and then draw them away, yet he must be understood of those
deleterious venomous Purgers in common use; whereas new ones are found, and
more may be found out, which will drain the Veins of their vicious humors in an
amicable manner, and leave the blood behind purified from its own impurities,
and untainted with any exotic Ferment contracted from the Medicin: which work
being done without straining or offensive irritation of Nature, the
Fermentation or Ebullition in Acute Diseases cease of its self without any
more ado. But if Purgation will not do, there are next to be used other means
to pacify, with much more effect and security than by Phlebotomy, which
always rids away a portion of the Sulphur, the Balsamic and Spirituous part
of the blood; which if kept within the Body, would conduce to a more quick
overruling and pacifying of the abundance of Saline acid Humors, which are
floating in the Veins of most persons that are ill-habited, or Scorbutically
inclined For,

2. If it be true (as I have before shown) that a decay of the Sulphur and
Spirituous part of any liquor, is the cause of its becoming crude and acid, and
if thereupon also the Salty part become extravagant for want of the Spirit and
Sulphur to restrain and attemper it; it is plain likewise in the blood, that
the Balsamic Sulphur and Spirituous part thereof being but little, and less in
our Northern Bodies than those of other Climates, it must be a pernicious
course that shall offer to make it less; for (as I have hinted already) every
little part drawn away leaves the remainder in the Veins less able to allay or
sweeten the acrimony of those acid and Saline Humors which are associated
therewith. This is the Cause, why Fevers, and Agues, in these parts of the
world, usually fare ill upon bleeding; for, though for some hours after perhaps
there seem to be some abatement, yet commonly presently the Disease becomes
thereby more fierce and difficulty curable; the strength Spirits and Balsam
(which should help to qualify and conquer the Morbifick matter) being more
abated than the Feverish Cause, or its Distemper.

To second this necessary truth, give me leave to introduce the same learned
Author, whom I mentioned before, viz. Thonerus the German Professor, whose
Judgment concerning Continual Fevers is backed with Reason, Experience, and
good Authorities; so that it cannot be amiss to cite him here at large. Observe.
Med. lib 1. Obs. 33.
That drawing of Blood is (says he) dangerous, and for the most part deadly,
is evident in Reason: For, whereas the Source of those Fevers springs not from
a Plethorie or Fullness, but from ill Juices, and that which feeds or kindles
the Disease exists in a putrefaction and corruption of serous and pituitous
Humors, frequently mingled with such as are ichorous and bilious; if then Blood
be let, the Humors become the more unruly and confused, and natural strength is
cast down by a resolution of the vital Spirits, which not being strong before
in an ill-habited body, must needs be unable afterward to encounter with the
Disease and conquer it.

Add moreover (says he) that the Seminary of those Fevers being for the most
part settled in the M^seraick Veins and the lesser vessels more distant from the
heart, it falls out thereupon, that a Vein being opened, the more laudable
blood flows out first; afterward follows that which is much worse, and so by
reason of vacuity, to preserve a continuation of the stream, the vicious humors
being called away from the remoter or remotest parts, and brought nearer to the
heart, cause much detriment and danger. And when there is Malignity in those
Fevers, they have much more need of good Cordials so fitted as to infringe it,
and discuss the Miasma or Malign Inquination of blood and humors. It is
witnessed by Experience, that many persons who have drawn blood to prevent
Fevers, have by that means been seized thereby, some examples whereof you will
find in my Observations; and Philip Hochstetterus Physician of Aubsburgh,
relates in his observations, that he knew diverse of the Nobility and Gentry,
who having no Sense of any Disease likely to come on them, would needs be let
blood for security, but within few days after fell into a Fever, and died. For
my own part (says he) I have by long experience found, that many persons
seized by those Fevers, from whom blood has been drawn by advice of principal
Physicians, have thereby been sent packing to their Graves, although their
bodies, as to outward appearance, have seemed Sanguine and Plethorick.
Thereupon, I being afraid to follow their steps, do very rarely give order for
or encourage the opening of a Vein. And it has very often been no small matter
of wonder to me, that foreign Physicians, both Italian, French, and Spanish, are
so profuse in letting blood, in all Continual Fevers without distinction. Of
late, four Germans, of which three were Barons, being at Paris, fell into a
Fever, and were blouded several times, after the fashion of that place; the
three Barons died, but the fourth man escaped, though less strong of
constitution than the other. So far this grave Author; some of whose
Expressions though I approve not, yet as to the main about the sond custom of
Bleeding, he speaks Reason, and his own Experience in a Climate little
differing from ours.

The like also may be said concerning those Intermittent Fevers called Agues,
for the Cure of which (especially in the Spring) it is a common course to Vomit,
Purge, and Bleed, This (as Doctor Willis says, is De Febr. cap. 3.
Curatio Dogmatica, the common Dogmatical way of curing Tertians, by which the
Sick are miserably tormented, and the Disease seldom removed, so that this
Disease is deservedly called Oppobrium Medicorum, the shame and Reproach of
Physicians. Here, though he seem to disallow Vomitories and Purgatives, it must
needs be understood of those Medicaments which are commonly used by such as
practice the Dogmatical Galenick way, which usually infect the blood with an
ill Tincture, and by irritation put it into a more fierce Fermentation, and
worse disorder than before; but other Evacuators may be had whereby that
Inconvenience is avoidable; and a little after, the same Doctor grants, that
even by an ordinary Vomitory given a little before the Fit, the Ague is
sometimes taken away. But that which makes against Bloodletting is, that he
says there, that the Cause of Tertians is an ill disposition of blood,
acrimonious, and bilious, Ubi supra.
so that it does not rightly transmute and assimilate the new Chyle or
Nutrimental Juice which is continually supplied, so as to make good blood of
it, but turns it into an ill Fermentative matter: From whence I argue, that if
the state of the blood be acrimonius, and (as he calls it) bilious, that is to
say saturated with an adust degenerated Sulphur, as well as a sharp acidity (as
it usually is in all Agues, but remarkably in Tertians) certainly in the
drawing forth of such blood out of the Veins, the loss of the Balsamic genuine
Sulphur and Spirit contained therein, which always issues out mixed with the
other liquors, must needs be very mischievous, because the remaining liquors
become the more prevalent within the Veins, and turn the succeeding Aliment for
the most part into their own vicious Nature, instead of Blood: So that it is no
wonder, if every thing grows worse with a Tertian Ague after Phlebotomy. And if
this be true touching Tertians, then the Reason holds a Fortiori touching the
other sorts of Agues, because the rest are more commonly attended with a Blood
much more vicious, either crude, acid, or acrimonious. Hence it is, that the
usual consequence of opening a Vein is, that the state of the blood growing
more degenerous, through the loss of its Sulphur and Spirit, is changed from
its active, spirituous, sweet, balsamic condition, either into a flat and
vapid, or else into an acid austere condition; and so for these three years
past, I have observed, especially in bodies Scorbutically inclined, that
Tertians in the Spring, after Bleeding, and other Dogmatical Dotages about
Cure, have in a short time been converted into Quotidians, and before Autumn
into Quartans: others have become Double-Tertians; and in time wearing away the
body after the fashion of a slow continual Fever, have made it become Hectic,
and wasted it to an incurable Marasmus. And those robust bodies that escape
best, though the errors of Curation have not been able to sink them, yet
usually they come off with a habit of body much impaired, being (most of them)
all their days after liable to Dropsy, Gout, unwieldiness of body, Scurvy,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, ill Concoctions, Obstructions, and all those
Chronick Diseases that are the Concomitants, or Consequents, of Crudity and
Acidity; among which are various Arthritical pains, pains of the Loins,
Gravel, Stone, Scrophulous Tumors. Leprous, Scabby, Itchy, and Ulcerous
Dispositions. And as these great Mischiefs the bodies of men remain liable to,
after Bleeding, and other irrational Means and Scholastic Methods of handling
Agues; so the usual practice of Bleeding, upon pretense of Curing any of those
Chronick Diseases beforementioned, which proceed from a crude, ichorous, acid,
acrimonious qualification of blood, though it seem to cure at present, yet the
truce given by the Disease is but like Fides Punica, very treacherous, because
the Crimson balsamic liquor having lost part of its Sulphur and Spirit, has
less of a Vital Sanguifying power than it had before, and so every addition of
Nutriment serves but to advance the Heap of Crudities and Acidities, and the
Saltish principle, grown exorbitant for want of the native Spirit and Sulphur
to restrain it, is exalted to a condition much more corrosive, and destructive:
So that upon the least Accident, either by Change of weather, ill Diet, etc. or
a Turn of the Seasons of the year, the palliated Diseases, return with more
severity than before; and yet after this, I have seen men so mad as to attempt
a cure again by Bleeding, which procures perhaps a new P^iliation, till after
many Repetitions of the same wicked Course, the habit of the Body and the state
of the blood becomes so depauperated, that its Vital principle being exhausted,
there remains no more room for the like palliatory proceeding. Which leads me
to a disquisition upon the third Preliminary Point; and that is the vapid,
flat, insipid, dead state of the Blood.

3. Now if there be such a flat, vapid, Spiritless state of Blood (as we
suppose, may be) that is to say, not absolutely such, but in an analogical
Comparative Sense, (for, so it may be said to be, if compared with that florid
Vegete vigorous condition which ought to be;) then surely it will be yielded,
that in such a Case, letting blood must needs be exceeding pernicious: For, the
less of the nobler vital blood is in the Mass, the more mischievous it is to
part with any part of that little, forasmuch as in all openings of Veins a
considerable proportion of the Crimson liquor comes along with the other, and
leaves the remaining Mass the more Spiritless and destitute. In any liquor, as
the loss of the Sulphur, and a depression of the Spirits, causes it grow acid
and acrimonious; so a diminution, evaporation, destitution or deprivation of
Spirits, causes it to grow vapid, or (as we call it in English) flat and dead.
This holds true likewise in the Liquor of the Veins: It may be concluded
therefore, that when it is brought to such a Pass, or in any persons that lead
a Course of life which must of necessity bring it to that pass, we ought to be
very careful to avoid the breathing of a Vein (as they call it) or rather the
breathing out of the Spirituous liquor, which is that which gives life and
vigor to the whole Mass, so far as it is capable thereof.

The persons usually reduced to such a Pass as this are these,

Such Scorbutic persons, and the Pocky, as have much of those Ferments either
Hereditary, or else long settled and inveterated within them through ill Diet,
or by ways of Contagion Mediate or Immediate long contracted; for, nothing
eclypseth the luminous Ethereal Vital Spirit, and by that means depauperates
the blood more than the poisonous Ferments of these Master-Maladies; and this
is visible enough in those so Tainted, that have not by nature so strong a
constitution of Body to resist the operative power and influence of the same
Ferments, as some other Tainted persons have; for, in the weighing of all these
Reasons you are to add a grain of Salt, that is, you are to give some
allowance, according to the condition of the Patients; but be it what it will,
Bleeding does always bring detriment; and by frequent repetition of it, the
Venom lodged in the other parts of the Mass gains the greater opportunity to
show it self, and by such errors, it at length acquires a Dominion, even in the
strongest persons, over the whole habit of the Body; and then they are reduced
to the same visible Inconveniences and damages, which are wont to ensue the
bleeding of those other Tainted persons that are by nature of a more weakly
Frame. But the sum of this Business is, that in these Cases, where any thing of
those Contagious or Venomous Ferments lurks, Bleeding does hurt more or less,
though sensibly and presently in some more than in others; and this I observe,
that when persons Tainted are seized with quick Agues, or Fevers, or other
acute Diseases, which ever bring the strongest Constitutions down to a weakly
state, the drawing of blood draws a miserable Train of Consequents after it.
Which has brought me to this Resolution, and I hope it will work upon others,
seeing the Venereous, and Scorbutic Ferments are grown so universal, never to
open a Vein but when there is a very great urgency, or else a necessity for
immediate saving of a life, or upon some other extraordinary occasions; which
are apprehended well enough by judicious Physicians, and it is not proper to my
design, who affect brevity, here to recite them, and who have taken upon me,
only to discover the vanity of comprising Phlebotomy within the compass of a
common Formal Method, as it was of old, in order to the curation of most
Diseases; whenas all Constitutions of men and Diseases in this Age do (as I
have pretty well manifested) participate more or less of the aforementioned
Ferments, and their Bloods are by the Fermental Venoms contained in them, more
or less vapid, dis-spirited and impoverished, or apt to be so upon any small
Accident that way tending.

Next to the persons Scorbutically and Venereously Tainted, I may reckon those
that are immoderate in the exercise of Simple Venery; for, excess this way
wonderfully exhausteth the Spirits, and carries away as it were the Flower, and
most balsamic part of the Alimentary Juice, to the defrauding of the Mass of
blood of its noblest supply; so that it soon grows acid and acrimonious, and by
degrees Spiritless, Vapid, and Insipid. Such persons as these are very liable
to Fevers; and if they happen to be seized therewith, or any other Disease, the
opening of a Vein brings such damage as is scarce to be repaired.

It is to be observed likewise, that persons given to excess of Wine, or strong
Waters, or other Tiplings, do in tract of time lose the noble native Heat of
the body, and the Spirituous Balsamic part of the blood comes to evaporate and
spend it Self, by being infested with an extraneous preternatural Heat, and
with Crudities; and so the Mass becomes as vapid by this way of intemperance as
any other.

The like may be said concerning people of a sorrowful Frame of Heart, or that
are broken in their Fortunes, who are usually sick in mind rather then Body,
and the mind disorders the body. Be their Disease what it will, I never saw
them prosper with bleeding; or with the other Evacuations upward, or downward,
if violent, or frequent.

To these add also persons who are of little or no appetite to Feeding, or that
have an ill Concoction; for, their liquor within the Veins must needs be very
liveless, crude and vapid, seeing the Chyle comes to them imperfectly cocted;
This is very well noted also by Doctor Willis De F^br. Cap. 1.
, who says, that in men seemingly sound, after the more plentiful feeding and
playing the gluttons, perpetual Tiplings and large drinking Bouts, too great a
quantity of Serum or juice is infused into the Blood, so that its whole Mass
being too much diluted with crude Humor, becomes more watery, and the less
Spirituous; by which means men are rendered sluggish, and unapt for motion or
exercise. But none have a more defective state of-bloud, than those that are
worn and wasted by a long course of abstinence, hard labors, and Studies,
Fastings, and Watchings; For, the same Doctor well says, that in such Cases as
these, the vital Spirit being very much evaporated, the Mass of blood does
begin as it were to grow vapid, flat or dead. He says also, Ubi supra.
that Diseases many times induce such a Disposition of blood habitually; as do
the Scurvy, Jaundies, ill habit of Body, long Fevers and Agues, and the
greatest part of Chronick Diseases; in which the whole Mass of blood, passes
from a Spirituous nature into a sharp, acid, or austere. -- Now in all these
Cases and Constitutions, to venture upon drawing of blood, unless in case of
extreme necessity, is a thing so contrary to reason, as, not to be answered
before God or man, seeing that after the detracting of any portion from the
Mass, the slorid vivacious part which comes forth, though never so little, is
not to be made up again, where there is a redundance of crude, watery,
Spiritless liquor in the Veins, to drown and pervert all the succeeding
Alimentary Juice, that should be made use of and improved toward the
reparation of the loss.

4. Moreover, if there be at other times such a state of the blood, as that
which Hippocrates of old, and Doctor Willis of late, calls coagulated and
congeled, certainly wherever this state of blood is found, the reason holds
very strong here likewise against the opening of a Vein. Now doubtless, in all
those Scorbutic Dispositions which proceed from a fixed Salt, it is obvious
enough, that the blood not having the Spirit, and native Sulphur, sufficient to
attemper and exalt the Saline principle to its due state, it does by its
coagulating nature render the Mass of Blood the more thick, and unapt for
Circulation; and in this Case, it being in reason to be supposed, that the
Circulation which is, is performed by the most Spirituous and noblest part of
the Mass, what can be said but that when a Vein is opened, the noble and more
sprightly Juice is let forth, and the vicious left behind, to do mischief
sevensold more than ever it could do before?

Nor is it thus hazardous only in the common Chronick Scorbutic Dispositions;
for, Coagulations of some parts of the Mass of blood do happen upon many other
Accounts also of Acute Diseases, particularly in Continual Fevers. And very
pertinent to our purpose, for the explanation of this particular, is that other
place of the same learned Doctor, where he says, that the blood, after the
manner of Milk, is subject to many mutations within the Veins, and among the
rest, to be coagulated, congeled or curdled, by the accession of acid Humors,
and the like, that have a power to separate and curdle some part of the Mass.
His words are these; ^bi supra, circa finem.
as upon the opening of a Vein, the Blood that is drawn forth, does by a
spontaneous Coagulation, and separation of the parts from each other, imitate
the various substances of Curded or Turned Milk; so sometimes while it is
contained within the Veins and Arteries, it undergoes just such another
mutation by Morbifick Causes, as Milk does when it is imbued with the Runnet;
by which means the blood being Clogged or Hindered in its circulation, or in
some places congeled and settled by parcels, produces manifold Distempers;
among which, he reckons also Malign and Pestilential Fevers. And to this also
may be ascribed many Distempers of the Heart, and Lungs, while so
ill-conditioned a Blood passes through them in its circuit, and besides an ill
Tincture, leaves behind it some curdled portions, or else congeled Clodders,
sometimes to the suffocating, but often to the obsessing and distressing of
those two most noble Vital Instruments of the Body. To the like purpose he
speaks very well also toward the latter end of his second Chapter, which I have
mentioned also before, Sometimes (says he) there happens a preternatural
manner of effervescency or Ebullition of Blood, which induces such an
Alteration of it as befalls Milk; that is to say, sometimes there is induced a
coagulation of that Crimson liquor by a Morbifick Cause, so that its substance
being turned, separateth it Self into parts, and a secretion is made of the
gross and earthy part from the thin: by which means the blood is not so readily
circulaeed in the Vessels, but that portions of it like gelly, will be stagnant
and clogging in the way, to the causation of diverse Malign and pestilent
Distempers.

In his seventh Chapter, he says the same, that e Miasmate venenato Sanguinem
inficiente, ej usque liquorem congelante, Febres Malignae dependent, from a
venomous Miasma or Inquination infecting the blood, and congeling its liquor,
Malignant Fevers do depend. And in his fourteenth Chapter, which treats
particularly of Malign Fevers, he says, that the Malign Ferment causes a
coagulation of the blood by parts, which congeled portions cause a Necrosis or
inward Mortification, with a Syncope or dejection of Spirits. Which he repeats
again in his 15. Chapter touching the small Pox and the Measels; and a little
afterward says, that the blood being Tainted with the Ferment of the small
Pox is apt to coagulate; and that the prime Intention in curing them is, that
the motion of the blood should be preserved from Stagnancy, and that the
congeled or gellied venomous portions of it be driven out toward the skin; in
which respect I cannot but wonder that so learned a man, after he has said
thus much, should allow bleeding, if there be a Plethorie, as he does express
himself in the same place; whereas reason must needs hold very strong against
it, because if there be in the small Pox and Measels (as he says) a venomous
or Malignant Miasma, and an aptness in the blood to coagulate, and if the venom
cannot be drawn away by bleeding in any Malignant Disease (as he signifies
sufficiently in the foregoing Chapters) nor the congeled portions of the Mass
of blood be let forth (which in other places he grants;) I say if these things
be so, I would sain know then, whether that which is emitted from the Vein be
not purior pars Sanguinis, the most florid Vital part of the blood, and whether
it being drained out of the Body, it be not in reason to be expected afterward,
that Nature being debilitated by its loss, the venom having less of good juice
within the Veins to control it, must needs grow the more tyrannous, and the
gellied por^ions become the less conquerable, and the circulatory motion much
more slow, and less equal, when that vital and more sprightly juice whith
should subdue, and quicken them to motion, and drive them forth toward the
Skin, is separated from them? In such case, certainly a pretense of Plethorie
is not passable, because Plethorie properly is but a Simple Fullness; but in
these Diseases, the most cogent Indications are to be taken from the Malignity
or venenosity of the Miasma, and from the obstinacy of the matter; that is to
say, of those congeled or gellied portions, which exasperate Nature, and hinder
the purification of the Mass, and deprive it of its regular equal Motion
throughout the Body. Therefore I suppose at this time, the worthy Doctor (who I
perceive is not very fond of Bleeding) might be carried aside a little with the
stream of Practisers; whose common Hypothesis has been heretofore, that Nature
being by Bleeding eased of part of the hurden of Morbifick matter, is by that
means the more enabled to deal with the Remainder: But as in these Malignant
Diseases, Bleeding carries not away the Malignity; so where the offending
matter within the Veins is grown grumous, curdled, or gellied, it is not to be
imagined that the Prick of a Lancet can let it forth, but it will make way
rather for a loss of the fluid and more lively part.

No marvel therefore, that we in these North parts of the world, whose Bloods
are more naturally abounding with crude, serous, acrimonious Humors, and
consequently more inclinable to those Coagulations, do by experience find it so
exceedingly destructive to draw blood in Fevers (which are most of them
Malignant) and in many other Diseases (there being Malignancy and acidity
almost in all). And for Fevers, it is intolerable to see how customary this
course continues among us, it being a matter of course, insomuch that if a
Patient die which has not bled for a Fever, many of the better sort, taken
with Foreign Fashions, are apt to think it is for want of Bleeding. It Is not to
be denied but cases extraordinary may happen to indicate it necessary, but then
it should be admitted only upon such occasions, and not practiced as a matter
of course in our Climate: And the more suspicion there is of any Malignity, the
more it is to be avoided.

Hear therefore what our grave German Author Thonerus says further about this
matter. And it is not by virtue of his own opinion only, that he was against
the opening of a Vein in his Climate, which is of so near a nature to ours;
but he Thonerus, observe. Med. ubi supra.
brings in the Suffrages of other most eminent German Physicians, as Joannes
Agricola an excellent Chemist and Practitioner, who in his Book entitled Parva
Chirurgia, says, that letting of Blood in a Malignant Fever is deadly,
especially if it be delayed twenty four hours after the first seizure made by
the Disease; and that he had observed above a hundred destroyed by Bleeding. To
him agrees also that famous Practitioner Rulandus, who plainly professes,
that he always found it pernicious, and that though the Veins have been
opened at the very first, yet the Fevers were thereby the more exasperated, and
the more grievous Symptoms followed; for, (says he) the Feverish Fomes does
not consist in a Plethorie, but in a Cacochymie. Add to these also the learned
Italian Fracastorius Lib. De Morb. Contag.
, who says, that when those Malignant Fevers which showed themselves with
spots, began first to spread in Italy, the Physicians pursued the old course of
Bleeding, and though they began the cure with it, yet they all died that had a
Vein opened. And if the Course proved so destructive even in Italy, in a
Disease that had Malignancy in it, what shall we think then of it in our
Climate, and in this Age, where not only Fevers, but most other Diseases have a
Malignant and Contagious Ferment rooted in them?

And notwithstanding what slipped before, I find Doctor Willis also (who has
had the honor of opening the eyes of the world, more than any before him, about
the nature of Fevers) very positive against Bleeding: For in his ninth Chapter
he says, it is found by observation, that frequent letting of Blood renders
men more apt to Fevers, wherefore it is commonly said, that those who once let
blood are inclined to a Fever, unless they do the same every year. And in his
fourteenth Chapter, that where Malignity is, there, upon evacuation by
Catharticks, or by Bleeding, Malignitas plerumque augetur, it is for the most
part increased, and, if not heeded, more largely diffuseth its venom. And how
can it be otherwise? seeing the Cause of the Disease is many times so seated,
that a strong Purge will not easily reach the place, much less will Bleeding be
a means to evacuate any thing from thence: For, the Doctor and the best part of
Authors do determine, that Malign Fevers for the most part Chap. 1^.
are seated in the Animal Spirits, or in that Spirituous subtle liquor which
is abounding in the Brain, the Nerves, and all the Nervous parts; and their
venom takes impression the more profoundly, if the Patients have been oppressed
either with Fears, or Griefs: These things the Doctor takes notice of as a
great matter in the producing and qualification of those Fevers: To which give
me leave to add my own observation; that I never saw any person so oppressed,
that has been seized with any Fever, but the Disease grew worse after
Bloodletting, and the Cure much more difficult; but in Malign Fevers all
things have proved so bad after it, that very few have escaped, but have
immediately visibly drawn on toward Destruction. And the like may be said of
persons that have been much delighted with, or debilitated by venereous
exercises, Watchings, hard Studies, etc. or any Course of life that brings on a
dissipation and poverty of Spirit, though otherwise their habit of body may
seem never so Plethorick, fleshy, or Sanguine. -- But to return to the main; if
it be so in Fevers of a Malign Nature, that the labes of their venom usually
lurks in the Animal Spirits, and in the Spirituous liquor wherewith the Nerves
and Nervous parts are irrigated and stored; and seeing it is in the nature of
every Venom and Contagion whatsoever that befalls the Body, to take the course
toward the Brain and the Nervous parts and liquors, and there seat themselves,
as is evident in all Pocky and Scorbutic Malignities, I would fain know which
way Bleeding, which drains only the Venal Blood, should be of use to relieve a
Disease seated in so abstruse and remote passages as the Nerves; and what the
evacuation of blood can contribute to the amending of a default contained in a
nobler and more Spirituous liquor; and whether it be not a dangerous mistake,
to aim at an eventilation and an allaying of ebullitions and Fervors of blood,
when the Fever is caused and continued by an effervescence and exagitation of
the other Liquor aforesaid; and what a madness it is, in such Fevers to
consider a putredinous state in the Humors of the Mass of blood, whenas the
Disease mainly consists in Spirit? Moreover, seeing the Pocky, and Scorbutic
Ferments are so rise and general in this Age, that they get more or less into
all Diseases, and induce a Malignity in them (as has been already shown) it is
worthy the care and study of Physicians to consider, whether Fevers in general
have not a Touch of Malignity in our Age, upon that account, as (I have shown
you) Helmont does wisely determine; and consequently whether in our days,
Fevers by the direction of those Malign and Contagious Fermenss, have not
changed their usual Quarters in the Veins, Arteries, and Bowels, and taken up
new ones in the Nervosum genus, the Brain and Nervous parts; and so whether the
main battle in contending against them ought not to be maintained by
Alexipharmacal Remedies, others than those in common use, and such as are more
appropriate to the Nature of those Fermental Venoms, rather than by Bleeding
and other evacuations? He who observes in these days, almost in every Fever,
yea and in Agues, what little Spasms, Vellications, Convulsive Motions,
Tremblings, Stupors, Rigors, Torpors, drowsy and delirious Symptoms, and the
like distempers incident to the Nervous parts, are attending, and much more
frequently than in former time, will easily grant, that Fevers do for the most
part settle in the liquor of the Brain, and of its Nervous Appendants; and so
that Bloodletting, serving only to debilitate persons, because it cannot reach
the offending Cause, must needs be out of Doors, together with the ordinary
languid Julips and Cordials of the Shops. To say no more of this, I have been
very much confirmed in my Judgment, by observing the Practice of one who is no
Academian, but an ancient Practiser, of a good Insight into Nature, and
exceeding dextrous and Successful in curing Fevers (a grand multitude daily
flocking to him) and yet he draws no blood, and very seldom uses other
evacuation than by breathing Sweats, procured by the use of Alexipharmacal
means, such as oppose Malignity, and by dissolving, or discussing the
coagulated or gellied portions of the Mass of blood, do restore the blood into
a due course of Circulation, and preserve it so, till the Malignity be subdued,
and dissipated per Diaphoresin, that is to say in English, by a breathing forth
or transpiration through the Skin. And what is said here against Blooding in
Fevers, etc. is by a parity of Reason applicable to diverse other Acute
Diseases; yea and much more to those that are Chronical, seeing the
Coagulations and Congelations here described are most frequent in them, by
reason of the acrimonious Crudities and Acidities which in these days are in
Vogue among them. Nevertheless, where Customary evacuations of blood by
Menstruals, Haemorrhoids, and the like, are suppressed; or if Patients have
been often used to Bloodletting for their Distempers, somewhat may, in such
cases, be indulged to necessity and custom, but not without the good
consideration and care of a wise wary Physician.

5. If it be true, which the most learned and industrious Inquirers of this Age
do now hold, that in the work of Sanguification, it is the Blood which makes
Blood; viz. that the power of converting the Chyle or Alimentary Juice into new
Blood, depends upon the goodness and the validity of the old Mass, which is
supposed to give it the true Tincture and Transmutation, then the drawing forth
of the Crimson liquor in all the Cases beforementioned, wherein either the
Spirits are decayed, or the Mass is vitiated, does but disable Nature from
making a new supply, as I have before endeavored to illustrate; and so
thereupon arises a just exception in innumerable Cases against Bloodletting.
Therefore it will be very much to the purpose also, here to cite what is
delivered by the same Doctor in several places, to show, that such a state of
Blood is prevalent in the causation of most Fevers, and thereupon to argue
against Bleeding in that case. In his first Chapter D^ F^br.
he says thus: If the supply of the Alimentary Juice be not congenerous with
the blood nor assimilated to it, but, by reason of a defect of coction, is
wholly diluted into a crude humor, it is a principal cause of perverting the
Mass, and rendering it sometimes waterish and cold, sometimes sharp or Salt, and
sometimes acid, austere, and degenerated from its natural state after one
manner or another, and becomes liable to be stagnant, i. e. defective in
motion, or subject to Feverish Ebullitions, and is a cause of Paroxysms or Fits
in Agues and Fevers. This he confirms also in his third Chapter, saying, that
the Esservescence of blood in Agues, which constitutes the Fit, depends only
upon the non assimilation of the Alimentary Juice to the Blood; and that the
said Juice daily supplied out of our daily Food, not being duly digested and
Sanguified by mixtion with the old Mass, does degenerate into watery crude
humor, which Nature not being able to subdue, is provoked to that Feverish
disturbance, which we call a Fit; and the Returns of it are not taken off, till
the offending Juice be removed out of the Body. To this Sense is much of that
Chapter, and he repeats it in his sixth Chapter when he comes to treat of
Quartan Agues; which may be applied also to most other Agues, because though
they have another Type and Formality, yet they have much of the Nature of a
Quartan, by reason of the Scorbutic Acidities predominant in them more than
heretofore, and that is the main reason why they are all become as difficult to
be cured now, as Quartans were of old; so that drawing of Blood and other
Evacuations are as little to be allowed in them, as in the Quartans; wherein
the learned Doctor says, Evacuators do not procure one jot of advantage, but
rather by depauperating the Blood, destroy the strength; whereas the right way
to cure is, to reduce the Mass from its crude acid state, by such remedies as
will new Spirit the blood, and volatilize it.

In a word, there is this to be said touching the different effects of Bleeding
betwixt the Northern and the finer parts of the world; They bear it much
better, because their blood is endued naturally with a greater plenty of
Spirits, than ours, and has less of that Serosa Colluvies with which the
Northern men do abound; so that in the more delicate Countries when Blood is
drawn, those Spirits which are lost thereby are, because of their plenty,
better spared, and sooner repaired; partly by the benignity of the Na^ive Air,
and partly (yea especially) by the notable power of Assimilation which is in
their Blood, much beyond others; which quickly supplies them with Blood again,
because there is not in their Veins such a Flood of acid and vapid Serosities
to drown and pervert the new Chyle, so as thereby to hinder the work of
Assimilating it to the stock of Blood which remains behind; and therefore it
is, that as they bear the loss better, in regard of a greater store of Spirits,
so the reparation of the stock of Blood and Spirits is much quicker, in regard
of the more sure and speedy dispatch of Sanguification. Now in the Northern
Climates, especially in a cloudy dripping Island, as ours is, where the Air is
not so impregnated with clear luminous Ethereal and Spirituous Atoms, as theirs
is, and consequently not so near of kin to the Spirit of man; as it cannot be
expected here should be so great a plenty of Spirits in our blood; so likewise
it is but reasonable (which is observed by Writers) that our Mass of blood
should be floated with a greater quantity of Crude Serosities, and consequently
that we should be not so able to bear Bleeding, because of the paucity of
Spirits; nor so likely to repair what Blood is lost, because the Remainder has
less power to assimilate and Sanguifie the succeeding Alimentary Juice or
Chyle. So that consider the different flate of the generality of men in the
various Climates and Countries, and we see there is reason why they should
generally approve Bleeding, and be relieved; and why we should have a general
Aversation to it, so as not to permit the practice of it to be so general and
customary, as in more delicate Airs and Countries, when we daily see it so
destructive in our own. Away then with those Maxims and Methods of the Ancients
about Phlebotomy, which were calculated for the practice of another Climate:
And yet I deny not but some particular Cases may require it here; only the
Customariness and commonness of the thing ought to be exploded. For the
illustration and confirmation of our D^scourse about this matter, methinks that
that of Heurnius is very pertinent, setting forth the nature of our Northern
blood and Spirits, that they are qualified according to the Air; Institut. Med.
lib 3. cap. 8.
The Spirits of men (says he) are variously affected by Aliments, and by the
external Air; from whence it comes to pass, that those people which inhabit the
cold parts of the world, by reason of their Dense or gross Spirits, which flow
from a thick Blood, are stout and formidable, and fearless of danger, etc. The
Asiaticks and such other finer Nations, have a finer blood and Spirits, etc.
They have finer, and more Spirits, but more easily dissipable by Action, and by
the fineness of their Air, and of their Blood, the sooner repairable after Act
on. On the other side, we having more gross Spirits, by reason of the thickness
and fogginess of our Air, and of our Blood, those Spirits of ours are not so
easily dissipated, and remain strong even after action; but because when we
lose our blood and Spirits together by Bleeding, they are not so easily or
suddenly repairable, in regard of the abundance of Serous (yea and gross)
Crudities which always float in the Mass, more than in warmer and clearer
Countries; therefore it is, that though we be more stout and valiant in Acting,
and will fight in blood to the last, when others shrink and fail, yet
afterward we generally feel more damage by loss of Blood, than the other are
wont to do. -- But yet after all this, it is reported of the Turks, that though
they live in those delicate Quarters of the Earth, they use not Bleeding, but
are cured of their Diseases without it: which causes wonder, that other
Nations (as the French, Italians, Spaniards, and Portugals) breathing in the
like Climates, should hold it so necessary, as that they seem not, in most
sicknesses, to hope for any relief without it.

I might to these reasons of my own add here also the Reasonings of Helmont;
but they are too large, and I have already driven out this Treatise to a
greater length than I intended; only it is fit you take notice of what is said by
his Epitomiser D^ Febr. lib. 2. cap. 2
Grembs, who after he has reckoned up the several Arguments, concludes the
Discourse about Fevers thus; That the opening of a Vein is a Fraudulent Remedy,
and that by it no man can with any assurance promise health: And whereas Nature
is the Curer of Diseases, by how much the stronger she is maintained, so much
the more happy she is in doing her work; and whereas in the course of the
Disease she is sufficiently weakened by fasting, want of sleep, and other
Accidents, it cannot be convenient to add weaking to weankness by letting of
Blood. And he further signifies in the same Chapter, that bloodletting has
hitherto been tolerated, only upon this Account, that Physicians have not been
Masters of such powerful Medicines as might be effectual without it, and that it
would be no longer tolerable to continue the Custom, if such Remedies were
invented: wherefore, if ignorance of nobler Medicaments in ancient time, first
brought it into practice, in Countries where it might be better tolerated than
in ours, then certainly in this Age and Climate, where so many Reasons lie
against it, and where God has given a heart and wisdom to some laborious
Students to find out better Medicines and Methods, it is intolerable to see so
many of our Countrymen nursed up in an opinion, that hardly any Cure can be
wrought without it.

And as it tends not upon good account, toward the curation of those many
Diseases, in which it is commonly reputed necessary; so the same Author says
also it is pernicious being used under pretense of preservation; (...). 3. de
^^^vitate vitae humanae, cap. 1.
prava ista consuetudo, etc. that ill custom of opening a Vein is no small
cause of shortning a man's life; so that it is a wonder to see, that there is
scarce a House in the City, wherein they use it not twice a year; so prodigal
they are of wasting the Treasure of life! Yea more (says he) I have known very
many persons, very inclinable to an ill habit of body, and weaknesses of the
Liver, and yet were so bold as to draw blood every year, and so it is no wonder
they were afterward snatched away by untimely death. And in the same place he
adds this, Hanc malam comsuetudinem non praepediunt Chirurgi and Tonsores,
blaming such Chirurgians and Barbers as do not hinder this wicked Custom, which
preyeth upon our Vital parts, cuts off the thread of life, accelerates an early
death, and is in cause that even the strongest men have no long life; as is
witnessed by experience. Thus He.

And so this is all that at this time I shall communicate upon this Subject of
Phlebotomy; intending a more copious Discourse hereafter, if there shall be
occasion.

VI. The last Particular that I mean now to insist on, is an examination of the
state of Medicin, in respect of Medicaments, the old Scholastic Recipes or
Compositions, which have been continued hitherto in the practice of Physic. I
have in part shown you before, by many Inferences made upon the parts of my
discourse in the several Chapters, how insufficient those Medicines must needs
be which are in the reason of them grounded upon wrong Suppositions: For, as I
told you, Mr. Boil Exper. Phil. part. 1. p. 66.
has very well shown, that the Doctrinals, and the Dogmatical Method, and the
common Remedies, have a dependence upon each other. Indeed, if you keep to the
Doctrine, you must hold to the Medicines; and if you use the Medicines, you must
proceed in the Method, according to that Heathenish Galenick Doctrine. For, it is
true, that An error in the Foundation cannot be amended in the Superstructure:
If the trifling Notions of Elements, Qualities, Temperaments, Complexions, etc.
be out of doors, what remains then, but to pray, that the crude, sulsom,
ill-conditioned Messes and Mixtures, and Liquors, which are fitted to those
Notions, may be thrown out of doors also? And if there be so great an
Alteration of Diseases (as I have proved) and they proceeding (for the most
part) from new Causes unknown to the Ancients, and of a much more mysterious
Nature than formerly, (great Alterations having fallen out in the narrow
Compass of twenty years past) what remains but that we ought to think also of
another way of Pharmacie, for making of new Medicines; and not to destroy
Apothecaries, but to rectify and encourage them? As the Case now stands with
them, they are under a miserable drudgery (and I have heard some of them sigh
at it) that Custom prevailing for the use of so many Horrid Electuaries,
Lohocs, strange contrived Pills, crude Drossie Syrups, endless varieties of
unguents, and Plasters, most of which are useless (and were they meliorated
would yet be of little use) they are obliged to drudge and toil to have all
these things in readiness, or else they must lose their Customers; and if they
have not Customers enough to take them off, they must stand and perish upon
their hands; whereas if these were mended by preparation, and reduced to a very
small number; or rather if the stream of their employment were turned, by
putting them upon a Materia Medica formed for the most part in the noble way of
Chemical Preparation, they might, without that great ado which is made every
year, provide themselves in one year for seven or more years, of Medicines not
liable to corruption, and in the usage, of much more advantage and pleasure to
their Patients. In the mean while, it is pity to see so many ingenious men as
are of that Profession, one of the worthy Companies of this great City,
condemned as it were to a Trade much like the Confectioners; the greatest part
of which are, as things now stand, exposed to a Temptation to exceed their
usual Bounds, and to relieve themselves, renounce obedience to their Galenick
Masters; in which course, it is humbly submitted to better Judgment, whether
they do right to their Friends and Countrymen, or not; and whether a Toleration
may not be given them to preserve themselves from ruin, till there be more
proper Doctrins and Medicines instituted, in order to the practice of Physic;
for, what use can there be of that piece of state the mere Scholastic Doctor,
when the Apothecary sometimes must direct him, and at all times, as well, if
not better, understands the Medicines, than he that seldom has seen the making
of a Medicin? or why should the sick be put to a double Charge for their cure,
when as a common knowledge of the use of common Medicines is likely to render
them more effectual in the hands of an Apothecary, that uses them in such a
Method as his own experience and Mother-wit will direct him, than in the hands
or by the Prescript of such a Titular Doctor, as follows only that erroneous
Method hitherto commended by the Schools? For my part, were I in a sick
condition, and ignorant of the Art of Physic, and were there a necessity that
I must submit to a Cure in the old way of means, I would rather commit my self
into the hands of a prudent Apothecary, or of any prudent Practiser that is no
Scholar, than venture my life at the dispose of any other Practiser that
pedantically pins himself up to the old Scholastic Learning and Medicines;
because he that is no formal Doctor will probably follow his own observation
and experience, as he finds things altered in the Age and Climate wherein he
lives, and so may hit on a cure, because he projects to himself such Means and
Method, as seem agreeable to suuh Alteration; whereas a Doctor that is inspired
with the Divinity of Hippocrates and Galen, having heard them boast in their
Books, that their Maxims and Remedies are little less than infallible, and will
hold so, in all Ages and Countries, to the end of the world, usually comes with
those narrow antiquated Notions to the management of a Cure, and so must needs
miss the mark, because things are otherwise now (though he will not believe it)
than they were in the days of old, or in the Countries of Greece, Italy, and
Arabia, from whence the common Oracles and Compositions are transmitted to us.
Therefore doubtless the Apothecaries have reason to desire Favor in order to
their Support and Maintenance; and the Sick, in many Cases, may with reason
make use of the one, as well as, or without the other: And, admit there be a
necessity (as there seems to be) of other Doctrins and Medicines in this Age and
Quarter of the world, then certainly if the Dogmatick Physicians will not be
converted, the Apothecaries have reason to leave them, and betake themselves
more fully to the Study of Chemical Philosophy, and Chemical Preparations; and
it is advisable for them to fall upon this course betimes, if they mean to
preserve their Trade, because now adays Princes, and Nobles generally
apprehend the usefulness, gentleness, pleasantness and mighty power of Medicines
so prepared, and what a Fulsomness and Insufficiency there is in the other: So
that while it gains ground every day among the ingenious part of men, it is
easy to foresee what the state of Physic will be after twenty years more are
past, when Death shall have disposed of some few Practitioners, that are (as
they think) too old and wise to learn better things.

It Is not to be presumed I can be an enemy to a company of men so considerable,
and of so great ingenuity as the Apothecaries, because I wish a Reformation of
their Shops, that they may be eased of that yoke that is imposed upon them, and
furnish themselves with finer and less bulkie Medicines, such as may invite
Physicians of the new and nobler way to employ them; which cannot be expected,
till they have laid aside the other Medicaments: For otherwise, necessity will
constrain Physicians to erect Laboratories, and take to the making of such
Preparations within the compass of their own Houses, as will better fit and
furnish them, for a finer and more delicate course of Practice. And if this
Advice will not be hearkened to from me, they may do well to give ear to a
learned and most ingenious Member of their own Profession, I mean Monsieur Le
Febure, the Kings Royal Professor in Chemistry, and Apothecary in ordinary to
the Household, who having dedicated to his Majesty the Book called A Complete
Body of Chemistry, directs also an Epistle Entitled To the Apothecaries of
England, wherein he tells them, that he has, and always shall have the same
Tenderness for them, as he has had for his own Countrymen the French
Apothecaries: That the end of his endeavors in his undertaking is, to advance
the dignity of Pharmacy, that is to say, the Art of the Apothecary, which now
lies bending toward its ruin, if it be not upheld by its true Arches and
Pillars, the faithful learned experienced and curious Physicians; and that you
may perceive he does not mean the Galenick Doctors, he names those notable
Chemists of the French Nation, Doctor Duhan, late public Professor at Sedan,
Doctor Clos of Paris, who (as he says) did him the favor to correct his
Defaults, and lead him by the hand through all his endeavors; and Doctor Vallot
the French Kings chief Physician at present, under whom he served as that Kings
Apothecary, to perform operations by his direction for a true course of
Pharmacy, which is Chemistry; so that you see the chiefest Physicians of our
neighbor Kingdom have for some time been laboring to settle the Profession of
Apothecaries upon a new and better, viz. the Chemical Foundation: For a little
after he says, He gives nothing in his Book to the Apothecaries but what he
first received from the Physicians, so that it is to them only that they owe
the obligation. And he invites the Apothecaries to a falling to a more true and
legitimate course of Preparation than formerly, as the only means to attain
better Remedies and Compositions; and tells them, that he has undertaken this
labor for their sakes, because he never yet found one that has taken the pains
or care, to show and discover punctually the manner of operating upon things to
preserve their virtue and correct their defaults; and that they may observe the
difference there is in the correction of those Medicaments which are made
according to the opinions and directions of ancient Pharmacie, with that which
is directed and commanded by the Modern, viz. the Chemical; and that they may
observe likewise the Envy and Malice of those that carp at and rail against
Chemistry, whilst they through ignorance exclaim, that this admirable Art is
not employed by its followers, save only on Poisons, whereas they will find
Chemical Preparations of Animals and Vegetables, as well as of other things.

Now other Apothecaries perceiving, not only by the words of this Apothecarie
Royal, but by the current of the stream of Practice running every day in other
Nations and our own also, toward this new and more safe, as well as delicate
way of preparation of Medicines, grounded upon a new and more certain Philosophy
than the Scholastic, must needs be at a great stand what to do; for, in regard
that the pedantick Galenists, and the Semi-Chymists of the Town, know not how
to attempt a cure, but by prescribing the old stuff, in pursuance of the old
Dogmatical Learning, therefore the Apothecaries must have that stuff in
readiness, or else they lose the benefit of that sort of Practice: and whereas
on the other hand, the later and more excellent Brood of Physicians do every
day run under the Wings of Chemistry, and addict themselves only to
Experimental and more rational Learning, and to the inventing and using of more
noble Medicaments than the Shops as yet afford, there is a necessity lying on
these Physicians, for the good of their Country, as well their own honor and
content in the discharge of a good Conscience, to decline the use of that old
fulsom (and for the most part) unwholsom stuff (the best of it being but dull
languid, and of little efficacy to encounter the strange Hydraes of Diseases in
this Age, or so much as to reach them in their lurking Dens and Centres of
residence or retirement) and so not finding in the Shops what is agreeable to
the new, they instead of sending Bills thither (as the fashion is) are
constrained either to make Preparations in their own Houses, or else borrow and
buy of one another what they know to be right and fit for their purpose: by
which means most of the Apothecaries are strangers to them, and lose the
greatest part of advantage, which otherwise might accrue to their Society by
this new and nobler way of practice. What remains then for remedy and support
to so worthy a Society as the Apothecaries, but that they should for present
maintenance be indulged to make use of their own Medicines, at their own
Discretion, among the Sick, seeing the prudent part of them understand the
nature of them, and the old road of practice belonging to them, as well as (if
not better than) the Galenists? For, unless numerous Families be impoverished,
there seems to be a kind of necessity of such indulgence, till the old Galenick
Formalities be reformed, or laid to sleep, and a more useful state of
Pharmacie, and of Physical learning, can by degrees be admitted and settled in
their place, that so the Shops and the Physicians may mutually correspond
again, and flourish in due time, by being established upon more sure
Foundations, and upon a more rational course of Practice, than ever can be
attained to by a pursuance of the old Scholastic Precepts, Methods and
Medicines; which appear every year more fruitless and Worm-eaten than formerly,
and a very few years experience more will give them a Passport.

For, most excellently speaks Fernelius in this, as in many other things, who
though he died a Galenist, it must be imputed to the time wherein he lived,
rather than his own default; for, though the noble Art of Chemical Experimental
Philosophy and Physic lay then very much in the dark, yet the notable brain of
that man had formed to himself many more sublime Notions touching Nature and
her operations, than the common Crambe of the Schools afforded; as may be seen
by that refined Piece of his De Abditis Rerum Causis, concerning the hidden
Causes of Things; which whoever reads will find he had so much good Philosophy
in his head, as had he lived in this Age to see what we see, would quickly have
brought him off to an imbracement of the profession of Chemical Physic. For,
he saw well enough, that Diseases in his days began to alter, and gives us to
understand, that if there be an Alteration of the state of them, it must be
also in the state of Medicin.

In his 17. Chapter De Abd. ^er. Causis.
treating of the occult powers of Medicaments, and of occult Diseases, he
shows, that neither of them are to be considered according to the ordinary way
of calculation upon Qualities, Temperaments, and the like. By occult Diseases
he means such as do not lie in a distemper of Elements and Qualities, but have
a higher and more secret Cause, which is termed a tot a substantia destructive
of Nature. By occult powers of Medicaments, he means such as have a higher and
more secret Faculty or power provenient a tot a substantia, to oppose and
conquer those occult Diseases, without consideration of Temper or Distemper
arising from Qualities, etc. In a word, by occult Diseases are to be understood
such new ones as have a Malignity in them, which render them not definable by
the common Schemes of Galenick Philosophy; and occult Medicaments are to be
apprehended such, as by a specific or peculiar power oppose and subdue
Diseases, rather than by contrary Qualities and Tempers. But take him in his
own Expressions, and he says thus: I have (says he) already shown, that there
are those occult silent and secret Powers in things, and that they are
contained within the limits of Nature: For, Si occulti Morbi, necesse est and
contraria illis, occultaque remedia, existere.
if occult Diseases at any time arise, there is a necessity that there should
be occult remedies contrary to them. There is nothing in this whole world, to
which Nature has not produced somewhat that is like (or agreeable) and somewhat
that is contrary, although it cannot be found out by our diligence. Therefore,
as against Diseases proceeding from Distemper, we oppose virtues which are of a
Distemper contrary; and against Diseases proceeding from matter, contrary
faculties of matter; and against instrumentary Diseases, the second powers or
virtues of Medicament, which arise from the powers of the Temperament and of
the matter mixed together: So truly in occult Diseases a tota substantia, it is
necessary that nature should provide contrary powers, which are themselves also
occult, and by disagreement a tota substantia contrary to them. For, shall we
think such strange Diseases should lie as incurable and destitute of proper
remedies? or that nature should be so exceedingly defective, as not to afford
us things necessary for life? Therefore in the nature of those Faculties and
Qualities, which slow a tota substantia, many orders or degrees are to be
placed, whose extremes are contrary: Of these some are disagreeable, and wholly
enemies to us; on the contrary, others are tota substantia both friendly and
familiar, and as it were preservative of our life. These are they which are
customarily called the occult Proprieties of Medicaments. Thus far he; the
result of which Discourse is, that if a new and occult nature of Diseases does
at any time start up, there must be occult new and noble Arcanaes made use of
to cure them. To which Testimony of Fernelius, let me add also that of the best
of the old Physicians, I mean the prudent Celsus, who tells us in his Preface,
that there do often happen new kinds of Diseases, of which no Account can be
given by common experience. And therefore it in such case is necessary to
consider upon what account they began; without which no mortal man can
understand, why he should use one Remedy rather than another. Now to apply this
to our present business; seeing I have made it in some measure apparent, what
the Reasons and Causes are of the strange Newness that is in all manner of
Diseases; and the new Causes being known how it began; and Celsus affirming the
Remedies must be proportionate to their Nature, and consequently new; and
Fernelius avowing, that occult and mysterious Diseases must have mysterious
Medicines to cure them; and the Medicines of the Shops not reaching the
mysterious nature of the Maladies of this Age, but being the best of them but
languid, because most of them proportionated only to the exterior Phenomenon of
Diseases, and not aiming at their internal central natures or essences, but
being devised to answer and qualify obvious Qualities and Temperaments in the
main of Medical practice, and of the Compositions thereto belonging, the use of
them is to be left to such as neither know nor seek after better, if they can
get the Sick to submit to them any longer. Petet autem Medicus novum Consilium,
non a rebus latentibus (istae enim dubiae and incertae sunt) sed ab his quae
explorari possunt. When the world is at this pass, then (says Celsus) it
concerns the Physician to entertain new Counsel, not deriving it from things
latent (for those are dubious and uncertain) but from such as may by inquiry be
made manifest: and this prudent Admonition (I say) should excite all Physicians
in this Age of Wonders in Diseases, to entertain new Counsels for the invention
of Medicines which may suit with the variation of Diseases. What fulsom odious
violent stuff was in use in the days of Galen! which if a man should now use,
he had need have a Farriers Horn to force it down the throats of his Patients.
Afterward, when the state of Medicaments was amended by the Arabians, they
being (as Epist. Med. lib. 2. Ep. 2.
Langius observes) Medicamentis Graecorum Medicis opulentiores, stored better
with Medicines than the Greek Physicians, though the use of Rhubarb, Senna,
Cassia, Manna, and other fine things, was brought on, and better Compositions
invented; yet they remained still mighty lothsom and ill-conditioned: And last
of all, when Chemistry began to show it self, and held forth a greater purity
of Medicin, after the Hot Heads of the Galenists then ruling had been cooled in
their Graves, and their Reproaches buried with them, their Successors by
degrees began to refine their Practice, and meliorate the Shop-Compositions,
and what they did of that nature was done by virtue of Notions borrowed from
such as they in scorn termed Paracelsians: and yet after all that they have
done to this day, though they cannot so amend the old Slops and Messes, as to
make them friendly to nature, and acceptable to the Stomach, they still retain
them, because they are loath to take pains to learn new and better means of
practice; for, as Monsieur Le Febure well says, In his Preliminary Discou^se.
they think it becomes not them to set their hands to work, to attain a true
knowledge of mixed Bodies by Chemical Anatomy. They, and their Sectators, imagine
they should wrong their Gravity and Doctoral state, to desile and fully their
hands with the blackness of Coals; to which saying of his, let me add, that it
is much more ease and profit, to lie a bed when the name is up, or instead of
viewing old Books to spend their time in Studying old Nurses, and Midwives,
with the Creatures, the Humors, and the Interests of Families: this is quickly
done with a Diploma in a man's Pocket to authorize a Doctor. But (that I may
continue the words of that ingenious Frenchman) the Course of Chemical
Philosophers and Physicians has been quite contrary; their learning lies not
in Philosophical Maxims raised by contemplation, but are persuaded that
operation ought to be joined to it, to attain full delight and satisfaction,
and lay firm and sure Foundations to their Reasonings; being unwilling to build
upon the quick sands of vain, frivolous, and fantastical opinions: which makes
them willing to undergo the charges, Toil, and labor of practical Chemistry,
and not be discouraged by watchings and ill scents and savors, that they may
the sooner attain to a solid and delightful knowledge of the works of Nature,
and find out by the several experiments of their works and Processes, the
abstruse Causes of her wonderful effects. For, it is a very difficult matter
for any to attain to the exact knowledge of things Natural, without the
previous guidance of Chemistry, and an acquaintance therewith; neither can any
be reckoned a perfect Physician without the help of Hermetick Philosophy, since
it is the truest ground of Physic, without which no Practitioner can deserve
any other Title than that of Emperick. It is not a Gown, nor a Degree taken in
Universities, which makes a man a Physician, but a solid knowledge of Nature:
To which I may add, that it is not a crossing the Sea, to buy that Degree
abroad in Foreign parts, and a returning home swollen with Title and confidence.
But there is a Theorie belonging to Chemistry, as well as a manual operation.
The Theorie directs to a knowledge of the real parts and principles of mixed
Bodies; and he who is not acquainted with them is a mere Emperick, though
perhaps pufft up with Scholastic Learning, seeing he is altogether ignorant of
the internal Principles of the Bodies of men and Living creatures, and of
Vegetables and Minerals, and is therefore unable, either to invent a proper
Medicin, or to give true Physical reasons why he does administer such or such a
remedy for such or such a Disease, because he considers not things real, as the
Chemical Physicians do; and he knows not, that the rare Prescriptions of
Chemistry have their Medicines grounded, not upon the actions of First and
Second Qualities (which the Galenists are wont to mind) but upon the internal
Specifical virtues of their Chemical Principles. Thus far then I enlarge in
the Sense of this most ingenious Artist: by whom it is sufficiently intimated,
that the Medicaments of the Galenists imposed upon the poor Apothecaries, being
grounded upon the low Notions of Qualities and Temperaments, cannot reach to
the Center of any considerable Disease. But that they are so grounded, you
shall not take my word only for it, but have it acknowledged by one of the best
of the Galenists themselves, I mean Langius, who in his time was chief
Physician to five Princes Palatine of the Empire; and after he has found fault
with the vain Compositions used in Shops, concludes thus, Epist. Med. 76.
Nec Medicamentorum Compositiones recte Methodo concinnatas despuo, quas cum
contrarietatis proportione oporteat morbo esse analogas. Remediorum igitur and
Medicamentorum compositionis esse easdem Indicationes Galenus asserit, and
recta curandi morbos ratio quae contrariis constat, exigit. I do not despise
such Compositions of Medicines as are made according to a right Method, which
ought to answer a Disease by a proportioning of Contraries. Galen affirms, and
the right Method of curing Diseases, which consists in Contraries, does
require, that there should be the same Indications of Remedies, and of the
composition of Medicaments. Then he goes on, and shows what Galen's conceit is
touching a Disease; a Disease he makes to consist in Diathesi, an ill
Disposition; and what is this ill Disposition? he makes it to consist in a
preter-natural state of Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, etc. (as Helmont in many places
throughout his work does sufficiently mention, and confute it as a Phantsie);
and so according to the Galenick determination, not only the public
Medicaments of the Shops, but the private Bills and Prescripts of the Galenists,
are framed to this day; as may be seen upon the File in the Shop of any
Apothecarie; for, as in their Definitions of Diseases, they consider the ill
Dispositions in Qualities as Diseases, whenas they are indeed but the Products
and Consequents of Diseases; so in order to the work of curing, they generally
proportion the Compositions of Medicines by the old Rule of Contraries,
pretending thereby so to temper Ingredients which are of a nature contrary to
each other, that out of their strife or contrariety, there may result a Medicin
of such or such a Temperament, ^s they phantsie may be proper to encounter such
or such a Distemper or ill Disposition of the Sick; and thus they trifle about
the Shel, but never touch the Kernel, never reach at the essential part of a
Disease; whereas the Chemical Physicians, neglecting qualified Dispositions and
Temperaments, consider the real Principles of humane Bodies, as they do either
in excess or defect, or any other enormous state whatsoever, contribute to the
forming of a Disease; and accordingly in their analyzing of mixed Bodies
ordained for Medicine, they make an examen of the very same principles
contained in them, and so order the Principles in the framing of a Medicament,
that there may be in it a proportion of them, answerable to the same Principles
in the body of man, and fitted to restrain, rectify, or encounter them when
they in any wise are exorbitant, or peccant: So that in this way of curing,
there is an accommodating of real Principles in Medicaments to the very same
Principles in man's body, as grown irregular, and by consequence causative of
Diseases. Now, Utrum horum Mavis, accipe, choose which you please, and let the
world judge, which Sect of Physicians is most likely to understand the nature
of Diseases, and the fitting of Medicaments to cure them; whether the
Galenists, whose way is not to acquaint themselves with those Constituent
principles, which are visible in the Chemical anatomising of mixed Bodies, but
rest in mere Traditional Doctrins and fantastic opinions, wrapped up in
general Conclusions and Definitions of pretended Principles, and of Diseases,
the mere Products of wit and opinion, than which, as my Lord Bacon says, there
is nothing more Polydaedalous, various and uncertain (the Brain of man being a
wondrous winding Labyrinth of Conceptions); or whether the Chemists, who build
their Philosophy or knowledge of Nature in man, and in Medicaments, and in
Diseases, upon real operations and productions of things natural, which they
see, feel, and handle?

Nor are we to consider the Medicaments of the Shops only, as devised upon an
Insufficient Foundation of reason, as to the principles considered by their
Authors in the Devising of them; but to look upon the very Frame of them, and
observe what want there is of due correction of Ingredients, and how both Pure
and Impure go all together in the Mass; and then it is considerable what an
endless number of Kinreds and contraries are jumbled into a Body, whose Virtues
strangulating one another, a Virtue different arising from them all, is
supposed to be the curative power inherent in the whole Composition; and all
that they can say for their Treacles, Electuaries, and their other Trumpery, is
this, That they have by experience been found good for this or that Distemper;
and who then I pray you are the Empericks? Are not they that make Medicines by
jumbling Ingredients at adventure, and then plead experience that they have
done good, though the Mass be so made that the maker has no rational ground to
assure him it is good for this or that purpose? And shall not those men be
reputed much more the Rational Physicians, who from their knowledge of the
essential Principles of things do so form their Medicaments, that they have a
certain ground wherefore they put in this or that, and prepare things thus or
thus, from solid reason leading them by the hand toward the accomplishment of
their work? One years proceeding at this rate in a Laboratory by a knowing
Artist, shall produce Medicines of true nobility and worth, both Catharticks,
Cordials, etc. such as will in virtue (not to mention pleasure) weigh down all
the bulky stuff that has been since the days of Hippocrates, or that can by
assistance of the Galenick way be invented to the end of the world.

Nor let men think that I am without Authority for what I say, even from the
most learned and ingenuous of the Galenists themselves, who thought there was
great need of a Reformation of the Medicaments of the Shops, and accordingly
have complained in their Writings: But I shall cite only one, and that is the
aforementioned Langius, in the same place of his Epistles; where he falls
heavy upon the Apothecaries, and makes such Practisers also to be no better
than the meanest Empericks, who by an ambitious and vain Langii Epist. Ubi
supra.
ostentation of a Plurality and great Bodies of Remedies, suppose those
Medicaments to be the better, which are without Method made up of a world of
Succedaneums, Roots, Stones, Metalls, Herbs, and Flowers. And then he goes on
thus, Nostri Logiatri omnia ad inanem ostentationem, in unum pharmacum
numerosum, veluti in confusum Chaos conglomerare solent; quibus Pharmacopolas
magis locupletant quam aegros alleviant; that is to say, our mere Talkative
Physicians are wont, out of a vain ostentation, to heap together all things
into one numerous Medicament, as it were into a confused Chaos; by which they
enrich the Apothecaries rather than ease the Sick. This is very much condemned
by Plutarch in his Symposiacks, (...). l. 4.
and derided by him, and he brings in the Testimony of Erasistratus, a
Physician in request before Galen, and of a better Temper, upon the ruin of
whose reputation Galen endevors to raise much of his own.

But though Langius speak so hardly of Apothecaries, it ought not to be charged
upon all; the Fault is not in them, but in their Galenick Masters that impose
on them a continuation of such Medicines, and hold the people (as well as they
can) in an opinion of them, for the carrying on of their own dull dilatory way
of Practice, which of all things under Heaven cries loudest for a Reformation;
and the more ingenious sort of Apothecaries, which are not in confederacy with
them, would rejoice in it as much as any, as a very great Deliverance. For, the
stuffing of Bills with abundance of Ingredients is that which they sigh at as
much as any. Therefore Mr. Boil would persuade Physicians out of this Humor;
they should Exp^r. Phi^. Part. 1. p. 239.
be persuaded (says he) to decline that more frequent than commendable custom,
of stuffing each Recipe with a multitude of Ingredients: For, I think
Physicians may well be more sparing, as to the number of the things prescribed,
than most of them use to be, both to save charges to their Patients, and for
other Considerations. The addition of needless Ingredients to the Bulk of the
Medicin makes it but the more troublesome to be taken, and the more apt to clogg
the stomach; besides, oftentimes the efficacy of the more useful Ingredients,
as well as their quantity in each Dose, is much abated by their being yoked
with those that are less appropriate, or less operative. Besides, it seems a
great impediment to the further discovery of the virtues of Simples, to
confound so many of them in Compositions. For, in a mixture of a great number
of Ingredients, it is so hard to know what is the operation of each, or any of
them, that I fear there will scarce in a long time, be any great progress made
in the discovery of the virtues of simple Drugs, till they be either oftener
employed singly, or be but few of them employed in one Remedy. And besides all
this, whereas when one of these Mixtures is administered, the Physician expects
Page ^39. ^40.
but such operation as is suitable to the Quality which he conceives will be
predominant in the whole Compound, several of the Ingredients may have
particular Qualities that he dreams not of; which working upon a Body that the
Physician considers as subject only to the Sickness that he endeavors to ^^re,
may therein excite diverse latent seeds of other Distempers, and make new and
unexpected Commotions in the Body. And a little after, the learned Gentleman
has these words; I fear, that when a multitude of simples are heaped together
into one compound Medicin, though there may result a new Crasis, yet it is very
hard for Physicians to know beforehand what that will be; and it may sometimes
prove rather hurtful than good; or at least, by the Coalition, the virtues of
the chief Ingredients may be impaired rather than improved; as we see that
crude Mercury, crude Nitre, and crude Salt, may be either of them safely enough
taken into the body in a good quantity; whereas of Sublimate, which consists of
those three Ingredients, a few grains may be rank Poison.

And to show what a poor esteem he has of the best reputed Medicaments of the
Galenists, he proceeds thus: As for those famed Compositions, Mithridate,
Treacle, and the like, though I cannot well commend the skill of those that
first devised them; and though I think that when two or three simples may
answer the same Indications, they may be more safely employed, yet I would by
no means discommend the use of those Mixtures, because long experience has
manifested them good in several Cases. And in a word, though I had not the
respect that I have for Matthiolus, and other famous Doctors that devised the
Compositions, whereinto Ingredients are thrown by scores, if not by Hundreds,
yet however I should not reject an effectual Remedy, because I thought it
proved so rather by Chance, than by any skill in the Contriver: And I think a
wise man may use a Remedy that scarce any but a Fool would bave devised. By
which words of his, though couched as tenderly as may be, you may see what
pitiful stuff he reckons those Antidotes to be, which have till of late been
held in so great estimation, but are daily growing out of date, because
Diseases being altered, they are of Service only in the slighter sort of
Maladies which consist in Distemper; and though he handsomely brings it in, yet
he does as good as say the Authors made a business of them by chance, and that
there was nothing of a sure Principle that guided them in the Contrivance.

Certainly then, it is high time to look toward other Principles to direct us
in the inventing of Medicines proper for the Age wherein we live; nor are we to
look only to Principles, and the state of Diseases in this Age, but we are also
to have regard to the Climate, and Country where we live, if in the framing of
Medicines we will fit them right for the purpose to which we intend them; for,
what will cure in one Climate or Country, may either kill, or make the Sick
much worse in another Country, there being a kind of Crasis Temper or nature in
one soil, and under one Sky, both as to Men and Things, which is different from
those in other parts even of the same Country, much more in the remoter parts
of the world; and therefore I do not see how we can, even for this cause,
conceive that Medicaments, and Methods of using them, borrowed from Greeks, and
Arabians, and other Quarters of the earth, can with reason be relied on, with
so much Authority and confidence, as our ruling Galenists would persuade us at
this day. I remember what prudent Celsus says In praesat.
, differ quoque pro natura locorum genera Medicinae, and aliud opus esse
Romae, aliud in Aegypto, aliud in Gallia; that is to say, the Kinds of Medicin
ought to differ according to the nature of places, and that the work of curing
is one thing at Rome, another in Egypt, and another in France. And that there
is a different or less efficacious effect in one and the same thing used in
different Countries, appears by a Drug now grown into common use in England, I
mean Coffee, which Prosper Alptnus De Medicina Egypt.
relates to have abundance of virtues in that Country of Egypt, of which we
find no effect in England, save that it serves to make a Liquor harmless enough
in rhumatick Bodies, for ordinary conversation, like other Drink, but not for
any considerable peculiar uses of Medicin, as in Egypt; where it is not only
common Tipple, as here, but a noted Medicament also in many occasions of
Sickness, though as to the same purposes here, it be wholly ineffectual.
Besides, somewhat of difference is to be attributed likewise to the different
manner of Life, Customs, Diet, and other Circumstances, which make people ^ven
of the same Country differ from one another, much more people of diverse
Countries; which no Body will deny that considers the various effects of the
same Medicaments administered in the North, and in the South of England; or to
Gentlemen, Citizens, and Clowns: And therefore, I remember, Langius, in his
forecited Epistle, commends to us the consideration of Domestic Medicines,
calculated with an agreeableness to our own Country, Natures, and Cases; and
the use-of them, rather than the Medicines devised by Foreiners. Indeed it is a
wonder to see, how a few Authors of one or two particular Countries, have,
through the ignorance of mankind, for many Ages, imposed Medicines, as of
universal use for all the world.

By Domestic Medicines, I mean not such only as are growing at home in our own
Fields and Gardens, but such Artificial Medicines also as are fitted to that
which the Greeks call Idiosyncrasia the peculiar Temper of our Bodies as we are
Englishmen, and to the condition of the Diseases of our Country, there being as
great a difference in the proprieties of the Diseases of distinct Countries, as
there is in the Natures of the people. It were to be wished, that Simples of
the growth of our own Country were more used, and the knowledge of their
Virtues better improved; and then certainly much more might be effected by them
than yet we see; especially, were our Diet and Drinks more Simple and less
Luxurious, and people more temperate, doubtless mere Simples might be of much
more efficacy, because our Diseases would be more Simple, and much less
Complicate than they are seen to be. But seeing we live in an Age, wherein
there is a conjunction of numerous Luxuries, which men acquaint their Bodies
with in their manner of living, there is no relying upon Simples in the greater
Diseases; but there is a necessity of using Art to the utmost, till there be a
more Temperate world; and all I contend for is, that in making use of
Artificial Preparations, we should not rely upon devices of Foreiners, nor
suffer them to be imposed upon us (as they have been of old to this day) as the
only things to be rested on in case of Sickness, and upon that account up-held
by Physicians for common use unto the People: but when we have occasion to make
use of Medicines, the only way is to seek out such as are by our own Countrymen
devised, with a regard to the peculiar condition of Nature in our own people,
and to the altered state of Diseases among us. Upon such consideration as this
it was, that Hadrianus a Minsicht quitted the Prescripts of the ordinary
Dispensatories, and framed a store of Medicaments for his own Practice more
suitable to the Country where he lived, and much more pleasant than those
Torments (meaning the common public Medicaments) In Praesat. ante The saurum
Medico-Chymicum.
which (he says) are so nauseous, lothsom, and abominable, that they are
neither easily taken, nor held; yea rather, men are miserably crucified, the
whole body put violently out of order, the Ferment of the Stomach perverted,
the native heat oftentimes mortified, and the natural strength and vigor much
abated: which are the usual effects, especially of their Pills, Electuaries,
etc. In the room of which, he tells us, he had devised such Medicaments as were
fitted to these times, the places, and the people where he lived; being new in
respect of Method, and so new, that the newness of Diseases, which in this most
frigid old age of the world, and as it were new Age of maladies (ever and anon
starting up and increasing, and which were utterly unknown to the Ancients)
does seem not so much to persuade, as to exact and command this newness also of
Remedies. For, if it was commendable in the Ancients, yea and in the Physicians
of all Ages, rather than blameable, that they in their Compositions and
Prescripts of Physic, had every one a respect to their own Air or Sky, and
their own people, both Greeks, Arabians, Spaniards, Italians, French, etc. who
who will blame me, or take it amiss, that I in my Prescripts do accommodate my
self to our Countrymen, and these Northern Parts, especially the Inhabitants of
the Lower Saxony, and of the Baltic Sea? Thus plainly He. And truly, if his
example were followed by some of the surly stately Sirs of the Faculty,
sometimes to handle Coals and the Bellows, sometimes the Pestle and Mortar,
and ever and anon to be sifting and observing the new natures of Diseases, and
the nature of our own people, and not look upon them through the false
Perspectives of old Authors, the Nation had not been now to seek of remedies
proper to its condition, nor would so many every day run away from their
unprofitable Recipes, grounded upon old Foreign Gallimafries, to seek, after
tedious patience and expenses, a remedy from the hands of such as they disdain
by the name of Quacks and Empericks; which Title better becomes some of those
that would be thought the Learned, in whom the Title of Learner would at this
time be much more honorable and commendable than that of Doctor, till Practice
be meliorated, and the People sensibly find that the old unprofitable Learning
be laid aside, and the pride which belongs to it, by having Diseases better
understood, and more speedily and effectually removed. We every year see, the
common Custom of the Sick is (especially if they be pursful, and desirous to be
cured in state) to run the round of all the Galenick Messes, and after that a
Methodical solution has been given to the Purse-strings, with Phlebotomies
enough to the Purse as well as the Body, then when it is a shame to hold people
in hand any longer, they are even turned off to the blessing of Tunbridge, or
Epsam, or some such place, where if they be not cured by the Chemistry of
Nature in those Mineral-waters, then, to the honor of those Physicians be it
spoken, who are scandalously termed Empericks, into their hands they fall as
the last Refuge, where the world sees how often they receive a Cure; and it is
observable to reckon what numbers of people have been ready to attest the Truth
of this, when the ruling Galenists have to no purpose endeavored to vex the
Practitioners.

Here therefore it cannot be amiss to repeat what is said by Monsieur Le Febure
concerning the Galenists: they buz in the ears of the weaker and more timorous
persons, and Sex, that they are to take heed of Chemical Physicians and
Medicines, as dangerous, because they deal in Minerals, and so are but pleasant
Poisons; * It is confessed (says he) that many Remedies Part. 2. Book 2. p.
^^.110.
in Chemistry are taken from the Family of Minerals: but for all this, it must
not, nor can it be granted, that they are Venomous, or contrary to the nature
of man's body; and to affirm it, is the height of Ignorance: For, if ancient
Physicians have used them crude and raw, as they were, without any preparation,
as may be seen in Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, and several other Authors; If some
of the modern Galenists also have made use of them, as Rondeletius of crude
Mercury in his Pills against the Pox; and Matthiolus, who put Antimony in
practice, calling it by way of Excellency the Hand of God; and if Gesnerus has
done the like with Vitriol; Fallopius, with the Filings of Steel; and Riolanus,
and many others, with Brimstone, for Diseases of the Lungs, why should Chemical
Physicians be debarred from the same Remedies, after they have by separating
Purity from Impurity, prepared, corrected, and divested them from the malignity
and venom which they did contain? which is a much better way than the pretended
correction which Galenists give to their Medicines, who pretend to mitigate the
vices and malignity of their Medicaments, by the addition of some other
substance, which usually has in its self some particular vice and impurity; as
is obvious in the Preparations of their Th^s Vegetables are every jot an
malignant, being crude as any Mineral whatsoever.
Hellebore, Spurge, Scammony, Coloquintida, Agarick, and some others which they
pretend to correct by a simple addition of Mastick, Cinnamon, Cloves, gum Drag:
Ginger, and the like. But I cannot better resemble the difference between their
way of correction and that of the Chemists, than by using a vulgar comparison
touching an unskilful Cook, that in dressing of Tripes should think it enough
to boil them with sweet Herbs, and never wash or cleanse them from their inward
impurity.

However the matter stands in D^spute in words, yet in very deed many of the
Galenists seeing their own old Remedies very insufficient, and less pleasing,
cast half an eye upon Chemistry, and are content to use such common Medicines of
that sort as they can get from the Shops, but then Page 111.
most of them (as Le Febure says) do it by stealth; and those among them that
would be thought quainter in practice than their Fellows, though they retain
their old Learning, yet come on so far as to be Semi-chymists in the use of
Medicines, dividing their practice betwixt the Laboratories and the Shops; and
truly so far they do well, and they want but little of true conversion, seeing
the only thing that remains to be done is a throwing aside of the old
Principles and Methods, which no more agree with the right order and
Institutions of Chemical Practice, than the Laws of these Parts of the world do
with the Government of Turkey, which bear as great a disproportion to each other
as can be: to which they must likewise add a casting off the old Definitions
and Descriptions of Diseases, and consider the Diseases of this Age under other
notions and qualifications than they had of old. Therefore to stop the mouths
of the Galenists fully (says the ingenious Ubi supra, p. 110* 111.
Le Febure) take notice that they use in their Practice, though Emperically,
Chemical Remedies, whether they be Natural or Artificial; as for example, do
they not make use of crude Steel and Mercury, and many more natural mixed Bodies
without preparation? Do they not use Spirit of Vitriol, Spirit of Sulphur,
Mineral Crystal, Cremor and Crystalls of Tartar, Crocus Martis Aperitive and
Astringent, Salt of Vitriol, Sugar of Lead? And though most of them be
unacquainted with Antimony, and the true time and Method of exhibiting that
admirable Remedy, yet nevertheless they venture by stealth to give it their
Patients, disguising it oftentimes with some Infusion of Senna, or some portion
of their ordinary Pills; for, they mix Antimonial Wine in their Infusions, and
Mercurius Vitae in their Pills. But that which is yet more to be noted and
considered is; that when the Galenists, by the obstinacy of a Disease, are at a
stand, and can no longer find in their Method a Remedy to cure, and eradicate
the evil of it, because they never attained to a perfect knowledge of it, they
use to send their Patients to Baths and Minerals, as to the last Refuge; which
practice of theirs makes them tacitly to confess, that there is in Minerals a
more potent, penetrative and active virtue than in any other of those Remedies
which they did put in pract^se before. This Truth is further confrmed by those
remedies which are daily used by Chirurgians with very good success, being for
the most part compounded of Metalls and Minerals; but those especially which do
work with most efficacy.

It is true, that Chemists do also send their Patients to Mineral Waters, and
enjoin them the use of them; but there is this difference betwixt them and the
Galenists; that the A prudent Clymical Physici^n knowing the nature of the
several Waters, is able by skill, in his Study, even with common Water to make a
preparation of Water equivalent to any of the Mineral Waters which are in u^e,
that they who cannot go to the Wi^lis may be furnished ^^^^me.
Chemical Physicians are distinctly acquainted with the Sulphur, Salt, or
Spirit, which predominates in the Waters by them prescribed; which the other
Physicians do not, having but a confused and superficial knowledge of the
virtue residing and hidden in these waters, and prescribing them only because
others have used them before, not being able to give a Reason for the effects
by them produced, much less to give an account of the efficient internal Causes
of the same, since it belongs properly to the inquiry of Chemists, whose
peculiar work it is to anatomise Mineral Waters, and demonstrate what Fire or
Volatile substances are contained in them: And if the ingeni^us Artist finds
not himself fully satisfied with the examining the Waters, he may further
extend his inquiry in working upon the Earths adjacent to these Mineral
Spirits, and endeavor to discover what Metal most abounds in the Marc^sites
growing about that place; which being done, it will be easy for him to find
what Salt, or what Spirit, is the most likely to dissolve that Metal, and to
mix and unite it so indivisibly as it is with the Water: and being thus
instructed, he can never fail to assign pertinent and demonstrative Reasons,
both of the effects and cause of the virtue and efficacy of those Mineral
Waters. If it be answered, that Galenists do also give reasons for those
effects, and assign them to the Salt, Sulphur, or Spirit predominant in the
Waters; I reply, that they can never fully satisfy a curious Inquisitor and
searcher of truth in Nature, by Reasons taken from the Doctrine of the Schools;
but what light they have must be borrowed from Chemical Authors, and so far
they are no more a Galenical Doctrine, since they reason only by the Principles
and Organs of Hermetick Philosophy. Let us then conclude in the behalf of
Chemical Remedies, and say, that they are the true weapons wherewith a
Physician must arm himself, to conquer and extirpate the most stubborn and
rebellious Diseases, even such as are held incurable by the ordinary Remedies
of Galenical Physic.

And yet for all this, the Galenists will not part with their old Scholastic
Methods and Principles, though many of them come off so far as to make use of
some of the ordinary Chemical Remedies, which prove the less effectual, because
the use of them requires other Notions to manage them with advantage, even when
they are best prepared. But that which is most considerable, and which brings a
scandal upon Chemical Medicaments, as well as grievance many times to Patients,
is, that the Galenists venturing to use them as they find them in the Shops, do
too often light upon unlucky Preparations, such as are Crem Tartari adulterated
with Alum; Calomelanos, the Emetick Powder called Merc. Vitae, and diverse other
Medicaments, which being made Beyond Sea by halves, or unskilfully, are bought
at low rates, and brought in many times by Druggists and others trading in such
Commodities, of whom Country-Practitioners and some Apothecaries do buy them,
or else of mean Mercenary and unskilful persons who live in Corners, and
venture upon the making of these edged Tools at lower rates than others;
whereas the most industrious and ingenious sort of Apothecaries do, and the
rest ought to make them carefully with their own hands, and to seek an
amendment of those Preparations: but in the mean while, the fine fingred
Galenist, whose fair hand is made only for feeling of Pulses, and so dares not
fully them by raking in Cinders, leaves the validity of those Medicaments to
the credit of others, and so the Patient is left to a miserable hazard; for,
put case that one of the Ambulatory Doctors has occasion to write Bills for
several Patients in a day, and in them has occasion to prescribe those or the
like operative Chemical Remedies which are in common use, perhaps the Patients
live at several Ends of the Town, and so usually the Bills are sent to several
Apothecaries, whom perhaps the Doctor never saw, much less knows whether they
be honest careful men, or whether those their Medicaments be rightly prepared,
what assurance can there be for the poor Patients? or what recompense be made
them, if mischief be done by such a careless way of Practice?

Besides, it is another error in practice, that in the most urgent and
important Cases, when a Patient is upon the Vertical Point of life or death, as
in extreme Case of Fevers, and the like, the common Road-Practiser is not
furnished with some noble Remedies of his own, to interpose at such Critical
Minutes, upon the efficacy whereof he might of his own knowledge surely rely,
rather than leave the Patient to the cure of the Common-Cordials of the Shops,
which (if they were of any powerful efficacy in their own nature, yet) do
exceedingly differ in force and goodness, according to the various Preparations
in the honest or dishonest, skilful or unskilful, diligent or careless hands
through which they pass; yet Master Doctors Bills go to every Shop alike; that
is, the Patient is ventured upon the reputation of any Shop he please to choose,
or which the Doctor may commend, whereas in such Cases of extremity he should
think it the best way to trust none but himself, and rely upon no remedies but
his own, which every good and knowing Physician ought, in discharge of
conscience, to have in readiness upon occasion, seeing the least excess, or
defect in the nature of a Medicin, may at such a time, being relied on, be the
destruction of the Sick.

Hence it is, that the less literate and more Emperical Practisers, do
oftentimes perform Cures in desperate Cases, when the Medicines prescribed by
the learned Bills will do no good; the Reason whereof I cannot so readily
ascribe to any thing else, as to this, that they are (for the most part)
Masters of good Specificks of their own Preparation, to encounter Diseases in
the most difficult plunging Cases, whose virtues they are sure of, and know
that they may rest upon the use of them with safety. Which Sense of mine
touching this matter I the more willingly to express, because it jumps just
with the observation of Mr. Boil in his Part. ^. p. 220. and 221
Experimental Philosophy; where, after he has told us out of Varenius and
Almeida, how well Physic thrives among the Chinese, and the Japonians, where
the unlearned Doctors use no bloodletting in their practice, and with
reputation manage it, without that and other evacuations so frequently made
here by Potions, and Issues, etc. wishes that we had some of their Physic
books to set our European Physicians to learn again: And having told us also,
how the Art of Physic might be improved, if Physicians were a little more
curious, to take notice of the observations and experiments, suggested partly
by the practice of Midwives, Barbers, old Women, Empericks, and other
illiterate persons, He says, where the Practitioners of Physic are altogether
illiterate, there oftentimes Specificks may be best met with, because such
persons being wont, for want of skill in Physic, and particularly in the art
of mixing Simples, and in that of varying their Remedies according to
circumstances, do almost wholly rely upon Specificks, whose virtues from their
practice, may sometimes be better gathered, than from that of Id est. Whose
skill lies in old Book Learning, and the old Methodus Medendi.
skilful Physicians, in regard that those Empericks (besides that they assist
not with any skill in the Methodus medendi the virtues of their remedies) are
wont to try to the uttermost of the effects of their few Specificks: And the
nature of their Medicines may be the better known, in regard they are not wont
to blend them, as Learned men but too often do, with many other Ingredients,
whose mixture either alters their nature, or makes it difficult to determine,
whether the effect be to be ascribed to what is given for the Specific, or to
some other of the Ingredients, or to the whole Compounds as such.

And page 223, 224. the same noble person adds, that we should not d^sdain the
Remedies of illiterate Practisers, only because of their being unacquainted
with our Theory of Physic: nor should we by too great reliance on the
Galenical, or other ancient Opinions, neglect useful Remedies, because
presented by persons that ignore them, and perhaps too hold opinions contrary
to them; therefore I leave you to consider what is in the person of that
Emperical Sect, represented by Celsus, where having spoken of the darkness of
the Causes of things, and the uncertainty of the Theorems of Physic, he says,
In P^af.
that those speculations are of no concern at all to Physic, appears by this,
in regard that those Physicians who differ in opinion from others about these
things, have notwithstanding restored men to one and the same health. And this
they have been able to effect, because they calculated their ways of curing,
not from obscure causes, nor from natural Actions, which were diversely
apprehended by them; but from Experiments, according as they conceived they
might answer every ones Case: And truly, in the beginning, Medicin was not
deduced from Speculative Notions and Questions, but from Experiments, etc. For
though this Sentence ascribes too little to Reason, yet there is something in
it that deserves to be considered; especially since we observe not, that the
late Anatomical discoveries of the Motion of the Chyle, the Lymphatick Liquor,
etc. by formerly unknown ways, in newly detected Vessels, has yet made men
cure diseases much better than before; not that I think that Anatomical and
Pathological discoveries will not in process of time (when the Historia facti
shall be fully and indisputably made out, and the Theories thereby suggested
clearly established) highly conduce to the Curative part of Physic; but yet
this observation may make it the more reasonable, to beware of relying so much
upon the yet disputable Opinions of Physicians, as to despise such practices,
though usually succesful, as agree not with them. Thus far from Mr. Boil, out
of whose Learned and Ingenious Book, I have already inserted diverse passages of
like nature, in the foregoing Chapters, and among the rest this, That he
thinks it were no ill piece of service to mankind, if a severe Collection were
made of the Cures of such persons as have recovered after a having been judged
irrecoverable by the Doctors; which I am sure would redound unto no small
reputation of such as they have scorned as illiterate, and unworthy of their
conversation.

But that which pleads highest in commendation of the meaner sort of
Practisers, and which, if any thing, bespeaks it as the public Interest to
connive at them, is, that without them, not only the rich many times remain
uncured, but the poorer sort of people would be totally at a loss; For, Mr.
Boil well says, Page 138.
that though to cure cheaply be not properly and in strictness any part of the
end of the art of Physic, which considers men's health, and not their purse;
yet it ought in Charity, if not also in Equity, to be the endeavor of the
Physician, especially when he deals with Patients that are not rich; for, not
now to say any thing of the Fees of Physicians, which in some places are not
very moderate, it is certain that the Bills of Apothecaries, especially in
Chronical Diseases, do often prove so chargeable, that even when the Remedies
succeed, by that time a poor Patient is recovered, he is undone, and pays for
the prolongation of his Life that which should have been his livelihood: Whence
it comes to pass, that the more necessitous sort of people are either fain to
languish unrelieved, for want of being able to purchase health at the
Apothecari's rates, or are deterred from applying themselves to a Doctor, till
their Diseases have taken too deep root to be easily, if at all eradicated; And
this oftentimes, not more through the fault of the Apothecary than of the
Doctor, who in his prescriptions might, for the most part, easily direct things
that would be much more cheap, without being much less efficacious. If this be
so, I say the meaner sort of people were at a miserable pass, if they should be
left without remedy, by the assistance of other Physicians, or be forced to
wait the leisure of our Galenick Masters, till their Charity be greater.

I for my part, am for Learning as much as any man, and have reason to be so,
having been bred up in the Schools, and know it is of excellent use where it is
rightly employed; but as for that which is commonly counted Learning in the
Schools in order to Physic (which I doubt not ere long our Universities will
reject) I conceive it not only useless, but destructive, misleading Practisers
upon mistaken Principles, shallow Notions, and a wrong Method, to deal with the
Diseases of this Age; and though the most ingenious part of those which follow
the old Method, cannot but see the vanity of it, and of the old Definitions of
Diseases, yet as long as Interest prevails, and the knot is not dissolved,
expect no Reformation; For, Mr. Boil says plainly, Page ^03, 204.
that diverse of the Eminentest Methodists themselves have more than once
ingenuously acknowledged to him, and seriously deplored with him the
incompleatness of their Art; and since about diverse particular Diseases, we
have observed the Method of some of the most reputed Doctors in England (which
yet I think is at this day as well stored with Learned men of that Profession,
as any part of Europe) not only very differing, but repugnant to each other, I
suppose we may without disrespect to their Profession, dissent from the most of
them about those Cases, about which they are reduced to disagree so much among
themselves. And it would be worth an impartial disquisition, whether since the
Methodus Medendi ought to be grounded on and accommodated to the Doctrine of
Diseases, the New Anatomical discoveries lately known, and others not yet
published, do not by innovating diverse things in Pathology, require some
Alterations and Amendments in the Methodus Medendi.

To this I answer, that perhaps they may; but let me add also, that the
alteration of Diseases themselves, according to the description which I have
made of its Causes in this Treatise, is that which cries aloud for an
alteration, not only of the old Method, but of the state and composure of
Medicaments also. As for the Method, it was never of a greater height of
reputation, than in the days of Fernelius; and yet that excellent wit was not
satisfied with it, but saw the vanity of it, and yet could not find in his
heart to speak otherwise than tenderly against it; I cannot remember the
Chapter where, but can recite the words, and they are these, Qui Methodum,
scilicet Scholasticam, in omnibus nimium pertinaciter exquirit, pariter cum
Morbo hominem de Medio tollit: which is, that he who in all points too
pertinaciously insists upon the Scholastic Method, does together with the
Disease remove the man out of the world. And if he in his days saw there was a
necessity of being loose from it, is it not a miserable thing to see, that men
learned, and of reputation in the world, should tie themselves (for the most
part) to it in this new state of Diseases? I remember, Oswald Grembs does tax
them for it tartly, in the Preface of his second Book, that though they make
use often of Chemical Medicaments, yet they administer them according to the
Galenick Method; but though in this (says he) they would seem very Methodical,
yet in truth they are no better than Empericks, while they give Chemical
Remedies, but are ignorant from what ground they have their operation; for
(says he) if they know not from what cause Spirit of Sulphur gives relief in
Fevers, not because it is cold, not because it is hot, not because it cuts and
attenuates, but because it extinguisheth the hot Fermenting Alkali, which is
the occasional, internal, and continent Cause of Fevers, then they cannot be
called truly Methodical Physicians, because ignorance of the true cause renders
them Empericks, and because if they perform a Cure with those Remedies, they
know not why, or what they do.

And yet truly, they are to be commended, rather than derided in the use of
them, because though they be ignorant of the true Method of using Chemical
Remedies, in regard they are unacquainted with the Nature and Reasons of the
preparation of them, yet much good may be done in the administering by their
hands, forasmuch as the excellency of the Medicines does very often produce a
good effect, notwithstanding a defect of Method in the application of them. And
this also Mr. Boil observes, Page* 204, 205.
that the unusual efficacies of new Remedies, may probably make the Method of
curing more compendious, because one Medicin may be so richly qualified, as to
answer several Intentions, which in the common way require diversity of helps
and Remedies. Thus for Instance, in the cure of the Kings. Evil, by the
received Method the Physi^ian must propose to himself several Scopes (suited to
several Indications) yet one single Medicin, without any sensible Evacuation,
has wasted the peccant humor, appeased the pains (which before were very
great) discussed the unbroken Tumors, and healed the broken ones. -- Thus
according to the known Method, the great remedy in Pleurisies is copious Blood
letting, which is strictly prescribed even to aged persons, and Teeming women,
by the famousest of our Practitioners, and, I confess, not irrationally, where
the Physician is furnished but with vulgar Remedies: and yet by some Helmontian
Medicines we have known pleurisies cured, even in young men without Phlebotomy,
and I some while since made a succesful Trial.

Also, that new and more generous Remedies may so far alter the received
Methodus Medendi, as to make diverse of its Prescriptions unnecessary, he gives
a notable Instance of the Rickets, one of the new and abstruse Diseases, by a
slight preparation Ubi Supra.
of Colcothar, experimented in diverse children, which Remedy performs its work
almost insensibly, save that in many Bodies it is (especially at first)
Diaphoretick. Hereupon he says, we may consider, that oftentimes the peccant
Matter, Page 206.
though very offensive by its qualities, is much lesser than is supposed in
quantity, and migbt, if we were but Masters of Specific Remedies, either be
breathed out by insensible Transpiration, or carried off by Sweat or Urine,
without tormenting, or weakening the Patient, by those other copious Evacuations
of grosser matter, viz. Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, Issues, etc. which are
always troublesome and painful enough, though not always effectual. Nay that
even in Surgery it self, if those that practice it were as knowing as Nature
is bountiful, there would not be so often a necessity, as it is commonly supposed
there is, of multilating or tormenting the Patient to recover him. For certain
it is (as he says in Page 1^4.
another place) that the Charges and Trouble of taking Physic may be very much
lessened; and that if we did look after a deeper insight into Nature, we might
by discovering the true Causes and Seats of Diseases, find out such generous
and effectual Remedies (whether Specificks, or more Universal Arcana) as by
quickly freeing the Patient from his Disease, may exempt him from needing
either much Physic from the Apothecary, or many chargeable visits from the
Doctor.

And that this is to be done no other way so likely as that of Chemistry, he a
Page 196.
little after affirms, that by this very means, if men want not curiosity, and
industry to vary and prosecute experiments, there must necessarily arise such a
store of new and active Medicines, that in all probabilty many of them will be
found endowed with such virtues as have not been, at least in that degree, met
with in the usual Medicines, whether simple or Compound, to be found in the
Apothecaries Shops.

Indeed, there are (says he in Page 405.
another place) certain Preparations and Compositions so lucky, and whose
success does so much exceed expectation, and the efficacy of common
Compositions, that the same Physician, whose they are, may upon several
occasions, prescribe an hundred others, each of which he may think as rational
as any of those, which nevertheless shall all of them be inferior thereunto;
and for instance, he makes mention of Sir Theodore de Mayern's peculiar way of
preparing Salt of Steel, which he used with great success in many obstinate
Diseases.

Now my end in reciting all these Passages, is, to give some countenance to my
own Conceptions, and the Judgment of others, who long for a renouncing of the
ancient Methods and Medicines, while I express their Sense in the language of so
noble an Author, who is so far from approving that piteous pedantick Humor,
which causes the whole Drove of Galenists to lie down, take their ease, and
set up their Rest in a supposed sufficiency and perfection of those old
Traditional Notions and Remedies, that he by his own industrious example of
working, as well as writing, labors to excite others to higher Inquiries, and
greater Achievements, by Chemical operation. And whereas many of the
Galenists, being by tract of time convinced of the safety and efficacy of
Chemical Remedies, have wheeled off in part, and in the use of them are become
parcel Chemists, he concludes his Book with Advice to them, that they should
not, by those common Chemical Remedies which are sold in the Shops, make a
Judgment of those higher and more noble ones which may be produced, according
as the Art of preparing Materials shall be promoted. Nor are they to rest upon
the use of those Common Chymistries only; for (he says) Page 186, 187.
I must take liberty to add (and that upon serious consideration) that the
Chemical Preparations hitherto common in Dispensatories, are, as to the
generality of them, sarr enough from being the most dextrous, or noble, that
can be devised. For, our vulgar Chemistry (to which the Shops owe their venal
Spagyrick remedies) is as yet very incomplete, affording us rather a Collection
of loose scattered (and many of them but casual) Experiments, than an Art duly
superstructed upon Principles and Notions, emergent from severe and competent
Inductions. And therefore till the Principles of Chemistry be better known, and
more solidly established, we must expect no other, than that very few vulgar
Chemical Remedies should be of the noblest sort; and that in the preparation of
many other, considerable Errors should pass unheeded, and Faults gross enough
be apt to be mistakenly committed.

And in Page ^96, 197.
another place he says, he must particularly inculcate this, that if we had
but a few petent Menstruums to unlock Bodies, or Alkahestick Liquors which can
resolve a great variety of Concretes, without having their virtues, I say not
impaired, but destroyed thereby, I scarce know what might not be done in
Chemistry.

But whereas the Cry of the Galenists is, that though the Chemical Physicians
boast high of the virtues of their Remedies, yet they fall short of their
Promises, Let me advertise you (says the Page 394.
same learned Gentleman) that if diverse Chemical Remedies have seemed upon
Trial less effectual than indeed they are, it is because they have been tried
by such Physicians, as weaken their efficacy by not administering them as they
should: For, some Physicians will never exhibit a Chemical Remedy, till the
Patients strength has been almost tired, if not quite spent with the
unprosperous use of diverse other clogging and debilitating Medicines. Others are
so difsident of Chemical Remedies, that they never dare exhibit them in a full
Dose, nor by themselves, but will blend a small quantity of a Chemical Medicin
with other Ingredients, which either constitute with it a M^dicin of new
Qualities resulting from that Mixture, or at least much clogg or enervate the
activity and virtue of the Chemical Ingredients; by which, even in so
inconsiderable a Dese, these distrustful Docto^s dare yet require that great
matters should b^ performed. And another sort of Physicians there is, Page 394.
who are of so despondent, or rather partial an humor, that if a Chemical
Remedy or Specific, do not presently perform the hoped for cure, though they
find that even upon their disadvantageous manner of administering it, it does
good, yet they will quickly desist from the use of it: And because it does not
do wonders, they will not scruple to affirm that they have tried it, and found
it do nothing; whereas they are wont to continue their own Courses of Physic
without Discouragement, though it be usually some weeks before the Patient find
any good by them, and oftentimes the Patient is, by the tedious course of
Physic he has gone through, very little bettered, if not much impaired, as
numbers of the Printed Observations, as well as daily experiences, do testify.
Which (says he) I speak, not with an intention to disparage Physicians in
general, the most learned and ingenious of them being free enough from the
partiality which I here take notice of, but to keep good Remedies from being
disparaged by the Envious or unskilful Trials of bad Administrers (as, say I,
most of the Semi-Chymical Galenists use to be.) And though indeed some Chemists
are so vainglorious, or unwary, as to promise, that the operation of their
Remedies shall be as well sudden, as effectual, yet if the Medicines themselves
be found available, although not swiftly so, that slowness ought to make us but
condemn the Boastings of the man, not reject the use of the Remedies. For (as
he says Page 296.
a little after) sometimes the Patients Constitution makes the Medicin
prescribed by the Receipt unfit to be administered; and sometimes too, the
Disease for which the Receipt is proper, is in the Patient complicated with
some other distemper, which may be as much increased by the Specific, as the
other Disease may be lessened. Of which he gives some Instances there, too
large to repeat.

Another Trick of the Pedantick sort of Galenists, and a very common one, is,
that if Chemical Medicines be administered, though they be of the noblest, the
safest, and best prepared sort, and much more gentle and efficacious (as
generally the meanest of them which have due Preparations are) than any they
can pretend to out of the common stuff of the Shops, yet if the Patient prove
not curable by them, but draws down to death, and if the Forerunners of death
be, as in many Cases they are, great Pains and other dire Symptoms, then
knowing that the more ignorant and fearful sort of people are, even by the
malice, or ignorance of such Physicians, as well as by their own Phantsies,
made prejudicate against the name of Chemistry, those Physicians craftily take
occasion from thence to work upon peoples weakness, and buz into their ears
that those afflictive Conflicts of Nature and the Disease are caused by the
Chemical Remedies, than which (I say) rightly prepared, there are not safer
Remedies in the world. Upon this account it is, and by such subtle
Insinuations (which are the Arts they have leisure to study, and little else to
do, because all their Do lies in a Pen and Inkhorn and a Recipe) that they hold
some part of the people in bondage to this day, though the greatest part are by
time and observation grown too wise now to be bug-bear'd by them any longer.
When Chemistry first began to open the eyes of the world, Oh then there was
nothing but Fire and Faggot against it, because the Galenick Masters were
disturbed by the Lift that it gave to old Ignorance and Error; whole Colleges
began to ring against it as a new Art of poisoning the world, yea and no less
than an Invention of the Devil, as the many Books they then set forth against
it, do show, and among the rest, none is more fierce than that which was
published by the College of Paris against Sir Theodore Mayern and the famous
Quercetan; and the numerous bitter railing Invectives contained therein against
Chemical Remedies, I might here insert, were they not too tedious. Let it
suffice to know, that they railed against things they understood as little as
some of ours do at this day, being such Remedies as made those two persons men
famous in their generation all over Europe, and yet Galenick Ignorance and Envy
was so bold, as to condemn them by public sentence (touching which you have
had an account in the first Chap. of this Treatise) and not only them, but the
whole Art of Chemistry it self. And yet it was not long after, that these angry
men the Galenists began to cool a little in consideration of the harmless and
noble effects of some of the Medicines, the meanest of which they saw were able
to effect greater Feats in curing, than the best of their old ones; so that
after they had grumbled and gazed and repined and paused a while, they began to
venture to use some of the more common sort of them. Oh, what, Mercury and
Antimony! they were not once to be touched so much as with a pair of Tongs: But
at length they did venture both upon Mercurial and Antimonial preparations (to
their praise be it spoken) and these they are even to this day so fixed upon (I
mean the more common preparations which they have settled the use of in the
Shops) that most of them rest there, and care not to budge an inch from them,
to busy themselves either in Meliorating them, or inventing higher and nobler
Medicaments of that kind; nor do some of them willingly afford a good thought
or word for any that are invented, or that are put upon improvement and advance
by the industry of the more laborious Chemical Physicians; to whom (next under
God) this new Age of Diseases is beholden for their Cures in most of the
Chronick and most obstinate Cases; as every days experience does now abundantly
manifest.

And therefore that advice of Mr. Boil falls in very pat here, when he tells
us, Page 390, 391.
We must not be so timid as to suffer our selves to be persuaded, that if a
Patient miscarry after the use of those Remedies, the fault must necessarily
belong to the exhibited Medicin. For oftentimes Nature will in despite of
Remedies make a Metastasis of the peccant matter, and thereby impair the
condition of the Patient; and much oftener before Death, the Conflict of
struggling Nature and the conquering Disease, does manifest it self in horrid
and dreadful Symptoms, which some envious or ignorant Doctors (for the more
learned are wont to be more equitable and less partial) do injuriously impute
to the Chemical Remedy given before the appearing of those Symptoms, not
considering that the like Accidents are wont to attend dangerous Diseases, and
dying Persons, where Galenick Remedies only, and no Chemical ones at all have
been administered. And that diverse of the most Eminent and Methodical of our
Modern Physicians, scruple not now to use frequently both Crocus Metallorum,
Mercurius Dulcis, and some other Chemical Remedies, and to impute the
miscarrying of the Patients that use them to their Diseases, rather than the
Medicines; though not many years since, all the frightful Symptoms accompanying
the dying Persons to whom they had been exhibited, were considently imputed to
those Medicines. Thus he. To which let me add, that as it is nothing but Pride,
Laziness, and Covetousness, which hinders some men of this Profession from
being a means by their Interest and Authority to beget a more general esteem of
Chemistry, as is due; and from giving a good example by industry unto others,
to promote the invention of nobler Remedies, more fit for the occasions of this
Age, than the common ones; and from owning truer Principles of Philosophy
conducible thereto; so there is no question, but a little more Observation and
Experience of the people, touching the truth of these things, will in the
revolution of a very few years, enable the meanest to make a Judgment between
things and Persons that differ, and totally disable Calumniators in their old
Practice, not only of Physic, but of scandalizing the more rational Practice,
and the more excellent Remedies of other Physicians.

And yet truly, I would not be mistaken, I am not so much for the use of
Chemical Preparations, that the Fabric of Curation should rest wholly upon
them, exclusive of the use of Simple and Single Specificks, which Nature her
self has prepared for us; I have collected such store of them by conversation
with the meaner Persons and Practisers, which the Learned (as they would be
counted) are wont to scorn, and of so great efficacy have I found them, that I
have no reason but to applaud rather than exclude them, and admire the wisdom
and mighty power of the Creator, that has endowed plain things with
extraordinary virtues.

Nor am I (as the same noble Gentleman Page 1^^, 159.
speaks) of the humor of some Chemists (for there are faults on all hands) and
of others that practice Physic, who so dote upon the Productions of their
Furnaces, that they will scarce go about to cure a cut finger, with less than
some Spagyrick Oil or Balsam, and in slight distempers have recourse to
Chemical, and perhaps to Mineral Remedies, which being for the most part such
as vehemently alter the body, they do oftentimes more harm than good, when
employed in common cases that need not such active Medicines. And methinks those
that practice, as if nature presented us nothing worth the accepting, unless it
be cookt and perfected by Vulcan, might consider, that Paracelsus himself often
employeth Simples for the cure even of formidable Diseases. And though for
particular reasons, I be inclinable enough to think that such searching and
commanding Remedies as may be so much of kin to the Universal Medicin, as to
cure great numbers of differing Diseases, will hardly be obtained without the
help of Chemical Preparations, and those perhaps of Minerals; yet as to most
particular Diseases, especially when not yet arrived to a deplorable height, I
am apt to think, that Simples, or other unelaborate mixtures, may furnish us
with Specificks, that may perform much more than some Chemists are wont to
think, and possibly be preferrable to many of their costly Magisteries,
Quintessences, and Elixirs. Helmont himself, a person more knowing and
experienced in his Art, than almost any of the Chemists, scruples not to make
this ingenuous confession, Helmont Pharmac^. and dispensat. Nov. p. 458.
I believe (says he) that Simples, in their Simplicity, are sufficient for the
curing of all Diseases. And he elsewhere truly affirms, that there may be
sometimes greater virtue in a Simple, such as Nature affords it us, than in any
thing that the fire can separate from it. And certainly, the Specific
properties of diverse, if not most Simples, are confounded and lost by those
Preparations, etc. And as for the long and tedious Processes of some Chemical
Preparations, he spends two Page 160, 161, 162.
or three Pages to show, that less elaborate and more skilful ones would
procure Medicines of much greater efficacy. For (says he) Page 187.
it is not the elaborateness, but the skilfulness of Preparations, that
produces the noble Remedies; and a few Teeming principles well known and
applied, will enable a man with ease to make better Remedies, than a great many
furnaces and Glasses, though never so well contrived, and though very useful in
their kind: And of this he gives an instance in the preparation of Opium, which
in the Shops is imperfectly done by adding Saff^on, Cinnamon, and other
Aromatical Drugs to make it into a Laudanum, whereas (he says) the correction
is better performed by a digestion of the Opium in wine that is impregnated
with an equal weight of the Salt of Tartar; the great power of which Salt, to
correct the most violent as well as Narcotick Ingredients, may be seen by that
Pil called Matthews his Pil (the Invention whereof is now claimed by an other
Artist in Chemistry) wherein there is a great quantity of white Hellebor as
well as Opium, and the grand corrector is that Salt of Tartar. The truth is, a
good Mother-wit, that can reason out the Nature of mixed Bodies, whether
Vegetables or Minerals, by examining those Chemical Principles of which (we
see) they are composed, may do very much with the Simples both Vegetable and
Mineral, without much straining by long preparations; I know it experimentally,
only by making Mixtures, and Infusions, and Fermentations, without the
concurrence of Fire, or Furnaces; and how much I have achieved by this plain
way, I may give an account of hereafter; and particularly in the examination of
Roots and Plants, some by Incineration, but most by Infusion in several
Menstruums, and many times by Mixtion of the Juices with each other, and with
other Liquers also, and sometimes by mere single putrefaction of the Plants
themselves; which courses who ever will follow, may find a way to give a better
account of the nature of Herbs, and other Vegetables, than the world is yet
acquainted with; very little having been known of Herbs since the days of
Dioscorides, but what came by mere chance; for, the Herbalists have but written
after his copy, and transcribed out of one another Books; and the Galenick
Masters (have for the most part) considered only the outside qualities of hot,
cold, moist, dry, etc. and by estimate of these endeavored to pry into their
Natures, so that they still rest in the dark Chaos of unknown virtues, or
hidden Qualities; whereas if they would take that Bunch of Keys, the sublimer
Notions of the Principles of Chemical Philosophy, and use them, they might even
by common little ways of Operation and Experiment, unlock the Simples, and
look into the more essential part of their Natures; for even Vegetables may
come to be understood this way, as well as the parts or Principles of Minerals
come to be Analyzed and Apprehended by the help of Fire, and more elaborate
operations.

And truly, this course of handling Vegetables, I take to be every jot as
Chemical, as if they were examined only by Fire, like the Minerals, and ought
to be Characterized by the name of Chemical Remedies, because he who makes the
inquiry to invent them, is guided therein by reasoning according to the
Principles of the Chemists. Nevertheless, this is not said to lessen the repute
of that good way of examining and improving Vegetables, as well as Minerals, by
the help of Fire and Furnaces; for nothing is more necessary than that helps in
every way be made use of, for discovering the nature and virtues of all mixed
Bodies; and hitherto we have been beholden (for the most part) to the fire for
our discoveries, and are like to be; so that the hinting and offering of a new
way of discovery can be no prejudice thereto, but all courses ought to be taken
to improve the knowledge of the virtues of Vegetables as well as Minerals,
because Vegetables are most for ordinary use, and when they will not do, then
Minerals are often of most concern in the more desperate and deplorable
Diseases. Therefore, it is a great mistake in the common sort of people to think,
that Chemical Physicians deal only in Minerals; and that mistake of theirs has
given occasion to Scandalizers to work upon their Phantsies an aversation from
the Chemists, whereas none deal more in Vegetables and parts of Animals than
they do, for the making of Medicines; only Mineral Medicaments are used upon
occasion, and may be with as much safety as the other, at the discretion of
such Physicians as take care of the preparation.

And certainly, one may easily conclude, that their Knowledge and Discretion is
most to be relied on, who are best acquainted with the Phenomenon, the
operations and Mutations of Nature in Natural Bodies* and according to them are
able to consider and make a due estimate both of things natural and proper in
the Frame of Medicaments, and of things preternatural and exotic in Diseases,
and from the consideration of real Principles, prevailing in the one, and
pec^ant in the other, proportion their means and Methods of Curation
accordingly: this prudent and most natural Course is that, which guides the
learned Chemical Physicians in their Inventions of Medicines, and in the
application of them. For Chemistry is without Dispute the truest Handmaid (as
Mr. Part 2. p. 35.
Boil calls it) to Physiologie, and will not a little contribute to clear up
the nature of Digestions, and of those Deficiencies or Aberrations in them,
which produce a great part of Diseases. And truly, though Chemistry should
never have brought to light any considerable Medicin for the use of men, yet it
is praiseworthy, and to be encouraged even upon this Account, that besides the
unlocking of parts and principles in mixed Bodies, the operations thereto
belonging are made use of by learned men now adays, to illustrate the Doctrine
of Diseases. For, let me once more cite what Mr. Boil says, Ubi supr^.
that since the Liquors contained in man's body abound, diverse of them, with
Saline or Sulphurous Parts, He that has been by Chemistry taught the nature
of the several sorts of Salts and Sulphurs, and both beheld and considered
their various actions upon one another, and upon other Bodies, seems to have a
considerable help to discourse groundedly of the Changes and Operations of the
Humors, and other Juices of the Body.

Thus the present learned Professor of Leyden, Francis de Le Boe in his Medical
Disputations, illustrates the Alterations and Secretions of Juices and Humors
in the Body by the operations of Chemistry; and when he comes to that part
which con^erus the Dispu^. ^.
Process of the Chyle both in the Stomach and the Bowels, Let me (says he) for
the manifestation of that Process, which has hitherto lain hid quasi in
Democriti puteo, call in to my counsel and assistance, Chemistry, an Art which
produces things admirable and stupendous every day, and is certainly of
principal use in the discovery of natural Mutations, and in some Particulars,
if I may speak it, exceeding Nature her self; the most profitable and only
necessary Means, for the constituting of Natural Science, and a solid Body of
Physic. And in Disput 3.
another place, I shall not (says he) as others have done hitherto, consider
the nature of Diseases according to the Etymological definitions, whereby the
Essences of them are very ill explained, and the sick worse cured, men resting
in former time upon a dubious, barren, and sometimes mischievous Grammatical
Disquisition of Terms in the Art of Physic; but my principal care is about the
laying of such a solid Foundation of the Art of Physic, as may be fit for the
better sort of Practisers, who desire to contend with Diseases, not wrangle
about Phantsies; and therefore is ought to be, by the help of Sense and Reason,
derived from the true Fountains of things Natural and Medicinal, that we may,
by a Chain of Reasonings thereupon, be led to a finding out the true Causes of
any Distempers whatsoever, and the right way of curing them. In prosecution of
his purpose, he has (as Doctor Willis did before him) from the Fermentations
and effervescencies, alterations, and quietatious of External Liquors,
endeavored to illu^^^ate the like of the liquors in the Body of man, as to the
causation and curation of M^ladies.

It is of great use to observe the alterations befalling these two B^^ds (or as
it were Ligaments) of the P^^ts of mixed Bodies, the Salt and the Sulphur. It is
the Principle of Water which dissolves that of Salt (as may be seen in
Hydropick Bodies;) which that Principle called Sulphur (the oily part) cannot
do, but submits to the Fire, which the Salt will not do: and if while the
Principle of Sulphur is added to Fire, the vapors thence elevated have not free
egress to spend themselves ^^^o^d, they are ready to extinguish the Fire, and
enervate its operation. Just so it fares many times in man's Body, when the
Vital Flame thereof by some accident is hindered from making a due dissipation
of an abounding Balsamic Sulphur in the Blood: For, even as a Candle burns, so
does the Lamp of life, by a convenient vicissitudinary supply and dissipation
of oily matter, viz. of that Sulphurous Balsamic Alimentary Juice which is
added every day. It were too tedious to Philosophise at large upon these two
Principles in reference to Sanity and Sickness; therefore I cut short.

Hitherto, Spittle has been looked on as almost a mere Excrement; but he who
considers, that if the Spittle be either defective or vicious, the work of
Concoction goes not right on in the Stomach, will admit it to be an useful
Ferment, consisting principally in a proportion of Water, Salt, and Spirit; and
when the Stomach through its default is put out of order, he that attempts to
cure it without a Notion of these things, may possibly by some lucky Stomachick
Medicines relieve and assist the Stomach, but never thoroughly amend the Causal
Default, unless it be by mere Chance.

Bile also has, till Helmont opened the eyes of this Age, been thought an
Excrement, but now men begin to be of his opinion, that it is one of the
noblest Ferments of the Body, separated from the Arterial blood, and serving
for many uses, and particularly subserving to the motion of the Chyle, after it
is passed from the Stomach to the Intestines, by promoting the Peristaltick
Motion of the Guts; and that the Chyle being a Substance impregnated with a
Volatile Spirit, a Lixivious Salt, and an acid Spirit, by the Fermental Action
of the Stomach, becomes in the Duodenum impregnated by a far greater quantity
of Lixivious Salt, and somewhat more of a Sulphur, or oily nature, and of a
Volatile Spirit, than it had before, in order to its further Process in the
Milky Veins and in the Heart, till it put on the rudimental Form of Blood;
which Chemical Notions whoever is ignorant of, will hardly be able to
understand the Nature of those many Diseases called Bilious, with other
Distempers incident to the Stomach and Bowels, and consequently be less able to
apply such Medicaments as may meet with them, according to the predominancie or
exorbitancie of either of those Principles, ingredient either in the Chyle, or
in the Bile; from whence arise abundance of fretful and frightful Diseases,
especially in Children. As for Instance, when the Ferment of the Stomach, or
the Bile, grown extravagant through the over acidity of the Spirit, or through
excess or adustion of the Lixivious Salt, causes Frets in Children, or
Torments of Belly in elder people, then the Galenick Medicines usually given to
lenifie, dulcifie, and alter the matter, and pacify the Bowels, prove for the
most ineffectual, whereas other Medicines administered by the hand of a Chemical
Physician, which are severe in appearance, but having in them a power of
strangulating those Saltinesses and Acidities which cause the Distemper, do
immediately put an end to it. After this manner have I seen that severe
corrosive Liquor called Oil of Vitriol by addition of the Acid Oil of Tartar,
or of the Salt of Tartar, lose that Corrosive acidity which it had before. Not
that I would have Oils of Vitriol and Tartar used by any to do the like, in
such Cases, within the Body; but I mention the Experiment, only to illustrate
my Discourse, and convince the Reader, that a learned Chemical Physician, who
understands these things, and thereupon knows immediately, from sure and
rational Principles, how to form a Medicin, is the man more surely to be relied
on for Cure, than the common Galenists, who rest upon old Notions, and general
Shop-Medicins; and are usually strangers to the Properties of things, as they
are discoverable by the genuine Principles and Operations of Nature. Thus those
Acidities abounding in Quartans are often cured by Liquefactions of Sandivere,
or of common Salt after its being calcined, a convenient number of Drops being
duly exhibited in some proper Vehicle. And if those Acidities or Acrimonies be
dealt with by Medicaments abounding with a Volatile Salt, they are immediately
lenified: Just as Spirit of Wine being cohobated with Spirit of Salt, they so
attemper each other, that the one loses its Fervor, and the other its
acrimonious Acidity.

Thus in the many frequent Distempers, which arise from Ebullitions of sharp
and acid Liquors in Scorbutic Bodies, in which Cases the common Galenists
presently are for blouding to allay them, a learned Chemical Physician, being
Master of such Medicaments, as have power immediately to alter, pacify, or
precipitate those Acrimonies and Acidities, performs the work, without any such
damageable diminution of Blood, which is the grand Vehicle of vitality; and the
draining of it in such Cases, brings the Bodies of Patients to such a Pass,
that after once or twice relieving them by it, the most dangerous Consequent is
this, that when they fall ill again, they look for it, and (Custom proving
Another Nature) can have no relief without it, till the habit of the Body being
destroyed by Iterated Phlebotomies, there remains no more place for the
practice of that, or any other Remedy whatsoever.

It is not above a Fortnight since, that a youth lying in a very Feverish
state, with an ill Cough, I perceiving it came from a Wormatick Cause in the
Bowels, ordered him a Cordial impregnated with such Alkalisate Salts as might
alter the matter, kill the Worms, and abate the Feverish Heat, all in one;
which a certain Doctor being brought in by some of the Friends to view the
sick, having tasted, he said there was strong water in it, and 'twas too Hot,
and sharp, and no more to be used, etc. because little considering the Worms in
the Case, and that when that Cause was removed, the Fever and Cough would end
of it self, he concluded from the heat it was a Hectic Fever, and so ought to
be plied with cooling Pectorals; but the Boy two or three days after, avoiding
a Worm, immediately recovered, without more ado. I had not mentioned this, but
to show, how apt such Physicians, though otherwise learned, are to be mistaken
by the outward consideration of Hot and Sharp, and other First and Second
Qualities, when they go no further to ground a Judgment concerning the nature
either of Diseases, or Medicines.

But what says noble Mr. Boil upon this subject? Part. 2. p. 28, 29.
He that finds (says he) that there may be acid Juices in the Stomach, and in
other parts (as is frequently evident in the sharp Liquors which many Stomachs
cast up) and that there are also Sulphurous Salts in the Body, as is apparent
in Blood and Urine, which abound with such: He that observes how acid Liquors
lose their Acidity, by working upon some Bodies, as Spirit of Vinegar grows
almost insipid upon the Coral it has corroded: and how those Saline Liquors,
by working upon certain Bodies, degenerate into Salts of another nature, as we
have sometimes observed in Oil of Vitriol working upon the Fourth part of its
weight in Quicksilver; and how the contrariety of Acid and Sulphurous Salts
makes them sometimes disarm, sometimes, after some ebullition, Precipitate each
other, and sometimes unite into a Third substance of a differing nature from
either of those from whose Coalition it results, as we see in Tartar
Vitriolate, and (as I have observed) in a Salt which I sometimes make to emerge
from a due proportion of Oil of Vitriol and Spirit of Urine, freed, after
conjunction, from their Aqueous Moisture: And he, in a word, that has
carefully Analyzed and made Trials on many Parts both of the Macrocosm and
Microcosm, and heedfully applied his Experiments made on the former, for
illustration of the Changes observable in the latter, shall be likely to
explicate diverse particulars in Pathology, more intelligibly than he that is a
stranger to Chemistry. And so from some observations of his own he concludes,
That the generality of fermer Physicians have ascribed too much to the Humors,
under the notion of their being Hot, and Dry, Cold, and Moist, or endowed with
such other Elementary Qualities, and have taken a great deal too little notice
of the Saline and Sulphurous properties of things. And that is the reason (I
say) why the old Scholastic Learning is not sufficient to furnish us with any
tolerable account, touching the Nature of Diseases, and the curing of them: But
he who is able, being instructed by Chemistry, to reason out things according
to the real Appearances made in the Operations of Nature, and who to the
consideration of other substantial Notions joins also this, That all Fixed
things may be made Volatile by the help of the Volatile Spirit alone, and that
by the volatilisation of what is Fixed, and a Fixation of what is Volatile,
many wonderful incredible Tinctures and Mutations of Humors and Liquors, may
arise within, as well as without the Body of man, shall be able to apprehend
the condition and cure of most of the Diseases hitherto accounted incurable by
Galenical Physic.

And truly it is great Pity, that none of the Chemical Physicians have yet taken
the Task upon them, to write of the several Diseases incident to the Body of
man in such a manner, as from Chapter to Chapter, to Philosophise at large upon
each Disease and the ways of Remedy, by the mediation of Chymick Principles,
Processes, Alterations, and Productions: For hitherto, the useful Notions of
this kind that have been published, lie scattered in several Authors, and call
aloud for a Collection by the hand of some learned Chemist, who may be able to
improve them in Discourse from his own knowledge and experience, and be ready
to take in also the Counsel and Contributions of the ablest Brethren of the
Faculty, toward the accomplishment of so needful a work. And if the Hints which
I have here given, touching the influence or concurrence of Venereous,
Verminous, and Scorbutic Ferments, in the Maladies of this Age, be of any
value in men's eyes, I hope the admitting of them as Hypotheses will be of use
to others, as they have been to me, in the curation of Diseases; for, the great
Remedies that I rely on are so fitted to those three, that be the Disease what
it will, Acute or Chronick, they shall reach at it, and the three, All in one:
And if at any time I have had success more than ordinary in the curing of any,
whether Infants or others, I ascribe it (next the blessing of God) to the
putting of this Notion in practice; and the effects following thereupon have in
time assured me, that I am in the right, therefore cannot but recommend it to
others, that they may (if they please) ex propria Minerva form unto themselves
such Medicines and Methods, as may answer the Design of this Discourse.

Oswald Grembs, lib. 1. cap. 1. De Cordis affectibus. Si Galenicorum Remedia
Secundam, and Tertiam Digestionem non attingant, multo minus Quartam, and
Quintam.


THE END.

