Christianissimus Christianandus. OR, REASON FOR THE REDUCTION OF FRANCE To a
More Christian State IN EUROP.

Odimus Accipitrem quia semper vivit in Armis. LONDON Printed by Henry Hills,
and are to be sold by Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street.
1678.

Christianissimus Christianandus. OR, Reason for the Reduction of FRANCE to a
more Christian State in EUROP.
Section I.
Being an INTRODVCTION.

CErtainly it is high time to think of making the Ministers of France better
Christians, when it is apparent they have taken up the Principle of the Common
Enemy of Christendom: and make his Maxims the Rules and the Measure of their
Proceedings. Absolute Power at Home, and Universal Empire abroad, is their Aim
as well as the Turks; and seeing that by their Actions all the Duties of
Christianity are laid in the dirt, it were hard to determine under which of the
Two Christendom would obtain Fairest Quarter, after an absolute Conquest. For
though France be Owner of the better Faith, yet the other keep Faith better;
because all Travelers tell us the Turk counts it Religion to keep Word and
Promise.

But (it seems) France may do any thing Regnande causa, as we shall show by and
by, when we come to tell how little value is made of Promises, Obligations,
Alliances, and the Sacraments. In these things they exceed the Grand Seignior:
but in matter and extent of absolute Dominion they are his Rivals, and aspiring
to forestal him in his design upon Europ, to become sole Masters of a Western,
as he is of the Eastern Empire. And why not? Why should not Louis the 14th have
it now, as his Predecessor, Charlemain, had it heretofore? His great Ministers
and Officers both Civil and Military, say, They have ample Territories, and
very populous, and a most numerous Nobility and Gentry; as much Courage as
their Ancestors, together with the advantage of being trained up either to
Actions of War, or Warlike Exercises: also the Situation of their Country, and
the Opportunity they have by it to invade their Neighbors upon all Occasions;
the Fruitfulness and Riches of the Soil, the prodigious quantity of all sorts
of Commodities, Manufactures, and other ways, with which they supply
neighboring Countries; And lastly, the vast Revenues of their Kings, who
governing of late without check or control at home, are thereby the more able
to oppress other States or Princes. They boast how Charles the Eighth frighted
all other Potentates, by the surprising. Conquest of the Kingdom of Naples: How
they contended with the Austrian Family, when it had been raised on a sudden
to a wondrous Grandeur, by the accession of innumerable Provinces, united in
the person of Charles the Fifth; and that their King Francis the First, had
like to have carried from him the Imperial Crown, having to that end engaged
several of the Electors: but they forget to tell us, that when he had missed
it, then to be revenged on the Emperor, and the other Christian Princes, he was
the first that taught the French Kings the most Christian trick of making
Leagues with the Turks; for so did he with the Great Solomon the Magnificent,
as you may read in my Lord Herbert's History of our Henry the Eighth: and God
prosper'd him accordingly: for though he had several times the Turks assistance
to carry on his Reverigeful Designs, to the hazard of all Christendom, yet at
last he was forced to yield to the victorious Arms of that Emperor Charles, who
took him Prisoner, and made him buy his Peace at an extraordinary Rate. But yet
his Son Henry the Second had better success, and would have extended his
Dominions very far, had he not been prevented by a sudden, unfortunate Death,
as did also his Successor, Henry the Third.

Then came on his Successor, Henry the Fourth, and of him they boast, that he
subdued Monsters of Factions at home, and afterward revived that Monstrous
Design of grasping all abroad: that having made good his Title to the Crown by
the Success of his Arms, he bent all his thoughts upon a Project, vast in the
extent of it, as extraordinary in the Nature of it, intending no less than to
cast Europ into a new Model, and reduce all the Kingdoms and Commonwealths
that were in his time, to a certain number, and to bring them into such bounds
as he should think fit to prescribe to them; but to reserve to himself a
Portion so considerable, as to have enabled him, or at least his Successors, to
grow up into that state of Universal Monarch, which had been first imagined by
his Predecessor Francis. To this effect he had made choice of his Generals, and
other great Officers, furnished his Arcenals with mighty Stores of Arms, and
collected prodigious Sums of Money into his Treasury; and then all came to
nothing by a sudden unexpected stroke, which was given him by the Hand of
Ravalliac.

After him, his Son Lewis the 13th, Father of the present King, though, by
reason of some Domestic broyls and Civil Wars, he was not at leisure to carry
on the Project of his Predecessors, by employing that way the great Armory and
Wealth which his Father had provided; yet still he had an Eye toward it; and
Cardinal Richelieu, with the rest of his Ministers, finding that the House of
Austria was very near bringing all Germany under their subjection, and after
the Battle of Prague stood fair to carry away Universal Empire (the Darling of
France) they hastened, with what speed they could, to put an end to Civil
Dissentions, and having got quiet at Home, they being then courted by diverse
Princes for Assistance and Protection against the Austrian Family, were glad of
the Opportunity: reckoning, that under a show of assisting weak Princes, they
might at length take occasion to share with them in their Principalities, and
by that means vastly increase their own Power: And so they did subdue new
Provinces, and considerable Towns in Spain, Italy, Germany, and the
Low Countries; which at last made the Princes as jealous almost of him, as they
had been before of the Austrian: So that to prevent farther mischief they were
content to sit down with their losses, rather than trust their French Alliances
any longer. Which occasioned that great Treaty held at Munster, which ended in
a general Peace, An. 1648.

Now before I proceed, give me leave, by the way, to make use of what is past
in these few Observations, viz.

First, That had not France had a mavelous Wit, Courage and Fortune, it could
never have born its Head above water in the midst of so many Waves and Tempests
of Discord and Rebellion, as were raised during the Reigns of those Kings, and
yet continue still in a Condition after all, to maintain it self, and bid fair
also against its Austrian Rival for the Mastery of a General Dominion.

Secondly, That in all Ages, as soon as their Intestine troubles have been
over, they have still, out of a restless, warlike Humor, endeavored to
incroach upon their Neighbors, and for enlarging their own Lordship, laid hold
upon all opportunities to disturb Mankind; and they could never yet set any
bounds to their Ambition.

Thirdly, That this Ambitious humor of theirs, supported by the greatness of
their Power, would long before this time have brought all Europ under
Subjection, if their own Divisions and private Quarrels had not from time to
time put back their Designs for many years; or had not their greatest Princes
been cut off before they could have finished their intended work.

Fourthly, and lastly, as a consequence of the three former, That it was, and
ever will be, the true Interest of all Princes to oppose the French Designs: or
if they have at any time occasion to use them against other Oppressors, yet
still to remember, That no Oppression is like theirs; and that they meditate it
always, even in the midst of Friendship: and therefore that they are not to
accept of their Assistance longer or further than mere necessity or public
utility requires it; but to cast them off as soon as the danger is over; as it
was practiced in the Peace of Passaw; in the time of Henry the Second, and that
of Munster; in both which the French were prevented of further Progress by the
Jealousy of their Allies. However, in all such occasions, they ever made
acquisitions, and came off with great advantages.

In the Stories of such glorious Pranks of their Princes, it is that the French
Ministers do pride and delight themselves; and to their Monarchs, when
youthful, they propound them for imitation. To this end, it was the Care of
Cardinal Mazarine, in the Minority of the King now regnant, to provide him an
agreeable Tutor, that might form and fix in the mind of his Majesty, the
greatest Idea's of Glory and Warlike Enterprises. This was the Bishop of Rodes
his first Governor, who, as soon as his young Master came to understand
Letters, instead of diverting him with Romances, entertained him in reading the
Lives and Actions of the greatest of his Predecessors; but above all,
recommended to him the Story and Model of a great Prince, in the high
Achievements of his Grandfather, King Henry the Fourth; as may be seen in a
Book of his, written to that purpose, which has since been published.

This Prince, as well by his own Genius, as by the happy Success of his first
Undertakings, has relished such Instructions, and has solely proposed to
himself that Example for the Rule of his Actions. The History of that Great
King has been his most ordinary Study. He has, in imitation of him, taken
care to accumulate a vast Treasure, and settled a mighty Revenue, sought for
Alliances abroad, and successively raised many most numerous Armies. It Is
evident therefore, That he acts upon the very same draughts; and that all we
see at present are but the Old Projects of his Predecessors renewed, and the
Effects of those Impressions which he has sucked in with his Milk, Do but read
the Book called the Memoirs of Henry the 4th, with those of the President
Jeannin, and of the Bishop of Rodes; and then conclude, that whatsoever his
most Potent Grandfather had conceived in his Imagination, this King intends to
bring forth by the Power of his Armies; viz. A Wondrous Theater of Unchristian
Glory, planted upon a Mountainous heap of Christian Sculls, to amaze and
terrify Mankind into an Universal Slavery. For, as the desire of Glory has no
bound, and in regard his Years and present Condition put him into a capacity to
run a longer course than did Henry le Grand, so we cannot reasonably expect
otherwise than that he, who has so often crossed the Rhine with his last
Summer's Successes, will also, when he has overrun the Continent, cross the
Narrow Seas to make his Visits.

His Penmen have taken a great deal of pains to nourish these Thoughts in him,
and have no other study but to feed this Natural Humor of his Majesty, and
transfuse it also into his Son the Daulphin, having wholly sacrificed their Pens
to infuse it, and tickle that Native desire of Glory, which they have
discovered in them both. The great rewards that have been given them for it,
are authentic marks of an acceptance of their Service: and surely such
acknowledgements from a young High Spirit, that believes himself to be in a
posture to execute all that pleases him, and who has drunk down this Maxim,
That to take possession by the Sword, any Title is sufficient must needs be a
dangerous fore-running Sentence upon all the rest of Mankind, against whom his
Ministers shall persuade him that he has any thing to pretend. Which yet more
clearly to make appear to Us, We only need read the printed Books not long
since dedicated to him; among which is one that carries this Title, viz. The
Just Pretenses of the King of France to the Empire; which Book having laid down
this for a Ground, That the Dominions of Sovereign Princes have always been the
Dominions and Conquests of their Estates: and that the Dominions and Conquests
of Crowns can be neither alienated nor prescribed, at length draws out these
two Conclusions:

First, That the greatest part of Germany is the Patrimony and ancient
Inheritance of the French Princes.

Secondly, That Charlemain did possess Germany, as King of France, and not as
Emperor.

What may not be drawn from such kind of Assertions?

-- Nihil est quod credere de se Ambitio laudata nequit......... If these
things be believed in France, what may not the Scribes of France persuade their
Master? May they not as well prove and persuade him, That he wears the Titles
of all other Princes within the Pomel of his Sword? If one may judge of what is
to come by what is past, all Europ will have cause enough to stand upon their
guard, and take the All'arm, to prevent the Machinations of the French
Ministry, whose sole business it is, To blow up the Glory of their Master to a
mighty Bubble; and it is indeed no more but a Bubble which he gets; he is at the
Expense, whilst they collect for themselves mighty Fortunes out of the Ruins
of Mankind, and feed the Marshals and the other Great Military Commanders, with
Expectations of sharing other Princes Principalities, and, as fast as they can
Conquer, to be all made Princes.

SECTION II.
Showing how far the French Ministers receded from the known Rules of Justice
in beginning this War.

HIstories tell us, That the Heathens made it a main point of Conscience, never
to begin a War upon their Neighbors or others, till they had for it good
Justifying Causes. Among them, for this Principle the Romans were most eminent;
and therefore such Causes they in their Language termed Principia; that is to
say, Beginnings or Principles, intimating thereby that no War could be well
begun without them, nor luckily end. Thus, in Livy, said the Rhodian
Ambassadors in their Oration made to the Senate of Rome; Certe quidem vos estis
Romani, etc. Certainly, ye are Romans indeed, in regard ye place your Glory in
this, that ye expect your Wars should prove successful, because ye take care
that they be just in the Causes of them, and that ye look to the Principia, the
Beginnings of them, that they be not without cause undertaken, rather than to a
victorious event of them. Much might be said to this point out of Cicero, and
others that write of these Laws universally received among Nations; but, to be
short, Writers on that subject, do generally determine, that the just Causes of
War are reducible to the three following Heads.

1. That it be undertaken for Defense. Or, 2. For Recovery of what has been
taken away. Or, 3. To punish for Injuries done.
Some one of these ought to be Ingredient in the beginning of War, else it
cannot have a just cause.

Now therefore let us examine the French War by these Rules. We may remember
when it first began, the World was very much at Peace, and France so much
beforehand in Power and Greatness above other Nations, that it needed not to
fear any of its Neighbors, and consequently it had no necessity upon it, nor
occasion for Self-defence.

Again, the Crown of France was then so far from a having been robbed by any
other Nation, that it had aggrandised its self above all proportion by the
spoils that it had made of many Nations; nor was any of the Neighbor Nations
in other State and Condition in respect of the French Power, then as the Lark
under the Hobby, not daring so much at to stir. but was glad to couch and lie
close under all the Oppressions and Rapines that had been practiced upon them
by the French. It were too tedious here to recite their Actions in their
Neighbor Countries for Evidence, being notorious to the World, and to be
collected anon out of our ensuing Discourse.

Moreover, the French were so far from having any cause to make War to punish
any for Injuries done, that having been in that respect also beforehand with
their Neighbors, most other Princes had then abundant Reason, and much more
now to complain against Injuries of the highest nature acted upon them, and to
punish them with such Revenges as are due to the Common Enemies and Disturbers
of Mankind.

And truly, we may well take it for a kind of tacit consession that they had
no just cause nor occasion for beginning the present War, seeing that in a
Declaration consisting of a very few Lines, which the French Ministers did put
forth in the Name of their King before the Invading of the United Provinces,
there is not the leaft mention made of any cause, save that it was for their
King's Glory; because forsooth the Hollander had (but we were not told how)
detracted from his Glory, and the Glory of his Ancestors. Not a word of any
other caufe, nor of the Glory of God, whose Work it is usually to pour shame
and contempt in the end upon all such Glory.

There is also another Point which of old has been in Use, and that is a
Denunciation of War before the Beginning of it. Collegium Fecialium, a College
of Heralds was instituted in old Rome, without whose Advice as the Roman Senate
never made War; so having first referred it to them to consider of the Justness
of their Undertaking, if they determined the Justice of it, then one of the
same College was sent to the Enemy before any act of Hostility on their part
to denounce it. So Cicero, in his first Book of Ossices, Belli quidem oequitas
sanctissime Feciali Populi Romani jure proestripta est; That is to say, The
equity of any War was most religiously determined according to the Law of the
College of Heralds: And they had certain Laws in that College which were
called Jura Fecialia, by which they judged of the Justness of every War before
they entered upon it; and when Wars were denounced, they were called Promulgata
Proelia: For Justice being removed, what are Wars but Grand Robberies and
Murtherous Executions? Thus conscientiously and solemnly proceeded mere
Heathens heretofore; and shall they not then rise up in Judgment hereafter
against such French Christians? for, their Ministers not minding Right or
Wrong, thought it better to begin this War by way of surprise upon the Dutch
Republic, reckoning it a surer way first to get possession, and afterward to
leave it to the Scrupulous Critics of Law and Conscience to write and dispute
about the Justice of the Work: no matter whether it were righteous, as long as
it was in their sense, and by custom become a Glorious Achievement, to invade
on a sudden and oppress their Neigbours, having before given the World a proof
of this good quality, by surprising the Dominions of Flanders, Lorrain, Sicily,
and many other Countries.

These things being said, and known too notorious to be denied, I suppose none
can deny, That the Rise of this War was against all the just Rules of Warlike
undertaking. And all that they, or any body else, can have to say in excuse of
them is, That they are born under a necessity of giving trouble to all the rest
of the World, in order to the preservation of themselves at Home; for if Wars
were not found out for them abroad to entertain and exercise their Young
Nobility at the expense of their Neighbors, France alone would be too little
to supply them. In truth the Genius of the Nation is such, that it cannot
endure to live long in the idleness of Peace. They are of a Nature so hot, that
there must be Aliment for this Fire; and if some were not given it from abroad,
it would form to it self matter at Home.

To this Natural propension must be added the Custom of most part of their
Provinces, and the particular Dispositions of Noble Families, which give so
great Advantages to the Elder Brothers, that they leave nothing almost to the
Younger but their Industry and Sword: And whereas they rarely betake themselves
to Letters to obtain a Livelihood, and their Quality suffers them not to apply
themselves to Mechanic Trades, there is nothing left to them but their
legitimate Robbery of War, or common Robbery, to preserve themselves from want
and Poverty. From hence it comes to pass, that their Kingdom always finds it
self filled with an idle and boiling Youth, ready to undertake any thing, and
who seek Employments for their Valor at whose cost soever it be. The Liberty
which they had heretofore to void this pernicious humor in Duelling, is at
present taken from them by wholesome Decrees of their King; so that did not his
Ministers find out a Foreign vent for their Spleens, by which they might
evaporate, the flame would ever be breaking forth within their own Bowels.

Moreover, as the greatest Revenues of the Crown of France rise out of the
Purse of the People, so because the Common Contribution cannot be exacted in
times of Peace, without making a great many Malcontents; it is always
necessary to feed and fume the Airy multitude with the smoke of some Conquests,
wherein they also are apt to Glory, though they (Poor Creatures!) get no more
by the chaining of Neighbor Nations, but to have more Fellow-Slaves, and to
have their own Fetter set the harder on, and fastened the firmer at their
heels. To which end the Grandees are always coining pretenses of Quarrel to
continue in Arms, and maintain by Forcethat Royal Authority, which has so
strangely overflown the Limits of their Fundamental Laws. It is otherwise
impossible to satisfy all the Princes and Great Men of the Realm, though the
Princes are nothing so numerous now as they were in the times of Henry the
Third and Fourth: since which they have taken it up as a principal Policy to
diminish the Princes as fast as they can. That is one course; and another is,
always to hold them employed in Foreign Wars; and to incite them unto Glory,
that they may be consumed e're long in ruinous Undertakings, to the consumption
of their own, as well as other Nations. The Platform of which Device was first
laid, and in part effected by Cardinal Richelieu, and in a great measure
completed by Mazarin, his Successor in the Grand Ministry of State. So that you
see how they observe the Rules of of Justicewhether they deal with their own
Princes and People, or with Foreigners, be it by the way of War or Peace;
makiug havoc of all Mankind without Remorse, to greaten a few of themselves:
and that their King may be spurred to drive furiously on, they have given his
fancy a fair Prospect of an imaginary Throne of Glory at his Jorney's end, on
which they promise to place and elevate him above Petty Monarchs, as sole
Monarch and Emperor of the Christian Universe.

SECTION III.
Proving, That as they have observed no Rule of Justice in making War, so they
have had little regard to it in observing Peace when made.

I Would not make thus bold with France, were it not that there is a necessity
for it. It is no time now to be mealy-mouthed (as we phrase it) but to speak
out, seeing All that is ours is involved in the Common-fate of Europ: and our
cause cannot but be just, because we have had patience, and tried all manner of
fair means to induce the French Ministers to grant a Peace, and we have born
their Injuries to the utmost; among which this has been no small one, That
under pretense of allowing our King the Christian office of a fair
Mediatorship, they have at length by going at the same time to ravish the rest
of Flanders, thereby shown plainly to all the World, that their intent was
merely to delude and abuse us.

In handling this subject, it is our concern to evidence how they have violated
the Law of Nations, which is common to all, and to prevent the introducing of
such Maxims into the World, as would destroy the whole Commerce of Mankind, and
render Humane Societies as dangerous as the company of Lions and Tigers. We are
also no less concerned, to defend the Public Faith of Treaties against their
Finesses, and subtle Evasions, to preserve the Law of Arms within the Rules and
Formalities which the Consent of all Nations has established; and to remove
out of the sight of Christendom such scandalous Examples, which by lamentable
consequences would expose the weaker to the Will and Pleasure of the stronger,
and would establish Force the sole Arbiter of all proceedings. We are to
meditate such Courses and Means, as may stop a rapid Torrent, against the
impetuousness whereof neither Peace, Marriage, Oaths, Blood, Kindred,
Friendship, nor Condescension, can be Banks strong enough to keep it within its
Channel. It is to our purpose to defend the Common Interest of all States and
Princes, against a vast Design, which has for its Cause nothing but a
Predominant Desire of Conquests; for its End, Dominion; for its Means, Arms and
Intricacies; nor for its Limits any thing but what Chance will prescribe.

In a word, it is our Business now to decide the Fortune of Europ, and to
pronounce the Sentence either of its Freedom or Slavery; for betwixt these two,
no Middle State can be attained, no Peace be assured. Other Princes must (as
long as they can) oppose France to preserve themselves free; because France
will never be at rest, till She has hung about their Necks the Took of
Conquest: And if she should hearken in the mean time to a Pacification, know
that you are not to enjoy it longer than She by gaining of time to form fresh
Counsels into new Designs, thinks fit to make a new Rupture, and fall in upon
you on a sudden like a mighty Tempest. The French Faith has of late Years
been pure Punick; no sooner given, but as soon broken; and She by tampering
with other Princes Ministers and Subjects, instructs them how to menage their
Faith in point of Truth to best advantage, and by a Metal of her own, tries
what Metal they are made of e're she deals with their Masters; and with this
sort of white Powder, which does execution without noise, shoots down more
Castles, Citadels and Forts, and takes in more Towns than all the roaring of
her Cannon. It has been observed, That when her Ambassadors go abroad, they
carry along with them the principal Engines, or else they are sent after them.
The truth of this has been too notorious to the Emperor at Vienna, and in
Sweden, Poland, Hungary, Hanover, Bavaria, Munster, and other Places of the
Empire; so that an Ambassador, or an Agent, usually goes before the Army, and
a Conquest follows; which is a new way to Glory, unknown to Coesar, or any of
the dull Roman Conquerers. But against an Enemy any thing now is glorious;

-- An dolus, an virtus, quis in host requirat? And if this Course of
corrupting other Men's Faith be a Virtue, it is no wonder She can so readily,
without straining, quit her own, by a quick discharge of all Agreements and
Obligations. Old Nicholas the Florentine, says, Rattles were invented to
please Children, and Oaths Men: That is to say, to make Men mere Children.

But the best way to satisfy the World about this matter, will be to give a
brief Account of the Conduct and Carriage of the French Court, since the
Ministers which are now in Employ there appeared upon the Stage; who are not
likely to relinquish those Methods which they were bred up in, nor to act upon
any other principles than those that were taught them in the School of their
two Cardinal-Masters; Of the latter of them, Mazarin, it is reported by many,
that upon several occasions he had been heard to say, That it was a meanness in
a Man of State-Employment to be Esclave de sa Parole, A Slave to his Word.

We are not to seek for Instances, how he and his Disciples have practiced
accordingly to this very day. Let us look back as far as that grand Treaty
betwixt France and Spain, called the Pyrenean Treaty, the occasion whereof was
this, -- By the Mediation of the Queen Mother of France, a Peace was set on
foot betwixt that Crown and Spain, with a proposition of a Marriage between
this King her Son, and the Lady Infanta of Spain: The ends of it were alleged
to be,

A Desire to give ease and quiet to their Subjects.
To put a period to the many mischievous Consequents of the War.
To forget and extinguish all the Causes and Motives of the Wars past; and to
establish a sincere, entire, and durable Peace betwixt them and their
Successors.
The Treaty being begun, it was grounded upon two principal Particulars; and
unless the French would grant those, the Spaniard was resolved not to proceed
in it. The one was, That the French should forsake their adherence to Portugal.
The other was, That the Infanta should, upon the Marriage, make a Renunciation
(confirmed and ratified by the French King) of all her Pretenses, Titles, or
Claims whatsoever to the Spanish Monarchy, and all the Dominions thereof, or to
any part of the same. And the Reason of it in the Draught of the Treaty is set
down in these words; Lest the glory of their respective Kingdoms should happen
to decay and be diminished, if through the said Marriage, they should come to
be united and conjoined in any of their Children or Posterity; which might
occasion to the Subjects such troubles and afflictions as may easily be
imagined.

Next, as to the Exclusion and abandoning of Portugal, the French King obliged
himself to it in these words: His said Majesty of France will intermeddle no
further in the said Business, and does promise and oblige himself upon his
Honor, and upon the Faith and Word of a King, both for himself and his
Successors, not to give to any Person or Persons thereof, of what Dignity,
Estate or Condition whatsoever, either at present, or in the future, any help
or assistance, neither public nor secret, directly nor indirectly, of Men,
Arms, Munitions, Victualling, Vessels, nor Money, under any pretense; nor any
other thing whatsoever, by Land or by Sea, nor in any other manner: as likewise
not to suffer any Levies to be made in any part of his Kingdoms and Dominions;
nor to grant a passage to any that might come from other Countries, to the
relief of the said Kingdom of Portugal.

Now, can any imagine more cautious and efficacious words in a Treaty, to
prevent a further assistance from France to Portugal, which was the main thing
that the Spaniard sought for by this Marriage? Yet as soon as the Treaty was
penned, and before the Instrument was signed, the most Eminent Mazarin, sent
privately the Marquis of Chenes into Portugal, to assure the Portugais, That
notwithstanding he could not avoid the putting such words in the Treaty, in
order to the Conclusion of it, as did engage France not to assist them,
howsoever they might rest assured, his Master would never forsake them, but
would continue to them an assistance as much as before.

For the more full clearing of this matter, viz. That an abandoning of Portugal
was one of the essential Foundations of that Peace, and that otherwise it could
never have been treated of, nor concluded; take notice that in the 60th.
Article of the said Treaty you may find these words: [ Forasmuch as we have
foreseen and apprehended, that such an Engagement might have been an obstacle
not to be surmounted in the concluding of this Peace, and by consequence would
have reduced the two Kings to a necessity of perpetuating the War, etc.]

And a little after, in the same Article, it is further expressed thus, [
Finally, in contemplation of the Peace, and seeing the absolute necessity
wherein his most Christian Majesty finds himself, either to perpetuate the War
by a Rupture of the present Treaty, which he perceives to be inevitable, in
case he should have persisted to obtain from his Catholic Majesty in this
Affair, other conditions than those which he had offered, etc.]

Moreover, by the same Article it is evident, That whereas the French King
offered then to the King of Spain, to make restitution of all the Places which
France had gotten from him by Arms during the War, rather than he would have
been by Treaty obliged to forbear a further assisting the Portugais, the
Spaniard utterly refused this Offer, as is apparent by other words of the same
Article, as they follow:

[ Offering, besides the Places which are to be restored unto his Catholic
Majesty by the present Treaty, to render unto him also all the other Conquests
in general which his said Arms have made in this War, and entirely to restore
the Prince of Conde; provided, and upon condition, that the Affairs of the
Kingdom of Portugal should remain in the State in which at present they are.]

It Is likewise out of controversy, that this abandoning of Portugal was
covenanted and promised by France, so authentically, and in such clear and
special Terms, that it is not to be questioned, nor be made subject to any
Interpretations contrary to the true sense and intention of the Parties
contracting; the terms whereof are these: [ His said Majesty shall meddle no
more with the said Affair, and does promise and oblige himself upon his Honor,
and in the Faith and Word of a King, for himself and his Successors, not to
give unto the aforementioned Kingdom of Portugal, neither in general, nor to
any Person or Persons of it in particular, of what Dignity, Estate or Condition
soever they may be, neither for the present, nor hereafter, any aid or
assistance, public or secret, directly or indirectly, of Men, Arms,
Ammunition, Victuals, Ships, or Moneys, under any pretext; nor of any other
thing that is or can be, by Land or by Sea, nor in any other fashion: As
likewise, not to permit that any Levies shall be made in any of his most
Christian Majesty's Kingdoms and Estates, nor grant free passage to those which
may come out of other Countries, to the help of the aforesaid Realm of
Portugal.]

Nevertheless it is evident, that they immediately failed in every point and
circumstance of this Promise, insomuch that as in the very time of the public
making of the said Treaty, they were privately tampering with the Portugais,
and gave them underhand Assurances; so at the concluding of it, the Bon-fires
which were every where kindled for joy of the Peace, were not quite
extinguish't, when an evident Breach of the Treaty was observed, in the French
sending Auxiliary Forces into Portugal-at the beginning under the Name of
Mareshal Tureine diverse Troops were raised and conveyed into Portugal with Arms
and Ammunition; as if Tureine durst have presumed to do such a thing, without
the privity and consent of the Prime Ministers: And when the Spaniard by his
Ambassador complained of this, they deluded him, by issuing forth public
Orders to the Governors of their Ports, that no Soldiers, or Arms, etc.
should be suffered to imbarque for Portugal: But those Governors better
understood their private Lesson, and so let them pass by connivance. But at
length they began to act openly, and notwithstanding the Treaty they had made
with Spain, they entered into an Offensive League with Portugal against all its
Enemies; in which the French had so well provided for themselves, that by
Agreement they were to have all the Sea-Towns delivered to them which should be
taken from the Spaniard.

The truth of these things was not only manifest in Fact, but it was also
testified by Letters, which the Ministers of Spain had intercepted, that after
the Peace made betwixt the two Crowns, the Court of France had fomented the War
of the Portugais, hindered them from accepting those advantageous Conditions
which Spain had offered them; animating them by a hope of mighty Succors, not
only for their defense, but also for carrying an Offensive War into the very
heart of Spain. Among these were many of those that had been written by the
French Minister Monsieur de Lyonne, and the Archbishop of Ambrun, to Monsieur
de Schomberg, which proved the continual correspondence that was betwixt them
for the direction of that War. And to promote it, it is known that in 1672. the
Duke of Beaufort came with his whole Fleet upon the Coasts of Portugal, where
he spent a part of the Summer, to secure a passage of Victuals and Ammunition,
whereof the Portugais were in extreme want; and this at the same time when they
were offering Spain their Mediation to make an Accommodation with Portugal. Not
to omit how one of the Prime French Ministers, Monsieur Colbert, privately made
several Voyages thither to encourage them, and contract a more strict Alliance
with them, and to open a way for the bringing about a League Offensive: Which
in some time after was concluded with the Portugais, with these following
Conditions; [ That they shall be the Friends of their Friends, and the Enemies
of their Enemies, excepting England. That France shall furnish them with as
many Men as they need, to carry on an Offensive War in Spain both by Sea and
Land; Shall advance to them by way of Loan the half of their pay, for the
entertainment of Auxiliary Troops; and that they shall furnish them every Year
under the same title of Loan, with the Sum of three hundred thousand Crowns.
That all the Ports which they shall take in Spain, either upon the one or the
other Sea, shall be put into the power of France. That they shall not treat
either of Peace or Truce, without common Consent. And that this League shall
last for the space of ten Years.

By these particulars it is apparent, how little credit is to be given to
France, in the most solemn Engagements that She can make to any Prince, about
any Matter whatsoever. For, that a Treaty managed in order to a Marriage
between Princes, (which is one of the most Solemn Subjects that can be handled
among Men) and confirmed by Oath, with the most Sacred Mysteries of their
Religion at the High Altar, for a Punctual observation, should be thus palpably
broken, is not to be paralleled by any Instance or Example in all the World
beside. But it is not in this Business of Portugal alone that a Breach was made;
that which is more considerable is, That as soon as the French saw Opportunity,
after the Death of the late King of Spain, they started up a Claim for their
King, in the Right and Behalf of his Wife the Infanta, notwithstanding her
Solemn Renunciation formerly mentioned, which was entered into the Body of the
Treaty, and as sacredly sworn to; pretending that a great part of the Spanish
Low Countries was devolved to him in her Right, by the Municipal Laws of those
Countries; whereas it is known, that when Princes enter into a Treaty, it is
regulated and confirmed according to the Law of Nations common to all; and
being so to be understood, it is ridiculous among Civilians, to imagine that a
Consideration of Laws Municipal, or Customs, belonging to any particular
Country under the Dominion of either of the Treating Princes, can intervene or
be admitted afterward to the over-throwing of the Treaty, or the depriving
either of the Parties of the Benefit and Security which he has thereby: It is
a thing not to be named among Statesmen. For without the Renunciation, the
Treaty had never been agreed on; and it was so carefully penned, as if a Grand
Council of Civil Lawyers had been called to outdo all former Expressions used
in such Contracts, and to find out new binding Clauses, to take off all
possibility of Evasion: And yet against the very Sense and End of that
Renunciation, the French (as all Men know) under that so slight pretense of a
Claim, fell foul on a sudden upon Flanders and other parts with their Army;
which was their First Invasion upon those Countries after that Treaty.

But it is further observable, That this Invasion, so contrary to the French
Engagements, and so destructive of the very Essence of the aforesaid Pyrenean
Treaty, was attended with some Circumstances no less surprising than the Breach
it self. The one was that which passed at Paris between the Marquis de la
Fuente Ambassador Extraordinary of Spain, and the French King. And the other
was what the Archbishop of Ambrun, Ambassador of France in the Court of Spain,
declared there in his Master's Name.

As to the first, Fuente having received a Call Home to Spain, and being
jealous that the great Preparations then made in France were intended against
the Spanish Dominions, he thought fit to press the French King, to give his
Mistress the Queen-Regent of Spain some new Assurances, that might quiet and
settle her Mind against the many strange Reports of his intended Preparations.
Thereupon, that King did with all possible Asseveration engage His Royal Word
and Faith, that he would Religiously keep the Peace, and continue an entire
Amity to her and the Young King her Son.

As to the second, note that whereas not long after, the French Army took the
Field, and had possessed it self of Charleroy, about four or five days before
the News could arrive at Madrid: yet the said Archibishop of Ambrun, being
expostulated with about it, did in verbo Sacerdotis, and upon all that is most
sacred among Roman Catholics, protest and vow to the Queen-Regent, that his
Master intended nothing less than what was reported of him. And that he knew he
would never break with the King of Spain, nor invade any of his Dominions, as
long as he was Under Age.

-- Sic saevis inter se covenit Vrsis. Oh, how well do the French Ministers and
their Ambassadors agree with one another, to effect their Master's Business
and their own! For, it was not many days after this, that News was brought to
the Spanish Court how fairly the French had kept their word, having entered and
practiced all manner of Hostilities upon Flanders, firing many considerable
Towns, and wasting the Country, proceeding so outrageously, and so far, that
England and the Neighbor Princes taking the Alarm, and expostulating the
matter with France, it brought on another Treaty, which was held at Aken, i. e.
Aix la Chapelle, to make a New Agreement betwixt France and Spain; about the
Observation whereof we have afforded us another Instance of the French Fidelity.

Unto this Treaty all the Princes of Christendom were invited, to take care of
the common Security; and his Majesty of England among the rest, who sent also a
Minister to the Protestant Princes of Germany, to invite them into the Guaranty
of the said Treaty of Aix. Proposals also were made to the Duke of Lorain, and
several other Princes, to come into the League then to be made, to which the
Lorainer immediately accorded, hoping that by this Treaty he might have better
luck with the French, than he formerly had with them by the Pyrenean Treaty.

But before we proceed, it will not be amiss to remember you, How the French
kept Faith with this poor Prince, whose Interests had been provided for by the
said Treaty, as well as those of Spain, and his Duchy to be restored to him,
with all the Places and Towns which he had been possessed of within the
Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun. But see how France dealt with him: They
deferred as long as they could the performance of that part which related to
the said Duke, and refused still to return him his Country, till they had
brought him to make another Treaty with them in prejudice of the former;
whereby he was forced to part with several considerable Places, over and above
what had been granted to them by the General Peace. And yet this would not
serve their turn: For, after the oppressed Duke had enjoyed a Year and a half
but a very unsettled possession, during which, under several artificial unjust
pretenses, new Quarrels were picked every day, they with a considerable Army
constrained him to give them his Town of Marsal.

Moreover, it was but a little time after this, that they fell to teazing him
again, compelling him to sign a New Treaty more disadvantageous to him than the
two former, and yet (so insatiable is their Appetite after Dominion) the
unhappy Duke could, as little as before, obtain a quiet enjoyment of that
little they had left him. They every day encroached upon his Jurisdiction, the
limits of his Territories, and his Sovereignty it self. They imposed grievous
Taxes upon his Subjects. They caused him to disband his Forces, and to raise
new Men again, as they thought fit. They kept him from revenging his own
Quarrels, to take part in others. They let loose all his Enemies against him,
and stopped the progress of his Armies, as soon as he had got the least
Advantage: And in few words, he was at that time more a Vassal to France than a
Sovereign in his own Country. But yet all this would not satisfy the French
Court; they must have all again: wherefore the Duke by many Circumstances
showing how ill he brook't this kind of unreasonable usage, They ordered one of
their Generals to surprise and seize his Person, and to bring him either dead
or alive: Of which intended violence having had timely notice, he escaped when
it was very near being effected. Which (as one very well observed) is a new way
of dealing with a Sovereign Prince, not known before in these parts of the
World; and it may teach all other Princes what to trust to in treating, and
what to expect from such monstrous Neighbors: And it gives us some hope, that
we may e're long live to see the West governed by Bashaws as well as the East.

No other thing could give us a better In-sight into the Ambition and Pride,
nor more fully discover the Intent and Design of France. None but an Universal
Monarch can pretend to an Arbitrary displacing of Princes, and a disposing of
their Liberty, Lives, and Territories........... Thus you see how persidiously
they dealt with the Duke of Lorain.

But to return to the Treaty of Aix. It proved to be of little avail to that
Duke. For, they have since seized his Country again, and driven him out to seek
his Fortune; and this (as Men say) for no other Reason, but because he hoped by
this Treaty to have confirmed himself among his Allies in a better State of
Security than he had hitherto been. And as for the Court of Spain, the French
also resolved to defeat their Expectation of benefit by this Treaty: for
contrary to it, they presently fell to work; First they dismantled all the
strong Places and Holds of the Country of Burgundy, carried away all the
Munitions out of it, and would have spoiled the rich Salt Pits of that
Province, Had not the Powerful interposition both of England and Holland
Prevented.

In despite also of that Treaty, they exacted great Contributions from the
Dutchies of Limbourg and Luxembourg. They laid a new Claim to some Towns, as
important as any of those that were granted to them by the Peace. They
confiscated the Estates of the Subjects of the King of Spain that would not
forswear their Allegiance, and spared not the very Royal House of Mary Mont.
Nay, as if these Infractions were not enough, and still to encroach as far as
they were able, they forced their way with great quantities of Merchandise
through the Spanish Territories, without paying the Customs, and not long after
endeavored to surprise the Town of Hainault. In a word, They did whatever they
pleased, plundered even the most Sacred Places, and acted whatever can be
imagined to be done, without remorse, by insolent and unconscionable men.

But to proceed; it must not be forgotten, How under a pretense of advancing
the Affairs of Poland, and settling an Amity there, they contrived a Marriage
for that King with a Lady of France; by which means they were enabled to send
thither along with her in her Train, so many expert Instruments of mischief,
that immediately they settled a Cabal with such Intrigues, as in a short time
inflamed the Nobility of that Kingdom into heats and Factions against one
another, which are never likely to be extinguish't; and at that time they
operated so far, that that King soon became willing to quit the Kingdom; and
thereupon the Turk seeing the great Divisions that were wrought among them, was
easily invited in by the French Cabal, merely because they could not bring in a
King that was of French Blood, or of French Interest, at the following
Election. And also to this, That one of the greatest Motives of their fetching
in the Turk, was, that their New King contracted Marriage with the Emperor's
Sister; which Princess being now a Widow, is shortly to be married to the Duke
of Lorain.

It is worth the while also to remember how finely they used the Duke of
Newbourg while they trained him on to engage the greatest part of his Estate,
almost beyond redemption, in hopes of getting the Polish Crown, which they had
promised to procure for him by the help of a strong Party which they had made
in that Kingdom. Yet underhand, and contrary to their Treaties, as well with
the Elector of Brandenburgh, as with himself, and to their iterated Promises
and Vows, both by word of Mouth, and in Writing, they did by their Creatures
and Agents oppose the said Duke's pretensions, and endeavored with all
Industry to have gotten the Prince of Conde preferred before all his
Competitors: a particular Account whereof would, if published, without any
other Instance, be a sufficient warning to all other Princes, and afford them a
perfect Character of the French Court.

But it is remarkable, That it is not with Princes alone that they thus finely
deal; but they observe also just the same measure of Faith toward such Rebels
and Traitors of their making, as they have gained for Money, to betray the
Concerns of their own Country, by serving the Intrigues and Interests of
France. For, when after the beginning of this War, they saw the Emperor
setting himself in good earnest to assist the Dutch, then to dissuade and
divert him from his purpose, and to engage him (if it had been possible) not to
concern himself or take part in the Quarrel, they very fairly offered him to
deliver into his hands all the Original Letters and Papers they had received
from time to time from their bribed Friends and Creatures in Poland, to the end
that both his Imperial Majesty, and his Brother-in-Law the King of Poland,
might take what course they thought sit with those Traitors. Which handsome
Story may serve as a fair Warning and Fright to all those that prefer French
Money before their Loyalty, and the true Interests of their Country. And truly,
this piece of Insidelity in the French is the only Piece of Justice that I find
them guilty of, in the management of Affairs with their Friends and
Correspondents.

But withal I find, that this piece of their kindness to his Imperial Majesty,
was to make him amends for another prank of Treachery that had been played him a
while before. For the most Christian Ministers pretending a courtesy to assist
him against the Turk, and accordingly having sent Forces to join with the
Imperial Army, they at the very same time began to settle a Correspondence with
Count Serini, Frachipani, Nadasti, and Tottenbach; as did afterward appear
upon the breaking out of the Conspiracy, when the Depositions and Confessions
of some of the Accomplices were produced, who had been instrumental in carrying
both Moneys and Letters from the French Minister resident at Vienna, to the
said Conspirators.

Next, let us have recourse to the Swedes, and examine whether they, having been
many years their very good Friends and humble Servants, have had better luck in
treating with them than others, in point of dealing. But surely Siveden cannot
forget, that almost twenty Years ago they had occasion to make a Treaty with
them whereby they were to receive by way of Gratuity or Pension Sixteen Hundred
Thousand Crowns. Nevertheless, upon second thoughts, the French finding their
Treaty with Sweden to be but of little use to them at that time, refused to
ratify it, and sent Monsieur de Trelon his Ambassador to them, to tell them
in short, That the King his Master declared it to be void. Which is a fine
Court-stile for one Prince to use to another in Treating; and a tart, short,
Majestic way of rescinding Treaties.

It were both needless and tedious to tell, how well they have observed their
Treaties with Holland, seeing they cannot so much as assign the least Cause of
the War they now make against them, forasmuch as in their Declaration they told
us only of a Mauvaise satisfaction, and that they were ill pleased; and that it
would tend to a diminution of the Glory of the most Christian King, unless to
please himself he put all Europ in a Flame, and endeavor to bring all under
his subjection.

It is pleasant likewise to observe, how they practiced their Art also upon
that notable Fox the Bishop of Munster, how they not only lurch't him during
his Contest with the United Provinces, but their French Troops fell also upon
him, and endangered the loss of his Country. How they another time brought him
about to lurch us in England, by reducing him to a necessity of separating from
our Interest, after he had received assistance from us in a good Sum of Money.
How they hindered the Swedes from arming in our favor, and swayed Denmark from
our Party during our War with the Dutch even at the same time when France
seemed to forward and favor us against Holland; and it has been often
published, that they then spurred on the Dutch, and were in with them in the
contrivance of that Affront which they did us in the River of Thames; thereby
reckoning, that so severe an exasperation would necessarily follow in our Minds
against Holland, as might render us irreconcilable to them, and engage us in
War so long, till we should waste and wear out one another's Men and Shipping,
that we might at last be the less able to oppose France, who was at that time
meditating and forming such a mighty Advance of her own Naval Power, as might
enable her to contend against us both, when We should see it our Interest to
unite against her hereafter. And the truth is, the French Ministers did herein
act according to a right understanding of their own Business: For, they did and
do very well know, that in order to the main End of grasping All, they ought to
dread nothing more than a durable and firm Friendship between us and the United
Provinces, as that alone that can set bounds to their Ambition, and redeem
Europ from that Took which they are framing, and devising how to put about our
Necks. Therefore it was dexterously done of them to find out a fine Artifice of
Treachery to delude us both, and to spin out that War: For, in the very heat of
the War, they kept Negotiations still on foot, both in England and at the
Hague; put on a disguise of Mediation, pretending to make us Friends; and to
that purpose made Offertures and Proposals of Peace. It might be told who were
said to be the Instruments on both sides, to push on this project of delusion
upon us so far, that we in England were assured by the French, that the Dutch
were so well inclined to Peace, that for that time they meant to lay up their
Men of War; but then afterward the French under hand pressed the said Dutch
with all vigor and earnestness imaginable against us, and to fit out their Men
of War again, promising that rather than fail they would join theirs to them
against us. It was upon a supposal the French were true to us at that time in
carrying on their pretended Proposals of Peace, that we were made secure,
slackned our Preparations that Year; and so a surprise followed upon it; for,
the Dutch having been Tarantulated with a French Brieze in their Tails, danced
after the Lesson they had set them, and so entered our River as high as Chatham:
thus it was brought about, as Report went in those days. However, admit it
should not be true that the French were the Authors of that Counsel, yet it is
unquestionable they knew of the Design e're the Attempt was made; it was their
pretense of bringing about a Peace that rendered us secure, when indeed we had
no Security but in War, or in a Peace of our own making. Which may sufficiently
instruct us at our own cost, what Security is to be expected from French Amity
and Treaty. It was not long after, that we began to see a Convenience of Peace;
insomuch that a Treaty was concluded at Breda: and where as one Article was,
That the French should restore unto us St. Christophers, in the manner and form
therein expressed, nevertheless they began again to abuse us, and instead of
performing it according to the very letter and true meaning of the Article,
they still from time to time upon several unjust and frivolous Pretenses, put
off his Majesty's Commissioners that went to receive it, till seeing a
necessity to comply with us in so small a matter, they after four years
baffling, were pleased to deliver it. But it is to be noted, That before the
delivery of it they destroyed all the plantations, plundered and carried away
all that was portable, laid the whole Country waste, and left it in a worse
condition than if it had been never planted. And as if the detaining of his
Majesty's Territories had not been sufficient, they interrupted the Trade of
his Majesty's Subjects in those parts: and assuming to themselves a Sovereignty
in those Seas, they would not suffer any Ships but of their own Nation, to sail
by, or about their Islands: and upon no other Ground proceeded so far, as to
bring in many Vessels as Prizes, and confiscate them.

But it is not in the West India Trade only that we have been thus used: but
they have been many years, and still are, diminishing our Trade here at home.
They design upon our Cloth-Trade, and many of our useful Manufactures, by
Money tempting away the Makers of them to go and settle in France, and by them
get their own People to be instructed in the making of them. And in the mean
while, to advance and encourage their own Manufacture; and cause ours to lie
upon our own hands when made, they lay heavy Impositions upon all English
Cloth, Stuffs, etc. that are or shall be Imported into France; which is the
ready way to blow up many of our Merchants, and most of our Manufactures, and
undo Thousands of poor People who depend upon them for a Subsistence by Work.
No wonder then it has been observed, That we do not of late send into France
the Fourth or Fifth part of what Goods and Commodities we formerly sent over.
Nay, I hear, That Monsieur Colbert, one of their principal Ministers, is at
this very time consulting and advising with Merchants and others, to give our
Trade a further diminution; while we (such is the fondness of our Nation!) are
bewitched with an affectation of French Commodities, though but mere Baubles
and Gugaws, and though our own Workmen afterward work better, and outdo them
in the making of their own Inventions, yet (such is our base folly!) unless the
Retailers of them do swear, and lie too, that they are French-made, there is no
putting them off to advantage at a quick rate. Moreover, we must have all
French about us; their Behavior, their Fashions, their Garb in wearing them,
their mean way of Housekeeping (to the utter extinguishment of the Noble way
of Old English Hospitality) their needy men for Servants, their mere Dietary
Leeches or Scholastic Methodists (no better than most of our own) for
Physicians; their cast Tooth-drawers and Barbers that had not worth enough to
earn Bread at home, to become our admired Chirurgions; French Music, French
Dancing - Masters, French Air in our very Countenances, French Legs, French
Hats, French Compliments, French Grimaces; only we have not so frequent the
French shrug of the shoulder, because we are not generally so low -- and itchy.
Pardon me, if thus far, in zeal to mine own Nation, and indignation, I a little
digress. Any thing that speaks French is our delight; and such is the
Witchcraft also upon the other Nations of Europ, that having made the French
Language and Humors Universal, I cannot but look on it as a sad Omen of
Universal Slavery; for as much as both Divines and Politicians have, by the
course of God's Providence, and Revolutions past in the World, observed, that a
Nations taking of Language from another Nation, and preferring it before their
own, has usually bin a forerunner of, and prepared the way for its Conquest.
No marvel then that France is carried on and elevated with the Ambition and
belief of Conquering All, when they see all so fancifully dote upon their more
effeminate Language, Fashions, and People. Therefore it is high time that we
return to our Old English Spirit and Humor, which naturally is more grave,
manly, and Martial, and by its native courageous Temper sufficiently enabled
(as of old) to cure their hot fits, and cudgel them out of their disciplinary,
artificial Conduct, and evaporating Valor.

But to return where I left, let me say, there is much more fear of their
pretended Friendship, and certain Falsehood, than of any thing else they can do,
notwithstanding all their Numbers; as may be collected out of the memorable
Stories of Cressy and Agincourt; of which last they have in their Chronicle
left this dismal Note, LaMauvaise Journee d'Agincourt. Let us then in the mean
time have an eye to their Treachery, Treaties, Peace more dangerous than War,
and their abusive Dealings.

And if those Particulars which we have hitherto repeated, be not enough to
paint them out in their Colors, let us next call to mind how falsely they dealt
with us in the last Dutch War, under pretense and appearance of a hearty
Conjunction with us. As to the undertaking it self, they made us to believe
they would be Principal in the War, and that they would be content that our
Forces should second them but as Auxiliaries: but as soon as they thought they
had engaged us so far in the business, that we could not well go back, nor take
new Counsels, they in all Princes Courts declared it was not their Quarrel, and
that they were engaged in it only to assist us. Which was a friendly course to
render us as liable as they could to the Displeasure of other Princes that
liked not the War; and to excuse themselves, though they had bin the chief
Causers and Contrivers of it.

We cannot omit to remind you next, how strangely they behaved themselves
toward us by Sea; When they should have assisted us in the Battle that was
fought under the Conduct of the most Illustrious his Highness Prince Rupert;
when by reason of their standing at a distance in the very heat and stress of
the Fight, and never coming in to assist him, they did sufficiently manifest,
that their Squadron of Ships was sent only to be Spectators, and to learn to
Fight, and for other ends, rather than to act in it: and truly his Highness
that day gave them an Heroic Example of Skill and Courage, when he was set
upon by two of the Dutch Squadrons together, one of which the Admiral of the
French Squadron ought to have engaged, according to the Orders that his
Highness had sent to him the day before: but he not coming in, though the wind
all the day stood fair for him, his Highness was left alone to bear the brunt
of the Engagement with two of the Enemies Squadrons at once: and though his own
Ship was surrounded on all sides, yet he so nobly acquitted himself that day,
that he not only made his own way out of that great distress, but giving a
Courageous Example to the rest of his Squadron, went with them, and assisted
that other Squadron of ours which had been engaged against Vice Admiral Tromp
at a great distance in a separate Fight, contrary to his Highnesses Orders.
Moreover, it is to be remembered, that as he made way to their Assistance, his
Squadron by the way still fought the Dutch Squadrons, who made way also side by
side with ours at some distance, both sides shooting at each other; the Dutch,
in hope to have hindered the Prince from giving the assistance intended; which
being nevertheless effected by his Highness, and the Hollanders Admirals
finding they could not prevent it, and that they had enough of it, made sail
away for their own Coasts. But had the French Squadron under the Command of the
Count D'Estrees, done his Duty, and come in to second the Prince any hour of
the day, as he easily might have done (the wind standing fair) it was evident
that day, we might then have had one of the most glorious Victories that ever
was obtained by Sea, and but few of the Dutch Ships could have escaped home.
This was afterward acknowledged and attested by Monsieur Martel, the Count
D'Estrees own Vice Admiral, who, like an honest man, attempted to have come in
with a few of his Ships, but could not; and afterward for his forwardness to
have fought, and because he blamed his Admiral, when he returned to Paris, he
was called to an Account, and Committed to Prison; whereas the Count having
followed the private Instructions of the French Ministers, was still continued
in Honor and Command. And therefore it must needs be an undeniable Evidence,
that he had privy Orders and Instructions only to stand still and look on,
while we and the Dutch should be tearing and destroying one another; because
otherwise, in order to a vindication of the Honor of France and its Ministers,
They would doubtless have made him answer that egregious Piece of Treachery
with the price of his Head.

I intend as much brevity as may be, therefore have forborne to touch upon all
the Circumstances of that affair: but thus much is absolutely necessary, to
give you proof of the French good will and faithfulness to England, as well as
to all other Nations that have had, or shall have any Dealings with them. Now
let us next see how they dealt with us, in order to the putting an end to this;
which having been by us entered into jointly with the French, doubtless nothing
ought to have been attempted by any one in order to the ending of it, but what
should carry a fair Respect to the Interest of both Parties in conjunction: But
see how they played their parts with us in this also! -- The StatesGeneral of
the United Provinces having nominated several Deputies to be sent, some to his
Majesty of England, and some to the French King, to know of them both upon what
Terms they would be willing to agree, and come to a Peace: His Majesty (as it
is a Virtue innate in his own Royal Temper) intended to deal most justly with
the French King upon this occasion; and therefore so carried the matter, to
avoid giving him any offense or jealousy; and being loath to do any thing in
the Affair without participation of Counsels, immediately sent him word, such
Deputies were arrived at London, and would not so much as hear what their
Errand was without the privity of France, supposing that he should have a
suitable Return from thence.

But what happened in the mean time? Even a quite contrary behavior of the
French: For, no sooner were the other Deputies arrived at the French Court, but
they were presently visited and caressed by two Secretaries of State, and
without further delay it was demanded of them, first if they had full power
from their Masters to treat; and next, what Proposals they would make in order
to a speedy Peace. The Deputies desired rather to know first what Proposals the
French Ministers would make. Whereupon, to hasten them to a Conclusion of the
Work, the French shortly told them, they were to understand, That what their
Master the King had Conquered by his Arms in Holland he would not part with,
unless they gave him an Equivalent, as well for those Places, as for the rest
that he should conquer before the Treaty be concluded.

This Answer made, the Deputies forthwith send back one of their number to the
Hague, by name Mr. De Groot, who was speeded back again with Instructions to
Amerongen, authorizing him and his Fellow-Deputies to conclude a Peace with the
French. He was no sooner arrived, but Monsieur de Louvoy one of the Prime
Ministers of State made short Work, delivered the Dutch Deputies a Project of
Treaty, or rather the Pretensions of the King his Master; upon grant whereof
(as he said) he would be both willing and ready to return to his former Amity
with the States General, and conclude a firm Peace with them.

Was not this a sweet Return of dealing toward his Majesty of England? For,
you to are note, That though the War was made jointly, and so no doubt it was
not to be ended without respects to be had to the Interests of each Party
concerned therein, which you have seen was fairly meant and observed by his
Majesty on our part toward the French; yet they had so little regard of us,
that they not only put on and entered upon a Treaty without our Privity or
Consent, but would have concluded it upon that separate Treaty without us, only
to their own Advantage, whereby their Master might as perfectly become sole
Master of the United Provinces, as if he he had conquered all by the Sword.

You are to note also, for a clearer understanding of their Intents, That when
the Here De Groot being to go the second time from Amerongen to the Hague with
the Articles of this Separate Treaty; when he arrived there, the States finding
that there was nothing in them which concerned England, he told them the French
Ministers had told him, The Sates his Masters might deal as they pleased with
England, and make an end as cheap as they would; because (as they pretended)
they were not bound by Treaty to procure the English any Advantages. And thus
no more Notice was taken of his Majesty, nor greater care of his Interests,
than if he had never been concerned in the War, or in no League with the French
at all: So that if by wonderful Providence this Separate Treaty had not been
broken off, Europ might have been in greater hazard of its Liberty, and we of
our Safety, by a settled Domination of the French in the United Provinces.

Much more might be added, to show the foul play of the French with us at that
time, and afterward also when the Duke of Buckingham and My Lord Arlington
were sent hence into Holland: but I must be brief, this being enough to
discover their friendly behavior during the Joynt-War An. 1673.

In the next place, let us see how they have carried themselves since the Year
73. For, we have an Account, that notwithstanding the Amity betwixt us has
been continued to this Day, yet that Nation has never ceased to do us one
Injury or other, and no sufficient Redress at all has been obtained, though
Complaints have been made, and Reparation earnestly sought for. Witness
especially the many Affronts and Violences done to us upon our Merchants Ships
at Sea by the French Privateers: For, but very few of them have been restored;
and those that have been, have found the Remedy worse than the Disease, because
the tedious delay of it brought such charge to the Merchants, that the benefit
coming by the Restitution would not countervail their Expenses in attendance at
the Court of France.

For the Clearing whereof, it cannot be amiss to give here at large an Account
touching the Event of such Applications as have been made to his Majesty for
Redress at the Council Board, and with the Commitee of Trade belonging to his
most Honorable Privy Council, excellently penned, and now come to my Hand
newly printed and dispersed; therefore I reprint it. And it here follows.

At the Court at White Hall the 4. of August 1676. Present The King's most
excellent Majesty in Council.
The Right Honorable the Lords of the Committee of Trade did this Day present
unto his Majesty in Council, a Report touching the Injuries which his Subjects
did sustain by French Capers, in the Words following:

May it please your Majesty,
There was presented unto your Majesty in Council on the 31. of May last, a
Petition in the Name of all the Merchants of London, and other places,
concerned in the several Ships taken by the French Privateers, and carried into
several Ports of that Kingdom; and their Complaints consisted of the Points
following:

1. That the Ships and Goods of your Majesty's Subjects, though manned
according to the Act of Navigation, and furnished with all necessary Passes,
were daily seized, carried into Dunkirk, Calais, Sherbrook, and other Ports,
the Masters and Mariners kept close Prisoners, to force them by hardship to
abuse the Owners, or else for Relief of their own necessities (being commonly
stripped and plundered) to enter into the Privateer's Service, which great
numbers have done with very pernicious effects.

2. That the delay and charge of prosecuting the Law in France, does commonly
make the Owners to become losers of half the value, when ever they are
successful.

3. That there is no Reparation ever gotten from Privateers, for what they
plunder and imbezle, which makes them freely seize upon all they meet, and
perpetually molest the Navigation of your Subjects.

Wherefore your Petitioners humbly imploring your Majesty's Protection and
Relief, your Majesty was hereupon graciously pleased, out of a sense of your
Subjects sufferings, to command that some Frigates should sail forth to clear
the Coast of those Privateers, to seize them, and bring such as had offended to
make Restitution. And your Majesty did further order, that the Committee of
Trade should well take notice of the particular Cases and Complaints depending,
that such of them as were of weight and merit might be fitted to receive your
most gracious Recommendation, for Relief, as to survey the whole number of
Seizures which have been made on your Subjects, in order to lay before your
Majesty what hardships have been sustained at Sea, and what sort of Justice
has been administered in France, with their Opinion of what is sit to advise
your Majesty therein.

In obedience to which Command we have hereunto annexed a list of such ships as
have bin seized, to the number of 53. and the Cases wherein the Owners have
repaired unto your Majesty either in your Council, or by your Secretary of
State, for Relief; which as in the general it supposes a Justice in such
Complaints, so it leaves a suspicion of great hardship in the Methods of
Redress, and the number of Captures is no small proof of the facility of
Condemnation.

How many other helpless Men there have been (besides the said Cases) who have
not had ability to prosecute, or how many of these Cases have been favored
with Redress, we cannot certainly understand, till the Information we have
sought for, comes from Paris, which may also enable us to complete their
Circumstances of every Case.

But in the mean time, such of all the Instances of Redress, as are come to our
knowledge, we have not failed in the Margin, to make mention of them, being in
number seven.

While we were in the midst of this Prosecution, Mr. Secretary Coventry does on
the 6th. instant present unto the Committee a Paper, which he received from the
French Ambassador, Monsieur Courtin, relating to these matters, and the
Contents thereof were as follow.

An Extract of a Letter from Monsieur Colbert to Monsieur de Pompone, one of
the French King's Secretaries, written the 28th. of June 1676.
For what concerns the Prizes, it would be a difficult matter to answer to all
the Cases contained in Monsieur Courtin's Letter; What I can say is,

That the Council for Marine Affairs, sits every Friday at Saint Germans.

That all Privateers and Reclaimers know it.

That Sir Ellis Leighton, nominated by the English Ambassador, has always
notice of it, and is always present at it.

That not a Week passes, but I give him two or three Audiences, and oftentimes
I send for him on purpose.

His reasons are all reported, read, and examined.

As likewise are all Petitions of Reclaimers, and I shall tell you more, I
acquaint him wiih the Reasons upon which Judgment is given.

In giving Judgment, all Vessels which have any appearance of being English,
are realeas'd, and very often, and almost always, although we are satisfied
that the Ships are Dutch, yet they are released because there is some
appearance of their being English; and every thing is judged favorable for
that Nation; and it is true that all Ships that are taken are of Dutch-built,
that they never were in England, that the Masters and all the Equipage are
Dutch. that the Documents are for Persons unknown, and which are not
oftentimes so much as named, that they carry with them only some Sea-Briefs
from Waterford, or some other Town of Ireland, or Scotland: That the whole
Ships Company deposes, they were sent to Holland, that we have found on Board,
three or four Vessels, Bills of Accounts, by which it is seen the English took
two, three, and four per Cent: for owning of Ships: and although it is
impossible to avoid confiscating them, yet these are the Ships which make such
a noise in England.


In answer to which remarks, though it be true that all respect imaginable
ought to be given to what Ministers of that consideration do pronounce, yet
there being some differeuae between them who feel the smart, and those who feel
it not, we shall insist on some particulars, that your Majesty may discern
whether your Subjects are fortunate in their Freedom of Trade at Sea, or in the
helps of Justice when they are seized, as the Report and Information of the
Letter will seem to make out; for as it magnifies the favor which is exercised
in France, the facility in all Addresses, and the tenderness to relieve English
Men in all Complaints, so we cannot on this subject but own to your Majesty the
very different resentments we have thereof: for we understand that when English
Ships are brought into the Ports of France, many of the Mariners complaining of
ill treatment, and some of torment, their Papers being seized, and their
Persons in restraint, till all examinations are prepared, then are all their
Writings sent up to the Privy-Counsel at Saint Germans, and there Judgment
definitively given, seldom are any of the Reasons of Condemnation mentioned in
the Decree, and never any Appeal or Revision admitted of; so at last it was
until the 20th. of June last, and whether this be the tenderness, or the
Justice which is mentioned, we do not know, but we are well assured, that the
Methods of your Majesty's Clemency and Justice on like occasions have been far
otherwise; and we appeal to the present Ambassador, Monsieur Courtin, if
almost in all Cases that he or any of the Ambassadors thought fit to own when
his Excellency was here before, and your Majesty in War with Holland, seizing
many Ships as Prize, and under great suspicion claimed by the French, whether
it were not very customary to have a short reference, and a Summary Examination
of all Papers by the Judge of the Admiralty in his Chamber; and that if any
thing appeared fair in the Case, whether the Ships were not immediately
releas't without Law, charge, or delay; and 'twill not be out of Season, we
hope, to annex hereunto the Copy of an Order of the 22. of July 1665. signed by
the then Lords Commissioners of Prizes, where it will appear that eighteen
French Ships which were laden with Wine and Brandy, being at Dover, and
detained as Prize, were all eighteen by one Order discharged without any Law,
or even the Ceremony of the Judge's Examination, being singly on the Credit of
the mba Assador's Word, affirming that they belonged unto the French.

As for the matter of Revisions or Appeals after Sentence in the Court of
Admiralty here, we know his Excellency will also remember, That never any Man
was denied his Liberty therein; but on the contrary, your Majesty gave a
standing Commission for Appeals in all Cases of Prizes, and filled it with the
Lords of your Council only, that every Case might receive a candid as well as
unquestionable Determination.

We might also put your Majesty in mind, That during the whole Term of your
late League with France, whenever any French Ships were seized by the
Hollander, and afterward retaken by his Majesty's Frigates, such French Ships
were always restored on Demand, no consideration being had of the time they
were in possession of the Hollander, whether a Month, two, or three, as
sometimes they were; and when the French owner, as it has happened, knew not
of such retaking, but that the Ship was according to Law condemned to your
Majesty, and sold with other Prizes; yet the Claimer appearing, your Majesty,
has ordered the Money and product of the Ships to be restored unto him.

Such various Methods of Justice and of Clemency might have entitled your
Majesty to a different acknowledgment, and more advantageous Effects.

As to the other part of the said Paper, it seems to contain very harsh
Imputations on the Trade of your Majesty's Subjects, and from some ill Practice
perhaps found out (as every where there may be Instances of the like) General
Rules are made, and severe Impressions taken, which having entered the thoughts
of some Eminent Ministers, we must not wonder, how frequent and how multiplied
soever your Majesty's Recommendations for Justice are, that the events of
Trials prove so unfortunate; if your Majesty will but vouchsafe to cast your
Eye on the Causes here annexed, you will soon see,

Whether (as it is imputed) all the Ships taken are Dutch-built?

Whether they are all such as never were in England?

Whether all the Masters, and all the Mariners are Dutch?

Whether the Documents be for Persons unknown, and oftentimes not named?

Whether in the whole List, there be more than one Ship from Waterford, and but
six from the rest of all Ireland, but from Scotland not so much as one.

Wheher it is credible all the Ships Company do swear they are sent to Holland,
when so many are taken even coming from Holland?

Tour Majesty may see how many Ships in the List are English-built, taken with
English Colors, English Mariners, English Owners, some of them known to your
Majesty, and to whom the best Papers your Majesty, or your Ministers can sign,
or the Treaties do require, are given but all in vain.

So that if the Case be in the general quite different from what in the general
is represented, we hope it will be no crime for your Majesty's Subjects to make
some noise in England, when they are hurt, and when they see their goods taken
from them by violence; and that violence rather justified, than redressed by
Law.

It Is not for the Condemnation passed on these very ill Cases enumerated, that
your Subjects do complain, for it were to their advantage, if all such were
punished and deterred from Trade who by collusion take share in that profit,
which the favor of the present Conjucture seems wholly to appropriats to this
Kingdom.

And surely your Majesty and the whole Kingdom did reckon upon this Advantage,
and the extent of Trade that would naturally flow, as one of the greatest
Fruits and Blessings of your Peace; so that your Majesty being sensible of
great decay and loss of English Trading Ships in the late War, did think it
advisable to admit your Subjects to repair themselves on the sudden by
purchasing of Foreign Ships, and your Majesty by your Authority made them free
and fit to partake in the benefit of English Ships, to the diminution of those
higher Customs which otherwise such Ships were obliged to pay, and while your
Subjects, with these and with their own home-built Ships, are in prosecution of
the said advantages, while every Man is invited by the Conjuncture to venture
more, and to enlarge his Trade, while by a general trust in the Peace and
Alliance your Majesty holds with all your Neighbors round about, they are led
to go abroad unarmed and without defense, we cannot but lament it as a great
misfortune and disappointment, to observe how these your Majesty's Subject are
frequently made a Prey of, and very evily treated both at Sea and Land.

Wherefore considering that the root of all these Disorders arises from the
Violence and Rapine of the French-Capers, who ought to be looked on as
disturbers of the Public quiet, and Enemies of the good Friendship between the
two Crowns, we are humbly of opinion that your Majesty has just occasion from
the injuries past, and those which are now depending, and which do every day
increase, to make a very serious Representation of all unto his most Christian
Majesty; and not only press for some better method of repairing the grievances
mentioned, but earnestly to insist on the calling in of all Privateers; or else
your Majesty must do right, and give defense to your Subjects from all the
Insolences which they so frequently meet. All which is most humbly submitted.

Council Chamger 31. July 1676. Anglesey, Bath, Craven, J. Ernle, Finch C.
Bridgewater, H. Coventry, G. Cartret. Robert Southwell.


His Majesty taking into his serious Consideration the daily Complaints of his
Subjects, and having a great sense and resentment of their ill usage, has
thought fit to approve the said Report, and is therefore graciously pleased to
order as it is hereby ordered accordingly.

That the Right Honorable Mr. Secretary Coventry do immediately transmit to
his Majesty's Ambassador at Paris a Copy thereof, that so the evil and the
unhappy state of these things may be made known in that Court, and the Remedies
presst for in his Majesty's Name, which are proposed by the said Report; and
Mr. Secretary is also to attend the French Ambassador here, with the same
Representation, and to Expostulate upon all these Hardships, and the little
Remedy given to his Majesty's Subjects, either on the Merits of their Causes,
or the Recommendations of them by his Majesty. That so his Excellency being
made sensible of his Majesty's Displeasure herein, and the reasonable
Discontent of his Subjects, there may be by his Care such lively Impressions
hereof fixed with the King his Master, and the Ministers of France, as may
redress the Evils that are complained of, and obtain the just Remedies which
are proposed.

Phillip Lloyd.

To these Evidences, I might add the List of several Ships belonging to our
English Merchants, taken by French Privateers since December, 1673. which was
also presented to the Right Honorable the Committee of his Majesty's
Privy Council for Trade; and by them to his Majesty, together with the Names of
their Owners, and their other Circumstances; but it would be too copious for
this place. Therefore it is sufficient for me to show you only an excellent
Account of the Business it self, and of the great Care and Pains of the Noble
Lords of the Council's Committee for Trade; and of his Majesty's Royal
resentment of the Sufferings of his Subjects, and the Abuses put upon our
Nation; which may testify, that no Nation under Heaven can have better Reasons
on their side to justify a War, than England has against France, for the many
Dishonours, Affronts, and Injuries done us, in recompense of his Majesty's high
Integrity, and fair Carriage toward them.

But this Unfaithfulness of theirs toward us is ingrafted in their very
Nature, as may appear not only by what has of late been observed, but also by
the Stories of old, all the time that Scotland was under a Crown separate from
England, it having then been perpetually made use of by France, when any
Difficulties were upon us, as a Backdoor to enter, disturb, weaken, and
attempt us here in England. Therefore having, since the happy Union of the two
Crowns under King James, been at a loss all his Reign how to disturb us by
their wonted way, they at length got an Opportunity to plague us, by bolstering
up a boisterous Presbyterian Party in Scotland, that might open the Backdoor
again, to let into England, not only Armies, but the delicate Pandora with her
Box of Beauty, varnished over with the name of the Holy Discipline, and filled
with all the Plagues of Egypt, to make our Nation miserable; I mean
Presbytery, the pious Mother, Nurse and Seminary of Civil Wars, and perpetual
Factions among us: and thus for the planting of War here, we are beholden to
France, among the other good Deeds they have done to our Nation. -- But that I
may no longer talk in the Clouds, the plain Story in brief is this:

The French having long had a Design of Conquering the Spanish Low - Countries,
and conceiving it was no time to discover or attempt it, as long as England
should be in a condition to hinder it, therefore to remove this Impediment out
of the way, the best way for attaining their End was thought to be in the first
place an Imbroilment of the King of England, that instead of looking to
Concerns abroad, he might be held in Contest at home with a factious Party of
his Scottish Subjects, who before, and in the year 1639. had shown themselves
very vexatious and troublesome to his Majesty's Government, about matter of
Kirk - Discipline, and its Government by Bishops: This was matter combustible
enough for France to work upon, and blow into a flame: so that Cardinal
Richlieu, grand Minister of State to the French King, by his Agents giving them
large Promises and Encouragements, got into a participation of Counsels with
them; whereby the Faction was agitated into a downright Rebellion there, under
the Name of seeking a Reformation; and then followed Counsels also for an
Invasion of England; which was effected, and they made their way with an Army
to Newcastle, possessing themselves of it. But by the King's Prudence they were
sent home again, a Pacification being made, and hoped it was that all would
have remained quiet. But this sudden matter not suiting with the mind of the
French Ministry, and Richlieu finding that there was a working up of the like
Discontents, and a likelihood of the same Designs in England for the cause, or
rather pretense of Religion, the Bellows were blown here also by the same hand;
some of the heads of the Faction here were brought to a brotherly
correspondence of Counsels and Resolutions with their Friends of Scotland, a
conjunct Design was laid for a Second Invasion upon England, under the Name of
Brotherly Assistance; and the Platform of the great Covenant was then proposed,
approved by the Agents of their friend Richlieu, to be set on foot first in
Scotland; and by Agreement it was afterward to be handed thence in due time
back into England. In the mean while, the FORTY ONE Parliament being called,
matters then ripened apace for their purpose by means of a prevalent Faction in
Parliament, which very much alarmed the King and his Court, insomuch that he
conceived it was high time to rip open this Evil, by discovering, seizing, and
accusing some of the aforementioned Heads of the Faction, viz. a Lord, and Five
Members of the House of Commons. The Articles of the Charge against them were
in number Seven, One of which was; That They had traitorously invited and
encouraged a Foreign Power to Invade his Majesty's Kingdom of England. Which
was so true, that he desired a Trial of them; but their Party in the House not
daring to permit it to be put to Proof, they shocked the King in the Business;
and so the Affair of the COVENANT, and the other Effects of that Invitation,
ran the more roundly on to a ripeness and final Dispatch in Scotland, by the
time that the Sun in its course brought on the year 1643. And then came on a
Second Invasion of England, flourishing their Colors with this Rebellious
Motto, FOR THE CROWN AND COVENANT OF BOTH KINGDOMS. And thus you see how far we
were beholden to France for all the Miseries of the ensuing Wars, and the
numerous Brood of Factions which issued thence in England, Scotland, and
Ireland: Of the certain Truth whereof we might have had undeniable Evidence,
upon the Trial of those whom the King had then charged with Treason, if the
Temper of that time would have permitted a fair prosecution; however, it was (I
remember) sufficiently talked of in those days; and I have now by me a Book in
the French Tongue, which was printed 24 Years ago by Adrian Vlac, at the Hague
in Holland; in the third part whereof are eight Chapters, and over the second
Chapter is this Title, [ Le Cardinal de Richelieu la cause des Desordres
arrivez en Angleterre.] That is to say, [ Cardinal Richelieu the cause of the
Disorders befallen England.] Which he brought in (as I told you) by the way of
Scotland, to the ruin of our Peace, the Royal Family, the Church, and the whole
State and Government of our Kingdom.

But this tampering with and corrupting other Prince's Subjects, is an old Game
that the French Ministers have ever been playing all over Europ. Let it be
remembered how the same Richelieu wrought the Revolt of Portugal from the
Spaniard, and the Rebellion in Catalonia, and carried on the Wars in both those
Countries to bring down the Power of Spain; how he tampered also with the
Swede, under Gustavus Adolphus, to invade the Empire: and then with the
Emperor's General, Wallestein, to betray the Imperial Army; by whose sudden
death the French King lost the great opportunity to work himself into a
possession of the Imperial Throne. How Cardinal Mazarin, after him, carried on
the Popular Commotions raised by Masaniello in the Kingdom of Naples, by
sending thither the Duke of Guise to be their Head, to the almost wresting of
that Kingdom out of the Hand of the Spaniard; and then also how he lurch't that
Duke, and deserted him: Moreover, how the last Year the French Intrigues so far
prevailed in Spain, as to turn the Queen Mother out of her Regency, drive out
her Favorites, such as she thought most fit and firm for the young King's
Safety, to put him into other Hands, and turn all things in that Court
topsie-turvy, that being agitated and held in play by their own divisions at
Home, they might be less able to have regard to the preservation of the
Flemings, or to the carrying on a Joynt-war with the Hollanders. How they have
been the common Enemies of every State, destroying the Peace of Government
every where; sowing of Factions in all Princely Courts, their Councils, or
among such of the Subjects as are factious; or else they jumble one Prince
against another by turns, as they did the Prince Elector Palatine against the
Elector of Mentz, starting up an occasion of Quarrel betwixt them; one while to
take part with the Elector Palatine against Mentz, another while with Mentz
against the Prince; whose Country they miserably harassed and wasted.

It cannot be forgotten what they lately did to corrupt the Emperor's Council,
by means of his own Favorite Prince Lobcowitz, whom they bought for Money to
betray his Master's Counsels and Affairs; besides their Intrigue in the same
manner with the Prince of Furstenberg and his Brother. Also, what they did in
the United Provinces to incommode his Highness the Prince of Orange, by
bolstering up the De Wits, and their Louvenstein Republican party against the
Princely.

What they have done to clog the Emperor, by fostering a Rebellion against him
in Hungary; and how great charge they are at to sever the power of the Duke of
Bavaria, and of the Duke of Hanover, from the common Interest of the Empire in
this War. How they have diverse times endangered all Christendom by
confederating with the Grand Seignior, to disturb both Hungary and Poland; for
which cause (as My Lord Herbert writes in his History) the Pope had like to
have given away the Title Most Christian from their French King Francis the
First, to bestow it upon our Henry the Eighth before he had been dubbed by his
Holiness with that of Defensor Fidei. -- What Artifices have been used by them
to settle and nourish perpetual Faction among the Polish Nobility, whereby
other great Opportunities have diverse times been given the Turk to fall upon
them.

In a word, their common practice has been, to give the World all manner of
disturbance, and so to render themselves in its Opinion the common Enemies of
its Peace, a public Pest among States and Princes: in every Country they
either find combustible stuff, or else make it, and then set fire to it; they
are at a mighty charge to find Fodder for the various Animals of Faction in all
Places. By this means Divide and Impera makes way for them, and thus they
conquer more than by their Arms: they inflame Countries thus, as well as burn
them, as they did Alsatia, that having enough to do to quench fires at Home,
they may have neither leisure nor power to hinder French Projects abroad.
Questionless then, since we in England have seen and do see our Neighbors
Houses fired one after another, it is high time to look to our own, and secure
our selves and all Europ, from such Boutefeus, and the sad Effects of their
Impious Courses.

SECTION IV.
That as the French have dealt falsely with us, and all other Princes in the
point of Peace; There is no Security to be had for any one Party, but by a
Joint War.

HIs Majesty of England having hitherto on his part preserved a fair Respect
and Amity toward France, passing by the many Indignities and Injuries done to
himself and his Nation, in hope his Patience might, by fair means, have
prevailed with the French King at length to do reason to us, and the rest of
his Neighbors; and that to that end his Majesty might have persuaded him to
have forborne a further prosecution of the War in Flanders, that thereby we
might have seen some good Fruit of his Majesty's friendly interpoposing in
order to the procurement of a speedy Pacification; and the French pretending so
to do, and to admit his Majesty to a performing the good Office of Mediation
betwixt France and the Confederates; but now the Issue of all being contrary,
for that the French have made an unexpected sudden Breach further upon Flanders
in the depth of this Winter, and appeared resolute to carry the whole Country,
if they could, before Spring; so that this surprise gave a new Alarm to us and
all the Neighbors: the World must justify his Majesty, it after all amicable
means used in vain, he shall now find himself in prudence concerned to take a
Course by War, to vindicate his own Honor against the many Violations and
Affronts acted by France; and by God's blessing to become the happy Instrument
to recover the Rights of the oppressed States and Princes; as also to preserve
his own Nation against the Dangers threatened at our very doors, and to restore
unto the Generality that glorious Christian Peace, which cannot otherwise be
obtained.

Peace was the Subject of Christ's last Sermon; the great Legacy that he
bequeathed to his Followers. What Christians then are they, that make it their
Interest and Business to destroy it on Earth! This is the Work of wild Beasts
and Monsters to infest whole Countries; and when men act as such, the very Law
of Nature as well as of Nations, excites and justifies all Mankind to War
against them: Look back on the former Sections of this Discourse, and there you
have a sight who are the men, whom no Treaties nor Entreaties can reduce to a
more Christian State. Their Motto is, Jus est in Armis, No Law but the Law of
Arms: therefore by Arms alone the Quarrel is to be decided; and that for these
following Reasons: Provided that Foreign States and their Ministers do not
trifle with, but come up roundly to us: And that people here at home do their
Duty for Encouragement answerable to the Importance of so great and necessary
an undertaking. Which (no question) every man wise and honest will be ready to
do, and no reasonable man can doubt it, seeing our own and the Universal
Interest now calls for it, and the Parliament did this last Summer so earnestly
address for it; and (I suppose) his Majesty had suitably answered it, had he
conceived the Time to be seasonable, and some other Circumstances agreeable;
which the Law most prudently has left in his own Judgment to determine; the
more full and better sense whereof may be collected out of his Answer to the
Address it self; at the end whereof I read this Intimation; That he could not
do things for the security of his People, with those Advantages to them, which
by the Parliament' s Assistance at that time he might have done. Which (I
remember very well) most Men did interpret to be meant of the House of Commons
not granting, and the King's wanting the Six hundred thousand pounds demanded
by his Majesty for a further supply, which might have enabled him to, etc. But
of this, more anon.

Here are the Reasons aforementioned.
I. The first Reason for War against them, I draw from the Summum probabile,
the Highest probability, that if we help not to reduce them, and extinguish War
abroad, they will at last bring it home to us. Which I prove by consideration
of these three particulars.

France's Aphorisms of State. The Political Creed. Their Necessity to continue
in War.
1. The first Aphorism is such as is destructive of Peace in all Places, and
disposes them to act accordingly. That is, To enter into all sorts of Affairs
by Right or by wrong, by Hook or by Crook, and every where to become Arbiters
by Violence or by Cunning, by Threats or by Friendly Pretenses. In all the
Differences past or present, they some way or other wind themselves in to take
party, and form for themselves an Interest: nor did ever any People show the
least dislike to the Government, and an Inclination to Rebellion, but the
French fomented it, and made the Factions their Allies. They never entered into
any War to favor any Party, but with intent to exasperate it; nor into any
Peace, but to sow the Seeds of New Disputes, as past Experience has made
evident, and the Stories of these Truths afford numerous Examples; but I now
want room to insert them: So that if we constrain them to Peace, it will last
no longer than they can work our Mal-contents into Mutiny, and then they will
violate that Peace by encouraging them, or by siding with them, secretly or
openly.

2. A Second Aphorism is, to have for their only Rule Interest of State; so
that the Faith of Treaties, the Good of Religion, or the Ties of Blood and
Amity cannot hold them. The Instances for proof thereof I have given already.
All that the Turks have done in Christendom since the time of Francis the First
to our time, they owe to the Alliances of France with the Ottoman Court; and to
the diversion which France made in their Favor, against any Christians who
were likely to act against that Common Enemy of our Religion.

3. Their Third Aphorism is, To keep other States, as much as they can, divided
and busied at home, or else engaged in some External War, as England, Germany,
Italy, Denmark, Spain, Poland, Holland, and many other Countries have had sad
Experience. What Peace then with such a Nation, when her Witchcrafts are so
many?

Their Fourth is, To keep their Younger Brothers of the best Families always
in Arms abroad at the Expense of their Neighbors.

All these are the Maxims of Conquerors; infallible Evidences of a profound
Design to be prosecuted to the utmost Bounds of Conquest: So that to talk to
them of Peace, is to talk against their Interest; that is, it is to no purpose.

The other thing to be considered, is their Political Creed; which I shall not
give you in my own words, but as it is translated, having been printed in the
French Tongue at Ville-Franche by Jean Petit, 1677.

[They believe that what others call Violence, is but a bare precaution, and a
pursuit of one of their Infallible Rules of Art, viz. That Conquerors ought to
provide for the future, by destroying whatever may hurt them, and that they
ought to have no Law but the Sword, the Appetite of Governing, and the Glory to
be had by aggrandizing themselves at the cost of their Neighbors. Pyrrhus also
believed this just; and Caesar, that all things were lawful for Dominion.

They generally applaud these Maxims; and hold that nothing is forbid to them,
that may disturb their Neighbors, and sow division among them: that they have
a secret joy in doing wrong, and whatever else may be most afflicting and
outrageous. That Pity is a cowardly Virtue which over-throws a Crown, whose
best Support is Fear, and Impiety its Foundation. That Arms inspire a reverence
among Men, and Troops are the admirable Advocates which plead a cause best.
That the proclamation of the Cannon is above all other Titles. That Justice is
a Phantasm; Reason a Chimera; Marriage a trifle; the Faith of Treaties an
illusion; Peace but a bait. That their Cabals ought to be full of mystery,
their Conferences insnaring, and their Oaths but sport of Children, a Trap to
catch a Cully, and a Charm for Fools.

They further believe and say, That Perjury is just, and that according to
their new Morals, Ill may be done for a greater Good. That sincerity ruins
them, that perfidiousness is profitable; Imposture, of much benefit; that
Infidelity is the Charter of a Prince: Faith, a foolish Maxim; Keeping their
Word but a mean Compliance; and Violence the proper hinge to move upon.

Our Tears are their Tipple, our Sighs they regard not; they speak one thing,
do another; make great Promises, never perform any: Their Mouth flatters, while
their Heart betrays; they have no Friendship without an End; Vengeance is sweet
to them, their Protection heavy: They embrace with one Arm, and smother with
another: France is the Proteus of the Age, and has a thousand Faces; She
enters like a Lamb, transforms into the Fox, and thence becomes a devouring
Wolf. They never pardon, are never to be surprised, and their Ways are past
finding out: A double face, a charming Voice, with a studied behavior. They
count nothing a pleasure but what tends to enslave the People, and lead them to
despair. Tunc oderint dum metuant; and they scoff at the hatred of the
conquered, if they can but make them fear.

Elizabeth of England always asserted, That France might be espoused as a
Friend, but never approved for a Neighbor; their rapidity and heat consuming
what they can reach, not being able to subsist without coveting and invading
their Neighbors Goods and Territories.]

The last of the three Particulars to be considered, is, That France is under a
necessity to continue War as long as they can.

1. This appears by what I have hinted in the Third Section: viz. That their
King having brought the younger Brothers of his Nobility and Gentry (which are
a vast number) to depend upon War for a Livelihood, and by War for a making of
their Fortunes; so that he has made War their Trade. It Is absurd to imagine he
will by any long Observation of Peace destroy their Trade and Livelihood: For
then, what follows? They must even prey upon himself at home; he must maintain
them, or they mutiny, and turn popular, and the common people being easily to
be agitated with the hope of easing their most intolerable Burdens (for
whoever among the Bourgeois, the Tradesmen, or the Peasants, do get either
Lands or Pence, their King, as often as he pleases, demands three parts in four,
and so they pay him three Farthings of every Penny, if he Tax it upon them, and
sends Troops of Horse to collect it; as now they do at this time in the
Provinces of their own Nation; as I have seen the Account of it set down in a
Letter which came to hand but few hours ago) for these things, I say, may
readily dispose them to close with mal-content Traders in War, who will be sure
to drive that Trade of War at home, if they have it not abroad. This alone is
evidence enough to show he must needs avoid a Peace, though he may seem willing
to Treat about it, and pretend fair toward it, and perhaps keep it a little
while, till he can frame to himself greater Advantages by breaking it; which
his Interest (you see) will compel him to, to avoid that grand domestic
Mischief aforementioned.

2. Besides, Peace is so far against his Interest, that if he grant it, he
cannot have any tolerable pretense to keep up that vast Revenue, which he
raises at present out of the Purse of the people to maintain his Wars; which I
have heard to amount yearly to above Eleven Millions of Pounds Sterling,
besides his Contributions raised out of conquered Countries, which are
estimated at a grand rate by those that understand them: and all these must
needs be diminished if he permit Peace. So that it is a mean thought, to imagine
that the French Ministers should not see and avoid these Consequences, which
would lessen their Profit, as well as their Master's

3. To be brief, By another Reason of State he is necessitated not to permit
Peace long, because without War they cannot long retain their numerous Princes,
Mareschals, Dukes, and chief Nobility, in a dependence upon the Crown for
augmentation of their Estates, or the satisfaction of their Pride, Ambition,
and Avarice, which is not otherwise to be done, but by having to bestow on them
great Military Commands, Offices, and Governments in the Conquered, and other
Conquerable Places. By these things you see what Necessity lies upon their
Ministers to advise and determine, as Monsieur Louvoy, one of the chief among
them very lately did; that there was a necessity for their continuation of War.
And indeed, No man better than Louvoy understands the Temper, Inclination,
Sense, and Interest of his Master.

Now if these things be so, it is time for us to proceed with our other
Arguments for War, on our behalf and foreign Neighbors: one of which I have
already given you.

II. A Second Reason, or Argument for us and them to War against France, is;
That as the French Ministers cannot admit Peace, so this is one evident Token
they never intended it; forasmuch as they so ordered the matter of Peace under
debate at Nimiguen, that the Treaty was rendered hopeless.

III. They have hitherto frustrated the gracious Intent, Offertures, and
Endeavors of his Majesty of Great Britain, to procure a Peace by Mediation on
the behalf of the Confederates, and all Europ: which is no less than a tacit
Declaration for an Universal Conquest.

IV. A Fourth Reason may be drawn from the Ambition of France, which is
restless, and boundless; never to be satisfied more than is their Avarice,
large enough to swallow All upon the Continent, while they reserve these Isles
of Great Britain, and Ireland as the last Morsels.

V. A Fifth Reason, had I time or place here, might be copiously drawn from the
huge magnitude of France, its Dominion being extended upon the ruins of other
Nations to an immense Bulk, beyond all tolerable Allowance: so that in
comparison with them and their Mountain of Power and Greatness, the Neighbor
States and Princes are become so light, that they are but as the small Dust in
the Balance. And therefore unless a Course be taken to give them a Diminution,
there will ere long be very little probability of our being able to give him a
Counterpoise. That excellent Prince the Duke of Rohan, in his little, but
weighty Book, stating the Interests of several Princes, determines it is the
Interest of England to keep such a Balance of their Powers, as not to permit
that either of them grow so great as to be able to oppress another: And that we
ought ever to hold it even betwixt France and the House of Austria, and if
either of them exceed, to reduce it to an Equality; this was accounted a
principal part of the Ancient Grandeur of the English Nation: King Henry the
Eighth first well settled it in managing the Differences betwixt Charles the
Fifth, then both Emperor and King of Spain, and Francis the First King of
France, the two Grand Competitors of that Age. That excellent Princess Queen
Elizabeth well improved it, and so it continued till the time of Cromwell, who
first erred in this matter of Public Interest, to serve his own private, by
greatning of France beyond due proportion, so that he interposed the
Difficulties which since lay in the way of Reducing it. By the Influence of
this old piece of policy, it was that England was always in a condition,
whenever she pleased, to dispense Peace, or War to every Nation, and thereby
great Honor redounded to our own, throughout the World, and there is nothing
but War can restore it, by curing the overgrown Dropsy of the French Greatness.

VI. You had before an Intimation of another most considerable Reason, drawn
from a consideration that no Peace that can be made, can give us any security
of enjoying it long; to which I may add, That a Peace will but betray us to the
next Opportunity the French shall please to take. Besides, in the interval we
should but give him the opportunity to reinforce himself, ramass his Treasury,
and thereby enable himself to prosecute the old Artifice of corrupting other
Princes, Ministers, Officers and Governors, and work his Ends so as to alienate
and separate as many of the Consederates as he can from their holding Counsels
in common for Mutual preservation, to embrace such terms as he shall, under a
specious show of Advantages, think fit to propose unto them; which if obtained,
would utterly break them one after another, and induce this Inconveniency upon
England, to be left alone, or with but few Participants to join in the Work of
Reducing France into its former legitimate moderate Condition.

VII. Another Reason is to be derived from a Consideration of the great
increase of the Naval Power of France, whereby they are enboldened to give
disturbance to our Merchantmen in our own Seas; such an Indignity to his
Majesty, and Violation of our Rights by Sea, as is not to be endured; and which
the Kings of this Island have from all Antiquity possessed as far as the very
shores of France, exclusive of any Pretentions of Right of any other Nations
within the FOUR SEAS: The Evidences whereof were collected, and with Arguments
drawn from all sorts of Learning and Records, digested into one excellent Book,
by that most famous Man Mr. Seldom, entitled MARECLAVSVM. Among the
particulars whereof I remember that the Addition of the Port-Cullis to the
Royal Badges of the Crown of England (which is yet to be seen upon many of the
Royal Houses built by our Kings) was made for this Reason, even to signify to
all the World, That we had a just Right and Title, at pleasure to shut up, and
open the Sea when we thought fit, as it were, with a Port-Cullis, to all
Passengers passing by Sea. And by the same Evidences it is there proved, that
our Title to our Propriety in the Sea is as good as any Title the French King
has to any part of his Dominion by Land. His Grandfather wrote diverse Letters
with his own Hand to King James (which I have formerly seen in the Paper-Office
at White Hall) to ask Leave for some few Vessels to fish for Soales (as he
should have occasion) for his own Table: Which was a sufficient Acknowledgment
where the Sovereignty lies by Sea. There have been also, in former time, brisk
Messengers sent to the French Kings, requiring them, as soon as they had but
begun to lay the Carcass of some pitiful Ship upon the Stocks, to forbear
building. Which shows the present Presumption of the French in making so grand
Naval Preparations to invade our Seas: And our Honor, as well as our Right,
calls aloud for a Vindication.

VIII. There is Reason also to be drawn from a Consideration of the hazard of
Religion. 1. As concerning the Protestant, about which I shall not use any more
words to clear this point, than this short Proverb now used in France, and by
them attributed to their own King; That his Grandfather loved the Protestants,
his Father feared them, and he himself hated them. Which any one that beholds
the Ruins of their demolished Churches, and the hard Conditions under which
they are oppressed in every point, within that Kingdom (too large here to
recite) will easily believe. 2. As touching the Roman Catholic Religion, how
that is like to fare, may readily be prognosticated;

Tros, Rutilusve fuat, nullo discrimine habebunt. Be a Papist or be a
Protestant, the French make no difference in usage, wheresoever they come.
Witness to this how they have dealt in Catalonia, Alsatia, the Spanish
Low-Countrys, and diverse other Roman Catholic Countries where all men exclaim
against the Domination of France. 3. Whereas it was of old a Doctrine instilled
into the minds of the Romanists by their Father-Confessors, that they ought to
adhere to Spain and the House of Austria, rather than to promote the French
Empire, because Spain being then much the greater Kingdom, and esteemed the
dearer Son of the Church, by reason of its greater Zeal, and more strict and
entire Imbracement of the Romish Faith, and through the diligence of the
Inquisition, kept without any mixture of that which they call Heresy, and
therefore more likely to continue firm to the Roman See; now of later time, the
State of Empire being altered, Spain brought much lower, and not able to give
such Protection and Defense as formerly to the Roman Cause in these parts of
the World, the Pope and his Priests and Jesuits are so far altered too, that
having since seen the French go on like Conquerers, they have quitted the
former Reasons on Spain's side, and like the Men of the World, are turned
Courtiers of Fortune, crying up France altogether now, though if they please to
remember how not many Years ago France, upon a petty Quarrel in Rome, betwixt
some of the Pope's Soldiers and the Duke of Crequi's Servants (then Ambassador
there) ruffled the Pope himself with such unheard of Insolence, that for mere
fear he was constrained to abandon diverse of his Friends and Kindred, and to
the perpetual disgrace of the Holy-Chair, and of their Religion, and of the
Adored-Father of Christians, (as they would seem to repute him) they made him
cry like a Child, and erect a Pillar in Rome, with an Inscription, signifying
the pretended Affront to France, engraven upon it; and it continued some Years
standing, till the Tears of his Holiness prevailed for the demolishing of it.
Notwithstanding all this (I say) the Roman Priests do venture to magnify
France as much as they did Spain before, not considering how their Interest of
Religion declines there by the marvelous increase of the Protestants and
Jansenists, and by the indifferency of zeal in most of the French Papists; and,
were it not mere Reason of State that holds it up there among the Great Ones
for the present, no Man knows how soon it might be relinquish't, if a little
time should happen to alter that Reason of State, it being a voluble thing, if
their Ministers shall think they have as good reason to invade Italy, as other
Places, and after Conquest of the smaller Princes there, to seize Saint Peter's
fair Patrimony for an Addition to the French Kings Revenue, and then make the
Pope content to become his Chaplain, and to be glad of a Pension, as the Mufti
is at Constantinople; who knows then how far Reason of State may alter it self,
and make further Alterations? But let the Popish Party look to that: They may
hope the best, if they please; but we and all the rest of the Protestant Party
in Germany and other parts, must be sure to go to wrack as fast as they can
reach us, and then deal with us, as they do with their own, in the Concerns of
our Religion as well as Estates.

Ours shall be sure to go down: and the Papists cannot be sure their Religion
shall not receive Alterations; especially in Secular Advantages of Wealth and
Power, seeing even in France the King has already converted to his own use a
great part of the Monastic Revenues. Therefore it almost equally concerns both
Papist and Protestant, in reference to Religion, to adventure their distinct
Powers and Interests in one common Bottom, and Resolution, to War with him, and
to hinder the obstinate pursuit of that Project of an Universal Monarchy.

IX. The last Argument that might be brought is the Universal Inclination of
our People toward a War with France. And the like Inclination, yea, and
Necessity that appears among our Foreign Neighbors: Never was there a more
marvelous Consent of Mankind about any one Business; therefore I need not use
more words to press it on.

SECTION V.
An Account of such Objections and Impediments as by Malcontents may be cast in
the way, in case His Majesty shall see Cause now to make a War.

THat there are Discontents among us, is a thing in no wise to be denied; and
the Authors of them are sufficiently known. They are a sort of ominous Birds
always hovering about City and Suburbs, presuming to misrepresent, argue, and
arbitrate the great Affairs of State; and such is the licentious Liberty they
take to themselves, that they censure, arraign, and condemn what and whom they
please. Ever against the Sitting of Parliament, they gather and appear in whole
Flights and Flocks, breeding of false News, and boding Mischief wheresoever
they come. They sometimes haunt the Houses of Ambassadors, and other Foreign
Ministers, if they can get any intimacy with their Servants, with whom they
give, and take Supplies toward a Stock of Intelligence; the one to furnish the
Foreign Post, the other the Coffee-Houses, whence they issue again, and make
sallies upon the Canary Cabals at the Globe, the Horn, the King's Head, or the
Devil, to furnish them, and settle Correspondencies both East and West, and to
that end receive Commission to become Emissaries and Trotters betwixt some
particular Wiseacres in both the Climates. If the Parliament chance at any time
to be Prorogued or Adjourned, that Season proves to this sort of News-mongers,
like a nipping Frost to Flies, and they are even ready to die away like
fainting Grass-hoppers. There Is nothing revives them in the Interval, like some
unlucky Mischief befal'n the Court. It Is Mischief they gape for; and yet are
but Fools at doing it, and therefore ought to be better instructed.

For if I loved Mischief, and meant to do it, I would first raise Objections to
prevent a War now, though a while ago I wished well to all those that had a
desire to promote it. I would object, that it is too late to enter upon it now,
because it should a been done last Summer, before the French King could a made
his late Impression so far into the Spanish Low-Countrys, and before the
Confederates were brought so low. Besides, I would not give way with patience,
to hear another man answer me, that it is not too late; but prove that had his
Majesty consented to it last Summer, there are most sufficient Reasons to be
given why it might have turned very much to the prejudice of his Affairs; as
for Instance,

1. Had he then declared an immediate Consent to it, it had been all one as to
have declared a War; for, the French are not so slow-witted as not to apprehend
it so, nor so remiss as to neglect a dealing with us accordingly. What could we
have expected, but that our Merchants Ships, which at that time were in great
numbers trading within the Dominions of France, would have been immediately
seized, and all their Effects, which amounted to a vast sum of money? whereby
our King, besides the losses of the Merchants, must have lost a great sum of
money accruing here to his Customs by the Import of those Goods and Commodities.

2. His Majesty very well understands what an important Point it is to consent
to a War, which is all one in effect as to proclaim a War, before competent
preparations made for it by Money, Ammunition and Men, Ships, and all other
necessaries for War could be ready to put it in execution.

3. The French King might then (for ought that can be said to the contrary)
have been thereby so exasperated, as to lay aside a while his Affairs in
Flanders, and being ready furnished with all the necessaries that we wanted,
immediately have resolved to fall upon us by an Invasion; and what (I pray you)
could have hindered at that time such a Surprise of us?

4. It had been a strange Adventure to have been so forward to have engaged our
selves by promise to enter into the War, before it was known what the
Confederates would do toward it, to encourage us to their Assistance. The
present Distress lies upon them more than upon us; therefore there ought to be
no bogling with us, or delaying, but a quick doing what is reasonable for them
on their part, to engage us in their Confederacy.

5. The French King, having pretended fair for an embracing of His Majesty's
Mediation in order to a reasonable Peace, it was questionless very convenient
we should stop a while to see what would be the issue of his pretense, that in
case he should play foul, and deceive us, we might have the juster and fairer
cause to War with him.

6. If there had not been any of these Reasons for delay; yet the happy
Alliance with the Prince of Orange, having been since accomplished; and being a
very good expedient to open the way for a more convenient entrance into
Confederation, is that which may abundantly serve to balance any pretended
inconvenience of the delay of entrance. -- But to proceed

Moreover, If notwithstanding these Reasons, any one of those men of
Intelligence should yet mischievously Object, That last Summers delay has been
the ruin of Flanders, and made the recovery of it in a manner impossible, and
should endeavor to persuade others it is so, because of the loss of some few
Towns there since, let such consider, that the Spaniard, by his not closing yet
with us in our friendly Inclination, seems not to be of their Opinion, or that
Flanders is yet so near ruin, seeing that he himself has made a further
delay, by not coming up to our reasonable Demands at this time, whenas he has
of late so much pretended it, and all men expected he would accordingly have
done it out of hand.

Besides, Let those News-and-Mischief-Mongers remember, it is not long ago
since they themselves, in one of the Canary-Clubs, were of a mind, that the
Confederates, if we were joined with them, would be able to work Miracles in
Flanders against the French: but it now seems that the loss of St. Ghislain, or
of a Town or two more, has in a moment deprived us and the Flemmings of all
Power to do what is fit to preserve the Country. It has been told me, that
very lately, the like Discourse being boldly bandied at a certain Cable of
Coffee-mongers, one that sat smoking hard by in a Corner of the Room, stepped
in, and said honestly, That he wondered there should happen among some men such
a sudden Change of Opinion; and that it must needs give a suspicion there is
some invisible Spring that moves them; some Secret Intrigue and Reserve in the
Heart, when the Tongues go at so rolling a rate: and that they are a sort of
people tutored to this Tune, to argue Pro and Con by Turns, as their own
Occasions alter; That they are resolved to dislike whatsoever the King may
judge is reason for him next to do in his public Affairs; and that they put on
the approbations and disapprovements of a War, according as they are
influenced, and as the WORD is given out by their envious Mal-contented
Leaders; and as it may serve to please, or irritats, and to render themselves
gracious in their eyes unto whom they are Retainers. I do remember (said he)
what Joy the People had, and Bonfires, as soon as the Marriage of the Prince of
Orange was declared; and not many days after, this sort of frequent Changelings
raised I know not how many Scandals about it. How far the French have had an
influence on such petulant Talkers, I cannot say; but other men more honest
speak broad enough about it.

Which having been thus roundly uttered, the Gentleman laid down his Pipe, paid
for his Dish of Coffee, and went his way, leaving them all in an amaze to guess
who this Man should be.

Now, no sooner was this Gentleman gone, but another, who overheard the
Discourse, drew near to them; (for all are free over a Coffee-dish) and sitting
down, said, Gentlemen, pardon me if I tell you I was here the other day, and
heard some others of you discoursing about Money to carry on the War; and
methought it was much any among you should think it reasonable, and most
necessary to have War; and others yet be of opinion, That the Point of Money
should be cumber'd with Delays or Disputes about it. What would the Event of
this be? Would it not render us ridiculous to the French, and make them scorn
us? Would it not dishearten the Confederates, and make them jealous, that
whatsoever Resolutions we take to give them hope of assistance, yet as soon as
they are taken, they will by one Accident or other be made impracticable? In
time of Necessity, and when Hannibal was at the Gates, or any other Enemy*nigh
coming, the Romans ever instituted a Temporary Officer, whom they called
Dictator, and to him the Senate and People gave, during the public danger, but
not longer, as full Power as the King of France now enjoys, to do and take
whatsoever he should judge necessary to secure the Public State of the Nation:
by which Policy they avoided all Disputes and Debates about the Concerns of the
War; and so they generally came off with Success. Be it far from me to urge at
this time, that we should in this occasion of ours imitate them, but yet
methinks we should so far learn of them, as to do all we can to avoid and lay
aside disputings; especially about the very Life and Sinews of a War, constant
supply of Moneys, and other Necessaries; and to come as near the Roman Policy
as the public Constitution, convenience, and State of our Government can
possibly permit, if we mean to obtain the like happy Success. A trust must be
lodged some where; therefore it is best and safest to place it where, and in
what manner the Law has placed it. The Law obliges the People, as well as the
King: It obliges the King to make War, where, and when he shall judge it
needful. And on the other hand, it obliges the People, readily and cheerfully
to give him necessary supplies; otherwise this absurdity would be implied in
our Law, that it should oblige the King, and leave the People loose in this
matter; which can by no means be supposed, because then it would oblige him to
an Impossibility; it being impossible for him to do his part, unless they on
their part shall sufficiently supply him. Which it is not to be imagined the
People can be so mad as to decline, because it is for common Safety, The Supreme
Law, which is a further Tie upon them; and if they observe not that, it is not
only to be wanting to the ends of Gubernation, but in effect a Frustrating both
of Law and Government it self: and at this time, an unnatural abandoning of our
selves, and a giving up of that most noble cause wherein whole Europ is so
deeply concerned.

I thought, Gentlemen, to have spoken no more at this time; but (craving your
Pardon) pray, Sirs, let me tell you, I overheard also here the other day, what
some of your Company said, reflecting upon some State-Particulars past, the
reviving whereof would better become the mouth of a Common Enemy, than a true
Englishman, being matters altogether Foreign to the Business of War, which is
now The Unum Necessarium, The one Thing Necessary: and till all fit Resolutions
upon that be taken, why should any matters inferior, that may cause discontent
or division of minds, be discoursed among you? I will not so much as name them,
to give you cause to over-heat your selves to answer me; I resolve to bury
them, and all that you then said about them: For I am no Spy upon you: I am a
Gentleman; and if any other person that is an Informer may have taken notice of
what you said, and should chance to call me to witness any thing against you,
know I have a Gentleman's Memory, very apt to forget all upon such an occasion.

This Discourse (as I have been told) surprised them more than what was said by
the other Gentleman, insomuch that the Company stared on him with silence,
being most of them (I suppose) of Opinion, that what he said was Reason: but as
there is are all Companies some whom no Reason can satisfy, so there were (it
seems) among them some few Emissaries, Trotters, and Mischief-mongers belonging
to the Canary Cabals, who began to grumble, but presently broke up, and went to
the several places of Caballing, and communicated the matter there to their
Principals; among whom there happening to be a false Brother, or two, by that
means I got the Story.

Now for a Conclusion:

Let me answer one Objection which I hear walks about like a Bugbear to
affright us. viz. That though our Chronicles tell us, that Edw. the Third
conquered France, and his Son Edward, called the Black Prince, brought their
King Prisoner into England: and though Henry the 5th. made a Second Conquest of
them more completely, being Crowned King at Paris; and his Son Henry the 6th.
also Crowned there, and Reigned over them many years: yet the Case is altered
now; France is quite another thing; it is now one compact Body; it in those
days was shared by diverse Sovereign Princes, which made the French King but
little in comparison of what he is in these days; being become exceedingly more
potent and more difficult to subdue, by reason of his present Lordship over all
those Sovereignties.

To balance these Advantages of his, note, that England also is (through God's
good Providence) become much more powerful than it was in those days; For
though in those days we had Ireland, yet it was but a miserable halfplanted
Country, always rebellious against us, so that it was an extraordinary charge
and a clog rather than a help to us: but now we have it improved to the height,
and the Irish in good order with our English; also the Accession of the Kingdom
of Scotland, a numerous and warlike People, which then also was another great
Clog upon us, now united with us. To these Considerations add, That by addition
of the Confederates, if they please to be plain with us, we may I suppose be
contrepoise enough to answer all the French Advantages: and no Man that knows
what England is at Sea, and what an English-Seaman is, will doubt, especially
Holland join with us, that we may be a Match sufficient for that King; and that
we over-match him in this, that we have a Better Cause; and therefore (God
pardoning our Iniquities in other matters) have a better hope of Divine
Benediction.

Which being well weighd, we may very aptly invert the old Saying of Cicero,
Justissimum Bellum iniquissimae Paci antefero. That is, being a little
paraphrased in English, I upon the whole matter conclude; That a most just War
is to be preferred before a most unjust Peace, most dangerous to us, and all
the rest of the European Nations.

FINIS.

