A PROPOSAL For Amending the Silver Coins OF ENGLAND, And the Possibility of
it, without any Great Charge to the NATION. Demonstrated In Two Different Ways.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1696.

A PROPOSAL For Amending the Silver Coins OF ENGLAND, etc.
HAving often reflected on the Misfortunes, that the Clipping Counterfeiting,
and Melting down of the Silver Coin of England would bring on this Nation; and
foreseeing that I should be involved in the same as a Member of the Society; I
thought it my Duty to bestow sometime in the thoughts of endeavoring to find
out a proper Remedy for that Public Disease, being encouraged by the Insight I
have had already into that matter, having had an occasion to apply my self to
know the different Standards of Gold and Silver, either in Ingot, or in Current
Coin.

I framed then a Project about two Years ago, in which I had always before my
Eyes the great Difficulty of finding out a sufficient Fund to carry on the War,
and supplying the Charges of amending our Silver Coins. It Is true, the
Distemper was not then so great as it is at present, but I thought it ought
speedily to be remedied, for fear it should become worse, if I may say, not
uncurable. I considered therefore with my self all the Objections that, I
think, are made at this day; and, I hope, I have removed them as much as is
possible, humanly speaking. However, I grant, that there are in this Case such
Difficulties as will never be removed, if no Body will contribute toward it,
as for Example; It Is certain, our old Coin is hardly worth half of its first
value, and if every Body will have the old Species changed for new ones of the
same Weight, Standard, and Price, as the old was made for, and will not at the
same time contribute any thing toward it under pretense of the Taxes he is
obliged to pay, to carry on the War; I don't know how they may be satisfied
unless one should have the power of making something of nothing, or the rare
Secret so much inquired after, of converting our Lead into Gold or Silver. But
if Men were more reasonable, and were once sensible of the Inconveniences that
bad Money brings into their Trade, and of the loss they suffer daily by the
diminution of the Coin, they would (rather than be reduced to Trust or
Exchange) earnestly entreat the King and Parliament to find out, in their
Wisdom, a proper Remedy for that Disease, and instead of repining at the very
name of Taxes, for that purpose, they would cheerfully offer to pay them; for
the Amendment of our Silver Coin will appear to any Thinking Man, a necessary
Thing to secure our Riches, establish our Prosperity, and enable us to carry on
this War with more Vigor, and less Charge.

But if Men will shut their Eyes against their own Interest, must we be always
in this deplorable Condition? I don't think so, and I make bold to say, that
His Majesty and the Two Houses of Parliament are to the rest of the Nation,
what a good Father is to his Child: And now supposing that a Father had
suffered his Child to be several times let Blood by way of Precaution, or to
preserve his Health; would it not be a very odd thing if he should refuse to
suffer him to be let Blood once more to dissipate a Flux, which according to
the Judgment of the best Physicians, would infallibly deprive him of his Sight?
Sure I am, that no good Father would give ear to the unreasonable Apprehensions
his Child should have of the Chirurgions Lancet. The Application is easy
enough, but, I hope, it is needless; for, I think, I see a better Disposition
in the Nation, and every Body seems resolved to pay what Taxes shall be found
necessary to free our selves from the innumerable Inconveniences that attend
the badness of our Coin.

This Disposition ought to Encourage all Friends and true Lovers of England, to
impart all they know of this Matter, so that their Projects being compared
together, the best and the most easy way might be abstracted out of them, for
the Amendment of our Silver Coin. The Right Honorable the Lords of the
Treasury have given us a good Example, in desiring some Ingenious Gentlemen to
give their Opinions concerning several Projects, and ordering Mr. Lownds their
Secretary to make a Report of the same, with his own Thoughts on the Case,
which he has performed with a great deal of Ingenuity and Accuracy.

It was from this Motive, that I made bold to present on the Fourth of January
last, to the Lords of the Treasury, a Project for Reforming our Coin; which
since that time, I have labored to improve and illustrate, by answering all
the Difficulties and Objections, that I thought could be made against it. I
have also examined the various Opinions of those who have written on that
Subject, and perused almost all the Projects that were given the last Session
of Parliament. It would be useless, and too tedious to make particular
Observations on those Projects, and therefore I Will content my self with these
few General Propositions.

I. That an Ounce of Gold and Silver of the same Weight and Standard, has in
all parts in the World the same Intrinsic value, as here in England.

II. That the Denomination of the pieces of Gold and Silver, or the raising or
the lowering their current Price, adds nothing to the Intrinsic value thereof;
as for Example, If the Piece we call a Crown, was raised from five Shillings to
ten Shillings, or lowered to 2 s. 6 d. it is always the same Piece, there is no
more and no less Silver in it, and its Allay is neither courser nor finer.

III. If its Intrinsic value be always the same; it is plain that Foreigners
will take our Coin according to it, and not according to its Denomination.

VI. That our Coin being taken by Foreigners only according to its Intrinsic
value, they give their Commodities in Exchange, in Proportion to the same.

V. That they take our Commodities in Exchange for theirs, or for Gold or
Silver proportionably, according to the Estimation they make of our Coins, viz.
according to its Intrinsic value.

VI. That the Exchange with Foreign Countries is always fixed and settled, (or
with a very inconsiderable difference, sometimes more sometimes less, according
to what we owe them, or they owe us) when the Value, Weight, and Standard of
the Coins are settled.

VII. That Foreigners make a considerable profit upon us, by reason of the
uncertainty of the value of our Clipped Money, and have a great advantage in the
Exchange, taking the occasion from the badness of our Money.

From these Observations it follows, that the raising or lowering our Coin, is
nothing to the Riches of our Country, but that it is highly necessary to melt
down all the Clipped Money, to make new Coins, which may not be Clipped, and to
fix its Weight and Standard, and then all the Commodities, both of our own
Country, and Foreign; and the Exchange will in a short time fall proportionably
to its Intrinsic value.

There is no sensible Man, but will, I am sure, own this Consequence, and that
it is time to do it, the Disease growing every day worse and worse; but the
great Difficulty is to find out a Practicable Way in this time of War. I must
confess this is a weighty one, but, I hope, the Project which I offered last
Year to the Lords of the Treasury, will make it appear to be very possible, and
therefore I offer it again with some Additions, in Relation to the Present Time.

I don't presume however, that this Project should be the only one by which our
Coins may be amended, seeing I have since that time made another, which I have
annexed to my former, to show that I am very willing to impart whatever I know
on this Subject; and, I think, as I said before, that every true Englishman
ought to do the like.

A PROPOSAL to have all the Silver Money of England Melted down, and made New,
and to be of the same Weight and Standard, as the New Milled Money now is, or of
more; and that the Loss which thereby will happen to those who have Clipped Money,
will be so inconsiderable, that even they themselves shall be willing to bring
in their Money to be new Coined, and that the Diminution of the Numerical
quantity of Money, which will happen by the Melting it down, will be more than
supplied.
WHereas the Crown Piece, or its value and weight in half Crowns, Shillings,
Six-pences, etc. is by Clipping reduced (one with the other) to very near one
third part of Loss, as it will appear by a Computation, hereunto annexed, in
which it is shown, that the said Crown Piece, and any other Piece proportionably
from Nineteen Penny Weight 254838/1000000 parts of Penny Weight, that the said
Crown ought to weigh, is now reduced to Thirteen Penny Weight or there abouts,
from whence it follows, that upon Five Millions of Silver Coin, it is 1666666
l. 13s. 4d. of Loss; which Loss cannot be mended by the usual ways, but by a
General Tax, (which is not seasonable in this time of War) or by Means that are
not proportionable to the Grandeur of this Nation, as the lessening of the
Weight of the Coin, without increasing the Price thereof; or the lessening of
the Standard, by mixing of Copper or other Allay; or lastly, in setting an
higher value than Five Shillings, or Sixty Pence to the said Crown Piece. And
whereas it is absolutely Necessary to prevent the Clipping of the Coin of this
Kingdom for the Future, the following Expedients have been found.

I. That in two Years time, viz. from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of
March School, all the Silver Coin of England should be brought to the Mint, to be
melted and new Coined, and there to be taken and paid according to its Weight,
in new Coin Standard, of the Weight hereaftermentioned, and for the Price
hereafter specified.

II. That from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of March School, all the Coin
of England, Clipped or not Clipped, should pass Current, and be taken in Payment
for the Price it was made for, viz. Crown Pieces for Five Shillings, half
Crowns for Two Shillings and Sixpence, Shillings for Twelve-pence, Six-penny
Pieces for Sixpence, one, two, three, or four Penny Pieces for the Price they
go now for, (the Exceptions hereafter mentioned only Excepted.)

III. That from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of March, 1697, any Crown
Pieces, or their value in half Crowns, Shillings, Six-pences, etc. that ought
to weigh Nineteen Penny Weight, and shall weigh only Fifteen dw., not only
should pass in Current Payments for Five Shillings, but be taken at the Mint
for that Price, separated or mixed together with other Crowns of more or less
weight; Shillings of Three dw. for Twelve Pence, the Six-penny Piece of 1 dw.
12 gr. for Sixpence; the Four-penny-piece of 1 dw. for Four Pence; the
Three-penny-piece of 18 gr. for Threepence; the Two-penny-piece of 12 gr. for
Twopence; and the One-penny-piece of 6 gr. for One Penny.

IV. That from the said 25th of March 1697, to the 25th of March School, any
Crown Pieces or their value in Half-Crowns, Shillings, etc. as above, that
shall weigh only Fifteen Penny Weight, shall pass in Current Payment for Four
Shillings Four-pence Halfpenny; and for that Price shall be taken at the Mint
separately, or mixed with others: The Half-Crown for Two Shillings Twopence
Halfpenny; the Shilling for Ten-pence Halfpenny; the Six-penny Piece for
Five-pence one Farthing; and the Four, Three, Two, and One-penny Pieces shall
pass in current Payment for their ordinary Price, but at the Mint they shall be
taken only according to their Weight, at the Rate of Five Shillings and
Ten-pence an Ounce.

V. That from the said 25th of March School, and thenceforth all the old Silver
Coins of England be Cried Down, insomuch that no Body takes it in Payment for
any Price, and that the same be Sold to the Mint, and no where else as Bullion,
after the Rate of Five Shillings an Ounce; which shall be for the Future the
settled Price of the Ounce of Silver Standard:

VI. In order to encourage People to carry their old Money to the Mint to be
Melted, it shall be allowed at the Mint, from the 25th of March 1696, to the
25th of March 1697, One Penny profit for every Penny Weight that any Crown
shall weigh above 15 dw. viz. a Crown, or its value in Half-Crowns, Shillings,
etc. Weighing 16 dw. shall be taken at the Mint for Five Shillings, one of 17
dw. for 5 s. 2 d.; one of 18 dw. for 5 s. 3 d.; one of 19 dw. for 5 s. 4 d.;
and one above 19 dw. if any for 5 s. 5 d.

VII. And to lessen the Loss of those that shall have Crowns, or any other
Coins Proportionably under the weight of 15 dw. till 10 dw.; it shall be abated
only Twopence for every Penny-weight, that such a Crown or Crowns, or other
Pieces proportionably, shall weigh less than the said 15 dw. from the said 25th
of March 1696, to the 25th of March 1697, viz. a Crown from 15 dw. to 14, shall
be paid at the Mint 4 s. 10 d.; one from 14 dw. to 13, 4 s. 8 d.; one from 13
dw. to 12, 4 s. 6 d.; one from 12 dw. to 11, 4 s. 4 d.; one from 11 dw. to 10,
4 s. 2 d.: And from the said 25th of March 1697, to the 25th of March School, it
shall be abated Threepence for every Penny-weight that a Crown Piece, or its
value in Half-Crowns, etc. shall Weigh less than 15 dw.

VIII. To encourage People to carry their Clipped Money to the Mint to be Melted,
and to moderate the Loss which will happen by the Crowns (Half-Crowns and other
Pieces proportionably) that shall weigh under 15 dw.; it shall be at the
liberty of every Person, from the said 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of March
School, to mix their Broad and Clipped Money, so that the heavy Coin should make
amends for the light one: As for Example, one who has two Crowns, whereof one
weighs 19 dw., and the other 11 dw. may by putting them together, reduce them
to 15 dw. and receiv at the Mint 5 s. for each of them.

IX. That no Crown, or its Value in Half-Crowns, Shillings, etc. that shall
Weigh under 10 dw., shall be taken alone at the Mint but as Bullion, viz. from
the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of March School, after the Rate of 6 s. 8 d.
an Ounce; but after the said 25th of March School, and thenceforth the Bullion
Standard shall be fixed at 5 s. an Ounce, and no more and no less. But such a
Crown may be taken at the Mint, from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of
March School, if mixed with other heavy ones, so that together they should weigh
above the said 10 dw. The same Piece however shall pass Current in Payment for
Five Shillings during that time, unless it should be Marked by an Officer
appointed for that purpose, in which Case it shall cease to be Current, and
shall be taken only by the Mint, as Bullion, after the Rate abovesaid.

X. And to avoid the Clipping of our Coin hereafter, and make new Coins really
worth what they shall go for; It Is Proposed to Coin henceforth at the Mint new
Pieces called Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, Six-pences, and Three-pences
Standard, Milled and Stamped, as the now new ones are, with some difference in
the Stamp, in order that they may be known one from the other. The New Crown to
Weigh Twenty-penny Weight, the Half-Crown 10 dw.; the Shilling 4 dw.; the
Six-penny Piece 2 dw.; and the Three-penny Piece One-penny Weight, Coined so,
that it should be two or three per Cent benefit upon the Money, from the Weight
of the Bullion, that is to say, That out of 100 Ounces of Bullion Standard, it
should be made One hundred, and two or three Crown Pieces, whereof One per Cent
shall be allowed to any Person that shall carry old Coin, for the value of Ten
Pounds or above at once, to the Mint to be Melted, but no Allowance to be made
under the said Ten Pounds.

The Copper Farthings shall be estimated worth Two Grains of Silver, and shall
go at any time hereafter, as they go now four for a Penny.

XI. These new Coins shall be Current, from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th
of March 1697, viz. The new Crown for 6 s. 8 d. the new Half-Crown for 3 s. 4
d.; the Shilling for 1 s. 4 d.; the Sixpence Piece for 8 d.; and the
Three-penny Piece for 4 d.; and for that Price shall be exchanged at the Mint
for old Coin of England.

XII. And from the 25th of March 1697, to the 25th of March School, the said New
Milled Money shall be Current only at the following Price, viz. The Crowns for 5
s. 10 d. the Half-crown for 2 s. 11 d.; the Shillings for 1 s. 2 d.; the
Six-penny Piece for 7 d.; and the other pieces in Proportion: But afthe 25th of
March School, and thenceforth no Silver Coin of England shall go, but the New
One, viz. The Crowns for 5 s.; the Half-crowns for 2 s. 6 d.; and the
Shillings, etc. in Proportion.

XIII. But whereas the Melting of the Old Coin, and the Making of New, shall
have diminished by the 25th of March School, about one third Numerical part of
the Silver Pieces, to supply that Diminution without any considerable Tax; it is
Necessary that the Parliament should Enact.

That from the 25th of March 1696, and thenceforth all the Gold and Silver
Bullion in Ingot, Plate, or otherwise; above one Ounce for Gold, and twelve
Ounces Weight for Silver, that shall be hereafter Imported or Exported, be
Entered in a Book kept for that purpose at the Custom-House; and from thence
carried to the Tower of London, to be assayed there and Marked, how much better
or worse it is than Standard, and Registered again (the whole to be done Gratis,
and with a free Cocket, as well for the Exportation as the Importation.) The
Pieces of Eight, or any other Foreign Coin, Gold or Silver, are also to be
Registered, and if thought fit, Marked at the Tower; (The Pieces of Eight,
Mexico and Sevil excepted as to the Mark.) It shall be also at the liberty of
any Person, that shall have Bullion, carried into the Tower to be Assayed
there, to have it cast in Cakes of 40, 50, 100, 200, 300, or 400 Ounces each,
the same being first reduced to Standard, which shall be done Gratis.

And from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of March 1697, all such Bullion
Assayed at the Tower, and Marked Standard, cast in Cakes or not, and also all
the Pieces of Eight, Mexico, or Sevil, (although not Marked,) shall pass and be
Current in Payments above Ten Pounds, as the Coin of England, by the Ounce, and
not by the Piece, after the Rate of 6 s. 8 d. an Ounce; and the Bullion Marked
better or worse, for more or less than the said 6 s. and 8 d.; and from 1697,
to School, for 5 s. 10 d. an Ounce.

But* after the 25th of March School, and thenceforth all such Bullion, and also
the Pieces of Eight, Mexico and Sevil, shall pass in Current Payment for above
Ten Pounds by the Ounce, and not by Piece, after the Rate of Five Shillings an
Ounce, and the Bullion Marked better or worse than Standard, for more or less
value than the said 5 s.

And whereas there is already in the Kingdom abundance of Gold and Silver,
which is neither Marked nor Assayed at the Tower, it shall be Lawful to the
Owner thereof to Export it, carrying it first to the Mint to be Assayed and
Registered there; but after the 25th of March 1696, all the Bullion in the
Kingdom not Marked shall be Lawfully seized as Coin of England Melted.

But in case any Gold or Silver of the Quality abovementioned, after the 25th
of March 1696, should be found Shipped in stealth to be Exported, or Imported,
the same shall be confiscated, two third parts to the King, and the other third
part to the Informer.

And whereas some Ships Importing such Bullion, may be entered in other
Custom-Houses than London; in that Case such Bullion shall not pass in Payment,
nor be exposed to Sale at any Rate, nor Bought by any, upon pain of Forfeiting
the same; two thirds to the Kings, and one third to the Informer, till it has
been Assayed in the Mint; and in the mean time the Owner thereof is to have it
Entered for his discharge in the Book of the next Custom-House, where the Ship
is Entered, for fear that such Bullion should be seized as Coin of England
Melted.

And also the Officers of the Mint are to be strictly charged to receive no
Bullion from any Body, (that appears not to have been Imported by the Register,
kept for that purpose) except the Owner thereof, or some Body for him, should
make Oath, that the same is not directly nor indirectly of the knowledge of Him
or Owner, proceeding from any Coin of England Melted, and in case any Bullion
at any time was proved to proceed from the Coin of England melted, the same to
be Confiscated; two thirds to the King, and one third to the Informer; and the
Melter thereof to be subject to the Laws already in force in such a Case.

That no Silver Bullion Standard, from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of
March 1697, be Sold or Bought for more than 6 s. 8 d.; and from 1697 to School,
more than 5 s. 10 d.; but if better or worse, proportionably to that Price. And
after the 25th of March School, no more than 5 s. an Ounce upon pain of
Forfeiting the same, two thirds to the King, and one to the Informer.

Whereas in the Two Years Melting, Contentions may probably arise about the
Brass and Clipped Money; Fourteen Persons skilled in the knowledge of Coin are to
be chosen to be Judges of that, and also to change the old Money for new: And
during the said Two Years, viz. from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of
March School, they shall Mark all the Brass Money that shall fall into their Hands
with a double Punchon; and all the Crowns under the Weight of 10 dw.; with a
single Punchon, and the Money so Marked shall not pass, but as Bullion. Those
Fourteen Persons are to be disposed as follows; One at the Tower, who shall be
called, General Register-Keeker. One about the Royal Exchange. One about
White Hall. One at Oxford. One at Southampton. One at Exeter. One at Bristol.
One at Chester. One at Nottingham, One at Newcastle, One at York. One at
Colchester,
In Wales,
One at Denbigh, and another at Caermarthen,


Who shall be called Mint-Bankers, or Changers. Those of London shall send
every Week the old Coin to the Tower to receive new; and those of the Country
every Month, unless it is thought fit to erect new Mints in several parts of
England, as it has been done formerly in such a Case.

And for the Ease of those Bankers, and of the Mint too, (which shall not be
able to Coin Money enough to satisfy those that shall carry in their old Money)
all the Sums under 10 l. shall be paid in new Coin, but the Sums above that,
shall be paid in Bills, half upon the Bank of England, and half upon the
Million Bank. Therefore all those Mint-Bankers, or Changers, shall give to the
King Security of Ten Thousand Pounds each, and each of them may draw at two
days Sight upon the General Register-keeper* payable in the Banks, as far as
the said Sum of Ten Thousand Pounds, and no more.

The Banks are to be paid every Month, more or less, as the new Coin shall be
made; so that they shall not advance more at one time than 130000l. and the
Interest thereof shall be paid after the Rate of Three per Cent per Annum.

And in Consideration of that Advance, when the Banks shall carry their old
Money to be exchanged, they shall have the benefit of the Coinage weight for
weight; but they shall tarry Three Months to receive their Payments in new
Money, without any allowance of Interest.

Lastly, It is to be considered by the Parliament, that if His Majesty by a
special Love to his Subjects, will take upon him such a good Thing for the
Nation; He shall be at extraordinary great Charges for two or three Years
together. Therefore in Consideration, that His Majesty shall make good the Loss
of the old Coin, from 15 Penny-weight to 10 dw. for Threepence for every
Penny-weight, which will cost him more, and also Pay a great many new Officers,
that shall be employed for that purpose; besides the Sixteen-pence Halfpenny
that he pays for the Coinage of every Pound Weight of Silver, to which Expenses
the Act for Coinage, nor any other Benefit arising by this Project, can
suffice. It Is Necessary, that the Parliament should allow Fifty Thousand Pounds
a Year, for Three Years only; and a Register shall be kept at the Tower,
wherein all the extraordinary Charges shall be entered, and the Parliament is to
Promise to make the Loss good, in case it shall appear by the said Register,
that the King is a Looser.

Some Observations upon a Project, Presented on the 4th of January 1694/5, to
the Right Honorable the Lords of the Treasury, by L. G.
1. THose who will be at the pains to peruse my Project with any Attention,
will easily perceive that I propose, 1. To Melt down all the Silver Coins of
England: 2. To make new Milled Money: 3. To have the said new Milled Money of the
same Standard as the former, viz. 11 Ounces 2 dw. Fine, and 18 dw. Allay: 4. To
have the new Milled Money of the same Weight at least, as the now Milled Money
is, viz. The Crown of 19 dw. 254833/1000000 parts, or 19 dw. 8 gr. and a half a
little more; and the Pound Weight, or 12 Ounces of Silver Standard to be cut in
62 Shillings, 124 Six-pences, 186 Four-penny Pieces, 372 Two-penny Pieces, and
744 One-penny Pieces, if thought fit to make such small Silver Pieces, which,
in my opinion, it is better to defer, till the Nation be supplied with a
reasonable quantity of new Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings and Six-pences: 5.
That the loss of the Owners of the Money shall be very inconsiderable: 6. That
they shall bring in their Money very willingly to be new Coined, and 7. That the
Diminution of the Numerical Quantity of the old Species, will be more than
supplied. I don't question in the least, but that my Project will seem at first
to be impracticable, but, I hope, it will appear very possible, if carefully
examined, and especially with the few Remarks here set down.

2. I see so many People who declare against the Raising of our Coin; that, I
think, it is necessary first of all to acquaint them with the Reasons I have to
demand, that the new Crowns should be Current for Two Years at 6 s. and 8 d. I
have laid down as an Axiom, at the beginning of this Writing; that the
Denomination of the Species of Gold or Silver, do not change their Intrinsic
Value; and that therefore the Nation is neither the richer nor poorer, by
raising or lowering the Coin, I propose then to raise the Crown Pieces to 6s.
8d. for Two Years, for the following Reasons; 1. To make the Loss that will
arrise by Clipped and Brass Money less sensible to the Owners thereof: 2. That
Guineas may fall by degrees from the extravagant Price they have been raised
to; for if they should fall at once from 30 s. to 21 s. 6 d. as they must do
whenever we have good Silver Money, and its Price fixed at 5 s. an Ounce, it
would be a great Loss to many Tradesmen and other People, because for this
Twelvemonth past we have seen hardly any other Money but Guineas: 3. Because
People are already disposed to it; and had it not been for an Act of
Parliament, they would have certainly raised the Milled Crowns thereabout to
that price, proportionably to the price of Gold: 4. I have fixed it to 6 s. 8
d. rather than to 6 s. 6 d. without any other Mystery, but because that price
is devisible by equal quantities of Pence, Farthings, and accommodated to the
present denominations of Crowns, Shillings, etc. and also to the Species of
Gold.

3. As to the First Article of my Project, wherein, I say, there is about one
third part of our Coin lost by Clipping. I know that some Ingenious Men are of
another opinion, and that they pretend that there is abundance of old Money
unclipt hoarded up; I wish it may prove so, but that is so far from being an
Objection to my Project, that it makes it more easy. I own, I have supposed the
thing at the worst, but a Table hereunto annexed, will make it more plain, and
therein I have calculated how many Ounces of Silver we want to make good the
Loss. When I Presented my Project to the Lords of the Treasury, I supposed
there was but Four Millions and a half of Silver Money in England, but upon
better Information I have thought I might suppose Five.

4. I demand two Years time to melt down all the old Silver Coin of England,
and to make the new, for the following Reasons, 1. Because it is difficult to
have Mints enough to do it in a shorter time, 2. Supposing there should be
Mints enough, yet it would be necessary to allow two Years time, for if there
was but one allowed, the price of Silver, which must fall gradually, should
fall too suddenly, viz. every Six Months; and so the Inhabitants of the
remotest Counties from London should hardly have time enough to be acquainted
with it: 3. I grant that there is no time to be lost in this Affair, but too
great a Precipitation may be liable to as great Inconvenience, as a Delay; and
after all, People must have time to carry their old Money to the Mint, and the
Mint must have time to Coin it. It will be well enough, if we are in the mean
time supplied with new Coin for Sums not exceeding 10 l. and Bills upon the
Banks for greater ones by the Changers, as it is in my Proposal, for this
answers all our wants,

5. It is just, and more convenient, that the Mint should take the old Coin
rather by Weight, than by any other way; and it will be a greater Satisfaction
for the King and the Nation, that in the Books appointed for that purpose at
the Mint, or in the hands of the Changers; there should be several Columns,
whereof one should be for the Weight, and the others for the old Estimation in
Pounds, Shillings and Pence.

6. It is proposed, that the old Money be taken in Current Payments at a certain
Rate, the better to carry on our Trade till we have new Money enough.

7. I suppose the new Crown to weigh a full Ounce, though I know it does weigh
only 19 dw. 8 gr. and a half, which makes an Allowance of about 3 and one third
per Cent, for the Melting and the Stamp; so that if a Pound Weight of Silver
Standard, valued at Three Pound is cut, as it is usual in 62 Shillings, a Pound
and eight Ounces of Silver, which will cost but 5 l. will make 103 Shillings
and Four-pence in Number, though they be but of the same weight. I say, that an
old Crown weighing 15 dw. is to be Current, and taken at the Mint for Five
Shillings, which is a necessary Consequence from what I said at first
concerning the Price of Silver, for if a new Crown weighing an Ounce is worth 6
s. 8 d. an old Crown of Silver Standard of 15 dw. must by the same reason be
worth 5 s.

8. Silver is the Center of Trade, and all things in the World, either Lands,
Houses, Goods, Diamonds, and other Commodities, are but its Circumference; so
that if the price of Silver is not fixed, it is impossible to make a just
Estimation of Commodities, as it is impossible to say how far the Circumference
is from the Center, if the Center be not fixed.

It Is then highly necessary to fix the price of Silver in Quantity, Quality,
and Estimation, either Coined or not Coined. The price of Quantity of Silver
not Coined, is fixed in England by the Weight of a Pound containing 12 Ounces
Troy, the Ounce of 20 dw., and the dw. of 24 gr.

The price of Quantity of Silver Coined, is fixed from a number of Pieces that
the King orders to be cut from a Pound Weight of Silver, as 12 Crowns, 62
Shillings, etc.

The price of Quality of Silver not Coined, is fixed by the Assay that is made
to know whether it is better or worse than Standard.

And of Silver Coined, by the Standard of the same, which is 11 Ounces 2 dw.
Fine, 18 dw. Allay.

The price of Estimation of Silver Coined, is fixed by Public Authority, being
ordered that a Crown Piece weighing 19 dw. 8 gr. be esteemed Five Shillings,
etc.

But the price of Estimation of Silver not Coined, is not fixed in England, and
I think, it is absolutely necessary to fix it.

As to the Price of Quantity and Quality of Silver, I believe it would be very
difficult, if not impossible, to fix it in a better way, than it is now, and
besides the least Alteration in this Case would be liable to many
Inconveniences, but as to the Price of Estimation of Silver not Coined, I see
no reason why it should it be Arbitrary rather than the Estimation of Silver
Coined, and if it be prohibited to sell a Crown (weighing 19 dw. 8 gr. that is
to say, within a small matter of an Ounce) above Five Shillings; I would fain
know why an Ounce of Silver not Coined of the same Standard as the Crown,
should be sold for Six Shillings and Sixpence? As long as the thing continues
so, there is no doubt but the Goldsmiths will melt down all the Milled Money
that falls into their hands, for the Profit is clear. But if the Price of
Estimation of Silver not Coined is once fixed, and that it be prohibited to
sell or buy above the Price set upon it by Law, (they may sell it under if they
please) and that the Estimation of the Silver Coined be proportionable to it,
which are inconsiderable difference for the Stamp of 3 or 3 per Cent. as it is
now, we need not fear that our Coin will be melted down; no Body shall have the
least Temptation toward it, and the Reason is very plain, for Silver in Ingot
will be then as cheap and cheaper, as the Silver Coined, of 3 per Cent.

This is enough to show how necessary it is to fix the Price of the Ounce of
Silver, but I must remove an Objection that Clippers and others concerned with
them, are like to make in name of Merchants that Trade in Gold and Silver, viz.
That if the price of Silver is lower in England than in other Countries, no
body will Import Bullion, but rather will Export all the Coin they Can. This
may appear specious to those who have not well considered that the price of all
Commodities both of our own and Foreign Countries is always proportionable to
the Intrinsic Value of Silver, and not to the Denomination of the Species of
the same, and so Foreigners will then Barter their Silver with us, for our
Commodities, as much as they did before, with this only difference, that the
Estimation of Commodities, and the Estimation of Silver will be low, then more
proportionable, more just, and more certain. It is not to be wondered why
Bankers, Goldsmiths, Refiners and the like, should make their Endeavors to
hinder the settling of the price of Silver Standard, every body knows that this
is against their private Interest, for they are a sort of People who enrich
themselves to the cost of the Nation.

I humbly conceive that it is absolutely Necessary to fix the price of the
Ounce of Silver* Standard at Five Shillings, for there is no other way to
prevent the Melting down of our Coin; but for the Reasons contained in my first
Proposal, and in these Additions, I thought, it was Necessary to raise now our
Coin, viz. The Crown Piece to Six-Shillings and Eight-pence, to reduce it
afterward by degrees to Five Shillings, which must be after Two Years, viz.
from the 25th of March 1696, to the 25th of March School, that the same Price
shall be fixed for a Crown Piece, and an Ounce of Silver. It would be very
necessary also to fix the Price of Gold, so that it may never exceed Sixteen
times the Value of Silver, Weight for Weight.

I own, that there is a considerable Objection against the raising and lowering
of our Coin, and which it is impossible to avoid in any Country in the World,
and this concerns the Leases of Estates, that are made for a long time, for in
this Case the Landlord must lose or get considerably; However, as I demand but
Two Years Time, I think, no body will grumble at it, especially if a Man
considers how much he loses every Day, and the trouble he is perpetually put
to, by reason of the Badness of our Coin.

A COMPUTATION, by which it appears, that the Silver Coin of England being
Rated to be Five Millions, is probably Clipped one with another of 33 per Cent.
and upon the whole, by Mr. Gervaize's Method, the King shall lose 150000 l. or
3 per Cent, whereof 75000 l. or 1 per Cent. is to be deducted, (by the
difference of 2 or 3 per Cent. that the New Coin shall be more in Quantity than
Weight). And the Owners of the Coin shall lose 650000 l. or 13 per Cent.
Whereof one per Cent. is to be deducted by the Difference as above, viz.
Part of the Crowns- l. Crowns. 1000000 or 4000000 At 4 d. profit to the King
is 175000 l. At 1 d. profit to the Owners 025000 l. Is Clipped from 19 dw. to 16
dw. reduced together to the Weight of 17 dw. 12 gr. at 3 d. 1/8 per dw. 54 d.
11/16. One Crown at 54 d. 11/16 Worth. Weight. Pences, Dw. Gr. 54 -- 11/16 --
17 -- 12 Part -- l. Crowns. 1000000 or 4000000 Even without profit nor loss.
From 16 dw. to 14 dw. reduced to 15 dw. worth 46 d. 14/16 One Crown at 46 d.
14/16. 46 -- 14/16 -- 15 -- 00 Parts -- l. Crowns. 2000000 or 8000000 At 3 d.
loss to the King is 100000 l. At 9 d. loss to the Owners is 300000 l. From 14
dw. to 10 dw. reduced to 12 dw. worth 37 d. Two Crowns at 37 d.. 75 -- 24 -- 00
Part -- l. Crowns. 1000000 or 4000000 At 7 d. loss to the King is 125000 l. At
22 d. loss the Nation is 375000 l. From 10 dw. to 5 dw. reduced to 7 dw. 12 gr.
worth 23 d. 7/16. One Crown at 23 d. 7/16. 23 -- 7/16 -- 07 -- 12

Pences. 200 -- 00 -- 64 -- 00 The Fifth Part is -- -- 40 -- 00 -- 12 -- 19 And
so the Crown that ought to Weigh 19 dw. 8 gr. and to be worth 60 d. is reduced
to 12 dw. 19 gr. 4 mit. and is worth 40 d. which is 33 per Cent. Loss. The
King's Loss of one part. -- 100000 l. Ditto of another part. -- 125000 l.
225000 l. The King's Profit deducted on the other side. 75000 l. It remains of
Loss to the King* -- 150000 l. The King's Profit upon the Benefits of 2 or 3
per Cent. for the Quantity of Pieces more than Weight, after the Rate of 1 per
Cent. upon the whole. -- 75000 l. And so the King's neat Loss is, or 1 per
Cent. 75000 l. The Owner's Loss of one Part -- 300000 l. Ditto. -- 375000 l.
675000 l. The Owner's Profit deducted. -- 25000 l. Rest Loss to the Owners. --
650000 l. The Owner's Benefit of 1 per Cent. upon the quantity of Pieces. 50000
l. And so the Owner's Loss is, -- or 12 per Cent. 600000 l.

A Table to show how to reduee Gradually the Price of the Ounce Troy of Silver
standard to its ancient Price of Five Shillings, the same having first been
raised to 6 s. 8 d. according to the proposal heretofore, with this only
difference that the Crown piece of Silver (though it weighs, but 19 dw. 8 gr.)
shall be Current for 5 s. and be esteemed for an Ounce of Silver, and so the
Silver shall have 3 per Cent benefit by the Coynage.
Space of 2 years to make all the Silver Coin new. Price of the Ounce of
Silver. Weight of Crowns, Half-Crowns, etc. Price of Ditto Crowns, etc. From
March 25. 1696, to September 25. 1696. 6 s. 8 d. -- Dw. gr. Cr. 19. 8 C. 9. 20
Sh. 3. 20 6Pc. 1. 22 3Pc. 1. 23 l. s. d. -- 6 -- 8 -- -- 3 -- 4 -- -- 1 -- 4 --
-- 0 -- 8 -- -- 0 -- 4 -- From Septem. 25. 1696, to March 25. 1697. 6 s. 3 d.
-- Dw, gr. Crown, -- Half-Cro.-Shill. -- 6 Pence -- 3 Pence. -- l. s. d. -- 6
-- 3 -- -- 3 -- 1 -- 1 -- 3 -- -- 0 -- 7 -- 0 -- 3 From March 25. 1697. to
September 25. 1697. 5 s. 10 l. -- Dw. gr. Crown, -- Half-Cro.-Shill. -- 6
Pence. -- 3 Pence. -- s. d. -- 5 -- 10 -- 2 -- 11 -- 1 -- 2 -- -- 0 -- 7 -- --
0 -- 3 From Septem. 25. 1697, to March 25. School. 5 s. 5 d. -- Dw. gr. Crown, --
Half-Cro.-Shill. -- 6 Pence. -- 3 Pence. -- s. d. -- 5 -- 5 -- -- 2 -- 8 -- 1
-- 1 -- -- 0 -- 6 -- 0 -- 3 From March 25. School, and thenceforth. 5 s. -- Dw.
gr. Crown, -- Half-Cro.-Shill. -- 6 Pence. -- 3 Pence. -- s. d. -- 5 -- 0 -- --
2 -- 6 -- -- 1 -- 0 -- -- 0 -- 6 -- -- 0 -- 3 --

A Table to Reduce gradually the Price of the Ounce Troy of Gold Standard to 4
l. an Ounce. being esteemed Sixteen times the value of Silver Weight for
Weight) the same having first been raised to 5 l. 6 s. 8 d. which is the
proportion of Silver to 6 s. 8 d. an Ounce, the Gold Standard Coined or not
Coined esteemed a like, by reason that Gold esteemed 16 times the value of
Silver Weight for Weights, is the highest Rate that ever was.
Space of 2 years to reduce the Gold to the Proportion of Silver. Price of the
Ounce of Gold. Weight of Guineas and half Guineas. Price of ditto Guineas, etc.
From March 25. 1696, to September 25. 1696. 5 l. 6 s. 8 d. Gui. Dw. gr. 5. 9.
half Guineas -- Dw. gr. 2-16- 1 l. 8 s. 8 d. 0 l. 14 s. 4 d. From Septem. 25.
1696, to March 25. 1697. 5 l. 0 s. 0 d. Guineas ditto. half Guinea ditto. 1 l.
6 s. 10 d. 0 -- 13 -- 5 From March 25. 1697. to September 25. 1697. 4 l. 13 s.
4 d. Guinea ditto. half Guinea ditto. 1 l. 5 s. 1 d. 0 -- 12 -- 6 From Septem.
25. 1697, to March 25. School. 4 l. 6 s. 8 d. Guinea ditto. half Guinea ditto. 1
l. 3 s. 3 d. 0 -- 11 -- 7 From March 25. School, and thenceforth. 4 l. 00. s. 0
d. Guinea ditto. half Guinea. ditto. 1 l. 1 s. 6 d. 0 -- 10 -- 9d.

A New PROPOSAL to Melt down all the Old Hammered Money of England, and make New
Coin of the same Standard and Price, as the present Milled Money is; and to
supply the Loss arising by Clipped Money.
1. THAT by Act of Parliament, the Price of Silver Standard be fixed at Five
Shillings an Ounce, and that the Price of Gold never exceeds above sixteen
times the value of Silver, Weight for Weight.

2. that the Milled Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, Six-pences, Four-Pences,
Two-pences and Penny-pieces of Charles II. James II. William and Mary, and
William, continue to be current as they are now, viz. the Crown at 5 s. and the
other Pieces propor^^onably.

3. That from the first of Ianua^^ 1695, and thenceforth no Crown piec^ or its
value in Half-Crowns, Shilling^ etc. that ought to Weigh 19 dw* 8 gr. and a
half, and shall weigh under 15 dw. Half-Crowns 7 dw. 12 g^* Shillings 3 dw.,
and Six-penny Piece^ 1 dw. 12 gr. be taken in Payment, and cease from that day
to be Current Money of England.

4. That from the first of January 1695, to the first of June 1696, all the old
Crown pieces that shall weigh 15 dw. or above, Half-Crowns 7 dw. 12 gr.,
Shillings 3 dw., Six-pences 1 dw. 12 gr. so that One Hundred Pounds of that
Money should weigh 300 Ounces or Twenty five Pounds, be taken in Current Payment
for the Price they were made for, but after the First of June 1696, no old Coin
of England, except the Milled Money of Charles II. James II. William and Mary,
and William, be taken but as Bullion, after ^he rate of Five Shilings an Ounce.

5. That the said old Pieces or Bul^ion be taken at the Mint, or by the
Changers, as by my first Proposal, and that the Owners thereof receive a new
^or old Milled Crown, or its value in Milled Half-Crowns, Shillings, etc. for
every Ounce Weight of old Coin Standard. And in case the Mint or Changers
should want new Coin to Exchange the old, it shall be lawful for the Mint or
Changers, when any great Sum shall be brought to them to be Exchanged, to pay
the Owners thereof Ten Pounds in new Milled Money, and to give them for the rest
a Bill payable to the Bearer upon the Bank of England, or the Million Bank,
which shall be repaid in 3 Months time, as by the first Proposal.

6. And to supply the Loss that should happen, by reason of the difference of
the Estimation of the Clipped Money by Tale, and its Estimation by the Ounce, it
shall be delivered Notes upon the said two Banks answering the said Loss, to be
exchanged with Bank Bills, bearing Interest of Twopence a Day for one Year,
provided that the said Notes do not exceed the Sum of 250000 l. upon each Bank:
That is to say, that if a Man brings to the Mint an Hundred pound of Clipped
Money, that ought to Weigh Four Hundred Ounces, and shall Weigh but 200 or 50
Pounds, the said Man shall receive Ten pounds in new Coin, and Forty pound in
Bills upon the Banks, payable to the Bearer, and for the other Fifty, that
would be Loss to him, were it not provided for, he shall receive a Note for the
same upon the same Banks, which shall be exchanged with Bank Bills bearing
Interest of Twopence a Day for one Year.

7. And for the Re-payment of the said Banks, it shall be provided by the
Parliament a sufficient Fond to re-pay in One Years time the Sum of Five
Hundred Thousand Pounds, and Thirty Thousand Pounds more for the Interest
thereof after the Rate of Six per Cent.

8. To Encourage those who have Plate or Foreign Bullion, to carry it to the
Mint, to be Coined, such persons are to have the Benefit of Coinage, which is 3
or 3 per Cent. viz. Weight for Weight, Standard Silver and Gold.

9. And to prevent people from Melting the old Coin, to carry it afterward to
the Mint to receive the Advantage of 3 or 3 per Cent. (which Benefit is
designed to help to bear the Charges of the clipped Money.) All Bullion that shall
not be Marked at the Tower (as it is largely expressed in my First Proposal)
shall be deemed Coin of England Melted, and for that Reason esteemed 3 per
Cent. worse than Standard, and for such taken accordingly at the Mint.

10. Now to supply in part the Loss that will happen to the Public, by reason
of the Clipped Money, which will amount to Fifteen Hundred Thousand Pound or
thereabouts, as it will appear by a Computation hereunto annexed, I have
thought fit to propose the following New Million Adventure.

1. There will be delivered a Hundred Thousand Tickets at Ten Pound a piece, in
the same way as they were delivered in the first Million Adventure.

2. Old Crown-pieces, Half-Crowns, Shillings, Six-pences, etc. though clipped,
under the degree adove-mentioned, shall be taken for Tickets, provided Ten
Pounds of that Clipped Money weigh together Fifteen Ounces, (though they ought to
weigh Thirty Eight Ounces 14 dw. 4 gr.)

3. Twenty Pounds of Counterfeited Money, shall be judged Equivalent to Ten
Pound of Clipped Money, and taken for one Ticket, unless the said Counterfeited
Money should be extraordinary bad, which must be left to the Discretion of those
whose who shall be appointed to deliver Tickets.

4. In Consideration of the said Million arising by an Hundred Thousand
Tickets, at Ten Pound a piece, it will be provided a Fond of an Hundred and
Twenty Thousand Pound a Year, which shall be divided into Prizes and Blanks as
follows; l. l. 1 Of the Yearly Rent of 500 500 2 -- of 250 500 2 -- of 150 300
20 -- of 100 2000 30 -- of 50 1500 65 -- of 20 1300 380 -- of 10 3800 2000 --
of 5 10000 2500 First and last drawn each 50 100 20000 l.

And for the Hundred Thousand Pound remaining, they are to be employed for
paying the Blank Tickets at Twenty Shillings a Year each, for sixteen Years
together, as in the Million Adventure of 1694, and for the Charges of the same.

It remains only to pay the two Banks of the Five Hundred Thousand Pound
advanced by them, and for that, the Author of this Proposal, has a Project
ready at hand, to raise that Sum, as also the Hundred Thousand Pound for the
Yearly Rent of the Million Adventure, which he has not thought fit to publish
here. The Computation hereunto annexed, will show what Charges the Nation must
be at, besides this new Million Adventure.

Would I deal with others, as I was dealt by in the first Million Adventure, of
which I can boast I was the Inventor, Though tulit alter honores, I should say,
that I am the Contriver of this, but I act by other Principles, and therefore,
I own, that Major Hayens, a worthy Citizen of London, is the first who has
Invented how to apply such a Lottery to the Mending of the Coin, and I add
nothing to it, but that Twenty Pound of counterfeited Money ought to be
Equivalent to Ten Pound of clipped Money, and taken for a Ticket in this Adventure.

From what I have said, it follows, that the Public shall lose nothing upon
clipped Money, and it were to be wished, that they should be no losers by Guineas;
but besides the Difficulty of the Thing, there is no Justice that the State
should make good the loss of Eight Shillings and above upon every Guinea,
seeing they have been advanced to that extravagant Price against the general
consent of the Nation, as it is plain from an Act of Parliament passed last
Sessions, to prevent Clipping. The King has got nothing by it, but on the
contrary has lost very much, and therefore it is but just that those who have
got by raising the Price of Gold, should now suffer by lowering of the same.

The Prejudice which the King and the Nation in general have suffered by the
high price of Guineas, may be well guessed at by this only Instance, viz. That
whereas Six Millions were sufficient for the Charges of the War, when Guineas
were at 21 s. 6 d., Nine Millions or very little less, are now absolutely
Necessary to bear the very same Charges; Cloth, and all other Commodities
having been raised in Proportion to Guineas. This Observation by the by shows
that we lose every Year to no purpose, twice as much as it will cost us once
for all to reform our Coin.

However, to help the Public as much as possible, I make bold to propose, that
Guineas be lowered by degrees, according to the Table annexed to my first
Project, viz. every Three Months, and so that Guineas be current from the First
of January 1695/6, to the First April 1696, at 28 s. 8 d., From the First of
April to the First of July, at 26 s. 10 d.; From the First of July to the First
of October, at 25 s. 1 d.; And from the First of October to the First of
January 1696/7, at 23 s. 3 d.; and thenceforth, that no Body presume to take
them above the Price of 21 s. 6 d. This will prevent many Disputes, but let the
Parliament fix the Price of Guineas, or not, they must needs fall to 21 s. 6
d., as soon as Silver is fixed at 5 s. an Ounce.

I have considered this Matter these Three Years since, and though what I
propose be directly against my own private Interest; I think, it is an absolute
Necessity for the Honor and general Interest of the Nation to melt down our
old Clipped Money, and make new Coin of the same Standard, Weight and Price as the
former; and when that is done, and our Trade and Navigation secured, I question
not to see England the happiest Country in the World, which is my Hearts desire.

FINIS.
A Computation of the whole Charge that the Nation will be at, to make the
Clipped Money good to the Owners thereof; besides the voluntary advance of one
Million in Clipped Money toward the Mending of it, by way of an Adventure,
according to the New Proposal.
Quantity of ounces of silver that ought to be in 4 Millons of Coin. Quantity
of Oun. of Silver that by clipping etc. are left in 4 Mil. of Coin 1 Mil. or 4
Mil. of Cro. which at 19 dw. 8 gr. 1 half ought to Weigh. ounces dw. gr.
3870833-13-8 The said Crowns or, their value in half Cro. shillings, etc.
though reduced by Usage to something less than 19 dw. 8 gr. half Being Milled
money, are not to be melted down and are reputed to weigh. Ounce dw. gr
3870833-13-8 One Millon, or 4. Millons of Crowns. 3870833-13-8 By Clipping,
etc. are reduced one with another to 15 dw. 3000000-0-0 Two Millons, or ^.
Millons of Crowns. 7741667-6-16* By ditto reduced one with another to 12 dw.
4800000-0-0 One Millon; or 4 Mil. of Crowns, which will be taken up for Tickets
on a New Mil. Adventure. 0000000-0-0 By ditto reduced one with another to 7 dw.
12 gr. will render toward the mending of the Coin. 1500000-0-0 5 Mil. or 20
Mil. of Cro. Being the whole of the Silver Coyns. The benefit of 3 one fourth
per Cent upon 3 Millons that are to be melted, weighing 9300000 Ounces.
302250-0-0 2010251-0-0 4 Mil. ought to weigh Ounces. 15483334-13-8 It remains
to be made good in Bank bills. 15483334-13-8 The said 2010251 Ounces of silver
at 5 s. an Ounce make sterling, -- 502562l. 15s. 0

FINIS.

