The SIGNS of the TIMES: OR, Wonderful Signs OF Wonderful times.

BEING A Faithful Collection and Impartial Relation of several SIGNS and
WONDERS, called properly PRODIGIES, (together with some Philosophical and
Theological Descants upon them) which have been seen in the HEAVENS, on the
EARTH, and on the WATERS, as they have been Testified by very Credible Hands.
All which have happened within the compass of this last Year 1680.

Which may well be called another Annus Mirabilis, or Wonderful Year, wherein
the Lord has given us loud Warnings to Repent of our Sins and Return to him,
that he may have Mercy upon us.

Woe to thm that Regard not the Work of the Lord, neither Consider the
Operation of his Hands. Isa. 5.11.12, 13. By C. N.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. And Published by Langley Gurtiss, on
Ludgate Hill. 1681.

The Comet and the Dart
depiction of comet and dart The Armies in the Air:
depiction of armies The Three Suns seen:
depiction of three suns The greathailstones
depiction of hail Hatfield maid and Ghost
depiction of maid and ghost The Earthquake.
depiction of earthquake The 3 dead Tower-lyons:
depiction of three dead lions the River dryd: the whale
depiction of whale The fight of Ships.
depiction of ships

TO The Worshipful Francis Warner, Esquire
AMongst all my small Acquaintance, I have not had the Happiness to know
personally any person of Quality (though undoubtedly, some such there be out of
my reach) so much conversant and so exquisitely versed in prophetic Mysteries
like your self, and considering That Prodigies (which this portable pocketbook
treats upon) are a kind of mute (yet speaking) Prophecies, I made bold to
Dedicate it (quale quale est) to your Worship, being experimentally Assured,
That you are a lover of Learning, and a candid Patron to all Abstruse Essays,
well knowing that in magnis voluisse sat est, and Difficilium, facilis est
venia. Sir, your Candor, I presume, will incline you to pardon me in the
whole, in as much as I have been constrained throughout this whole Work to
tread all in untrodden paths, finding none walking in the same way and Method
before me: You will find the Labor (such as it is) the more elaborate, in
finding out Sacred (which are least obvious to Exceptions) as well as Civil
Parallels to present Prodigies; and in making such (I hope) Innocent Descants
upon them, as the Matter does require* Sir, I look upon you as one above many
for Discoursing about the Signs of the times: both the Signs of Divine Anger
and of Divine Favor. Signum and Signatum sunt correlata. Every Sign must have
the thing signified, no Sign is so dumb, but it speaks something which only the
wise do understand, Hos. 14.9. 'Twas Daniel only and not the South-sayers, That
could Read the Handwriting upon the Wall, and give a Right Interpretation of
it. Dan. 5.8, 11.12, 15, 16. Such as seek to Sorcerers, deserve no better than
a Disappointment, the lowest fruit of their sublime Folly, None of those
Wizards of the world (though they might have Deep Reaches in Humane Affairs)
could give the Sense of that Divine Oracle, that work was reserved for a better
man than they: Stultorum plena sunt omnia; Store of such Fools (no better than
Dust heaps) are found in every Corner, who either know not the mind of God in
mystical matters, or Stumble at it. There be too many Atheists, who do
extenuate and undervalue all Prodigies. Heathenishly ascribing them to Dame
Nature only, whereby they do dangerously Darken the Power and Providence of the
Almighty God. but there are not many wise, wise-hearted, and wise unto
Salvation. They are few that Understand the Signs of the Times. It Is Objected,
Prodigies are common Things, therefore cannot be special Presages of future
Events, or of the End approaching. I Ans. (1) It Is very observable that the
Palmoni Hamadabbat or Prince of Preachers preached upon Prodigies those signs
and wonders which did presage the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of his last
Coming, occasioned by his Disciples asking [ When shall these things be, and
What sign will there be when these things shall come to pass, Luke 21.7. Mat.
24.3. and Mar. 13 4. etc. No sooner had Christ prepared them with due Cautions
concerning themselves, but he declared what was satisfactory to their curious
question. (2.) The very first Text that Christ's Apostles preached upon (after
Christ was gone from them, and the Spirit come upon them) was concerning
Prodigies which the Prophet J^el foretold God would show in the world, chapter 2.
ver. 30, etc and the Apostle Peter handled that Text so powerfully as to
prevail with 3000 Converts at one Sermon, Acts 2^ 17.19.41. Showing how New
Testament times do unvail and Accomplish the vail^d Prophecies of the Old. (3)
It Is the concurrent Opinion of our best Protestant Authors, that there be some
Special Signs of the Times (called Sacramentis and M^raculis cognata, near a
Kin to Sacraments and Miracles) which are more than Natural, even of a Divine
Ordination, declaring how the Great God stands affected toward poor man, in
respect of his Favor or Anger: See Polani Syntagma^^ 6. ca. 48, and 59 and
many Classick Authentic Divines. (4) It Is likewise as concur^^^^ a Sentiment
of Go^d Hist ri^^^ (both Ancient and Modern) that Prodigies do mostly Portend
the Futurition of some extraordinary Events, as, Herodotus, etc. and Lucan. l.
^. tells, how the sad calamities of Rome were presaged by many strange
Prodigies in Heaven, Earth and Sea, singing or saying, Thus -- Superique Minaces
Prodigiis terras imple^runt Aethera pontum
Igneta obscurae viderunt Sydera Noctes,
Ardentemque polum flammis, coeloque Volantes,
Obliquas per Inane Faces, etc.


All which do signify, that the whole Fabric of the Universe had put upon it
(by the Angry God) a most frightful Face and Aspect, and Heaven, Earth and Sea
did conspire together to chastize the Pride and Luxury of Rome at that Time,
and Claudian says, That after Caesar's Victory over Pompey, not only the
Heavens dropped blood, but also pits and pools flowed with blood, as a praesage
of Caesar's Stabbing, cum multis aliis, etc. (5.) Pliny, l. 2. c. 58. says, The
Heathens were startled at the Prodigys of his time, in so much that they had
their solemn Sacrifices for Diverting the Evils portended by them; And will not
those Dictates of the dim light of Dame Nature in these blind Heathens rise up
in Judgment against our Atheists, who scoff at all those wonderful signs so
terrifying in themselves, and so testifying God's wrath for Man's sin? Alas,
they had not God's Heifer to plow withal (which we have) yet could they
Unriddle those Mysteries (called (...), God's prodigious preachments) better
than many of us: their very natural Religion was a dark Imitation of the true
Divine Devotion, though the Devil (God's Ape) did impose upon them therein much
Superstition. If against this, it be alleged what is said, Jer. 10.2, 3. Learn
not the way of the Heathen, and be not Dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, as they
are, for their Customs are vain. I Answer (1.) God Cautions his people there,
(going Captives into Chaldea then) that they learn not the vain Astrology and
Idolatry of the Chaldeans in their Country. (2.) That Astrology which
pretends to read Fates and Fortunes in the Heavens, ascribing all to Stars
and not to God, is Idolatry, condemned there by Jeremy and by Isaiah ch 47: 12,
13, etc. (3) Jeremy speaks of Natural and ordinary Signs of Heaven which the
blind Heathens were dismayed at ( Desying God while they Deified them) as if
the Issues of their Affairs depended on them: Wherefore Gods people should not
be so: If there were no other Reason but that only, Matthew: 6.32. but there be
other Extraordinary Signs, dreadful Apparitions, whereby God warns his people
of some ensuing Wrath, as appears from Joel, Christ and Peter, etc. (as
above) God does not forbid us to mind them and to be affected with them.
Especially considering this is Gods last way of speaking to us, as it was to
Pharaoh, when God had said sostly to him at first, Let my People go, etc. he
hardened his heart, then God spoke more severely to him by Signs and wonders: So
now, our Barnabas's has been rejected, God sends his Boanerges's and preaches
to us by Prodigies, and such as are more than Ordinary without a Parallel for
this So year, and so attended with such concussions of Kingdoms (e'n Popish
one against another, etc) which seem to put an Accent on them and though there
have been frequent Prodigies, yet may they be Signs of the last times, as a
Disease is a sign of Mortality, though a Man recover sometimes, yet cease he
not to be mortal but dies at last; So those signs (though often seen) do not
cease to be Signs of the Approaching End: and former Prodigies, might have
other Praesages and significations, as those in 60, etc: what has befaln ever
since, such as, Plague, Fire, etc. I speak to a wise man (skilful in Mysteries)
who will judge heartily what is said by,

From my Study this 10 of May, 1681. Yours in the best Bonds, Christo. Ness.

The Signs of the Times: OR, Wonderful Signs OF Wonderful Times.
OUR Lord and Savior has said, Except men see SIGNS and WONDERS, they will
not Believe, John 4.48. There is a natural Itch inbred in the nature of all
Mankind to see some signs and Wonders; Hence it is, That such an universal
Aptness is found in all the Sons and Daughters of Men to behold Rare Shows and
strange Sights, Thus the People Ran forth out of all the Region round about to
get a Sight of John the Baptist, as of a burning and shining Light: Matthew. 3.5.
and 11.7. Luke 3.7. and Joh. 5.35. Seeing they had not any one Prophet born to
them from the Building of the Second Temple until His Birth: Then was
[Cathimath Chazon] a Sealing up of Prophesy, Dan. 12.4.9. No Prophet 'twixt
Malachy and John Baptist, Mal. 4.5. Mat. 11.14. with 17.10. Hence that
Captivity Psalm, Psalm. 74. complains, verse 9. that there was no Prophet
amongst them. Hence it is also, that we read so often in Scripture of many men
(Good as well as Bad) asking after a Sight of Signs:

Indeed (1) It is an evil and Adulterous Generation (according to Christ's
Character) that most seeks after signs, Matt. 12 28, 39. that is, so
earnestly, if that were not Done, they were Undone: (I.) Those carnal Scribes
and Pharisees could call for a Sign after so many Signs. They had been personal
Ey-witnesses How Mighty Christ was both in Word and Deed (in Doctrine and
Miracles) before God and all the People, Luke 24.19. which were so many
Infallible Proofs, Act. 1.3. that he was the Messiah: yet these were but SIGNS
on Earth, they would not believe in him, unless he could show them a SIGN from
Heaven, and Do as Moses, Samuel and Elijah had done: for Moses called for
Manna, Samuel for Rain, and Elijah for Fire, All from Heaven, etc. John 2.18.
and 6.30. Christ showed them many Signs, Jo. 20.30. and wrought many Wonders
(which no power but that which is Divine could work, John 9.32.3.) both beyond
the Course of Nature, and above the Power of Art, yet (as the Saying is) they
could not see VVood for Trees. No, they must have such Signs as were shown and
seen upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.16, 19. Such Thunders and Lightnings though
they had their Bath-Kol, the Daughter of a Voice (which was, as they say, the
only Oracle abiding with the Second Temple) and such a Voice of God (as Thunder
is called, Psalm. 29.3, to 10) they had from Heaven, John 12.29, 30. Therefore
Christ checks and chides them for requiring such Signs as would rather affright
these Hypocrites than instruct them. They should have been contented with his
Doctrine and Miracles which did sufficiently demonstate a Divine Power, and
though the Thunderclaps at the Giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai were most
suitable to the Rigor of that Dispensation, yet his Miracles of Mercy
(confirming his Doctrine) were more suitable to SION, and to the Grace of the
Gospel. Therefore went Christ about Doing Good to many by his Miracles, Act.
10.38. but never (which is very remarkable) Doing Hurt to Any by them, As most
other Wonder-Workers Did, for his Name was JESUS a Savior, not Abaddon) [A bad
one] or Apollyon, a Destroyer. In all this those wicked Hypocrites were
wittingly, willingly and wilfully blind, and who so blind as they that will not
see. (II.) Another Time Came the Superstitious Pharisees (leaving behind them
the Supercilious Scribes) and conspired with the Irreligious Sadduces to tempt
Christ by asking a SIGN, Matt. 16.1, etc. Those two Sects were deadly Enemies
each to the other, yet can they here combine as loving Friends for confronting
of CHRIST. The two Good Sticks (Israel and Juda) became one in the hand of God,
Ezeck. 37 19. but those two Bad Sticks (the Pharisees and Sadduces) became one
in the hand of the Devil, not only as Herod and Pilate did, Luke 23.12. but
also as the Popish Priests and Jesuits, the Monks and Friars (All which be at
deadly Difference amongst themselves in as much as they do notoriously
disparage and bespatter one another) yet as Herod and Pilate could join hands
against CHRIST, so those Miscreants can all conspire against Protestants: Thus
Dogs though they be fighting never so fiercely and tearing one another, yet if
an Hare run by, they can give over, and all run after her, Accordingly those
two sorts, though of Heterogeneous Principles, could be enough Homogeneous to
Assault Christ with their cavelling Interrogatories, wherein their putid
Hypocrisy (courting him at the first, and calling him Master, whom before they
had branded with that black name of Beelzebub) appeared, desiring him to show
them a SIGN. Them by all means, as more worshipful men than the Multitude, e'n
such as might well seem to merit such a signal and singular Favor. They must
by all means be the only Men to whom the Messiah must show a Sign from Heaven,
such as Josuah showed in commanding the Sun to stand still; such as Isaiah
showed in causing the Sun to run Retrogade ten Degrees, or such as Samuel
showed in calling for Thunder and Rain in Harvest, etc. or rather suchas Moses
showed in Commanding the Corn of Heaven to come down for daily bread to Israel,
John 6.31.32. and if the Messiah would do so much for them, none, they
pretended, should be more willing to own him: yet, all this while, they
intended Malice and Mischief against him, contemning his Miracles on Earth as
if done by Magic Art, etc. III. Herod also was of no better Bran than those,
who Desired to see Jesus for a long time, that he might show him some sign,
Luke 23.8. Such as would recreate his Eyes and his Mind in beholding, for he
looked upon our Lord as no better than a Common Juggler, that would undoubtedly
(to ingratiate himself with the King) show to him the very best Trick in his
Budget. Thus that Fox would gladly have been gratified, but he was notoriously
deceived, inasmuch as Christ was not so profuse of his Divine power as to put
it forth at the pleasure of bad men, mearly to satisfy their vain Curiosity.


But (II.) we do not only find (upon Scripture Record) wicked men Desirous to
see Signs, but even Godly men also, as (1.) Moses, Exodus 4.1. who had
Experience of his Brethrens rejecting him, and thrusting him from them, Exodus
2.14. Act. 7.27. and so they might Do again, If he had not something to show
what might well warrant his Extraordinary Call: therefore, he says, They will
not believe me, etc. that is, I dare not Venture upon a bare Divine Call and
Commission, unless some Divine signs be showed me for my farther Confirmation:
Hereupon God condescends to gratify him with the Two first miraculous Signs;
Thus, in the first Sign it is observable, That the turning of Moses Rod into a
Serpent, was a manifest Disclaiming of any Power borrowed from the Devil, in
all those wonders which he was to work with that Rod, for that Sign did
demonstrate Moses power over the Devil or Serpent, (his express Type) and
exercised against him. in handling him (though not without some Fear at first)
through a strengthened Faith at his Pleasure: Moses, indeed, took this Serpent
or Crocodile by the Tail only, 'Twas the Work of the MESSIAH to break the
Serpents Head: In this first Miraculous sign, the ROD showed the flourishing
State of Israel while Joseph was Lord of the Land of Egypt, and so held the
Rod or Scepter for their Comfort, but its Turning into a Serpent (or Dragon)
did plainly portend the Afflicted Estate of that Church, when Pharaoh that
Dragon, Ezekiel. 29.3.) with the Subtlety of the Old Serpent most grievously
oppressed Israel; and yet this Serpent must be turned back again into a Rod, to
signify that the afflicted Estate of the Church should be turned into a
flourishing Estate again by the Ministry of Moses (more glorious than that of
Joseph) who was called King in Jesurum, Deuteronomy. 33.5. (a Title above that of
Joseph) and who was commanded to take the Serpent by the Tail, Exodus 4.4. which
was dreadful to be done, because of the Innate Antipathy and probable Danger of
the Sting, yet Faith fortifies Moses's Heart against his Fear of this
formidable Creature, and carries him through the Difficulty of this Duty; he
does as God bids him, and had no Damage thereby, but the Serpent was turned
into a Rod again:

Moreover (2.) for Humbling Moses and helping him to know That this miraculous
Sign was not wrought by the Power of his own hand, therefore was his hand made
a Leprous one, to show, That such great Wonders could not be wrought by so
unclean a Hand, without the Help of a better and greater Hand than his own: and
yet the Accomplishment of this Second Sign was a farther Confirmation of
Moses's Faith, that Leprous hand of his (as white as Snow) must be returned to
its Natural ruddy Complexion again, Moses found the Leprosy in his Bosom, and
there also he immediately left it: This was to signify to him, That the sore
Estate of the Church should presently be cured, the Time of Her Healing now was
at Hand, tho she had lain long among the Pots (and so were not only as poor
despised Lepers covered over with a white Leprosy, but all blakned and
besmutch'd in the Bosom of Egypt their House of Bondage) yet God would restore
her again to a Sound Estate and give her Wings of Silver, and Feathers of
Yellow Gold, Psalm. 68.13. Thus the most high God does vouchsafe to stoop so low
to the meanness of Man, as to give Moses sign upon sign, as he had done before
to him, Exo 3.3.12. Giving him then a Double Confirmation (1.) That of the
Burning Bush, for the present: (2.) That of Serving God at Horeb for the
future. The like Favor the Lord likewise vouchsafes to us by giving us a
frequent Administration of the Lords Supper, whereby he does Seal and Seal
again the Confirmation of our Faith in the exceeding great and precious
Promises of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.4. God said to Moses, Such as will not Hear the
voice of the first Sign, they will believe the Voice of the latter sign, Exodus
4.8. Lekol Haoth, the voice of the Sign, plainly imports That every of God's
Signs has a Voice, and therefore the Psalmist faith, That they have not only a
Voice, but Words also. [Dibre othothau] he showed the Words of his Signs, So
it is in the Hebr. Psalm. 105.27. They speak not to our Eyes only, but to our
Ears also. Thus does Sacramental Signs, They have a Voice, as Abel's Blood is
said to have, Genesis 4.10. Hebr. 11.4. which yet speaks, How much more the
Blood of Christ, which speaks better things than the Blood of Abel, Hebr.
12.24. The sign has a Voice in it (as Exodus 4.10. Ezekiel. 1.28. and Job. 4.16.
God Annexing his Word with his Sign that it may be the better heard and
understood) because it (as it were) speaks that to the Eye, which words do to
the Eear; and on the contrary that which is plainly declared to the Ear, is
sometimes represented as if it were acted, and exhibited to the Eye, Gal. 3.1.
Thus the Administratiom of the Lords Supper is a lively Resemblance of Christ
crucified upon the Cross; and thus the stung Israelites were heald by looking
upon the Brazen Serpent advanced upon the Pole, Number. 21.8. 'Twas but Look and
live then, and, it is but Look and live now, John 3.16. As they that looked upon
their Sores, and not upon the Sign, Dyed for it, So, they that fix their Eyes
upon their Sins, and not upon their Savior, do Despair, and Dye: and, as they
that looked upon the Sign though but with one Eye, though but with a squint
Eye, or but with half an Eye, they were presently healed, So, those that look
up to Christ, though Weak in Faith, yet Faithful in Weakness, are sure to be
saved, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me All the Ends of the Earth, and be Saved, as the
Moon when she looks most fully in a direct line upon the Sun, then is she in
the Full, and most fully enlightened: This is the great Duty Required, to look
upon a Crucified Savior, Zech. 12.10. and Salvation (in the Extent of it) is
in the former Scripture propounded as the Grand Wages of that work and Duty and
that Universally to all Right Lookers both Jews and Gentiles.

The second Instance of a godly man (desirous to see Signs) is Gideon, as Moses
was the first, both of them reckoned among Gods Renowned Worthies. Heb.
11.20.32. This Gideon though but weak in Faith, yet was faithful in weakness,
and therefore is he dignified with a Room in that Court-Roll, of the most
radiant Stars in Scripture Horizon, yet his Faith though true, being weak,
required some Supporters, hence he says [ then show me a Sign [Judg. 6.17.
This Sign Gideon sought not, as that Adulterous and Evil Generation (the
Pharisees, etc.) did, out of Curiosity and Incredulity, but (as Moses before
him, etc.) for farther Confirmation of his Faith, concerning his call to so
great a Work, whereby he might be satisfied that it was God (and not man or
Devil) that called him: A good Cause, a good Call, and a good Conscience, will
make a good Courage, and all are necessary to a Captain or Soldier. Especially
the Lord looked upon him, as well liking his speech. v. 14. vouchsafes him a
Sign, v. 21. signifying, that the Midianites should be Destroyed without man's
labor, seeing Fire came out of the Rock (as before Water had done, Exodus
17.7.) without any humane help to consume the Sacrifice; therefore did Gideon
erect an Altar to the Lord, who had thus confirmed him (not only by these
Signs, v. 17. but by two other Signs, v. 36.37.) and thus comforted him against
his despondencies, and called the name of his Altar [Jehovah Shalom] the Lord
of Peace, v. 23.24. O that this Inscription were upon all our Hearts, as 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. The Lord of Peace give us peace always by all means, this would
answer all Doubts, and advance Faith above Fear. The sign of the Fleece, Gideon
desired to be doubled, not out of Incredulity to tempt God, but out of Humility
to be supported under the sense of his own weakness and unsuitableness to so
great an undertaking, against which he found marvelous Relief, in the double
Wonder of the Fleece, which intimated two things to him. 1. Concerning Israel.
2. Concerning Midian. (1.) As to Israel, that was represented by the Fleece,
being sometimes wet with the Dew of Heaven, and sometimes dry. (2.) As to
Midian, they had Fleeced Israel of all their good things, and pulled all the
Wool from off their backs, as the Shearer (in that Fleece) had don to the poor
Sheep, turning him naked out of doors into the open Fields; but now Gideon
(with the Lords help) should fleece Midian: the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon
should do as much for them, as they had done for Israel, pay them home in their
own Coin, and requite them to the full, after the Law of retaliation: hereby
Gideons Faith, weak at first, did gradually grow strong by those confirming
Signs; so comes he in as a Candidate in that Apostolical Catalogue, Heb 11.32.
Amongst the highest Favorites in the Court of Heaven: Besides those two Godly
Men ( Moses and Gideon, that desired confirming Signs) there be many others, to
whom God vouchsafed Signs, though undesired: as, the Tree of Life to Adam, Genesis
3.22. The Fire of God to Abraham, Genesis 15.17. The budding of the Rod to Aaron,
Number. 17.5. The Sun standing still to Joshuah, Josh. 10.13. And its running back
to Hezekiah. 2. Kings. 20.8, 9. Fiery Tongues to the Apostles, Acts 2.3, 4. A
Draught of Fish to Peter, John. 21.6. A Star to the three Wise men, Mat. 2.2.9.
Dumbness to Zechariah, Luke 1.20. and many other Signs to Believers, Mark
16.17, 18, 20.

Yet sometimes we find God forcing Signs, even upon wicked men, as upon that
branded one Ahaz, Isai. 7.10.11.12.14. etc. Though this was King Ahaz, wicked
with an accent, even he shall see, that while he was under the power of a
malicious Devil, yet has he to do with a most gracious God, who by a wonderful
condeseension will needs give him a Sign; it is an unheard of vouchsafement to
vouchsafe a Sign to such a notorious Unbeliever, this is more than Christ would
do to the Pharisees, whom he calls a bastardly Brood, for desiring a Sign, as
before. Matt. 12.39. [ Ask a Sign either in the Depth, etc.] Here was a fair
offer to a most foul Sinner, he might have had a sight of Heaven or of Hell for
a Sign, yet instead of an humble and thankful asking, he sordidly answered
(tantamont) I Will ask no askings, Ille try no Signs, I know a trick worth two of
that, I Will send to the Assyrians so help my self, God may keep his Signs to
himself, I crave no such courtesy at his hands, etc. Did ever any branded
Belialist or black-mouthed Bedlam speak worse to God than he in all this: no
wonder if God set a black brand upon him, saying, This is that Ahaz, 2. Chron.
28.22. Yet notwithstanding all this ingratitude and provocation, God (of
himself) gave Israel a Sign, Isa. 7.14. A singular Sign, a Sign both from above
and from beneath, inasmuch as this Immanuel, born of a Virgin, did join pure
Heaven and base Earth together, in his two Natures. Again, those Signs which
the Scripture mentions are manifold; as, 1. Such as be merely Natural, Genesis
1.14. 2. Praeternatural, beside the power of Nature in her ordinary production,
such are Prodigies in Heaven and Monsters on Earth, etc. 3. Supernatural, which
are either Divine (such as were the Miracles God wrought by the Prophets and
Apostles) or Diabolical, as the Lying Wonders. Deuteronomy. 13.2.3. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. and
Rev. 13.13. As there be Natural Signs, so there be Instituted Signs, to wit,
the Sacraments which are called Signs and Seals of the Covenant, Romans 4.11.
Moreover the Signs God shows to men, are either ordinary or extraordinary,
commnnia aut Insolita Signa: Except we see (not common, but) unusual signs, we
will not believe. John. 4.48. We have a frequent sight of Natural Signs, and of
Artificial Signs, the former hanging in the Heavens, exposed to open view, the
latter hanging over every House (almost) in this great City, yea and such signs
as be significant, indeed some Signs are significant, ex primaria intention
instituentis, purposely and primarily Instituted to signify something, whether
the Institutor be God or Man. God is the only Institutor of all significant
signs in Sacred things, as he Instituted the two Sacraments under the Law, and
the two Sacraments under the Gospel; other significant Signs or Ceremonies,
which are only man's Institution ( and never came into the mind of God, Jer.
7.31. Nor out of the Mouth of God, Deuteronomy. 4.1.2.) ought justly to be exploded.
All Divine Worship must have Divine Warrant, and Divine Institutions may not be
mingled with Humane Inventions: This is to Plow in Gods Field, with an Ox and
an Ass, and to sow therein mingled Seeds (even Tares as well as Wheat,) and to
worship the Lord in a Linsy-Woolsy Garment, Deuteronomy. 22.9.10.11. There be also
significant signs in Civil and common things (as well as Sacred) whose proper
and primary end in the purpose of their Institutor (man) is to signify
something, as the Signs at every Door in the City, and at every Inn in the
Country, and the Escucheons at Great men's Houses: And there be other Signs,
which be significant only by consequence and secondarily, not essentially and
from the primary purpose of their Institutors, Thus Steeples and Posts etc. may
signify by their shadows what time of the day it is, which is not the proper
and peculiar purpose for which they are made, or use of them, as is of Clocks
and Dials, it is a secundary use only.

But to insist only upon extraordinary Signs and Wonders (called signa insolita
unusual Marvels) according to my present Design: consider, that as their Ends
so their Kinds are various, 1. Their Ends are from their Author and Original)
manifold: as, 1. They are intentionally designed, by the great and sole
Wonder-working God, for the confirming of that Truth, once delivered to the
Saints, Jude 3. Mark 16.17.18.20. and Hebr. 2.4. Those extraordinary Signs, are
well called, the Swadling-bands of the Infant Church, therefore was she
principally Dignified and Fortified with Miracles, always and only while and
when she was young, tender, and needed some corroboration: It Is true, there were
some sprinklings of Miracles upon other emergent occasions, etc. But the main
body of them were wrought first by Moses and Joshuah; Moses was the first and
new giver of the Law, then the Church in the Wilderness (so called Act. 7.38.)
was but a weak Infant, so needed those Signs and Wonders, which Moses wrought,
both in Egypt Act. 7.36. and in the Wilderness, Ps. 105.39.40.41. with 27. to
38. Yet none were wrought after she got into Canaan, though Joshuah did in
conveying them thither. 2. By Elijah and Flisha, who were the two new Restorers
of the Law, (which amounts almost to a Giver of it, so tantamont a Lawgiver)
then the Church was newly Born again, and so stood in need of a second
swaddling, by many more Miracles, after her Recovery from her worse Relaps in
Ahabs time, etc. 3. By Christ and his Apostles, who were both new Givers and
Restorers of the Gospel inasmuch as the Gospel was preached in Paradise, Genesis
3.15.) Then did the Doctrine of the Gospel by diverse Miracles, as by the Wings
of the Wind, fly abroad and was divulged at first all the World over; and it is
very remarkable, though John Baptist came in the spirit and power of Elijah,
yet did this Type do no Miracles, as the Anti type did, John 10.41. least he
should be mistaken for the Messiah, Luke 3.15. who was to do many, John 7.31.
and 11.47. Yet John was a burning and a shining Lighn, John 5.35. burning in
himself and shining to others, he Thundered in his Doctrine, and Lightened in his
Life without Miracles, therefore was he so much admired, as a great Reformer in
a most Deformed Age. Christ and his Apostles were all Wonder-worksecured by it
while it is tender, and it is often watered, but ers, which was as an Hedge to a
young Plant, that is when once grown up, the Hedge is removed, and the watering
left off. Hence we say to the Romanists, That all the Miracles of the New
Testament, are ours of the Reformed Religion, inasmuch as they all did
Demonstrate the same Doctrine, which we do defend, We need no new Miracle, to
conform an old Truth that has been before so confirmed: He that now requires
a Miracle, is therefore himself a Miracle. The Establishment of our present
Reformation is and will be that great Miracle, which we are in these times to
look for: it is that wonderful Work which former Ages did despair of, the
present Admireth, and the future will stand amazed at: concerning the Lying
Wonders the Romish Church so much boasts of, I have discovered the fallacy of
them at large, in my Discovery of the person and period of Antichrist from page
48. to 55. to which I refer the Reader.

The Second End of Extraordinary Signs and Wonders is for Awakning a droufy,
sluggish and secure World, which will not know the Signs of the Times, Matt.
16.3. yea, and for Rousing up the Slumbring Virgins of the Church, both the
Wise and the Foolish, As the Midnight Cry did. Matt. 25.2, 5. 6. This is
certainly the great End why the great Wonder-working God works Wonders and
shows signs such as are Extraordinary and Universally astonishing, to Alarm,
as with those Trumpets, both Saints and Sinners, that none might be surprised,
He therefore does most graciously sound his Trumpet in and by them, that his
Judgments may not come as a Thief in the Night upon us, as he has often foretold
us, Matthew. 24.44. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. Revel. 3.3. and 16.15. The Thief gives no
Warning, but comes unexpectedly: So does not a Gracious God who gives Warning,
for which Charles the Great blesses God for Rebuking his Sluggishness out of
his Tender Mercy by those his Signs, as a Blazing Star, etc. As I show in my
little Book of this late Comet, page 22. It Is undoubtedly most dear Divine
Clemency to give timely Warnings of Approaching Judgments, for, Humane Calamity
the more sudden, the more gricvous it is, as (1.) It amates, (or Daunts,) and
Exanimates a man, as the sudden Storm does the Mariner, and as the Devil
designed Job's Messengers should do him, in coming, one at the Heels of
another, so unexpectedly upon him. 2. It surprises him at unawares, he stands
not upon his Guard, so can no more prevent it, than unweildly Eglon, could
Ehud's deadly thrust.

As Signs and Wonders are Various, 1. In their Ends, so, 2. In their Kinds; as,
1. There are Miracula and Miranda. Many things are miracula, much marvelled at,
as exceeding the common Course of Providence which yet are not, Ex natura Rei,
Miracula, of the proper Nature of Miracles. The latter exceeds the Power of
all created Agents, but the former does not so, A true and proper Miracle is
the Stopping or Altering the common Course of Nature, and it is a producing of
some such E^fects as do transcend Natures Law, Power, and Capacity: it is
indeed, an Extraordinary operation of the Almighty Creator in Nature, either
without the Interposition and Concurrence of Second Causes, or Above their
natural Capacity: In a word, it is the production of Something out of Nothing,
either as to Matter or as to Manner of production, so that the Almighty can
only work true Miracles either in himself or in his Servants impour'd by him.
2. There are mira ceu miranda, marvelous Works and Wonders, 1. of God's
Working, and 2 of the Devil's, who is God s Ape herein, and who by his
Impression, which, through his Angelical Nature, he is able to make upon
matter, can do wonderful things to cheat the blind world, as he did Pharaoh and
the Egyptians by his Vassals the Sorcerers. But he cannot work such a Wonder
as is a Miracle. The Lending Power will never accommodate the Borrowing party
with such a Power as may be prejudicial to his own holy and glorious Design.
The only wise Creator will never gratify his Creatures, nay the worst of his
Creatures, such are all Sorcerers) for any such end as either to obstruct his
WORK, or to cheat the World Hereupon Austin, de Unit ate Feels. cap. 16. says
excellently, That the pretended Miracles of his time were either figmenta
mendacium Hominum, aut Portenta fallacium Spirituum, either the Forgeries of
lying Men, or the Portents of Deceitful Devils: for a true Miracle is the work
of an Infinite Power, whether primarily or Secondarily performed: and hence
David says. That God only does wondrous Things, Ps. 72.18. Indeed God sometimes
uses men as moral Instruments, but never as natural Causes in working
Wonders, which surpass the Power of Nature. Hence also Nebuchadnezzar, when
God drove him from men by his own Courtiers and subjects, and so had tamed him,
and taken him a loop or link lower, by making him graze among the Beasts,
himself becomes a Catholic Preacher to the World, publicly proclaiming the
Great God to be the only Author of Signs and Wonders; It Is the Lord only that
shows them, And they are all His, with an Emphasis, and not only So, but they
are [Rab Rabbin] Great many, and Magnificent, as the word signifies, Dan. 4.2,
3.33, 34, 37. Mark how he enlarges upon this point again and again, and he
calls God's great Acts toward him, (in his Expulsion from his Throne) 1.
SIGNS, as they did signify Gods Wisdom Power and Justice to him; and 2.
WONDERS, as worthy to be Wondered at by him, when yet in the Highest Ruff of
his Pride and Prosperity, should have both a Vision and Execution of his
Downfall from the Highest Pinnacle of his Arch Triumphant: Mark, Nebuchadn.
hereupon celebrates God's Kingdom only, had David handled this, he had added
(as in his Hilled Gadol, or great Gratulatory Psalm, the 136.) He does often,
His Mercy endures for ever, which is the foot and burden of the whole Song,
not as an idle tautologie, or vain Repetition, but as a most notable intimation
of the Saints unsatisfiableness in praising GOD, for his never-failing mercy,
his Covenant-mercy, his special mercy in CHRIST (who was the most signal Sign,
Isa. 7.14.) in and by whom God only works wondrous things. Ps. 72.17.18.
Where David blesses God, for all the forementioned Benefits by the Lord
Christ, of whom his Son Solomon was but a Type: hereof Nebuchadnezar was
Ignorant, However it is admirable, he could go thus far, as to acknowledge the
Lord Jehovah to be the true and wonder-working-God, whereby he testified his
Repentance in his admiring (as in a Rapture) the mighty and matchless power of
God, he was constrained to give God the Glory of all his wondrous Works, hence
some think he was truly and thoroughly Converted here, seeing he falls so kindly
under the mighty hand of God, whereby (as he penitently acknowledges) those
great Signs and Wonders, were wrought concerning him, that such a mighty
Monarch (as he was) should be chased from his Kingdom, yea and from among men,
and live among brute Beasts, feeding upon Grass as they fed (who had formerly
fed on the choicest fare, the chiefest Cates and Delicates in the World) and
that for 7 long years, yea deprived of his Humane Understanding all this time
(oh that the proudest Potentates of the World, would well ponder this wonderful
Work) and yet after all this, be restored to his right Intellectuals, and to
his Royal Dignitys. How well does he style them Gods great Signs and Wonders
for who but God can look upon the proud and bring them low, Job 40.11, 12, 13.
God did abate his Pride, and abase his Power, to bring him to Repentance (...)
God has a most powerful Eye, both for Eversion as here, and for Conversion as
^nk. 22.61. and here (probably) also. The whole work being a supernatural
change both forward and backward, outward and inward) and every circumstance
(occasion, manner, degree and time, etc.) seeming no less then a new Creation.

Again 3ly. The Wonders of Gods working are either Ordinary or Extraordinary.
1. Ordinary, God often shows himself maximum in minimis, the greatest Artist in
the smalest matters, not only in that miraculous plague of Lice (made of the
Dust) upon the Land of Egypt, which so fainted under these poor Vermin (armed
with the power of God) that they were forced to cry out, This is the very
Finger of GOD, Exodus 8.17, 18, 19. wherein it is very Admirable to observe how
this Act of Omnipotentency in such base and vile Creatures, as are Dust and
Lice consounded the Imposture and Power of Jannes and Jambres 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
yea, and of the Devil their Master) yet the Great God was highly honored
thereby, for, it is said, All the dust of the Land was made Lice by Moses, ver.
17. then the Magicians had no matter lest them to try their Diabolical Art upon
unless they could create Dust, and suppose they had some Du^^ left them for an
Experiment, yet, though they stretched ou^ their hands with Rods, and did their
utmost Endeavors, The could not, verse. 18. They could neither Create Dust
where there was none, nor, where there was some, convert it into Lice* Neither
could these Magicians save their own Skins, etc.

Thus it plainly Appears, That the power and Providence of God extends even
to the lowest and vilest things in the Creation, and that God can, after a
Miraculous manner, f^^ the Greatest power either of Men or Devils therewith at
(...) Pleasure. And this is Gods showing himself the greatest Operator in the
least of his Operations, and not only, I say, in extraordinary, but also even
in ordinary Cases: Indeed the (...), the eternal Power and God head is manifest
and knowable in the whole Creation, yea in the Decimo-Sexto's as well as in the
Great Folio's thereof: Every Creature has Aliquid Dei aeque ac aliquid Nihili,
Something of God in it as well as something of Nothing; otherwise it could not
be said to be created out of Nothing by the Creator, and many times we Admire
that there should be more of Art and Activity, in a Dwarf, Be or Ant, than in
a Giant, or Elephant, most great Souls are sometimes couched in most little
Bodies. Amd the truth is, True and real Wonders are God's daily work (upon
which Account they may be called Ordinary) as I show in my Crown of a
Christian, upon that Book with Three leaves (the Creation of God) viz. Heaven,
Earth or Sea, Psalm. 135.6. There be Wonders without number in all those Three,
Job 9.10. Such as the Wisest may well wonder at, and more observable than
either the most are aware of, or affected with: It Is manifest, That Jehovah is
the true and only Thaumaturgus the great and ordinary Wonder-worker: To omit
the Wonders of the Creation (for which see Psalm 136, 4, 5, 6, 7. and my little
Book aforesaid upon Meditation, page 125. to 145. and give but a Specimen, or
small Scantling of them: (1.) It Is a Wonder to be wondered at, How the Bones
grow in her that is with Child, Eccles. 11.5. Solomon himself, who was Natures
Secretary, wonders at this; and so did David before him, Psalm. 139.14. 2. The
double Motion of the Lungs, called Systole and Diastole, and of the Pulse in
man's Body, is a Wonder which that Famous Physician Galen, tho an Heathen, was
so amazed with, that he would needs offer Sacrifices to that God whom he knew
not, who yet as he supposed must be the Original of that Wonder, 3. The
Strength of the Nether Chap is a Wonder, whereof no man could ever give a
Sufficient Natural Reason. Nor 4. of the Heat in the Stomach for Digestion, of
all Meats in Succum and Sanguinem, into juice and Blood in a little time. Nor.
5. Of the various Colors in the Rainbow: Nor, 6. of the Flux and Reflux of
the Sea: Nor, 7. of the Magnetic Virtues of the Loadstone; to let pass many
others, that are Wonders all, though ordinary: No nor 8. of this common case,
that Chaff should be so cold, as to keep Snow (hid within it) from melting, and
yet so warm as to hasten the Ripning of Apples which are coverd with it. Gods
wonders are without Number: But 2. Instances more. The 9th wonder is, God's
turning water into Wine, as his Daily Work. It Is true, this is called, The
Beginning of Christ's Miracles, Joh. 2.11. and 'twas a mighty Miracle, yea
better than that of Moses, for, the Giver of the Law turned Water into Blood,
but the Giver of the Gospel turned Water into Wine; the former could not be
drank without danger of dying, the latter was delightful to Drink, and
Heart-Reviving: yet this VVonder of turning water into Wine, is a daily work
with God, as Augustine excellently observes, Inasmuch as the Rain water which
falls upon the Root of the Vine and nourishes the Tree, Does in time turn into
the Grape, The Juice, Blood or Wine is originally Water. In the 10th and last
place, Augustine excellently also makes Gods multiplying a grain of Corn, sown
in the Earth, to 30, 60, or 100 Corns, a more miraculous wonder than Christ's
multiplying the few Loves to feed 5000 persons: his words are, mirabilior est
Grani in Terra multiplicatio, quam illa quinque panum; Tract. 24. in Joh. 6.9,
10, 11. yet was that miracle of the 5 loaves exceeding marvelous, Inasmuch as
the Loaves, by a strange kind of Arithmetic, were Multiplied by Division, as
they were distributed among the Multitude, and an Addition to them was made by
Substraction: As each person had his piece subtracted from the Loaves, yet were
they augmented thereby: Notwithstanding all this. That Reverend Father prefers
the common Experience of every Husbandman, the multiplying of one grain, as a
greater wonder:

Thus, something may be known of God in the whole Creation, Romans 1.19. and much
more in Divine Providence, God never leaves himself without Witness, Acts
14.17. yet, leaves he all men without excuse, (...), without any Apology, Romans
1.20. for though natural light is not available to bring fallen Man into the
Favor of God, yet it is sufficient to convince him of Moral wickedness both
against God and Man: oh then what pity it is, that Christ should still say, Ye
will not believe, except ye see Signs and Wonders, whereas men live in the very
midst of many such like Signs and wonders (as are the aforesaid: etc. yet, they
come not up to so much as amounts to an Old Testament Faith, of Believing in
GOD, (though a New Testament Faith is requisite also, as Christ says, Ye
believe in God, believe also in Me, John 14.1.) but are Intoxicated with
Atheism, and live according to their Lusts, as if they were all become David's
Fools, which say in their Heart, There is no God, though they Daily see God
sufficiently sealing up his General Goodness to Man, in doing him Good pro
victu and amictu, bestowing upon him Daily Bread and Daily Clothing.

2. Besides those Ordinary, God has also his Extraordinary Wonders: The (...),
the very great and Wonderful Works of GOD, Act. 2.11. for, though the Great GOD
does limit Nature to her Common Products, yet will he never limit himself, but
Will Do whatever pleases him, Psalm. 115.3. without either the Help or the
Hindrance of any Whether it be Miracles or Marvels, or Ordinanary Occurrences:
As to the first of those, I have spoke so largely already, and shall only add,
that there were never any Miracles for Weight, Measure and Number (for God is
said to do all things pondere mensura and Numero) equal to those in the time of
the Gospel: none of those either before or under the Law, can be parralel'd
with those under the Gospel, upon all those three accounts, they are not like
them for weight, measure and number, It may easily be Demonstrated how far
Law-Miracles come short of Gospel Miracles, in all these respects. To Instance
only in that one asorenamed; Moses indeed turned Water into Blood, but the
Messiah turned Water into Wine, and how much the latter exceeds and excels the
former, is obvious to every ordinary understanding, inasmuch as the former was
made pestiferous the latter salutiferous Drink: therefore the captious and
carnal Jews were exceedingly irrational, in rejecting those Miracles the
Messiah wrought amongst them, and requesting some such as Moses had wrought for
their Forefathers (as giving them Manna from Heaven, etc.) Seeing those of the
Messiah did far surmount those of Moses both in quality and quantity and in
ponderesity, Inasmuch as that Manna Moses gave their Forefathers melted,
putrified, bred Worms, and perished in the using, but the Messiah gave himself
the true Bread from Heaven, to feed them up to Everlasting Life, his own Flesh
for them to eat, and his own Blood for them to Drink, a Meat and Drink that
must last (without putrefying) so long as the World does last, Manna was but
the Type, which is always the lesser, Christ is the Antitype, which is always
the greater and better; If our Savior say of himself, that he is greater than
Solomon, Matthew. 12.42. We may likewise say of him, he is greater and better
than Manna. Moreover, that which more aggravated the Jews Contempt of Christ's
person and his Miracles, is, that their knowledge of Moses's Miracles they had
upon Credit only, they received it by Tradition from their Forefathers: But as
to the Miracles of our Blessed Messiah, they received them not by Hearsay, but
were personal Eyewitnesses of them, therefore does the Apostle Peter, make his
Solemn Appeal to their own Knowledge and Consciences, Act. 2.22. So that he
leaves them no liberty of doubting, for CHRIST was by so many manifest
Demonstrations Approved of GOD (to be his grand Embassad or to the World) and
should therefore be also approved of men, especially of those men who could say
[Hisce oculis ejus miracula Vidimus] we have seen with our very Eyes, the
wonderful Works which he wrought, and which never any Man before him did Work.
John 9.32. No not Moses whom they called their Master, so that even the very
Strangers in Jerusalem did know that Christ was mighty in Word and Deed ( as
well as Moses Act. 7.22.) both before God and before all the People, in whose
very presence Christ wrought his Miracles. Luke 24.18.19. for he did nothing in
a corner, as Act. 26.26 but before multitudes of Spectators and Eyewitnesses
thereof. As to the third, to wit, Ordinary Occurrences which comes to pass
commonly and usually by the power of Nature (and often by the dexterity of Art)
is not my designed Subject in this short Discourse, though there be whole
bundles of Wonders, even in the common course of Natural (if not Artificial)
productions, as I have Instanced in ten particulars aforementioned, which at
this time may be sufficient. As to the second, to wit, Marvels (which are
certain middle things, betwixt Miracles and Ord inary Occurrences) those are
the principal matter intended to be Discussed in this little Treatise (which
though it be little in its Bulk) yet Treats upon the great things of GOD.
It Is a Theological Maxim, that an increated liberty is an Attribute of the
Divine Essence, and this being Infinite, (as well as Increated) cannot be
limited by any of its objects, but Acts freely and out of his mere good
pleasure, and not out of any necessity of Nature. Ps. 115.3. Dan. 4.25. Jer.
27.5. and 18.4. etc. Hereupon the Great God, being a Free Agent may sometimes
step out of his common Road, and ordinary course of Providence, and so work
beyond the reach of Nature, and above the skill of Art, to the producing of not
only Miracles (as above) but also Marvels or Wonders. Thus God is Described to
be one that does great things and unsearchable, yea marvelous things without
number, Job 5.9. Thus Eliphaz here spoke the Truth, concerning the wonderful
Wisdom and Almighty Power of God; and Job himself does readily set his Seal to
that great Truth, Job 9.10. He is a God Glorious in Holiness, fearful in
Praises, and doing Wonders, Exodus 15.11. It Is a most stately Description of
God, crying who is like thee, and David cries also Who, is a God like our great
God, a God that does Wonders. Ps. 77.13.14. Sua mirabilia sunt omnimodo
memorabilia, He makes his marvelous Works, all worthy to be remembered. Ps. 111
4

In Sacred Scripture, we find Miracles and Marvels or Wonders, are
promiscuously taken for each other, yet are they not convertible Terms: All
Miracles are indeed Marvels, but [vice versa] on the other hand all Marvels are
not Miracles: there is this difference [Ex part Rei] betwixt them, Miracles do
exceed the power of Created Agents, but Marvels do not so, yet are they
extraordinary Productions of Divine Providence, overruling Natural Agents: God
is said to work three ways: 1st. (...) according to Nature: 2ly. (...) besides
Nature: 3ly (...) above Nature; but never (as some say) (...) directly against
Nature: The ordinary products of Providence, are according to Nature:
Extraordinary Miracles are above Nature: and extraordinary Marvels are only
beside Nature; but should the Great God put forth his power against Nature,
Nature would be destroyed, and the Destruction of Nature would be the
Destruction of the World, for it is as a round chain consisting of many links
all linked one to another) and if one of those links be loosed, the whole chain
falls in pieces and becomes useless: As to those Marvels or Wonders, which are
beside Nature (the present Subject of my Discourse.) A right understanding may
be had hereof, in this manner; we must suppose the God of Nature is above
Nature, so can overrule it at his pleasure: No Natural Agents can possibly. Act
without the leave of Supernatural Providence. The Fire cannot burn (as in the
Case of the Bush, Exodus 3.2. and of the three Nobles of Babylon, Dan. 3.28.)
nor can the water drown (as in the Case of the Red Sea and of Jordan) without
(as Philosophy phraseth it) a Divine concurse: God is the primus motor, and his
Providence is the primum mobile of all Created things, and have their
Dependency upon their Creator (both as to being and as to motion and as to
all-things, Act 17.25.28.) and no created being can make any motion, more than
the lesser Wheels can move in a Clock or Watch, without the Impulsion of the
greater Wheels thereof: yet still we must know, when this Great Creator works
any Marvels (yea or Miracles) he still holds Nature as a Pen or Pencil, in
his Hand, and draws his own Models or Platforms (either Ordinary or
Extraordinary) according to his own pleasure, yea it is all one with GOD whether
he act with it or without it, by a power that is Almighty, All sufficient (of
it self) and infinitely Superior to it, for he is under no obliging necessity
of being confined to use Nature as his Pen or Pencil. Though this general
Discourse has (beyond my expectation) swollen much upon my Hand, yet have I all
along judged it necessary to say all that I have said, for a fuller Explication
of my present Subject (which ought to be distinctly discoursed) before any
Application can be made thereof: therefore to avoid any farther prolixity, I
shall (for brevity sake) confine my self to three Heads. 1st. The Sorts. 2ly.
The Scenes. 3ly. The Significations of those marvelous Signs and wonders, etc.
1. Of the Sorts or Kinds of them: 1. Philosophy tells us of three sorts of
Signs: 1st. Such as are memorative (called (...)) which recalleth something
that is past, to present remembrance, as the Rainbow is a standing Sign and
Monument of the past Flood, and as that stately and lofty Pillar, lately
Erected nigh London Bridge, is a Monument (so called) of the late dreadful
burning of London. 2ly. Such Signs as are Demonstrative (called (...)) which do
show something that is present, as Smoke does Demonstrate some Fire to be
present, and the Bush, that Wine is then and there to be sold, and such like,
as are Ordinary; and so those Signs Extraordinary, which accompanied the
primitive Believers: Mark 16.17.20. did all signify Gods presence co-working
with them, working wonderful Works, both in Preachers and Hearers, etc. 3ly.
Such Signs as are Predictive (called (...)) which presageth or foresheweth
something that is Future, and will come to pass, as redness of the Sky, at the
Evening, betokens a fair day approaching; but in the morning the same is a Sign
of Rain or Wind, Mat. 16.3. This is proved and approved, by Universal
Experience, the probable Reason whereof in the course of Nature, may be this,
the Setting-Sun carries off those red Clouds all along with it, out of our
Horizon, into the other Hemisphere, and there disperseth them, either to a
Consumption or to a Rainy day unto our Antipodes, but the Rising Sun, carries
the Red Clouds up alost along with it, into our Meridian, and then dissolves
them into Wind or Rain; not unlike to this, is that Prognostic Monastic of
the Poet, from the various color of the Firmament.

Caeruleus pluvias, Denuntiat Igneus Euros. A watery Sky foretells Rain, and
a red fiery Sky foresignifies high, boisterous and tempestuous Winds. These
(and such like) are called natural and ordinary Prognostics, and not at all
unlawful in their own nature, for CHRIST did not reprove the Pharisees and
Sadduces (in Matt. 16.3.4.) for their being weather-wise (though it belonged
not to their Profession) and for their discerning the Face of the Sky,
concerning fair and foul Seasons, to the more aptly ordering their secular
Occasions, he did not blame them for this absolutely but comparatively only,
because they could be so skilful in the Book of Nature, yet were so unskilful
in the Book of Scripture; saying, certainly, you Leaders of the People cannot
be ignorant what the Scripture testifies, that the Messiah shall make the Deaf
to Hear, the Dumb to Speak, the Dead to Live, etc. Such [signa insignia]
Wonders has been wrought by me, as never were seen or heard of, and ye your
selves cannot but acknowledge it, John 11.47. Besides, the Testimonies 1. of
Angels. 2. Of the Star. 3. Of the Dove. 4. Of my Father. 5. Of John Baptist. 6.
Of the very Devils. Yea 7ly. Of the Multitude, yet cannot ye Discern the Signs
of the Times. Ye must all therefore be (says our Lord) either a sort of
sordid sorry Sots, or deep Dissemblers and Hyperbolical Hypocrites, or both, in
sceming so critical to enquire after the Messiah, so curious to search after
the Truth, which ye are neither careful to know, nor conscientious to obey.
Yet there be other Signs, which are) besides those Natural and Ordinary, even
preternatuacl and extraordinary, which are prognostics also of future things,
Neither is it Unlawful, to pass a General Judgment, tho a Particular without a
Special Gift may be) upon them, as will be made more Distinctly manifest in the
Application of the whole. Again, Those prognostic or presaging SIGNS are
Reduced to Three Heads, They are either 1. Omens, or 2. Monsters, or 3.
Prodigies. As to the 1. to Omit all the Omens observed by the Superstitious in
a way of Divination, as, Sneezings, Valentines, stumbling upon the Threshold in
the Morning at first going out, stepping over the Threshold with the left leg
first, or knocking the Knees or Legs one against another, even to a Fall, etc.
The Superstition whereof I have Demonstrated in my Antidote against Popery,
page 14, to 18. However Dreams appear to be ominous either for Good or for
Evil, or for both, not only out of the Platonic, Stoic and Pythagorean
Philosophers, but also out of the Scriptures as in Pharoah's, young Samuels,
Daniels, and Joseph's Dreams, there was an Omen in them all: now, They are
either 1. Natural, and such are very Deceitful, Eccles. 5.7. So not to be
Regarded unless, for such and such Ends, as I have mentioned in my Treachery of
the Heart. page 92.2. Diabolical such as (some supposes) Pilate's Wives was,
whereby the Devil might endeavor to hinder the Work of our Redemption. 3.
Divine Dreams, which sometime be doubled, and so do make a deep impression, as
that of Pharaoh, etc. Gen 41.1, 5. etc. Thus it is said, God came to Abimelech
in a Dream, Genesis 20.3. This was frequent under all the Old Testament, and at
the beginning of the New: but now since God has spoke his Will, in his Word, to
us by his Son, Hebr. 1.1.2. We must not now expect any New Revelation about any
Divine Truth from God in Dreams: yet possibly God may communicate some
Information about Humane Events to his Godly Servants by Dreams: Instance
Monica's Dream concerning her Son Augustine while he was a Manichee, That her
Son should return to the true Faith of his Mother, which she construed as a
good Omen, and accordingly the Lord heard her Prayers and Tears for him, and
caused him to return: There be sundry others in Ecclesiastical History which I
pass-by, and pitch only upon blessed Pareus's Dream, related by his Son Philip
writing his Fathers Life, as a Preface to his Comments. Saying this, I dreamed
in the year 1618. (The very year of a great Comets appearing,) that I saw all
Hildeberg in a thick Smoke, but the Princes Palace all on a light fire:
Hereupon I Prayed, Oh most merciful GOD! divert from us this most sad Omen, and
save thy Sarepta from these Desolations by the Enemy, both within and without.
Thus the Good man dreamed, and thus he prayed, but the Decree was gone forth,
and shortly after executed acccording to his Dream. Yet this is a most certain
Truth, That all Dreams are not significant, much less have any thing Divine in
them: Therefore it is not only Folly but iniquity also to put such an Universal
Stress upon them, as if God always warn us in and by them concerning future
Events: This is not only Vain Curiosity, to search into Secrets, but also a
Sinful Superstition.

The Second Predictive Sign are Monsters, so called a monstrando, because they
do premonstrate some future Events, though it be not every ones part to assign
them in particular; as before the Destruction of Jerusalem, a Cow did bring
forth a Lamb; the Destruction of the City was presaged by it, etc. Philosophers
tells us, That there are no Monsters properly among Plants, but only among
Animals, and among them, It Is not barely Excess, as in Giants, or Defect of
Quantity, as in Pygmees) that make a Monster: but when the Animal does so much
vary from the Right Disposition of its own Kind, as to make it either Horrible
or Miserable, then it is a Monster. Those Animals are Monsters, that have two
Heads and but one Heart, which is the Fountain of Life: this makes but one
Animal, yet Monstrous: but, If there be two hearts as well as Two Heads, This
make 2 Monstrous Animals, for in such it is observed, when the one sleeps, the
other can wake, when the one laughs, the other can weep, when the one Dies,
the other may over-live, as Buchanan observes, Rer. Scot. lib. 3. Some,
indeed, do make those excesses and Defects of Nature (mentioned, Lev. 21.17. to
23.) monstrous marks of Disgrace, as if Nature had See her black Brand of
Disgrace upon them, and as if those monstrous Deformities of the Body did
Demonstrate the like Defects and Deformities in the Soul: It Is true, concerning
those that are crook'd-back'd (which is one of those brands of Nature mentioned
in Levit. 21.) Plutarch says, They do [Nemesin propriam portare] carry upon
their Backs their own Destinies, and so, indeed, our crook-back'd Richard did,
etc. But the Tenderness of God in the Levitical Law, toward such is very
observable, that tho none such must be admitted to offer up fire-offerings to
the Lord, lest they should pollute Gods Sanctuary, both as they were to be
Types of a Comely Christ, Ps. 45.3. and Cant. 5.10. etc. and as they should be
better than their Sacrifices, which were to have no blemish, Levit. 22.20. The
Offerer must be no more blemished than the Offering, yet might they eat the
Bread of their God, Levit. 22.22. which shows us, That our Involuntary
weaknesses shall not Debarr us of the Seals and Benefits of Christ: But the
other Priests for Voluntary Uncleanness were Deprived of that Privilege which
the Deformed ones (wherein they were not blamable) had Admission unto, Levit.
22.3. yea further, The Scripture tells us, That Halting Jacob was true
hearted, that Blear eyed Leah was both fruitful and faithful, Stammering Moses
was the meekest man upon Earth, and Mephibosheth tho he was lame, yet was he
loyal, etc. as if the God of Nature did commonly compensate and Recompense all
the Defects of the Body, with a better and more blessed Surplussage in the Sl:
But to pass-by all the Defects in Nature, and Speak only of the Excess, which
Philosophy phancyeth cannot make a Monster, Seeing it is no more than the
Highest Vigor of Nature, wherein she exerteth her utmost strength for
producing of Giants, yet those prodigious mighty men, the Scripture mentions,
Genesis 6.4. Numb. 13.28, 33. Deuteronomy. 1.18. and 3.11. Amos 2.9, etc. were probably
Monsters, being both monstrous in their Manners, and in their Mightiness: Some
as tall as Oaks and Cedars, Amos 2.9 and one of them, viz. Og, was so massy,
that a Bed of wood was not strong enough to bear the Vast Weight of his
overgrown Body in turning himself upon it, but he must have a Bed-stead of
Iron, and that too, that it might be as a just Proportion to his Bulky Body,
must be fifteen foot, that is, five yards eight Inches long and seven foot
broad, Deuteronomy. 3.11. yea so great some of them were, that the Greatness of the
great God himself is ascribed to them, compare Numb. 13.33. with Isai 40.22.
where other men were said to be as Grashopppers, poor, low, contemptible things
in comparison of those Monstrous Giants, as well as in comparison of the Mighty
God.

So that Theology (more noble than Philosophy) doubts not to call that Race
of Rephaims Monsters, such as great Goliath, who could not only bear and wear
Weapons which (at the least) weighed above two hundred pounds weight, and walk
with them, but he was able to weild them and to War with them. 1. Sam. 17.4, 5,
6, 7. Oh what a prodigious Monster was this man, Armed Cap-a-pee, and stalking
in the Field like a whole walking Armory. However that Giant (called [ish
middah] a man of mighty measure) having twenty four Fingers and Toes. 2. Sam.
21.20. 1. Chron. 20.25. may well enough be deemed a Monster among men, yet
notwithstanding those two mighty Monsters aforenamed went into the Field like
Thunder and Lightning (defying the God of Israel) they went off (both of them)
like sooty smoke, and stinking Snuff: Now the God of Nature never sent any of
these mighty Monsters into the World, in those ancient times, but it was to
praemonstrate that much Rapine, Violence, Arbitrary Oppression and Tyranny
should be perpetrated by them amongst men, as Nimrod, that mighty one or Giant
(according to the Greek) that Magnifico, or Grand Rebel (as Hebr. Nimrod
signifies) and that first Babelbuilder, was a crafty and cruel Hunter (not so
much of Beasts as) of men, whom he sacrificed to his Lusts, he was the first
who (after the Flood) set up an Arbitrary and Violent Domination over Men
(pursuing those that would not submit to his Tyrannical Yoke) with no more
pity than Hunters show to Beasts, which they Hunt for their Pot or Spit:
Hereupon Tyranny is in Scripture alluded to Hunting. Jer. 16.16. Lam. 4.18
Monsters in magnitude prove mostly Monsters in manners too, this Nimrod who was
a Rebel to God his Superior (as his name signifies) was also a Tyrant to Men
that were his Inferiors, having a Belluine not a Genuine greatness: and
though our present Times does not produce such litteral Monsters, as the
ancient Times did, yet God knows) we have too many mystical and moral Monsters,
both Inferiors who become Monsters in Iniquity, ( none such Sinners and
matchless among men) and Superiors who become Monsters in Tyranny, grinding
the Faces of their poor people, both those sorts of Monsters do premonstrate
the Judgments of God against them, they are linked together: but above all, the
greatest Monster, that this day affords is that Behemoth, that Beast of
Beasts, the Antichr^st who may well be called a Monster (according to the
Philosophers definition of it) A Monster (says he) est peccatum naturae, etc.
A Transgression of Nature, wherein strange Members in the Body, and Strange
qualities in the Mind, are produced and exposed to open view: how well this
does [quadrare] and accords with the Romish Beast, appears by considering
two Scriptures. Dan. 7.7. and Revel. 13.2. etc.) 1^. Daniels 4th. Beast (which
was the Roman Power (is not likened to any certain Beast (as the other three
aforementioned are) because no particular Beast (amongst the most savage the
World brings forth) can be named so cruel and so monstrous as to express the
Cruelty and Monstrousness of that fourth Monarchy, no not, although it were
(...) as H^mer says, a Lion before, a Dragon behind, and in the midst a
Chimera: it is therefore a nameless Monster, made up of all the cursed
properties of the forenamed Beasts: This Beast is said to be diverse from all
the Beasts, not only for its monstrous qualities in the mind (having all and
more of all the other Beasts) but also for its monstrous Members in the Body,
Described by Daniel, and 2ly. by John. Revel. 13.1.2.11. Having 7 Heads (to
Plot with) and 10 Horns (to push with) the Feet of a Bear, and the Mouth of a
Lion, Himself like a Leopard, and the Dragon giving him Power, as if all
Monstrous Immanity were met together in him; This is the man of Sin, and the
mighty Monster of present times, which does plainly premonstrate, nothing can
be expected but Barbarous and Savage Outrages, until Christ (our true
Hercules) come to cut off all the Heads of this Lernean Monster, and his
Carpenters come to saw off all his Horns. This is that Ahaz, 2. Chron. 28.22.
This is that Nimrod (or Rebel against Christ, even Antichrist) of our Day, that
mighty Hunter (even of the Lives and Souls of men) before the Lord, who dare
Hunt thus, in spite of an All-seeing God, who beholds all his bold,
boisterous and brutish Huntings, Ezod. 3.7. This is that mystery of Iniquity,
and mother of Harlots, that has made so many Kings of the Earth drunk, with the
Intoxicating Cup, of her (both of corporal and spiritual) Fornications. I have
sometimes wondered why Sir Edward Cook (that strenous Lawyer and Lord Judge)
used to call Royal Prerogative, a mighty Monster, and I cannot tell how to put
a sounder sense on it, than by Interpreting his Words thus; That Popery in all
Kings and Kingdoms brings forth Tyranny, (...) Evil Bird, Evil Egg, as is the
Mother so is the Daughter; This Monstrous Beast brings forth most Monstrous
Births: no doubt but there is a just Prerogative (well butted and bounded)
belonging to Kings, yet may it be said of it, as Naturalists say of the Dragon
[serpens serpents vorando-fit Draco] as when an overgrown Serpent has
devoured other Serpents, that are lesser and below him, thereby he becoms a
Dragon. So when Royal Prerogative has swallowed both Privilege of Parliaments
and Liberty or Property of Subjects, then does it Degenerate into a Tyrannical
Monster, and this is evident in Popish Kingdoms, where the King is called a
King of Asses, their Subjects being as so many Vassals, Peasants, and silly
Asses, tamely couching down under every Burden, that an unlimited Prerogative
Imposes on them: As that Creature is commonly Reputed a Monster wherein the
common Rules of Nature (which never intends any monstrous thing) are
prevaricated: so this Prerogative (that Sage Judge so Styleth) may well be
accounted a Monster, when there is any notorious prevarication from the known
Fundamental Laws of the Land there y when all Law becomes swallowed up with an
Absolute and Arbitrary Domination, and when no rule is observed therein, but
Sic Volo sic Jubco, stat pro ratione voluntas. And quod libet licet which are
the Proposals of Popish Parasites to Popish Princes, Thus one Monster begets
and brings forth another in its own Monstrous likeness. The beastly Religion of
that Monstrous Beast of Rome, both begets and brings forth Monstrous Tyranny,
changing Due Prerogative into a true Monster. God Almighty bless this poor Land
from all such Prerogative-Monsters, which have so long infested Europe: Though
Africa has been always accounted famous for affording most Menslers,
according to that old Adage [Africa semper aliquid novi sen Monstra Assert] and
I find this Story in Record, That in Africa near Nilus were found a few Mice,
only one half made up, Nature was there taken in the very Nick, how she was
prevented from perfecting her Work I know not, yet this (says my Author) I
know, she had wrought Life in the foreparts thereof (Head and Breast) but the
hinder parts still remainedunform'd, unquickned, still abiding in the fashion
of a little lump of Earth, and so she lest them; but by the Premises it
appears that Europe as well as Africa abounds with Monsters, and not so
much with monstrous Mice which mar the Land, as 1. Sam. 6.5. Or as Pliny
writes, with such Mice which drove out the Inhabitants out of Troas and the
Island Gyarus. Pliny lib. 8. cap. 28. and 10. and 10. cap. 65.68. Nor with such
Mice as Speed in Essex mentions in the year 1581. (just an hundred years ago)
which came in a great Army and overran the Marshes of Dengy Hundred, near unto
South Minster, shearing the Grass to the very roots, and so tainted the same
with their venomous Teeth that a great Murrain sell upon their Cattle that
grazed thereon. Alas Europe is now Infested not only with Land Marring Mice
(which threatens both a Famine of Bread, and a Famine of the Word too, Amos.
8.11.) but also with monstrous and Landmarring Beasts, such as are butting
pushing Rams and slinking nausty Goats, Ezekiel. 34.17.18.19.20. to wit, the
Popish Clergy, who eat up the Best, and beat down the rest, with their foul
Feet, and for wholesome, obtrude Brakish water upon men, to quench their Thirst,
muzling and misleading some silly Souls, to feed upon Traditions, lying
Legends, cheating Indulgences, vowed Pilgrimages, hard Pennances, ande. They
are glad to eat such as they can catch, but other more enlightened Souls as
cannot touch, taste nor handle with them, they thrust with the side, and with
the shoulder, v. 21. and push them with their Horns of Excommunications and
Persecutions, until they have scattered them ahroad. They force them out of the
Fold, Flock, and Pasture of Gods Ordinances, administered in power and purity:
in such a case what can the Righteous do? Ps. 18.3. They are not able to abide
the pushings of those Monstrous Beasts, they must either Fly or Dye, they have
not a Third for their choice, oh pray, that Christ (the good Shepard) may come
and save his Flock from being a Prey to those Monsters, and to Judge between
Cattle and Cattle, and to cause those unclean Beasts to cease out of this Land,
and other Lands in Europe, v. 22 to 26. The Lion Nero, and other
Slaughter-Slaves of Satan, assuredly shall not worry Gods Flock for ever. It Is
Gods promise I will cause the unclean Spirit (of the monstrous Beast) to pass
out of the Land, Zech. 13.2. But what a deadly Bite this deadly Beast may give
at passing and parting we know not, morsus Bestiae moribundae sunt maxim
mortiferi, the good Lord give us a good Deliverance from the last Bite. The
third Predictive Sign or Wonder, is prodigies prodig^um, some Etymologizeth
quasi predicium, because it is predictive and prognosticating: others quasi
porro agendum [more and further to do] as a Prodigy portends God has some more
and further great Work to do in the World: in Greek it is called (...) terren,
because a Prodigy is an affrightful prospect. In Hebrew it is called [Mopheth] a
Jasaph Splenduit, fulsit, Illuxit, because Prodigies (especially those in the
Heavens) have a shining spendour, which do dazzle the Eyes of beholders, and often
Astonisheth their Minds with their sparkling and shining Luster. The word
[Mopheth] Deuteronomy. 13.2. Is Translated portentum ( quia Indicat quid porro
tendatur, because it portends some further tendency of Providence) though there
it be used for fallacious Wonders, which the Devil (by Jannes and Jambres)
wrought, through Gods permission, for the further hardening of Pharoah's Heart.
True Portents, Prodigies, or Wonders (that do exceed the common course of
Nature) are always Gods Seals, which he never sets on for confirming an
untruth: they have (in the general) a persuading power to believe, and
prompting us to awake out of our lazy slumbers; hence one wittily compares
Prodigies exposed to View, unto a Musicians first strokes upon his Instrument,
to try in what tune it is: and then he puts forth his most excellent dexterity
in playing over sundry choice Lessons, with most melodious and Ravishing
Music: Thus when the great God does expose his wonderful Prodigies unto
Public view, and the knowledge of Mankind, it plainly portends that he therein
is tuning his Instrument, (as he is the chief Musician, according to David's
Dedication to many of his Psalms) and that he is about to play over some
eminent Acts of Providence (which he will manage throughout with most
excellent skill) upon the Stage of the World, even such curious Lessons,
(though consisting of Discords) which may prove sad cordoliums to the Wicked,
yet sweet Cordials to the Godly.

The second particular in this General Discourse, is the Scene whereon the
great God shows his marvelous Signs and Wonders, and where they have their
extraordinary situation: whereof we cannot have a better account from any
better Hand, than from the sweet singer of Israel Ps 135.6. Where after he had
declared. 1. Gods Goodness, v. 3. Then 2. Gods Greatness, v. 5. Yea greater
than all Gods, either Deputed (as Magistrates, Ps. 82.1.6.) Or Reputed as Idols
Ps. 115.4.1. Cor. 8.4. He comes to declare what a most free Agent, this good
and great God is. v. 6. Doing whatever pleases him, whereby he confuteth three
sorts of the Truths Adversaries: 1st. The Stoics that bind Gods Almighty
Hands, under a Fatal necessity, as if God could do nothing but as second Causes
do move and oblige him: 2. The Epicureans, who dotingly Dream, that God (called
Actus purissimus) is altogether Idle, sitting in Heaven at his own ease, and
altogether unconcerned with the Affairs of this lower World which (they say are
managed by chance and fortune: 3. The Ethnicks, who confess God to be concerned
in the greatest matters of this lowermost World, but not with the least of
them, saying, Non vacat exiguis Rebus Adesse Jovi. Jove is not at leisure to be
present at small matters.

David here does Demonstrate the grossness of all those three mistakes; saying,
God is always at work, as John 5.17. and he works freely what he pleases. Ps.
115.3. and under no Constraint or Restraint, no second cause can either help
him or hinder him, even the seeming Impediments he over-ruleth, and making them
serviceable to his own irresistible Will: as Phaorah's Daughter is made to
preserve Moses, who was to Destroy Pharoah's Kingdom, etc. And lastly, he
names the three grand Stages or Theaters whereon God works what he wills,
both his Ordinary and extraordinary works, to wit, Heaven Earth and Sea, the
great God is concerned in all things that come to pass in all these; parts of
the visible World: This leads me from the General to a particular Discourse of
those mighty Signs, Wonders and Prodigies, which the great God has very lately
shown to the World, upon all those three Scenes or Stages. And first in the
Heavens, this Mighty God ( Jehovah not Jove or Jupiter) is declared to be the
Maker of all Meteors, Jerem. 10.13. Ps. 135.7. whether they be Fiery, Airy, or
VVatery, and whether they be Ordinary or Extraordinary. 1. Ordinary, it is the
great God that causes Vapors to ascend from the ends of the Earth. Ps. 135.7.
And Jerem. 10.13. Those Vapors the Sun, Moon and Stars exhaleth out of the
Earth and Sea (by the Ordinance of the Creator) whereon those usual Meteors (as
Clouds either with Rain or without, Thanders and the Rainbow etc) are made as
on their proper matter: This may be exemplified in the little World (Man) in
whom Vapors are experienced to Ascend up from below unto the Brain, and from
thence again do Deseend in a Defluxion of Rheum down upon the Lungs, etc. Thus
it is in the Great World, as to the first common Meteor, to wit, Clouds, which
are moist Vapors dra^n up (as is aforesaid) into the middle Region, where
being, by the coldness thereof, condensed and congealed, they so continue
there, until by the warmth of the Sun they come to be dissolved and turned into
Rain. Zanch. de Op r. Dii. lib. 3. cap. 6. page 381. Hereupon they are called,
Gods Garden-Pat for watering Plants, wherewith he duly waters, the wide
Garden of the World. Now this, though Common, is one of Gods mighty Sig s and
Wonders that he should bind up such a vast weight of water in his Clouds, which
are nothing but Vapors knit together, and so are Vessels much thinner than the
Liquor contained in them, it is a mighty Wonder, that the Clouds are not rent
under them, Job. 26.8. And so to cause a Cataclysme (or warer Spouts, as
Mariners call them) to drown not only Ships at Sea, but also the whole Globe
of the Earth. This wonderful work of God, (that such a Massy weight of Water,
should be confined to a thin Cloud, as if a strong man should be conjured into
a slender Cobweb, and there be kept Nolens Vole^s) If well weighed, would be
sufficient to convince the greatest Atheist in the World, of an Omnipotent
Deity: no mere man can spread aloft the thinnest Curtain [absque fulcris]
without some solid thing to uphold it. Yet the great God spreads those thin
Curtains (the Clouds) over the whole Face of the Firmament, Job. 25.9.36.29.
such as have great Floods bound up, sometimes in them, as in a Garment, Prove.
^0.4. Yet have they nothing but the fluid Air to sustain them; there be also
Clouds without water (as well as with) which seem to carry the less VVonder in
them: yet if we Consider, that all Clouds are Gods Spunges (as Zanchy, that
Divine Philosopher calls them) which are in time filled with the waters that
are above the Firmament, and the true reason, why some Clouds do Rain upon the
Earth, and others do not, is, because God does not squeeze all those Spunges
with his mighty Hand: and thus God says, I will command the Clouds to Rain no
Rain upon this or that place. Isa. 5.7. Those are Clouds without Rain Prove.
25.14. For God presses them not, and those which God squeezes (as man does a
Sponge,) he does it not with all his might, but gently, that they may
moderately drop upon the Earth to refresh it, but not to Ruin it, as was done
to the Old World, when God opened the Cataracts of Heaven and wrung those
Spunges hard upon them: the Consideration hereof should bring man to the
knowledge of the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, Romans 1.19. Job. 38.37. Jer.
5.22. The second common Meteor is Thunder, etc. This is also Wonderful, that
Fire and Water, should mingle in one Cloud, and that Hard Stones (according to
the vulgar Opinion) should come out of the midst of thin Vapors. These are
Wonders in Nature far beyond Humane Apprehension, that one and the same Cloud
should one while be an Aerie Sea, to power down a whole Tide of Water, and
another while, (even immediately) be as some Aerie Furnace, which scatters
abroad flashes of Fire, into all parts of the Earth, astonishing the World
with the dreadful noise of that Eruption, and that God should fetch Fire out of
the midst of Water, and hard Thunderbolts out of the midst of such a soft
Exhalation as a Cloud is: Hac sunt sane Tremenda, atque admiranda, no less to
be Dreaded than Admired: The third comman Wonder in Nature is the Rainbow,
fixed upon a watery Cloud, by the Reflection of the Sun upon it, This is such a
wonderful work of God, that the very Heathens feigned it to be the Daughter of
Thaumantias (which signifies VVonderment. This is a work top-full of Wonders,
witness 1st. The beautiful Form and Fashion of it, a Semicircle, the ends
whereof were never seen by any Mortal, but as it is terminated by the Horison.
2ly. The Various Colors it carries exceeding the splendor and livelyness of
the deepest Dye in the World) which have (as some conceive) their various
Significations, as the two grand Destructions of the Old World, and of this New
by Water and by Fire, the watery color of the Rain Bow signifying the former,
and its fiery color the latter. 3ly. The several Prognostics of it, according
to Scalage, saying, a morning Rainbow portends Rain, but an evening one, fair
weather. 4. The Shape of it, being that of a Bow (therefore called the
Rainbow) which yet never shoots any man, unless it be with Admiration,
Delight, etc. 5. The posture of it, the Bent of the Bow is from the Earth and
toward Heaven, as if man were shooting at God, and not God at man. This Bow
with both ends downwards and its back to Heaven; must needs be [nuntius
faediris and serenitatis] an Emblem of Peace, and a messenger of Mercy to
mankind, for he that shoots holds the Back of his Bow always from him, and
this may be the Signification of its third (to wit Green) color, that is, the
merciful preservation of the World, betwixt those two grand Destructions of
it, signified by its watery and fiery colors aforesaid. 6ly. The unreadiness
of it, as to any Execution of Divine Displeasure. David says, God has bent
his Bow, and made his Arrow ready, Ps. 7.12.13. But here, though the Bow seem
bent, yet we see no String, neither do we either read of (as Ambrose well
observes) or behold any Arrow ordained for this Bow: If he does so at any
time, it is, (as the Psalmist there tells us) against Persecutors, and not
against his People: The time would fail me to speak of the Wind, both
Tempestuous and VVhirlwinds (whereof I have spoke something of it in my Crown
of a Christian, in Chapter of Meditation) and of other Meteors, in the
Firmament, that are ordinary products of Nature, yet Marvelous Wonders in
Nature, as to man's Capacity and Apprehensions; It shall suffice to say only
this in General at this time, which is no less a signal and singular Wonder,
that out of one and the same equal matter (to wit, out of those same Vapors,
which are exhaled out of the Earth and Water) so many several and differing
Meteors should be engendered by the Almighty Power, and unsearchable Wisdom of
God.

Come we now to those that are Extraordinary, and confine our selves to this
past year (1680.) only which God has made Annum Mirabilem, a wonderful year,
as he did that past year (1660) also. How those two famous years run in Parallel
lines, and yet how that Congruity has also its Disparity, is made manifest in
the Application: The 1st. Sign from Heaven or Prodigy in the Heavens that this
VVonder-working God showed to the World, was according (to my now modeled
method) that prodigious Comet, or Blazing-star, seen all over Europe, upon
which I have Published, (for public good) a little stitcht Book of three
sheets, Entitled, A Philosophical and Divine Discourse Blazoning upon this
Blazing-Star, unto which, I must here refer the Reader, for a distinct
discerning of the Product, Form, Color, Motion, Situation, and Signification
or Probable Prognostics, etc. Thereunto Here adding this little supplement, at
this time: This last Comet (in the year 1680.) was so prodigious, that the like
has not been seen (for length and breadth of its Train) this 800 years. I have
consulted Osiander's Epitome of the Centuries, who (indeed) mentions a Comet
of an unusual magnitude, a little before the Death of Constantine the Great,
which (he says) was exposed to public view, [tanti principis obitum
Destgnasse] as a Prognstoick of the period of so great and so good a Prince,
Cent. 4. Lib. 2. Cap. 25. page 214. And the same Author tells of another Comet,
of a prodigious greatness, shooting his Dreadful Rays above the City
Constantinople, and reaching almost (as he says) from Heaven to that City,
which was (as he adds) to give warning of Gajan the Scythian and Arrian's
Design to set that great City on Fire, yet through the goodness of God (at the
prayers of his People in it, that Hellish Plot (as he says) was most
graciously prevented) and that by an Apparition of an Host of Angels, which
terrified this Cursed Arian, from his burning project. See Cent. 5. Lib. 1.
Cap. 19. Page 89. I would to God the same mercy may be shown to London, for the
prayers of many in it. Genesis 18.32. Isay 65.8. The same Author also tells of
another Comet, in the 6th. Century, which did portend the Overthrow of the
Metropolis of Cilicia by an Earthquake, and much more mischief done in the
East. Cent. 6. Lib. 1. Cap. 34. and of another Horrible one of an unusual
Longitude in Justinian the Emperors time, which fore-ran that horrible Butchery
the Hunns made over most of Europe. Cent. 6. Lib. 3. Cap. 9. in the year 557.
after Christ. But I do not find (in my Reading any such prodigious Comet (as to
its Train) save only that one which was the forerunner of the Turkish Monarchy
in the 6th. Century, and who knows, but this parallel Blaze may likewise presage
the Approach of the fifth Monarchy of our Dear Redeemer, who will (sooner or
later) take to himself his great power and Reign. Rev. 11.17. He will certainly
Divide the spoil with the strong, Isa. 53.12. He will not always be an
underling in the World, but will put in for his part which his Father gave him.
Ps. 2.8. in despite of a strong Turk, strong Pope, and strong Potentates, and
a strong Devil, (who is the Master of them all) for his Father will make all
his Sons Foes his Footstool. Ps. 110.2. and Matthew. 22.44. He will put down all
power that is opposite to the power of this Prince of Glory. 1. Cor. 15.24. and
put them (who now Crest it high against Christ) into the fittest place for
them, to wit, under Christ's Fect. It Is beyond doubt, that this present Comet,
put Rome into a strange Consternation; oh pray, pray, pray, that the Influence
of it may consume all the dreggs of the Roman Church, in all that B^asts
Dominions, as Keplerus foretold long ago, should be the effect of that
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in Leo, a sign of the Fiery Trigon. And the
reason why such an Effect was expected, may be this; The various Returns of
those eminent Trigons, fall out very rarely in the World. Acute Tychobrahe,
thus reckons them. The first was under Enoch. The second under Noah. The third
under Moses. The fourth under Solamon. The fifth under Christ, Tabernacling in
Flesh. Then the Roman Empire was in its Zenith or highest Advance: The sixth
under Charles the Great, when the Roman was turned into the German Empire, and
the seventh draws nigh, which is supposed to have a Sabbatism (as the Sabbath
of Rest, followed the 6 Days labor at the Creation) in its Womb. Our Blessed
[(...) or] Master of the Marriage Feast, reserveth his best Wine for this last
time: Although (that Universal Scholar) Alsted make a little variation of
those 6 aforesaid Conjunctions and Revolutions, yet he fully agrees with
Tychobrahe in this, that the seventh great Revolution of the superior Planers,
falls upon our last times, and does certainly portend some great and
universal mutation (as all the other six has formerly done (especially
considering that those Planers in their seventh Return, has perfectly
completed their circular Motion, and then are in the same point and posture
that they were placed in at the Creation of the World. Alsteds Encupl.
Uranosc. Lib. 11. Page 125.

That which startled the great men of Rome so much, at the Blazing out of this
Comet, was, the Mathematicians there observed it to be in the Train of it, six
times longer than that which did portend the last Pope Alexander the VII. Exit
out of the World: This Discovery put the present Pope into such a cold
paroxysm, that nothing but a Dutch Stove could keep him warm: I doubt not but
that cold Sweat which has seized now upon all the Limbs of Antichrist, will
(in due time carry off, not only him, but such as should succeed him, by the
Breath of Christ's Mouth, and by the brightness of his coming. 2. These. 2 8 A
prodigious Comet, and a Climacterial Conjunction (Astrologers say) are a double
Seal of the great God, to aseertain this great Truth.

In that lesser Conjunction of the two superior Planets, in the year 1664. The
Comet followed the Conjunction as a Seal, for Confirmation that dreadful
Effects were portended thereby, which not only this Land (in Fire, Plague and
Plots, etc.) but also most of Europe (in most Desolating Wars) smarted under,
but as to the Total, Greatest, or Clymacterical Conjunction approaching (which
comes to pass only every 800. year) this has as its Seal) a Dreadful Comet as
its [(...)] or Harbinger going before it, and showing it self first to awaken
and amaze the Drowzy Secure World, etc. However we (well enough) may call it a
Divine Preacher (or Preco) sent from God, to point out some sacred Truth out of
Heaven, to the Inhabitants upon Earth; it is an Orthodox, and Authentic
Preacher, backed with such insuperable Authority, as neither the proud pashur
of Rome, nor any of his popish Prelates, can suspend from its Office, or put to
Silence, until it has delivered its message, and done its Work, that its
Creator gave it to do: It cannot be obscured (in its astonishing light and
luster) or dwindle away by any created Hands, but only by the hands of its own
Maker. And now when it is gone off the Stage, Oh that the loud Sermons it has
preached, may still Sound in our Ears, and Sink down into our Hearts, taking
deep Impressions there, though it be a good while after, as did those Sermons
loudly and lustily cried out by Christ's Crier, or Forerunner (John the
Baptist) who did lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, Isa. 58.1. and those sacred
Truth, he had preached long before, had their blessed and saving Effect, long
after, as John 10.41. The Word preached sometime before, sometimes Works, (and
that considerable) after. Yea, may we not say of this late Comet, that it was
some Prince-Peracher, having such Attendants before it and after it) all, as so
many Curats under it, God himself (speaking to Job out of the Whirlwind, Job
38.1.) does magnify Arcturus that Star of the first magnitude, and that always
Rises upon the 10th. of March exactly when the Sun Sets) by describing how
Stately he is attended with his Sons (the little Stars) that wait upon him. Job
38.32. In like manner the great God, has so Ordered, that this late
Blazing-Star (of a prodigious Magnitude in its Train) should have other
Apparitions attending it (as small Curats to that Illustrious Preacher the
Comet) especially that Fiery Dart which followed its extinction, within a few
weeks after: This is the second Phaenom non or Apparition, which the great God
showed to poor man as a Sign from Heaven, seeing none shown on Earth will
convince us, it being with us as it was with those Christ-Tempters in the
Gospel. Luke 11.16. They must have a Sign from Heaven, over and above all those
mighty and matchless Miracles that Christ wrought amongst them upon Earth; They
must have the Messiah to Thunder from Heaven upon them, as Samuel had done upon
their Forefathers. 1. Sam. 12.16.17. to convince them of their Sin (in asking a
King) and to bring them to Repentance: for as John's Baptist, was Christ's
Forerunner into the World, so Repentance must be his Forerunner into Men's
Hearts, Houses, Cities and Countries, etc. Therefore to bring men to it, when
they will not comply with the Council of Mortal Ministers upon Earth (as those
would not with that of Samuel) God sends some Signs Extraordinary from Heaven,
seeing [signa de Caelo sunt Formidanda] such Signs as God sends from Heaven are
most formidable: Samuel bids that people first stand and Hear, v. 7. that is,
Bustle not, Bristle not, but suffer a word of Exhortation, Heb. 13 22. When
this would not do (the good old man being contemned by them, both in his
person, preaching and power) he set GOD at work to speak to them by Signs and
Wonders, and then Samuel says, Secondly Stand and see, v. 16. that so those
two Learned Senses (as Aristotle calls Hearing and Seeing) being both Affected,
might be also Instructed: so God says likewise Heartye Deaf, look ye Blind,
Isa. 42.18. Thus the Lord says to us in our Day, so gives us not only the Word
to Hear, but also Signs to see, and that one Sign upon another, that they which
will not Hear the Voice of the first Sign, might be moved to hear the Voice of
the second, Exodus 4.8. Therefore did God send a second sign (the Bolis or Fiery
Dart) immediately after the first, (to wit, the Comet) as a Seal annexed to it,
in its direful prospects and prognostics: It Is true I cannot say of this
latter, as I can of the former, that [^^isce Oculis Vidi] I saw it with my own
Eyes, but sundry spectators of it does assure me, that it was a long str am of
Fire, pointing down toward the Earth, and appearing but two or three nights,
which was the cause of my not beholding it; Letters also from the Hague and
from Copenhagen give a dark account of this Blaze, about the 27th. of February:
This Liery Lance or Dart, Philosophers calls Bolis, (...) Jacit, to Cast, as
if it were Gods Javelin which he casts at sinful men, as Saul did his against
David. 1. Sam. 18.11. The Hebrew word [chanith] signifies also a very long
Spear to thrust through at distance, yet no mortal man is armed with so long a
killing Spear, as the great God is, no not great Goliath (himself) whose
[chanith] or Spear was of a prodigious length and thickness. ^. Sam. 17.7. It
was 26 foot in length, and like a Weavers Beam for thickness, besides its head,
which according to the Hebrew [lahab] Flamed and which weighed twenty five
pound: yet this long Flaming Spear is nothing to Gods Glittering Spear, Habb.
3.11. Which he draws out, to stop the way of his peoples Persecutors, Ps.
35.3. Where the word [chanith] is used. And although the great God is able to
cut off the Greatest men with a bare nodd of his Head or frown of his Face, Ps.
80.16. Yea to blow them away as so many small Dust-Heaps, Job 4.19. Yet the
Holy Ghost here atributeth to him, Armor both Defensive and Ofensive, that his
appearing for his people might appear sufficient, Ps. 35.2, 3. Notwithstanding
God needs no bigger a [chanith or] Lance to kill an Atheist with than an Hair,
as the dying Nobleman once acknowledged upon this occasion: He sitting in the
Great Moguls Court, dallying with one of his Misses, she plucked an Hair out of
his Breast, this little Wound, (made by that small means) presently Festered,
and turning into an incurable Canker soon killed him: yea, suppose, man be as
great as the Great Pope, yet Adrian the IV. (an English man) can tell them by
woeful Experience, that though his name (before he was Pope) was Break-spear,
yet could he not break Gods Spear, though it be no stronger then an Hair or Fly
(in Gods Hands) wherewith he was Choked: The word [(...)] Jaculum. A Dart, is
used Heb. 12.20. Yet it also signifies that Plummet of Lead which Mariners
cast down with a long Line to plum the depth of the Waters, least the Ship run
upon the shallow and there be shut up in the Sands and be broken; or which
Carpenters use, to measure and mark out that part which they intend to Hew off
or Plain. If we take it (in the first Sense) as a Fiery Dart, Philosophy says,
it signifies Drought, and portends War. Alsted Encyclop. Lib. 7. Cap 9. Page
469. If (in the second) as 1st. The Mart^ers Plummet, then it may signify God
is sounding the Depth of Religion in our Land, Oh that the Ship (the Church)
may not be found upon the shallows running all Religion into a Form only,
denying the Power of it. 2. Tim. 3.5. Alas then the Quick Sands will swallow us
up, or we shall run upon some splitting Rock. 2ly. As the Carpenters Plummet,
then God Bless us from the dreadful Divine Threatening mentioned 2. Kin. 21.13.
That God wip not our Jerusalem (or London) as one wipeth a Dish when it is dirty,
and turn it upside down. This he will do, If he lay judgment to the Line and
Justice to the Plummet. Isa 28.17 This should make wicked men's (who shall
certainly have their Due) Ears tingle, and their Hearts tremble, through
Terror, Horror and Dolor, for God will not give over wiping until all the Dirt
be done away; yet loves he to fore-signify it, thus threatening that he may not
strike, as ^^^brose observes, God gives us many warnings hereof, If God say
to us as he did to Amos chapter 7.9. What see thou? The sight of this second
Apparition was, as Gods Line and Plummet, to measure ^ut how much is to be cut
off, yet the Square Timber or Stone shall be spared: Christ (that Skilful
Carpenter, Mark. 6 3) will not cut an Hair-breadth beyond his Mark or Measure,
when he gives the wicked their Due, it may be done without damage to the Godly.
May we but see the Line or Plummet once in the Hands of our Z^r^bba^^ls, as
Zech. 4.10. The Perpendicular put once into Parliamentary Hands, the wicked may
be pulled down, and the Godly built up. But if nor, and God (...) upon our
Iniquity. Ps. 130.3. We can expect nothing but the Line of consusion, and the
stones (or Plumm^^^,) of Em^ti^^ s^. Isa. 34 11.

The third Dreadful [(...),] or Apparition in the Air, was on Dec 17. 1680. at
Ottery nigh Exeter, near 5 at night, then appeared two great A^mies, the one
out of the North, whose Leader had a Coronet on his Head) the other out of the
South, seeming furiously to join Battle, and a little Retracting, charged again
most vigorously, this continued about an hour, till at last there came a
Reserve and joining with the Southern, beats back the Northern in great
Disorder, many were Tertified at it, and it is as true as it was terrible, etc.
This Account came from a Reverend Minister, who (with many others) was an
Eyewitness of it, while viewing the Amazing Comet, as published in Print.

And the like before had appeared on Sept. 12. Though the Relation and
Confirmation thereof, came not to Hand till Jan. 14. after. The same year near
Portsnet, in Monmouth-shire, as the Scheme and Letter Testimonial of a
judicious Minister of that Place, does abundantly Testify: The Narrative is as
follows.

The first things that appeared were a Grove of Trees, a House on a Mountain,
and a Church on its South Side. Next we saw a Hill on the North side, with a
Grove and Houses therein. Then we noted a green square Meadow, between the two
Hills, then void of men. We saw many great Rocks toward the bottom of the
South Hill, and a great Golden Globe, glittering gloriously on the top of the
Spire of the Church, and a red Vane upon it. Then a great River broader on the
North than on the South, in which were Ships Sailing, from North to South under
the Mountain with the Tide, where one of the Ships which was hindermost tacked
about, and Sailed through the Fleet, and got before the rest. Then we observed
the other Fleet Sailing with the Wind and against the Tide, from the South
Point of the South Hill, and then meeting the other Fleet under the Grove, then
the great Ship in the North Fleet, first shot, and the rest in order; then the
South Ships shot at them, the Fire and Smoke we clearly discerned, and we heard
the noise of Guns, after this we observed the Army marching under the foot of
the Hill along the Cliff, by the Seaside; consisting both of Horse and Foot,
from the South-point of the South-hill, toward the Square Meadow, then the
North Army over the top of the Hill on the North-side, toward the square
Meadow, where the Armies met, and after a shout, fought: the Swords and Pikes we
clearly discerned. We noted more Ships in the North Fleet, and most men in the
South Army, when we drew to the upper end of the Field, and after the Land
Battle, we heard over our Heads three lamentable and sad Groans, Oh, Oh, Oh, at
which we were much affrighted.

Now this Apparition of Armies (yea and ex abundanti of Navies too) was doubled
as was Pharoah's Dream: Genesis 41.32. on a three fold account, 1st. To show the
certainty of its Prognostics accomplishment. 2ly. The celerity, or speediness
of these things coming to pass. 3ly. To strike the greater Terror and
Astonishment in right thinking minds, which Joseph the Interpretor of the 2
Dreams) prudently concealed from that Infidel Pharaoh, yet though the Visions
or Apparitions (in the Royal Dreams) were two, the signification was but one.
v. 25. Importing one and the same matter; Thus it may be in this Aerie
Apparition (which was doubled) as it is thus also in many Divine Revelations,
whereof we find in Scripture some srequent Repetition, which yet have their
singular use, to wit, a making more deep Impression upon the minds of Men, and
importing both Assurance and Expedition of the matters foretold therein: Alas
we need Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, Here a little and there a
little, Isa. 28.13. and all little enough to praeponderate the dullness of our
Hearing, and the deadness of our Hearts: to write the same things to the
Philippians, though 'twas grievous to the Apostle, yet was it safe and
advantageous to the People. Phil. 3.1. It Was not a vain Repetition or an idle
Tautology, but served to set forth the Necessity, Difficulty and Excellency of
the matter so reinforced. Nunquam satis Dicit, quod Nunqu^m satis Discitur,
Truth is never enough said, till it be enough learnt. And because men's Breaits
are Brawny, and their Heart Strings Horny, therefore are the Apparition of
Armies in the Air Doubled upon us, the more and better to beat upon, inculcate
and imprint those Divine warnings in the minds of men: Upon my diligent Search
for Scriptural Paralells, and exemplification of Apparitions of Armies, I do
find three especially: The first of them is very (...), yet such as might have
been prevented by a timely and true Repentance: the other are very comfertable:
The first is that of Joel the Prophet who had such a Prophetieal Vision or
p^arition of the Bab^^^am Armies, that should so swarm in upon Judaea, as to
make that very Day a Day of Darkness, and of Gloominess a Day of Clouds and of
thick Darkness. Joel 2.2. As if it had been (no light matter as they made it,
but) a light-less Day, and (as it were) a doleful Doomsday. Their numerous
Armies should come in great Swarms, which, as the Cloud of Locusts would Darken
the Air, so as to turn Day into Night and spread far and near all the Country
over, and that so suddenly, as the morning spread over the tops of the
Mountains: and in this Apparition Joel boheld Flames and Flashes of Fire,
burning up all before them. v. 3. Those Locust, should so consume the Country,
as they go along with their vast Armies (as if all had been burnt up by Fire)
turning the (...) Eden into a Barren Wilderness etc v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
wherein the Babylonians are Described. 1st. In their persons to be (...),
numerous, swift, terrible, skilful orderly courageous and Innumerable. 2ly. In
their Actions, to wit, Depopulating the Land (which occasioned Famine,)
Destroying their strong Forts, and filling all (both Church and State) with
Confusion.

The Lord God Almighty preserve this Land from such Persons and such Actions.
Oh pray, pray, That God may not Hiss for the Fly of Egypt, and for the Be of
Babylon. Isa. 7.18. for those Flys would Bite us, to disturbus in our peace,
but those ^ees would sting us to deprive us of our lives. God Bless us from
those Romish Locusts (so called Rev^^. 9.3) to wit, the Popish Priests, Monks,
Friars and Jesuits, being (all) both numerous and voracious Creatures. Oh that
such Pestilent Vermin may never have Commission from God to Mar our Land: As
the Prophet proposed Repentance as a Remedy (before the Decree brought forth)
to them. v. 12.13.14. saying, now, though it be late, yet not too late, Nunquam
sero si serio. Though some Locusts be already come, as Kimchy senseth it. So
your Repenting for Sin, be but proportionable to your Rebelling against GOD. So
sweet is his Nature, so gracious, so merciful, so flow to Anger, etc. He will
Repent of the Evil, and who knows, if he will not leave a Blessing behind
him. Yea he will certainly turn to those that turn to him. Zach. 1.3. Oh that
England know such things as belonged to her Peace. Luke 19.42. Before the Gate
be shut, the drawbridge taken up, and the Taper of Mercy be quite burnt out,
etc. Then God would send out his Mandamus: Ps. 44.4. and come with his Non
Obstante, Ps. 106.8. and Isa. 57.15. Yea and turn things to the contrary, as in
Hamans Day. Est. 9.1.

The second Instance of a Scripture Apparition, is that of Jacob. Genesis 32.1.
Which was not Terrible, but Comfortable to him, for it was not a visible
Apparition of Armies of men fighting one against another, but 'twas an Army of
Angels: neither must we think (with the Hebrews and some others) that one Troop
or Company of those Angels (which appeared as armed Soldiers) were for Jacob
and the other against him, or yet that those two Armies appeared under the
command of two distinct Generals, the one under the President Angel of the
Country of Mesopotamia (from whence Jacob was coming) and the other under the
President Angel of the Country of Canaan whither Jacob was now returning: this
is a presumptuous fancy, and as false as presumptuous, for this would have
rather affrighted than comforted Jacob, as to the Issue, but we find that Jacob
without any fear, said upon the first sight of it [This is Gods Host] v. 2.
Mahanaim, Hebr. or two Armies: The Hebrew Rabbis say well in this, that Jacob
in this third Apparition knew them to be the same Angels whom he had seen (in
his Apparition) Ascending and Descending upon the lofty Ladder. Genesis 28.12 The
Scope of this Apparition of Armies to Jacob was to strengthen his Faith in the
way of his Obedience: Jacob was now going whether God had commanded him to go.
Genesis 31.3. Labans lowering look, makes Jacob look homeward (Oh that the Frowns
of the World had this blessed effect on us) Laban pursues him, which put Jacob
to a fright. v. 25. But God had whispered a word in Labans Ear. v. 24. So was
better to him than his own Fears. God had spoke for him (and so he can for us)
in the Heart-of his Enemies. Now, 'twas not true that Laban said [ it is in the
power of my Hand, etc.] v. 9. Jacob was now as one that Fled from a Lion (
Laban had some shamefacedness) and a Bear (that had none) to wit, Esau met him,
says a Rabby, This Apparition of an Host of Angels came to fortify his Faith,
against his next and worst Fear; that he should now hope the same power which
had protected him from the Lion Laban, would also preserve him from the Bear
Esau, though he had sworn his Brothers Death, and came armed with 400
Cutthroats (at his Heels) against him.

Jacob (who in his excellent Wrastlings) had power with God and prevailed. Gen
32.26. etc. could not want power to prevail with men. Hos. 12.4. Let Persons,
yea Parliaments go but that way God bids them as Jacob did, and they shall not
want a Mahanaim, or Heavenly Host to convoy them through a boisterous Sea,
where the Winds are contrary. Math. 14.24. and to conduct them through a
wayless Wilderness, through never so many Profane Esau's, with Hundreds and
Thousands of Cutthroats do way-lay them: Jacob was back-set by Lowering Laban,
and fore-set by bloody Esau, yet this Host of Angels carry him through both and
all.

The third Scripture Instance of Apparitions of Armies, was that in 2. Kings
6.17. which was a comfortable Apparition also, being an Army of Angels too, not
of Men. Benhadad suspected his Councellor of Treachery: Some Courtier (that had
been with Naaman chapter 5) tells him, it was Elisha that disclosed his Secrets,
and so frustrated them by his Prophetic Spirit; therefore the King sends
Horses and Chariots to fetch him. v. 12.13.14. as soon his Spys brought him
Word, he was come to that little Town Dothan; the Town is presently begirt with
the Syrian Army. Gehazi's Successor (being yet but a little acquainted with his
Masters Miracles) could see the Danger (so cries, alas my Master, what shall we
do. v. 15.) but could not see the Deliverance, Elisha was no more concerned
than to have his Servants Eyes opened, (that his Faith also might be above his
Fear) God opened them, and then he saw better Horses and better Chariots for
their Defense; Their Remedy would overmatch their Malady, v. 17. The same
Horses and Chariots that had carried up Elijah, were now come to protect
Elisha, from the Horses and Charriots of Benhadad: Horses and Chariots of Fire,
must needs be too hard for the Syrians of Flesh: Elisha thus guarded, goes out
to his Adversaries, and as he prayed open his Servants Eyes, he prayed his
Enemies Eyes into blindness. v. 18. so led them thence to Samaria, where he
entrapped them, that thought verily they had entrapped him in Dothan, not far
from Samaria. v. 19.20. etc. While the Prophet staid in Samaria (his place of
chiefest Residence and the chief City of the Kingdom) he was secure from the
Syrians Assaulting him, but if he be Removed to Dothan (to a place of
desection, as the Hebrew word signifies) a lesser Town of lesser strength,
there and thither may the Syrian Host better Assemble, but they cannot Assault,
the P. is safe there also, having more for than against, v. 16. They that be
with us are more than they be with them. 2. Chron 32.7. more Friends than
Adversaries.

There is yet a fourth Scripture Apparition of Armies, which, according to the
Sentiments of some, is an Army of Men, but of others an Army of Angels, so
seems a mixture of both, to wit, Zech. 6. from v. 1. to 9. 1st. Some sense that
Apparition of 4. Charriots, to signify the four Empires [in ordine ad
Ecclesiam] all ordered from their Rise to their Ruin (in each of them) by the
Decrees of God, which lay hid as it were in Mountains of Brass, and ran like a
River under ground, till they broke forth, and showed themselves in their due
execution, with respect (all along to the Church of God. And if we admit of
this Interpretation, then this Apparition was an Army of Men, yea of four
several sorts of Men, The Assyrian, The Persian, The Grecian And the Roman.
Thus the four Empires ( coliectively taken) must be understood: But the second
Sense is, that it was an Apparition of four Squdaron of Angels, and this is
more probable, as more agreeable to the Interpretation which the Prophets-
Tutor (rather than Tutelar Angel) gives of it. v. 5. calling them the Spirits
of Heaven, etc. And though the word [Ruachoth] Signify Winds, by which Daniel
prefigures the four Monarchys, Dan. 7.2. Yet more emphatically, Angels are
called Spirits. Hab. 1.7.14. And the Spirits of Heaven, Math. 24.36. and Gal.
1.8. Who as Ministering Spirits do Stand before the Lord of the whole Earth.
Mat. 18.10. To serve his Providence and to be sent out (as his Agents and
Instruments) upon various Errants, at his pleasure: and therefore are they
Described here Gods Chartots, as Ps. 68.17. and of diverse colors, 1. Black,
when their Errands are Sorrowful. 2. White, when Joyful. 3ly. Red, when Bloody.
4. Grizled, when mixed of both Joyful and Sorrowful, as to contrary Subjects.
It Is very Remarkable here. 1. That Divine Decrees are unsearchable,
insuperable, unavoidable, unremoveable, they stand like Mountains of Brass,
which can never be removed: 2ly. All Humane Events are ordered in the World by
Divine Decrees: Therefore it is our part to put our Amen to Gods Amen; and to say
in the Language of the primitive Christians (the will of the Lord be done) Act.
21.14. 3. Angels are Gods Agents for moveing the wheel of Providence, in all
Events, The Spirit of the living Creatures is in the Wheels. Ezech. 1.20. and
10.9.11.13. It Is a Comfort to Holy Men, that all Occurrences are managed by the
Holy Angels, 4. The Work God Employs Angels to work in the World, is various
work, it is Black work and White work, Red work and Mingled work. 5. Their Black
work is upon Babylon, and their White work is upon Sion: The Black Horses were
sent to destroy Babylon, that lay North of Judea, and the White Horses were
sent after them into the same Northern Country to deliver Sign, which then in a
great part lay among the Pots in Babylon. 6. Their grizled or mingled work, was
upon Egypt and Arabia, which lay South from Judea, the Punishment whereof was
somewhat mixed and mitigated, they should be in some better case than Babylon,
yet not so good as to retain the Jews there from their own Country. 7. Their
Black work done upon Babylon is said to quiet Gods Spirit. v. 8. To ease him of
his Adversaries, Isa. 1.24. to pacify his Anger and to give God full content.
8. The Errand of the Red Chariot, is wholly omitted, probably because it is a
work reserved for the last times, as the Black Charret did destroy Babylon
Literal, so the red Charet (not mentioned as to its going out here) may be
Reserved to destroy Babylon Mystical, and to give her Blood to Drink, for she
is worthy. Revel. 16.6.9. After all this is done, comes in the Kingdom of the
Branch. v. 12. Thus the Prophet here concurrs with Daniel, who after he had
mentioned the downfall of the four Monarchys brings in the Kingdom of the Stone,
Dan. 2. (the Kingdom of Christ our dear Redeemer) Daniel had such Apparitions
of mighty things, as Zachary had.

The fourth fearful Phenomenon was that fiery flying Bullet, falling from the
Firmament, whereof this Account from Rostock in Silecia is given, that in Jan.
last, the Heavens seemed to be Ruffled up like a sheet of Paper, at which time
a white glittering Bullet appeared, which seemed to yield some drops of water,
being attended with two great flashes of Lightning; The Bullet was seen (by
many spectators) to fall down, but none of them could tell where it fell, only
in this all do unanimously agree, that the said Bullet, in its saling, gave a
greater light into their Houses than the greatest lights they burned for three
or four Miles round the place. I know not how to Exemplify this Apparition with
a more suitable Parallel, out of Scripture Record, than with Zachary's Flying
Roll: Chap. 5.1.2. etc. This Roll is called a Volumn, or a Scroll of Paper or
Parchment, rolled up (as the Heavens seemed to be in this Prodigy) yet Flying
and flecting swiftly all a long as a Bird of Prey in a ready posture to seize
on his Prey. Volans Velocissimum ultionis incursum denotat. This very posture
of Flying does demonstrate some sudden Incursion of Divine Vengeance, says
Chrysostom, but God only knows where it will fall: Nemo scelus gerit in
pectore, qui non idem Nemesin in Tergo. No man can carry any divellish
wickedness in his Breast, but the same man must bear Nemesin (so was the
Goddess of Revenge called) or Divine Vengeance upon his Back. This the blind
Heathens could say, by the light of Nature, into whose Hearts the Remarks how
the Holy God Revengeth himself upon wicked men, cast a greater light, than
could this Flying Bullet, into the Houses of those Villages which were
enlightened with it. Hereupon they called Vengeance (...) which signifies
unavoidable, because no Offender can either Avert or Avoid the Revenging hand
of God, there is no escaping its coming, nor abiding it when it comes: This
Flying Roll is described by the Prophet to be ten yards long and five broad.

This Remarkable Measure of the Flying Roll is 1st. Commensurate to the Porch
of the Temple, which is exactly described to be of the same Breadth and Length.
1. Kin 6.3. And as it bore a proportion in measure to the Porch, so it may be
supposed to come out from thence, as a Voice from the Temple. Isa. 66.6. And
unfolding as it came thence, it appeared in the Air in a Flying posture,
hastening and hovering over the Heads of wicked Persons. 2ly. It bears likewise
a proportion to the Land of the Jews, which Geographers Describe to be twice as
long, as it was broad, and now it being covered all over with the Guilt and
Filth of Men's Sins, it was ready to be covered all over with the sense and
smart of Gods Judgments. 3ly. It Is commensurate also to the whole World of
Gentles, the length whereof, (take it from East to West) much exceeded the
breadth of it from North to South, as Geography observes, and thus it
signified that as all the Habitable Lands had filled themselves with all kind
of Sins, so God would now fill them with all kind of punishments: 'Twas every
way large enough to plague all sorts of Sins, and to punish all sorts of
Sinners, whether in every corner of Judea, or in the utmost parts of the
Habitable World. Thus the Flying Roll is said to go forth, yea Fly (more
swiftly than the Eagle, the Arrow, or a Flash of Lightning) over the Face of
the whole Earth, v. 2.3. And the Curse of God (contained in the Roll within and
without) is as the Fiery Bullet, that burns on all sides, being like Ezekicls
Book, filled with such contents as Lamentation and Mourning, and Woe, Ezekiel.
2.9.10. This Curse of God when it falls upon the People of Gods Curse, Isa.
34.5. has a more mighty and mortal fall than the bulkiest Bullet in the World,
far beyond the Burden of that mountanious Bullet, which (History tells us)
was shot out of that monstrous murdering-piece, called Grand Diabolo, or the
great Devil: Inasmuch as the mighty Hands of the Almighty and All-Creating God
in Heaven, can give a greater and more fatal Blow, than can the created Hands
of the greatest Devil in Hell. This is the Fiery Bullet that Droppeth the
bitter Water which causes the Curse. Number. 5.18. and which will make the Thigh
to Rot, and the Belly to Swell. v. 21.23. Neither let any man say, that the
Curses written in Gods Book, are but Bug-bears, and that words are but wind, as
they said, Jer. 5.13. for the words written in that Book (or Hebrew Scroll)
should cause the waters thus to work, which (in themselves) had neither any
discerning Virtue, nor any destroying Vigor, yet the Divine Institution made
the same potion, either Poison or Medicine, according to the cleaness or
uncleaness of the party: Thus also Gods Word which Scoffers call but Wind, yet
may have Dreadful Effects, for even Wind, when gotten into the Bowels of the
Earth, may cause an Earthquake, so this Word of the Curse, when gotten into
the Bowels of a man's mind, may make an Heart-quake. Besides, that very Word
which those Mockers made light off as Wind, should become Fire, and themselves
Fuel to feed it. Jer. 5.13.14. And as Fire slyeth upon Fuel that is fully
dried, and consumes it in an instant, Nah. 1.10. So Gods Flying-Roll will lick
up wicked Livers, as that Fire from Heaven did the Sacrifice, the Wood, the
Stones, and the Dust, with all the Water in the Trench, 1. Kin. 18.38. Divine
Threatenings, in Gods Flying-Roll, are (as Erasmus says of Ezekiel. 3.18.) Fulmina
potius quam Verba. Hot Thunderbolts, rather than such Words as be but Wind) The
same God that has denounced it, will certainly do it, he will see his own Law
Executed. Zach. 5.4. and will (himself) Execute the Judgment written in this
Roll: Ps. 149.9 Yea and more than is written: Deuteronomy. 28.61. Upon the Head of the
Thief (great as well as small, as the Pyrate told Alexander) under which is
comprised all other Sinners against the second Table; and upon the Head of the
Swearer (comprehending all against the first) God has Sworn that Swearers
shall not enter into his Rest. We live in the Dreggs (the last and worst) of
Times, wherein Blasphemous Oaths, are belched out of Black Hellish Mouths, both
ordinary and openly, yea some Oaths are become Rhetorical Inrerjections of
Speech to the Vulgar sort, and other some mere Phrases of Gallantry to the
Damme-Gallants: but mark the end. The direful Curse comes flying with a Divine
Commission breaks into the Houses of those Thieves and Swearers) which they
call their Castles, wherein they think themselves out of the reach of Gods Rod)
there it remains as a troublesome Inmate in despite of them, they cannot rid
or remove this cursing Roll, until it has not only sauced their Meat and
spiced their Drink, with the Wrath of God, as Job 20.23. but until also the
Fire thereof has kindled the Brimstone that lay scattered upon their
Habitations, Job 18.14.15. This puts their All into a light Flame, consuming
both Timber and Stones, their persons and their Estates, which they have raked
together by Rapine, Sacriledg, Perjury, and other wicked ways: Such Balls of
Fire (Resembling this Flying Roll, etc.) have been seen faling out of Heaven
(Gods Temple) upon Woods, Ground, yea Houses here in England, The bigness of
which Fire Balls, have seemed to Spectators as large as the greatest Chaldrons,
these must be predictive Signs to us, as Jeremys Boyling-Pot was to the Jews,
Jer. 1.13. and as Ezekiels was, Ezekiel. 24.3.4.13. Representing Jerusalem which
then had a mighty Scum in her, but the Fire of Gods Wrath set the Pot on
boiling (by the Chaldeans) until it had boiled out all the Bones and the Flesh
(the Stoutest and Richest) at which they had Scoffed. Ezekiel. 11.3.7. But when
they go to the Po^, and boil lustily there, their Scoffs are forced back down
their own Throats, and their Hearts might then bespeak them, as the Heart of
the Tyrant Apollodorus (who dreamed he was taken and flead by the Scythians,
and boiled in a great Chaldron) did, cry out of the Kettle or Chaldron to him
(...) it is I that am the Cause of all this thy Misery. No less a Sign was
Ezekiels Iron Pan, to the Hard-Hearted Jews. Ezekiel. 4.3. both which
Hieroglyphics and Emblems did not only signify, their City should be hardly
Besieged, but also that God would so sees them in a Pot, and so fry them in a
Pan, as that they should pine away in their Iniquitys. Levit. 26.39. The good
Lord Divert this sore Judgment from London, and Direct it to Rome or mystical
Babylon, for she is worthy. Revel. 16 6.

The fifth wonderful Signs in the Heavens, is, the Several Suns that have been
seen in the Firmament, at some due distance one from another, as has been
Testified to me: but I shall not Insist upon this, (as I have upon the former)
not only because my Book begins to swell beyond my Expectation, but also
because I have resolved to enlarge upon nothing, no nor insert here any thing
upon slender Evidence, without evident and sufficient Testimony: It shall
therefore suffice to say but little to this, save only, that such an Apparition
need the less to be doubted of, seeing natural Philosophy mentions it, as one
of Natures Products, though not ordinarily, calling them parelia or Mock-Suns:
yet that Divine Philosopher Zanchy, does not only (in concurrence with Heathen
Philosopers) suppose such Apparitions to prognosticate abundance of wet
weather, but also (as he says further) various Judgments, as Famine, Sword,
etc. Zanch. de Oper. Dei. Page 348. Yea our own English Chronicles tell us,
that such an Apparition was seen in the Heavens in the beginning of Queen
Mary's Reign as there had been the like before, to presage the Death, of that
insolently proud Prelate, Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury.

In a word, both time and room (and it may be Credit too) would fail me, should
I insert the other Apparitions in the Air (we hear off if not see) as the
Dreadful Thunders and Lightnings, the Impetuous Wind and Whirlwinds, and many
strange Meteors which I designedly omit, until I get better prooff, (which I
truly desire from all good Hands) well knowing my Brethren that went before me,
in this Work 20 years ago, some do blame for credulity: Alterius perditto mea
fit cautio. The Censure passed upon my Predecessors (in the like work) for
being over Credulous, has been cogent to make me a little the more Cautelous:
Therefore I pass on to the second Scene or Theater, whereon God shows his
Wonderful Signs or Prodigies, to wit, on the Earth (as well as the first in the
Heavens or Air) And first of the Prodigious Hailstones, which God cast out of
the Air, down to the Earth, which cannot be called Apparitions in the Air (and
so belong to the first Scene) seeing their prodigious bulkiness could not be
distinctly discerned, until they appeared (fallen, taken up, and measured) upon
Earth. This same Prodigy or Wonderful Sign, happened upon the 18th. of May,
1680. which became so mischievous to all the Sky-Llights, all over London, etc.
and knocked down many Rooks, by their vast weight, and bigness, some of them
(being measured) were found seven Inches about, etc. This Sign also may be
exemplified both out of Sacred and Civil History. 1st. Sacred and 1st. The
Plague of Hail slones upon Egypt, Exodus 9.18. to 27. Such as that Land never
saw or felt before, for this seventh Plague was: 1st. More General than any,
being over the whole Land at once. 2ly. None ever was so Tempered with Fire
which ran along the Groun. v. 23. Though Fire and Hail be of two contrary
Tempers, yet in this they made a Peace betwixt themselves, that they might obey
the Will of their Creator. This was a strange mixture, and a Miracle within a
Miracle, says Rab. Solomon: such Hailstones and Coals of Fire mingled
together are mentioned: Ps. 18.13.14.15. and Isa. 30.30.31. as here and Ps.
78.47.48. and Ps. 105.32.33. 3ly. None ever so punctually Predictied and as
punctually Performed, according to the Prediction. v. 18.23.24.25. 4ly. None
ever so Destructive to Man, Beast and Trees, v. 25. Ps. 66.46.47.48. and
105.33. 5ly. None ever so Distinguishing though it was over all the Land of
Egypt, yet the Land of Goshen (a part of it) was exempted. v. 26. Such an
Exemption (was that Torrent of Fire which ran down from Mount Aetna) vouchsafed
to those Religious Children, which ventured to Rescue their Aged Parents, from
those fearful Flames, made Aristotle say, [(...)] It extorted from him an
acknowledgement of Gods good Providence for the Godly here on Earth, when he
saw the Flames of Fire, dividing themselves and making a Lane for those Godly
Rescuers of their Helpless Parents. The second sacred Instance of Prodigious
Hailstones. Josh. 10.11. Observed the like exemption or distinction (as that
in Exodus 9.26.) it is said [the Lord cast down great Stones from Heaven]
explained there [beebeni Habarod, Hagedeloth] such huge Hailstones as brained
the Canaanites, but hurt not the Israelites that were not only at their Heels,
but also mingled amonst them as they flew them in their Flight and dreadful
Thunder and Lightning came along with those Hailstones also, as not only
Josephus says, but Habaccuck likewise Habbac 3.11. Where God shot off his
shining Arrows, and darted from him his Glittering Spears, yea he levelled them
(whether Huge Hail stones, or Hot Thunderbolts) with so even an Hand to their
several marks, that he hit the one and missed the other, even when they were
intermingled together: this was Digitus Dei. 2ly. Civil History mentions
strange Hailstones, both Ethnicks, as Livy Decad. 1. Lib. 1. and Decad. 3.
Lib. 10. Claudian, etc. And Ecclesiastic, as Eusebius Lib. 5. Tertullian Cap.
5. Apolog. And Dio in the Life of Marcus Antonius (the Philosopher so called)
who fought against the Quades, and by the prayers of the Thundering L^^^on (as
in Aurelius the Emperors time they were called) of Christians, Ingens Gr ando
complur aque fulmina in Hosts Ceciderunt, etc. Such huge Hailstones, and hot
Thunderbolts falls upon the Enemy does that Heathen Historian say, as if he
had been an Ecclesiastic Writer) and Fire and Water did fall down from Heaven,
the Christians and their Party drank of the water and were Refreshed, but the
Quades (their Enemies) were Burnt by the Fire and Perished, while it fell not
at all upon the other, or if it did, it was presently quenched. Neither did the
Waters Relieve the Quades, but Inflame them, as if it had been Oil, so that
they called for Water to cool them, when the water fell upon them, yea and
wounded their own Bodies, to quench their burnings with their own Blood: many
more such strange Stories have we in the Magdeburg Centurists and in Ostanders
Epitome (too long to Relate) I add only that out of Pererius (the Jesuit) who
tells us of a most grievous Hail shower in France in the Reign of Lewis Son to
Charles the Great, which was so prodigious in the weight and bulk of the
Stones, that it slew both Man and Beast, and at that time a piece of Ice of 12
foot long, fell with the Hail out of the Air, etc. If there be such Wonders in
a Hail-shower, it is the less Wonder that God proposes this great Wonder to
Job, asking him, [Hast thou seen the Treasures of the Hail, which I have
Reserved against the time of Trouble, as the Day of Battle and War.] Job
38.22.23. Showing that the Inspection and Administration of all these marvelous
Meteors, do only belong to the Great God, he has vast Treasures of them, many
Arrows laid up in his Quiver (which can never be emptied, as the Poet says of
Joves) against the appointed time for Punishing his Adversaries, then he brings
forth his upper and lower Troops (as the Rabbis Phraise it) ready pressed for
his Service, and this he will do against Babylon, against which God has a most
Dreadful Shower of Hailstones, Revel. 16.17.18.21. where the seventh Plague
upon Egypt is compared to the seventh Plague upon Babylon, yet this latter far
worse, as more weighty than the former, every Hail-stone weighed a Talent, far
bigger than those that Brained the Cananitish Kings. Josh. 10. See my
Church History page 507. When our Joshua or blessed Jesus shall come forth
Conquering and to Conquer the World (as that Typical Joshua did Canaan) he has
a worse Shower of Hailstones wherewith to knock down not only all the Romish
Rooks (that would Rook us of our Reformed Religion) but also to Brain all the
Grandees of the Earth, that lend their Power to uphold the tottering Whore of
Babylon; those prodigious Hailstones shall drop down out of Heaven and descend
upon the Earth. Revel. 20.9 as if both conspired to destroy Christ's Enemies, as
they had done David's before. Ps. 18.13.14.15. and the Churches Isa. 30.30.31.
Such as never were seen upon Earth. Revel. 16.18.

The second Wonderful Sign upon Earth, is that strange Apparition to the Maid
at Hatfield.

Elizabeth Freemans Relation, taken before Sir Joseph Jordan Knight. and Richard
Lee D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, and Rector of Hatfield, on Jan.
31.80.
I. SHE says, That Jan. 24. Sitting by the Fire side about 5 in the Evening
(which was its constant time of appearing) she heard a voice behind her, mildly
saying, Sweetheart! She turning back, saw the appearance of a Woman (as she
thought, all in white, with a white Vail, so that she saw no Face, but a very
white Hand was laid on the back of her Chair) which said to Her; The 15th. of
May is appointed for the Royal Blood to be Poisoned, and further said, be not
afraid, for I am sent to tell thee. II. That on Jan. 25. coming home, it
appeared in White and Veiled, as before, saying, Do you remember what I said?
she Answered, yes. She farther said, In the Name of the Father Son and Holy
Ghost, what art thou? It immediately appeared in a very glorious shape, with a
very Beautiful Face, and with a Crown on its Head: and harshly said, Tell K.
Charles from me, not to remove his Parliament, and stand to his Council, and
charging her to obey its Command, to which she answered, yes, etc. III. On Jan.
26. It came again, she being at home, and her Mother perceiving her troubled,
said Daughter see thou any thing? she not being able to speak, nodded her
Head and waving her Hand: the Mother said, shall I go out? she being enabled to
speak, and the Apparition nodding to her, she said, yes. The Mother going out,
the Apparition bid her do her Message: she answered, I will, so soon as God
shall enable me, it said be not afraid, and so Vanished. IV. It appeared Jan.
27. at a Neighbors House, but spoke not. V. It appeared again at home, as
formerly, Jan. 28. her Mother and two Neighbors being present, seeing her
begin to be troubled, they all kneeled down to Prayer, it commanded her to do
her Message, saying, the Lord will go with you, but the persons by did neither
hear nor see it. VI. Jan. 29. It appeared as she was praying, but said nothing.
VII. Again the 30th. it appeared, but said nothing. VIII. Jan. 31. It appeared
to her again at her Brother-in-Law's House, being in a very glorious shape, as
on the Tuesday before, and said, God has sent me to bid you do as he has
commanded you. etc. IX. It appeared on Feb. 1. again, in white, but said
nothing. X. Feb. 2. The day she came to London, it appeared again, and
commanded her to bid K. Charles keep to his Nobles, and them he takes to be his
Enemies, and keep the Parliament in the City. XI. Feb. 3. She being at
Whitehal, could not be admitted to speak to the King: as she was coming back
faw the Apparition in white, but it said nothing. XII. On the same day it
appeared again, and said, You have done your endeavor to the utmost that God
has commanded you, you shall be troubled no more.

Feb. 9th. This Maid, accompanied with Sir Joseph Jordan, Dr. Lee, Mr.
Wilkinson, her Mother and others, attended the King and Council, where his
Majesty asked her many Questions, and heard her Relation patiently, after which
bidding her Go home and serve God, and she should see no more such Visions; or
to that effect, and so she was dismissed. Yet about the middle of April 81. She
Relates, that the Vision has appeared again to her, and has commanded her
once more to present her self to his Majesty.

The first grand Enquiry, is whether this Apparition were a good or an Evil
Angel. Answer, 1. In general: A Visible Apparition of Invisible Spirits, is
preternatural, and therefore a Prodigy, whether the Spirit that appears be good
or bad: 2ly. Learned men give this Character of Distinction betwixt the
Apparition of a good and of an evil Angel. That the good always appear in the
shape of Beautiful Persons or Clean Creatures; as, of a Lamb to Clement, of an
Heart to Eustace, and of a Dove to Gummarus, etc. But the Evil Angels Appear as
Deformed men, or as Filthy Beasts. Thus the Devil appeared to an Assembly of
Witches in the Shape of a Stinking Goat, and of a filthy Hog, in these Churches
of Agatha, profaned by Arrians. Thus Satan (soon after his Fall) took the
likeness of a Serpent, and is called so, yea a Dragon, and thus he is said to
appear in the ugly shape of all loathsome Creatures to Hillary, Anthony, etc.
As Athanasius and Hierome in their supposititious Relations have Reported. yea,
some do further say, Hoc est admodum mirahile nunquam Visos esse Daemones
utroque pede Humano ull^bi apparuisse, etc. Says Fornerus De Angelis Sermon. 9.
It Is a very Wonderful thing says he, that Devils never are seen appearing any
where in man's shape, with both Feet alike, but either with one Foot cloven, or
with a whole club Foot. All this seems not an infalibly distinguishing
Character: for, it is true, the great God can put such discriminating Brands
upon such deceitful Apparitions, of Evil Spirits, and possibly does often mark
them so: yet this will not hold Universally true, for that Devil who can (as
the Scripture of Truth says) turn himself into an Angel of Light. 2. Cor.
11.14. may also Tranform himself into the shape of some comely Man, or lovely
Beast: 3. That which the Apostle there affirms, was then taken for granted
among the Learned (such as Paul's opposers deemed themselves) and this was
acknowledged by Porphyry, Jam^lichus, etc. That the Devil (the Prince of
Darkness) could Transform himself into an Angel of Light, either by assuming to
himself a lightsome, comely and glorious Body, as if he were an Angel of
Heaven, or by suggesting something that seems to savor of Piety and Zeal for
God, as if it came from some blessed Angel, whereas his suggestions (as he
suggesteth them) do indeed tend to Gods D^shonour and the Souls Ruin. 4 The
Character that even Porphyry gives Satan (calling him (...)) one of many Forms
and Fashions, does Evidence, that it was the Opinion of the Ancients, how he
does not always appear in one and the same Form, but has as many several
shapes as Proteus had among the Poets: This is made more manifest in the
History of the Acts of the Apostles, as, first at Lystra he appeared as a
Comedian, as if a Scene of Plautus were to be Acted upon the Stage, Act.
14.11.12. etc. Secondly, at Antioch he appeared like a Jesuit with Traditions
in his Mouth. v. 26. and Act. 15.1. Thirdly at Athens, he sallyes out like a
Philosoper, Act. 17.18. Fourthly, at Ephesus he takes the likeness of a Master-
Artisicer. Act. 19.24. And fifthly, ot Corinth, he tranforms himself into an
Angel of Light. 2. Cor. 11.14. with Act. 18.6. etc. In all those places the
Devil Acted the parts of all the aforesaid, though he did not visibly assume
their shapes. 5ly. As to the latter Times touching visible Apparitions; Severus
Sulpitius in the Life of Martinus, chap. 25. gives this Account, that Satan
appeared in the form of a good Angel, among other Apparitions to Anatholius a
young Monk, etc. He tells how the Devil appeared to St. Martin (so called) as
he was praying in his Monastic Cell, the apparition seemed very glorious,
sparkling with a dazeling light, having upon it Royal Robes, upon its Head a
Golden Crown bespangled with Jewels, upon its Feet gilded Shoes, and with a
benign Aspect out of a comely mouth spoke as follows [ Oh Holy Martin,
acknowledge me whom thou beholds, I am Christ coming down to the Earth, and I
would first manifest my self to thee, etc.] and the Apparition often Repeating
those Words, the man (Martin) Answered, that Christ had no where foretold, he
would come again in so glittering and glorious a posture (upon Earth) before
the last day. I will not believe that it is Christ (who is come now to me)
unless he appear in the same Form and Habit wherein he suffered, and having his
five Wounds wherewith he was stigmatized upon the Cross; upon this Answer the
Devil vanished out of sight, leaving an horrible stink behind him, as says the
Author. See him of sundry other Stories of the like Delusions: and Johan.
Wierus de praestigijs Domonum Lib. 11. Cap. 16. 6. There is another Character
whereby the Discourse of an Evil Angel to us may be discerned from that of a
good one, which Peter Thyreus Lib. 4. of Apparitions, Chap. 16. Numb. 17.
mentions, saying [The Discourse of a good Angel does at the beginning
affright a person, but afterward leaves that mind quieted and comforted, but
on the contrary, when an Evil Angel appears and discourses them, it is
pleasing and insinuating at the first, but it ever leaves the mind disturbed
and in little ease at the end. The same Sign does Pineda give, in his Notes
upon Job, 4. v. 16 This also is no Infalible Note, but a falacious Sign also,
for the Apparition of a good Angel 1st. To Sampsons Mother was no way
affrightful to her, but rather comfortable, encouraging her to run to her
Husband, to acquaint him with the glad Tidings, Judge. 13.3.6. Neither was her
Husband terrified with this Apparition, speaking boldly to it [art thou he
which spoke to the Woman] v. 11. Though after his departure, a Trembling Seized
upon Him, through want of Faith v. 22. not upon her, whose Faith was strong v.
23. and 2ly. The Apparition of an Evil Angel (or Devil) to Saul (as the good
Angel was Christ to Sampsons Parents, Jud 13.22.30. called Elohim and Jehovah)
did drive the King into a Swoon. 1. Sam. 28, 20 preaching to him his Funeral
Sermon, yet at the close he had some small comfort from the Witches fatted
Calf, not so much to refresh him, as to get him safe out of her House, and
least his qualm of fear should drive him quite off from the Devil. Both these
two Instances are point blank contradictory to Thireus and Pinedas
distinguishing Character. 7ly. Neither is that Sign (which some say is
distinguishing) any better than the former, to wit, It must be a good Angel
that suggest good things, whereas the Devil can give good Counsel, and put upon
good Duties, but always for evil Ends, as Bodinus observes in Lib. 23. de
Daemonomania cap. 6 and Samuel (himself) could not have spoken more gravely and
severely than Satan did. 1. Sam. 28.16. I have read a Story of a good man, who
was very weak, and after his Solemn calling upon God, on his Knees by his
Bedside, he betakes himself to his Bed for Rest, but being about to sleep, an
Apparition speaks to him, saying, rise up to Prayer; The poor Tempted Soul
bravely answered the Tempter, I Will pray at Gods bidding not at the Devils, etc.
And it is a known case Satan suggests to his Vassals (Witches and Wizzards) to
frequent places of Gods Worship but all in Hypocrisy) least they should seem to
be so bad as they are indeed: yea sometimes to receive the Eucharist, but to
reserve it for some of their Magic and Diabolical Charms. So that it is best
judging of such Suggestions from the end proposed, The Devils evil end in
prompting the Sick man to the Good Action of Prayer was to discompose him from
sleep and to destroy him thereby. 8. But much less may an Evil spirit be
distinguished from a good one by the place where the Apparition is appearing;
for the Devil sometimes can thrust himself in among the Sons of God or Elect
Angels, Job 1.6. and when Satan thus makes himself one among the Holy Angels,
it is by Divine permission, and not without the overruling power of God: The
good Angels came into Gods presence for good to Job, but this evil one for evel
to him, to wit, for a Commission to hurt him, yet even this God over ruled for
good: Jam. 5.11. though the beginning was the Devils, yet the End was the
Lords, So Zech. 3.1 2. yea and long before that, that Evil Angel was got into
Pardice the best place that was then in the World; yea, and long after that he
could not only accompany, but even carry Christ himself to the Holy Temple,
when he placed him upon a Pinnacle of it, thus it appears from
Scripture-Record, that evil Spirits may appear. even in good places, as well as
bad ones: to this Drexelius Vision gives a farther confirmation, saying, He saw
ten Devils at a Sermon, and but one at a Market; the Reason whereof he gives,
is, that at a Sermon, men stand in Awe of Gods presence there, Act. 10.33. and
therefore ten Devils Satan thinks few enough to tempt them, that they may not
serve the Lord without Distraction. 1. Cor. 7.35. But at a Market the Tempter
needs not so many tempting Tools, for there one man will (fast enough) Tempt
another, The Buyer the Seller, and the Seller the Liar. The second great
Enquiry is, Whether God uses the Ministry of good Angels to his Servants now
under the Gospel? Answer 1st. without all controversy he does, yet in an
insensible and in an invisible manner, that God might draw up our Hearts
Heavenward, and have our Gonversation in Heaven, while our Commoration is on
Earth. Phil. 3.20. Devils are not more ready to tempt and devour us, than the
Angels are to succor and deliver us: As Evil Angels do suggest Evil Motions,
so do good Angels good ones, and as our good endeavors are often hindered by the
Evil Spirit: 1. These. 2.18. So are our evil undertakings often by the good
Angels, otherwise our Protection were not equal to our Danger. The Devil moved
Balaam to go and curse Israel, a good Angel resists him, and speaks in the
mouth of his Ass to convince him, etc. Here Bishop Hall notes well, in his
contemplation on that Scripture, If an Heavenly spirit stands in the way of a
Sorcerer Sins, how much more are all those Caelestial powers ready to stop the
miscarriages of Gods dearest Children: how often (yet more) had we fallen, had
not these Blessed Guardians upheld us in their Arms. Ps. 91.11. whether by
removing the occasions and opportunities of Evil, or by injecting contrary
instincts and motions to Good. As Michael opposed Satan about the Body of
Moses, so do the good Angels about the Bodies and Souls of the Saints while
they live and carry their Souls immediately into Abraham's Bosom when they Dye;
therefore should we bless God for Angels Ministry, as a part of Christ's
Purchase. Heb. 1.6.7.14. who have their Commission from him (to keep the Saints
in their way) as well as their Confirmation by him in their own Everlasting go
dness: hence he is their Head, Col. 2.10. and that Jacobs Ladder on which they
Ascend with Men's Desires, and Descend with Gods Answer. Genesis 28.12. much more I
might add, but I avoid prolixity.

The Second Answer. It must be granted that in the times of the Old and New
Testament, God did use the Visible Ministry of good Angels, as in the Old to
Abraham, Genesis 18.17. to Lot, Genesis 19.15. to Gideon, Judge 6.12.14. and to
Manoah, Judge. 13.3. etc. and in the New Testament, to Joseph, Matt. 1.20. to
Zachary, Luke 1.13. and to the Blessed Virgin, Luke 1.26. etc. Then did God
speak to his Servants at Sundry times and in diverse manners, that is, in
Dreams and Visions by his Angels, but now he has spoke to us by his Son, Heb.
1.1.2. and therefore all Visible Apparitions are ceased but not their Invisible
Operations: They still Act for Gods Church and Children, though invisibly,
therefore their Hands are represented to be under their Wings, Ezekiel. 1.8.
because their Actions are for the most part insensible and invisible: For God
now Governs his Church in a spiritual manner, without the visible Apparitions
of Angels, though they be present with the Church in an invisible way: Eccles
5.6. and 1. Cor. 11.10. It Is true, the Retired Saints of the primitive Times
(as well as the Holy Martyrs) since the New Testament Times, had sometimes good
Angels appeared to them, for their consolations in their forced solaudes and
sufferings as the best Ecclesiastic Historys Record, concerning the Holy
Virgin, Theophyla, Agnes, Lucia, Caecilia, and others, to prorect them in their
Chastity, whilst driven into Deserts by Persecution; as also concerning
Theodorus (who had an Angel wiping off his Sweat, with a soft Handkerchief,
while he was under hard Torments by his Tormentors) and many others: but the
Elder the Church grew, the more rare became those Apparitions, as of other
miraculous Signs, not because Gods Arm was shortened, etc. but because his
Church was (through his gracious Providence) now settled in an ordinary way:
Thus it was with the Infant Church in the Wilderness, there she had the Food of
Angels rained down daily upon her, but when come into Canaan that Ceased, and
then Israel must purvey for themselves: so now we must not expect either the
Food or the Apparition of Angels.

The Third Answer, Goulartius in his Collections of the memorable Histories of
later (than those primitive) Times, makes his Reports of several such
Apparitions, yea Melancton in his Coment upon Daniel, tells us of his own
knowledge, how holy Grynoeus was delivered from a bloody Popish Priests
intention to Murder him (for reproving him of false Doctrine) by an Angels
appearing to Melancton (like a grave goodly old man) and warning him to bid
Grynoeus hasten out of Spyres quickly, who no sooner had got a Boat upon the
Rhine, but he was immediately and eagerly sought for at his Lodging, by his
very name, which (it seems) the good man had told the Priest, upon his
dissemblingly desiring some farther Conference with him.

Answer the Fourth, The best Casuists (I can consult with) do say, that it is
neither pious nor profitable now for men to affect either the Apparition or
Conference with Holy Angels: indeed the carnal Jews did of Old, attribute much
to this, John 12.29. thinking that Bath-kol, or Daughter of a voice from
Heaven, was the Voice of some Angel, not only because the Decalogue (which God
himself is said to speak) was ascribed by them to be spoke by Angels, Act.
7.38. and Hebr. 2.2. but also because they did not think God would speak to
Christ in his own person, being they looked upon Moses, as greater than Christ,
and Eusebius Hist. Lib. 5. Cap. 15. Tells us, how the Montanists (as well as
Jews) were great pretenders to Angels-Apparition, from whom they ventured to
foretell sundry things which came not to pass, so event proved them Liars, etc.
Yea Mahomet (that Grand Cheat) pretended he received his Hodg-Podg Archaron
from Gabriel the Angel, and the Romanists boart (even our-vying Mahomet) of a
mighty power over Angels, Insomuch that they pretend to show a Plume of
Feathers, that was plucked out of Gabriels (that Archangels) Wings: possibly it
might be got when Angels (as common Fowls) do Mowt and cast their I eathers:
yea Popery (at this day) ascribes much to the Apparition of Spirits, from whom
they understand the state of their Friends in Purgatory: Thus are they (for
rejecting the Truth) judicially given up of God to believe Lies, as Experience
(the School Mistress of Fools) do suffciently Teach, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. This is a
part of the Romish Apostasy, to give heed to seducing Spirits, and to Dectrine
of Devils. 1. Tim. 4.1.

Answer the Fifth, To receive any new Doctrine from an Angel is now abominable,
Gal. 1.8. For Angels have no Divine Institution to be Teachers of Men in the
Church, they have no Sacred Mission or Function thereto, Romans 10.15. 1. Cor.
12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. God has Instituted the Ministry of Man (not of Angels) to
Build up his Church, this Honor God gives to Man, and the Word Preached by Man
is called the Word of God. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. and they that Hear Man (according to
the Gospel are said to hear God. Luke 10.16. yea it is so far the power of God,
as to pull down the power of the Devil, therefore let none he beguiled into a
voluntary Worship of Angels, Col. 2.18.

Answer the Sixth. The very light of Nature among the Heathens, did lead them
to speak of both Lares, or good Angels, the Guardians of Good Men, and of
Lemures, to evil Angels, the pursuers and vexers of Evil Men, thus a Devil
entered into Judas and an Evil Spirit often Vexed Soul. 1. Sam. 16.14. etc. Yea,
it is not scarce yet out of the Memory of some men, how frequent were the
Apparitions of Evil Spirits, Phayrie, Hebgeblins, and many frightful Spectrums,
wherewith many places were frequently Haunted, and many persons horribly
distracted in Times of Popery and gross Superstition; and the rareness of such
scaring Visions, in these latter times of Reformation, is sufficient to
discover the difference (as Bishop Hall excellently says betwixt the state of
Ignorant (Popish) Superstition, and the clear Light of the Gospel. Bishop Hall
of Evil Angels, page 993. And Camerarius (with others) tell us, how usual those
Strange Apparitions were in times of Darkness, although now (blessed be God)
the Relation thereof is terrible to us. Camerrarius his History Obser. Lib. 4.
Cap. 15. page 288. Theater of Gods Judgments page 531. to 437. Mr. Baxter's
Rest, Edi. 2. page 271. Lavater de spectris per totum, etc. 'Twas frequent then
before the Reformation in Europe (where the Gospel has not come to Dethrone
the Devil) The Ignorant Indians see and hear strange Spectrums and Spirits in
bodily shape, Night and Day, whereas in New England (by the Light of the
Gospel) is much delivered from that Prince of Darkness: Sozomen writes of one
Apelles (a famous Egyptian Smith) who was tempted to uncleanness, by a Devil
in the shape of a Woman, in which shape (says Trimethius) never any good Angle
Appeared; hereby we may make some guess at Dr. Dees Galitah the Maid, one of
his Spirits, which after appeared as a Man. Dr. Dee, page 12.16. and at his
Friend E. Kelly, who could not abide his own Wife, but abhorred her. page 30.
and at his Uriel (another of his Spirits) that often swore [marry] page 411. yea
and himself who condemns Calvin, Luther, etc. and denis the ^ope to be
Antichrist, etc. Joh. Bromiar. Sum proedict. v. superbia. Tells a famous Story
of an Angel, and an Hermit walking together, there laid in their way some
stinking Carrion, at this the Hermit stops his Nose, turns away his Head and
hasts out of that offensive Smell, but the Angel held on his way, without any
show of dislike: straightway they met with a very proud, pragmatical man, gayly
adorned, deeply perfumed, looking loftiy, and strutting along in a most stately
posture, the Hermit gave this man great reverence and admiration, but the
Argel stopped his Nostrills, turned away his Head, etc. Rendering this Reason,
that the stench of Pride was more loathsome to God and his Angels, than that
stinking Carcass could be to him: Here was a better Character of the Apparition
of a good Angel than of those Spirits, that Dr. Do mentions: I might add
much more, etc.

Answer the Seventh: Suppose an Apparition of Evil Spirits, Casuists conclude
it unsafe to confer with them: our Grandmother Eve got a fall by holding Chat
with the Devil in Paradise. That Fort or Castle which yields to a Parley, is
accounted half lost, they are too wily for us, having much advantage over us,
standing upon higher ground to us, etc. Bishop Hall's Cases of Conscience, page
161. ctc. Saying he admired at the Jesuit Cottons considence, who provided
many Questions to propound to a Demoniack, some whereof were matters of State,
concerning the then French King, and the King of England, page 165. and Cotton
being questioned for this, answered he had License from Rome for his so doing,
ibid. and much more of Romes trash. As to this Apparition in particular, though
at first sight, it seemed to me dressed up like the Devils Oracle at Delphos,
in ambiguous Expressions, yet upon second thoughts (which should always be the
best, as being most deliberate) I shall not take upon me to Determine, either
its goodness or badness, as to kind or thing, but shall refer my Reader to a
serious comparing it with the Circumstances of the aforegoing general Answers,
subjoyning only, that it is Gods declared Will, we should Live by Faith, and
not Walk by Sense or sight of such Apparitions, wherein there may be much
Daceptio Visus. History (indeed) tell us, that in some extraordinary case, God
has given out some Apparitions for the discovery of some secret heinous
Murder, etc. and this he may do by Devils, who are reputed ready to make such
Discoveries, that their Prey may come sooner into their Hands, by the stroke of
Justice. As to the Predictions of future Events, which Apparitions do
pronounce; some few things (for Brevity sake) only, shall be said here. As
first, it is God and God alone (who is Omniscient) that himself can foretell
future Events, Isa 41.22.23. The Prophet convinces the Heathen of the Vanity
of their Gods (or Idols, saying, That all certain Predictions of future
Providence (which yet have no assured natural Cause or significant Sign)
belongs only to the true God. Thus the Prophet Argues, chapter 44.7. and
45.20.21. and 46.10. and 48.14. Idols cannot declare things to come. Secondly.
The Devil (though a most Intelligent Spirit can know nothing of what shall
befall for the future, save only those things he sees in their Causes, or in
the light of participation: The Devil can better Discover what is past and
done, by his own Instigation, as that Murder committed on a Stranger, at an Inn
in Exeter, 30 years before the Discovery was made by an Apparition: as was
likewise the Fraud of an Executor converting a Gentleman's Estate from his
Children to his own use, who was affrighted by an Apparition unto a Restitution
to the right Heirs, both happened lately, and seem to be well attested by Godly
Ministers. It Is certain that future Contingents are not within the compass of
the Devils Cognizance any other way, seeing they are wholly at Gods disposing:
yet Satan in some Cases, and at some times, can foretell things to come, as
1st. He being a Mighty Naturalist, able (by his Angelical sagacity) to dive
into the deepest causes and secrets of Nature which men cannot do) and so
accordingly to frame his Predictions, such as seem supernatural to us he is
also an Exact Artist, attained (both by his acute Observations, and almost 6000
years Experience) to an acquaintance of all natural, moral, and political
causes of things, as the Premises, hence may he give shrewd guesses (though he
know nothing Infalibly) and gather such consequences, as may probably come to
pass, if the great God be not pleased to interrupt this Chain of Causes, as he
sometimes does, by his overruling Power. Though Satan be a Prince of Darkness,
yet may he have secondly such a participation of some light by Divine (not only
pirmission, but) Commission, when God makes him the Executioner of his
Judgments, and in such a case it is easy for him to foretell future things, as in
the Case of Job, he could predict (without difficulty) that such and such Evils
would shortly befall that good man, when he had got a Commission from God for
them, and wanted no tools to work them: and as in the Case of the 400 false
Prophets of Ahab, in whose Mouth he had a Commission from God to be a Lying
Spirit, and delude them. 1. Kin. 22.6^ 22. which shows King Ahab's Death, was
revealed to the Devil, and then he could Reveal it to whom he pleased. The
Devil Deceived those Deceivers the false Prophets, and they Deceived Ahab, and
draws him (as the Mouse) into the Trap, where he Perished, not only for his
Cruelty to Nabeth, but by his Credul^ty to those many cursed Sycophants: yea,
and in the Case of Saul (which is yet higher) he only could have foretold the
^a^^ of King ^ha^ (ut supra) but he actually did foretell the Death of King
Saul. 1. Sam. 28.19. Naming the time, though in ambiguous Words, as [to morrow]
is indefinitely used, Exodus 13.14. and Matt. 6.34. Thus the Devil Equivocates
in all his Oracles (as in this and in that of Ahab) The Lord shall deliver into
the Hands of the King) 1. Kin. 2.26. where the Particle [it] is not in the
Original: The word [thee] may as well be supplied: and this Lying Spirit names
not which of the Kings he meant, whether Ahab or Benhadad, yea his quibling
Oracle (as the Delphick Devil had many) might be construed in a quite contrary
Sense: either 1st. The Lord will deliver [thee] Ahab into the hands of
Benhadad, or 2ly. [It] to wit, Ramoth Gilead into the hand of Ahab: thus the
deceitful Devil will save his Credit, what ever happened, and yet as bad as this
Abaddon is, he shows more ingenuity here than does the Jesuits, for he
ingeniously acknowledges his Equivocating Oracle, to be no better than a Base
Lie, saying I will go and be a Lying Spirit, in the Mouth of all Ahabs
Pa^asytical Prophets. v. 22. However Satan (that mock- Samuel) seems more
positive and peremptory in his Predictions of Saul's Dow^fal (as above) yet this
was no more than what a prudently-thinking man might have conjectured from the
concurrence of secundary Causes how much more might an acutely observing Devil
make up a shrewd Guess (by comparing things with things) of Saul's approaching
Ruin: He could not be ignorant both of Saul's Rejection, and of David's
Election, the Courage and Confidence of the Philistines Army, the Despondenties
and Diffidence of Saul and his Soldiers (both which had been formerly
Valorous) were not unknown to him, or possibly he might peep into those
Prophetic Predictions concerning Saul and David, in chapter 15. and 16. of the
first of Sam. Yea he well knew, what himself designed to do in the day of
Battle (with Gods Permission) against Saul who had forfeited Gods Protection.
The third Consideration I shall conclude with is, that the Devil has his
Instruments or Vassals amongst Mankind, to whom he imparts his Predictions,
that they may impart them to others; and those are mostly Women (of the Devils
choice) more than Men, because they are Weaker Vissels, whose credulity is
sooner imposed upon, and easilyer abused and deluded by the Devil: we have two
samous Instances one in the Old the other in the New Testament) the 1st hereof
is 1. Sam. 28.7. where Saul said, seck me out a Woman that has a familiar
Spirit not a Man but a Woman, he had put down Witches before, yet hoped he some
might be remaining (though not of Men, yet) of Women, which are wont to be
lighter and proner to Superstition, not only because of weaker Wits and apter
to be Deceived, but, seeing they cannot compass any Fame or Glory by Noble
Exploits (as men can) they therefore would become Famous by Magic Art: hence
this Woman became a Dame to a familiar Spirit, and thither Saul comes, who
rather than fail would crave help from Hell, etc. And the second Instance is
not unlike this first, Act. 16.16. The Divining Damosel, who probably foretold
many things that came to pass, otherwise she could never have brought so much
Gain to her Masters, as that Scripture says: she might make unhappy Hits
sometimes, from the sagacity of (her grand Master) Satan; yet miss too at other
times; for if the Devil himself cannot foretell all future Events, nor any thing
Infalibly himself, but either as it is Revealed to him by God (as was Ahab's
Fall at Ramoh Gilead) or as be foreseeth them in the Causes, Signs or
Prophecies of Holy Scripture, wherein he is not a little skilled, and out of
which he sometimes steals a parcel. Far be it from me to apply our present
Apparition to either of these aforementioned, especially upon these Grounds.
1st. We do not find that this Apparition required any Adoration; when Saul
bowed himself to Satan (that Mock- Samuel) 1. Sam. 28.14. That Adoration was
the main thing that the Devil chiefly aimed at: 2ly. We do not find (in our
Case) any seeking to this Apparition, for that is (Tantamount) a Worshipping,
though there be no bowing, and how far amounts holding Conference with
Apparitions (see above) but yet it seems an higher step to obey their Commands,
especially such as are dissonant to the Law of Nature or Nations, or Scripture,
which is not our Case, neither does this comport with the latter Instance,
though here is a Divining Damsel, yet not such an one as the Septuagints usually
call (...) because the Devil spoke out of their Bellys; for which cause also
the Hebrews call them Oboth or Bottles, because the Bellys of those Women (thus
made use of by the Devil) swelled as big as Bottles, when they began to
Prophesy. 2ly. Neither do we hear of any gain either to her self or to her
Masters here, as appears there. 3ly. Neither do we find any Disturbance given
to Gods Worship under specious pretenses here, as is found there. They that
desire to know more of those Divining Intrigues, let them consult Baldwins
Cases of Conscience. Lib. 3. Page 533. to 620. etc. too long here (so much as
to abridge in this small Treatise) and other Casuists; I add this only, 1st. If
the Death of any be foretold by the Devil we ought not to believe it, as from
him (the Liar) God can Cross it, 2ly. If God permit it, it is to harden the
superstitious Observers of it: 3ly. it is enough Gods Word. foretells that all
shall fall out for the best to them that love God, Romans 8.28. So ail's welcome:
so far as Gods Word guides us, we walk safely, but if we step farther into a
By-way 'twill lead us down into the Chambers of Death.

I Omit the strange Apparitiors at Pons Town in Tipperary in Ireland, attested
by 16 persons Eye Witnesses, and Printed. The last and latest of Land-Prodigies
(omitting many others that come not yet well proved to my Hand (is the Death of
3 Tower-Lyons; called Old Charles, Queen and Duke which is the more Remarkable,
because we do not find (scarce in a whole Age) any Record of the Death of so
much as one of those Royal Long Lived Creatures (the Keeper whereof is so much
obliged both by Loyalty and Advantage to preserve them) much less of so many
and that within few days, as if they had conspired to march off together, the
more to amuse and amaze this Tripple Realm, for every Kingdom one: to Exemplify
it in our English Chroniels, though something like it is said to happen in King
Richards Reign, yet I cannot find a fit Parallel unto this strange Prodigy upon
Record, save only in Henry the sixths Reign, Whereof Sir Richard Baker (who is
generally owned as an Impartial Chronicler of former Times) gives us this
Account. That in the 18th. year of Henry the sixth all the Lions in the Tower
Dyed. Bakers Chron. page 199. This Kings Reign was attended with many mischiefs
betwixt him and the then Duke of York. Henry the Fifth after he had Conquered
France, and kept his Court with incompatable Magnificence for some time, then
he Returns with his Queen into England, who was delivered of a Son at Windsor,
called therefore Henry the 6. of Windsor (upon whom at his Birth his Father
spoke Prophetically [I Henry of Monmouth have gained much and shall remain but
a short time: but Henry of Windsor shall Reign long and loose all] and acording
to this Paternal Prophesy the Son first lost His All in France, and after, 2ly.
His All in England. In this Henry the sixths time, France, Normandy, Aquitain,
were all lost from the English, and in England such were the bloody Contentions
between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, that ten several fierce Battles
were fiercely fought between the two Factions, whereof 5 were fought in Henry
the sixths time. The first at St. Albans in which Yorks prevailed: the second
at Black Heath, in which the Confederate Lords were Conquerors: the third at
Northampton, in which Henry the sixth was again overthrown: the fourth at
Wakefield, in which the King was Victorious: the sixth at Towton, in which the
new Duke of York carried it, who became thereby King Edward the IV. In whose
time also five more several set Battles were fought upon the same Quarrel: as
first, that at Exham: secondly, that at Banbury: thirdly, the Battle of
Loose-Coats: fourthly, that in Barnet Fields: and fifthly that at Tewxbury.
Thus even the White Rose was Dyed Red, over and over again, with the blood of
many brave men, and a Period was never put to this Contention twixt the White
and Red Rose, until that concluding Battle at Bosworth Fields, in which the
Plantaginets expired, and both the Houses were after united in Henry the VII.
Rosse's History of the World, page 534. etc. and Dr. Prideaux's History of
Successions in our own Land, page 333. Who tells a memorable Story of those
such Catching Times (as he calls them) of one Burdet a Mercer in Cheap. side,
who jocularly said to his Son, if he would ply his Book, he should be Heir to
the Crown (meaning his own House, which had the Crown for its Sign, and had no
Relation to the Crown of the Kingdom) for this Jest the Man lost his Life:
assuredly an Honest Jury would not have given him such hard Measure. God bless
us from such Contentious and such catching Times, which were presaged not only
by the Death of the Tower Lions, as above, but also by several other Prodigies,
as a Blazing Star, Monstrous Births, a prodigious C^^k out of the Sea at
Portland, crowing three times, and turning his Head to the South, North and
West, and Paul's Steeple was fired with Lightning: See Ra^^es History of the
World, page 534. And Sir Richard Bakers Chronology of the same time, all these
Prodigies were Presages of sad future Calamities. Enquiry, Why must the Death
of Lions be made a Prodigy, seeing they are M^r^^ as other Beasts, and Dye only
in the common course of Nature? Answer the first, Consider in the general, A
Lion 1st. For his Majesty, that sits enthroned in his looks. 2ly. For his
Magnanimity, as disdaining to go out of his stately pace, though Danger pursue
him, Prove. 30. v. 30. 3ly. For his Formidableness, insomuch that when the Lion
Roareth, all the Beasts Tremble, Am. 3.8. and have not power to fly from him,
though they can out run him; hence he is the Hyeroglyphick of Dominion, and
worthily as well as vulgarly is called the King of Beasts. Hereupon the Fall of
a Lion is as the Fall of Abner, the Fall of a Prince, 2. Sam. 3.38. It Is looked
on as a Fatal Fall, the Death of a Lion was the presage of Julian's death,
says Ammianus Marcellinus, Answer the second, more specially as the living
Lion Resembles Majesty Domineering (according to Aesops Apologue) over the Ass
and the Fox in sharing the Prey they had jointly caught in Hunting: So the Dead
Lion represents Majesty Deceased (according to Alciats Emblem and the Greek
Epigram (...).

Thouth the Lion while living be the Noblest of Beasts, Prove. 30.30. yet when
Dead, this Noble Beast is exposed to the Scorn of the most weak and timorous
Hares. Hence arose the Hebrew Proverb, that a living Dog (with them the basest
of Creatures) was better than a Dead Lion (both as to Use and as to Essence)
Eccles. 9.4. Importing that the meanest man Living, is better than the greatest
man Dead. Answer the third, The Death of a Tower Lion is more portentous than
the Death of many Lions in the Wilds of Lybia, whereof no notice would be
taken, but a Tower Lion is the Darling as well as Emblem of Princes, and the
Delight as well as Wonder of the People that have been admitted to behold them;
and seeing they naturally live longer than the oldest of Men, scarce any one
Age brings Tidings of the Death of a Tower Lion (as before) so carefully
attended, etc. This occasions the general Opinion, that such an Occurrence is a
Forerunner of some Fatality. Answer the fourth, How much more the Death of 3
Tower Lions at once, as if a Lion Pestilence (that (...) or Divine Thing had
been sent to kill three Lions at one blow, this hardly finds a Parallel in
History, the strong Tower (it self) with all its high Walls, deep Trenches,
brass Guns, great Guards, and warded Gates, could not be a Tower of Defense to
them or to any one them, and if Tria had been Omnia here (as it is in
Philosophy) the Tower had been left a Lyon-less Tower. Sacred Story speaks of
one Prodigy, not altogether dissonant to this, to wit, Samson turned aside to
see the Carcass of the Lion, and behold there was a Swarm of Bees and Honey in
the Carcass, Judge. 14.8. prodigiosum est ( says Lovater) quod Meilificarunt
Apes in Cadavere, etc. 'Twas no less than a Prodigy, that Bees should breed and
make Honey so soon in such a place, seeing they are naturally driven away by an
ill Smell, as abhorring all stinking things, such as this Carcass must needs be
upon its Putrefaction; herein Pliny, Columella, Aelian, Varro, and all
Naturalists do unanimously concur: Indeed some (as Virgil, Ovid, etc.) do say,
Bees may breed in the Carcass of a Bullock raturally, but never in the Carcass
of a Lion, which has a more foetid flesh and a more stinking smell; however,
not in so short a time as was between Samsons Contract and the solemnizing of
his Marriage. It therefore only came to pass, by the special Providence of God
producing this Prodigy, not, only by a praeternatural, but also by a
Supernatural power. Now that the Tower Lions be dead (though we had no hand in
their Death, as Samson had in his) let us turn aside (a little) to view these
Carcases, as Samson did this) and behold both the Congruity and Disparity of
them: As 1st. God Bless us, that no Swarms of those Bees of Babylon ( Isa.
7.18.) may breed out of their Carcases, nor out of them whose names they bore,
to Sting us with their Fatal Stings: And God bless us not only from those
Honey-less Wasps and Dronish Robbers, but also that the right Honey may be bred
in the body of the superviving Lion, called Charles the II. and in him whose
name he bears: 3ly. Though we find no Honey in any of those 3 Carcases, as
Samson did in his one, yet may we find such a Riddle in them which may puzzle
and Nonplus all the uncircumcised Philistines, Judge. 14.12.14. Out of those
Eaters may came forth Meat and out of the strong sweetness. This Problem (as
many of Gods Providence) is made up of contraries, yet the aenigmatical
Sentence seems to signify, that it should come to pass, the Philistines which
ruled with rigor over the Israelites at that time, should be subdued and eaten
up by the Israelites, and when they were most strong, they should not damnify
but accommodate the Hebrews: The good Lord grant the same Privileges to the
Protestants over the Papists, who have eaten us up as their Daily Bread, with
the like voracity as the Hungry devour Bread, Ps. 14.4. Yea, those cruel
Cannibals makes Flesh as well as Bread of poor Protestants, and do as
barbarously and brutishly worry them with open Mouth, as the bloody Lions do
the helpess Sheep, Ps. 27.2. O that they may now stumble and fall in attempting
it, and both they and their Leviathan (the Pope) with his broken Head, may be
given as meat to the people Inhabiting the Wilderness, Ps. 74.13.14. Then would
God unriddle, how out of the grand Eater comes Meat, and out of the strong
comes Sweetness.

This Leads me to the third and last Scene or Theater, whereon God thews his
Wonderful Signs, to wit, (as in Heaven and on the Earth, so) upon the Waters:
As I do designedly omit many marvelous things, mentioned in Foreign and
Domestic Letters, such as the Earthquake at Malago, which overturned their
Religious Houses, and put all Spain into a Fright, etc. And such as have lately
happened also in our Lands) because they come not well Attested to make them
enough Authentic, in the foregoing Stage or Theater: so I must do in this
last, omitting many Stories, and pitch first upon that which has
unquestionable Testimony of the Truth thereof, to wit, the Drying up of the
River Wye in Wales, between Radnorshire and Brecknock-shire (where it is near as
broad as Thames at Brainford) about a stones cast over, and of a sierce
Current, yet on the 25th. of January last at Lewysford, it stopped its course
and parted it self, and became dry, so that several persons walked over
Dry-shod, some gathered up Fishes for several Miles, this continued for several
Hours: This is Attested for Truth, by Mr. Probat High Sherriff of Radnorshire,
and Mrs. Jones, (whose letter hereof I had to assure me) both Eyewitnesses,
and it was also observed that the two Rivers ( I thou and Yrvon) which fall
into that River Wye, were at the same time likewise suddenly dry: but after a
few hours flowed with more Violence, and higher than usual: and (as my Letter
adds) no natural Reason could be rendered hereof: Now to exemplify this
Prodigy by Parallel Instances, from Sacred and Civil History: 1st. Satred Story
says, that when God brake the Heads of the Dragon (Satan's sworn Swordmen and
Pharoahs chief Captains) and the Head of the grand Leviathan or Pharaoh
himself, then did God also Divide the Sea, and clave also the Fountains and the
Flood, Ps. 74.13.14.15. Drying up mighty Rivers, as Jordan, Euphrates and the
Red Sea, which (in respect of the Main Ocean) was but a mighty River. This the
Angel of God Divided and dried up, for six hundred Thousand to pass over in
Rank and File. Exodus 14.21.22. Ps. 136.13. and 106.9. Gods Rebuke was upon the
Waters, clove them in twain, and bound them up with his Swaddling Band (as
easily as a Nurse does her Infant) Job 38.9. so that they could neither wave,
nor swell, nor flow, but became as a firm Wall (frozen into hard Ice) on both
sides of Israel, Ps. 78.13. Thus the fluid Waters, were fixed and became as
Stone Walls, on each hand of them, while they passed through with ease and
safety. This the Psalmist Wonders at, and asks the Waters, What ailed thee, O
thou Sea, etc. Ps. 114.5. and thence he passes to Jordan, (more Parallel to our
Case) asking what was the matter with you both, that the one Fled and the other
was Driven back: can there be any natural Reason given? or was it the powerful
presence of God that affrighted you into this Retrograde Run or Motion, v. 7.
This Instance shows we may many times ask Questions, and yet neither doubt of
the matter, nor be ignorant of the Cause: This more Parallel Case of the drying
up Jordan, Josh. 3.13. The Waters of that River were cut off, that is, the
Waters that came from above were cut off so as to stand still as on a Heap, and
the waters that were below (according to their ordinary course) ran away into
the Dead Sea, so the Channel was left Dry, having no waters coming down from
above to feed and fill it. This was a wonderful Work of God, and much admired
by the Psalmist in his Ps. 114. Now this Jordan was a compound of two Rivers (
Jor and Dan) as our Welsh River was, yet the Course of both the streams were
stopped for some Hours, so the Channel was dry, though ('it is true) the Camp of
Israel was not there with the Ark to pass over into Canaan: The Chaldee
Paraphrase Adds the drying up of Arnon and Jabbok, whereof see Number. 21.14.
and Deuteronomy. 2.37. as Revel. 16.12. mentions the drying up of Euphrates for the
Kings of the East to pass over, etc. but leaving Sacred, come we to Civil
Story: Our Famous Cambden Reports of another River in Merionith shire in Wales,
the River Dee that runs through Pimble-Meer or Lake, it mingles not her
Streams with the Waters of the Lake, though this be a great Marvel, and has
also a good Moral (to wit, that we should not mingle the streams of our
Affections with the puddle Water of Corrupt Company, when carried headlong at
unawares among them) yet it is far short of our present Prodigy: and the same
Cambden relates, how the River Ouse near Bedford (in the last year of King
Richard the II.) stood still, and ceased his Course, so as the Channel remained
dry for the space of three miles together. Cambden Brit. page 399. which was
then adjudged to signify the Revoltings of the Subjects from their Prince.
Bakers Chron. page 154.167. He being mislead by his Favorite Michael de-la-pool
and other Sycophants, did incurr the hatred of his People, Prideaux
Introduction, page 324. In his time was the marvelous Parliament, and that
which wrought Wonders. See Baker of his Reign. Also in the Reign of Henry the
VI. The same River Ouse (on New Years Day) suddenly stood still and divided it
self, which (as was conceived) did portend the prodigious Broyls between the
Houses of York and Lancaster, see Bakers Chron. among the Casualties (as he
calls them) of his Reign. The like happened in the year 1660. to the River
Derwent near Darby, which was dried up upon Nov. the 29. for many miles and
some hours, so that the Mills stood, the Boats were on ground, the Fishes taken
up upon the Sand by Children, and men walked over dry shod. This was the
greater Prodigy, not only because it is a broad River and runs with a fierce and
full Stream (as Cambden Britt. page 554. relates) but also because the Waters
of the Sanctuary were dried up soon after, by the Silenting of some thousands
of Orthodox Ministers: As those Rivers returned (all of them) to their course
again, so the good Lord know us in our Wilderness and (...) the Land of great
Drought, Hos. 13.5. and make us again as a watered Garden, whose Waters fail
not: Isa. 58.11. That our Fleece, as Giacons may not still be Dry. Judge. 6.39.
but the Lord be as springs of Water to us, (...) all our fresh springs are in
him, Ps. 87.7. an everflowing and overfl^^^ng Fountain of Grace and Comfort.

Were not my Book already swollen too bulky, I might insist also upon the
pr^^^gious Whale, which was found lately in the River Wevner, within 6 miles of
Chichester, 50 foot in length, and 28 in thickness, who broke off his own Tail
with struggling, and turned the River into Blood with his Blood: an undoubted
Prodigy, for the Whale never breaks forth out of her beloved Ocean (which is
her peculiar Dominion) into narrow Rivers, but it presages Storms, where such a
thing happens: Assuredly Jonah's was the greatest of Prodigies, who shipped him
to the shore, and in the mean time afforded him an Oratory a place to (...) in.
Four Prodigious Wonders were concurring therein says Mercer, est. That the
Heat of the Whales Stomach did not Consume Jonah as it did other (...). 2ly.
That in so close a Prison he could both breath and live, without the common use
of Air and light. 3ly. That be was not choked with the Stench of so fifthy a
Jakes as the Whales Belly. 4ly. That he had his Senses (as well as Life) there,
to pour out such an excelient Prayer and Praise to God. Jonah was the true
Arion (the Poets mention) out of whose History Christ gathers the Mystery of
his own Death, Burial, and Resurrection, Jon. (...). and 2.10. with Matt.
12.40. This great Sea Monster (that never uses to come near the Shore, but
Sports himself in the deep Waters Ps. 104.26.) yet when the Great God (the
chief Centurion) commands him thither; he must go and Vomit up Jonah upon dry
Land. He breaks the Head) as well as Tail) of this Monstrous Leviathan, and
gives him to be Meat to the People inhabiting the Wilderness Ps. 74.14. Though
no Mortal man can Ring him like an Hog, or Rule him like a Bear, Job. 41.2.
etc. yet the Immortal God can and did so, to Senacherib that crooked Leviathan.
Isa. 27.1. and 37, 29. and does so, both to the Great Turk, who would Devour
Europe, and to the Great Pope, who would destroy the Reformed Countries:
Procopius tells of a great Whale in his Time, that much Infested the Coasts of
Constantinople, and did much Mischief for fifty years together, but at last was
taken and tamed (by slaughter) though 30 Cubits long and ten bread. Thus
Jehovah will Take and Tame both Behemoth, the Turk who Eats up men like Grass
upon the Mountains. Job. 40.15. etc. and Leviathan the Pope who Sports himself
in his See to devour Protestants, God will pull those 2 Kings of the Children
of Pride out of their Seats (though they have Infested the Church many fifty
years, and both Saddle and Bridle them. Job. 41.13.34. In due Time God will
make this latter (Leviathan) to break his own Tail, and let out his own Blood,
as that Colchester Whale did, and God will break his Head, and give him to be
meat to his People: There be many more Signs and Wonders I omit (though
mentioned in public Intelligences) because not (to me enough Authentically
Attested, I would also subjoyn here the many marvelous and prodigious
Providence, not only reported, but likewise Recorded in our own Land of late
(were it not to avoid prolixity) such as the Wonderful Discovery of Justice
Godfreys Death: The Wonderful delivery of Justice Arnolds life. The Wonderful
disappointment (hitherto) of all the Popish Plots (both Sham and Real against
King and Kingdom. The Wonderful Death of three grand Enemies (to an honest
Alderman in Hull) who all dyed in three Weeks time, in the heat and height of
their Persecutions against him: with many more such marvelous Occurrences,
befalling several Persecutors and Profane Scoffers (as him whose Eyes dropped
out of his Head, immediately after his Scoffing at the late Comet) not yet
plenarily proved.

The Application in short (after a long Explication general and particular, yet
Applicatorily Explained all along) is twofold, 1st. General. 2ly. Particular,
the latter of those to be possitive and peremptory in (without a peculiar Gift,
which we pretend not to) is by the best Casuists called Nefas, and no better
than presumption to pry too curiously into the Ark of Divine Secrets, for which
fifty Thousand Bethshemites were slain, 1. Sam. 6.19. Arcana Dei sunt Arca Dei,
we may not search into Gods Secrets. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Mirari oportet, rimari non
licet, it is as unmannerly to pry into our Neighbors House, as it is to press
into it, said Xenocrates: how much more may men be paid for peeping into Gods
House, as the men of Bethshemesh were, contrary to Gods Command. Number. 4.20.
Eorum que scire nec Datur nec fas est, Docta est ignorantia, istius scientiae
Appetentia est insaniae species, says Austin: It Is a learned Ignorance not to
know what we ought not to know, and it is a kind of madness to desire it,
Funccius sings well, saying, Tufuge seu pestem (...). And Peter gives charge
against this Impious Curiosity as against Theft and Murder, 1. Pet. 4.15. it is
a being too buisy with Gods matters. Baldwin therefore concludes this point,
praestat Ergo, etc. it is better to pass over prodigies in silence, and leave
the particular Application of them to the most Wise God, than by an
overcurious Divining to betray our own temerity, Bald. Cases of Conscience,
Lib. 3. Page 813. However to make a general Application (which is the former)
of them, is to be Wise unto Sobriety, seeing Events in all Ages do evidence,
that Prodigies do portend (in the general) a Futurition or Approach of some
things (not yet existent) and such as bear some proportion in quality to the
Predigies themselves: as Armies portend Wars, etc. This is acknowledged by
Herodotus and Machiavel, that no extraordinary Calamities befall Nations or
Cities, but it is foreshewn by some Extraordinary Signs and Wonders, as the
Reverend Dr. Jackson (in his Sermen preached before King Charles the I.)
quoteth them. page 9.10. Yea, our Savior himself did Institute Signs and
Wonders, as immediate forerunners of that final Destruction of Jerusalem, so
forely threatened and so severely executed by Titus Vespasian, Matthew. 24. Mark
13. and Luke 21. and Josephus has a good Note upon it, lib. 4. cap. 12. of the
Wars of the Jews, that it was Gods Clemency to Mankind to foreshew by those
extraordinary Signs and Wonders, what wasting Desolations were approaching that
his people being forewarned might be forearmed also and take the best Course
for their own safety. The General Application of Prodigies, (which are
unquestionable) be principally two, according to Cornelins a Lapide's Notion,
on Joel. 2.30. Prodigia sunt Credentibus benefica, incredulis vero Malefica and
Horribilia. 1st. They do portend much mischief to that part of the World, which
wallows in Wickedness without Repentance: The Signs and Wonders God showed to
Pharaoh were not only Messengers, but even Harbingers of his and his Peoples
Destruction, so was the Handwriting upon the Wall a Prodigy portending
Belshazzars Downfall for his Drunken and Debauched Quaffings, Dan. 15.22.23. So
were the Prodigies in Heaven, Earth and Sea (as Luke ranks them Luke 21.25.)
Infallible portents and presages of the final fall of the Jews and their
Jerusalem, for Persecuting Christ and his Apostles, etc. Thus it was of latter
times in Germany, as their wickedness and Debauchery increased, so did their
Prodigies, Signs and Wonders, Hist. Iron-Age, page 66. Yea and in our Land Sir
Rich. Baker has worthily Recorded. How the many Mischiefs (that have befallen
this Nation) were all foreshewed by many foregoing Signs and Wonders (which he
calls Casualties) in every Reign, whereof I have extracted an Epitome, and
thought to have inserted it here, were not my Book too bulky already. 2ly. They
do Prognosticate Relief and Remedy to the Religious part of the World. Aegypts
Overthrow was Isreal's Deliverance, and so was and will be Babylons to Sion.
Therefore Christ encourages his Servants at the sight of such Signs, to lift
up their Heads for their Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21.25.28. All men ought
therefore to Regard the Works of the Lord and to consider the Operations of his
Hands, least by neglect thereof they provoke a Jealous God to Destroy them and
not build them up. Ps. 28.5. How often does God call on Zechary, lift up thine
Eyes and behold, etc. and what see thou? etc. God shows his Signs and
Wonders, not that men should cast scurrilous Scoffs at them, (who knows
whether such have a minute betwixt his last Jest in this World, and his
Everlasting Earnest in a worse World) but to make serious Contemplations on
them: what curious Artist can endure (when he exposes some special piece to
public View) to see sottish men take no notice of it, or silly spectators
(that cannot understand its Admirable Art) Deride it. God is Certainly Tuning
his Instrument (as I say in page 32.) and will shortly play some choice Tune,
though made up of Discords. The good Lord help us to Dance after his Pipe, and
to meet him in the way of his Judgments, or in the way of his Mercies, Isa.
26.8. Otherwise the Great Turk (who ('it is said) is so alarmed with those
Prodigies that he has proclaimed a Fast to be kept throughout all his
Dominions) will rise up in Judgment against all Scoffers, as the Queen of Sheba
will against the Jews, Math. 12.42. The Heavens, those Catholic Preachers: Ps.
19.1. The spangled Curtains of the Bridegroomes Chamber, has Read such a
Divinity-Lecture to us in Signs and Wonders, and so has the Earth and the Sea,
all terrifying and testifying Gods Anger against Man's Sin, yea in his own
people, in whom he will pardon, but not patronize Evil: and shall we look on
those Signs of the times, to be Inania Terriculamenta, insignificant
Scar-crows, which the Sorcerers of Egypt (were they here to see them) would
acknowledge to be the Finger of God. As Jerusalem (that Slaughterhouse) of
Saints) had her Signs of Destruction. So Rome (the like Slaughterhouse) had
(at the Rise of Luther) such a Storm upon her chief Church, as struck the Keys
out of Peter's Hands, while the Pope was creating Cardinals in it: ever since a
cold Sweat has stuck upon all the Limbs of Antichrist, as Bellarmine (his
great Champion) confesses, assuredly the pouring out of the seven Vials
(mentioned Revel. 16.) will produce such a prodigious Storm upon Rome, as will
not only blow down her Keys, but her Images also, yea blow away all the Trash
and Trumpery of that Scarlet Whore, and the Whore her self with all her proud
helpers; all Christ's Foes shall then be made his Footstool (the fittest place
for them) in all Lands: yet before the accomplishment hereof, sad Calamities,
(if not the Salaughter of the Witnesses) may be seen, yea such Tribulation as
has not heretofore. Matt. 24.21. The very Time may seem nothing else but
Affliction it self. Mark 13.19. So befell it to the Jews that (had not God cut
short those Days Matthew. 24.22. No Flesh had been Saved) no Jewish Flesh had
been left alive. What Woes may befall the Gentile World, after such prodigious
presages, we know not. It Is good for us to get into Augustus's posture, (who
once sitting 'twixt Virgil (a frequent sigher) and Horace (that had watery
Eyes) pleasantly said, he sat inter Suspiria and Lachrymas, betwixt Sighs and
Tears: sure I am, Our Day calls upon us, not only to say so, but also to sit
so, with all seriousness: Christ's Council to the Jews was [pray ye] Matthew.
24.20. It Is no less the Duty of us Gentiles, Prayer is the best Ordinance and
Artillery, wherewith to Batter Heaven, Flecti^ur Inatus Voce Rogante Deus: Where
God seems most bitterly bent, yet will he yield something to prayer, which is
the best lever at a dead lift, provided it be the Prayer of Faith, for as Gods
mercy is the Mother, so the Churches Faith is the Midwife of Deliverance,
Hereupon Joel in setting down the Dreadful Signs of direful Days (least any
should despondingly say, as Mark 10.26. Who then can be saved) concludes with
this comfortable Corollary, whoever calls on the Name of the Lord shall be
saved. Joel 2.31.32. That such may be Reserved as a Remnant for Royal Use being
accounted worthy to escape those things that may yet come to pass: Luke 21.36.
Is the Hearty prayer of C. N.

FINIS.
The Reader is requested to correct these following Faults that have escaped
the Press.
Errata.
Page 1. line 19. read Math. 12. p. 6. l. 14. r. Ear p. 11. read line 20.
before line 19. p. 18. l. 25. for 80. r. to. p. 31. l. 16. for 18. r. 11. p.
37. l. 27. r. prognostic p. 40 d. 24. r. Truths. p. 48. l. 29. for through r.
though. p. 49. l. 2. for Councelor r. Council. p. 55. l. 16. r. (...). p. 57.
l. the latter r. 65, 66, 67, etc. to 71. in p. which should be 96. l. 11. r.
next Answer [as Messengers only, not as Mediators, according to the Popish
Doctrine, and l. 22. after are r. mostly: and l. 34. for Virgin r. Virgins. p.
69. l. 20. for Trimethius r. Trithemius. the Sheet (L.) should begin with 73,
and so on. p. 76. falsely paged 68.) l. 20. r. (...).


