THE Nature and Causes OF HARDNESS OF HEART, Together with the Remedies against
it, Discovered in a SERMON, Preached first before the Honorable Society of
Lincoln's Inn, and afterward before the University in Great St. MARY'S Church
in CAMBRIDGE.

By Robert Neville, B.D. Rector of Ansty.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Billingsley, at the Printing-Press under the Piazza
of the Royal Exchange, 1683.

To the Worshipful my much Honored Friend, Colonel Richard Goulston, OF
WIDDIAL-HALL Esquire One of his Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of Peace
for the County of HERTFORD.
Honored Sir,
I Had no long Debate within my self, whose Name I should borrow to Patronize
this Discourse, when I considered it had been delivered in Two Great and
Judicious Auditories, one of the Honorable Inns of Courts, and the most
Ancient and Learned University of the Nation: My Thoughts presently fastened
upon Colonel Goulston (a Person who has sucked much Excellent Learning from the
Breasts of both Universities, and been refined and polished by an Inns of Court
Education) as the best qualified to do me such an Honor: And though it seems
little less than a Libelling your Judgment, to publish my Hopes of its owning
so Mean and Sorry a Pamphlet; yet I have presumed to give you the Trouble of
this Address, not from any Opinion I have of the Value of what I present to
you; but because the Honor, and Happiness, of some years Neighborhood, and
Conversation, have given me a more than ordinary Assurance, that your Candor
and Charity will be ready to Pardon the Faults, and Umbrage the many
Imperfections of it.

Were I inclined to put off the Divine, and put on the Courtier, I could (as
some have done in Addresses of this Nature) cross the Seas, and Rifle Foreign
Countries, for DIAMONDS and RVBIES, to SET in, and enrich your Name, and Exalt
and Imbellish your Virtues with High and strained Hyperboles: But my own plain
and honest Temper has made me a faithful Friend to Truth, and an inveterate
Enemy to Paint and Varnish; nor do I here so much pretend to draw a curious
Picture of your Virtues, as to give you a rude Draught of my grateful
Resentments of those many Neighbourly Kindnesses you have heaped upon,

Honored Sir, Your most Faithful and Humble Servant, R. Neville.
Ansty, November. 29. 1682.
A SERMON Preached Before, both the Honorable Society OF Lincoln's End, And
the University at Great St. MARY'S CHURCH IN CAMBRIDGE.
Hebr. 3. part of the 15th Verse. Harden Not Your Hearts.


THough we are in the hand of a skilful Artificer, that of the knottiest and
crookedest Timber, can make Beams and Rafters for his own House; that can
square the Marble and Flint, as well as the Freestone: And though the Sunshine
of Divine Grace can melt and thaw the Ice, of the most congealed hardened Heart,
and God can turn men extempore into Saints by his Omnipotent Convincing Spirit:
yet if we observe the more Ordinary Course of God's Proceedings, we shall find
that there is a Peculiar Temper of Mind, which is most agreeable to the
receiving of Christ; which those that are Owners of, are said to be (...), Fit
or disposed for the Kingdom of God: They must have that peculiar Temper,
wherein the Gospel will take root, and prosper, namely, an Humble, Flexible and
Soft Heart: whereas on the other side; there is Luc. 9.62.
AN EVIL HEART OF UNBELIEF, and Heb. 3.12.
A REPROBATE Mind; and 2 Cor. 13.5.
A HARD HEART, Heb. 3.13.
HARDENED THROUGH THE DECEITFULNESS OF SIN, against which St. Paul gives us
this necessary Caution here in my Text, saying, HARDEN NOT YOUR HEARTS.

From which words I shall endeavor to show you these Four things:

First, How and when Man Hardens his own Heart.

Secondly, How and when God, without any impeachment to his Justice, may be
said to Harden the Heart.

Thirdly, What are the Properties of a Hard Heart.

Fourthly, By What means we may avoid this Hardness, this Obduration, And

First, I shall show you, How, and When, Man Hardens his own Heart: For the
more perfect discovery whereof I must acquaint you with three sorts of Hardness:

First, A Natural Hardness, the Hardness of our Natural Inclination, which was
Born with us.

Secondly, A Voluntary Hardness, A Hardness acquired by our own Resolutions and
Endeavors.

Thirdly, A Penal, A Judicial Hardness.

First, A Natural Hardness, or the Hardness of our Natural Inclination, which
was Born with us.

Physicians tell us of a disease converting the Womb into a Hard Stone; and the
Story in Crollius of (...) A Child of a perfect stony Substance, is asserted by
others: and such Children are we by Nature, Children of a perfect stony
Substance, of stony Hearts: There grows A hard Pearl in the Understanding, the
Eye of Our Souls, which makes us almost Blind.

The Soul of the Natural man is so stupefied by Obduration, that it measures
all Divine Truths by the Standard of Sense and Reason: The Eye of his Soul
looking downward, sees clear enough, but if it looks up to the Sun of
Righteousness, it is, presently dazzled: We are Naturally Eagle-Ey'd in Worldly
things; Mole-Ey'd in Heavenly, in Spiritual things.

The Will of a mere Natural man (before the Grace of God Emancipates and sets
it free, and makes it capable of any good impression) is obstinate, and
impenetrable: We may as easily pierce a Rock, or dissolve a Flint, as prevail
upon it, when it is overgrown with that Crust of Natural Hardness; which
oftentimes is improved and increased by the Addition of a Voluntary and
Acquired Hardness; which brings me to the Second kind of Hardness; and that is,

Secondly, A Voluntary Hardness, A Hardness acquired by our own Resolutions and
Endeavors; A Wilful Hardness; when men have wilfully persisted in long
continued Habits of many sins, which (like gravel after long continuance in the
Bladder) Cake into a Stone, and make their hearts hard and obdurate. They have
enslaved themselves by a strong Habit of Obduration, they are bored through the
Ear, and are resolvedly bent not to change their Servile and Slavish condition.

The Cords of Sin, with which they have bound themselves, are of their own
twisting, and those Cords are twisted into so strong a Habit, that they are not
easily broken; and when men have brought themselves into these Circumstances,
they are almost under a fatal Necessity of committing Sin: I do not believe
(says a Dr. Tillotson's Sermon on Heb. 3.13 page 13.
Reverend Author) that God has Predestined any man to ruin; But by a long
Course of Wilful Sins, men may (in a manner) Predestinate themselves to it, and
Choose wickedness so long, till at last it becomes Necessary; and continue to
be bad men upon the same account, that the Historian Extravagantly says Cato
was Virtuous, Quia aliter esse non potuit, vellei. Paterc.
BECAUSE HE COULD NOT BE OTHERWISE being bound in the chains of their own
wickedness, nay, like Sampson, not only bound by those lusts which they have
embraced, but likewise, robbed of all their strength, whereby they should break
loose from those Bonds. And this brings me to the Third kind of Hardness I
named to you, and that is

Thirdly, A Judicial, a Penal Hardness; when men are hardened by God by way of
punishment for hardening themselves; their Voluntary Hardness proves the mother
of their Penal Hardness; as you may see in the 12th of St. John, 39, 40.
Therefore THEY COULD NOT BELIEVE, BECAUSE THAT ISAIAH SAID, HE HAS BLINDED
THEIR EYES, AND HARDENED THEIR HEARTS, THAT THEY SHOULD NOT SEE WITH THEIR EYES,
NOR UNDERSTAND WITH THEIR HEARTS, AND BE CONVERTED. It is as St. Augustine
observes Peccatum est poena peccati and causa peccati.
SIN IS BOTH THE PUNISHMENT and CAUSE OF SIN; which happens when the Soul is so
overspread with the Contagion of Sin, that all Spiritual food corrupts within
it; which God perceiving, withdraws the wholesome food of his Grace he did before
allow it; He withholds those Beams which before kept the heart soft and
pliant, and thereby it is congealed and frozen; God being justly provoked
withdraws his Grace, and leaves us to our selves; and though Satan tempts us to
Obduration, yet neither God nor Satan, do really or effectually, produce this
Hardness in us, we breed it in our selves, as ill diet may occasion the stone
in the Bladder but it is the inward distemper of the body, that immediately
breeds it: For, the further illustration whereof, I shall, as I promised,
endeavor to show you,

SECONDLY; How and when God, without any impeachment to his Justice, may be
said to Harden Man's Heart; and First, God may be said to Harden men, when he
withdraws his grace, because men have first Hardened their hearts against it:
It being free for God to take the forfeiture of his grace and mercy, when, and
how far, he pleases: For although that Help of General Grace allowed to all,
be, if rightly improved, sufficient to strengthen and Convert the Soul, and to
emancipate and make the Will Free: Yet if we forfeit our Indentures by the
abuse of our Liberty, and neglect the Grace of God, when offered to us, he then
may most justly withdraw it from us, and take away the Patent our Wills had for
the Privilege of their Freedom: To which purpose it is generally observed by
Divines, that there is to every Sinner a time, when the measure of his iniquity
is filled up, and Gods Patience in waiting for him is so wearied, that he
withdraws his grace, and gives over calling him to Repentance; this was wont to
be called by the Jews THE MEASURE OF JUDGMENT; i. e. such a pitch of Sin, which
Judgment inevitably followed: And it is possible, that to Obdurate Sinners such
a time may be, which may be their last for grace, though not their last for
life: That they may live here, and yet be dead eternally: and that a time may
be when Heb. 10.26.
THERE WILL REMAIN NO MORE SACRIFICE FOR SIN, but Sinners are Sealed up to
Obduration, when God in Justice strikes them dead, who would not live, and
consigns them to Damnation who were before resolved to Damn themselves. And St.
Basil has asserted Gods Justice in this Case, by affirming that God, though he
hardens men's hearts, yet he is not the Author of Sin: But that Sin is (...)
OF MAN'S OWN CHOICE, not Originally and primarily from God, or by any Positive
Act of Gods upon him; of which he gives us a lively instance in Pharaoh whom
God found hardened; he did not make him So. And, if you read the story, and
observe the method of Gods Proceedings with Pharaoh, you shall find Exodus,
8.15.32. that Pharaoh. HARDENED HIS OWN HEART: And when after so many miraculous
Judgments, He was not reformed, then it is said, in a new style, Exodus 9.10. and
10.27. That the LORD HARDENED PHARAOHS HEART: But there is one Objection, that
seems to interfere with this Doctrine, which I must remove, and then I Will shake
hands with this Particular.

The OBJECTION IS THIS.

Did not God tell Moses at first, before ever we read that Pharaoh paved his
Heart with Obduration, that he would Harden him? Did not God say to Moses,
Exodus 4.21. DO ALL THE WONDERS BEFORE PHARAOH, WHICH I HAVE PUT INTO THINE
HAND, BUT I WILL HARDEN HIS HEART, THAT HE SHALL NOT LET THE PEOPLE GO: Now
these words of God, I WILL HARDEN HIS HEART, are recorded before we have any
news of Pharaoh's Hardening himself.

To which I Answer,

That Gods foretelling so early, that he would Harden Pharaoh's heart, is no
argument, that he would do it immediately, and without any Demerit of
Pharaoh's; but that God, foreseeing and foreknowing, that Pharaoh would lay the
first stone of his Obduration, and first harden himself, said thereupon, I WILL
HARDEN HIS HEART: Now that God foresaw Pharaoh's hardening himself is clear and
evident from Exodus 3.19. AND I AM SURE THAT THE KING OF EGYPT WILL NOT LET YOU
GO, NO NOT BY A MIGHTY HAND: So that if you carefully peruse the History of
Pharaoh's life and actions, you will find that God did not Harden him, till he
had hardened himself six times against Gods heavy Judgments: Which was a notable
Example of Gods dealings with an Obdurate Sinner, that has filled up the
measure of his Sins, keeping him alive, but without Grace, without Repentance.

SECONDLY, God may be said to harden men (without any impeachment to his
Justice) by presenting occasions, which Sinners, through their own innate
Corruption, make instrumental to their Obduration; but this can reflect no
dishonor upon God, nor blemish his Justice, because these occasions are not
designed by God to DECOY any into Sin, but are good in themselves: Light
(though good and pleasant in it self) yet it hurts Sore Eyes: What is there so
good, that obdurate Sinners will not abuse?

Pharaoh was Hardened by Miracles, by which another man's Heart would have been
mollified: the Hardened Sinner (like the Spider) sucks poison out of every
thing: He sucks poison from that, which was designed as an Antidote for him: To
this purpose it is said Jer. 6.21. I WILL LAY STUMBLING BLOCKS BEFORE THIS
PEOPLE; that is, such Occasions and Providence, as through their own wilful
obdurateness are a means to ruin them: It being Ordinary in Scripture to
ascribe an Act to God, whereof he gives the Occasion; An Example of this may be
Shimei's Cursing David, which he told Abishai in 2 Samuel 16.11. that the Lord
bid him do: But how did the Lord bid him? He gave him no outward Command,
neither did he move him to it by any internal impulse; for, if God had done
either, He had been the Author of Shimei's Cursing, and Shimei had been
blameless: What other meaning then can these words ( THE LORD HAD BIDDEN HIM)
be capable of but this? namely, that God did present the Occasion, in letting
Shimei see David, in that Affliction spoken of in the 12th verse, and with a
small retinue flying from his Son Absalom; his Guards about him being then so
small and inconsiderable, that Shimei thought, he might safely vomit out his
rancour, and fury, against him: In all which, and the like, actions, God
derogates nothing from his Justice; these Occasions, which God Presents, being
in themselves harmless, though wicked men abuse them.

And this may suffice for the Second thing I was to show you; namely How and
When God, without any impeachment to his Justice, may be said to Harden the
Heart.

I Proceed now to show you,

THIRDLY, What are the Properties of a Hard Heart; and the FIRST Property of a
Hard Heart is this, that it does not yield to any means of grace; For,

First, It cannot be prevailed upon by the word of God, which is a Powerful
Agent; the Preacher that speaks to obdurate Sinners, speaks to Rocks, rather
than Men; the Earth will sooner tremble than they;

Illis Robur and Aes triplex circa pectus. Their Hearts are so guarded with the
Armor of Obduration, that the Word of God, though it be a two-edged Sword,
cannot enter into them: Though God has ordained a Function of men, by whom he
does beseech them; though he arms their Messages, and Doctrines, with such
Terrors, as makes the very Devils tremble, and joins his holy Spirit too, sends
him in tongues of Fire, that he also may preach to them; and fright them with
more flame; yet Hardened Sinners break these Strengths, and vanquish all the
Arts and Strivings of the Almighty; and though Gods Ambassadors flash Hell
fire against their Vices, in torrents of Scripture threatenings and
Comminations, they concern themselves no more, than they would at the story of
a new eruption of Aetna or Vesuvius; their Hearts are turned into Stone, into
pure Mine and Quarry; and thereupon such, as Preach to them, may be said to be
damnati ad Metalla, (that old Roman Punishment) condemned like slaves to dig in
these Mines and Quarries; So that as Cato Censorius paved the Courts of
Judicature with sharp stones, that men might not delight in Lawsuits; So the
Courts of the Lords House are often paved with Hard Hearts, that the Preacher
might be discouraged from Preaching. There is so much Ice in men's hearts, there
has been so long a winter in their affections, which are chill and dull to all
goodness; that the word of God, which is said to be Jerem. 23.29.
A FIRE, cannot thaw or melt them: And as a hard heart cannot be prevailed upon
by the word of God; So neither

Secondly, Will it be wrought upon by Gods good Spirit; for, though it cannot
hinder the grace of God from shining upon it, yet it may, and often does hinder
the workings and Operations of that grace; and receives the grace of God in
vain; and Heb. 10.29.
DOES DESPITE TO THE SPIRIT OF GRACE, and abuses, and Jude. 4.
TURNS THE GRACE OF GOD INTO WANTONNESS.

It was strange that Christ when he was upon Earth Converted so few; the
Evangelist wondered at it, John 12.37. THOUGH HE HAD DONE SO MANY MIRACLES
AMONG THEM, YET THEY BELIEVED NOT IN HIM. BUT he satisfies the wonder, and
gives the reason of it out of the Prophet Isaiah, THEREFORE THEY COULD NOT
BELIEVE, BECAUSE THEIR HEARTS WERE HARDENED: Their Hardness was the cause of
their small progress in believing; Engravers upon stone cannot rid much work;
they that Point and Polish Diamonds, use much grinding to wear away a little
unevenness. And then

Thirdly, The hard heart will not be wrought upon by the mercy of God; God's
Mercy to Pharaoh hardened his Heart; (...).
HE HARDENED, HIM BY HIS MERCY AND FORBEARANCE BY RESPITING HIS PUNISHMENT,
says St. Basil.

The Hardened Sinner shrowds his Sins under the wings of Gods mercy; He makes
Gods mercy his Protection in Sin: Accustomed dangers escaped harden the Sinner
oftentimes to a Stupidity: The ruder Mariners, that have weathered out several
storms will steal, blaspheme, and be drunk, in the next tempest: And Dion
Cassius tells us, that Catiline being accused for the murders, and rapines,
committed on those, whom Sylla had proscribed, and escaping the condemnation,
under which others fell for the same Crimes, (...)
DID FROM THIS GROW MUCH WORSE: The Hardened Sinner COMMITS the Attributes of
God, and (as it were) raises a Contest and Dispute between them; and to all
declarations of his future Justice, he opposes that God is merciful; that
satisfied with his own rectitude, he descends not to mark men's follies; and
thus he baffles Gods Veracity with his Clemency, and makes his long-suffering
wear out the sense of his Justice: How far such foolish Collections as these
will prevail to harden men's hearts, the Wise man tell us Eccles. 8.11. BECAUSE
SENTENCE AGAINST AN EVIL WORK IS NOT SPEEDILY EXECUTED, THEREFORE THE HEARTS OF
THE SONS OF MEN ARE FULLY SET IN THEM TO DO EVIL: Such is the hard-hearted
Sinners misery, that God cannot look friendly upon him, but by his too much
presuming upon it he ruins and undoes himself: Heavens shining and smileing
hurts him more than its lowering; the longer the Hardened Sinner looks upon the
Sun of Gods mercy he gathers the more spots, and impairs the beavty of his
Soul: God is forced to be a tyrant to obdurate Sinners; He must be always
whipping and scourging them; and till they are mollified and bettered by
stripes, He cannot in mercy remove his rod: His taking away his plagues from
them would be a greater Plague to them. And then

Fourthly, A Hard Heart cannot sometimes be wrought upon by Gods Judgments: As
Gods mercy cannot draw it, so his Judgments cannot drive it from Sin. It is an
insensate unrelenting Anvil to the heaviest Strokes of the Divine Vengeance: It
does (like the Roman Emperor Caligula) (...) thunder back against God, and
shoot up a sin, a provocation, against Heaven, for every arrow of Judgment shot
down from Heaven; It undervalues Gods Power; Hector's and Braves his
Omnipotence; it continues to affront God to his face after all his Judgments,
as if he had wasted all his thunderbolts, emptied his Quiver, and broke his
Sword in the last encounter; and were like those poor Animals, who lose their
sting in the first wound they give. He that should have seen the Tragical
iniquity we read of, in the City of Lions, which was so visited with the
Pestilence, that the Dead (without a Figure) buried their Dead, falling down
one upon another, each being at once both a Carcass and a Grave; He, I say that
should have seen this, and observed withal, that the Soldiers daily issued out
of the Citadel, and deflowred Virgins, even whilst they were giving up the
ghost defiled Matrons even already dead, COMMITTING with the dust, warming the
grave with sinful heats, and coupling with the Plague and Death; would
certainly have been amazed, to see men so hardened in sin, as to Suffer and Sin
together: And thus much for the First Property of a hard heart, that it does
not yield to any means of Grace: Secondly. A

SECOND Property of a hard heart is this, that it has no Feeling in it; it is
insensate: It is observed in the Body, that the rest of the senses may be
distempered and lost, without much impairing the health of it, but only the
Touch cannot, which therefore is called the SENSE of life; because that Part,
or Body, which is deprived of Feeling is also at deaths door, and has no more
life in it, than it has relics of this Sense: So is it also in Spiritual
matters, of all other Symptoms, this of a hardened Senlesness is most dangerous;
and as the Greek Physicians are wont to say of a desperate disease, (...),
very, very mortal: A Man may not feel an aile and yet not be in health; and it
is a good degree of health to know our disease; For if a Sinner grow once so
hard and senseless, as that no Physic, no means, will work upon that Body of
death, that does encompass him, Conclamatum est, We may ring his Funeral knell;
for, though he be alive, and in this world, he is dead to all Grace and
goodness: If there be no remorse, no grief, no dislike of sin, then woe be to
us, this is descensus Averni; the lowest stair that leads to the Chambers of
death.

I have read that, near the City of Capena, lay a stone of great note, which
upon great droughts the People would bring into the City, and large showers of
rain would presently fall; but if we would be tenderly sensible of, and weep
large showers of penetential tears for our sins; we must on the contrary, beg
of God, to remove the stone out of our hearts, and give us a soft and tender
heart, a heart of flesh: And thus having described to you the Properties of a
Hard Heart; it is high time I should make use, of those words of
Hipocrates(...); Furnish your selves with all the Softning Plasters you can,
which may either prevent, or remove, this Obduration: And this brings me to the
Fourth thing I was to show you; And that is,

Fourthly, By What means we may avoid this Hardness; And

First, If you would avoid it, avoid gross Sins; for they wast the Conscience,
make havoc of grace, and render the heart hard and callous: When David cut off
the lap of Readiness garment it is said, his heart smote him; but when he fell into
those foul sins of Adultery and Murder, it is not then said, his Heart smote
him; it grew hard upon the commission of those gross sins, till God dispatched
the Prophet Nathan to him, to rouse and awake him. As for Sins of Infirmity,
which are sins of a less and imperfect Choice, some Passions blinding or
corrupting the Judgment, they are entailed upon All; and, as the Schoolmen say,
Possibility of Sinning is included in the notion of a Creature: But though all
men are prone to Sins of Infirmty, and yet all men's Hearts are not so Hardened
as Habitually to commit gross and scandalous Sins; they have not such vitiated
Palats, as to be able to drink down the worst dregs and lees of Vice: When
Conscience says to any person this is a Great Sin, Commit it not, and yet in
despite of Conscience, and the Checks it gives him, he will run on; It is just
with Conscience, (when its Counsel is rejected) like Achitophel, to strangle
and stiffle it self. And as we must abstain from gross Sins, so if we would
avoid Hardness of Heart.

Secondly, We must be careful not to harbor any the smallest Sin, with
satisfaction and delight: By giving way to little Sins, one after another, we
are prepared and disposed for greater, and our strongest Resolutions against
them are broken; for though they be not snapt in sunder at once, yet by this
means they are untwisted by degrees, and then it is easy to break them, one
Thread after another: it is scarce imaginable of what Strength and Vigor one
Sinful Action (be it never such a Dwarf in our Eyes) is, to Procreat and beget
more: for Sin is Prolifical and Fruitful; and, though there be no Blessing
annexed to it, yet it does strangly INCREASE and MVLTIPLY: There are certain
Rudiments and First Elements of Vices, in which men are first entered, and they
advance gradually to more gross and heinous Crimes.

Our Savior reproves the Pharisees in the Gospel, because they would strain at
Gnats, and swallow Camels; but yet it is true, that men learn at length to
swallow Camels, by swallowing Gnats at first.

Juvenal.
Nemo repent fuit turpissimus. No Sinner is so adventurous, as to attempt the
greatest Sins at first; the way by which men train up themselves to the
committing gross and heinous Sins, is, by not making Conscience of committing
less Sins; and yet, I know not Nescio an possimus leve aliquod peccatum dicere
quod in der contemptum admittitur.
(says Paulinus in St. Jerome) WHETHER WE CAN CALL ANY SIN LITTLE, THAT IS
COMMITTED AGAINST GOD: Small Contempts against Great Princes are accounted
great Crimes; for what is wanting in the thing, is made up in the Worth of the
Person; How great a Sin then is the smallest Contempt of the Majesty of God? To
which I may also add, that when a small Sin comes by Design, and is Acted with
Knowledge and Deliberation, the Malice of the Agent heightens the smallness of
the Act, and makes up the Iniquity. It is incredible how insensibly many small
Sins heighten and inflame our Reckonings, and increase our Spiritual Hardness:
Oh then that we would Cant. 2.15.
TAKE THESE LITTLE FOXES; Psalm. 1 37.9.
that WE WOULD DASH THESE BABYLON's BRATS AGAINST THE WALLS. And this brings me
to the Third Remedy against Obduration, and that is;

Thirdly, To nip the forbidden Fruit of Sin in the Bud, before it grows into a
Habit; Ibi maxim oportet observare Peccatum ubi nasci solet, says St. Jerome;
Observe, and Kill Sin in its infancy; Crush this Cockatrice in the Egg: The
Tree, which was in the beginning but a small Plant, may at length bear its Head
and Branches so high, as to cast a most dangerous Shadow: Even the smallest
Pullulations of Sin must not be neglected; the first Blossoms of Iniquity must
be blown away; For Sin is of a growing, multiplying nature; there is usually a
Concatenation of Vices; one Devil brings seven other Devils; One Sin makes a
Bridge for more to come over, like the Waves of the Sea, the End of the one is
the Beginning of the other: If we go with Sin one Mile, it will compel us to go
with it twain: It will swell like the Cloud Elijah saw, from the Bigness of a
Man's Hand, to such a vast Expansion as will cover the Sky: No man descends to
the worst at first, but gradually, Step by Step; as Mariners setting sail,
first lose the sight of the Shore, then of the Houses, then of the Steeples,
then Mountains and Land.

Few or none are so hardened, and desperate, at first, as to leap into Hell:
Alipius, in St. Austin; who went only at first for Company, to those bloody
Spectacles of the Gladiators, came at last to applaud them: We know where we
begin and set out in Sin, but we know not where we shall End, or take up; as no
man can say, He will let in just so many Palefuls of the Sea, and no more.
Stulta res est Nequitiae Modus, says Seneca; it is a foolish, ridiculous thing
for a man to think to set bounds to himself in any thing that is bad; or to
hope to sin by Rules of Art, and in Number, Weight and Measure.

Fourthly and Lastly, If you would avoid this Hardness, use fervent and
constant Prayer. Let us importune God to cut the Thread of our Wickedness, that
we may not spin it out to such a length: Let us sue out a Divorce between us,
and our Beloved Sins, that Harden us. The Fire of Prayer must never go out, if
we expect that such Metal as a Hard Heart consists of, should ever be melted
by it.

Those, who endeavor Chymically to extract the Philosopher's Stone, must never
let their Fire go out; and so those, who would extract and draw the Stone out
of their Hearts, must never let the Fire of their Devotion go out; this Fire
(like that of the Vestal Virgins at Rome) must be always kept Burning. Now, that
we may make an Experiment of this last Recipe of Prayer against Obduration, let
us Beg of God to take away these Hearts of Stone, from within us, and give us
Hearts of Flesh, for his dear Son Jesus Christ his sake; to whom, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory, and Praise, both now and for
ever.

FINIS.

