A Spiritual Legacy; Being a PATTERN OF PIETY FOR ALL Young Persons Practice,
in a faithful Relation of the Holy LIFE and Happy DEATH OF Mr John Draper.

REPRESENTED Out of his own and other Manuscripts; containing his Experiences,
Exercises, Self-Examinations, and Evidences for Heaven.

Together with his Funeral SERMON.

Published by CHR. NESS, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON. Printed by H. Clark, for the Author, and are to be sold by L. Curtis,
at Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey's Head, near Fleet Bridge, 1684.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO YOUNG MEN
THE Bosom and best Beloved Disciple says, [I write to you Young Men, because
ye have overcome the wicked One, because ye are strong, and the Word of God
abides in you, etc.] 1 John 2.13, 14. And poor I ( the least of Saints, and
greatest of Sinners) write accordingly unto you, that it may be so with you in
this present Time, as it was with those Young Men in the Primitive and
Apostolical Times: What they (through Grace) did, and Had the honor of, the
same ye ought to do, and have the like Ambition, both for Valor and for
Victory: Solomon says also, That the Glory of Young Men is their Strength,
Prove. 20.29. The Hebrew word there for Young Men, signifeth Choice men, to wit,
for Military Employments, which may be understood in a Mystical as well as in a
Literal Sense, seeing there is a Spiritual as well as a Temporal Warfare, Isa.
40.2. 1 Cor, 9.7. and 2 Cor. 10.4. and 1 Timothy 1.18. There is the Figurative
Fighting, the good Fight of Internal Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.7. Heb.
10.32. As well as that which is Corporal by External Force: Nor can Young men
be reputed more truly Valorous in any Heroic Exploits, than in Vanquishing the
Prince of Darkness.

O ye Young men, your Strength is indeed your Glory, and you are prone to Glory
in your Strength as your peculiar Privilege above all other Ages, but forget
not that word of Wisdom which tells you [Let not the mighty man Glory in his
might, etc. but let him that glories Glory in the Lord] Jerem. 9.23. 1 Cor.
1.31. And remember to use your strength well, not in Quarrelling and Duelling (
as those Youngsters at Helketh-Hazzurim did, who sheathed their Swords in each
others Bowels, for a Play and Pastime, 2 Samuel 2.14.16.) Not in Vanity or
Villainy, etc. but in following your particular Callings, ( as well as in
fighting for your native Countries, as those Young men of the Princes of the
Provinces did, 1 Kings 20.20. from ver. 13, 14, etc.) As you are Strong Young
men; more especially in pursuing your General Calling, as you are Strong Young
Christians. Thus Young Timothy became a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy
2.3. not dreaming of any Carnal Delicacy, but Enduring Hardship, and living so
abstemiously among the luxrious Ephesians that the Apostle was constrained to
prescribe him Physic, 1 Timothy 5.23. As Godly Timothy 's daily Task was to war a
good marfare, so it ought to be yours.

DIRECTIONS.
First, Make Religion your business, not a By-business; let it be jour Alpha
and your Omega, that must be in the Beginning and in the Ending, yea and in the
Middle also of all your Actings. Inure your selves so to it as to make it your
familiar Exercise or Recreation, Acts 24.16. Yea bestirr your selves lustily in
it, as your business of greatest Importance, 1 Timothy 4.7.

Secondly, Arm your selves with the whole Armor of God, both that part which
is Defensive (as the Girdle of Truth, the Helmet of Hope, the Shield of Faith,
the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and the Shoes of Peace and Patience) And
that also which is Offensive, as the Sword of the Spirit, and Darts of Prayer,
Ephesians. 6.12, 13, to 19.

Thirdly, In this Armor fight ye the good Fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. Be men
of God, ver. 11. and Quit your selves like men, 1 Cor. 16.13. Be more than men,
be strong, 2 Timothy 2.1. in the Grace which is by Je sus Christ. Be Strong Young
Men, Resist the Devil and he will flee from you, James 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.9. Satan
is therefore but a Coward, who (like the Crocodile) when you follow him, he
flees you, but if you flee from him, he follows you.

Fourthly, In this Armor also do ye war a good warfare, 1 Timothy 16.18. against
those Fleshly Lusts, which war against your Souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. That like the
Syrians, are commanded by their Master to war with neither Small nor Great, but
with the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22.31. All their Spite is against the Soul, to
destroy it and its Grace and Peace. If such a Chaste and Chastened piece as
Mortified young Timothy was bid to Flee youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22. How much
more you in these debauching days, and in your slippery Age, as slippery as
Glass.

Fifthly, Tremble to turn This Celestial Armor into Carnal and Effeminate
Amors: If you embrace Vice in your Youth, it is a thousand to one but you will
refuse Virtue in your Old Age: Trees that blossom not in the Spring, will
hardly bear fruit in Autumn. Besides, is this fair dealing to give God the
Devils leavings? How can God like to be Gleaning at last where the Devil has
been reapimg all your Time? to say nothing of the Strains and Cramps of
Conscience, which you will carry with you to your dying Day, as possibly you
may do some strains and cramps (while young and presumptuous) in your body.

Sixthly, But to be short, consider what Solomon (in his sapiential Sermon,
concerning the most sovereign good) says by his most emphatical Irony for
deterring all youngsters from persuing sensual pleasures [rejoyce O Young Man
in thy youth?] Eccles. 11.9. That is [Do if thou darest] As God said to Balaam
[Go since thou will go.] Numb. 22.20. But know that thou go upon thy death.
Thus this Ironical Concession intimates that Young Men have strongest
Inclinations to, and the stoutest Abilities for all kind of sensuallity, and
they are most impatient both of reproof and restraint, therefore do they
indulge their own jolly and frolic humors, in taking their full of delights:
In eating drinking, being madly merry, etc. Let them do so (says Solomon) but
at their peril. [ But know, etc.] O this stinging [But etc.] marrs all their
mirth, and is a Cooler to the Youngsters courage; one thought of an after
reckoning spoils all his sport, [For all these things] which are accounted but
Triffles and Tricks of Youth, [God will bring you to judgment,] either in this
life (as he did Young Absalom and Adonijah, Hophni and Phineas, Nadab and
Abihu, and other Young Men, or however in the next life. Your Death Day shall
unavoidably become your Dooms Day, then God will force you to appear before his
dreadful tribunal, (though never so much against the hair and against the
heart) thereto receive the direful sentence of [ go ye cursed etc.]

Young Men (of all men) are aptest to put the evil day of death and judgment
far from them: But this avails not any, yet undoes many, lulling them asl^ep in
the cradle of security. For (as Bernard says) Senibus mors in Januis,
Adolescentibus in insidiis, Death is at the Door for old Men, yet lays in
ambush for the young, and breaks often in without knocking at the door, it often
comes like the lightning or thunder, both blasting the green corn, and breaking
yea burning down the newest and strongest buildings.

Lastly. Let it be your care and your Conscience to Remember your Creator in
the days of your youth, before the evil days of old age come upon you, Eccles.
12.1. Sure I am, the strongest obligations to this Duty lays upon you; for God
is the first Author both of your being and well being, etc. To forget him
therefore (as the Wicked do and so are turned into Hell, Psalm. 9.17.) is most
Unnatural, Inhumane, and Disingenious: Do yo^ Remember your Maker practically,
so as to fear and love him, and faithfully serve him: Thus this Young Man your
pattern and my subject here (I am persuaded) did: You must accordingly serve
God with the best of your time and strength, while you are most able to do so,
and have the best oppertunities, for possibly you may not live till old age. Go
forth to gather Manna in the morning of your life, in the flower of your age,
this will be most acceptable to God whose Soul desires the first ripe fruits,
Mic. 7.1. And who will remember the kindness of your youth in your remembering
him, Jer. 2.1. This will be most Comfortable to your selves, knowing that you
have mortified (in part through grace) those impetuous passions, and inordinate
affections, which drowns so many thousands of Young Men in the pit of
perdition: O be not like the Circassians (a kind of Mongrel Christians) who
divide their lives betwixt sin and devotion dedicating their youth to rapine,
and their old age to repentance, Breerwoods inquiry, Page 135. But cursed be
that cozener (faith the Prophet Mal. 1.14.) that has a male in his flock, yet
offers to the Lord a corrupt thing. God likes not those loiterers, that think
to come into his Vineyard at the last hour of the day, to serve God then, when
they can serve their lusts no longer. That would put off their Creator with the
Dreggs and Snuffs of their time, when the Tempter has taken the cream and
best: though your memoryes lay in the Hinder part of your Heads, yet may you
not put off the Remembering your Creator to the Hinder part of your Lives, and
possibly that may be Now, for as soon goes the Lambs skin to the market, as the
old Sheep, let this Young Man, be a Pattern for your Practice: That your first
fruits may sanctify the whole lump, Romans 11.16. that you may be the blessed
Hope of another generation, 1. King. 20.14. and that you may be delivered from
wrath to come 1. These. l. 10. Yea and be accounted worthy (with this dear one
deceased) to inherit Glory is the unfeigned desire of an Old Servant of Christ.

CHR. NESS.

I Am this Day to Preach the Funeral Sermon of a very Godly and Exemplar
Young Man, who may be truly called [(...)] a Young Old Man (for his constant
Grave Carriage, and Pious Deportment) and that from a Text of his appointment,
to wit,

Genesis, 47. Verse 9. And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, the Days of the Years of my
Pilgrimage are an Hundred and Thirty Years; few and evil have the Days of the
Years of my Life been, and have not attained unto the Days of the Years of the
Life of my Fathers, in the Days of their Pilgrimage.

IT is a Dialogue 'twixt a Prince and a Patriarch. This Verse, my Text, as it
stands in Connection with the Context, is the Patriarch Jacob's Answer, to King
Pharoah's Question, Verse 8. Which was [How Old art thou?] Or, as the Hebrew
Reading is, How many are the Days of the Years of thy Life? The Answer is, The
Words of my Text aforementioned: The general Prospect: whereof (omitting all
unnecessary Criticisms and Curiosities upon the Text, as also, all Superfluous
Circumlocutions upon the Context, which our narrow Circumference of time cannot
admit) proposes to our Consideration these two particular parts.

First, The Positive.

And Secondly, The Privative or Negative part.

The Positive part is, the True and just Account, that Jacob gives Pharaoh of
the Nature, Quantity, and Quality of his Life or Converse in the World, The
Import whereof is this, [Though I have lived so long as to reach up unto an
Hundred and Thirty Years already, yet has my Life been an Unstable and an
Unsettled Life, and a continual Flitting, not only from one place to another,
but also from one Affliction to another, etc.]

The Negative part is, The Double Comparison the Patriarch makes betwixt
himself and Pharoah's People on the one hand, and his own Progenitors on the
other, Intimating, that though at these my Years I seem very Old, as compared
with the Short-lived Egyptians; yet fall I far short of the term of my
Predecessors, both the Ante-diluvian and the Post-Diluvian Patriarchs.

Though this Copious Text might be improved into a large Field of Discourse,
yet must I be confined to draw only some few, the most Material, most Practical
and Profitable Corollaries, or Observations from the Circumstances of it, with
a short Gloss upon each [ Tanquam Canis ad Nilum, only one lap and be gone]
then improve them in some Useful Inferences.

I. Observation, From the Circumstances of the Text.

The First Remark or Observation arises from the Person asking the Question,
(King Pharaoh) is this;

[ As that King was Kind, Courteous, and Affable to Jacob for Joseph's sake, so
all Kings ought to be the like to Jacob's Seed, for Jesus Sake.

This same Pharaoh was sensible how much both King and Kingdom were obliged to
Joseph, not only for Saving them all alive in the Famine, Genesis 50.20. but also
for his making vast Additions of Wealth, Power, and Honor to the Crown of
Egypt, Genesis 47.20, 23, 24, 25. Therefore he gratefully acknowledges his
Sentiments hereof in his showing Respect to Joseph's Relations, etc. But when
another Pharaoh arose after, who knew not Joseph, Fxod. 1.8. That is,
Acknoledged not any Obligations to him, though he fared the better for him in
his Crown-Revenues, yet he ungratefully disowned and unworthily Requited all
Joseph's Favors in the grossest Unkindness to his People.

USE.
This teaches by way of Resemblance, that all such Kings as know not Joseph or
Jesus (our Brother) are not only most unkind to, but also the most Severe
Oppressors of the Church. Though they have and Hold their Kingdoms by the
appointment and Providence of Christ. Prove. 8.15. Dan. 2.21. Romans 13.1. Yet
Christ's People Suffer hard things either by, or under them.

II. Observation, From the Circumstances of the Text.

The Second Remark or Observation arises from the Second Person in this
Dialogue, who makes the Answer to the Question, to wit,

[ As this Person was Jacob, so his Days were few and evil, but as he was
Israel, so his Days were many and good.]

He had two Names Jacob and Israel, Genesis 49.1, 2. both given him from his
Wrestling; the farmer Name was given him for wrestling with his Brother for the
Birthright in the Womb, wherein he Miscarried; but the latter for his
Wrestling with his God for the Blessing at Penuel, wherein his Valor (through
Divine Condescension) obtained the Victory. When the Messiah saw Jacob's
undaunted Courage in resolutely detaining him, Asks him his Name, Genesis 32.24,
26, 27. As if he should say, [Thou art such a Fellow as I never met with, who
though thou be lamed and laid Hard at, yet wilt not let me go without my
Blessing; Thou have let thy Flocks go, and thy Herds go, Thou have let thy
Wives go, and thy Children go, yet thou will not let me go, nor my Blessing
go.] I will not let thee go except thou Bless me, says Jacob, v. 26. Hereupon
He Honors Him (as it were) with the Honor of Knighthood, saying to him,
[Kneel down Jacob, Rise up Israel] for as a Prince, thou have had Power with
God and with Men, and have prevailed. Genesis 32.28. Hos. 12.3, 4. Now Jacob is a
Name of Weakness, the poor Worm Jacob, Isa. 41.14. Trampled upon, and trodden
under foot. This Afflicted State made Jacob sigh out those Sad Words [All these
things are against me] Genesis 42.36. and those of my Text also, [Few and Evil
have the Days of the Years of my Life been.] But so far as he had Princely
Power (as Israel signifies) both with God and with Men, In this Sense, his Days
were many and good. One Day with God is a Thousand elsewhere.

USE.
Hence learn we the Reason, why the Church is called Jacob through out the
Scriptures, when Speech is of her Weakness and Calamity. But she is frequently
called Israel, to signify her Splendor and Glory, and as it is thus with the
Church of God in General, so it is with the Children of God in Particular. Some
times they are run down with strange Temptations, and with strong Tribulations;
then are they the poor Worm Jocob, Isa. 41.14. The Shulamite found two Armies
Warring in her, The Army of the Flesh, and the Army of the Spirit, Cant. 6.13.
When the Army of the Flesh, or Amalek prevails, (as Exodus 17.11.) then the
Seed of Jocob droops; but when they are made strong in their Weakness, 2 Cor.
12.9. Strengthened with all Might, Col. 1.11. and made able (through the
Supplies of Christ's Spirit Phil. 1.19.) to Tread down Strength, as Judge. 5.21.
even the strongest Temptation without, then are they called the Israel of God,
Gal. 6.16. for their Prince-like prevailing over Flesh, World, and Devil.

III. Observation, From the Circumstances of the Text.

The Third Observation arises from the Conjunction of these two Parts, This
Question, and the Answer to it, which is.

['Tis a Duty Incumbent upon all Mankind, to be Asking and Answering, How the
Days of the Years of their Lives do pass away.

It was Moses's Prayer, Lord teach us to number our Days, that we may apply our
Hearts unto Wisdom, Psal^ 90.12. In which Psalm (it being ^ Meditation of Man's
Mortality) corresponding with my Text, therefore Mark

1. Moses mentions the Brevity and Uncertainty of Man's Life, comparing it to a
Watch, v. 4. which is but the fourth part of a Night Mark 13.35. Then he goes
on and compares it to a Sleep, to a Dream, all vanishing things, and to a Tale
that is soon told, and is as soon forgotten; lastly to Grass, which, we well
know, if it be not cut down in Summer or Autumn, does wither in Winter. So such
Mortals as are not cut down with the Sith of Death in their Youth, do yet
wither away in the Winter of Old Age. Quid est Vita, nisi quidam Cursus ad
Mortem? said the Ancient Father, Life is nothing but a Posting to Death.

The 2d. Occurrence in this Meditation of Moses upon Man's Morality is his
assigning the proper procuring Cause of this Humane Mise^y to wit, Divine
Displeasure against Sin, which causes God to ^urn Man to Destruction, ver. 7,
8. Man at the first was made Immortal, he had then an Immortal Body, a Suitable
Companion for his Immortal Soul. These two Sweet Associates had never been
severed each from other, if Man had not sinned against his Maker: Had Adam
stood on his State of Innocence, He should then have rendered to the Lord a time
of perfect Obedience and Service here upon Earth, and when that Homage to his
Great Landlord had been accomplished, he should then have been Translated from
Earth (without the least taste of Death) to Heaven; the Soul should never have
been separated from the Body, as now it is; for the Wages of Sin is Death, Romans
6.23. It was that one Man's Offense that pulled up the Sluice, and let in Death
as a Deluge, with a Regal Authority over all the World, Romans 5.14, to 17. and
Sin did not only let in Death but also all sorts of Sicknesses, Sorrows, and
Sufferings that are Forerunners of it.

Then 3ly, Moses Condemns Man's Dullness in taking no more notice of this Divine
Displeasure, ver. 11. All other Creatures know their Times and their Seasons,
Jerem. 8.7. but Man knows not the Day of his Visitation, till He come to be
Snared in an Evil Net, etc. Eccles 9.12. Though Man's Life be a Life full of
all Inconveniences, of Indignities, of Injuries, of Infirmities, and of
Iniquities also, yet such is the Stupidity of the Fallen Nature, that Man puts
the Thoughts of these things far from him, Amos 6.3.

Fourthly, Hereupon Moses begs God for Illuminating Grace wherewith to make a
more Distinct Discovery of all Humane Frailty, [ Lord teach w to number our
Days, etc.] ver. 12. And the Sweet-Singer of Israel, David, will be of the same
Chorus with Moses, sighing, as well as singing out these Synonimical Sentences,
[ Lord make me ^o know my end, and the Measure of my Days, what it is; That I
may know how frail I am, etc. Psalm. 39.4, 5. Thus likewise Jacob in my Text
carries on the like Concord and Consort to complete the Harmony, complaining
here, [ Few and evil have the Days of the Years of my Life been, etc.] Adding
only this one Note of Discord (for making better Music) that God had taught
him this great Truth concerning his own Frailty, He had seen it for time past,
and He would be sensible of it for time to come, his Days had been few and
Evil, Now they might be fewer and worse, seeing He and all his were famished
out of Canaan, the Land of Promise, into Egypt, the place where his Posterity
would be evilly entreated. Genesis 15.13.

USE.
Moses teaches us what use to make of the knowledge of our own Frailty. It
should strongly stir us up to an earnest imploring of Divine Mercy. He makes a
loud Out cry after Mercy. Crying, [ Return O Lord, How long, etc. Oh satisfy
us early with thy Mercy, etc.] Psalm. 90.13, 14. He could find nothing in all
the World but Divine Mercy to be a Congruous, and Competent Remedy, for Humane
Malady and Mortal Misery: And it is not a little of Mercy will do, but he must
have much, even as much as will Satisfy, [ Oh Satisfy, etc.] The Salve must
be suitable to the Sore for quantity, as well as quality; Great Misery smarted
under, requires Great Mercy to Cure it. Yea, and he must have it early also, [
Oh Satisfy me early, etc.] The Soul of a Frail Sinner (made sensible of his
Sinful Frailty) even longs after Mercy; He cannot Live without it, he dare not
Die without it, He must have Mercy (both the Giving and the Forgiving Mercy)
whatever else he wants; it is the Vnum Necessarium, He must have it speedily, or
he cannot sit down satisfied. Valde protestatus sum me nolle sic a Deo Satiari:
God (says Luther) shall not put me off with Pleasure, Treasure, Honor, or any
thing below his Mercy. Mercy gives us much, yet forgives us more, etc.

The Fourth Observation arises from the Body and and Substance of the Text,
more to be insisted upon, to wit,

Doctr. 4. [Man's Life is but a poor Pilgrimage.]

It Is twice thus titled in my Text, Jacob calls his own Life a Pilgrimage, in
the forepart of it, and the Life of his Progenitors, he calls a Pilgrimage
also in the latter part. The Apostle James moves a Parallel Question to this of
Pharoah's. The latter asks [What is your Age?] Genesis 47.8. and the former asks
[What is your Life;] Jam. 4.14. This of the Apostles admits of a double Answer.

The First is Philosophical, And

The Second is Theologicdl.

The First is that Answer which not Vain, but Solid and Sage Philosophy gives
to the Apostles Question [What is Man's Life?] to show the Nature of it.

1. Plato (that Divine Philosopher) calls Man's Life a Game at Dice, wherein
what shall be the cast [ wore or less) is not in the Gamesters Power, yet
whatever is the cast, it is the Gamesters Duty to make the best Improvement of
it, that he may win the Game: This Platonic Notion carries a Correspondency
with the Analogy of Faith, and with the Scripture of Truth, which says [ Man's
ways are not in himself, etc. [Jerem. 10.23. It Is indeed the Saying of some
[quisque suae Fortunae Faber] Every Man is the Framer of his own Fortune, which
may be taken in Sano Sensu, if Interpreted only by that first Sermon (after
that upon the Fall) which God (Himself) Preached to Cain, Genesis 4.7. If thou
do well, Shall thou not he accepted? But if thou Do ill, Sin lies at thy
Door. Notwithstanding, It is not in Man to direct his own Steps, faith Jeremy;
much less to order the Success of his Works. Solomon says, Man's Diligence
without God's Blessing cannot enrich, Prove. 10.4, 22. Man knows not therefore,
what his Cast shall be (more or less) in this Life, yet is it his Duty to make
the Best and (if it be possible) a Blessed Improvement of all Occurrencies of
Providence attending him, That through Grace (which is the true Philosopbers
Stone, that turns all it touches into Gold) all Natural and Moral Evils may be
converted into Spiritual good; This is the only way to win the best Game in the
World. Vincenti Dabitur corona Vitae. The Winner's Wage is Eternal Glory,
Revelat. 2.10, 17, 26. and 3.5.12.21.

Secondly, Next to Plato, Hear Seneca. (These two were the two great Luminaries
of the Heathen World) who abounds in his Allusions upon this Point. As

1. This Wise Morallist calls Man's Life a Warfare, wherein how soon our Enemy
(Death) will come upon us, and overcome us, we know not, Therefore should we be
always upon our Watch, and Ward. 2. He compares Man's Life to a Flash of
Lightning, which immediately appears, and as immediately disappeareth again.
3. The Philosopher comes up higher to the very Terms of our Text, and plainly
says, That Man's Life is but a Pilgrimage and Pathway to Death.
Some indeed say, That this same Seneca was acquainted with the Apostle Paul
(his Contemporary in Nero's time) and that Epistles were writ from each to
other, so might borrow such Divine Notions from him: But sure I am, he could
not be Conversant with our Patriarch Jacob, unless in Moses Pentateuch, from
which he might borrow such Sacred Phrases, etc. as Homer did his Alcinous
Garden, etc. and Ovid his Deucalions Flood, etc. from thence.

Thirdly, Pythagoras (Briefly of the rest) compares Man's Life to a Stage Play
on a Theater, where a Man acts his Part for a while, then retireth, being
dis-attired or divested of all his Histrionical Attire and Acting Garments.

Fourthly, To this add that of Simonides (Related by Rodulphus Agricola) who
being asked, What Man's Life was? Answered with a Silent Sign, showing himself
to the Company a little while, and then withdrawing out of their sight.

Fifthly, Epictetus Declares Man's Life to be like a Voyage at Sea, upon the
Narrow Seas, wherein he meets with High Winds, Rough Waters, Surging Waves, (as
it were) all in a Conspiracy to swallow him up; and if he escape the Storm,
either Ragged Rocks, or Cruel Quicksands may Shipwreck him in a Calm. Yea, it
may be, that Pirates may plunder him, or some contrary Blasts may blow him too
soon to Shore: However, in those Narrow Seas there is but a short Cut from
Shore to Shore.

Many more Sayings of those Heathen Sages might here be multiplied, were it not
to avoid Prolixity.

I have done with the Philosophical Answer to [What is Man's Life?] Let us hear
what is that which is Theological, that has a more Noble Original, and is
Taught in an Higher School: Picus Mirandula says excellently, that Philosophy
seeks Truth, Divinity finds it, and Piety possesses it. The Notable Essays of
the former have been heard, but Scripture Discovery is the more sure Word of
Prophecy, whereunto we shall do well to take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19.

The Word of God abounds with many Metaphors to Illustrate the Nature of the
Life of Man, being all Answers to the Apostles Question [What is your Life?] I
can but single forth some very few of them, that this narrow Discourse swell
not too much.

The (First) Resemblance (waveing those I mentioned before from Psalm. 90, etc.
which I enlarged on the more, because it is a Paraphrase on my Text) is that of
the Apostle James who moved the Question, What is your Life? And gives himself
the Answer to it; no doubt, but well Accommodated, because he was inspired by
the Holy Ghost to give it. He says, [It is even a Vapor that appears for a
while, and then vanishes away] Jam. 4.14. Oh what a poor empty thing is a
Vapor, no Solidity in it, it is not so much a Thing, as next to No-thing, It
disperseth it self so soon as it is raised, no sooner it appears, but it
disappears: Oh then, What a vain show makes Man in his Life. Psalm. 39.6. The
Pomp of Great Princes (...) a Swollen Bubble, a big Fancy, Act. 25.23.

The (S^^ond) Resemblance is Smoke, My Days (says David) are Consumed like
Smoke. Psalm. 102. 3. Good God, what a Vain thing is Life, if no better than
Smoke! a Vapor may be lovely with its comely Colors, but Smoke is a Sooty
thing, pleasing to none, but offensive to all; none thinks that Smoke is worth
keeping, so Life may be as Smoke to the Eyes, burdensome enough: Though the
Flame of Fire be Smoke fired, yet the Smoke it self has not a Spark of fire in
it; Thus this Temporal Life has not so much as a Spark of Light, and Life in
it compared with Eternity. Who can hold Smoke in his hand, or take and keep an
handful of it? No more can he his own Life. Oh how Smoke hastens up into the
Heavens in its Rolling Pillars, and circular Agglomerations! so does Man's Life
to the Fountain of Life, from whence it came: The Spirit returns to God,
Eccles. 12.7.

The (Third) Metaphor is a Shadow, Man flees as a shadow, and continues not,
Job. 14.2. and Psalm. 112.11. A Shadow (we know) lasts not long at any time,
it can but last the length of a Day at the longest, for as soon as the Sun
hides his Head under the Earth, die Shadow is gone; But mostly it lasts but a
little part of the Day, because the Sun is often hiding his Head under a Cloud,
and so often is the Shadow gone; The Shadow of the Dyal hastes to its Period,
and who can stop it. So does Man's Life, It flies, as the Shadow of the Night
before the Day, and as the Shadow of the Day, until Night returns; The Shadow
passes along as the Body passes, and who can hold it? but the Night comes
and takes it away. Man carries an handful but of Smoke or of a Shadow, while
he carries his Life in his hand. Oh what a poor handful is that which cannot be
held! Oh how many (like Aesop's Dog) do catch at this Shadow of a Temporal Life
(which is slippery as Smoke or as a Shadow, so cannot be held, and often so Vain
and vexing, that it is not worth holding) neglecting in the mean time, that
great Command [Lay fast hold on Eternal Life.] 1 Timothy 6.19.

The (Fourth) Similitude is, a Shepherds Tent [Mine Age is departed, and
removed from me, as a Shepherds Tent] says Hezekiah, I saiah 38.12. The
Shepherd removes his Tent, as his Flock removes from one place to another, and
he can remove it easily and speedily. Now the Lord is our Shepherd, Psalm. 23.1.
and our Bodies are as so many Tents or Tabernacles. Blessed Paul (who was a
Tent-maker, Act. 18.3.) compares the Body of Man to a Tent or (which is all
one) to a Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5.1. The Tent stands not, or falls not at its own,
but at its owners Pleasure; so Man's Life is not at his own choice, but at
God's Command; The Body is not called there a Temple (as Christ Body was, John
2.21. which could see no Corruption, Psalm. 16.10. and Act. 13.35. but was to
stand like a Stable Temple, wherein the Godhead dwelt Bodily, Col. 2.9. For
ever) but it is called an earthly House, a shaken weather-beaten House, a
decaying Cottage, and a Tottering Tabernacle that must be taken down: God's own
hand (that erected it) comes in a Fit of Sickness, and gently slackens the
Cords, and.draws out the Pins that upheld this Tent, or Tabernacle; and
sometimes the Tent is blown down with some Blast of sudden Death, etc. Yet if
Godly to be raised again, is a more Glorious Palace.

The (Fifth) Comparison is, the Shuttle of a Weaver, Job. 7.6. which in a
moment passes from one side of the Web to the other. The Shuttle has a very
sudden Motion, and a very swift Passage from end to end, it stops not, till it
(ordinarily) be through the Web, yet Job says, [My Days are swifter than a
Weaver's Shuttle] that is, the time on my Life hastens far faster than it to
its appointed Period: And Hezekiah compares God to a Weaver, and his! own Life
to the Thread, which the Weaver cutteth off either when the Web is finished, or
before it comes to the Thrums, even at his Pleasure, Isa. 38.12. [ He will cut
off like a Weaver, my Life, etc.] Before my Web be thoroughly wrought, before it
reach the Thrums that are tied to the Beam at the end of the Loom. The Blind
Heathens did hammer at this great Truth, in their Fiction of the Three Fatal
Sisters, Atropos, Clotho, and Lachesis.

Clotho colum Bajulat, Lachesis Trahit, Atropos Occat.

Clotho holds the Distaff, Lachesis Spins out the Thread, and Atropos cuts it
off at Pleasure: As the Shuttle is cast to and again and carries the Thread
along with it forward and backward, etc. So is Man's Life tossed too and fro,
backward and forward, Night and Day, The Night casts this Shuttle of Life to
the Day, and the Day casts it back to the Night again, but at length this
tender Thread either breaks, or is cut off according to Hezekiah's Phrase) and
possibly the Weaver will cut the Web out of the Loom, before it be half
accomplished, as this Dead young Man may sufficiently demonstrate: As to the
Case of Hezekiah, He then thought his Thread had been in breaking, but God (the
good Weaver) tied the almost broken Thread again upon a Weavers Knot, so
Hezekiah's Life became as an interrupted Web, an^ was woven on for Fifteen Year
longer: And surely the Messiah pu^ forth the most Exquisite Skill of a^
excellent Weaver upon all thos^ whom he raised from Death to Life so made that
tender Thread hold o^ as firmly, as if it never had bee^ cut off or broken.
Lavater has a^ useful Note upon those two Texts o^ the, Weaver's Shuttle,
saying, [You that are Weavers, or but Lookers up on their Work] Meditate on
your Mortallity, and your hastening (as the Shuttle) to your End, and learn
thence to live Holily, that you may Die Happily, for without Holiness, you
cannot have Happiness. Hebr 12, 14.

The (Sixth) Parallel (omitting the many more Metaphors occurring in Sacred
Writ, of which some I may mention upon the next Observation) is that is may
Text, [Man's Life is a Pilgrimage.] Sometimes the Scripture compares the Life
of Man to a Voyage at Sea, and sometimes to a Pilgrimage by Land, These two are
a Sisters, Synonoma's, and have the same Sense and Significations, thought in
differing Expressions.

First, As Man's Life is likened to a Voayage at Sea, so it represents, the
Perils from Pirates, Tempests, etc. that Mortal Man is exposed unto. [Is there
not an appointed time] Job. 7.1. The Septuagint reads it (...) Locus Piratarum,
Zanchy, a place of Pirates, The Ship is never safe but in Harbor. But Job
makes this Allusion more plainly, saying, [My Days are passed away as the swift
Ships.] Job. 9.26. Alas, how was poor Job as a Ship, tossed with Tempests and
not comforted. Isa. 54.11 till God brought him to the Haven^ Man's Life as a
Ship before the Wind, passes on without any stay, until it come to Shore:
Whether the Mariners in the Ship be sleeping or wakeing, working or eating,
she runs on her course: So does Man's Life run on, however he spends his time,
whether he sleeps or wakes, serves God, or serves the Devil, the Wind of Divine
Power and Providence is carrying our Ship of Life nearer its Port, while I am
thus Speaking and you Hearing, God grant it may be the Cape of Good Hope,
Heaven, to wit, the best landing place.

Secondly, As Man's Life is likened to a Pilgrimage by Land, so this likewise
declares it to be a Perilous Passage and Pathway. We must not take the Word
[Pilgrimage] in the Text either strictly, or Superstitiously in the sense of
the Popish Votaries, Jacob was not to be looked upon (no not by Pharaoh
himself) to be a Popish Pilgrim, nor any of the Holy Patriarchs his
Predecessors: The Popish Pilgrimage to Jerusalem is a Ridiculous, as well as a
Superstitious Practice, for no one place can bring a Man nigher God, than
another, all parts of the Earth have an equal distance from Heaven; though the
Romanists plead, that Father Cyril went thither, yet he himself professes,
that he went not upon the account of any private Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, but
as he was ordered by Public Authority to visit the Eastern Churches, and to
establish them in the Truth. But we must understand Pilgrimage here largely,
for a Pathway a Thorough-Fare, a Course, Race, or Journey, from one place to
another. Thus a Pilgrim in Scripture-Sence is all one with a Traveller, a
Stranger, and a Sojourner; Man's Life is but his walk and way.

There be many Congruities betwixt them, which I shall reserve to discourse
upon in handling the Sixth Observation, as being their proper place, adding
only here, that there is a Twofold Pilgrimage.

First, A Natural Pilgrimage.

Secondly, A Moral Pilgrimage.

First, The Natural Pilgrimage is the course that a Man rides, the Race that he
runs, even the whole Passage and Progress of his Life of Nature [ab Vtero ad
Vrnam] from his Birth to his Burial, for till then he comes not to his Journeys
end, or to the Period, or full Point of his Pilgrimage, There be two Terms in
this former, to wit, the Grave of the Womb is the Terminus a quo, or starting
place, Man begins this Pilgrimage as soon as he is Born of a Woman, and comes
out of the Womb into the World, and he never rests from his Travel (but is a
poor Pilgrim sleeping and waking) until he come to rest in the Womb of the
Grave: There the weary be at Rest. Job. 3.17. that is, His Terminus ad Quem.

There is Secondly, a Moral Pilgrimage, wherein likewise there are two the like
Terms, This is a walking from our selves, and from our Sins, up unto God and
unto Godliness. The beginning of this Pilgrimage (Morally taken) is the
privative part [a ceasing from Sin, or departing from Evil] and the
Accomplishment of it is the positive part [ a Learning to do well, and not only
a pursuing, but also an overtaking of that which is Good] Isa. 1.16, 17. and
Psalm. 34.14. and Amos 5.15. And this is a Metaphorical Walk, non Pedibus, sed
Affectibns, as says the Father, with our Affections (Those Feet of the Soul
whereby it goes forth after Objects) more than with those of the Body.

I. USE.
Seeing your Life is but a Pilgrimage, a coming and a going, as David's Phrase
is, and of Joshuah before him [Behold I am going the way of all the Earth] 1
King. 2.2. and Josh. 23.14. that is, The way of all the Men upon Earth, who are
all doomed to go that way. Hebr. 9.27. Oh consider, both you young, and you
old, your Life is a Pathway either to a Prison, or to a Palace, it is a
Thorough-Fare either to Heaven or to Hell: Bethink your selves in time: Be Men
and Women of Consideration, for that is it which distinguishes Men from Beasts,
etc.

II USE.
Then Agree with your Adversary (an angry God for your Sins) while you are in
the way of your Life, Matthew. 5.25. While you are going your Pilgrimage, before
you come to the Judges House, who will certainly send you (if unreconciled)
into an Everlasting Prison: If you walk in the broad way, being all for
Elbowroom to Sin, and leading loose and Licentious Lives, you are hastening
down to the Chambers of Eternal Death Matthew. 7, 13. but if in the Narrow-way,
of a strict: Conversation, Then are you going to a Palace, not to a Prison,
ver. 14. a good Life always bespeaks a good Death, and all Persons are passing
either to Heaven or Hell while they live, and when they Die, their Death is but
a flitting to the one place or to the other, etc.

Having thus far discovered the Nature of Humane Life, defined or described in
the Text to be, not any Royal Progress (which is constantly carried on, and
managed after a Splendid manner, every way adapted to the Grandeur of Majesty)
No, the Life of Man has no such stately Prospect in this Holy Patriarchs eye,
but it is a poor Pilgrimage, twice inculcated here, and as often aggravated with
contemptible Circumstances relating to both the Quantity, and the Quality of
this poor Pilgrimage.

From tke former of these two (to wit, the Quantity) arises my Fifth
Observation.

Doctr. 5. [The Pilgrimage of Man's Life is but a short Pilgrimage.

Thus this Blessed Patriarch computed his own Life in the Text to be but a
short Life consisting only of a few Days, though he had now attained to the Age
of an Hundred and Thirty years: [ Few and evil, etc.] To speak distinctly of
the [(...)] that it is so; of the [(...)] why it is so; and of the [(...)] the
manner how it is so, cannot be expected in this short Discourse, save only some
promiscuous Intimations of them all.

I. REASON.
The shortness of this Pilgrimage is Demonstrable three ways.

First, In as much as Man's Life is measured by Days (one of the least
Computations of time) not by Weeks, or by Months, much less by Years. Thus
Jacob computeth his own Life by Days in the Text twice over, as he does also
the Lives of the foregoing Patriarchs. Thus Job likewise numbereth his Life by
Days over and over again, as Job 7.1.6. and 14.1.5. and many more places, too
long to enumerate. So David, 1 Kings 2.1.4. and Psalm. 103.3.11, etc. yea, and
all the most Mortified Men in Scripture do unanimously concur in the same
Computation of their Lives by Days.

II. REASON.
The (Second) Demonstration that Man's Life is short, as it is measured, so it
is numbered by his Days, yea to be but as one day. Because it consists only of
a few Days, This Epithet is expressed in the Text, [ Few are my Days, etc.]
Man's appointed Time is but a few Days, Job. 7.1. and 14.13.14. A few Days are
the number of his Life, Psalm. 39.4. Yea, the Days of an Hireling, who is hired
only for some few Days to do some Jobb of Work which requires haste, and is
but for a Spurt, not lasting: Nay, Sometimes the Hireling is hired but for one
single Day, as Matthew. 20.1, 2, etc. where the Parable calls Man's Life but one
particular Day, consisting of twelve Hours. And what a poor part of time is one
Day, especially when the Sun Sets at the Noon of that Day. Amos 8.9. This makes
it a very short Pilgrimage indeed, as was that of this Young Man.

III. REASON.
The (Third) Demonstration is drawn from Scripture Metaphors which Illustrate
the swiftness of Man's Life in its Passage through the World, all implying the
shortness of that Passage, for the swifter, that the Motion of the Runner is,
the shorter is the time wherein the Race is run.

I might Reassume here, the Philosophical Allusions of Man's Life, As,

First, Plato's Game at Dice, is soon played out.

Secondly, Seneca's Flash of Lightning soon vanishes.

Thirdly, Pythagoras's Stage play is soon Acted.

Fourthly, Symonide's showing his Face, soon showed his Back and was gone.

Fifthly, Epictetus's Voyage is very short, and all the former are short, none
of them long abiding.

So likewise the Theological, As l. James's Vapor soon Evaporaeth. 2. David's
Smoke soon Dwindleth. 3. Job's Shadow soon Vanishes. 4. Hezekiah's Tent is
soon taken down. 5. And both Job and Hezekiah's Shuttle has both a swift and a
short Motion, etc. 6. The Prophet's Grafs soon withers, and his Flower soon
fades, The Time for all these is but a short Time, as says the Apostle [The
time is short] 1 Cor. 7.29.


But to insist only upon those three great Metaphors that Job seriously plays
upon all together [a Post, a ship, and an Eagle] Job 9. 25, 26. to show the
swiftness and (thereby) the shortness of his own Life or Pilgrimage.

The Improvement of these three Points must stand here for a Third Application.

The First Simile.

The First Metaphor Resembles Man Riding Post, [ My Days an swifter than a
Post, etc.] which Allusion has a fourfold Congruity.

First, As the Post-Boy is one that Rides upon Swift Horses, spurring them
End-ways, and sparing no Horse-stesh, Riding always upon the Speed, with Haste,
Haste, Haste for His Majesty's Service, from City to Country, and from one
Kingdom to another, carrying always Matters of Great Concern along with him: So
every Man is Riding Post in this Life, carried in the Chariot of Time, which is
drawn by the swiftest Horses, even such as be Winged Horses like Pegasus, and
so Flee faster than any Post, according to Job's Phrase [My Days are swifter
than a Post, They flee away, etc.] They run faster, and outrun the Post. Oh
that Men would consider the great Concern of the Packet they carry, and the
Tendency of their way, etc. Bethink your selves, 2 Chronicles. 6.37. (as the Hebrew
Reading is) and consider (...). Septuagint Reads Psalm. 119.59. Make a Dialogue
with your own Hearts, commune with them upon your Beds; as David did, Psalm.
4.4. Excutite, Excutite, Zeph. 2.1. Shake your selves from Sluggishness, as
Sampson did, Judge. 16.20. Consider and better consider, Hagg. 1.5, 7. do it not
to half part.

Secondly, The Post Rides Night and Day without either stop or stay, making no
long Meals any where, but takes a Bit and away, etc. So Man's Life is ever in
motion, it makes no stands at any place or time, but every Moment he is
yielding some little unto Death, his Life is passing toward it, while he is
sleeping in his Bed; He is ever Riding Post, be it Winter or Summer time, or be
his way and weather fair or foul, in Prosperity or Adversity. Oh that there
were such an Heart in Men Deuteronomy. 5.29. to consider their latter end. Deuteronomy.
32.29. Seeing every Year, Month, Week, Hour and Minute, you are riding Post to
your Graves. They that do not Remember their latter end, are to be lamented,
because they will come down wonderfully, Lament. 1.9.

Thirdly, The Post is Betrusted with Matters of weightiest Moment; sometimes
the saving or sinking of a Kingdom depends upon the Posts Carriage or
Miscarriage; he therefore (in such a Case) is commanded to Ride upon pain of
Death, and dare not loiter, or linger carelessly, till he come at the end of the
Stage, and till his Packet be carefully delivered: So Man in his Riding Post
is betrusted with a concern of Infinite and everlasting Consequence, to wit,
his Precious Soul, which is a Jewel of more worth than the whole World; Christ
(who is Truth it self) says so, and he is best able to know the worth of
Souls, because he alone paid the price of Souls. Matthew. 16.26. and 20.28. Oh
consider, how everyone of you are Riding Post with this Pearl of great Price in
your hands, take heed of scattering it, or trucking it away for Trash and
Trifles; you Ride upon pain of Death, be not careless, your Life Spiritual and
Eternal lies at Stake; how can you be too careful? beware of Spiritual Slumber,
until your precious Packet be delivered upon a Dying Bed, and you then be able
to say with the Proto-Martyr Stephen, [Lord Jesus, Receive my Spirit] Act.
7.59. or better with your Blessed Redeemer, saying [Father, into thy hands I
commend my Spirit] Luke 23.46. Thus David was careful to deliver his Packet
into Right hands both Living and Dying. Psalm. 31.5, etc.

Fourthly, Some Posts Ride longer Stages than others, and some shorter with
their Mail, and Errand; yea, some are stopped and Robbed of their Charge, etc.
Thus no Man knows the length of his Post-Stage: We know, that it is but short
in General, but alas, we know not how short it may be in particular: We are bid
[not to Boast of to Morrow, for we know not what a Day may bring forth] Prove.
27.1. Jam. 4.13. Matthew. 6.34, We know not what lies hid in the Womb of Time,
one Big-belly'd Day may dismount us: as young as we, as strong as we have been
dismounted; yea, some we see daily are unhorsed as soon as thy set out, dying in
their. Childhood: God called from Heaven to Abraham, saying [Stay now thy
striking] Gent 22.10, 11. and he may call upon any one of us. this or the next
Moment, saying [Stay now your Riding] God (indeed) gives to some enough of
Riding Post, they are weary with Posting, weary of the World, and the World as
weary of them, they live undesired and die unlamented: But all must wait till
their change come. Job 14.14.

The Second Allusion in Job 9.26. is a Man Sailing in a Ship. Mark the
Gradation.

The Second Simile.

First, A Ship is swifter than a Post, and thence Job rises higher there; but
an Eagle is swiftest of all the three: A Ship passes swiftly before the Wind,
and stops, stays not, till she come to the Shore, some one Port, she is
Bound for and rests not, strikes not Sail, till she reach her desired Harbor
or Haven.

Mark also the Congruity in sundry Particulars betwixt Man's Passage through
this Life, and a Ships passing through the Sea.

The (First) Congruity is, as a Ships Bulk (being built just after the manner
of Man's Body in a Supine posture, the Bottom-Tree answering our Backbone
which has many Ribs rising up on both sides, etc.) is made for Motion, not
Rest. Hence the Ignorant Indians called the first ships they beheld [Moving
Islands] All ships are made for launching out into the Deep Waters. Psalm.
107.23, 24. And when heaved from off the Stocks (where they are built) in order
to their passing down into the Deep, have a peculiar Name (as the Good-Speed,
the Adventure, etc.) put upon them: Even so it is with the poor Isle of Man,
(so called) he upon his first Launching forth from his Mothers Womb, into a Sea
of misery, has some significant Name put upon him, with many hearty wishes
(from Parents and Relations) sent after him, both for his Safety and Success.

Secondly, No sooner is the Ship Launched out into the Main Ocean, but she
meets with contarry Winds, raging Waves, dreadful Storms, etc. as before; so
that she is never safe or quiet till she reach her Rest, in her desired Haven,
Psalm. 107.30. Thus it is with Man, while in this lower World) the place of
Pyracy, Job 7.1. ut supra.) He is assaulted with many Pirates (who hang out
false Colors, to decoy him within the Command of their Cannons) He is
Afflicted, tossed with Tempests, and not Comforted, Isa. 54.11. This present
evil World is a very Shop, fully furnished with All Tempting Tools, and the
life of man is but as one Temptation, continued from First to Last: It Is a life
made up all of Temptation. Man is ever under either Visible or Invisible
Dangers: He passes through Perils ( in Perils often, as Paul, 2 Cor. 11.26.)
every moment, until he Reach to that Everlasting Rest, in a Desired Haven,
Heb. 4.9. Revel. 14.13.

The (Third) Congruity is, A Ship is not only made for Motion, but for Swift
Motion. Hence Job phraseth it [My days pass away, as the Swift Ships] Hebr.
Ships of Ebeck, which may be read [Ships of desire] whether they be Ships of
Pleasure, or Yatches, which are Built Frigat-wise, for Sailing Swiftly: Or they
be Ships of Pyracy (as Mendoza reads it, saying, [Naves Piraticae and mercibus
Vacuae quam velocissime Rapiuntur] Plundering and Pilfering Privateers, being
empty of Burdens, make the most speedy way, in Plowing through the Waters;
especially when they have both Wind and Tide with them, to promote their
Progress: Thus it is with poor mortal Man, who is a rolling, tumbling thing,
like a Ship, hopping from Hill to Mountain, and meeting with no Resting Place,
Jer. 50.6. He reels to and fro, as if drunk, like the Mariners in a tossed
Ship, Psalm. 107.26, 27. Yea, and many men's motions to Hell are as swift Ships,
making great haste thither, Prove. 1.16. Isa. 59.7. Romans 3.15. man's life is
swift of it self, but it runs most swiftly when the wind of Temptation and the
tide of Corruption concur to carry it forward etc. Oh would to God the motions
of your minds, made as much expedition toward Heaven, as wicked men do toward
Hell: All men are Ships of Desire, both good and bad, All are Home-bound to one
of those ports; and never do the winds so much fill the Sails of such and such
a Ship, as Desires do fill the minds of the Mariners to be at such and such a
Desired Haven: It Is true, the worst of wicked men do not Desire Hell, yet
though they do not desire that end, they have strong desires toward the way to
that end; how ought every gracious soul to pray for the fresh gales of Gods
Spirit: John 3.8. and to cry with the Spouse in the Song [ Awake O Northwind,
and come thou Southwind, blow upon me, etc.] Cant. 4.16. a Godly Person has
with Paul his [Cupio Dissollvi] a desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ,
Phil. 1.23. O how should we all (with the penitent prodigal, Hasten home to our
Fathers House, etc. Luke 15.17, 18, 20. Heaven is our home, 2 Cor. 5. from 1.
to 7. it is our Desired Haven, Psalm. 107.30. even everlasting happiness.

Fourthly, the (Fourth) paraphrase upon Jobs phrase (that man's life is like a
Ship) follows, that as a Ship leaves no visible tract behind her, so life
passes unto death, and the memory of it is forgotten. Solomon says, the way
of a Ship in the midst of the Sea cannot be tracked, Prove. 30.19. for though
she make deep furrows in her passage all along, ye^ do they immediately close
up again and the same Solomon says of men, yea of great men (that carry a
great figure in their place, and be of a Ruffling grandeur in the world) when
once Dead, the memory of them wears out of the mind, Eccles. 8.10. and 9.5.
Thus Egypt forgot Joseph, Exodus 1.18. and Israel Gideon, Judge. 8.34, 35. Yea
men, Friends and Familiars remember the dead no more. Thus likewise some
understand that phrase in Dan. 8.5. [The he goat touches not the ground] in
this sense that it imports, not only the speed and expedition of Alexanders
prodigious conquests, but also that in a^ short time no man would know what was
become either of that great conqueror, or of any of his vast Conquests, there
would be no print of any their footsteps left behind, they would no more be
found than the way of a ship in the midst of the Sea. Yet O how good it is to
be a godly person for the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance,
Psalm. 112.6. the memory of the just full be blessed., Prove. 10.7. they shall be
mentioned with much veneration, after death, even by those that spared not to
Reproach them in their life; their very name shall be honorable and acceptable
to God and men; whereas the name of the wicked rotteth, and stinks above
ground, Prove. 10.7.

Fifthly and lastly, a Ship never rests, till she come into her desired Heaven,
so man's life stays no where till it comes to its long rest, and that is a
blessed rest to those that dye in the Lord, Revel. 14.13. that fall asleep in
Jesus, 1 These. 4.14. God takes a way their Souls out of their bodies (as it
were) by a Kiss; thus Rabins read that phrase [ Gnal pi Jehovah] Deuteronomy. 34.5. at
the mouth of the Lord Moses dyed (not, as we, according to the words of the
Lord) As if God had taken away his Soul with a kiss of his mouth; such a kiss
of love as the Spouse prayed for; from the mouth of Christ, Cant 1.2. when this
is done what follows after but rest from labors? (1) from Labors of necessity
(2) from labors of Infirmity, and (3) from labors of Iniquity.

(1.) They Rest from the first, to wit, the Necessary yet toilsom^ Labors of
this Life; they take no more thought [Propoter Victum and Amictum] what they
shall eat, drink, or put on: They hunger and thirst no more; they are then
(...) as the Angels, that need no such things, Mat. 22.30. The Lamb there Leads
and feeds them, Rev. 7.16, 17, they are then clothed with Glory, 2 Cor. 5.2,
etc,

(2.) From Labors of Infirmity, they have their Writs of Ease. No more pain,
as well as no more pains, Rev. 21.4. No Grief nor Gripes then, Job in no fear
of the Caldeans there, Job 3.17, 18. Their Bacah is then turned into Berachah,
their sighing into singing, misery into majesty: All Tears are wiped from their
Eyes.

(3.) From the Labors of Iniquity. All men are under a Sinful Necessity here,
Eccles. 7.20. Sin will keep house with us, whether we will or no: It Is an
heart-greiving Inmate, till Death turn it out of doors, as Sarah did Hagar,
Genesis 21.10. etc. This the Antitype Typified by the fretting Leprosy, that
could not be scraped out of the walls of the house infected with it until all
the Stones and Timber thereof were taken down to the ground, Levit. 14.45, 44,
45. As Vltimus morborum medicus est mors, Death heals all the Diseases of the
Body. So Peccatum erat obstetrix mortis, and mors erit Sepulchrum peccati, Sin
was the. Midwife to Death, and Death shall be the Sepulcher of Sin in the
Soul. A believing Soul is not taken away in his sins, (as John 8.21.) but from
his sins: Till then, we are all bound to this Body of Sin, which makes us cry
out, [ O Wretched men that wc are, etc.] This brings down with Sorrow to the
Grave. But then Christ Delivers us from that Bond, Romans 7.24, 25. Causing the
Death of the Body, quite to destroy that Body of Death, till then, man's life is
a sore Travel, Eccles. 1.13. and 2.23 While the Plummets of Sin hang at the
heels of our Souls, we are Restless, altogether Restless, but when Death comes
to Strike off those Plummets, Then there is a Rest in deed.

The Third and last Resemblance in Job 9.26. is from the Eagles Flying; the
Climax here is very observable, An Eagle is swifter than a Ship, as a Ship
swifter than a Post. The Eagle, of all flying Fowls is reputed the swiftest
flight, and has the strongest Wing, Habb. 1.8. Prove. 30.19. The way of an
Eagle in the Air, is High, Swift and Strong. Thus Life hastes from us, and
Death hastens to us, as does the Eagle to the Carcass it desires to devour,
Matthew. 24.28. Then is the Eagle most swift when hunger (as it were) does add
Wings to his Wings, then comes he upon his Prey, like a Thunderbolt upon the
Earth, swiftly and suddenly, before it can shift for it self. Thus Death is not
said to walk on foot, but is mounted on Horseback, Rev. 6.8. Death rides upon
the Pale Horse. Death Rides Post (as above) upon a winged Horse to us, as Life
does the like in Posting from us. Oh how suddenly, some persons are surprised
with sudden Death.

The Sixth and last Observation is from the Quality of it, man's life is also a
most miserable Life. It Is not only a poor Pilgrimage, but it is also a short and
miserable one: It Is called here a Pilgrimage, and that made up of a few days,
and those evil ones also. When Man came first out of Gods Mint, (in his state
of Innocence) he was a curious Silver-Peice, which shone most gloriously, Psalm.
8.5. Eccles. 7.29, etc. But now since the Fall, he is become a poor, thin, worn
lost Groat, Luke 15.8, 9. Which has lost its luster, weight, the sound of
silver, and its image and superscription: He is now the Prodigal lost, and a
Pilgrim wandering in the Wilderness of sin, when cast out of the Garden of God.
Man is now become miserable every way, miserable in his Name, Enosh, which
signifies, (mere misery.) And in his Nature, but a bagg of Dung, a lump, not
only of Vanity, but of Misery also. Man is miserable,

(1.) At his Birth, Antequam natus est Damnatus, says Ambrose; He is Condemned
as he is Conceived: His Birth is polluted, Psalm. 51.5. and Ezekiel. 16.4, 5. and
Job 14.12. He comes crying into the World, prophesying (as it were) that he is
now launching out of the Haven of the Womb, into the wide Ocean of Care and
Calamity: So,

(2.) He is miserable in his Life: A Life Full of Trouble, Job 14.1. He is Born
to misery, Job 5.7. His Childhood and Youth is not only Vanity, Eccles. 11.10.
But if not villainy, it is yet misery. Yea his Middie-Age is made miserable by
grasping too greedily of that bundle of Thorns, the World, etc. Much more his
Old Age, which is expressly called an Evil Age, Eccles. 12.1. Thus in these four
respects, man is more than thrice miserable as to his life.

(3.) At his Death most of all, (if not Bornagain, before he Dye) then he does
but Begin his Endless Misery.

USE. I.
Oh that I could be a Boanerges, or Son of Thunder, to awaken souls out of the
fleep of Sin, [what meanest thou O thou Sleeper, arise? etc. Jon. 1.6. Awake,
awake, why sleep thou, etc. Ephesians. 5.14. Call upon thy God, and be not still
fast lulled asleeep, by a Soul-undoing Devil, in the bewitching Cradle of
Carnal Security. Know thou not, that upon this moment (and God only knows
how short it may be) depends no less than thy Eternity of Woe or Weal? As the
Tree falls, so it lies, and so it rises again: what way the Tree leans, that
way it falls, either to South or North, and it leans that way it has most
boughs on; O then enquire, on what side most boughs grow, that to Heaven or
that to Hell? Ye had better dye in a Ditch, Dunghill, or Dungeon, as Dye in sin,
Joh. 8.21.

USE. II.
Then Study this Patriarchs Optics, who had a Right Prospect of man's life;
that it is but a Lingering Death, a Poor, Short and Miserable Pilgrimage,
wherein thou must expect foul way and weather, as well as fair: A Returna Brevi
Term may (ere ever thou be aware) determine thy Pilgrimage. The Angels Question
to Hagar, [Whence come thou, and whither go thou?] Genesis 16.8. (Whether to
Heaven, or Hell) is of Infinite Importance? He that gathers in Summer, is a
wise son, Prove. 10.5 As this Young Man, (whose Funeral we are Solemnizing) did:
He had learnt to look upon all worldly things, with a Pilgrim's Eye, and to
make use of them (in his way Home) with a Pilgrims Heart. Much more might I
say, from my own personal Knowledge, were it not, that it is not my manner to
Paint Sepulchers, or to Beautify the Tombs of the dead, which is a work fitter
for a Pharisee, Mat. 23.29. than for a Gospel-Minister, etc.

USE. III.
Oh that all Young Men, were such Mortified Timothies as He was, who lived much
in a little Time! And though he be deprived of the residue of his days, Isa,
38.10. And has not the long life, promised to Piety, yet God keeps his Word
with him, for his Promise is but with the Silver of this life, but his Payment
is with the Gold of a Better Life. Solon said, (...) whom God Loves, Dye Young:
He Is taken away from the Evil to come, 2 Kings 22.20. Isa. 57.1. He has lived
long enough, that can say, (not, I have Married my Children to good Husbands,
as Worldlings say, but) I have Married my precious Soul, to the Blessed
Bridegroom: This was his Joy, yet could be Content to pass out of the midst of
this Joy on Earth, to possess a Better and Greater i^ Heaven: And O that we may
enter into our Masters Joy, as he has done! As a Post that has delivered his
Packet to God, a Ship that is laid up in the Haven of Heaven, and an Eagle now
feeding on the Carcass of Christ

FINIS.
A Brief Relation of the First Conversion and (after that) of the whole
Conversation of that precious Young Man Mr. John Draper, drawn out of his
Experiences, Exercises, Examinations of Himself, and his Evidences for Heaven;
all writ with his own hand in Characters, etc.
CHAP. I.
HAving diligently perused what a prodigious account he gives of himself with
^is own Handwriting, I could not but stand astonished, that one so young, and
a servant too, and who had so much business on Earth in his Masters service,
should redeem so much time to make Religion his business, in serving his great
Master Christ, and in securing Heaven for his Soul: Though it seems almost
incredible, yet it is most certainly true, that he Mellowed much, and Ripened
fast for Abraham's Bosom, as appears by the Sequel.

This Holy Young Man may be a very eminent Pattern of Piety to Old as well as
Young Men, in a fourfold respect (1.) for his Experiences, (2.) for his
Exercises, (3.) for his Self-Examinations, and (4.) for his Excellent
Characters and Evidences of his Interest in a better World. All which I find
very strenuously stated in his own Handwriting, though in Characters, yet by
the help of a Key is made both legible and intelligible, and now published for
public good.

I. For his Experiences, they fall under a twofold head, the former relates to
his first Conversion, and the latter to his whole Conversation: His Conversion
(I understand) was effectually wrought (notwithstanding his strict and
Religious Education and former convictions hereafter mentioned, etc.) by a
Sermon preached from Matthew. 5.25, 26. [ Agree with thy Adversary quickly while
thou art in the way, etc.] About December the 8th. 1678. From whence He learned
those blessed truths following, and not only had them fixed upon his Heart, and
sealed upon his Soul, but also I find his own Soul fixed (in wax) upon them, to
express the great Veneration of them for their being so Ravishing and
Refreshing (in the Hand of Christ) to his Spirit. The Great Truths that had an
abiding work upon his heart when this Time of Love came upon him, were these;

I. That God and Man are at variance through sin, they are at a distance.

II. It Is man's wisdom to make his peace with God his Adversary.

III. This must be done quickly, while Man is in his way, before he be brought
to the Judges House by death, etc.

IV. There is great danger in delaying or deferring this agreement, but sinners
should take up with God before it be too late, etc.

V. That God has an Action of Debt, for which to arrest every sinner, etc.

VI. This Debt of sin is strangely circumstanced, (1.) it is an Hereditary, (2)
an Universal Debt; both every man is born in this Debt, and no man living is
exempted from it. (3.) it is an increasing and a growing debt, the longer it
runs on in a man's life, etc. (4.) it is an infinite debt and therefore
insoluble; it cannot be paid etc. no finite creature can ever pay this infinite
debt, to the infinite Creator. Those blessed truths the Lord spoke with a
strong hand (as Isa. 8.11.) to this Young Man's heart, and made him consider,

First, That till this Agreement be made, my God is my Adversary, and I had
better have all the World my Enemy, the Maker of the World, who, if a friend
can make my Enemies Friends, etc.

Secondly, I cannot stand it out with the great God, who will burn up those
briars that set themselves against him, Isa. 27.4.

Thirdly, It Is no frivolous thing to be done or undone, but it is a matter of
great moment; Eternal weal and woe hangs upon it, etc.

Fourthly, I must agree, etc. because there is no other way in all the World to
take up this prodigious debt but by agreement, etc.

Fifthly, It will not always be my privilege to make an agreement; Time will
not last always for taking up the Controversy, for when Death comes, then it is
to late, etc.

Sixthly, If my cause come before the Righteous Judge, I am sure to be cast,
because it is a bad cause, and that Judge will not be bribed with any thing in
the day of Judgment.

Seventhly, It I be cast in my cause, I shall be delivered up by the Judge to
Gods Jailer and Executioner, to wit, the Devil.

Eighthly, If I be Delivered over to Gods officer of Justice, he will cast me
into Prison, that is, Dragg me into hell.

Ninthly, If once I be cast into the prison of Hell; there must I lie, till I
have paid the uttermost Farthing, which can never be done, I must be always
paying the Debt, yet never have paid it.

By these Soul-awaking Considerations, the Lord helped him (through his Grace)
to conclude with himself, That it was the highest Wisdom in the World to agree
quickly with God his Adversary (as he was a child of Wrath by nature, Ephesians.
2.3.) and it would be the most sublime Folly for him any longer to deferr it,
etc.

Hereupon the Lord having thus opened his Eyes, touched his Heart and broke
down windows into his Dark Soul, upon further inquiry he learned, that this
vast debt he was owing to Divine Justice (no less than Ten thousand Talents,
Mat. 18.24. which is no less than a Kings Ransom) could never be compounded
for: This just Judge will have either All or None, and till an Agreement be
made, God is an angry Adversasary: And better I should anger all the Witches in
the World, and all the Devils in Hell, than anger the great God, I must agree
with Him.

Then the inquiry was made how this might be done?

The answer was, there is something lays on Gods part, and something on yours:
That on Gods part is (1.) to find an Arbitrator or Days-Man one more than a
man, for what could a mere man do with an angry God? (2.) God found a Ransom, a
Surety to satisfy the debt with the Travel of his Soul. Job 33.24. Heb. 7.22.
and Isa. 53.11. (3.) God makes the Sinners Heart wil^ing to accept of this way
of Agreement. Phil 2.13. That which ^ays on man's part is two fold, (1.) ^o let
go sin (not only in action but ^n affection also) and (2.) to lay hold on
Christ as one undone without Him: Thus came this blessed Soul to be broken off
from the Wild Olive, Romans 11.24. In his letting go and ^aying down of sin, as
the greatest evil, and by Grace became grafted unto that Blessed and Bleeding
Vine ^he Lord Jesus, John 15.1, 2. who ever after his happy grafting time,
became a fruit bearing branch, have^ng juice and nourishment administered
abundantly to him from the ^ree of Life Jesus Christ, as the sequel will
manifest in almost unparal^eld instances.

Thus far in short, for his experiences in his first Conversion, now come we to
treat more largely of his whole Conversation, some parts whereo^ shall be
reduced to the three following Heads, His Exercises: His Ex^minations of
Himself, and his Evidences for Heaven which he attain^^ unto, etc.

CHAP. II.
NOW after his thorough a^^ sound Conversion follows (...) holy Conversation,
which appear^^ to be much in Heaven by his conve^sing so much with God, and
with (...) own heart, in his due preparation for, and true participation of
th^^ greatest of ordinances, the Lords S^^per, as is manifest by those
experiences writ with his own hand upon that subject which with no small
trouble yet with great delight are here transcribed.

Now that he was bred and made a new creature by his effectual calling he found
and felt a necessity that he must also be fed, so asks council about the
concern of his Soul, and learnt those Divine Lessons which He recorded.

As (1.) the Lords Supper is so called because our Lord ordained it at his last
Supper instead of the Passover.

(2.) it is the duty of Beleivers to receive it, else they do slight his Love,
and disobey his Command.

(3.) And to receive it often according to Christ's command and the Apostles
practice.

(4.) That being dull and doubting under my Spiritual wants (says he) I must
give all diligence toprepare my Heart for so great a work: All are naturally
unfit, God will come and veiw his guests, I have to do with the Son of God, etc.

(5.) This preparation must be made by a narrow search of my own Heart
concerning my Sins, my wants and my Graces, and by fervent and solemn prayer.

(6.) The Graces I must go to God and get from him are, Knowledge, Faith, Love,
Repentance, and New Obedience.

(7.) I must have Knowledge, for without it the heart cannot be good, nor can I
know my self nor discern the Lords Body: I must know how man was created, and
how he fell and I in him, how we are recovered by Christ, how renewed after the
image of God in knowledge, etc. till then my understanding is dark and ignorant,
my conscience benumbed, my affections out of order and set upon wrong objects,
my memory brittle, my eyes full of adultry and my whole Frame out of Frame, the
knowledge of those things will help to break my heart that such a filthy lump of
Sin as I am, should see and feel the arms of Christ embracing me.

(8.) I must have Faith whereby I may heartily receive him as my Lord and
Redeemer, and rely upon him alone both for safety and salvation: Without faith
it is not possible to please God, and I may not displease him at his own Table,
when I go thither for the food of my Soul.

(9.) I must have repentance, because I must judge my self, that I be not
judged: I must both mourn for sin and turn from sin, when I come to the Lords
Table, etc.

(10.) I must have Love too, because the Apostle says [without Love all is
nothing] it is uncomfortable to sit down at the table of an enemy (whom we love
not, and who loves not us) but it is dreadful and dangerous to sit down in our
Enmity.

(11.) I must have new Obedience also, else I come in my rebellion, and for
Some Sinister end, not out of obedience. I must here renew my covenant with
God, and be as serious as if I were to dye: Both in begging to be rid of that
Sin which most disturbs the peace of my Soul and to have that mercy which would
do me most good in a Dying Hour, etc.

(12.) I must quicken and draw forth into act all these forenamed Habits of
Grace when I come to the Lords Table, there meditating upon the great work of
man's redemption, Gods severity against sin in the death of my Surety and
Savior, the preciousness of my Soul, that cost such a price and the privileges
purchased for me thereby, for which I must be thankful, etc.

Having thus solemnly prepared his Soul for this great and tremendous ordinance
from July 22. 1681. to August the 7h. before he was yet twenty years old he sat
down the first time upon that day at the Lords Table: -- Upon this first
Sacrament, he received August the seventh, thus he writes, Before I sat down,
and at my first approach to the Table, something of Fear and Trembling seized
upon me, but soon after I had some Sweet Sights of my Dear Redeemer: I saw him
by Faith, how he stood with his Arms wide open to receive me, and how he was
Pierced, that the Blood came out of his Blessed and Bleeding Sides: I had then
a clearer Sight of my God (through my Redeemer) and of his blessed Angels. This
was ravishing, and Oh how refreshing; but could not get my heart Inflamed
enough with Love to Christ. I laid open my Sins and begged the Pardon of them
might be Sealed. I promised to live up to this Obligation, etc.

Concerning the Second Sacrament he Received Sept. 4. 1681. He gives this
account. [I had not duly prepared my Heart for so great a work and
Ordinanance, but blessed for ever, blessed be the Lord, who did not deal with
me according to my unpreparedness, which if he had done, I had not been here,
but been banished from his presence, and so been under the Death of Deaths. But
he was pleased to give me a Sight of himself (which I esteem above life) and
likewise a Sight of God and Christ's conferring about man's Redemption. I saw the
Lord (as it were) saying, Come ye Holy Angels, behold man is fallen, see if ye
can find a way for his recovery, which they could not, but Christ took upon him
man's salvation: And I saw my self (as it were) in Hell where I had for ever
laid, but Christ came, and drew me out, then I embraced him as my Prophet,
Priest and King, and became willing to forsake the World and all for Christ: O
that I may do it more and more, and never have this frame worn off, but that
while I am below with my Body, my Soul may be above with my God, etc.

The Third Sacrament was October 2d. 1681. on which he writes thus as the
minister (in administering) was saying. So that you are unfeignedly willing to
receive Christ, and whom nothing will satisfy but him, I bid come and welcome
to take him, then were my thoughts fixed upon Christ, though they had been
wandering two days before, and I had lost my beloved, yet nothing could give me
peace till I here found Him, and Sweet communion with Him, wherein I heard him
say to my Soul, thy sins (small and great) are pardoned, and thy pardon is
sealed; I saw (as it were) his precious blood spurting out of his sides into my
heart. Oh my Soul ever for ever love this Lovely Lord, admire and adore him who
has sealed thy pardon: Never sin more, but walk suitably to all this etc.

The Fourth Sacrament was November 6. 1681 whereof he says thus, I have longed
for this ordinance, because I had more than ordinary sins (such as pride that I
had long groaned under) which made me long for the sprinkling of my Dear
Redeemers blood to wash them away. I was also pestered with passion (as well as
pride) with unbelief, with wandering thoughts and some times with Blasphemy (O
cursed, cursed sin, and O wicked wicked heart, once to think whether God was or
no, when thou have had such clear evidences of a Diety) these were my five
deadly odious sins, which I begged might be purged from me.

O that I may never see nor feel them more: At this Ordinance, I found relief,
and feeling the Wine falling down lower and lower, I desired it might carry of
all my filth, so as to leave none remaining, and there did I resolve (through
grace) to leave those five sins, and never have any thing to do with them etc.

The Fifth Sacrament was December 4. 1681. wherein (says he) I did again lay
my sins before the Lord fearing their return upon me, did desire a meek and
humble heart against my pride and passion; I did again resign my self to God,
having broken Covenant with Him, and begging (with the Syrophaenician Woman) to
touch the Hem of Christ's garments, that I might be cleansed from my issue of
sin, but could not at that instant get so nigh him but afterward had I a clear
representation of Christ's sufferings in the Garden where he bore the wrath of
God, sweating drops of blood, through his cloths in a cold season, so that he
came as from Bozra, with died garments, then I saw the crown of thorns upon his
head and his head beaten with the Soldiers iron-gloves which made the thorns
wound his Holy Head in 72. places, so that the blood ran down upon his body, I
saw also the heavy weight of the cross laid upon Him, and how he was spit upon,
reviled and derided; this blessed sight prevented wandering thoughts, till the
last prayer, though I did not deserve the least crumb of comfort for
unpreparedness to so great a work, which, had God dealt out my desert, would
have been no less than Hell, etc.

The Sixth Sacrament he did partake of was January the first 1681/2. upon which
he makes these remarks, I had been some days before more than ordinary in my
preparation and prayer for a profitable receiving, and when I came to it, I was
sore afraid that I should lay stress upon preparatory actings, therefore begged
I of God that he would not deal with me accordingly, I labored to act my
requisite graces.

As (1.) Repentance laying open before the Lord all my old year sins to that
New Years day and labored to mourn for them more than formerly, especially for
my deadly deadly sins, Spiritual pride, Passionateness, Wandering Thoughts in
Holy Duties, unbeleif, worldliness etc. and I hope God gave there both pardon
of them and power against them.

(2.) My thankfulness I actuated (as well as I could) for so rich a mercy,
begging for it both hard and always.

(3.) My love, though I had much too little, experiencing the sweet Kisses of
Christ's mouth, and Embraces of his love, I saw Christ on the Cross Embracing me
as well as I him, and saying to God [I have paid a Ransom for him, this man is
he, etc.] This was so sweet, that I could embrace the stake or even go into
hell, so I might thus enjoy him whom my Soul loved; and when I heard the
Minister say, mourn for your sins that murdered your Lord, I answered within my
self, How can the Children of the Bride mourn while the Bridegroom is with
them? Twice did wandering thoughts offer themselves but were (by grace)
suppressed at the first rising, having now obliged my understanding, will,
memory, affections, conscience, yea all to attend Gods service: While thus
filled with this enjoyment I longed to be in Heaven, and desired that welcome,
welcome friend death that I might sing with the Holy Saints and Angels
Hallelujahs to to the Lord: then said I, O my Soul let nothing draw thy love
from thy Lord: For the World, Friends, Relations, Pleasures, Profits, all
things put together, can never give such joy to thee as thou have found from
lovely, lovely Jesus in this blessed ordinance, therefore lay not out thy love
upon any thing besides Him, who has done and is doing great things, yea and
will do greater for thee. Such was my warming warming loves at this Supper.

The Seventh Sacrament was February the 3. 1681/2. Upon which he remarks thus,
[when I found my heart not fully fixed by my New years Day Sacrament, but
notwithstanding all my striving I was yet troubled with distraction in duty, I
longed for this ordinance very much and thought it long till it came that
accounts might be made even between God and my poor Soul. I was dull for 2. or
3. Duties before and could not get my heart raised, whereby I saw that I
deserved nothing: though wandering thoughts pressed upon me, yet were they cut
short 2 or 3 times, and I found relief from those sins I had laid open before
the Lord in the foregoing Sacrament. I bewailed my breaking covenant, my
distraction, my deadness and coldness in duty, etc. And at this Sacrament my
Dear Redeemer met me and said to me I have pardoned those thy sins at thy
request, this much affected and inlivened me in love to him, seeing him then as
(it were) coming from Heaven to the Earth, and from Earth to the Cross
(shedding his precious blood for me) and from the Cross into Glory; and
(methought) Christ said to me, go sin these your sins no more, which obliged me
to a close walking and to be more watchful than before; all this month the Lord
kept me from pride, but alas my other sins returned to foil me.

The Eighth Sacrament was March 5. 1681/2. Upon this he says thus: I had more
than ordinary communion with God before it, and have not had a sweeter season
for a long time, which made me long till it came; in this ordinance, I saw my
dear Redeemer (as it were) dead with a company of Holy Angels holding of Him
and a great darkness over all the place, this was grief to my Soul, but
presently he that was dead I saw him alive again and coming into the midst of
us to see what we came for, I went to him and told him (methought) that my Soul
loved him, and I was come to meet him for strength against corruption, and by
his help I could forsake the world and sin (which I hated) to enjoy him, etc.
then he told me, my pride should not prevail against me this month, nor my
other sins but by own neglect. This was sweet and refreshing to my Soul, and
this was the occasion of the Devils great rage against me (as appears by my
Diary March 14.) yet could he not prevail, but Christ kept his promise in
keeping me from pride, etc.

Oh what cause have I to love the Lord Jesus, whom I saw here again coming from
Heaven to Earth, to the Cross to the Grave and to Heaven again, and all this to
save my Soul, here sin was made more odious Christ more dear, and here I
renewed my Covenant with God, etc.

The Ninth Sacrament was April the 2d. 1682. upon which he says thus, Some Time
before this I was in a dull frame by the hurries of our Trade, at this time (as
may be seen by my diary) little life could I find till the noon before that
day, then had I the presence of my Dear Lord in a lively manner and measure,
after this wandering thoughts dullness and coldness (unsuitable to so sweet a
supper) seized upon me, but by running over again the same circumstances of my
Saviors sufferings, especially his Agony in the Garden and all for such a
wretch as me, I found relief, got hatred of my sins, begged pardon of them: And
not only so but got power against them; yet wandering thoughts 4 or 5 times did
trouble me, but by Christ's strengthening me I overcame them, and hoped to have
my pardon sealed; and to have power for the future for watching better against
them and against my deadness and breaking my Covenant, etc. which made me long
to quit the World whereupon it was answered me, I should shortly be freed from
all sin, yet in this Sacrament I had the least communion with God than in any
before but still much more, infinitely more than I deserved, who (sure I am)
deserves not the least mercy.

The Tenth Sacrament was May 7. 1682. upon which he writes thus, I had not
longing desires after this Blessed Ordinance, having lost much of my life I had
in duty before through much hurries of our worldly affairs: This morning I
wrestled with God, but had not the light of his countenance which made me think
of not going, yet considering that was not the way to be better I ventured, but
found no life at first, yet a little after I felt some reaching after my Dear
Redemer, this made me resolve to walk more closely for the future, after this
it pleased God to come in (out of his free love) and to give me a clear sight
of my sweet Saviors going to his Cross, and I following him and laying my self
down at his feet, when I could do nothing; Then had I plain visions of my
lovely Lords ascensions and his Angels looking upon him, whereat I found much
goings out of my Soul, after him, yet wandering thoughts did trouble me for I
had not brought my breaking Covenant, my Dullness and Deadness before the Lord,
so as to be deeply humbled for them.

The Eleventh Sacrament was June 4, 1682. Upon which he He remarks, thus, I
having no time, was very bad in my preparations for this blessed Sacrament, so
doubted whether I should go to it, but fearing it might be the last I should
enjoy in peace I then went, yet it proved the worst I ever yet had, I hardly
felt any movings of affections only a little mourning for my breach of
Covenant, my coldness and deadness, etc. Had a little sight of my Dearest
Redeemer, but O my misery for not keeping my engagement made in the foregoing
Ordinance: whereby I feared the Holy Spirit was greived and sinned away, O sad
sad, lamentable, deplorable was my state when I had sinned my God from me: My
condition was wretched now and without more care it may yet be much worse.

The Twelfth Sacrament was on July 2d. 1682. whereupon he notes thus, I was but
little in preparation in order to my participation of this Holy Ordinance, yet
much more than on the last; on Friday morning before I had much of Gods
presence, but because I had not taken a Catalogue of my sins, and had broke my
vows with God, it is just with him to hide his face from me, and O my deadly sin
got again too much advantage against me, yet praised be the free Grace of my
God, I had his presence in this Ordinance, and saw my Dear Redeemer going along
bearing his heavy Cross, and his suffering thereupon and when his side was
pierced, (methought) I stood under, and his precious blood did drop down upon
me; but still I was too little grieved for sin, and had 3. times wanderings
which (through Grace) passed away, as the Wine went down I desired my sins
might be purged away and renewed my resolve of walking better, both before and
in this Sacrament, designing to shelter my Soul in the holes of his blessed
Side (that was ^ierced) as the Dove does in the holes of the Rock.

The Thirteenth Sacrament was August 6. 1682. On which he records thus: The
hurries of the World had made menegligent before it, yet did I try my self by
my catalogue of sins drawn up in February before, such as pride ( whereof I had
a great deal) breach of Covenant ( whereof I was greatly guilty) Wanderings,
Dullness in Duty, etc. and then another great one the neglect of self trial
after my vows and renewed Covenant to do it, after Sacraments, wherein I had
found much sweetness: I could not still call my self to a strict account, nor
actuate my repentance as becomes a worthy receiver though my sins were many and
great: At my first sitting down, I had but little sense of sin, but after God
showed me something of himself, then had I some sorrow of Soul and something of
my dear Lord, but once God seemed to come out in fury toward me, yet
(methought) I saw my Dear Redeemer stop it: Here again I lay under the Cross to
be washed from my sins and did see (as before) Christ coming from Heaven to
Earth, to hi^ Cross and to his Grave and from thence into Glory, this I viewed
with a little (oh too little) life, then the Devil tempted me to make no new
engagement of reformation, but the Lord helped me, and I harkned not to the
Tempter. About 4. times wanderings came, but (through grace) they continued not,
yet had I small actings of love and outgoings of Soul after my God and my Dear
Redeemer.

The Fourteenth Sacrament was September 3. 1682. On which he observes thus, I
had but little of God, some time before this till Saturday night. Though I had
been much in preparation, yet my God came not in till then, and indeed I saw
much sin in my best services, so begged God would not deal with me as I
deserved, which would have been hell and destruction: But coming to partake I
had great hopes of his presence, so soon as I had pleaded with God my last
years engagement, then found I some revivings, and hearing the two great points
of the Covenant (that God would be our God, and we should be his people)
opened, then did I resign up my self to God with a more than ordinary
resignation. My end in coming to this Ordinance was to ge^ the partition wall
(betwixt me and my God) cast down which I hope was attained, my Pride and other
sins were pardoned, provided I did not run into them again; I clove close to
Christ and would not let him go without his blessing, which my dear Redeemer
gave me, though Satan presented many things to prevent me thereof: The Lord
said here to me I will he thy God, and my Soul said, I do engage to he one of
thy People, leaving all that comes in competition with my sweet Savior, etc.

The Fifteenth Sacrament was October 5. 1682. he begins thus, Blessing, Praise,
and Honor be ascribed unto my God, and Redeemer, who has neither forgotten
nor forsaken me, though I did deserve it and Gods wrath too, for my manifold
sins, whereof murmuring in some measure (I am afraid) is one, and seeking
praise among men is another: Though sense of sin had too little been upon my
heart this last month, yet now was it more than usual, but less than my sins
required, I pleaded with God that he commanded me to believe, to this I had
great comfort returned and after much struggling the Lord assured me my sins
were pardoned; then had I such representations of my Redeemer as I had often
before, when Gods justice impleaded me for my sins, my sweet Savior did then
answer, I have dyed and satisfied for him, at this the Devil envyed, telling me
all this was but a fable, and would have diverted me but (by grace) I overcame
him: O how am I obliged to love God who has given me smiles when I deserved
nothing but frowns, shall not I be more careful to please him, and more fearful
to offend him (He ends as he began) Blessing, Praise, and Honor, be to my God
and my Redeemer for ever, etc.

The Sixteenth Sacrament was November 5. 1682. on which he said thus, I have
broke my covenant with God for the last month, by falling into these sins I
engaged and resolved against before, dullness in duty and distraction returned
upon me having not striven so much against them as I should, and having little
communion with God my deadly sin prevailed, wherefore nothing but fearful
looking for of judgment was before me, being remiss in my preparations yet God
dealt not with me according to my deserts, for then had I been set up as a
monument of Divine Displeasure among men: But before I sat down I strove to
raise my repentance, yet could not mourn as my case required. I pleaded Gods
promise, that his Son was sent to save such as I am, etc. I ran over Christ's
sufferings in my mind particularly, and seated my Soul at the feet of my
bleeding Savior on the Cross that his precious blood might cleanse away all my
loads of sins, I did justify God in all his dealing with me, and his
withdrawments from me, then did I receive Christ as my King, resolving to
forsake all for him and to follow him through all: some wanderings troubled me
in Christ's Wine-cellar but were soon cut off, etc.

As to the Sacrament in December, he acknowledges his Omission of it, by his
own Negligence and Folly.

The Seventeenth Sacrament was on January 7. 1681/3. where he writes thus; I
did endeavor to prepare (yet but alittle, for this great Ordinance and could
not for a long time get my affections inflamed (as formerly) with love to the
Lord Jesus, however I cast my sins at his feet, to be washed away that the
difference might be taken up and God might reconciled to my poor Soul again,
which (blessed be the Lord) was hopefully accomplished: I did bewail my
fearful breaking covenant, the return of my multitude of sins, especially my
deadly sin pride: I again viewed over distinctly the sufferings of Christ, how
he was scourged, etc. and all for poor me, this set me upon mourning, but I
could not shed tears, yet complained of the hardness of my heart; and begged
that Christ's Precious Blood might both soften and cleanse it, then (me thought)
I saw Christ upon the Cross stooping to me and giving me his hand, when he saw
I could not get up my heart to him: Hereupon I clasped about my Dear Redeemer
who had reconciled God to me, then I resolved (in his strength) never to fin in
the like manner any more, and was angry with my self for dealing so unkindly
with so kind a Father, who had rather a sinner should repent than dye, God was
loving to me who could, look for nothing but fury in the highest measure for my
backslidings; my heart would have wandered but (by Gods goodness) those
wanderings were taken short: I here solemnly engaged to walk more closely with
God for the future all my says, which if I did not, O how great will be my sin,
how vast will be my unworthiness, beyond what my Tongue can express.]

Upon the whole, As our Lord said of the Good Centurion [I have not found so
great faith no not in all Israel.] so ^m I like to say of this gracious
Young Man, I have not found such savoury Soul-experiences on record ^o not in
all England.

This will further more fully appear by the sequel in his Exercises, Self
Examinations and Evidences.

CHAP. III.
AFter his Experiences, come in the second place his Exercises which are
twofold, first concerning ^iety, secondly concerning impiety, both before his
effectual vocation and after it: Those before he took with his own hand these
memorials following.

(1.) About the year 1671. having read Jehosephats life, I was a little
startled, and grew melancholic, that was the first time I had a mind to pray,
and desired another to join with me in it, but he told me that he could not
pray without help of some form; no more (I said) can I, but used a form in a
spelling book, which I prayed often but very negligently, then going to Epson,
where I had a good master who prayed morning and evening with his family and
religiously instructed us, which did bring me to pray without a form, yet could
not d^ it with seriousness, though I was exhorted to it both by my master and by
(...) minister that came often thither. (...) this place I began to be willing to
hea^ the Word, though I little minde^ what I heard, till I read the Pilgrims
Progress, which made me again grow melancholic (the former being worn off) to
the observation of others; then the good providence of God brought to my hands
Mr. Baxters Call to the unconverted, which (through grace,) showed me the
necessity of my conversion; yet all this time never consulted with any man
about my sins, but only confessed them to God, till I met with Mr. Hookers Soul
preparation for Christ, which convinced me to advise with some Godly minister,
hereupon I did address to one though a stranger to him, saying, Sir, I cannot,
I dare not any longer refrain, having asked my self what fitness I had to dye,
was answered, I was unfit till I had eased my heart to you, as follows

(1.) When I was 7. years old, I tore my Bible, and cast away my Catechism.

(2.) I have broke the Sabbath, by rambling abroad, playing at farthings with
naughty boys and washing my self in the fields when I should have been at the
Church, etc.

(3.) By excusing my sins with a lie, so added one sin to another, for covering
it.

(4.) Nor have I been free from Youthful Lusts, which young Timothy was bid to
flee, but my corrupt Heart has had workings after the Act, several times, yet
has been wonderfully prevented by the advice of my Godly Sister, who laid
before me Christ's words, Mat. 5.28. whoever looks on a woman to lust after her,
etc. however, I am guilty of Heart-Adultry. yea,

(5.) I have, erred and laughed when I have heard the word preached with power,
etc. Hereupon the Good Minister gave me grave council and comfort suitable to
my penitent case and condition, yet notwithstaning all this, I was not
effectually called, nor througly converted, and made a new creature, until
afterward I heard that Sermon upon Mat. 5.25, 26. as the account above
mentioned specifieth.

But alas in my Apprentiship through the hurries of the World in our way of
trading (especially in May and June, etc.) I became negligent of my close
walking with God, not minding (as I might) to continue in his love, when God
(my adversary) was reconciled to me; I neglected Daily, Self-examination, or
did it only to half part, being dull and sleepy through weariness with worldly
work at night then my old corruptions got head again upon me, I broke my
Covenant made at the agreement with my adversary and I Apostatized from these
sweet thoughts I formerly had upon my God and Dear Redeemer, for which (had he
not been gracious) I had been damned and rotting in Hell for ever. This
consideration made me exclaim against my self saying, O silly Soul to heed a
perishing dying world before Heaven, such sadness and darkness seized on me at
this time (when the things of the world, I found had been the substance of my
thoughts and discourse) that I knew not what to do, nor whither to go, at last
I turned to the Lord and begged of him that he would not take the forfeiture,
nor suffer me to run this ready way to utter destruction.

I cried Lord, it is just with thee to hurl mein to hell and into the hottest
place thereof, and never wait longer upon such a cumber-ground as I am: but to
thee my Dear Redeemer do I run for refuge, as one that am hungry and hardly
bestead, poor, blind, naked, wretched and miserable, a loathsome wretch,
unworthy to be called a servant, much less a Son, having so wickedly departed
from my God, yet through thee will I venture again to my God, and by thy
strength I will better mind my future walkings: O my dearest Redeemer I die
without thee, O come in once again and let me feel once more what it is to have
Christ dwelling in my Soul! O find a time of love wherein to disperse those
dark clouds and shine upon my Dead and Darkened Soul! O has my night no day,
it is an hell to me to be thrust away from God, I know the cause is all at home,
my sin, my sin, O let it be done away, then should I recover the light of thy
countenance as formerly, and in so doing I do engage to amend my manners
(depending on thy help) my hand is witness, John Draper. now to bind his Soul
and Slippery heart to God the better in observing this new engagement, he wrote
down many profitable rules in his pocket book.

As (1.) In a day of humiliation I must lay all my sins before the Lord and
resolve to forsake them.

(2.) I must look upon my sin of Passion as a fever in my mind, of Lust, as
fire in my bones, of Pride as a fatal tympany in my Soul, of covetousness as an
insatiable and unsufferable thirst, and the sin of Envy or Malice as rank
poison in the heart.

(3.) If I would run so as to obtain I must cast off all those weights or sins
that do so easily beset me.

(4.) I must resolve to begin betimes the running of this race.

(5.) Nor must I loyter in the way.

(6.) Nor must I cumber my self with the needless encumbrances of the World.

(7.) I must look to every part of my way with equal care and observation.

(8.) Nor must I ever think I have gone far enough till I have obtained the
prize.

(9.) And the further I have run in this race, the more eager should be to
obtain the end.

(10.) I must always think that I am upon the brink of eternity, and therefore
should give all diligence to make my calling and election sure, working out my
Salvation and making sure work for a better world, before I go hence to be seen
no more.

(11.) I must ever come to God as to a Soul-pittying, a Sin-pardoning, and a
Prayer-hearing God.

(12.) I must be fervent in prayer, yet submit to Gods Soveraign^y.

(13.) Occasions of being too ^ong alone, are to be avoided, so ^s Strong
Drink, and too full a Diet.

(14.) I must be thinking often Death Judgment, Hell and Heaven, those four last
things

(15.) I must not stretch my Christian liberty too far, for he that dare go so
far as he thinks he may, goes sometime farther than he should, etc.

(16.) I must bridle my Tongue and not be too apt to speak of things whereof I
am not certain: And much more to the same purpose both for particular and
general instruction too long to insert here.

This Holy Young Man put down in his pocket book also, how he had been
Exercised with Temptations to Sin, as to Theft, Adultry, Playing at Cards, and
profaning the Sabbath, etc. as also with trials to prevent temptations,
instancing that in a lash upon his eye with a Coach-whip, whereby the Lord
healed him of hie lustful Eye which had been too full of Adultry, 2. Pet. 2.14.

CHAP. IV.
NOw come we to the Third Head, his Examinations of himself in the workings of
his heart relating to his Communion with God, It was not enough to this good
Soul to examine himself only when he was approaching to the Lords Table, on the
Lords Day (as is before specified) but he looked upon it as his duty to do it
every day, (both every Sabbath Day when there was no Sacrament, and every week
day also) making it his continual daily task, as appears by his most Dilligent
and Divine Diary. This necessary, but much neglected work of self-tryal (I
find) he began at the springtime Aequinoctial upon the 10. of March 1681 O
Holy and Happy Soul that had now his hard frozen heart thus kindly thawed by a
look of love from the Son of Righteousness, as Peter's was by a Look from his
Lord, Luke 22.61, 62 Hereby the Lord helped him to say with the Bridegroom in
the Song. [The winter is past the rain is over and gone, The Flowers appear on
the Earth, etc.] Cant. 2.10, 11, 12, 13.1 most blessed spring of Grace (better
than that of Grass) was now upon him, though I cannot give so distinct an
account of his Diary as I would because 'twas writ in obscure Characters only
with a black pencil (intended it seems solely for hi^ own private use) yet with
the be^^ key we could get it has been opened, that such precious treasur^
should not be lost, but communicated for the common good.

I begin here from the Manuscrip^ both as to the matter and as to the time as I
can judge, upon what Sabbat^ Day I heard a Sermon upon Peter going out and
weeping bitterly after Christ had looked upon him. Says he, I went to prayer
that night and begged of God to give me Peter's Repentanoe, and in the
earnestness of Spirit I fell flat upon the ground, before the Lord to beg it,
Then I laid long till I had some comfort from my God, yet remained I dull and
muddy till wednesday night, and then had I some communion with my God again,
even a new taste of his first goodness and comfort in prayer. On Thursday night
did I meet him whom my Soul loves again, which I found very useful to me,
finding by woeful experience that without Christ's strengthening me, I could do
nothing spiritually, nor before the Sabbath ensuing nor in it, had I the sweet
communion with God I used to have before, but on Monday night I met my God
having a pretty deal of time that evening, for Tuesday morning was not so good,
nor could I raise my heart at night till it was very late, and then had I my
former sweetness, but much more upon wednesday: the same I found upon the
Sabbath following, and on Monday night and on the next night also, though
everdul at the first yet enlarged after upon wednesday night I prayed twice
successively and found more than ordinary incomes: On Thursday again I had
inlargements but at the close the Devil made me drowsy to cut short my duty,
etc. but on Friday my heart was kept better raised: On Saturday I begged of God
to direct me how I might meet the blessing of the next Sabbath, which (through
grace) I met with on that day, yet was troubled with wanderings in my evening
duty: On Monday the presence of God was with me and made my duty sweet at
night: On Tuesday I met with a precious opportunity for my Souls good: On
Wednesday I did not so well, which made me chide my Soul for no better
requiting the Lords kindness On Thursday morning I had Gods presence and the
same at night though troubled with wanderings: On Friday I had many outward
mercyes, yet could improve aright neither Gods word of Grace nor his works of
Mercy, On Saturday (having spare time from business) I sought the Lord thrice
for a larger sight of the light of his Countenance when the Sabbath came, the
Lord gave me an Answer of Peace, etc.

Thus might a large account of this gracious Young-Mans Self-Tryal and
watchings over his own ways from Month to Month, all along but because to do so
distinctly from day to day would fill a volume, I must therefore wave it, and
that not out of Judgment only, but out of necessity also, seeing the key that
opened his Charactars, could not reach them all, neither in point of time, nor
in point of matter, the judicious Reader may easily imagine that this defect
will lame us in this work, yet though it cost me unspeakable trouble and pains,
I shall follow my thread in this labyrinth.

I have already given an exact account how he examined himself upon every
monthly Sacrament, from August 7. 1681. to Jan. 7. 1681/3. which was the last
he did partake of, for not long after his Dear Redeemer (whom he had so often
admired and embraced in the Lords Supper upon Earth) called him home to Sup and
Feast with him in Heaven.

As to his Self-Tryal at all other times between every one of those Seventeen
Sacraments, I shall proceed to relate, so far as my key will carry me.

The best computation I can make out of the many manuscripts consisting of
above thirty sheets which I have to abridge and methodize, drawn out of his
Diary, Pocketbook and Almanac, etc. He renews his self-examining work again,
upon March 17. 1681/2. being Friday: how he spent all the time from the last
March to this, save only relating to the Sacraments, we must be content to want
it, for want of better helps, but upon that day he has left upon record, he
had wandering thoughts in duty, did little for the good of others, my sins
(says he) lay but light, I mourned not for the sins of the land, I looked not
into my own heart, nor was I concerned in holy ejaculations: The same he says
of himself in spending the 18 and March the 19. being the Sabbath, he remarks
the same omissions, and not having a frame Suitable to the Day, yea in
night-duty pestered with wanderings: on March, 20. I arose from Table without
drooping, being full glad to meet God there. March 21. had the former omission
and Heaven little in my sight, 22d. day could not mourn for the sins of the
land: and the same frame was upon me, the 23. and 24. nor could I do better or
look into my heart the 25 of March 1682. nor the six following Days of that
month could he shake of those omissions, April the first he brands himself with
the same neglects: the second day he adds to those neglects, that wandering
thoughts had eaten up the life of his duty, on the third the same complaint, on
the fourth missed vain thoughts in a good measure, yet only through the
strenght o^ Christ, but on fifth he adds, God our of sight and Heaven out of
mind, on the sixth he makes the same moan, of seventh, my own sins and the sins
of the land lay too light upon my heart, etc. eight, the same and that he had
done nothing extraordinary for the Church in herday of distress. ninth the same
yet had some good thoughts but troubled with wanderings, tenth the same and so
the eleventh. adding, I have been this day tempted to pride; so the twelfth,
thirteenth and fourteenth, are filled with the like complaints, and fifteenth
he adds I have been spending this noon much too vainly, the sixteenth (being
the Sabbath) he blessed God that distraction had not dulled him in duty; 17th.
had like to have fallen into passion but God disappointed it, yet not much in
Holy Ejaculations, etc. eighteenth, not up early had my former omissions and
commissions, the ninteenth, twentyeth and twenty first, yea to the end of
April, he arraigns himself as guilty of all those aforesaid Crimes, then May 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Complains of all those evils, adding that hurreys of his trade
at this time did provoke him more to passion, but sometime God helped him to
subdue it, etc. the 7. being Sabbath Day, sin set too light, did not mourn for
the sins of the land, not enough in holy ejaculations, nor in looking into my
own heart, nor seriously minding the Word of God, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. the
same, little life, much dullness, being wearyed with the hurries of the World,
14, frothy discourse with some delight, O sin sin lay too light both mine own
and the lands sin, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. the same Complaint, 20. neglecting to
read Gods Word, 21, 22, 23. so on to the end of May, he cries out I have done
nothing for my self nor the Church, I have not been my self, hardly knowing
what I did through the hurryes of the World, O the World, the World is a sa^
impediment to my Soul, God has not been in my mind, Heaven out of my sight, I
have not mourned for my own sins, nor those of the land nor had holy
ejaculations, etc. thus he says particularly upon every day, adding thus I
continued till the fourth of June being always wearyed with work and unfit for
any good, O it has been a sad time for my Soul, thus likewise I neglected till
the 17 of June, on which I renewed my covenant with God, yet 18, 19. the same
neglects prevailed, only on the 20. I had some holy Ejaculations, but 21, 22.
the same and 23. I prayed not over the Sermon as I should have done and omitted
all as before, 24 still pestred with former neglects, O sad, sad that I should
be thus carried under Grace, thus he moans on 25, 26. and so on to the end of
June, on every day I have done little for the Church, or for my Soul, have not
read Gods word, sin sits too light, not mourned for my own sin nor for the sins
of the land, Heaven has been out of sight and God out of mind, too little have
I been in holy ejaculations, with wanderings not often looking into my own heart,
etc.

July 1682. from 1 to 10. he complains particularly upon each Day in the same
word's [too much wanderings in Holy Duties, too little sense of sin upon my
heart, I have not mourned enough for my own sins nor for the sins of the Land,
not much in ejaculations, Heaven too much out of sight, etc.] sometimes adding
[I neglected reading Gods Word, have done little for Gods Church have not
minded my Soul nor Gods praise, etc.]

Then concludes, these ten days with this divine rapture. [O this deadly thing
sin has not duly affected my heart, into what a sad state is my Soul fallen,
O my God, I beseech thee leave me not.] This same complaint concerning those
several omissions he carries on against himself quite through July, to the
last day. August 1682. He makes the same moans of the same neglects all along
the month upon the head of every day of the four weeks distinctly, yet
sometimes adding, God helped me on the 2 of August against my deadly sin on the
6 day (being the Sabbath) I was less troubled with wanderings than I was the day
after, on the 8 day I arose from Supper without dropping any savory word at the
Table, on the 11. God kept me much from my sin this day: On the 13. I had much
of God in my night prayer, though the Devil told me I had not begged Gods
presence, My dear Lord helped me to repulse him with ease: On the 16 out of
order all the day, but at night God shone upon my Soul more than a long time
before: but lost all the two following days, being hurryed with casting up our
shop, going backward not forward: On 19. I felt my deadly sin crawl apace
toward my heart, which put me upon examination, the 20. day, and found it not
in vain to cast my burden upon the Lord, for I had thereby relief against my
Pride etc. for which I have cried mightily to the Lord my God after which I had
sweet communion with God, then the Tempter strongly tempted me to neglect
hearing and reading the Word, but putting up an ejaculation, I had strength to
overcome him again: after hearing a Sermon I went down into the Cellar to pray,
where the Devil would affright me that something would appear, which (through
the help of my Dear Redeemer) I stoutly resisted and bid Satan defiance, then
he objected against me my deadly sin which I could not but own, yet could he
not make me think so long upon it as to distract me in duty, which was the
Devils design, but Osubtil Serpent my Lords goodness strengthened me to triumph
over thee, and I had a comfortable season: upon the 21 of August 1682. all my
old neglects prevailed, and wanderings in my night prayer, but God heard my
ejaculation, I got up early in the morning (which sweet way I had much
neglected through weariness with worldly work) to pray, wherein I found much of
God, O my Soul love that lovely lovely, one thy Lord, who has heard thee has
done, is doing great things for thee, and will do greater: On the 26. I
neglected reading the Word, been too much about Worldly affairs which took me
off from God, and I lost my time in Duty, nor could I get up my thoughts to my
God in my hurryes, yet on the Saturday following I recovered a blessed frame, O
my Soul love and praise the Lord for ever.

September the 2. I was at a fast for the fire of London, where I was not free
of my aforesaid omissions, yet waiting there all the day, at length had the
sweet presence of God: On the 4. I had Heaven in my sight and but little
troubled with wanderings, yet too little looked I into my own heart; I sat up
late for Duty and God made it sweet to me On the seventh he makes his old moan
against himself saying, I feat my own self righteousness, the 10. God
discovered my deadly sin which caused his withdrawment from me; and that
wishing to die to avoid misery by God withdrawings, is but a pang of passion,
The 15. old wanderings, etc. returned, I think my murmuring was the cause: I
first read, Isa. 65.22, 23, 24. from whence upon my ejaculation God spoke
comfort to me, so had after delight in duty. The 19, God discovered another sin
(my seeking the praises of men) that darkened his face from me. The 23. but
little sensible how I had grieved away Gods good Spirit in morning prayer. The
25. had little sense of Gods putting a vail over his Face toward me, which I
bewailed little, the other days of this month I neglected (being out of town)
to take an account of, only in the general, I observed that my deadly sin
prevailed most, while my Soul is most clouded.

October the 1st. my old Distractions. Disturbed me running from the Cellar up
to the closet, and from thence to the cellar again yet had (through Grace) a
little of Gods presence: The 2d. I was too rash in speaking a thing that was
not so: The 3. I was unwilling to pray in the Cellar at night, yet made willing
to go, I. found much of the presence of him who had thus inclined me; The 4. I
spoke not of God in company of others.

Yet with another Companion my God helped me to savoury Discourse in prayer but
then to Epsom, til the 14 day I was under dreadful desertions which made me cry
out woe is me, I have sinned away my God, by my minding the World too much and
my God too little, and by relying too much on my own strength: on the 14. he
renews his old complaints [Heaven out of sight not mourned for the sins of the
land nor my own, etc.] Adding rose from Table without any thing of God there:
On the 15 not so much troubled as before with wanderings, yet sin set too light,
etc. the 16. and 17. the same, The 18. and 19. bad, the 20. not so bad, had at
night God presence and some sense of sin, which made me burst out crying, how
have I been hopping from Mountain to hill through Simplicity, forgetting my
right resting place, O that those lost minutes and hours, had been spent in the
sweetest converse with my Dear Redeemer, but now (from this time) the Lord
grant great Reformation in John Draper. The 23. of October 1682. (he says) I
have strove this day to get to God, but could not, fasted and three times
prayed, still the face of God was hid from me. The 24. still under Gods
withdrawings, so on 25, 26, and 28, no better with me on the 29, 30, and 31,
but wanderings in duty, no right mourning for sin, dull dead and thoughts mostly
taken up with the World, very little of God in all that I do, so that I knew
not what to do.

November the 1 could not gain Gods presence, 2. the same, but not so bad in
duty, 3, and 4. as bad, O sad, sad, sad, but on 6. had much of Gods presence,
8, 9, bad again, so 10. and 11. still dull and cold, so 12. and 13. and endways
in a sad condition.

December. having been long out of town, half of the foregoing month till the
fourth of this month and lived as without God, my mind taken up with the World;
no longings after Gods presence 'twas a good providence, I saw their worship at
Windsor which did more establish me.

This month the Lord taught me the deformity of all sublunary things without
God, now I see my folly, and oh that it may not be too late! I could weep night
and day, for my great loss of God; I am so perplexed that I scarce know what to
do with my self, etc.

January 5. 1682. I was taken very Ill, so that those about me, thought I was a
dying, but God raised me up again, Oh that it might be to dye to Sin and and
live to God.

The 7th. (which was his seventeenth and last Sacrament-Day) makes his former
moans about wanderings, etc. Adding, I laid in Bed too long, when I should have
been upon my knees, yet had more Evidences that day than for along time before,
after this, was taken with a Dizziness in my head, like to fall down stairs,
about 8. had a great pain in my side and my fit came about ten, then from day
to day, lay long in bed, had little of God sometimes forgot how it was with me;
not minding my inward man enough, by distempers of my outward On the 22. I
considered what I should do if God call me to sufferings and thought Gods hand
was not shortened to strengthen me as he had done all the martyrs. On 25 my
cough and pain in my left side grew upon me so unfitted me for Duty yet on 30.
I prayed, and had a clear sight of God and of my Christ, my Dear Redeemer,
Blessed, for ever blessed be his holy name.

Least any ponderous passage (out of his Diary) that might be profitable to
posterity should be omitted which (through the broken account I have of his
manuscripts) cannot easily be avoided, I shall reduce the most remarkable of
them to those Remarks, or Heads following.

The First Remark is, this gracious Young-Mans Diary does plainly proclaim,
that God made him live at the sign of the Chequer, his life this last Year was
strangely chequered with the Black of Misery, and with the White of Mercy, he
was got into Canaan, a land of hills and valleys, now up and now down: One
while mourning for Gods Absence: and another while magnifying him for his
presence, etc.

The Second Remark, however God withdrew from him on the Weekday, yet did he
mostly enjoy lest or more of God on the Sabbath as well as Sacrament Days, this
I find in his own record, which was to bear up his head above water in his
Conflicts.

The Third Remark is, he observes Gods tenderness toward him in never
withdrawing too long from him, for though he found himself dull and dead in
duty in the morning of the Sabbath, yet found he life and warmth at evening,
etc.

Fourthly, When he was commanded to stay at home for keeping the house and shop
(upon the Sabbath) from Sermon (he says) God made that time of privacy a most
sweet time to him: When God denies means, He supplies means.

Fifthly, He Remarks, how often he was interrupted in his private duties, being
called off from them as he was a servant to his Master, which the Envious one
might have an hand in, as prayer is a charm and torment to him, when God is
present, etc.

Sixthly, He notes that the low Cellar was his oratory or place of private
prayer, where he spent many hours, without either fire or candle, in the night,
and once had the door broke open to fetch some candles while he was in his
Devotion, etc.

Seventhly, He observes Gods dealings with his Soul from one Sabbath to
another, and from one week day to another taking notice of all his omissions of
good, and of all his commissions of evil, from Monday Morning to Saturday Night.

Eighthly, This was not only his practice every Week, from the beginning to the
end of the Year (as is above mentioned) but also every Day how it was with his
Soul God ward Morning, Noon and Night, and what discourse at meat time also.

Ninthly, So strict was his Scrutiny and Self-Tryal, that he set down once the
thoughts of having a God Ring, and another time thoughts o^ getting some books,
the Tempte^ made use of to justle out his thought of God, etc.

Tenthly. So observant was he (...) all the workings of his own heart that he
sets down how that when, he was praying once in the dark Cellar without any
light, the Tempter possessed him with fears that something would appear to
affright him, but God graciously stepped in, and said to him, fear not thou Son
of Abraham, etc. Genesis 15.1.

Eleventhly, He records the very Days, wherein he missed his taking an account
of his own daily task of self examination, and when he omitted the scattering
of some savory discourse becoming table-talk, at meat-times.

Twelfthly, He computes the very times.

First. When mourning for sin was made sweet to his Soul.

Second. When he enjoyed Gods presence in prayer both by himself and with
others.

Third. How often God came to him when disturbed in Duty, or disappointed of
it, being constrained thereby sometimes to pour out his heart to God in the
shop by day, and upon his bed by Night, in both which places he had sweet
warmings of Spirit.

Fourthly. How often he made resignation of his Soul to God (which was very
frequent) as also how often he renewed his Covenant with God especially upon
Sacrament Days which are the most Material Remarks (whereof I would not omit
one out of choice) I could collect out of the many sheets I had to peruse in my
often reading them over.

And had not the same matter (so often upon distinct occasion repeated) been
reduced by this method to those few several Heads this tract might have swollen
into a volume.

CHAP. V.
THE last subject of this Discourse, is twofold.

First. The Evidences He had for Heaven.

Second. The Characters that were given him by gracious and judicious
witnessings of others: As to the First, I find several Evidences (writ with his
own hand) and which gave sweet encouragement to his Soul, that he was a chosen
vessel of mercy, and one to be filled as with Grace Here, so with Glory
Hereafter.

First. I know my Repentance (says he) because my sense under sin, as a
burden, is heavier to my Soul, than all my afflictions are to my Body, I am
ashamed of my secret sins (which no man sees or knows) before the Lord who
sees and knows them and all other things, and I desire to leave my darling
sin, and to leave all love to it, yea to loath it through my love I bear to my
Lord and Dear Redeemer, whom I account dearer to me than any sin, yea than all
the World, etc.

Secondly. I know (says he) that to have true faith, by Christ is more
precious to me than all things in the World, I am willing to receive him into
my heart as my Lord and King to Rule me, and my Faith works by Love so that I
am grieved for his absence, and rejoice at his presence, and I am willing to
part with all for him, that he may be my all, and in all.

Thirdly. I find a delight to do Gods Will, sometimes in praying to him,
sometimes in praising of him, sometimes in hearing from him, and sometimes in
meditating upon him, and upon that Work of man's Redemption.

Fourthly. I feel my heart mourning most for that sin, which most disturbeth my
peace, and most separateth betwixt God and my Soul, and longing most for that
mercy, that will do me most good in a dying hour, to wit not general, but
special mercy, even mercy in Christ.

Fifthly. I can say that I love the Lord, for I hate that which grieves him,
and that because it grieves him; and I love those that are most like him, yea
the places and duties wherein I have found the Lord warming my heart, and
cannot be content without him in any.

Sixthly. I can say I have a principle of life spiritual, for I find hungrings
and thirstings after an enjoyment of Christ, and find my Soul grieved, when he
is dishonored, either by my self or by others, and I love, long, and look for
his last appearing and coming.

Seventhly. I highly value the Gospel, that Word of Christ and Truth which
brings good tidings, even Reconciliation and the Dispensation of the Grace of
God which has been hid some Thousand of Years, and now is forfeited, yet
graciously continued to us, though withdrawn from many Nations, I am thankful
for it, labor to live like it, and to adorn it with my life daily.

Eighthly. I know that matters are agreed with God (so that he is now no
adversary) because I find an oneness with him, (1.) In mind, which is made
correspondent with the mind of God by this agreement; I can think the
reproaches of Christ to be greater riches than the Treasures of Aegrpt, Heb.
11.26. (2.) Oneness of Will, I can say (whether for life or Death) the will of
the Lord be done, Acts. 21.14. Though there has been much ado to bring my will
into an agreement with God; and when I find not sometimes an actual agreement,
yet have I always an habitual agreement of my will with the will of God, (3.)
Oneness of Affection, I love what God loves, and hate what God hates, Psalm.
119.70. Jer. 44.4. I hate sin which God hates, so I love holiness which God
loves, (4.) Oneness of way: Can two walk together unless they be agreed? Amos
3.3. Psalm. 119.30. and 25* 5. and Isa. 56.4, 5. (5.) Oneness of interest, Gods
Interest is mine and my interest is Gods: I can say (in the Witnessings of the
Holy Ghost, Romans 9.1.) that there is this fivefold Oneness betwixt God and me,
so are agreed.

The Ninth Evidence for his Interest in Heaven was, his Holy Jealousy over his
own heart in all his holy undertakings, ever fearing that some by respect and
not Gods glory was the motive that led him to holy duties, this he often prayed
against, and particularly cautions a gracious Young Man (with whom he had
agreed to carry on a Christian Correspondency, either in absence by Letter, or
in presence by Conference) that herein they did not bring hurt instead of good
to themselves, by seeking our selves, and not him whose we are, etc. [We are
not our own but Christ's who paid dear for us, far more than we are worth, and
we have covenanted to glorify him, not our selves, etc.] this Holy Jealousy, is
a blessed frame of Spirit.

Tenthly. His prizing an Union, and Communion with God, above the Confluence of
all worldly comforts. This point he (in another letter to the Young Man
aforesaid when in the Country by sickness) much insists upon, saying, while we
enjoy Gods presence, we have the Hidden Manna, and that joy which strangers (to
God) intermeddle not not with, all is nothing and worse than nothing without
it, it is Heaven upon Earth, and it is Heaven in the way to Heaven, thus David
reckoned One Day with God better than a thousand without him, etc.

Eleventhly, O What carefulness, do I find in all his Manuscripts as well as in
his letters expressed to keep his accounts even betwixt God and his Soul, that
right reckoning might keep them long friends in his Stewardship, which he
desired (himself and others) may give up with joy.

Twelfthly. His desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, this he repeats
often in all his papers earnestly longing to be out of this tottering
tabernacle and to be clothed upon with immortality and Glory, which desire of
his, God speedily granted, finding him fully ripe for Heaven, before he was at
age of 21. to lay claim to his portion here upon Earth.

CHAP. VI.
AFter these solid Soul-searching Evidences, which he found in himself, do
follow the many fair Characters, that his intimate friends (yet without
flattery) give of him recorded by others: The First Character, was from a
gracious Young Man, (his Alter Ego) who writes thus.

I was well acquainted with Mr. John Draper for some Years, and the more I knew
him, the more I admired him as one of the choicest Saints that ever I knew or
ever expect to know while I live: Among many other excellencyes I took notice
of him for these following.

First. For his Solemn and Frequent Dedications of himself to God, this he did
from the purest flames of Divine Love, and from a clear vision of the Beauty of
holiness, etc.

Secondly. For his frequent and silent Elevations of heart Heavenward,
evidenced by the often lifting of his eyes upward, conjoined with the sweet
smiles of his Countenance, when he thought none observed it, etc.

Thirdly. For his constant Retirements to hold communion with his God, which
was so sweet and satisfactory to him that he would sit up therein till one or
two in the morning, as his own manuscripts manifest, etc.

Fourthly, For his daily and diligent examination of himself by Mr. Allens and
by Pythogera's Rules, taking special notice what mercyes he daily received,
what were his omissions of good, and commissions of evil that his present Days
practice might amend the foregoing days error, etc. Hereby he ascended to be
eminent, etc.

Fifthly. For his Victory over temptations, wherewith (though so strict and one
of the highest form in Christ's School) He was greatly exercised: I well know
it cost him much pains to conquer his constitution-sin which through the
Majesty of God upon him (as he used to say) he prevailed over, and his other
sins at their first rising, etc.

Sixthly. For his Admirable mortification, The Pleasures, Treasures, and
Honors of the World were as Dung and Dross to him, using all creature comforts
in a mortified manner, so that it was hard for his friends to draw him to any
diversions his weaned Soul disliked unnecessary visits, etc.

Seventhly. For his delight in Holy Duties, O what time he spent in prayers and
praises, he was unwearied, in those Heavenly repasts and Angelical imploys
never contented with doing duty, till he found his God in Duty, and if diverted
by business at any time from Duty, he was restless till he could come at it,
and if he met not God therein (which was but seldom) he found the more of Gods
presence afterward in the next, etc.

Eighthly. For his Choice of, and Carriage among his Companions: As he was very
careful with whom he did associate, so his Speech was very savoury, among his
associates. O the many gracious discourses, I have heard from his mouth, as
once he said this to my self, [Let us be burning lights in the midst of a
perverse generation] and in all companies he would be very attentive to any
good discourse, and retain for practice what he judged fit, and his speech was
a powerful charm to others ever improving his Lords talent, etc.

Ninthly. For his Holy Zeal, earnestly soliciting his associates evermore to
stedfastness in the Good old way (as he used to call it) having fervent love to
Gods image where ever he saw it among differing persuasions.

Tenthly. For his great patience and Resignation in his last sickness, whereof
I was an eyewitness and heard him say, that all this visitation was to bring
him nearer God, and that divine love sweetened all his pains and bodily decays:
Never did I hear God more thanked by any Man for the highest confluence of
pleasing providence, than was by him for his affliction; nay never did he
magnify God more in his health, than now in his sickness: To conclude, He was
such a careful Redeemer of precious time, that he did not only not do nothing,
but also not do little, so that his diligence in Holy Duties was a presage of
his speedy translation into a better World, his hasty dispatch of his Heavenly
Work could not long want its reward.

The Second Character I find of him was from another associate and familiar of
his, who gives this description of him.

First. His natural temper was so sweet, and his carriage so amicable, as if
nature had opened her Treasure to adorn him.

Secondly. Though this be all that some attain to, yet could not he be
satisfied with this as his portion, nor with his descent of Godly Good Parents,
but he begged to be Heavenborn and to be eminent for Holiness, seeing
inestimable beauty in the ways of God.

Thirdly. I have admired to see him keep daily a sensible communion with God in
the midst of his Worldly affairs, being careful that all his actings had a
tendency to Gods Honor.

Fourthly. When he heard vain discourse from others, he would drive them out of
it, and persuade them to a love to the best things, if he could not prevail, he
would leave them.

Fifthly. When in company with those from whom he expected better discourse, he
was in pain while he met with it, telling them, should all our discourses be
registered, O how should we be ashamed, etc. hereby he shamed them out of
impertinencies, while he would spirituallize temporal objects.

Sixthly, He was one that set an high value upon the ordinances of God, and was
careful how he did approach to them, especially the Lords Supper, Conferring
with others for fitting himself and them for it, and every Sabbath He used to
run over the Heads of Sermons (he heard) with me, etc.

Seventhly. He was much affected that his sickness detained him from hearing,
so that though his Physician persuaded him to keep in, yet would he venture,
saying, he got no harm thereby.

Eigthly. He had an high estimation on the light of Gods Countenance, and if at
any time he apprehended frowns He would give no sleep to his eyes, etc. though
he sat till midnight till he recovered the smiles of Gods face again, daily
casting up his accounts with God.

Ninthly. He said to me, when I see Workmen tremble when they come to cast up
their accounts for fear they are not right, I think how Sinners will tremble at
the great day of Account.

Tenthly. He meditated much on Redemption, and crying O Eternity, Eternity,
etc. Arise ye dead and come to judgment, still sounded in his ears, etc.

Which made him keep a Diary to observe how grace increased and sin decreased,
etc.

Lastly. In a Word I want expressions, and am ashamed I have learnt no more
from so eminent a Pattern of Piety through hopes of enjoying him longer and
oftener. This made me neglect observing and remembering many sweet expressions,
which now I wish I had not done, etc.

The Third and most Perfect Character, I have from his own Gracious Sister, who
writes thus of him.

My Dear Brother Mr. John Draper, was born March, 26.1663. of Godly Parents
though he was much bereaved of the benefit of their Education of him, they
dying before he was 12. Years old, yet had they done their duty for him till
then putting up many earnest prayers to God in his behalf, which the Lord
graciously answered in taking care of the fatherless after: in the Year 1675.
he was put to a Schoolmaster who was as careful for his Soul as for his Body,
etc. In the Year 1678. He became an apprentice, where he served his Master
faithfully, being effectually called in the first Year of his time, and then
reflecting upon himself for his former mispending of time, and neglecting
seasons of grace: He now begins to make a better improvement of the Assemblies
Catechism, which he had got by heart before he was 11. Year old, at home, and
the Sermons he had writ abroad at School, now became he more sweet to us all, I
never saw him out of an Heavenly frame, but if he was not hearing something of
God, he would be speaking something from God, if at any time we desired him to
stay with us, he would answer my time is not my own, I must not neglect my
Masters business, much less Gods, to whom I must give an account of all my
Thoutghs, Words and deeds, I have much Work to do and but little time to do it
in, this should aw our hearts from sin and make us earnest for pardoning and
preventing mercy: O what need we have to stir up one another in ways of
Godliness, for Heart-work is hard work, and we love the World more than God, He
would often bewail with tears to behold how the Youth generally profaned the
name of God and were unwearied in doing the Devils drudgery, whereas we (called
Christians) are soon weary with doing our Masters will, whose Yoke is easy and
his Burden light, adding, it is free grace that makes the difference betwixt us
and those Vain Youths. He expressed his fear of setting up for himself often,
observing how many were Zealous while Apprentices, yet declined when became
Masters, who being asked why they had lost their first love, answered it was
for want of time, to which he replied it was more for want of love than of
time, this he feared might be his own case if God prevented it not. Being asked
if he were willing to suffer for God, he answered, if God call me to it he will
quallifie me for it, but he thought God would not put that honor upon him: The
time that others take for recreation, he spent in holy Duties, and the money
others spend idelly he laid out either profitably or charitably. His sickness
began Jan. 23. 1682. which he bore with wonderful patience all along.

Ever desiring God would complete his work in and upon him, O how would he
bless God that it fared well with his Soul, how ever it fared with his Body,
and that God was never wanting to us, when we are not wanting to our selves,
though some blamed him for being too bookish during his weakness, he answered,
should reading impair my health, I am sure it refreshes my Soul, and I wish you
all to prize Communion with God, and to make your peace with God before the
night come, had I now that work to do, I might expect frowns where (through my
Dear Redemer) I have smiles upon me, which I cannot express.

When in the greatest extremity, He would say, what is all this, to that which
Christ suffered for me, crying out, O the gentleness of God to me compared with
Crhists sorrows calling to hear the 14, 15, 16, and 17. Chapters of John, read
to him when weakest he would lay smiling with his eyes and his hands lift up to
Heaven, and a few days before he dyed he said thus to me, Sister I know you
wish me well, I cannot be well here, therefore be willing to let me go, it is
not long since God made you willing to leave me in a troublesome World, and now
will not you be willing to give me up to God: if a taste of Heaven be so sweet
here, what is the full enjoyment, let me go first, it is but a little time and
we shall meet again, etc. I have forborne to mention my death (to the loss of my
self and others) because your spirit cannot bear it, O how am I comforted in
the stock of prayers going for me, when I cannot now pray for my self,
especially that Christ is interceding for me in Heaven: After this his speech
was scarce intelligible, yet understood he said, [Lord thou know what I have
done, and what I have left undone,] often over, and all night spoke with such
earnestness as thinking he was understood, the next morning friends persuaded
me to withdraw as being no more useful to him, but hurtful to my self, and if
he became more sensible it would grieve him to see me grieve, But after some
hours absence, returning to him, he took me by the hand to comfort me saying,
with Arms spread, my God has chained up Satan, which was an answer to that
very request, put up for him a little before. Thus when death ( That King of
terrors, and terror of Kings) was unstung, he submitted to its stroke and
changed his life for a better. Aug. 3. 1682.

He appointed the Text for his funeral Sermon to be Genesis 47.9. (as is related
before) in the time of his Health, yet finding the sentence of Death upon
himself, etc.

He was born 1663. began his last sickness on Jan. 23. and dyed when August was
but 3. days old.

Thus

This Blessed Soul passed from Three to Three,
Handed by Three in one the Trinity,
From Womb to Tomb. Three threes compleats his race,
Turns all his griefs to everlasting Peace.
The Next Character is that of a Minister who writes thus to him in his last
sickness, etc.

Shall I be sorry to hear of your sickness? I am, as it is an evil to Nature,
but I rejoice in hope that it will increase your Grace, not doubting but to
such a serious Christian and Religious person as you have been, this Affliction
will be the taking away of sin, and this rod (with Aarons) will blossom with
the Peaceable fruits of Righteousness, your great knowledge in the mystery of
Salvation, and eminent proficiency in the School of Christ may well put a
Supersedeas to any instructions from me, yet give me leave as a faithful
Monitor to mind you of your duty of Patience, that you may be as eminent in
that Grace in the time of your sickness, as you were in other Graces in the
time of your health. I know it is impossible for Nature to endure (without
murmuring) the loss of such a mercy as health, but Grace can weigh these
Considerations.

First. Consider who is the Author of your affliction, it springs not out of
die dust, nor comes by chance, but it is my Fathers hand that appoints the time,
place, measure, and manner, so must not murmur.

Second. Consider, though you be a Son of God, yet your sin has deserved Hell,
and thither had you been cast, had not your Dear Redeemer dyed for you: But
seeing you are Delivered from wrath to come, and this is all your Hell you are
like to have, to wit, this present chastisement, therefore you may not murmur,
etc.

Third. Consider God never Afflicts willingly, but when need is, and for
gracious ends, to subdue sin and to strengthen Grace, to wean from the World,
and to make Heaven more desirable, etc. (his bowels still yearning while his
rod is on our backs) if this be so, should you not be patient.

Fourth. Meditate much on the joys of Heaven, and the happy rest there prepared
for you, which transcends our apprehensions while we tabernacle in houses of
clay. O the Rivers of pleasure, the Mansions of bliss, the Regions of
happiness, the Crowns of life, the scepters of power, the Robes of Glory, and
the thrones of honor, that are there prepared for the Lambs followers, no
sinning is there to provoke God, no suffering to molest us, no weeping eyes,
sighing breasts, or complaining tongues are found there. No crying there [ O my
Head! my Head, and O my bowels be pained, etc.] But all rest in the arms of
love, and in the Bosom of Christ. O happy Souls that are now got thither, and
since you will shortly be there, should you not be submissive to and rejoice in
the will of God: That he give you both an Happy and a Comfortable departure out
of time into eternity is the prayer of, etc.

The last Character is that of mine own from my own personal knowledge of him,
which, though it was not so much as was that of many others who were more
conversant with him, yet was enough to give me a prospect of his (almost)
unparalled piety: I never conversed with a more mortifyed Young Man from
youthful vanitys, so serious in his deportments, so savoury in his discourses
with so grave an aspect, and and so composed a countenance, as I seldom law in
this our English Israel. He had so faithfully followed these following rules.

First. Let not God find me in my bed when he looks for me on my knees.

Second. Nor wandering thoughts eat out the life of my Duty.

Third. Nor be slight in reading Gods Word, or hearing it preached, which I
should digest in my heart, and repeat in my life.

Fourth. I must redeem time.

Fifth. Deny my self.

Sixth. Do more than others.

Seventh. Be careful of my company.

Eighth. Leave the Savor of Grace behind me in all companies.

Ninth. Be Holy in all my relations as a servant, etc.

Tenth. No sin must sit light.

Eleventh. Nor may I live in that which I know or fear to be a sin.

Twelfth. It Is my duty to mourn for sin, my own and others.

Thirteenth. To be much in Holy Ejaculations, having God often in my mind, and
Heaven often in my sight.

Fourteenth. To be often looking into my own heart.

Fifteenth. To resist the first risings of sin.

Sixteenth. To bridle my tongue.

Seventeenth. To feed in Gods fear at my meal times.

Eighteenth. To do all my secular and sacred affairs for Gods glory, the good
of others as well as my self, etc. That he familliarizing his Soul with these
and the like helps, and duly and daily weighing himself in the balance of the
Sanctuary, soon became a None such, in Christian seize, so that the way
of this Godly-wise Young Man was above (as Prove. 15.24.) Raising the feet of
his Soul to walk in a higher Region and above the heads of most other
young men: Sure I am his Conversasion was in Heaven (as Phil. 3.20.) while his
commoration was on Earth. the Rabbis say, that Cain's sin was not dividing
aright for God, for which fault (they suppose) God brought that brand (of going
about eversighing and trembling, etc. but I may without vanity affirm, that if
any young man learned to divide aright betwixt his General and particular
calling, this Holy Young Man did, who seldom (or never) would suffer them to
justle out one the other. As he would not give his Masters-time to Gods
worship, so nor Gods time to his Masters service: I wish all apprentices would
learn to write after so fair a copy, and to dress themselves by so lovely a
looking-glass, I know also how the Spirit of God rested upon him in most
eminent actings and emanations, and I stand admiring, not only at his most
Evangelical Experiences, Exercises, Examinations, and Evidences above
mentioned, but also at his most sensible and savoury letters not only writ with
his own Mortal hand, but with a most Gracious Heart. In one of which I find how
he obliged his Correspondent (a Godly Young man) to Holiness with these
arguments.

First. We have covenanted not to allow our selves in any known sin but to use
all means for the death and destruction thereof.

Second. To forsake all that is dear to us in this world, rather than forsake
God and his Gospel.

Third. To watch over our own hearts against the temptations both of prosperity
and adversity least we be drawn from God.

Fourth. To take the Laws of God for the rule of our thoughts, words and
actions, squaring our whole life thereby.

Fifth. To neglect nothing we know to be our duty.

Sixth. To resign up our selves to God and avouch him for our Lord.

Seventh. To own Jehovah as our portion, promising to serve him all our days.

Eight. To improve Christ as he is the new and living way for access to the
Father.

Ninth. To be married to Christ, accepting him for our Head and Husband in all
states and times taking our lot as it falls, though sufferings and death do
accrue, we must renounce our own will and wisdom, etc.

In another I find the Saints pedigree.

First. What Christ is to us? He is Our Lord, 1. Cor. 1, 2. Our Friend, Cant.
5.16. Our flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. Our Brother, Ver. 17. Our Father, Isa.
63.16. Our Husband Romans 7.4. what we are to Christ? His Servants Romans 6.22. His
Friends, John. 15.14. His Kinsmen, Mark 3.21.35. His Brethren, John 7.3. His
Sons. Gal. 3.26. His Spouse, Sister, Love and Dove, Cant. 4.9. The Church is
one Vine, John 15. 1. One Seed, Gal. 3.16. One Temple, Ephesians. 2.16. One Body,
Romans 12.5. One Spirit, 1. Cor. 6.16. and one Christ, 1. Cor. 12.12. and upon
the survey of this Pedigree, he Cries out, Lord what is man thou art thus
mindful of him, making him (in some respects) Higher than Angels, Thou have
crowned him with Glory and Honor, etc. Psalm. 8.

In another letter to his elder Sister (writ about three a clock in the
morning) he gives an high encomium of Godliness (to strengthen her in love to
the good ways of God) saying, it is the great work we have to mind in this lower
World, therefore need we to meet helps to forward one another therein, it is not
a small thing, or a by-business to be forgotten, etc. it is the best riches that
cannot be taken from us, as there are all good things in it, so there is no
danger to loose it, yet find I a proneness to be triffling and tampering with
transitory vanities, while the true riches are neglected, O this Heart-work is
Hard-work, and the way to Heaven is up the hill, but our Captain (if we follow
him close) will make it easy, helping us to hold on and to hold out to the end
not only as living but also as lively Christians, not loitering in the way of
sin, but lustily running our race, seating our selves under Gods eye: All lower
persons and things be changeable, Relations may be our friends to Day and they
may be dead to morrow, or they may live, yet their love may die, and our
delights to day may be our sorrow and our horror to morrow, etc. but still in
Godliness we have an unchangable God, our thoughts of this must be bellows to
blow up the flame of our desires, and the spur to our dull affections.

In another Letter to his younger Sister (which came also to my hand) O what a
traveling spirit was upon him, that Christ may beformed in her, saying to her.

My hearts desire and prayer (...) that you may be saved, con^^der your sad
estate by nature, you are a slave of Satan, a stranger to God, and if you dye
in that estate you are undone for ever. O that you may see in this your day the
things that belong to your everlasting peace, least they be for ever hid from
your eyes. For judgment will certainly find you, where death does leave you, if
you die in an unregenerate slate, you will be banished from the presence of
God, and an eternity of horror and terror is to be endured, etc. But if you
make your calling and election sure, then may you expect, nay you will have
everlasting bliss. O think much on these things you have now time to make your
peace, put it not off (if you love your Soul) no not till to morrow (as too
many young persons do thinking it soon enough yet and yet) but know, you may be
dead before the morrow, pray therefore for conve^^ing Grace and for power to
cast off sin, especially that which lays nearest your heart, for if the
heart-sin be loved better than Christ 'twill undo you for ever, let but your
Lord have your chiefest love and you will soon find more pleasure in ways of
holiness than in all the ways of sin.

In another letter to his kinswoman, I find him very warm in his exhortations,
saying.

Now is the time of stirring up one another to prepare for approaching evils,
seeing the Cloud thickens and looks black over our head, we have need to have
our rock ready to fly to and to have our evidences for Heaven cleared, to have
our loins girt and our lamps burning, and to sit loose from those lower things
that seem now to be leaving us, O that sweet word Draw nigh to God, and he will
draw nigh to us, for the end of this dispensation is to drive u^ further off
from sin and nearer God. And O sweet word, In the world ye shall have
tribulation, but in Christ peace, who would not travel through a world of
trouble, to find that peace in Christ.

This kinswoman was so touched with his lines, that she cast in this character
of him after his death, saying, God took him from me, because I was unworthy of
him, he told me, 'twas better to want time than to want an heart for doing
good, he cried often (hearing the clock strike) O Time, Time, I am so much nearer
eternity, and O the Love of Christ that purchased an eternity of weal for me,
is there any Love like Christ's, etc.

In another I find these short rules (comprised in Verse) very useful to him
when time would not permit him to make any use of larger helps.

Let not soft sleep thy weary eyes invade
Before the same confine with the nights shade.
Thy thoughts retire, and make it their last task
Of the days deeds three questions thus to ask.
Wherein Have I transgressed this day? what good deed have I wrought,
And what have I forborne to do? which to have done I ought?
Or Thus.

What have I done amiss this day? What well?
What Good have I omitted? Conscience tell?
This Distich (as his who sent him them intimates) comprehends all our thoughts
words and deeds, and by pondering and improving them duly and daily, they both
reaped great ^^nifit, etc.

In another I find that the method of correspodency betwixt his Friend (a
gracious young man) and himself was carried on by a communication of
Experiences or practical and profitable discourses upon the joys of Heaven, the
love of God in Christ, the second coming of our Lord, the evil of sin, etc. As
to the first of those points, (the joys of Heaven) their intercourse makes
this mention.

The Glory (which we ought to have our Faith fixed on for our comfort) is
called in Scripture comparisons: A Crown of life, of Righteousness, and of
Glory, an incorruptible inheritance, a rest for the People of God, the
recompense of reward, an House not made with hands, an excellent place which
the eye has not seen, etc. The City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem,
the Holy kingdom, the Blessed hope and end of our holy race, the City whose
builder and maker is God, the house not made with hands, the heavenly Country,
the strait Gate, etc. The contemplation of all these divne comparisons afforded
strong consolation to Both their Souls, etc.

No less comfortable was their interchange of communion about the other point
of Christ's second coming, which is likewise called in Scripture a Day of
consolation, and of corronation, an harvest day a marriage day, and a day of
admiration, wherein Christ will be admired of all his Saints at his Glorious
appearance, though now we be despised by the world as our dear Redeemer
(himself was) yet, this is our joy our redemption day draws nigh, etc.

In another letter he has this passage (I suppose) to some Minister, saying,
Sir, though I be a stranger to you, yet cannot, nay dare not ho^^ any longer
from speaking to you; for asking my own heart whether I were fit to dye it was
answered that could not be till accounts were cleared (concerning the sins I
groaned under) between God and my Soul, about this Sir, my present address is
for your profitable advice: Therefore I beseech you search me thoroughly to the
very inwards of my heart, etc.

Many more such savoury lines (all seasoned with the salt of sincerity and
sanctity, I might add out of several other of his Letters, which must be
omitted to avoid prolixity.

To Conclude, upon the View of the whole, I must only add this though we have
not his picture drawnin paint by some skilful limner for refreshing the memory
of Relations, and to prefix before this Book, yet it is limned to the life in
black and white both by private Christians, and public Ministers: He was
(without flattery) a mirror of piety especially in making so strict a scrutiny
over all his own steps, and taking so serious a prospect over all his own works
both upon Sabbath days and upon every weekday between them, that He might keep
his heart with all diligence, Prove. 4.23. O how exact was he in
Self-Examination, as well in civil and secular, as in sacred affairs, I have
been young, and now am old, yet never in all my acquaintance found I so much
faithful Self-tryal which is indeed a most necessary, but alas a much neglected
duty, and I am confident most Christians are at a great lost in their inner man
by the omission hereof, as to my own part, I am utterly ashamed to behold my
self (now an old Minister of Forty Ye^rs standing in the Ministry) so far out
stripped by so Young a Man (not attaining the third part of my age) and so
private a Christian as an Apprentice; would to God, we could all (young and
old, Ministers and People) imitate this Pattern of piety, calling our faithless
hearts to a faithful account daily, and ever keeping upon our Watchtower,
etc. This would be a blessed means to keep in the fear of God all the day,
Prove. 23.17. to live much more in a little time, as he did from 1678. to 1683.
to be neither ashamed to live, nor afraid to dye, like him, who lived his
little short life with Christ in this lower world, and now reigns with Christ
in the upper and better world.

FINIS.
The I did dilligently correct every Sheet yet for want of some Revises, these
faults with some others have escaped.
ERRATA.
In the Epistle page 5. line 18. dele 6 p. 6. l. 24. read got. p. 36. l. 18. to
wit. trans. p. 49. l. 9. for third r. threefold. p. 63. l. 20. for Heaven r.
haven. P. 77. 1. 21. for soul r. seal. p. 79. 1. 17. r. than. p. 108. 1. 6. r.
get. p. 116. 1. 21. r. jeered, and 1. 24. r. that. p. 150. 1. 12. for to r. I.
for by r. because. p. 170. 1. 9. for 82. r. 83.


